Beta-1 adrenergic receptor; Beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. This receptor binds epinephrine and norepinephrine with approximately equal affinity. Mediates Ras activation through G(s)-alpha- and cAMP-mediated signaling. Involved in the regulation of sleep/wake behaviors ; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRB1 sub-subfamily.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), heterogeneous biliary tumours with dismal prognosis, lacks accurate early diagnostic methods especially important for individuals at high-risk (i.e. those with primary sclerosing cholangitis [PSC]). Here, we searched for protein biomarkers in serum extracellular vesicles (EVs). METHODS: EVs from patients with isolated PSC (n = 45), concomitant PSC-CCA (n = 44), PSC who developed CCA during follow-up (PSC to CCA; n = 25), CCAs from non-PSC aetiology (n = 56), and hepatocellular carcinoma (n = 34) and healthy individuals (n = 56) were characterised by mass spectrometry. Diagnostic biomarkers for PSC-CCA, non-PSC CCA, or CCAs regardless of aetiology (Pan-CCAs) were defined and validated by ELISA. Their expression was evaluated in CCA tumours at a single-cell level. Prognostic EV biomarkers for CCA were investigated. RESULTS: High-throughput proteomics of EVs identified diagnostic biomarkers for PSC-CCA, non-PSC CCA, or Pan-CCA, and for the differential diagnosis of intrahepatic CCA and hepatocellular carcinoma, which were cross-validated by ELISA using total serum. Machine learning-based algorithms disclosed CRP/FIBRINOGEN/FRIL for the diagnosis of PSC-CCA (local disease [LD]) vs. isolated PSC (AUC = 0.947; odds ratio [OR] =36.9) and, combined with carbohydrate antigen 19-9, overpowers carbohydrate antigen 19-9 alone. CRP/PIGR/VWF allowed the diagnosis of LD non-PSC CCAs vs. healthy individuals (AUC = 0.992; OR = 387.5). It is noteworthy that CRP/FRIL accurately diagnosed LD Pan-CCA (AUC = 0.941; OR = 89.4). Levels of CRP/FIBRINOGEN/FRIL/PIGR showed predictive capacity for CCA development in PSC before clinical evidence of malignancy. Multi-organ transcriptomic analysis revealed that serum EV biomarkers were mostly expressed in hepatobiliary tissues, and single-cell RNA sequencing and immunofluorescence analysis of CCA tumours showed their presence mainly in malignant cholangiocytes. Multivariable analysis unveiled EV prognostic biomarkers, with COMP/GNAI2/CFAI and ACTN1/MYCT1/PF4V associated negatively and positively with patients' survival, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Serum EVs contain protein biomarkers for the prediction, early diagnosis, and prognostication of CCA that are detectable using total serum, representing a tumour cell-derived liquid biopsy tool for personalised medicine. IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: The accuracy of current imaging tests and circulating tumour biomarkers for cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) diagnosis is far from satisfactory. Most CCAs are considered sporadic, although up to 20% of patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) develop CCA during their lifetime, constituting a major cause of PSC-related death. This international study has proposed protein-based and aetiology-related logistic models with predictive, diagnostic, or prognostic capacities by combining two to four circulating protein biomarkers, moving a step forward into personalised medicine. These novel liquid biopsy tools may allow the (i) easy and non-invasive diagnosis of sporadic CCAs, (ii) identification of patients with PSC with higher risk for CCA development, (iii) establishment of cost-effective surveillance programmes for the early detection of CCA in high-risk populations (e.g. PSC), and (iv) prognostic stratification of patients with CCA, which, altogether, may increase the number of cases eligible for potentially curative options or to receive more successful treatments, decreasing CCA-related mortality.
Atherosclerosis-associated cardiovascular disease is one of the main causes of death and disability among patients with diabetes mellitus. However, little is known about the impact of S-nitrosylation in diabetes-accelerated atherosclerosis. Here, we show increased levels of S-nitrosylation of guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(i) subunit alpha-2 (SNO-GNAI2) at Cysteine 66 in coronary artery samples from diabetic patients with atherosclerosis, consistently with results from mice. Mechanistically, SNO-GNAI2 acted by coupling with CXCR5 to dephosphorylate the Hippo pathway kinase LATS1, thereby leading to nuclear translocation of YAP and promoting an inflammatory response in endothelial cells. Furthermore, Cys-mutant GNAI2 refractory to S-nitrosylation abrogated GNAI2-CXCR5 coupling, alleviated atherosclerosis in diabetic mice, restored Hippo activity, and reduced endothelial inflammation. In addition, we showed that melatonin treatment restored endothelial function and protected against diabetes-accelerated atherosclerosis by preventing GNAI2 S-nitrosylation. In conclusion, SNO-GNAI2 drives diabetes-accelerated atherosclerosis by coupling with CXCR5 and activating YAP-dependent endothelial inflammation, and reducing SNO-GNAI2 is an efficient strategy for alleviating diabetes-accelerated atherosclerosis.
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) accounts for most pediatric non-Hodgkin lymphomas, being less common but significantly more lethal when diagnosed in adults. Much of the knowledge of the genetics of BL thus far has originated from the study of pediatric BL (pBL), leaving its relationship to adult BL (aBL) and other adult lymphomas not fully explored. We sought to more thoroughly identify the somatic changes that underlie lymphomagenesis in aBL and any molecular features that associate with clinical disparities within and between pBL and aBL. Through comprehensive whole-genome sequencing of 230 BL and 295 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) tumors, we identified additional significantly mutated genes, including more genetic features that associate with tumor Epstein-Barr virus status, and unraveled new distinct subgroupings within BL and DLBCL with 3 predominantly comprising BLs: DGG-BL (DDX3X, GNA13, and GNAI2), IC-BL (ID3 and CCND3), and Q53-BL (quiet TP53). Each BL subgroup is characterized by combinations of common driver and noncoding mutations caused by aberrant somatic hypermutation. The largest subgroups of BL cases, IC-BL and DGG-BL, are further characterized by distinct biological and gene expression differences. IC-BL and DGG-BL and their prototypical genetic features (ID3 and TP53) had significant associations with patient outcomes that were different among aBL and pBL cohorts. These findings highlight shared pathogenesis between aBL and pBL, and establish genetic subtypes within BL that serve to delineate tumors with distinct molecular features, providing a new framework for epidemiologic, diagnostic, and therapeutic strategies.
Humans with monogenic inborn errors responsible for extreme disease phenotypes can reveal essential physiological pathways. We investigated germline mutations in GNAI2, which encodes G(alphai2), a key component in heterotrimeric G protein signal transduction usually thought to regulate adenylyl cyclase-mediated cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production. Patients with activating G(alphai2) mutations had clinical presentations that included impaired immunity. Mutant G(alphai2) impaired cell migration and augmented responses to T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation. We found that mutant G(alphai2) influenced TCR signaling by sequestering the guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-activating protein RASA2, thereby promoting RAS activation and increasing downstream extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT S6 signaling to drive cellular growth and proliferation.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Interleukin 6 (IL6) and tumor necrosis factor contribute to the development of colitis-associated cancer (CAC). We investigated these signaling pathways and the involvement of G protein subunit alpha i1 (GNAI1), GNAI2, and GNAI3 in the development of CAC in mice and humans. METHODS: B6;129 wild-type (control) or mice with disruption of Gnai1, Gnai2, and/or Gnai3 or conditional disruption of Gnai2 in CD11c(+) or epithelial cells were given dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to induce colitis followed by azoxymethane (AOM) to induce carcinogenesis; some mice were given an antibody against IL6. Feces were collected from mice, and the compositions of microbiomes were analyzed by polymerase chain reactions. Dendritic cells (DCs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) isolated from spleen and colon tissues were analyzed by flow cytometry. We performed immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analyses of colon tumor tissues, MDSCs, and mouse embryonic fibroblasts to study the expression levels of GNAI1, GNAI2, and GNAI3 and the interactions of GNAI1 and GNAI3 with proteins in the IL6 signaling pathway. We analyzed the expression of Gnai2 messenger RNA by CD11c(+) cells in the colonic lamina propria by PrimeFlow, expression of IL6 in DCs by flow cytometry, and secretion of cytokines in sera and colon tissues by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We obtained colon tumor and matched nontumor tissues from 83 patients with colorectal cancer having surgery in China and 35 patients with CAC in the United States. Mouse and human colon tissues were analyzed by histology, immunoblot, immunohistochemistry, and/or RNA-sequencing analyses. RESULTS: GNAI1 and GNAI3 (GNAI1;3) double-knockout (DKO) mice developed more severe colitis after administration of DSS and significantly more colonic tumors than control mice after administration of AOM plus DSS. Development of increased tumors in DKO mice was not associated with changes in fecal microbiomes but was associated with activation of nuclear factor (NF) kappaB and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 3; increased levels of GNAI2, nitric oxide synthase 2, and IL6; increased numbers of CD4(+) DCs and MDSCs; and decreased numbers of CD8(+) DCs. IL6 was mainly produced by CD4(+)/CD11b(+), but not CD8(+), DCs in DKO mice. Injection of DKO mice with a blocking antibody against IL6 reduced the expansion of MDSCs and the number of tumors that developed after CAC induction. Incubation of MDSCs or mouse embryonic fibroblasts with IL6 induced activation of either NF-kappaB by a JAK2-TRAF6-TAK1-CHUK/IKKB signaling pathway or STAT3 by JAK2. This activation resulted in expression of GNAI2, IL6 signal transducer (IL6ST, also called GP130) and nitric oxide synthase 2, and expansion of MDSCs; the expression levels of these proteins and expansion of MDSCs were further increased by the absence of GNAI1;3 in cells and mice. Conditional disruption of Gnai2 in CD11c(+) cells of DKO mice prevented activation of NF-kappaB and STAT3 and changes in numbers of DCs and MDSCs. Colon tumor tissues from patients with CAC had reduced levels of GNAI1 and GNAI3 and increased levels of GNAI2 compared with normal tissues. Further analysis of a public human colorectal tumor DNA microarray database (GSE39582) showed that low Gani1 and Gnai3 messenger RNA expression and high Gnai2 messenger RNA expression were significantly associated with decreased relapse-free survival. CONCLUSIONS: GNAI1;3 suppresses DSS-plus-AOM-induced colon tumor development in mice, whereas expression of GNAI2 in CD11c(+) cells and IL6 in CD4(+)/CD11b(+) DCs appears to promote these effects. Strategies to induce GNAI1;3, or block GNAI2 and IL6, might be developed for the prevention or therapy of CAC in patients.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: NASH is an advanced stage of liver disease accompanied by lipid accumulation, inflammation, and liver fibrosis. Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(i) subunit alpha-2 (GNAI2) is a member of the "inhibitory" class of alpha-subunits, and recent studies showed that Gnai2 deficiency is known to cause reduced weight in mice. However, the role of GNAI2 in hepatocytes, particularly in the context of liver inflammation and lipid metabolism, remains to be elucidated. Herein, we aim to ascertain the function of GNAI2 in hepatocytes and its impact on the development of NASH. APPROACH AND RESULTS: Human liver tissues were obtained from NASH patients and healthy persons to evaluate the expression and clinical relevance of GNAI2. In addition, hepatocyte-specific Gnai2-deficient mice (Gnai2(hep-/-) ) were fed either a Western diet supplemented with fructose in drinking water (WDF) for 16 weeks or a methionine/choline-deficient diet (MCD) for 6 weeks to investigate the regulatory role and underlying mechanism of Gnai2 in NASH. GNAI2 was significantly up-regulated in liver tissues of patients with NASH. Following feeding with WDF or MCD diets, livers from Gnai2(hep-/-) mice had reduced steatohepatitis with suppression of markers of inflammation and an increase in lipophagy compared to Gnai2(flox/flox) mice. Toll-like receptor 4 signals through nuclear factor kappa B to trigger p65-dependent transcription of Gnai2. Intriguingly, immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence, and mass spectrometry identified peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) as a binding partner of GNAI2. Moreover, the function of PRDX1 in the suppression of TNF receptor-associated factor 6 ubiquitin-ligase activity and glycerophosphodiester phosphodiesterase domain-containing 5-related phosphatidylcholine metabolism was inhibited by GNAI2. Suppression of GNAI2 combined with overexpression of PRDX1 reversed the development of steatosis and fibrosis in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: GNAI2 is a major regulator that leads to the development of NASH. Thus, inhibition of GNAI2 could be an effective therapeutic target for the treatment of NASH.
Increased expression of GNAi2, which encodes the alpha-subunit of G-protein i2, has been correlated with the late-stage progression of ovarian cancer. GNAi2, also referred to as the proto-oncogene gip2, transduces signals from lysophosphatidic acid (LPA)-activated LPA-receptors to oncogenic cellular responses in ovarian cancer cells. To identify the oncogenic program activated by gip2, we carried out micro-array-based transcriptomic and bioinformatic analyses using the ovarian cancer cell-line SKOV3, in which the expression of GNAi2/gip2 was silenced by specific shRNA. A cut-off value of 5-fold change in gene expression (p < 0.05) indicated that a total of 264 genes were dependent upon gip2-expression with 136 genes coding for functional proteins. Functional annotation of the transcriptome indicated the hitherto unknown role of gip2 in stimulating the expression of oncogenic/growth-promoting genes such as KDR/VEGFR2, CCL20, and VIP. The array results were further validated in a panel of High-Grade Serous Ovarian Carcinoma (HGSOC) cell lines that included Kuramochi, OVCAR3, and OVCAR8 cells. Gene set enrichment analyses using DAVID, STRING, and Cytoscape applications indicated the potential role of the gip2-stimulated transcriptomic network involved in the upregulation of cell proliferation, adhesion, migration, cellular metabolism, and therapy resistance. The results unravel a multi-modular network in which the hub and bottleneck nodes are defined by ACKR3/CXCR7, IL6, VEGFA, CYCS, COX5B, UQCRC1, UQCRFS1, and FYN. The identification of these genes as the critical nodes in GNAi2/gip2 orchestrated onco-transcriptome establishes their role in ovarian cancer pathophysiology. In addition, these results also point to these nodes as potential targets for novel therapeutic strategies.
Neutrophils are not only involved in immune defense against infection but also contribute to the exacerbation of tissue damage after ischemia and reperfusion. We have previously shown that genetic ablation of regulatory Galpha(i) proteins in mice has both protective and deleterious effects on myocardial ischemia reperfusion injury (mIRI), depending on which isoform is deleted. To deepen and analyze these findings in more detail the contribution of Galpha(i2) proteins in resident cardiac vs circulating blood cells for mIRI was first studied in bone marrow chimeras. In fact, the absence of Galpha(i2) in all blood cells reduced the extent of mIRI (22,9% infarct size of area at risk (AAR) Gnai2(-/-) --> wt vs 44.0% wt --> wt; p < 0.001) whereas the absence of Galpha(i2) in non-hematopoietic cells increased the infarct damage (66.5% wt --> Gnai2(-/-) vs 44.0% wt --> wt; p < 0.001). Previously we have reported the impact of platelet Galpha(i2) for mIRI. Here, we show that infarct size was substantially reduced when Galpha(i2) signaling was either genetically ablated in neutrophils/macrophages using LysM-driven Cre recombinase (AAR: 17.9% Gnai2(fl/fl) LysM-Cre(+/tg) vs 42.0% Gnai2(fl/fl); p < 0.01) or selectively blocked with specific antibodies directed against Galpha(i2) (AAR: 19.0% (anti-Galpha(i2)) vs 49.0% (IgG); p < 0.001). In addition, the number of platelet-neutrophil complexes (PNCs) in the infarcted area were reduced in both, genetically modified (PNCs: 18 (Gnai2(fl/fl); LysM-Cre(+/tg)) vs 31 (Gnai2(fl/fl)); p < 0.001) and in anti-Galpha(i2) antibody-treated (PNCs: 9 (anti-Galpha(i2)) vs 33 (IgG); p < 0.001) mice. Of note, significant infarct-limiting effects were achieved with a single anti-Galpha(i2) antibody challenge immediately prior to vessel reperfusion without affecting bleeding time, heart rate or cellular distribution of neutrophils. Finally, anti-Galpha(i2) antibody treatment also inhibited transendothelial migration of human neutrophils (25,885 (IgG) vs 13,225 (anti-Galpha(i2)) neutrophils; p < 0.001), collectively suggesting that a therapeutic concept of functional Galpha(i2) inhibition during thrombolysis and reperfusion in patients with myocardial infarction should be further considered.
Hypertension, a major public health issue, is estimated to contribute to 10% of all deaths worldwide. Further, the salt sensitivity of blood pressure is a critical risk factor for the development of hypertension. The hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) coordinates neuro-hormonal responses to alterations in plasma sodium and osmolality and multiple G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) are involved in fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. In acute animal studies, our laboratory has shown that central Galphai/o subunit protein signal transduction mediates hypotensive and bradycardic responses and that Gz/q, proteins mediate the release of arginine vasopressin (AVP) and subsequent aquaretic responses to acute pharmacological stimuli. Extending these studies, our laboratory has shown that central Galphai(2) proteins selectively mediate the hypotensive, sympathoinhibitory and natriuretic responses to acute pharmacological activation of GPCRs and in response to acute physiological challenges to fluid and electrolyte balance. In addition, following chronically elevated dietary sodium intake, salt resistant rats demonstrate site-specific and subunit-specific upregulation of Galphai(2) proteins in the PVN, resulting in sympathoinhibition and normotension. In contrast, chronic dietary sodium intake in salt sensitive animals, which fail to upregulate PVN Galphai(2) proteins, results in the absence of dietary sodium-evoked sympathoinhibition and salt sensitive hypertension. Using in situ hybridization, we observed that Galphai(2) expressing neurons in parvocellular division of the PVN strongly (85%) colocalize with GABAergic neurons. Our data suggest that central Galphai(2) protein-dependent responses to an acute isotonic volume expansion (VE) and elevated dietary sodium intake are mediated by the peripheral sensory afferent renal nerves and do not depend on the anteroventral third ventricle (AV3V) sodium sensitive region or the actions of central angiotensin II type 1 receptors. Our translational human genomic studies have identified three G protein subunit alpha I2 (GNAI2) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as potential biomarkers in individuals with salt sensitivity and essential hypertension. Collectively, PVN Galphai(2) proteins-gated pathways appear to be highly conserved in salt resistance to counter the effects of acute and chronic challenges to fluid and electrolyte homeostasis on blood pressure via a renal sympathetic nerve-dependent mechanism.
P2Y receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) for extracellular nucleotides. The platelet ADP-receptor which has been denominated P2Y(12) receptor is an important target in pharmacotherapy. The receptor couples to G(alphai2) mediating an inhibition of cyclic AMP accumulation and additional downstream events including the activation of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and Rap1b proteins. The nucleoside analogue ticagrelor and active metabolites of the thienopyridine compounds ticlopidine, clopidogrel and prasugrel block P2Y(12) receptors and, thereby, inhibit ADP-induced platelet aggregation. These drugs are used for the prevention and therapy of cardiovascular events such as acute coronary syndromes or stroke. The recently published three-dimensional crystal structures of the human P2Y(12) receptor in complex with agonists and antagonists will facilitate the development of novel therapeutic agents with reduced adverse effects. P2Y(12) receptors are also expressed on vascular smooth muscle cells and may be involved in the pathophysiology of atherogenesis. P2Y(12) receptors on microglial cells operate as sensors for adenine nucleotides released during brain injury. A recent study indicated the involvement of microglial P2Y(12) receptors in the activity-dependent neuronal plasticity. Interestingly, there is evidence for changes in P2Y(12) receptor expression in CNS pathologies including Alzheimer's diseases and multiple sclerosis. P2Y(12) receptors may also be involved in systemic immune modulating responses and the susceptibility to develop bronchial asthma.
BACKGROUND: Stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD) exhibits profound tumor heterogeneity and represents a great therapeutic challenge. Single-cell sequencing technology is a powerful tool to identify characteristic cell types. METHODS: Single-cell sequencing data (scRNA-seq) GSE167297 and bulk RNA-seq data from TCGA, GTEx, GSE26901 and GSE15459 database were included in this study. By downscaling and annotating the cellular data in scRNA-seq, critical cell types in tumor progression were identified by AUCell score. Relevant gene modules were then identified by weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). A prognostic scoring system was constructed by identifying prognostic factors in STAD by Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) COX model. The prognosis and model performance in the RiskScore groups were measured by Kaplan-Meier (K-M) curves and Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Nomogram was drawn based on RiskScore and prognosis-related clinical factors. In addition, we evaluated patient's feedback on immunotherapy in the RiskScore groups by TIMER, ESTIMATE and TIDE analysis. Finally, the expression levels of prognostic factors were verified in gastric cancer cell lines (MKN7 and MKN28) and human normal gastric mucosal epithelial cells (GES-1), and the effects of prognostic factors on the viability of gastric cancer cells were examined by the CCK8 assay and cell cycle. RESULTS: scRNA-seq analysis revealed that 11 cell types were identified, and macrophages exhibited relatively higher AUCell scores and specifically expressed CD14 and FCGR3A. High macrophage scores worsened the prognosis of STAD patients. We intersected the specifically expressed genes in macrophages subgroups (670) and macrophage module genes (2,360) obtained from WGCNA analysis. Among 86 common genes, seven prognostic factors (RGS2, GNAI2, ANXA5, MARCKS, CD36, NRP1 and PDE4A) were identified and composed a RiskScore model. Patients in low Risk group showed a better survival advantage. Nomogram also provided a favorable prediction for survival at 1, 3 and 5 years in STAD patients. Besides, we found positive feedback to immunotherapy in patients with low RiskScore. The expression tendency of the seven prognostic factors in MKN7 and MKN28 was consistent with that in the RNA-seq data in addition to comparison of protein expression levels in the public HPA (The Human Protein Atlas) database. Further functional exploration disclosed that MARCKS was an important prognostic factor in regulating cell viability in STAD. CONCLUSION: This study preliminary uncovered a single cell atlas for STAD patients, and Macrophages relevant gene signature and nomogram displayed favorable immunotherapy and prognostic prediction ability. Collectively, our work provides a new insight into the molecular mechanisms and therapeutic approach for LUAD patients.
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IBD), which encompass ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), are characterized by chronic inflammation and tissue damage of the gastrointestinal tract. This study aimed to uncover novel disease-gene signatures, dysregulated pathways, and the immune cell infiltration landscape of inflamed tissues. Eight publicly available transcriptomic datasets, including inflamed and non-inflamed tissues from CD and UC patients were analyzed. Common differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified through meta-analysis, revealing 180 DEGs. DEGs were implicated in leukocyte transendothelial migration, PI3K-Akt, chemokine, NOD-like receptors, TNF signaling pathways, and pathways in cancer. Protein-protein interaction network and cluster analysis identified 14 central IBD players, which were validated using eight external datasets. Disease module construction using the NeDRex platform identified nine out of 14 disease-associated genes (CYBB, RAC2, GNAI2, ITGA4, CYBA, NCF4, CPT1A, NCF2, and PCK1). Immune infiltration profile assessment revealed a significantly higher degree of infiltration of neutrophils, activated dendritic cells, plasma cells, mast cells (resting/activated), B cells (memory/naive), regulatory T cells, and M0 and M1 macrophages in inflamed IBD tissue. Collectively, this study identified the immune infiltration profile and nine disease-associated genes as potential modulators of IBD pathogenesis, offering insights into disease molecular mechanisms, and highlighting potential disease modulators and immune cell dynamics.
T-box genes encode transcription factors, which control developmental processes and promote cancer if deregulated. Recently, we described the lymphoid TBX-code, which collates T-box gene activities in normal lymphopoiesis, enabling identification of members deregulated in lymphoid malignancies. Here, we have extended this analysis to cover myelopoiesis, compiling the myeloid TBX-code and, thus, highlighting which of these genes might be deregulated in myeloid tumor types. We analyzed public T-box gene expression datasets bioinformatically for normal and malignant cells. Candidate T-box-gene-expressing model cell lines were identified and examined by RQ-PCR, Western Blotting, genomic profiling, and siRNA-mediated knockdown combined with RNA-seq analysis and live-cell imaging. The established myeloid TBX-code comprised 10 T-box genes, including progenitor-cell-restricted TBX1. Accordingly, we detected aberrant expression of TBX1 in 10% of stem/progenitor-cell-derived chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. The classic CML cell line K-562 expressed TBX1 at high levels and served as a model to identify TBX1 activators, including transcription factor GATA1 and genomic amplification of the TBX1 locus at 22q11; inhibitors, including BCR::ABL1 fusion and downregulated GNAI2, as well as BMP, FGF2, and WNT signaling; and the target genes CDKN1A, MIR17HG, NAV1, and TMEM38A. The establishment of the myeloid TBX-code permitted identification of aberrant TBX1 expression in subsets of CML patients and cell lines. TBX1 forms an integral part of an oncogenic regulatory network impacting proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Thus, the data spotlight novel diagnostic markers and potential therapeutic targets for this malignancy.
BACKGROUND: Infantile hydrocephalus (IHC) is commonly related to other central nervous system diseases, which may have adverse effects on prognosis. The causes of IHC are heterogeneous, and the genetic etiologies are not fully understood. This study aimed to analyze the genetic etiologies of an IHC cohort. METHODS: The data for 110 IHC patients who had received exome sequencing at the Clinical Genetic Center of the Children's Hospital of Fudan University between 2016 and 2019 were reviewed and analyzed retrospectively. An exome-wide association analysis (EWAS) was performed within this cohort using IHC as the study phenotype. RESULTS: Of the 110 IHC patients, a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant was identified in 16 (15%) patients, spanning 13 genes. The genes were mainly associated with metabolic disorders, brain abnormalities, and genetic syndromes. IHC patients who had unclear clinical etiology were more likely to possess a genetic etiology. Based on previous studies and on our EWAS results, ZEB1, SBF2, and GNAI2 were over-represented among IHC patients and might affect the signaling pathways involved in IHC formation. CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed heterogeneous genetic etiologies in an IHC cohort. It is essential to perform genetic testing on IHC patients who have unclear clinical etiology, and genes associated with metabolic disorders, brain abnormalities, and genetic syndromes should be noted. In addition, when aiming to discover IHC susceptibility genes, genes that might influence the signaling pathways involved in IHC formation should be prioritized.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are critical sensors affecting the state of eukaryotic cells. To get systematic insight into the GPCRome of microglia, we analyzed publicly available RNA-sequencing data of bulk and single cells obtained from human and mouse brains. We identified 17 rhodopsin and adhesion family GPCRs robustly expressed in microglia from human brains, including the homeostasis-associated genes CX3CR1, GPR34, GPR183, P2RY12, P2RY13, and ADGRG1. Expression of these microglial core genes was lost upon culture of isolated cells ex vivo but could be acquired by human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived microglial precursors transplanted into mouse brains. CXCR4 and PTGER4 were higher expressed in subcortical white matter compared to cortical grey matter microglia, and ADGRG1 was downregulated in microglia obtained from normal-appearing white and grey matter tissue of multiple sclerosis (MS) brains. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia from active lesions, obtained early during MS, revealed downregulation of homeostasis-associated GPCR genes and upregulation of CXCR4 expression in a small subset of MS-associated lesional microglia. Functional presence of low levels of CXCR4 on human microglia was confirmed using flow cytometry and transwell migration towards SDF-1. Microglia abundantly expressed the GPCR down-stream signaling mediator genes GNAI2 (alpha(i2)), GNAS (alpha(s)), and GNA13 (alpha(13)), the latter particularly in white matter. Drugs against several microglia GPCRs are available to target microglia in brain diseases. In conclusion, transcriptome profiling allowed us to identify expression of GPCRs that may contribute to brain (patho)physiology and have diagnostic and therapeutic potential in human microglia.
BACKGROUND: Osteoporosis is the most common metabolic bone disease in humans. Exploring the expression difference of iron metabolism-related genes in osteoporosis can provide a new target for diagnosis and treatment. METHODS: First, we used online databases to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to iron metabolism in patients with osteoporosis. The differential genes were comprehensively analyzed by bioinformatics method (GO, KEGG, GSEA, immune infiltration analysis, PPI). The expression levels of hub genes and important signaling pathways were verified by qRT-PCR and Western blotting. RESULTS: A total of 23 iron metabolism-related genes with significant differences were identified, which were enriched in "regulation of protein dephosphorylation" and "negative regulation of protein dephosphorylation". The GSEA results, heme metabolism and Myc targets v1 were among the top two pathways, both upregulated. The immune infiltration analysis revealed that the expressions of genes such as ABCA5, D2HGDH, GNAI2, and CTSW were correlated with the infiltration degree of significantly different cells. The PPI network contained 12 differentially expressed iron metabolism-related genes. Additionally, YWHAE, TGFB1, PPP1R15A, TOP2A, and CALR were mined as hub genes using the Cytoscape software. qRT PCR showed that the expression of TGF-beta1, YWHAE, TOP2A and CALR increased. We also verified the expression of related proteins and genes in the oxidative stress signaling pathway by qRT PCR and Western blotting. The results showed that Mob1, YAP and TAZ molecules were highly expressed at the gene and protein levels. CONCLUSIONS: These differentially expressed iron metabolism-related genes could provide new potential targets for the diagnosis and treatment of osteoporosis.
Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynecologic tumor worldwide. Despite having developed molecular diagnostic tools and targeted therapies over the past few decades, patient survival is still quite poor. Numerous studies suggest that microRNAs are key regulators of many fundamental biological processes, including neoplasia and tumor progression. miR-222 is one of those miRNAs that has attracted much attention for its multiple roles in human diseases, especially cancer. The potential role of microRNAs in ovarian cancer has attracted much attention in recent years. Some of these microRNAs have been suggested as potential therapeutic targets for EOC patients. In this study, we sought to investigate the biologic functions of miR-222-3p in EOC carcinogenesis. Herein, we examined the expression of miR-222-3p in EOC patients, mouse models and cell lines, and found that higher expression of miR-222-3p was associated with better overall survival in EOC patients, and its level was negatively correlated with tumor growth in vivo. Furthermore, in-vitro experiments indicated that miR-222-3p inhibited EOC cell proliferation and migration, and decreased the phosphorylation of AKT. We identified GNAI2 as a target of miR-222-3p. We also found that GNAI2 promoted EOC cell proliferation, and is an activator of the PI3K/AKT pathway. We describe the characterization of a novel regulatory axis in ovarian cancer cells, miR-222-3p/GNAI2/AKT and its potential application as a therapeutic target for EOC patients.
The proteins of extracellular vesicles (EVs) provide proteomic signatures that reflect molecular features of EV-producing cells, including cancer cells. Detection of cancer cell EV proteins is of great interest due to the development of novel predictive diagnostic approaches. Using targeted mass spectrometry with stable-isotope-labeled peptide standards (SIS), we measured in this study the levels of 34 EV-associated proteins in vesicles and whole lysate derived from the colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines Caco-2, HT29 and HCT116. We also evaluated the abundance of 13 EV-associated proteins (FN1, TLN1, ITGB3, HSPA8, TUBA4A, CD9, CD63, HSPG2, ITGB1, GNAI2, TSG101, PACSIN2, and CDC42) in EVs isolated from blood plasma samples from 11 CRC patients and 20 healthy volunteers. Downregulation of TLN1, ITGB3, and TUBA4A with simultaneous upregulation of HSPG2 protein were observed in cancer samples compared to healthy controls. The proteomic cargo of the EVs associated with CRC represents a promising source of potential prognostic markers.
Salt sensitivity of blood pressure (BP) increases hypertension risk and associated adverse cardiovascular outcomes. At present, there are no validated rapid tests or diagnostic markers to identify salt sensitivity of BP in clinical practice. Based on our prior animal studies that report a role for brain Galphai(2) proteins in the salt sensitivity of BP and evidence that GNAI2 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associate with hypertension risk, we investigated the hypothesis that GNAI2 SNPs associate with salt sensitivity of BP in humans. Our data provide the first evidence that a GNAI2 SNP ( rs10510755 ) positively associates with salt sensitivity of BP in the Genetic Epidemiology of Salt Sensitivity data set (continuous phenotype P = 0.049, case-control phenotype P = 0.039; n = 968), independently of subject sex or age. These observations suggest that genotyping at GNAI2 may be a useful biomarker in identifying individuals at risk for developing salt-sensitive BP and related complications or in identifying salt sensitivity within the hypertensive population.
Ferroptosis is a new form of iron-dependent cell death and plays an important role during the occurrence and development of various tumors. Increasingly, evidence shows a convincing interaction between ferroptosis and tumor immunity, which affects cancer patients' prognoses. These two processes cooperatively regulate different developmental stages of tumors and could be considered important tumor therapeutic targets. However, reliable prognostic markers screened based on the combination of ferroptosis and tumor immune status have not been well characterized. Here, we chose the ssGSEA and ESTIMATE algorithms to evaluate the ferroptosis and immune status of a TCGA breast invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) cohort, which revealed their correlation characteristics as well as patients' prognoses. The WGCNA algorithm was used to identify genes related to both ferroptosis and immunity. Univariate COX, LASSO regression, and multivariate Cox regression models were used to screen prognostic-related genes and construct prognostic risk models. Based on the ferroptosis and immune scores, the cohort was divided into three groups: a high-ferroptosis/low-immune group, a low-ferroptosis/high-immune group, and a mixed group. These three groups exhibited distinctive survival characteristics, as well as unique clinical phenotypes, immune characteristics, and activated signaling pathways. Among them, low-ferroptosis and high-immune statuses were favorable factors for the survival rates of patients. A total of 34 differentially expressed genes related to ferroptosis-immunity were identified among the three groups. After univariate, Lasso regression, and multivariate stepwise screening, two key prognostic genes (GNAI2, PSME1) were identified. Meanwhile, a risk prognosis model was constructed, which can predict the overall survival rate in the validation set. Lastly, we verified the importance of model genes in three independent GEO cohorts. In short, we constructed a prognostic model that assists in patient risk stratification based on ferroptosis-immune-related genes in IDC. This model helps assess patients' prognoses and guide individualized treatment, which also further eelucidatesthe molecular mechanisms of IDC.
