Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1S; Pore-forming, alpha-1S subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents in skeletal muscle. Calcium channels containing the alpha-1S subunit play an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle via their interaction with RYR1, which triggers Ca(2+) release from the sarcplasmic reticulum and ultimately results in muscle contraction. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group.
We here tested the potential activity and the underlying mechanisms of neuroligin-3 (NLGN3) against ischemia-reperfusion-induced neuronal cell injury. In SH-SY5Y neuronal cells and primary murine cortical neurons, NLGN3 activated Akt-mTOR and Erk signalings, and inhibited oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD)/re-oxygenation (OGD/R)-induced cytotoxicity. Akt activation was required for NLGN3-induced neuroprotection. Galphai1/3 mediated NLGN3-induced downstream signaling activation. NLGN3-induced Akt-S6K1 activation was largely inhibited by Galphai1/3 silencing or knockout. Significantly, NLGN3-induced neuroprotection against OGD/R was almost abolished by Galphai1/3 silencing or knockout. In vivo, the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) procedure induced NLGN3 cleavage and secretion, and increased its expression and Akt activation in mouse brain tissues. ADAM10 (A Disintegrin and Metalloproteinase 10) inhibition blocked MCAO-induced NLGN3 cleavage and secretion, exacerbating ischemic brain injury in mice. Neuronal silencing of NLGN3 or Galphai1/3 in mice also inhibited Akt activation and intensified MCAO-induced ischemic brain injury. Conversely, neuronal overexpression of NLGN3 increased Akt activation and alleviated MCAO-induced ischemic brain injury. Together, NLGN3 activates Galphai1/3-Akt signaling to protect neuronal cells from ischemia-reperfusion injury.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Interleukin 6 (IL6) and tumor necrosis factor contribute to the development of colitis-associated cancer (CAC). We investigated these signaling pathways and the involvement of G protein subunit alpha i1 (GNAI1), GNAI2, and GNAI3 in the development of CAC in mice and humans. METHODS: B6;129 wild-type (control) or mice with disruption of Gnai1, Gnai2, and/or Gnai3 or conditional disruption of Gnai2 in CD11c(+) or epithelial cells were given dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to induce colitis followed by azoxymethane (AOM) to induce carcinogenesis; some mice were given an antibody against IL6. Feces were collected from mice, and the compositions of microbiomes were analyzed by polymerase chain reactions. Dendritic cells (DCs) and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) isolated from spleen and colon tissues were analyzed by flow cytometry. We performed immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analyses of colon tumor tissues, MDSCs, and mouse embryonic fibroblasts to study the expression levels of GNAI1, GNAI2, and GNAI3 and the interactions of GNAI1 and GNAI3 with proteins in the IL6 signaling pathway. We analyzed the expression of Gnai2 messenger RNA by CD11c(+) cells in the colonic lamina propria by PrimeFlow, expression of IL6 in DCs by flow cytometry, and secretion of cytokines in sera and colon tissues by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We obtained colon tumor and matched nontumor tissues from 83 patients with colorectal cancer having surgery in China and 35 patients with CAC in the United States. Mouse and human colon tissues were analyzed by histology, immunoblot, immunohistochemistry, and/or RNA-sequencing analyses. RESULTS: GNAI1 and GNAI3 (GNAI1;3) double-knockout (DKO) mice developed more severe colitis after administration of DSS and significantly more colonic tumors than control mice after administration of AOM plus DSS. Development of increased tumors in DKO mice was not associated with changes in fecal microbiomes but was associated with activation of nuclear factor (NF) kappaB and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 3; increased levels of GNAI2, nitric oxide synthase 2, and IL6; increased numbers of CD4(+) DCs and MDSCs; and decreased numbers of CD8(+) DCs. IL6 was mainly produced by CD4(+)/CD11b(+), but not CD8(+), DCs in DKO mice. Injection of DKO mice with a blocking antibody against IL6 reduced the expansion of MDSCs and the number of tumors that developed after CAC induction. Incubation of MDSCs or mouse embryonic fibroblasts with IL6 induced activation of either NF-kappaB by a JAK2-TRAF6-TAK1-CHUK/IKKB signaling pathway or STAT3 by JAK2. This activation resulted in expression of GNAI2, IL6 signal transducer (IL6ST, also called GP130) and nitric oxide synthase 2, and expansion of MDSCs; the expression levels of these proteins and expansion of MDSCs were further increased by the absence of GNAI1;3 in cells and mice. Conditional disruption of Gnai2 in CD11c(+) cells of DKO mice prevented activation of NF-kappaB and STAT3 and changes in numbers of DCs and MDSCs. Colon tumor tissues from patients with CAC had reduced levels of GNAI1 and GNAI3 and increased levels of GNAI2 compared with normal tissues. Further analysis of a public human colorectal tumor DNA microarray database (GSE39582) showed that low Gani1 and Gnai3 messenger RNA expression and high Gnai2 messenger RNA expression were significantly associated with decreased relapse-free survival. CONCLUSIONS: GNAI1;3 suppresses DSS-plus-AOM-induced colon tumor development in mice, whereas expression of GNAI2 in CD11c(+) cells and IL6 in CD4(+)/CD11b(+) DCs appears to promote these effects. Strategies to induce GNAI1;3, or block GNAI2 and IL6, might be developed for the prevention or therapy of CAC in patients.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) particles are thought to be secreted from hepatocytes through multivesicular bodies (MVBs); however, the cellular trafficking mechanisms prior to this process remain elusive. It has been reported that CCDC88A/GIV expression, which is involved in multiple aspects of vesicular trafficking, changes dynamically at different phases of chronic HBV infection. In this study, we focused on the role of CCDC88A/GIV in HBV replication. In the liver tissues of chronically HBV-infected patients, HBV infection significantly enhanced CCDC88A/GIV expression, and increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and autophagosome formation without changing endosome formation. Additionally, colocalization of SHBsAg with early endosomes (~30.2%) far exceeded that with autophagosomes (~3.2%). In hepatoma cells, CCDC88A/GIV and its downstream proteins, DNM2 (dynamin 2; a CCDC88A/GIV effector), CLTC and RAB5A significantly enhanced HBV replication and endosome formation but inhibited autophagosome formation. Blocking endocytosis disrupted HBsAg trafficking to endosomes and caused its accumulation in the ER lumen, which triggered ER stress to initiate the unfolded protein response (UPR). Therefore, HBsAg trafficking into autophagosomes was increased, and the lysosomal activity and maturation, which was inhibited by HBV infection, were restored. Meanwhile, core particles were prevented from entering MVBs. CCDC88A/GIV and its other effector, GNAI3, decreased autophagic flux by enhancing the insulin-induced AKT-MTOR pathway, thereby inhibiting HBV antigens autophagic degradation. In conclusion, CCDC88A/GIV enhanced HBV replication by increasing endosomal trafficking and reducing autophagic degradation of HBV antigens, suggesting that CCDC88A/GIV-mediated endosomal trafficking plays an important role in HBV replication and progeny secretion.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin beta; AO: acridine orange; ATF6: activating transcription factor 6; CCDC88A/GIV: coiled-coil domain containing 88A; CLTC: clathrin heavy chain; CQ: chloroquine; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DNM2: dynamin 2; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ERN1: endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 1; EIF2A: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2A; FBS: fetal bovine serum; GNAI3: G protein subunit alpha i3; HBV: hepatitis B virus; HBV RIs: HBV replication intermediates; HBcAg: HBV core protein; HBsAg: HBV surface antigen; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MVBs: multivesicular bodies; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; PDI: protein disulfide isomerase; PHH: primary human hepatocyte; pSM2: a HBV replication-competent plasmid; HSPA5/BIP: heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SEM: standard error of the mean; UPR: unfolded protein response.
Auriculocondylar syndrome is a rare craniofacial disorder comprising core features of micrognathia, condyle dysplasia and question mark ear. Causative variants have been identified in PLCB4, GNAI3 and EDN1, which are predicted to function within the EDN1-EDNRA pathway during early pharyngeal arch patterning. To date, two GNAI3 variants in three families have been reported. Here we report three novel GNAI3 variants, one segregating with affected members in a family previously linked to 1p21.1-q23.3 and two de novo variants in simplex cases. Two variants occur in known functional motifs, the G1 and G4 boxes, and the third variant is one amino acid outside of the G1 box. Structural modeling shows that all five altered GNAI3 residues identified to date cluster in a region involved in GDP/GTP binding. We hypothesize that all GNAI3 variants lead to dominant negative effects.
Inhibitory G proteins (G(i) proteins) are highly homologous but play distinct biological roles. However, their isoform-specific detection remains challenging. To facilitate the analysis of Galpha(i3) expression, we generated a Gnai3﻿﻿- ﻿iresGFP reporter mouse line. An internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) was inserted behind the stop-codon of the Gnai3 gene to initiate simultaneous translation of the GFP cDNA together with Galpha(i3). The expression of GFP was confirmed in spleen and thymus tissue by immunoblot analysis. Importantly, the GFP knock-in (ki) did not alter Galpha(i3) expression levels in all organs tested including spleen and thymus compared to wild-type littermates. Flow cytometry of thymocytes, splenic and blood cell suspensions revealed significantly higher GFP fluorescence intensities in homozygous ki/ki animals compared to heterozygous mice (+/ki). Using cell-type specific surface markers GFP fluorescence was assigned to B cells, T cells, macrophages and granulocytes from both splenic and blood cells and additionally blood-derived platelets. Moreover, immunofluorescent staining of the inner ear from knock-in mice unraveled GFP expression in sensory and non-sensory cell types, with highest levels in Deiter's cells and in the first row of Hensen's cells in the organ of Corti, indicating a novel site for Galpha(i3) expression. In summary, the Gnai3-﻿﻿ iresGFP reporter mouse represents an ideal tool for precise analyses of Galpha(i3) expression patterns and sites.
Guanine nucleotide binding protein, alpha inhibiting activity polypeptide 3 (GNAI3) is involved in many biological processes. However, its biological function in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unclear. An immunohistochemical staining analysis revealed that GNAI3 protein was down-regulated in HCC compared to non-cancerous liver. Furthermore, transwell assays indicated that GNAI3 inhibits HCC cell migration and invasion. Using software predictions and experimental screening, we found that miR-222 could directly bind to GNAI3 mRNA and decrease GNAI3 protein expression in HCC cells. Moreover, miR-222 was up-regulated in HCC and negatively correlated with GNAI3 protein expression. These results indicated that down-regulation of GNAI3 might be caused by up-regulation of miR-222 in HCC. In conclusion, GNAI3 was down-regulated by miR-222 in HCC, and this deregulation promoted migration and invasion of HCC. These findings extended our insight into the complex molecular mechanisms underlying the invasion and metastasis of HCC and may provide new therapeutic targets.
Ocular albinism type 1 (OA), caused by mutations in the OA1 gene, encodes a G-protein coupled receptor, OA1, localized in melanosomal membranes of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). This disorder is characterized by both RPE macro-melanosomes and abnormal decussation of ganglion cell axons at the brain's optic chiasm. We demonstrated previously that Oa1 specifically activates Galphai3, which also signals in the Oa1 transduction pathway that regulates melanosomal biogenesis. In this study, we screened the human Galphai3 gene, GNAI3, in DNA samples from 26 patients who had all clinical characteristics of OA but in whom a specific mutation in the OA1 gene had not been found, and in 6 normal control individuals. Using the Agilent HaloPlex Target Enrichment System and next-generation sequencing (NGS) on the Illumina MiSeq platform, we identified 518 variants after rigorous filtering. Many of these variants were corroborated by Sanger sequencing. Overall, 98.8% coverage of the GNAI3 gene was obtained by the HaloPlex amplicons. Of all variants, 6 non-synonymous and 3 synonymous were in exons, 41 in a non-coding exon embedded in the 3' untranslated region (UTR), 6 in the 5' UTR, and 462 in introns. These variants included novel SNVs, insertions, deletions, and a frameshift mutation. All were found in at least one patient but none in control samples. Using computational methods, we modeled the GNAI3 protein and its non-synonymous exonic mutations and determined that several of these may be the cause of disease in the patients studied. Thus, we have identified GNAI3 as a second gene possibly responsible for X-linked ocular albinism.
BACKGROUND: Auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND) is a rare genetic disease that affects structures derived from the first and second pharyngeal arches, mainly resulting in micrognathia and auricular malformations. To date, pathogenic variants have been identified in three genes involved in the EDN1-DLX5/6 pathway (PLCB4, GNAI3 and EDN1) and some cases remain unsolved. Here we studied a large unsolved four-generation family. METHODS: We performed linkage analysis, resequencing and Capture-C to investigate the causative variant of this family. To test the pathogenicity of the CNV found, we modelled the disease in patient craniofacial progenitor cells, including induced pluripotent cell (iPSC)-derived neural crest and mesenchymal cells. RESULTS: This study highlights a fourth locus causative of ARCND, represented by a tandem duplication of 430 kb in a candidate region on chromosome 7 defined by linkage analysis. This duplication segregates with the disease in the family (LOD score=2.88) and includes HDAC9, which is located over 200 kb telomeric to the top candidate gene TWIST1. Notably, Capture-C analysis revealed multiple cis interactions between the TWIST1 promoter and possible regulatory elements within the duplicated region. Modelling of the disease revealed an increased expression of HDAC9 and its neighbouring gene, TWIST1, in neural crest cells. We also identified decreased migration of iPSC-derived neural crest cells together with dysregulation of osteogenic differentiation in iPSC-affected mesenchymal stem cells. CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that the 430 kb duplication is causative of the ARCND phenotype in this family and that deregulation of TWIST1 expression during craniofacial development can contribute to the phenotype.
Pilocytic astrocytoma (PA), a central nervous system (CNS) World Health Organization grade 1 tumor, is mainly seen in children or young adults aged 5-19. Surgical resection often provides excellent outcomes, but residual tumors may still remain. This low-grade tumor is well recognized for its classic radiological and morphological features; however, some unique molecular findings have been unveiled by the application of next-generation sequencing (NGS). Among the genetic abnormalities identified in this low-grade tumor, increasing evidence indicates that BRAF alterations, especially BRAF fusions, play an essential role in PA tumorigenesis. Among the several fusion partner genes identified in PAs, KIAA1549-BRAF fusion is notably the most common detectable genetic alteration, especially in the cerebellar PAs. Here, we report a case of a young adult patient with a large, right-sided posterior fossa cerebellar and cerebellopontine angle region mass consistent with a PA. Of note, NGS detected a novel GNAI3-BRAF fusion, which results in an in-frame fusion protein containing the kinase domain of BRAF. This finding expands the knowledge of BRAF fusions in the tumorigenesis of PAs, provides an additional molecular signature for diagnosis, and a target for future therapy.
Craniofacial morphogenesis is regulated in part by signaling from the Endothelin receptor type A (EDNRA). Pathogenic variants in EDNRA signaling pathway components EDNRA, GNAI3, PCLB4, and EDN1 cause Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Alopecia (MFDA), Auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND) 1, 2, and 3, respectively. However, cardiovascular development is normal in MFDA and ARCND individuals, unlike Ednra knockout mice. One explanation may be that partial EDNRA signaling remains in MFDA and ARCND, as mice with reduced, but not absent, EDNRA signaling also lack a cardiovascular phenotype. Here we report an individual with craniofacial and cardiovascular malformations mimicking the Ednra (-/-) mouse phenotype, including a distinctive micrognathia with microstomia and a hypoplastic aortic arch. Exome sequencing found a novel homozygous missense variant in EDNRA (c.1142A>C; p.Q381P). Bioluminescence resonance energy transfer assays revealed that this amino acid substitution in helix 8 of EDNRA prevents recruitment of G proteins to the receptor, abrogating subsequent receptor activation by its ligand, Endothelin-1. This homozygous variant is thus the first reported loss-of-function EDNRA allele, resulting in a syndrome we have named Oro-Oto-Cardiac Syndrome. Further, our results illustrate that EDNRA signaling is required for both normal human craniofacial and cardiovascular development, and that limited EDNRA signaling is likely retained in ARCND and MFDA individuals. This work illustrates a straightforward approach to identifying the functional consequence of novel genetic variants in signaling molecules associated with malformation syndromes.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate the regulatory role of G protein subunit alpha i3 (GNAI3) in periodontitis. DESIGN: Following the induction of human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs) with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the mRNA and protein expressions of GNAI3 and Lin28A were detected by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and western blot. The transfection efficiency of Oe-GNAI3 and sh-Lin28A was examined by virtue of RT-qPCR and western blot. With the application of ELISA and flow cytometry, the releases of inflammatory cytokines and cell apoptosis were appraised. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining and alizarin red S (ARS) staining were conducted to evaluate osteogenic differentiation. Next, the binding ability of Lin28A with GNAI3 mRNA was estimated by radioimmunoprecipitation (RIP) assay while the stability of GNAI3 mRNA was assessed utilizing RT-qPCR. Western blot was employed for the measurement of inflammation-, apoptosis- and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)/NOD-like receptor family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome pathway-related proteins and osteogenic markers. RESULTS: The expression of GNAI3 was down-regulated in LPS-induced hPDLSCs. After the transfection with Oe-GNAI3, the inflammation and apoptosis in LPS-induced hPDLSCs were inhibited while osteogenic differentiation was promoted. Moreover, Lin28A could stabilize GNAI3 mRNA and Lin28A knockdown significantly reduced GNAI3 expression. Further experiments verified that the inhibitory effects of GNAI3 overexpression on LPS-induced cellular inflammation and cell apoptosis as well as the promotive effects on osteogenic differentiation in hPDLSCs were all partially counteracted by Lin28A depletion, which may possibly be mediated via the regulation of the NF-kappaB/NLRP3 inflammasome pathway. CONCLUSION: GNAI3 that mediated by Lin28A regulates the inflammation and osteogenic differentiation in LPS-induced hPDLSCs by mediating the NF-kappaB/NLRP3 inflammasome pathway.
Ovarian cancer (OC) is among the most malignant tumors of the female reproductive system. The role of autophagy in cancer is complex, and the functional relationship between autophagy-related genes and OC remains unclear. Here, the prognostic value of autophagy-related genes in OC and relationships between autophagy and immune function were evaluated. OC data from The Cancer Genome Atlas and the Human Autophagy Database were obtained to identify autophagy-related genes. Univariate and multivariate Cox analyses were used to construct a prognostic model based on autophagy-related genes. Relationships between risk scores and clinical traits were evaluated. Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and Cytoscape were used to analyze gene functions and their effects on the immune microenvironment. Relationships between autophagy genes and long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) were evaluated by Pearson's correlation coefficients, and lncRNAs corresponding to the autophagy-related genes associated with OC prognosis were used to construct a model. Relationships between risk scores and survival and prognosis were evaluated. Finally, a gene set enrichment analysis was performed. Seven autophagy-related genes (CAPN1, CDKN1B, DNAJB1, GNAI3, MTMR14, RHEB, and SIRT2) were identified as independent predictors of prognosis. Three lncRNAs corresponding to autophagy genes independently influenced prognosis. Autophagy genes are closely related to immunity. Fifteen immune cell types showed different levels of infiltration between the high- and low-risk groups. Moreover, immune cell infiltration differed between the high- and low-risk groups based on the model. Our analysis of genes and lncRNAs related to prognosis clarifies the role of autophagy in OC and provides a theoretical basis for further research.
BACKGROUND: The overwhelming majority of subjects in the current silicosis mRNA and microRNA (miRNA) expression profile are of human blood, lung cells or a rat model, which puts limits on the understanding of silicosis pathogenesis and therapy. To address the limitations, our investigation was focused on differentially expressed mRNA and miRNA profiles in lung tissue from silicosis patients to explore potential biomarker for early detection of silicosis. METHODS: A transcriptome study was conducted based on lung tissue from 15 silicosis patients and eight normal people, and blood samples from 404 silicosis patients and 177 normal people. Three early stage silicosis, five advanced silicosis and four normal lung tissues were randomly selected for microarray processing and analyze. The differentially expressed mRNAs were further used to conduct Gene Ontology and pathway analyses. Series test of cluster was performed to explore possible changes in differentially expressed mRNA and miRNA expression patterns during the process of silicosis. The blood samples and remaining lung tissues were used in a quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) (RT-qPCR). RESULTS: In total, 1417 and 241 differentially expressed mRNAs and miRNAs were identified between lung tissue from silicosis patients and normal people (p < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference in most mRNA or miRNA expression between early stage and advanced stage silicosis lung tissues. RT-qPCR validation results in lung tissues showed expression of four mRNAs (HIF1A, SOCS3, GNAI3 and PTEN) and seven miRNAs was significantly down-regulated compared to those of control group. Nevertheless, PTEN and GNAI3 expression was significantly up-regulated (p < 0.001) in blood samples. The bisulfite sequencing PCR demonstrated that PTEN had significantly decreased the methylation rate in blood samples of silicosis patients. CONCLUSIONS: PTEN might be a potential biomarker for silicosis as a result of low methylation in the blood.
The delta-opioid receptor (delta-OR) couples to Gi/Go proteins to modulate a variety of responses in the nervous system. Tauhe regulator of G protein signalling 4 (RGS4) was previously shown to directly interact within the C-terminal region of delta-OR using its N-terminal domain to negatively modulate opioid receptor signalling. Herein, using molecular dynamics simulations and in vitro pull-down experiments we delimit this interaction to 12 helix 8 residues of delta-OmicronR and to the first 17 N-terminal residues (NT) of RGS4. Monitoring the complex arrangement and stabilization between RGS4 and delta-OR by molecular dynamics simulations combined with mutagenesis studies, we defined that two critical interactions are formed: one between Phe329 of helix8 of delta-OmicronR and Pro9 of the NT of RGS4 and the other a salt bridge between Glu323 of delta-OmicronR and Lys17 of RGS4. Our observations allow drafting for the first time a structural model of a ternary complex including the delta-opioid receptor, a G protein and a RGS protein. Furthermore, the high degree of conservation among opioid receptors of the RGS4-binding region, points to a conserved interaction mode between opioid receptors and this important regulatory protein.
BACKGROUND: The complex and not yet fully understood etiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) shows important proteopathic signs which are unlikely to be linked to a single protein. However, protein subsets from deep proteomic datasets can be useful in stratifying patient risk, identifying stage dependent disease markers, and suggesting possible disease mechanisms. OBJECTIVE: The objective was to identify protein subsets that best classify subjects into control, asymptomatic Alzheimer's disease (AsymAD), and AD. METHODS: Data comprised 6 cohorts; 620 subjects; 3,334 proteins. Brain tissue-derived predictive protein subsets for classifying AD, AsymAD, or control were identified and validated with label-free quantification and machine learning. RESULTS: A 29-protein subset accurately classified AD (AUC = 0.94). However, an 88-protein subset best predicted AsymAD (AUC = 0.92) or Control (AUC = 0.92) from AD (AUC = 0.98). AD versus Control: APP, DHX15, NRXN1, PBXIP1, RABEP1, STOM, and VGF. AD versus AsymAD: ALDH1A1, BDH2, C4A, FABP7, GABBR2, GNAI3, PBXIP1, and PRKAR1B. AsymAD versus Control: APP, C4A, DMXL1, EXOC2, PITPNB, RABEP1, and VGF. Additional predictors: DNAJA3, PTBP2, SLC30A9, VAT1L, CROCC, PNP, SNCB, ENPP6, HAPLN2, PSMD4, and CMAS. CONCLUSION: Biomarkers were dynamically separable across disease stages. Predictive proteins were significantly enriched to sugar metabolism.
This study aimed to screen autophagy-related genes (ARGs) that affect the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) gene expression data and genotype-tissue expression (GTEx) databases. The expression data of pancreatic cancer and normal pancreas were downloaded from TCGA and GTEx databases. Human ARGs list was obtained through the Human Autophagy Database (HADB) and GeneCards database. The Wilcox test was performed to screen differentially expressed ARGs. Differentially expressed ARGs were analyzed by gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) functional enrichment analyses. The CIBER-SORT algorithm was utilized to analyze immune cell infiltration in samples. A total of 21 up-regulated ARGs and 11 down-regulated ARGs were screened in the TCGA-GTEx integrated data set. The enrichment analysis of GO and KEGG showed that 32 differentially expressed ARGs were significantly enriched in autophagy-related pathways. Univariate Cox regression analysis showed that 12 candidate ARGs were significantly related to the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients. Multivariate Cox regression analysis found that ATG16L2, GNAI3, APOL1, and PTK6 genes may be the key ARGs affecting the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients. Based on these four key ARGs, a prognostic risk assessment model was constructed, and pancreatic cancer patients were classified into the high-risk and low-risk group according to the risk value. Survival analysis and ROC analysis confirmed that the prognostic risk assessment model can accurately predict the prognosis of patients with pancreatic cancer. Immune infiltration analysis found that B cells naive, B cells memory, plasma cells, T cells CD8, T cells CD4 memory resting, monocytes and macrophages M0 were significantly different in tissue samples of pancreatic cancer patients in the high and low risk groups. Pearson's correlation coefficient showed that the four key ARGs may affect the development of pancreatic cancer by affecting immune cell components in the tumor micro-environment. In conclusion, ATG16L2, GNAI3, APOL1, and PTK6 may be related to the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients. The prognostic risk assessment model constructed based on these four key ARGs could accurately predict the prognosis of pancreatic cancer patients.
Auriculocondylar syndrome, mainly characterized by micrognathia, small mandibular condyle, and question mark ears, is a rare disease segregating in an autosomal dominant pattern in the majority of the families reported in the literature. So far, pathogenic variants in PLCB4, GNAI3, and EDN1 have been associated with this syndrome. It is caused by a developmental abnormality of the first and second pharyngeal arches and it is associated with great inter- and intra-familial clinical variability, with some patients not presenting the typical phenotype of the syndrome. Moreover, only a few patients of each molecular subtype of Auriculocondylar syndrome have been reported and sequenced. Therefore, the spectrum of clinical and genetic variability is still not defined. In order to address these questions, we searched for alterations in PLCB4, GNAI3, and EDN1 in patients with typical Auriculocondylar syndrome (n = 3), Pierre Robin sequence-plus (n = 3), micrognathia with additional craniofacial malformations (n = 4), or non-specific auricular dysplasia (n = 1), which could represent subtypes of Auriculocondylar syndrome. We found novel pathogenic variants in PLCB4 only in two of three index patients with typical Auriculocondylar syndrome. We also performed a detailed comparative analysis of the patients presented in this study with those previously published, which showed that the pattern of auricular abnormality and full cheeks were associated with molecularly characterized individuals with Auriculocondylar syndrome. Finally, our data contribute to a better definition of a set of parameters for clinical classification that may be used as a guidance for geneticists ordering molecular testing for Auriculocondylar syndrome. (c) 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex degenerative disease of the central nervous system, and elucidating its pathogenesis remains challenging. In this study, we used the inverse-variance weighted (IVW) model as the major analysis method to perform hypothesis-free Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis on the data from MRC IEU OpenGWAS (18,097 exposure traits and 16 AD outcome traits), and conducted sensitivity analysis with six models, to assess the robustness of the IVW results, to identify various classes of risk or protective factors for AD, early-onset AD, and late-onset AD. We generated 400,274 data entries in total, among which the major analysis method of the IVW model consists of 73,129 records with 4840 exposure traits, which fall into 10 categories: Disease, Medical laboratory science, Imaging, Anthropometric, Treatment, Molecular trait, Gut microbiota, Past history, Family history, and Lifestyle trait. More importantly, a freely accessed online platform called MRAD (https://gwasmrad.com/mrad/) has been developed using the Shiny package with MR analysis results. Additionally, novel potential AD therapeutic targets (CD33, TBCA, VPS29, GNAI3, PSME1) are identified, among which CD33 was positively associated with the main outcome traits of AD, as well as with both EOAD and LOAD. TBCA and VPS29 were negatively associated with the main outcome traits of AD, as well as with both EOAD and LOAD. GNAI3 and PSME1 were negatively associated with the main outcome traits of AD, as well as with LOAD, but had no significant causal association with EOAD. The findings of our research advance our understanding of the etiology of AD.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: The pathogenesis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has not be fully elucidated, and the lack of therapeutic strategies for NAFLD is an urgent health problem. Guanine nucleotide binding protein, alpha inhibiting activity polypeptide 3 (GNAI3) participates in several biological processes, but its relationship with lipid metabolism and NAFLD has not yet been reported. We aimed to determine the function of GNAI3 in the development of NAFLD. METHODS: Mice were fed a methionine and choline-deficient diet to induce NAFLD. An NAFLD model in HepG2 cells was induced by free fatty acid treatment. GNAI3 levels in HepG2 cells were downregulated by shRNA. Protein levels of related proteins were evaluated by Western blotting, and mRNA levels were determined by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Hematoxylin and eosin and Oil Red O staining were used to observe histological changes in liver tissue. RESULTS: The dysregulated hepatic lipid metabolism in the NAFLD mouse model was enhanced by GNAI3 knockout, which also provoked worse liver damage. In the NAFLD model in HepG2 cells, the downregulation of GNAI3 promoted cellular lipid accumulation and enhanced the changes in lipid metabolic enzyme levels. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that GNAI3 participates in the development of NAFLD in both cellular and mouse models. The data indicate that GNAI3 is a potential new target for the treatment of NAFLD in humans.
Auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND) is an autosomal monogenic disorder characterised by external ear abnormalities and micrognathia due to hypoplasia of the mandibular rami, condyle and coronoid process. Genetically, three subtypes of ARCND (ARCND1, ARCND2 and ARCND3) have been reported. To date, five pathogenic variants of GNAI3 have been reported in ARCND1 patients. Here, we report a novel variant of GNAI3 (NM_006496:c.807C>A:p.(Asn269Lys)) in a Japanese girl with micrognathia using trio-based whole exome sequencing analysis. The GNAI3 gene encodes a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein. The novel variant locates the guanine nucleotide-binding site, and the substitution was predicted to interfere with guanine nucleotide-binding by in silico structural analysis. Three-dimensional computer tomography scan, or cephalogram, displayed severely hypoplastic mandibular rami and fusion to the medial and lateral pterygoid plates, which have been recognised in other ARCND1 patients, but have not been described in ARCND2 and ARCND3, suggesting that these may be distinguishable features in ARCND1.
