Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(olf) subunit alpha; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as modulators or transducers in various transmembrane signaling systems. G(olf) alpha mediates signal transduction within the olfactory neuroepithelium and the basal ganglia. May be involved in some aspect of visual transduction, and in mediating the effect of one or more hormones/neurotransmitters.
Dystonia is a clinically and genetically highly heterogeneous neurological disorder characterized by abnormal movements and postures caused by involuntary sustained or intermittent muscle contractions. A number of groundbreaking genetic and molecular insights have recently been gained. While they enable genetic testing and counseling, their translation into new therapies is still limited. However, we are beginning to understand shared pathophysiological pathways and molecular mechanisms. It has become clear that dystonia results from a dysfunctional network involving the basal ganglia, cerebellum, thalamus, and cortex. On the molecular level, more than a handful of, often intertwined, pathways have been linked to pathogenic variants in dystonia genes, including gene transcription during neurodevelopment (e.g., KMT2B, THAP1), calcium homeostasis (e.g., ANO3, HPCA), striatal dopamine signaling (e.g., GNAL), endoplasmic reticulum stress response (e.g., EIF2AK2, PRKRA, TOR1A), autophagy (e.g., VPS16), and others. Thus, different forms of dystonia can be molecularly grouped, which may facilitate treatment development in the future.
A neurological condition called dystonia results in abnormal, uncontrollable postures or movements because of sporadic or continuous muscular spasms. Several varieties of dystonia can impact people of all ages, leading to severe impairment and a decreased standard of living. The discovery of genes causing variations of single or mixed dystonia has improved our understanding of the disease's etiology. Genetic dystonias are linked to several genes, including pathogenic variations of VPS16, TOR1A, THAP1, GNAL, and ANO3. Diagnosis of dystonia is primarily based on clinical symptoms, which can be challenging due to overlapping symptoms with other neurological conditions, such as Parkinson's disease. This review aims to summarize recent advances in the genetic origins and management of focal dystonia.
While Hermann Oppenheim probably described the first cases of genetic (DYT1) dystonia in 1911, the 'modern history' of dystonia genetics dates back to 1994 when mutations in the GTP cyclohydrolase I gene were discovered to cause dopa-responsive dystonia. Due to the advent of next-generation sequencing, the field of dystonia genetics has been evolving very rapidly over the past two years, resulting in the reporting of 'DYT1-25' and, for the first time, in the identification of genes associated with adult-onset focal/segmental dystonia. However, three of these putative new genes still await independent confirmation (TUBB4/DYT4; CIZ1/DYT23; ANO3/DYT24) and only 11 'DYT' genes have been unequivocally demonstrated to cause different forms of dystonia. Based on a recent consensus approach, dystonias are subdivided on clinical grounds into isolated (with or without tremor) and combined (with other movement disorders) forms. Confirmed genes for isolated dystonias include TOR1A/DYT1; THAP1/DYT6; GNAL/DYT25. In the combined forms, dystonia is accompanied by parkinsonism (GCH1/DYT5a; TH/DYT5b; ATP1A3/DYT12; TAF1/DYT3) or myoclonus (SGCE/DYT11). Persistent and paroxysmal forms are distinguished according to their temporal pattern. The paroxysmal forms of dystonia/dyskinesias present with a mixed pattern of hyperkinetic movement disorders (PRRT2/DYT10; MR-1/DYT8; SLC2A1/DYT18).
Mainly due to the advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS), the field of genetics of dystonia has rapidly grown in recent years, which led to the discovery of a number of novel dystonia genes and the development of a new classification and nomenclature for inherited dystonias. In addition, new findings from both in vivo and in vitro studies have been published on the role of previously known dystonia genes, extending our understanding of the pathophysiology of dystonia. We here review the current knowledge and recent findings in the known genes for isolated dystonia TOR1A, THAP1, and GNAL as well as for the combined dystonias due to mutations in GCH1, ATP1A3, and SGCE. We present confirmatory evidence for a role of dystonia genes that had not yet been unequivocally established including PRKRA, TUBB4A, ANO3, and TAF1. We finally discuss selected novel genes for dystonia such as KMT2B and VAC14 along with the challenges for gene identification in the NGS era and the translational importance of dystonia genetics in clinical practice.
BACKGROUND: Prior studies have indicated that female individuals outnumber male individuals for certain types of dystonia. Few studies have addressed factors impacting these sex differences or their potential biological mechanisms. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate factors underlying sex differences in the dystonias and explore potential mechanisms for these differences. METHODS: Data from individuals with various types of dystonia were analyzed in relation to sex. Data came from two different sources. One source was the Dystonia Coalition database, which contains predominantly idiopathic adult-onset focal and segmental dystonias. The second source was the MDSGene database, which contains predominantly early-onset monogenic dystonias. RESULTS: The 3222 individuals from the Dystonia Coalition included 71% female participants and 29% male participants for an overall female-to-male ratio (F:M) of 2.4. This ratio varied according to body region affected and whether dystonia was task-specific. The female predominance was age-dependent. Sex did not have a significant impact on co-existing tremor, geste antagoniste, depression or anxiety. In the 1377 individuals from the MDSGene database, female participants outnumbered male participants for some genes (GNAL, GCH1, and ANO3) but not for other genes (THAP1, TH, and TOR1A). CONCLUSIONS: These results are in keeping with prior studies that have indicated female individuals outnumber male individuals for both adult-onset idiopathic and early onset monogenic dystonias. These results extend prior observations by revealing that sex ratios depend on the type of dystonia, age, and underlying genetics.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to provide an update on the classification, phenomenology, pathophysiology, and treatment of dystonia. RECENT FINDINGS: A revised definition based on the main phenomenologic features of dystonia has recently been developed in an expert consensus approach. Classification is based on two main axes: clinical features and etiology. Currently, genes have been reported for 14 types of monogenic isolated and combined dystonia. Isolated dystonia (with dystonic tremor) can be caused by mutations in TOR1A (DYT1), TUBB4 (DYT4), THAP1 (DYT6), PRKRA (DYT16), CIZ1 (DYT23), ANO3 (DYT24), and GNAL (DYT25). Combined dystonias (with parkinsonism or myoclonus) are further subdivided into persistent (GCHI [DYT5], SGCE [DYT11], and ATP1A3 [DYT12], with TAF1 most likely but not yet proven to be linked to DYT3) and paroxysmal (PNKD [DYT8], PRRT2 [DYT10], and SLC2A1 [DYT18]). Recent insights from neurophysiologic studies identified functional abnormalities in two networks in dystonia: the basal ganglia-sensorimotor network and, more recently, the cerebellothalamocortical pathway. Besides the well-known lack of inhibition at different CNS levels, dystonia is specifically characterized by maladaptive plasticity in the sensorimotor cortex and loss of cortical surround inhibition. The exact role (modulatory or compensatory) of the cerebellar-cortical pathways still has to be further elucidated. In addition to botulinum toxin for focal forms, deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus internus is increasingly recognized as an effective treatment for generalized and segmental dystonia. SUMMARY: The revised classification and identification of new genes for different forms of dystonia, including adult-onset segmental dystonia, enable an improved diagnostic approach. Recent pathophysiologic insights have fundamentally contributed to a better understanding of the disease mechanisms and impact on treatment, such as functional neurosurgery and nonpharmacologic treatment options.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Tremor is an important phenotypic feature of dystonia with wide variability in the reported prevalence ranging from 14 to 86.67%. This variability may be due to the types of dystonia patients reported in different studies. This article reviews research articles reporting tremor in primary monogenic dystonia. RECENT FINDINGS: We searched the MDS gene data and selected all research articles reporting tremor in primary monogenic dystonia. Tremor was reported in nine dystonia genes, namely DYT-HPCA, DYT-ANO3, DYT-KCTD17, DYT-THAP1, DYT-PRKRA, DYT-GNAL, DYT-TOR1A, DYT-KMT2B, and DYT-SGCE in the descending order of its frequency. HPCA gene mutation is rare, but all reported patients had tremor. Similarly, tremor was reported in eight genes associated with dystonia parkinsonism, namely DYT-SLC6A3, DYT-TH, DYT-SPR, DYT-PTS, DYT-GCH1, DYT-TAF1, DYT-QDPR, and DYT-SCL30A10 in the descending order of its prevalence. DYT-HPCA and DYT-ANO3 gene showed the highest prevalence of tremor in isolated dystonia, and DYT-SLC6A3 has the highest prevalence of tremor in combined dystonia.
The past year has been extremely successful with regard to the genetics of dystonia, with the identification of four new dystonia genes (CIZ1, ANO3, GNAL, and TUBB4A). This progress was primarily achieved because of the application of a new technology, next-generation DNA sequencing, which allows rapid and comprehensive assessment of a patient's genome. In addition, a combination of next-generation and traditional Sanger sequencing has expanded the phenotypic spectrum associated with some of the dystonia plus (ATP1A3) and paroxysmal (PRRT2) loci. This article reviews the newly identified genes and phenotypes and discusses the future applications of next-generation sequencing to dystonia research.
Recent decades have witnessed dramatic increases in understanding of the genetics of dystonia - a movement disorder characterized by involuntary twisting and abnormal posture. Hampered by a lack of overt neuropathology, researchers are investigating isolated monogenic causes to pinpoint common molecular mechanisms in this heterogeneous disease. Evidence from imaging, cellular, and murine work implicates deficiencies in dopamine neurotransmission, transcriptional dysregulation, and selective vulnerability of distinct neuronal populations to disease mutations. Studies of genetic forms of dystonia are also illuminating the developmental dependence of disease symptoms that is typical of many forms of the disease. As understanding of monogenic forms of dystonia grows, a clearer picture will develop of the abnormal motor circuitry behind this relatively common phenomenology. This chapter focuses on the current data covering the etiology and epidemiology, clinical presentation, and pathogenesis of four monogenic forms of isolated dystonia: DYT-TOR1A, DYT-THAP1, DYT-GCH1, and DYT-GNAL.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the prevalence of TOR1A, GNAL and THAP1 variants as the cause of dystonia in a cohort of Spanish patients with isolated dystonia and in the literature. METHODS: A population of 2028 subjects (including 1053 patients with different subtypes of isolated dystonia and 975 healthy controls) from southern and central Spain was included. The genes TOR1A, THAP1 and GNAL were screened using a combination of high-resolution melting analysis and direct DNA resequencing. In addition, an extensive literature search to identify original articles (published before 10 August 2020) reporting mutations in TOR1A, THAP1 or GNAL associated to dystonia was performed. RESULTS: Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in TOR1A, THAP1 and GNAL were identified in 0.48%, 0.57% and 0.29% of our patients, respectively. Five patients carried the variation p.Glu303del in TOR1A. A very rare variant in GNAL (p.Ser238Asn) was found as a putative risk factor for dystonia. In the literature, variations in TOR1A, THAP1 and GNAL accounted for about 6%, 1.8% and 1.1% of published dystonia patients, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: There is a different genetic contribution to dystonia of these three genes in our patients (about 1.3% of patients) and in the literature (about 3.6% of patients), probably due the high proportion of adult-onset cases in our cohort. As regards age at onset, site of dystonia onset, and final distribution, in our population there is a clear differentiation between DYT-TOR1A and DYT-GNAL, with DYT-THAP1 likely to be an intermediate phenotype.
This comprehensive MDSGene review is devoted to 7 genes - TOR1A, THAP1, GNAL, ANO3, PRKRA, KMT2B, and HPCA - mutations in which may cause isolated dystonia. It followed MDSGene's standardized data extraction protocol and screened a total of ~1200 citations. Phenotypic and genotypic data on ~1200 patients with 254 different mutations were curated and analyzed. There were differences regarding age at onset, site of onset, and distribution of symptoms across mutation carriers in all 7 genes. Although carriers of TOR1A, THAP1, PRKRA, KMT2B, or HPCA mutations mostly showed childhood and adolescent onset, patients with GNAL and ANO3 mutations often developed first symptoms in adulthood. GNAL and KMT2B mutation carriers frequently have 1 predominant site of onset, that is, the neck (GNAL) or the lower limbs (KMT2B), whereas site of onset in DYT-TOR1A, DYT-THAP1, DYT-ANO3, DYT-PRKRA, and DYT-HPCA was broader. However, in most DYT-THAP1 and DYT-ANO3 patients, dystonia first manifested in the upper half of the body (upper limb, neck, and craniofacial/laryngeal), whereas onset in DYT-TOR1A, DYT-PRKRA and DYT-HPCA was frequently observed in an extremity, including both upper and lower ones. For ANO3, a segmental/multifocal distribution was typical, whereas TOR1A, PRKRA, KMT2B, and HPCA mutation carriers commonly developed generalized dystonia. THAP1 mutation carriers presented with focal, segmental/multifocal, or generalized dystonia in almost equal proportions. GNAL mutation carriers rarely showed generalization. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the current knowledge of hereditary isolated dystonia. The data are also available in an online database (http://www.mdsgene.org), which additionally offers descriptive summary statistics. (c) 2021 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
Four genes associated with isolated dystonia are currently well replicated and validated. DYT-THAP1 manifests as young-onset generalized dystonia with predominant craniocervical symptoms; and is associated with mostly deleterious missense variation in the THAP1 gene. De novo and inherited missense and protein truncating variation in GNAL as well as primarily missense variation in ANO3 cause isolated focal and/or segmental dystonia with preference for the upper half of the body and older ages at onset. The GAG deletion in TOR1A is associated with generalized dystonia with onset in childhood in the lower limbs. Rare variation in these genes causes monogenic sporadic and inherited forms of isolated dystonia; common variation may confer risk and imply that dystonia is a polygenic trait in a subset of cases. Although candidate gene screens have been successful in the past in detecting gene-disease associations, recent application of whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing methods enable unbiased capture of all genetic variation that may explain the phenotype. However, careful variant-level evaluation is necessary in every case, even in genes that have previously been associated with disease. We review the genetic architecture and phenotype of DYT-THAP1, DYT-GNAL, DYT-ANO3, and DYT-TOR1A by collecting case reports from the literature and performing variant classification using pathogenicity criteria.
Dystonia, a common and genetically heterogeneous neurological disorder, was recently defined as "a movement disorder characterized by sustained or intermittent muscle contractions causing abnormal, often repetitive, movements, postures, or both." Via the application of whole-exome sequencing, the genetic landscape of dystonia and closely related movement disorders is becoming exposed. In particular, several "novel" genetic causes have been causally associated with dystonia or dystonia-related disorders over the past 2 years. These genes include PRRT2 (DYT10), CIZ1 (DYT23), ANO3 (DYT24), GNAL (DYT25), and TUBB4A (DYT4). Despite these advances, major gaps remain in identifying the genetic origins for most cases of adult-onset isolated dystonia. Furthermore, model systems are needed to study the biology of PRRT2, CIZ1, ANO3, Galphaolf, and TUBB4A in the context of dystonia. This review focuses on these recent additions to the family of dystonia genes, genotype-phenotype correlations, and possible cellular contributions of the encoded proteins to the development of dystonia.
Loss-of-function mutations in the GNAL gene are responsible for DYT-GNAL dystonia. However, how GNAL mutations contribute to synaptic dysfunction is still unclear. The GNAL gene encodes the Galpha(olf) protein, an isoform of stimulatory Galpha(s) enriched in the striatum, with a key role in the regulation of cAMP signaling. Here, we used a combined biochemical and electrophysiological approach to study GPCR-mediated AC-cAMP cascade in the striatum of the heterozygous GNAL (GNAL(+/-)) rat model. We first analyzed adenosine type 2 (A2AR), and dopamine type 1 (D1R) receptors, which are directly coupled to Galpha(olf), and observed that the total levels of A2AR were increased, whereas D1R level was unaltered in GNAL(+/-) rats. In addition, the striatal isoform of adenylyl cyclase (AC5) was reduced, despite unaltered basal cAMP levels. Notably, the protein expression level of dopamine type 2 receptor (D2R), that inhibits the AC5-cAMP signaling pathway, was also reduced, similar to what observed in different DYT-TOR1A dystonia models. Accordingly, in the GNAL(+/-) rat striatum we found altered levels of the D2R regulatory proteins, RGS9-2, spinophilin, Gbeta5 and beta-arrestin2, suggesting a downregulation of D2R signaling cascade. Additionally, by analyzing the responses of striatal cholinergic interneurons to D2R activation, we found that the receptor-mediated inhibitory effect is significantly attenuated in GNAL(+/-) interneurons. Altogether, our findings demonstrate a profound alteration in the A2AR/D2R-AC-cAMP cascade in the striatum of the rat DYT-GNAL dystonia model, and provide a plausible explanation for our previous findings on the loss of dopamine D2R-dependent corticostriatal long-term depression.
BACKGROUND: Rare autosomal-dominant mutations in ANO3 and GNAL have been recently shown to represent novel genetic factors underlying primary torsion dystonia (PTD) with predominantly craniocervical involvement. METHODS: We used high-resolution melting to screen all exons of ANO3 and GNAL for rare sequence variants in a population of 342 German individuals with mainly sporadic PTD and 376 general population controls. RESULTS: We identified 2 novel missense variants in ANO3 (p.Ile833Val and p.Gly973Arg) and 1 novel missense variant in GNAL (p.Val146Met) in three different nonfamilial cases. Variant carriers presented with adult-onset dystonia involving the neck and/or face. In controls, 3 rare ANO3 missense variants (p.Tyr235Cys, p.Asn256Ser, and p.Pro893Leu) but no rare nonsynonymous GNAL variants were present. CONCLUSIONS: GNAL variants seem to be a rare cause of PTD in our mainly sporadic German sample. Low frequency missense variants in ANO3 occur in both cases and controls, warranting further assessment of this gene in PTD pathogenesis.
Dystonia is a common movement disorder seen by neurologists in clinic. Genetic forms of the disease are important to recognize clinically and also provide valuable information about possible pathogenic mechanisms within the wider disorder. In the past few years, with the advent of new sequencing technologies, there has been a step change in the pace of discovery in the field of dystonia genetics. In just over a year, four new genes have been shown to cause primary dystonia (CIZ1, ANO3, TUBB4A and GNAL), PRRT2 has been identified as the cause of paroxysmal kinesigenic dystonia and other genes, such as SLC30A10 and ATP1A3, have been linked to more complicated forms of dystonia or new phenotypes. In this review, we provide an overview of the current state of knowledge regarding genetic forms of dystonia-related to both new and well-known genes alike-and incorporating genetic, clinical and molecular information. We discuss the mechanistic insights provided by the study of the genetic causes of dystonia and provide a helpful clinical algorithm to aid clinicians in correctly predicting the genetic basis of various forms of dystonia.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Since the advent of next-generation sequencing, the number of genes associated with dystonia has been growing exponentially. We provide here a comprehensive review of the latest genetic discoveries in the field of dystonia and discuss how the growing knowledge of biology underlying monogenic dystonias may influence and challenge current classification systems. RECENT FINDINGS: Pathogenic variants in genes without previously confirmed roles in human disease have been identified in subjects affected by isolated or combined dystonia (KMT2B, VPS16, HPCA, KCTD17, DNAJC12, SLC18A2) and complex dystonia (SQSTM1, IRF2BPL, YY1, VPS41). Importantly, the classical distinction between isolated and combined dystonias has become harder to sustain since many genes have been shown to determine multiple dystonic presentations (e.g., ANO3, GNAL, ADCY5, and ATP1A3). In addition, a growing number of genes initially linked to other neurological phenotypes, such as developmental delay, epilepsy, or ataxia, are now recognized to cause prominent dystonia, occasionally in an isolated fashion (e.g., GNAO1, GNB1, SCN8A, RHOBTB2, and COQ8A). Finally, emerging analyses suggest biological convergence of genes linked to different dystonic phenotypes. While our knowledge on the genetic basis of monogenic dystonias has tremendously grown, their clinical boundaries are becoming increasingly blurry. The current phenotype-based classification may not reflect the molecular structure of the disease, urging the need for new systems based on shared biological pathways among dystonia-linked genes.
Dystonia is a neurological movement disorder characterized by sustained or intermittent involuntary muscle contractions. Loss-of-function mutations in the GNAL gene have been identified to be the cause of "isolated" dystonia DYT25. The GNAL gene encodes for the guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(olf) subunit alpha (Galpha(olf)), which is mainly expressed in the olfactory bulb and the striatum and functions as a modulator during neurotransmission coupling with D1R and A2AR. Previously, heterozygous Galpha(olf) -deficient mice (Gnal(+/-)) have been generated and showed a mild phenotype at basal condition. In contrast, homozygous deletion of Gnal in mice (Gnal(-/-)) resulted in a significantly reduced survival rate. In this study, using the CRISPR-Cas9 system we generated and characterized heterozygous Gnal knockout rats (Gnal(+/-)) with a 13 base pair deletion in the first exon of the rat Gnal splicing variant 2, a major isoform in both human and rat striatum. Gnal(+/-) rats showed early-onset phenotypes associated with impaired dopamine transmission, including reduction in locomotor activity, deficits in rotarod performance and an abnormal motor skill learning ability. At cellular and molecular level, we found down-regulated Arc expression, increased cell surface distribution of AMPA receptors, and the loss of D2R-dependent corticostriatal long-term depression (LTD) in Gnal(+/-) rats. Based on the evidence that D2R activity is normally inhibited by adenosine A2ARs, co-localized on the same population of striatal neurons, we show that blockade of A2ARs restores physiological LTD. This animal model may be a valuable tool for investigating Galpha(olf) function and finding a suitable treatment for dystonia associated with deficient dopamine transmission.
Recent consensus on the definition, phenomenology and classification of dystonia centres around phenomenology and guides our diagnostic approach for the heterogeneous group of dystonias. Current terminology classifies conditions where dystonia is the sole motor feature (apart from tremor) as 'isolated dystonia', while 'combined dystonia' refers to dystonias with other accompanying movement disorders. This review highlights recent advances in the genetics of some isolated and combined dystonic syndromes. Some genes, such as ANO3, GNAL and CIZ1, have been discovered for isolated dystonia, but they are probably not a common cause of classic cervical dystonia. Conversely, the phenotype associated with TUBB4A mutations expanded from that of isolated dystonia to a syndrome of hypomyelination with atrophy of the basal ganglia and cerebellum (H-ABC syndrome). Similarly, ATP1A3 mutations cause a wide phenotypic spectrum ranging from rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism to alternating hemiplegia of childhood. Other entities entailing dystonia-parkinsonism include dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome (SLC63 mutations); dopa-responsive dystonias; young-onset parkinsonism (PARKIN, PINK1 and DJ-1 mutations); PRKRA mutations; and X-linked TAF1 mutations, which rarely can also manifest in women. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity also characterizes myoclonus-dystonia, which includes not only the classical phenotype associated with epsilon-sarcoglycan mutations but rarely also presentation of ANO3 gene mutations, TITF1 gene mutations typically underlying benign hereditary chorea, and some dopamine synthesis pathway conditions due to GCH1 and TH mutations. Thus, new genes are being recognized for isolated dystonia, and the phenotype of known genes is broadening and now involves different combined dystonia syndromes.
GNAL encodes guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit Galpha(olf) which plays a key role in striatal medium spiny neuron (MSN)-dopamine signaling. GNAL loss-of-function mutations are causally-associated with isolated dystonia, a movement disorder characterized by involuntary muscle contractions leading to abnormal postures. Dopamine D2 receptor (D2R) blockers such as haloperidol are mainstays in the treatment of psychosis but may contribute to the development of secondary acute and tardive dystonia. Administration of haloperidol promotes cAMP-dependent signaling in D2R-expressing indirect pathway MSNs. At present, little is known about the cellular relationships among isolated, acute, and tardive dystonia. Herein, we report the effects of acute D2R blockade on motor behavior, DNA repair, cAMP-mediated histone H3 phosphorylation (Ser10), and cell death in Gnal(+/-) mice and their isogenic Gnal(+/+) littermates. In comparison to Gnal(+/+) littermates, Gnal(+/-) mice exhibited increased catalepsy responses, persistent DNA breaks, decreased cAMP-dependent histone H3 phosphorylation (Ser10), and increased cell death in response to haloperidol. In striatum, aged Gnal(+/-) mice exhibited increased global DNA methylation, increased euchromatin, and dendritic structural abnormalities. Our results provide evidence that Galpha(olf) deficiency intensifies the effects of D2R antagonism and suggests that loss-of-function variants in GNAL may increase risk for movement disorders associated with D2R blockers. We hypothesize that the effects of Galpha(olf) dysfunction and/or long-term D2R antagonism may lead to epigenetic silencing, transcriptional dysregulation, and, ultimately, cellular senescence and/or apoptosis in human brain.
