Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(q) subunit alpha; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as modulators or transducers in various transmembrane signaling systems. Regulates B-cell selection and survival and is required to prevent B-cell-dependent autoimmunity. Regulates chemotaxis of BM- derived neutrophils and dendritic cells (in vitro) (By similarity). Belongs to the G-alpha family. G(q) subfamily.
Sturge-Weber syndrome is a sporadic congenital neurocutaneous disorder caused by a somatic activating mutation in GNAQ; it affects 1 in every 20,000 to 50,000 newborns. It is characterized by a facial Port-wine stain, leptomeningeal angiomatosis, and glaucoma. Seizures are the most common neurological manifestation and typically present in the first months of life. Glaucoma may be present at birth or develop later. Neuroimaging studies show leptomeningeal angiomatosis, supporting diagnosis. Standard treatment for Sturge-Weber syndrome includes laser treatment for the Port-wine stain, anticonvulsants, and medical or surgical treatment for the glaucoma. Prognosis depends on the extent of leptomeningeal involvement and the severity of the glaucoma.
Melanoma is a common cancer in the Western world with an increasing incidence. Sun exposure is still considered to be the major risk factor for melanoma. The prognosis of patients with malignant (advanced-stage) melanoma differs widely between countries, but public campaigns advocating early detection have led to significant reductions in mortality rates. As well as sun exposure, distinct genetic alterations have been identified as associated with melanoma. For example, families with melanoma who have germline mutations in CDKN2A are well known, whereas the vast majority of sporadic melanomas have mutations in the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, which is the pathway with the highest oncogenic and therapeutic relevance for this disease. BRAF and NRAS mutations are typically found in cutaneous melanomas, whereas KIT mutations are predominantly observed in mucosal and acral melanomas. GNAQ and GNA11 mutations prevail in uveal melanomas. Additionally, the PI3K-AKT-PTEN pathway and the immune checkpoint pathways are important. The finding that programmed cell death protein 1 ligand 1 (PDL1) and PDL2 are expressed by melanoma cells, T cells, B cells and natural killer cells led to the recent development of programmed cell death protein 1 (PD1)-specific antibodies (for example, nivolumab and pembrolizumab). Alongside other new drugs - namely, BRAF inhibitors (vemurafenib and dabrafenib) and MEK inhibitors (trametinib and cobimetinib) - these agents are very promising and have been shown to significantly improve prognosis for patients with advanced-stage metastatic disease. Early signs are apparent that these new treatment modalities are also improving long-term clinical benefit and the quality of life of patients. This Primer summarizes the current understanding of melanoma, from mechanistic insights to clinical progress. For an illustrated summary of this Primer, visit: http://go.nature.com/vX2N9s.
Primary aldosteronism is considered the commonest cause of secondary hypertension. In affected individuals, aldosterone is produced in an at least partially autonomous fashion in adrenal lesions (adenomas, [micro]nodules or diffuse hyperplasia). Over the past decade, next-generation sequencing studies have led to the insight that primary aldosteronism is largely a genetic disorder. Sporadic cases are due to somatic mutations, mostly in ion channels and pumps, and rare cases of familial hyperaldosteronism are caused by germline mutations in an overlapping set of genes. More than 90% of aldosterone-producing adenomas carry somatic mutations in K(+) channel Kir3.4 (KCNJ5), Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)1.3 (CACNA1D), alpha-1 subunit of the Na(+)/K(+) ATPase (ATP1A1), plasma membrane Ca(2+) transporting ATPase 3 (ATP2B3), Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)3.2 (CACNA1H), Cl(-) channel ClC-2 (CLCN2), beta-catenin (CTNNB1), and/or G-protein subunits alpha q/11 (GNAQ/11). Mutations in some of these genes have also been identified in aldosterone-producing (micro)nodules, suggesting a disease continuum from a single cell, acquiring a somatic mutation, via a nodule to adenoma formation, and from a healthy state to subclinical to overt primary aldosteronism. Individual glands can have multiple such lesions, and they can occur on both glands in bilateral disease. Familial hyperaldosteronism, typically with early onset, is caused by germline mutations in steroid 11-beta hydroxylase/ aldosterone synthase (CYP11B1/2), CLCN2, KCNJ5, CACNA1H, and CACNA1D.
Sturge-Weber syndrome is the third most common neurocutaneous disorder, after neurofibromatosis and tuberous sclerosis, and impacts approximately 1 in 20000 live births. Sturge-Weber syndrome is not inherited, but rather occurs exclusively sporadically, in both males and females and in all races and ethnic backgrounds. Sturge-Weber syndrome presents at birth with a capillary malformation on the face (port-wine birthmark) with later diagnosis of abnormal vasculature in the eye and the brain which result in a range of complications. The underlying somatic mosaic mutation causing both Sturge-Weber syndrome and isolated port-wine birthmarks was recently discovered and is an activating mutation in GNAQ. When a newborn presents with a facial port-wine birthmark on the upper face, that child has a 15-50% risk of developing Sturge-Weber syndrome brain and/or eye involvement, depending on the extent of the birthmark, and close monitoring and appropriate screening is essential for early diagnosis and optimal treatment. Treatment options include laser therapy for lightening of the birthmark, eye drops and surgery for glaucoma management, and aggressive anticonvulsant treatment, low dose aspirin, and neurosurgery where necessary. Future possible treatments based upon new knowledge of the somatic mutation and downstream pathways are currently being considered and studied.
Succinate functions both as a classical TCA cycle metabolite and an extracellular metabolic stress signal sensed by the mainly Gi-coupled succinate receptor SUCNR1. In the present study, we characterize and compare effects and signaling pathways activated by succinate and both classes of non-metabolite SUCNR1 agonists. By use of specific receptor and pathway inhibitors, rescue in G-protein-depleted cells and monitoring of receptor G protein activation by BRET, we identify Gq rather than Gi signaling to be responsible for SUCNR1-mediated effects on basic transcriptional regulation. Importantly, in primary human M2 macrophages, in which SUCNR1 is highly expressed, we demonstrate that physiological concentrations of extracellular succinate act through SUCNR1-activated Gq signaling to efficiently regulate transcription of immune function genes in a manner that hyperpolarizes their M2 versus M1 phenotype. Thus, sensing of stress-induced extracellular succinate by SUCNR1 is an important transcriptional regulator in human M2 macrophages through Gq signaling.
Conjunctival melanoma (CM) is a rare but aggressive cancer. Over the past decade, molecular studies using rapidly advancing technologies have increasingly improved our understanding of CM genetics. CMs are mainly characterized by dysregulated MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways, driven by commonly mutated (BRAF, NRAS, NF1) or less commonly mutated (KIT, PTEN) genes. Another group of genes frequently mutated in CMs include TERT and ATRX, with known roles in telomere maintenance and chromatin remodeling/epigenetic regulation. Uveal melanoma-related genes (BAP1, SF3B1, GNAQ/11) can also be mutated in CMs, albeit infrequently. Additional CM-related mutated genes have increasingly been identified using more comprehensive genetic analyses, awaiting further confirmation in additional/larger studies. As a tumor arising in a partly sun-exposed mucosal tissue, CM exhibits a distinct genomic profile, including the frequent presence of an ultraviolet (UV) signature (and high mutational load) and also the common occurrence of large structural variations (distributed across the genome) in addition to specific gene mutations. The knowledge gained from CM genetic studies to date has led to new therapeutic avenues, including the use of targeted and/or immuno-therapies with promising outcomes in several cases. Accordingly, the implementation of tumor genetic testing into the routine clinical care of CM patients holds promise to further improve and personalize their treatments. Likewise, a growing knowledge of poor prognosis-associated genetic changes in CMs (NRAS, TERT, and uveal melanoma signature mutations and chromosome 10q deletions) may ultimately guide future strategies for prognostic testing to further improve clinical outcomes (by tailoring surveillance and considering prophylactic treatments in patients with high-risk primary tumors).
The major entities related to blue nevus are common blue nevus, cellular blue nevus, atypical blue nevus, and malignant blue nevus. These lesions share presence of dermal pigmented dendritic melanocytes derived from embryonal precursors to melanocytes, Schwann cells, and glial cells migrating to the skin from the ventral neural crest. Genetically, blue nevi harbor mutations in G-protein-coupled receptor subunits GNAQ and GNA11. Progression to malignant blue nevus is associated with additional mutations and partial gains and losses of chromosomal material. This article discusses recent advances in pathology of blue nevi with emphasis on differential diagnosis and molecular pathology.
Uveal melanoma is a rare malignancy affecting 5.1 patients/million per year with definitive treatment options of enucleation or radiation therapy to the primary tumor. Unfortunately, no FDA-approved systemic therapies exist for patients in the adjuvant or metastatic setting. Molecular profiling over the past decade has helped define uveal melanomas by characteristic mutations: GNAQ, GNA11, BAP1, SF3B1, and EIF1AX mutations. GNAQ/11 mutations are present in over 90% of patients with uveal melanoma and lead to signal transduction through G-protein coupled receptors to downstream growth factors. PKC inhibition has been an active area of investigation targeting this pathway specific to uveal melanoma. Several molecules have been developed and evaluated in clinical trials. Responses have been noted but clinical development has also yielded multiple toxicities and pathways of resistance limiting both breadth and durability of responses leading to combination therapy approaches. PKC inhibition remains an active and encouraging area of research to determine effective therapies for patients with uveal melanoma.
Recent progress in the analysis of genetic alterations in melanoma has identified recurrent mutations that result in the activation of critical signaling pathways promoting growth and survival of tumors cells. Alterations in the RAS-RAF-MAP kinase and PI3-kinase signaling pathways are commonly altered in melanoma. Mutations in BRAF, NRAS, KIT, and GNAQ occur in a mutually exclusive pattern and lead to MAP-kinase activation. Loss of PTEN function, primarily by deletion, is the most common known genetic alteration in the PI3-kinase cascade, and is commonly associated with BRAF mutations (Curtin et al., N Engl J Med 353:2135-2147, 2005; Tsao et al., Cancer Res 60:1800-1804, 2000, J Investig Dermatol 122:337-341, 2004). The growth advantage conveyed by the constitutive activation of these pathways leads to positive selection of cells that have acquired the mutations and in many instances leads to critical dependency of the cancer cells on their activation. This creates opportunities for therapeutic interventions targeted at signaling components within these pathways that are amenable for pharmacological inhibition. This concept follows the paradigm established by the landmark discovery that inhibition of the fusion kinase BCR-ABL can be used to treat chronic myelogenous leukemia (Druker et al., N Engl J Med 344:1031-037, 2001). The review will focus primarily on kinases involved in signaling that are currently being evaluated for therapeutic intervention in melanoma.
Uveal melanoma is the most common primary cancer of the eye, and despite rapidly emerging insights into the molecular profile of this disease, prognosis of patients with metastatic uveal melanoma remains poor with mortality rates unchanged in over 35 years. Early genetic events activate G protein-coupled receptor signaling in nearly all uveal tumors via mutually exclusive mutations in the GNAQ, GNA11, CYSLTR2, or PLCB4 genes. A multitude of signaling cascades downstream of G protein activation, including protein kinase C and mitogen-activated protein kinase activity, are actionable, and many ongoing clinical trials are targeting these pathways. Additional cytogenetic and genetic changes, however, including chromosome 3 monosomy, mutations in the BAP1 tumor suppressor gene, alterations in the splicing factors SRSF2/SF3B1, and mutations in the translation initiation factor EIF1AX, modulate signaling output in uveal tumors and modify the risk of metastases. Here, we review the complex interactions between genetic, molecular signaling, and prognostic profiles in uveal melanoma; the clinical implications of these interactions; and the latest potential targets for rational therapy.
Extra-axial cavernous hemangiomas (ECHs) are complex vascular lesions mainly found in the spine and cavernous sinus. Their removal poses significant risk due to their vascularity and diffuse nature, and their genetic underpinnings remain incompletely understood. Our approach involved genetic analyses on 31 tissue samples of ECHs employing whole-exome sequencing and targeted deep sequencing. We explored downstream signaling pathways, gene expression changes, and resultant phenotypic shifts induced by these mutations, both in vitro and in vivo. In our cohort, 77.4% of samples had somatic missense variants in GNA14, GNAQ, or GJA4. Transcriptomic analysis highlighted significant pathway upregulation, with the GNAQ c.626A>G (p.Gln209Arg) mutation elevating PI3K-AKT-mTOR and angiogenesis-related pathways, while GNA14 c.614A>T (p.Gln205Leu) mutation led to MAPK and angiogenesis-related pathway upregulation. Using a mouse xenograft model, we observed enlarged vessels from these mutations. Additionally, we initiated rapamycin treatment in a 14-year-old individual harboring the GNAQ c.626A>G (p.Gln209Arg) variant, resulting in gradual regression of cutaneous cavernous hemangiomas and improved motor strength, with minimal side effects. Understanding these mutations and their pathways provides a foundation for developing therapies for ECHs resistant to current therapies. Indeed, the administration of rapamycin in an individual within this study highlights the promise of targeted treatments in treating these complex lesions.
Pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma is a rare cutaneous melanocytic proliferation considered high-grade melanocytoma in the 2018 WHO Classification of Skin Tumors. Little has been reported about the associated genetic drivers in addition to BRAF and MAP2K1 mutations or PRKCA gene fusions. Here, we present a series of 21 cases of PRKAR1A -inactivated melanocytic tumors in which we could assess the associated genetic background. We identified 9 different driver genes related to the common, Spitz, blue nevi, and PRKC -fused groups. Nine cases were associated with a canonical BRAF p.V600E mutation, a hallmark of the common nevus group. They occurred mainly in young adults. All were combined (biphenotypic) cases with a variable proportion of compound nevus. The pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma component was made of thin fascicules or isolated epithelioid cells covered by a dense hyperpigmented melanophage background and was predominantly located in the upper dermis. One such case was malignant. Six cases were associated with Spitz-related genetic anomalies ranging from HRAS or MAP2K1 mutations to gene fusions involving MAP3K8 , MAP3K3 , and RET . They occurred mainly in children and young adults. Morphologically, they showed large confluent junctional nests in a hyperplastic epidermis and a fascicular dermal component of spindled and epithelioid melanocytes with a frequent wedged silhouette. Intravascular invasion was observed in 4/6 cases. Five cases were associated with canonical mutations of the blue nevus group with 4 CYSLTR2 p.L129Q and 1 GNAQ p.Q209L mutations. They were removed mainly in adults and showed a frequent junctional component with epidermal hyperplasia. The dermal component showed dense fascicules of spindled and epithelioid melanocytes predominating over melanophages. One case occurred in a PRKCA -fused tumor in an adolescent with classic morphologic features. These results could potentially shift the concept of PRKAR1A -inactivated melanocytoma, changing from a rather unified model to a more complex one, including genetic subgroup variations with clinical and morphologic specificities. The genetic background of PRKAR1A -inactivated melanocytic tumors should be systematically explored to better understand the extent and clinical behavior of these complex lesions.
BACKGROUND: Somatic mutations of cancer driver genes are found to be responsible for vascular malformations with clinical manifestations ranging from cutaneous birthmarks to life-threatening systemic anomalies. Till now, only a limited number of cases and mutations were reported in Chinese population. The purpose of this study was to describe the somatic mutation spectrum of a cohort of Chinese pediatrics with vascular malformations. METHODS: Pediatrics diagnosed with various vascular malformations were collected between May 2019 and October 2020 from Beijing Children's Hospital. Genomic DNA of skin lesion of each patient was extracted and sequenced by whole-exome sequencing to identify pathogenic somatic mutations. Mutations with variant allele frequency less than 5% were validated by ultra-deep sequencing. RESULTS: A total of 67 pediatrics (33 males, 34 females, age range: 0.1-14.8 years) were analyzed. Exome sequencing identified somatic mutations of corresponding genes in 53 patients, yielding a molecular diagnosis rate of 79.1%. Among 29 PIK3CA mutations, 17 were well-known hotspot p.E542K, p.E545K and p.H1047R/L. Non-hotspot mutations were prevalent in patients with PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum, accounting for 50.0% (11/22) of detected mutations. The hotspot GNAQ p.R183Q and TEK p.L914F mutations were responsible for the majority of port-wine stain/Sturge-Weber syndrome and venous malformation, respectively. In addition, we identified a novel AKT1 p.Q79K mutation in Proteus syndrome and MAP3K3 p.E387D mutation in verrucous venous malformation. CONCLUSIONS: The somatic mutation spectrum of vascular malformations in Chinese population is similar to that reported in other populations, but non-hotspot PIK3CA mutations may also be prevalent. Molecular diagnosis may help the clinical diagnosis, treatment and management of these pediatric patients with vascular malformations.
Most uveal melanoma cases harbor activating mutations in either GNAQ or GNA11. Despite activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway downstream of Galphaq/11, there are no effective targeted kinase therapies for metastatic uveal melanoma. The human genome encodes numerous understudied kinases, also called the "dark kinome". Identifying additional kinases regulated by Galphaq/11 may uncover novel therapeutic targets for uveal melanoma. In this study, we treated GNAQ-mutant uveal melanoma cell lines with a Galphaq/11 inhibitor, YM-254890, and conducted a kinase signaling proteomic screen using multiplexed-kinase inhibitors followed by mass spectrometry. We observed downregulated expression and/or activity of 22 kinases. A custom siRNA screen targeting these kinases demonstrated that knockdown of microtubule affinity regulating kinase 3 (MARK3) and serine/threonine kinase 10 (STK10) significantly reduced uveal melanoma cell growth and decreased expression of cell cycle proteins. Additionally, knockdown of MARK3 but not STK10 decreased ERK1/2 phosphorylation. Analysis of RNA-sequencing and proteomic data showed that Galphaq signaling regulates STK10 expression and MARK3 activity. Our findings suggest an involvement of STK10 and MARK3 in the Galphaq/11 oncogenic pathway and prompt further investigation into the specific roles and targeting potential of these kinases in uveal melanoma.
Uveal melanoma is the most common form of eye cancer and has a poor prognosis. Although the primary tumor in most cases is treated effectively by local surgery or radiotherapy, over 50 % of patients develop systemic metastasis, especially in the liver. In contrast to cutaneous melanoma, there is no standard-of-care treatment for metastasized uveal melanoma. Recently, oncogenic driver mutations in GNAQ or GNA11 were identified in about 85 % of uveal melanomas, which lead to constitutively active signaling in the Galpha(q/11) pathway and its downstream effectors. Direct targeting of deregulated Galpha(q/11) signaling might therefore be a therapeutic option for patients with uveal melanoma. In our study we identified the cyclic depsipeptide FR-900359, which is isolated from the evergreen plant Ardisia crenata as an effective inhibitor of constitutively active Galpha(q/11) proteins and their downstream targets. Although our data are preliminary, they might contribute to a future treatment option for patients with metastasized uveal melanoma.
Uveal melanoma (UM), a distinct subtype of melanoma, presents unique challenges in its clinical management due to its complex molecular landscape and tendency for liver metastasis. This review highlights recent advancements in understanding the molecular pathogenesis, genetic alterations, and immune microenvironment of UM, with a focus on pivotal genes, such as GNAQ/11, BAP1, and CYSLTR2, and delves into the distinctive genetic and chromosomal classifications of UM, emphasizing the role of mutations and chromosomal rearrangements in disease progression and metastatic risk. Novel diagnostic biomarkers, including circulating tumor cells, DNA and extracellular vesicles, are discussed, offering potential non-invasive approaches for early detection and monitoring. It also explores emerging prognostic markers and their implications for patient stratification and personalized treatment strategies. Therapeutic approaches, including histone deacetylase inhibitors, MAPK pathway inhibitors, and emerging trends and concepts like CAR T-cell therapy, are evaluated for their efficacy in UM treatment. This review identifies challenges in UM research, such as the limited treatment options for metastatic UM and the need for improved prognostic tools, and suggests future directions, including the discovery of novel therapeutic targets, immunotherapeutic strategies, and advanced drug delivery systems. The review concludes by emphasizing the importance of continued research and innovation in addressing the unique challenges of UM to improve patient outcomes and develop more effective treatment strategies.
Blue naevi (BN) form a wide group of benign dermal melanocytic proliferations. They are genetically distinct from common and Spitz naevi with frequent hotspot mutations occurring in Galphaq genes. Clinically, BN display a female predominance, elective sites of emergence and a great variety of subtypes related to specific regions of the skin linked to early embryological genetic events. Histologically, most BN are located in the dermis with small, bland, spindled and dendritic pigmented melanocytes within a fibrous background. Variation in tumour volume, fibrosis, and melanin pigment load can be broad. A growth in size and cellularity can occur within a subset of tumours as they acquire the morphological features of cellular blue naevi, with a biphasic architecture associating a dendritic blue naevus morphology near the surface, and deep vertical cellular expansions of medium-sized, bland melanocytes often reaching the subcutis. Sclerosing and myxoid variants can be observed either as individual or combined modifications that can add complexity to an otherwise straightforward diagnosis. Malignant progression of a cellular blue naevus is exceptional with an intermediate stage named atypical cellular blue naevus. Malignant blue melanomas are fast growing, large, pigmented tumours with most often obvious features of malignancy. However, they are difficult to separate from other malignant dermal melanocytic proliferations. Herein, we will extensively detail and illustrate the clinical, histological and genetic features of the vast spectrum of blue naevi and related entities in the skin.
Recent advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) have allowed for efficient whole transcriptome sequencing, leading to the identification of important kinase fusions as the primary driver in some melanocytic neoplasms. These fusions typically occur mutually exclusively of one another and other well-known initiating mutations such as BRAF, NRAS, NF1, KIT, and GNAQ. Fusions are found in over 50% of Spitz neoplasms, including ALK, BRAF, NTRK1, NTRK3, ROS1, MET, MAP3K8, and RET. Familiarity with the typical morphologic features of certain fusion-driven melanocytic neoplasms can help with classification, diagnosis, and identification of targeted molecular therapies in malignant cases. Spitz tumors with ALK, NTRK1, and NTRK3 fusions have characteristic morphologic features. BRAF and MAP3K8 fusions, in particular, tend to be epithelioid, high grade, and more frequent in Spitz melanoma than other fusion subtypes. Sporadic cases of pigmented epithelioid melanocytoma may have PRKCA fusions and sheets of monomorphic epithelioid melanocytes. Fusion events are also enriched among melanomas without the key mutations BRAF, NRAS, or NF1. Although NGS is the most reliable method to detect fusions, immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization are cost-effective alternatives in some cases. We describe recent discoveries regarding the role of kinase fusions in melanocytic neoplasms and their associated morphologies.
Melanomas are disease entities driven in part by the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. The TCGA network recently defined four genetic subtypes based on the most prevalent significantly mutated genes, including mutant BRAF, mutant RAS (N/H/K), mutant NF1, and Triple wild-type melanoma (harboring none of the aforementioned mutations, but instead includes KIT, GNA and GNAQ mutations). The successful development of kinase inhibitors marked a milestone in the treatment of metastatic melanoma. Combination treatment with a BRAF- and MEK-inhibitor is the current standard of care for inoperable stage IIIC/IV BRAF-mutated melanoma. Recent data demonstrate excellent long-term outcome, especially in patients with normal baseline LDH levels, and confirm that there is a subset of BRAF inhibitor-naive patients who experience durable responses without progression on combination treatment. In the future, adding a third compound based on individual genetic alterations might further improve the outcome of targeted therapy.
Capillary malformations (CM) (port-wine stains) are congenital skin lesions that are characterized by dilated capillaries and postcapillary venules. CMs are caused by altered functioning of the vascular endothelium. Somatic genetic mutations have predominantly been identified in the endothelial cells of CMs, providing an opportunity for the development of targeted therapies. However, there is currently limited in-depth mechanistic insight into the pathophysiology and a lack of preclinical research approaches. In a monocenter exploratory study of 17 adult patients with CMs, we found somatic sequence variants in the GNAQ (p.R183Q, p.R183G, or p.Q209R) or GNA11 (p.R183C) genes. We applied an endothelial-selective cell isolation protocol to culture primary endothelial cells from skin biopsies from these patients. We successfully expanded patient-derived cells in culture in 3 of the 17 cases while maintaining endothelial specificity as demonstrated by vascular endothelial-cadherin immunostainings. In addition, we tested the angiogenic capacity of endothelial cells from a patient with a GNAQ (p.R183G) sequence substitution. These proof-of-principle results reveal that primary cells isolated from CMs may represent a functional research model to investigate the role of endothelial somatic mutations in the etiology of CMs, but improved isolation and culture methodologies are urgently needed to advance the field.
