Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(T) subunit beta-1; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
G-proteins are intracellular partners of G-protein-coupled receptors. As a member of the G-protein family, GNB1 has been shown to play a pro-cancer role in lung cancer and breast cancer. However, the biological function and detailed mechanisms of GNB1 in hepatocellular carcinoma progression are unclear. In this study, we investigated the effects of GNB1 and its possible mechanism of action in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The clinical significance of GNB1 was evaluated in a large cohort of HCC patients, showing that GNB1 was overexpressed in HCC compared to adjacent normal liver tissues, and increased GNB1 expression was associated with poor prognosis. We also demonstrated that GNB1 enhances cell proliferation, colony formation, and cell migration and invasion in vitro and promotes the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition process in HCC cells. Tumor xenograft model assay confirmed the oncogenic role of GNB1 in tumorigenicity in nude mice. Activation of P38 signaling was found in the GNB1 overexpressed HCC cells. Further intervention of P38 confirmed it as an important signaling pathway for the oncogenic role of GNB1 in HCC. Moreover, co-immunoprecipitation followed by liquid chromatograph-mass spectrometry identified that GNB1 exerted oncogenic functions via the interaction of BAG2 and activated P38 signaling pathway. Together, our results reveal that GNB1 plays a pivotal oncogenic role in HCC by promoting the P38 pathway via cooperating with BAG2. GNB1 may serve as a prognostic biomarker for patients with HCC.
Though uncommon in melanoma, gene fusions may have therapeutic implications. Next generation sequencing-based clinical assays, designed to detect relevant gene fusions, mutations, and copy number changes, were performed on 750 melanomas (375 primary and 375 metastases) at our institution from 2014-2021. These included 599 (80%) cutaneous, 38 (5%) acral, 11 (1.5%) anorectal, 23 (3%) sinonasal, 27 (3.6%) eye (uveal/ conjunctiva), 11 (1.5%) genital (vulva/penile), and 41 (5.5%) melanomas of unknown primary. Sixteen fusions (2%) were detected in samples from 16 patients: 12/599 (2%) cutaneous, 2/38 (5%) acral, 1/9 (11%) vulva, 1/23(4.3%) sinonasal; and 12/16 (75%) fusions were potentially targetable. We identified two novel rearrangements: NAGS::MAST2 and NOTCH1::GNB1; and two fusions that have been reported in other malignancies but not in melanoma: CANT1::ETV4 (prostate cancer) and CCDC6::RET (thyroid cancer). Additional fusions, previously reported in melanoma, included: EML4::ALK, MLPH::ALK, AGAP3::BRAF, AGK::BRAF, CDH3::BRAF, CCT8::BRAF, DIP2B::BRAF, EFNB1::RAF1, LRCH3::RAF1, MAP4::RAF1, RUFY1::RAF1, and ADCY2::TERT. Fusion positive melanomas harbored recurrent alterations in TERT and CDKN2A, among others. Gene fusions were exceedingly rare (0.2%) in BRAF/RAS/NF1-mutant tumors and were detected in 5.6% of triple wild-type melanomas. Interestingly, gene rearrangements were significantly enriched within the subset of triple wild-type melanomas that harbor TERT promoter mutations (18% versus 2%, p < 0.0001). Thirteen (81%) patients were treated with immunotherapy for metastatic disease or in the adjuvant setting. Six of 12 (50%) patients with potentially actionable fusions progressed on immunotherapy, and 3/6 (50%) were treated with targeted agents (ALK and MEK inhibitors), 2 off-label and 1 as part of a clinical trial. One patient with an AGAP3::BRAF fusion positive melanoma experienced a 30-month long response to trametinib. We show that, detecting fusions, especially in triple wild-type melanomas with TERT promoter mutations, may have a clinically significant impact in patients with advanced disease who have failed front-line immunotherapy.
G protein signaling plays important roles in skeletal development. G protein subunit beta1 (GNB1) is a component of the G protein complex and is associated with G protein signaling. In humans, GNB1 mutations cause global developmental and persistent growth delays and severe neurodevelopmental disability. Similarly, Gnb1-knockout (KO) mice display growth retardation with neural tube defects. These genetic studies raise the possibility that GNB1 regulates skeletal development. This study was designed to investigate the role of GNB1 in skeletal development using Gnb1-KO mice. Gnb1-KO mice showed dwarfism, shortening of limbs, and a decreased ossifying zone of long bones. In situ hybridization and RT-qPCR analyses revealed that Col10a1 and Mmp13 expression was reduced in long bones of Gnb1-KO mice, while Runx2, Osterix, Ihh, and Ppr expression levels were similar to those in wild-type littermates. Gnb1-KO-derived osteoblasts maintained calcification abilities and the expression levels of osteoblast marker genes were unaltered, indicating that osteoblast differentiation and function were not affected in Gnb1-KO mice. Taken together, our results show that GNB1 is required for the late stage of endochondral bone formation by regulating Col10a1 and Mmp13 expression.
G protein subunit beta1 (GNB1), the beta subunit of the G protein family, plays an important role in regulating transmembrane signal transduction. Although a recent study has demonstrated that GNB1 can bind the matrix protein 1 (M1) to facilitate M1 transport to budding sites and promote the release of progeny influenza A virus (IAV), whether the GNB1 protein has other functions in IAV replication requires further study. Here, we found that GNB1 promoted IAV replication, as virus yield decreased in GNB1 knockdown or knockout cells. GNB1 interacted with polymerase subunits PB2, PB1, and PA. Overexpressed GNB1 facilitated PB2 binding to importin alpha3, alpha5, and alpha7 promoting the nuclear import of PB2, enhancing viral RNA synthesis and polymerase activity. Altogether, our results demonstrated that GNB1 positively regulates virus replication by interacting with polymerase subunits and facilitating the nuclear import of PB2, which provide novel insights into the molecular mechanism of IAV. IMPORTANCE Until now, there has been only one article on the role of GNB1 in IAV budding. No study has investigated the role of GNB1 in IAV replication. In this study, our research demonstrated that GNB1 could increase the interaction between PB2 and the importin alpha isoform and mediate the nuclear import of PB2. Therefore, GNB1 could promote viral replication and transcription. Our results provide a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of viral replication and provide potential antiviral drug targets.
Most patients with GNB1 encephalopathy have developmental delay and/or intellectual disability, brain anomalies and seizures. Recently, two cases with GNB1 encephalopathy caused by haploinsufficiency have been reported that also show a Prader-Willi-like phenotype of childhood hypotonia and severe obesity. Here we present three new cases from our expert centre for genetic obesity in which GNB1 truncating and splice variants, probably leading to haploinsufficiency, were identified. They all have obesity, hyperphagia and intellectual deficit. The clinical cases and their weight courses are presented, together with a review of all 68 published cases with GNB1 encephalopathy. Information on weight was not mentioned in most of these articles, so we contacted authors for additional clinical information on weight status and hyperphagia. Of the 42 patients whose weight status we could determine, obesity was present in 8 patients (19%). Obesity is significantly over-represented in the group with truncating and splicing variants. In this group, we see an obesity prevalence of 75%. Since GNB1 has been linked to several key genes in the hypothalamic leptin-melanocortin pathway, which regulates satiety and energy expenditure, our data support the potential association between GNB1 haploinsufficiency and genetic obesity. We also suggest GNB1 is a candidate gene for the known obesity phenotype of the 1p36 microdeletion syndrome given this chromosomal region includes the GNB1 gene. Knowledge of an additional obesity phenotype is important for prognosis, early interventions against obesity and awareness when prescribing weight-inducing medication.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Since the advent of next-generation sequencing, the number of genes associated with dystonia has been growing exponentially. We provide here a comprehensive review of the latest genetic discoveries in the field of dystonia and discuss how the growing knowledge of biology underlying monogenic dystonias may influence and challenge current classification systems. RECENT FINDINGS: Pathogenic variants in genes without previously confirmed roles in human disease have been identified in subjects affected by isolated or combined dystonia (KMT2B, VPS16, HPCA, KCTD17, DNAJC12, SLC18A2) and complex dystonia (SQSTM1, IRF2BPL, YY1, VPS41). Importantly, the classical distinction between isolated and combined dystonias has become harder to sustain since many genes have been shown to determine multiple dystonic presentations (e.g., ANO3, GNAL, ADCY5, and ATP1A3). In addition, a growing number of genes initially linked to other neurological phenotypes, such as developmental delay, epilepsy, or ataxia, are now recognized to cause prominent dystonia, occasionally in an isolated fashion (e.g., GNAO1, GNB1, SCN8A, RHOBTB2, and COQ8A). Finally, emerging analyses suggest biological convergence of genes linked to different dystonic phenotypes. While our knowledge on the genetic basis of monogenic dystonias has tremendously grown, their clinical boundaries are becoming increasingly blurry. The current phenotype-based classification may not reflect the molecular structure of the disease, urging the need for new systems based on shared biological pathways among dystonia-linked genes.
BACKGROUND: Kisspeptin (encoded by the KISS1 gene in humans) is an excitatory neuromodulatory peptide implicated in multiple homeostatic systems, including anti-oxidation, glucose homeostasis, nutrition, locomotion, etc. Therefore, in the current obesity epidemic, kisspeptin is gaining increasing interest as a research objective. AIM: To construct an updated interactome of genetic obesity, including the kisspeptin signal transduction pathway. METHODS: Kisspeptin and obesity-related genes or gene products were extracted from the biomedical literature, and a network of functional associations was created. RESULTS: The generated network contains 101 nodes corresponding to gene/gene products with known and/or predicted interactions. In this interactome, KISS1 and KISS1R are connected directly to the luteinizing hormone receptor (LHCGR), gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GNRH1), and indirectly, through the latter, to proopiomelanocortin (POMC), glucagon, leptin (LEP), and/or pro-protein convertase subtilisin/kexin-type 1 (PCSK1), all of which are critically implicated in obesity disorders. CONCLUSIONS: Our updated obesidome includes kisspeptin and its connections to the genetic obesity signalosome with 12 major hubs: glucagon (GCG), insulin (INS), arginine vasopressin (AVP), G protein subunit beta 1 (GNB1) and proopiomelanocortin (POMC), melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), leptin (LEP), gonadotropin-releasing hormone 1 (GNRH1), adrenoceptor beta 2 and 3 (ADRB2-3), glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (GLP1R), and melanocortin 3 receptor (MC3R) genes were identified as major "hubs" for genetic obesity, providing novel insight into the body's energy homeostasis.
GNB1 encephalopathy is a rare genetic disease caused by pathogenic variants in the G Protein Subunit Beta 1 (GNB1) gene, with only around 68 cases documented worldwide. Although most cases had been caused by de novo germline mutations, in this case, the pathogenic variant was inherited from patient's mother, indicating an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The patient presented at 25 years of age with mild developmental delay and cognitive impairment, prominent generalized dystonia, and horizontal nystagmus which are all characterizing symptoms of GNB1 encephalopathy. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed no epileptiform patterns, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hypointensities in globus pallidus and dentate nucleus areas. The main theory for GNB1 encephalopathy pathogenesis is neuronal hyperexcitability caused by impaired ion channel regulation. Due to low specificity of symptoms, diagnosis relies on genetic testing. As there are no standardized GNB1 encephalopathy treatment guidelines, evaluation of different treatment options is based on anecdotal cases. Reviewing different treatment options, deep brain stimulation and intrathecal baclofen pump, as well as some other medications still in preclinical trials, seem to be the most promising.
The quest to understand the molecular mechanisms of tumour metastasis and identify pivotal biomarkers for cancer therapy is increasing in importance. Single-omics analyses, constrained by their focus on a single biological layer, cannot fully elucidate the complexities of tumour molecular profiles and can thus overlook crucial molecular targets. In response to this limitation, we developed a multiobjective recommendation system (RJH-Metastasis 1.0) anchored in a multiomics knowledge graph to integrate genome, transcriptome, and proteome data and corroborative literature evidence and then conducted comprehensive analyses of colorectal cancer with liver metastasis (CRCLM). A total of 25 key genes significantly associated with CRCLM were recommended by our system, and GNB1, GATAD2A, GBP2, MACROD1, and EIF5B were further highlighted. Specifically, GNB1 presented fewer mutations but elevated RNA transcription and protein expression in CRCLM patients. The role of GNB1 in promoting the malignant behaviours of colon cancer cells was demonstrated via in vitro and in vivo studies. Aberrant expression of GNB1 could be regulated by METTL1-driven m7G modification. METTL1 knockdown decreased m7G modification in the 3' UTR of GNB1, increasing its mRNA transcription and translation during liver metastasis. Furthermore, GNB1 induced the formation of an immunosuppressive microenvironment by promoting the CLEC2C-KLRB1 interaction between memory B cells and KLRB1(+)PD-1(+)CD8(+) cells. GNB1 expression and the efficacy of PD-1 antibody-based treatment in CRCLM patients were significantly correlated. In summary, our recommendation system can be used for effective exploration of key molecules in colorectal cancer, among which GNB1 was identified as a critical CRCLM promoter and immunotherapy biomarker in colorectal cancer patients.
We explored the functional redundancy of three structurally related KCTD (Potassium Channel Tetramerization Domain) proteins, KCTD2, KCTD5, and KCTD17, by progressively knocking them out in HEK 293 cells using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. After validating the knockout, we assessed the effects of progressive knockout on cell growth and gene expression. We noted that the progressive effects of knockout of KCTD isoforms on cell growth were most pervasive when all three isoforms were deleted, suggesting some functions were conserved between them. This was also reflected in progressive changes in gene expression. Our previous work indicated that Gbeta1 was involved in the transcriptional control of gene expression, so we compared the gene expression patterns between GNB1 and KCTD KO. Knockout of GNB1 led to numerous changes in the expression levels of other G protein subunit genes, while knockout of KCTD isoforms had the opposite effect, presumably because of their role in regulating levels of Gbeta1. Our work demonstrates a unique relationship between KCTD proteins and Gbeta1 and a global role for this subfamily of KCTD proteins in maintaining the ability of cells to survive and proliferate.
Leukemias harboring the ETV6-ABL1 fusion represent a rare subset of hematological malignancies with unfavorable outcomes. The constitutively active chimeric Etv6-Abl1 tyrosine kinase can be specifically inhibited by tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Although TKIs represent an important therapeutic tool, so far, the mechanism underlying the potential TKI resistance in ETV6-ABL1-positive malignancies has not been studied in detail. To address this issue, we established a TKI-resistant ETV6-ABL1-positive leukemic cell line through long-term exposure to imatinib. ETV6-ABL1-dependent mechanisms (including fusion gene/protein mutation, amplification, enhanced expression or phosphorylation) and increased TKI efflux were excluded as potential causes of resistance. We showed that TKI effectively inhibited the Etv6-Abl1 kinase activity in resistant cells, and using short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated silencing, we confirmed that the resistant cells became independent from the ETV6-ABL1 oncogene. Through analysis of the genomic and proteomic profiles of resistant cells, we identified an acquired mutation in the GNB1 gene, K89M, as the most likely cause of the resistance. We showed that cells harboring mutated GNB1 were capable of restoring signaling through the phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mTOR and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, whose activation is inhibited by TKI. This alternative GNB1(K89M)-mediated pro-survival signaling rendered ETV6-ABL1-positive leukemic cells resistant to TKI therapy. The mechanism of TKI resistance is independent of the targeted chimeric kinase and thus is potentially relevant not only to ETV6-ABL1-positive leukemias but also to a wider spectrum of malignancies treated by kinase inhibitors.
Sensation seeking is a multifaceted, heritable trait which predicts the development of substance use and abuse in humans; similar phenomena have been observed in rodents. Genetic correlations among sensation seeking and substance use indicate shared biological mechanisms, but the genes and networks underlying these relationships remain elusive. Here, we used a systems genetics approach in the BXD recombinant inbred mouse panel to identify shared genetic mechanisms underlying substance use and preference for sensory stimuli, an intermediate phenotype of sensation seeking. Using the operant sensation seeking (OSS) paradigm, we quantified preference for sensory stimuli in 120 male and 127 female mice from 62 BXD strains and the C57BL/6J and DBA/2J founder strains. We used relative preference for the active and inactive levers to dissociate preference for sensory stimuli from locomotion and exploration phenotypes. We identified genomic regions on chromosome 4 (155.236-155.742 Mb) and chromosome 13 (72.969-89.423 Mb) associated with distinct behavioral components of OSS. Using publicly available behavioral data and mRNA expression data from brain regions involved in reward processing, we identified (a) genes within these behavioral QTL exhibiting genome-wide significant cis-eQTL and (b) genetic correlations among OSS phenotypes, ethanol phenotypes and mRNA expression. From these analyses, we nominated positional candidates for behavioral QTL associated with distinct OSS phenotypes including Gnb1 and Mef2c. Genetic covariation of Gnb1 expression, preference for sensory stimuli and multiple ethanol phenotypes suggest that heritable variation in Gnb1 expression in reward circuitry partially underlies the widely reported relationship between sensation seeking and substance use.
AIM: To identify additional genes associated with infantile spasms using a cohort with defined infantile spasms. METHOD: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on 21 consented individuals with infantile spasms and their unaffected parents (a trio-based study). Clinical history and imaging were reviewed. Potentially deleterious exonic variants were identified and segregated. To refine potential candidates, variants were further prioritized on the basis of evidence for relevance to disease phenotype or known associations with infantile spasms, epilepsy, or neurological disease. RESULTS: Likely pathogenic de novo variants were identified in NR2F1, GNB1, NEUROD2, GABRA2, and NDUFAF5. Suggestive dominant and recessive candidate variants were identified in PEMT, DYNC1I1, ASXL1, RALGAPB, and STRADA; further confirmation is required to support their relevance to disease etiology. INTERPRETATION: This study supports the utility of WES in uncovering the genetic etiology in undiagnosed individuals with infantile spasms with an overall yield of five out of 21. High-priority candidates were identified in an additional five individuals. WES provides additional support for previously described disease-associated genes and expands their already broad mutational and phenotypic spectrum.
Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is the leading indication for corneal transplantation worldwide. Our aim was to investigate the role of transient receptor potential vanilloid subtype 1 (TRPV1) and the associated immune regulation contributing to this pathological condition. Significant upregulation of TRPV1 was detected in the H(2)O(2)-induced in vitro FECD model. Based on gene expression microarray dataset GSE142538 and in vitro results, a comprehensive immune landscape was studied and a negative correlation was found between TRPV1 with different immune cells, especially regulatory T cells (Tregs). Functional analyses of the 313 TRPV1-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) revealed the involvement of TRP-regulated calcium transport, as well as inflammatory and immune pathways. Four TRPV1-related core genes (MAPK14, GNB1, GNAQ, and ARRB2) were screened, validated by microarray dataset GSE112039 and the combined validation dataset E-GEAD-399 & 564, and verified by in vitro experiments. Our study suggested a potential crosstalk between TRPV1 and immune regulation contributing to FECD pathogenesis. The identified pivotal biomarkers and immune-related pathways provide a novel framework for future mechanistic and therapeutic studies of FECD.
De novo monoallelic mutations in the GNB1 gene, encoding a beta subunit of heterotrimeric G proteins, cause a newly recognized disorder with the typical clinical picture of severe developmental delay/intellectual disability, hypotonia and extrapyramidal symptoms. We describe another case of the condition with manifestations of cutaneous mastocytosis associated with a novel do novo mutation GNB1NM_001282539.1: c.230G > T; p.(Gly77Val). We also present the detailed clinical and etiopathogenetic discussion on previously diagnosed patients as well as suggestions for the link of the mutation with skin disease.
We sought to determine the relationship between age-related clonal hematopoiesis (CH) and chronic kidney disease (CKD). CH, defined as mosaic chromosome abnormalities (mCA) and/or driver mutations was identified in 5449 (2.9%) eligible UK Biobank participants (n = 190,487 median age = 58 years). CH was negatively associated with glomerular filtration rate estimated from cystatin-C (eGFR.cys; beta = -0.75, P = 2.37 x 10(-4)), but not with eGFR estimated from creatinine, and was specifically associated with CKD defined by eGFR.cys < 60 (OR = 1.02, P = 8.44 x 10(-8)). In participants without prevalent myeloid neoplasms, eGFR.cys was associated with myeloid mCA (n = 148, beta = -3.36, P = 0.01) and somatic driver mutations (n = 3241, beta = -1.08, P = 6.25 x 10(-5)) associated with myeloid neoplasia (myeloid CH), specifically mutations in CBL, TET2, JAK2, PPM1D and GNB1 but not DNMT3A or ASXL1. In participants with no history of cardiovascular disease or myeloid neoplasms, myeloid CH increased the risk of adverse outcomes in CKD (HR = 1.6, P = 0.002) compared to those without myeloid CH. Mendelian randomisation analysis provided suggestive evidence for a causal relationship between CH and CKD (P = 0.03). We conclude that CH, and specifically myeloid CH, is associated with CKD defined by eGFR.cys. Myeloid CH promotes adverse outcomes in CKD, highlighting the importance of the interaction between intrinsic and extrinsic factors to define the health risk associated with CH.
De novo germline mutations in GNB1 have been associated with a neurodevelopmental phenotype. To date, 28 patients with variants classified as pathogenic have been reported. We add 18 patients with de novo mutations to this cohort, including a patient with mosaicism for a GNB1 mutation who presented with a milder phenotype. Consistent with previous reports, developmental delay in these patients was moderate to severe, and more than half of the patients were non-ambulatory and nonverbal. The most observed substitution affects the p.Ile80 residue encoded in exon 6, with 28% of patients carrying a variant at this residue. Dystonia and growth delay were observed more frequently in patients carrying variants in this residue, suggesting a potential genotype-phenotype correlation. In the new cohort of 18 patients, 50% of males had genitourinary anomalies and 61% of patients had gastrointestinal anomalies, suggesting a possible association of these findings with variants in GNB1. In addition, cutaneous mastocytosis, reported once before in a patient with a GNB1 variant, was observed in three additional patients, providing further evidence for an association to GNB1. We will review clinical and molecular data of these new cases and all previously reported cases to further define the phenotype and establish possible genotype-phenotype correlations.
Activating mutations in genes encoding G protein alpha (Galpha) subunits occur in 4-5% of all human cancers, but oncogenic alterations in Gbeta subunits have not been defined. Here we demonstrate that recurrent mutations in the Gbeta proteins GNB1 and GNB2 confer cytokine-independent growth and activate canonical G protein signaling. Multiple mutations in GNB1 affect the protein interface that binds Galpha subunits as well as downstream effectors and disrupt Galpha interactions with the Gbetagamma dimer. Different mutations in Gbeta proteins clustered partly on the basis of lineage; for example, all 11 GNB1 K57 mutations were in myeloid neoplasms, and seven of eight GNB1 I80 mutations were in B cell neoplasms. Expression of patient-derived GNB1 variants in Cdkn2a-deficient mouse bone marrow followed by transplantation resulted in either myeloid or B cell malignancies. In vivo treatment with the dual PI3K-mTOR inhibitor BEZ235 suppressed GNB1-induced signaling and markedly increased survival. In several human tumors, mutations in the gene encoding GNB1 co-occurred with oncogenic kinase alterations, including the BCR-ABL fusion protein, the V617F substitution in JAK2 and the V600K substitution in BRAF. Coexpression of patient-derived GNB1 variants with these mutant kinases resulted in inhibitor resistance in each context. Thus, GNB1 and GNB2 alterations confer transformed and resistance phenotypes across a range of human tumors and may be targetable with inhibitors of G protein signaling.
OBJECTIVE: Proliferative verrucous leukoplakia (PVL) is considered a clinically distinct entity from other oral leucoplakias (OLs) due to its clinical presentation and evolution. However, molecular differences between them remain unclear. We aimed to determine whether there are methylation differences between PVL and other forms of OLs. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Oral biopsies from 12 patients with PVL, eight patients with homogeneous leucoplakia (HL), and 10 healthy individuals were obtained for a genome-wide DNA methylation analysis via the Infinium EPIC Platform. RESULTS: A total of 1815 differentially methylated CpGs were found between PVL and HL, with a prominent state of hypermethylation in HL patients. CpGs covered 813 genes with distinct roles, including cell adhesion, extracellular matrix organization, and cell and synaptic signaling. 43% of these genes had been previously described in cancer and associated with prognosis. We developed a multinomial logistic regression model able to differentiate HL, PVL, and control samples. The model had a cross-validated estimate of 73% and included differentially methylated cancer-related genes between the pathological conditions and the healthy donors, including ADNP, BRCA2, CDK13, GNB1, NIN, NUMB, PIK3C2B, PTK2, SHISA4, THSD7B, WWP1, and ZNF292. It also included CpGs covering differentially methylated genes in HL (MEN1 and TNRC6B) and PVL (ACOXL, ADH1B, CAMTA1, CBFA2T3, CPXM2, LRFN2, SORCS2, and SPN). CONCLUSIONS: PVL and HL present differential methylation patterns that could be linked to their differential clinical behavior. Our findings show the potential of methylation markers and suggest novel diagnostic biomarkers.
This study intended to gain new insight into the genetic basis underlying ganglioneuroma (GN), ganglioneuroblastoma (GNB), and neuroblastoma (NB). Three fresh-frozen surgically resected tumor tissues (GN1, GNB1, and NB1) and matched blood samples (GN2, GNB2, and NB2) were respectively obtained from three pediatric patients with GN, GNB, and NB. After exome sequencing, we predicted the somatic single nucleotide variants (SNV) and insertion and deletion (InDel), and screened the predisposing genes. Finally, we detected and filtered the fusion gene using Fusionmap. Exome sequencing identified 815, 985, and 884 somatic SNV, and 56, 43, and 34 InDel for GN, NB, and GNB respectively. Total 29, 19 and 37 predisposing genes were identified from GN, GNB and NB samples, such as PIK3CA (GN), MUC4 (GN), PML (NB), TFR2 (GNB), and MAX (GNB). Additionally, four common fusion genes, such as HOXD11-AGAP3 and SAMD1-CDC42EP5, were identified from three tumor samples. Moreover, SAMD1-CDC42EP5 was also a common fusion position in three blood samples. These previously unrecognized predisposing genes, such as PIK3CA, MUC4, PML, TFR2 and MAX, and fusion genes, like HOXD11-AGAP3, and SAMD1-CDC42EP5 may have the potential to impact the progression and development of neuroblastic tumors.
