Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(T) subunit beta-2; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS) is a rare, noninherited neurovascular disorder characterized by abnormal vasculature in the brain, skin, and eye. Patients with SWS characteristically have facial capillary malformation, also known as port-wine birthmark, a leptomeningeal vascular malformation seen on contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging images, abnormal blood vessels in the eye, and glaucoma. Patients with SWS have impaired perfusion to the brain and are at high risk of venous stroke and stroke-like episodes, seizures, and both motor and cognitive difficulties. While the activating R183Q GNAQ somatic mutation is the most common somatic mutation underlying SWS, recent research also implicates that GNA11 and GNB2 somatic mutations are related to SWS. Recent retrospective studies suggest the use of low-dose aspirin and vitamin D in treatment for SWS and prospective drug trials have supported the usefulness of cannabidiol and Sirolimus. Presymptomatic treatment with low-dose aspirin and antiepileptic drugs shows promising results in delaying seizure onset in some patients. This review focuses on the latest progress in the field of research for Sturge-Weber syndrome and highlights directions for future research.
The Guanine-nucleotide binding protein 2 (GNB2) encodes for beta2 subunit (Gbeta2) of the G-protein complex. Keeping in view the increased demand of reliable biomarkers in cancer, the current study was planned to extensively explored GNB2 expression variation and its roles in different cancers using online available databases and diverse methodology. In view of our results, the GNB2 was notably up-regulated relative to corresponding controls in twenty three cancer types. As well, the elevated expression of GNB2 was found to be associated with the reduced overall survival (OS) of the Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (LIHC) and Rectum Adenocarcinoma (READ) only out of all analyzed cancer types. This implies GNB2 plays vital role in the tumorigenesis of LIHC and READ. Several additional analysis also explored six critical pathways and few important correlations related to GNB2 expression and different other parameters such as promoter methylation, tumor purity, CD8+ T immune cells infiltration, and genetic alteration, and chemotherapeutic drugs. In conclusion, GNB2 gene has been identified in this study as a shared potential biomarker (diagnostic and prognostic) of LIHC and READ.
PURPOSE: Binding proteins (G-proteins) mediate signalling pathways involved in diverse cellular functions and comprise Galpha and Gbetagamma units. Human diseases have been reported for all five Gbeta proteins. A de novo missense variant in GNB2 was recently reported in one individual with developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID) and dysmorphism. We aim to confirm GNB2 as a neurodevelopmental disease gene, and elucidate the GNB2-associated neurodevelopmental phenotype in a patient cohort. METHODS: We discovered a GNB2 variant in the index case via exome sequencing and sought individuals with GNB2 variants via international data-sharing initiatives. In silico modelling of the variants was assessed, along with multiple lines of evidence in keeping with American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines for interpretation of sequence variants. RESULTS: We identified 12 unrelated individuals with five de novo missense variants in GNB2, four of which are recurrent: p.(Ala73Thr), p.(Gly77Arg), p.(Lys89Glu) and p.(Lys89Thr). All individuals have DD/ID with variable dysmorphism and extraneurologic features. The variants are located at the universally conserved shared interface with the Galpha subunit, which modelling suggests weaken this interaction. CONCLUSION: Missense variants in GNB2 cause a congenital neurodevelopmental disorder with variable syndromic features, broadening the spectrum of multisystem phenotypes associated with variants in genes encoding G-proteins.
Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS) is a neurocutaneous disorder characterized by vascular malformations affecting skin, eyes and leptomeninges of the brain, which can lead to glaucoma, seizures and intellectual disability. The discovery of a disease-causing somatic missense mutation in the GNAQ gene, encoding an alpha chain of heterotrimeric G-proteins, has initiated efforts to understand how G-proteins contribute to SWS pathogenesis. The mutation is predominantly detected in endothelial cells and is currently believed to affect downstream MAPK signalling. In this study of six Norwegian patients with classical SWS, we aimed to identify somatic mutations through deep sequencing of DNA from skin biopsies. Surprisingly, one patient was negative for the GNAQ mutation, but instead harbored a somatic mutation in GNB2 (NM_005273.3:c.232A>G, p.Lys78Glu), which encodes a beta chain of the same G-protein complex. The positions of the mutant amino acids in the G-protein are essential for complex reassembly. Therefore, failure of reassembly and continuous signalling is a likely consequence of both mutations. Ectopic expression of mutant proteins in endothelial cells revealed that expression of either mutant reduced cellular proliferation, yet regulated MAPK signalling differently, suggesting that dysregulated MAPK signalling cannot fully explain the SWS phenotype. Instead, both mutants reduced synthesis of Yes-associated protein (YAP), a transcriptional co-activator of the Hippo signalling pathway, suggesting a key role for this pathway in the vascular pathogenesis of SWS. The discovery of the GNB2 mutation sheds novel light on the pathogenesis of SWS and suggests that future research on targets of treatment should be directed towards the YAP, rather than the MAPK, signalling pathway.
Breast cancer has overtaken lung cancer as the most prevalent cancer worldwide. The development of advanced drug resistance inhibits the efficacy of paclitaxel(PTX)as a first-line chemotherapeutic agent for breast cancer. Autophagy and microRNAs (miRNAs) play a key role in chemoresistance. This study investigated the miR-142-3p effect on PTX resistance by regulating autophagy. A PTX-resistant breast cancer cell line was constructed, and miR-142-3p and G protein beta polypeptide 2 (GNB2) were filtered out using RNA sequencing and protein microarray analysis. The study revealed that miR-142-3p expression was lower in drug-resistant cells compared parental cells. Higher miR-142-3p expression inhibited the viability, migration, and autophagic flux of drug-resistant cells, while promoting apoptosis and sensitivity to PTX treatment. Mechanistically, miR-142-3p was found to amend PTX resistance by targeting GNB2, further revealing that the knockdown of GNB2 expression could activate the AKT-mTOR pathway. This study suggests that GNB2 is an essential target for miR-142-3p to restrain autophagy, providing a new reference value for improving breast cancer PTX treatment.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a prevalent and lethal tumor, with metastasis being the leading cause of mortality. Previous research has indicated that the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) CCAT2 is involved in the regulation of various tumor progression mechanisms. However, the precise role of CCAT2 in CRC proliferation and metastasis remains ambiguous. This study seeks to elucidate the mechanisms through which CCAT2 influences CRC. METHODS: High-throughput sequencing and RT-qPCR were used to detect CCAT2 expression in CRC. Functional analyses including CCK8, colony formation, wound healing migration, transwell chamber, and Muse(R) Cell Analyzer assays were performed to study the effects of CCAT2 gene deletion on CRC cells. RNA-pulldown and protein mass spectrometry were employed to identify the interaction between CCAT2 and GNB2 protein. RESULTS: Increased CCAT2 expression was found in CRC, especially in metastatic CRC. Deletion of CCAT2 gene inhibited CRC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion while promoting apoptosis. The interaction between CCAT2 and GNB2 protein was shown to modulate GNB2 protein alterations and affect the ERK and Wnt signaling pathways, thereby promoting CRC proliferation and metastasis. CONCLUSION: CCAT2 plays a crucial role in CRC progression by modulating the ERK and Wnt signaling pathways through its interaction with GNB2. These findings highlight the importance of CCAT2 as a key regulatory element in the mechanisms underlying CRC proliferation and metastasis.
This study intended to gain new insight into the genetic basis underlying ganglioneuroma (GN), ganglioneuroblastoma (GNB), and neuroblastoma (NB). Three fresh-frozen surgically resected tumor tissues (GN1, GNB1, and NB1) and matched blood samples (GN2, GNB2, and NB2) were respectively obtained from three pediatric patients with GN, GNB, and NB. After exome sequencing, we predicted the somatic single nucleotide variants (SNV) and insertion and deletion (InDel), and screened the predisposing genes. Finally, we detected and filtered the fusion gene using Fusionmap. Exome sequencing identified 815, 985, and 884 somatic SNV, and 56, 43, and 34 InDel for GN, NB, and GNB respectively. Total 29, 19 and 37 predisposing genes were identified from GN, GNB and NB samples, such as PIK3CA (GN), MUC4 (GN), PML (NB), TFR2 (GNB), and MAX (GNB). Additionally, four common fusion genes, such as HOXD11-AGAP3 and SAMD1-CDC42EP5, were identified from three tumor samples. Moreover, SAMD1-CDC42EP5 was also a common fusion position in three blood samples. These previously unrecognized predisposing genes, such as PIK3CA, MUC4, PML, TFR2 and MAX, and fusion genes, like HOXD11-AGAP3, and SAMD1-CDC42EP5 may have the potential to impact the progression and development of neuroblastic tumors.
G-proteins are ubiquitously expressed heterotrimeric proteins consisting of alpha, beta and gamma subunits and mediate G-protein coupled receptor signalling cascades. The beta subunit is encoded by one of five highly similar paralogs (GNB1-GNB5, accordingly). The developmental importance of G-proteins is highlighted by the clinical relevance of variants in genes such as GNB1, which cause severe neurodevelopmental disease (NDD). Recently the candidacy of GNB2 was raised in association with NDD in an individual with a de novo variant affecting a codon conserved across paralogs and recurrently mutated in GNB1-related disease, c.229G>A p.(Gly77Arg), in association with global developmental delay, intellectual disability and dysmorphic features. Here, we report a patient with strikingly similar facial features and NDD in association with a de novo GNB2 variant affecting the same codon, c.229G>T p.(Gly77Trp). In addition, this individual has epilepsy and overgrowth. Our report is the second to implicate a de novo GNB2 variant with a severe yet variable NDD.
Leukemic relapse is frequently accompanied by progressively aggressive clinical course. To understand the molecular mechanism of leukemic relapse, MLL/AF9-transformed mouse leukemia cells were serially transplanted in C57BL/6 mice (N = 96) by mimicking repeated recurrences, where mutations were monitored by exome sequencing (N = 42). The onset of leukemia was progressively promoted with advanced transplants, during which increasing numbers of somatic mutations were acquired (P < 0.005). Among these, mutations in Ptpn11 (p.G60R) and Braf (p.V637E) corresponded to those identified in human MLL-AML, while recurrent mutations affecting Msn (p.R295C) were observed only in mouse but not in human MLL-AML. Another mutated gene of interest was Gnb2 which was reported to be recurrently mutated in various hematological neoplasms. Gnb2 mutations (p.G77R) were significantly increased in clone size (P = 0.007) and associated with earlier leukemia onset (P = 0.011). GNB2 transcripts were significantly upregulated in human MLL-AML compared to MLL-negative AML (P < 0.05), which was supported by significantly increased Gnb2 transcript induced by MLL/AF9 overexpression (P < 0.001). In in vivo model, both mutation and overexpression of GNB2 caused leukemogenesis, and downregulation of GNB2 expression reduced proliferative potential and survival benefit, suggesting a driver role of GNB2. In conclusion, alterations of driver genes over time may play an important role in the progression of MLL-AML.
AIMS: Vascular perfusion may be impaired in primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG); thus, we evaluated a panel of markers in vascular tone-regulating genes in relation to POAG. METHODS: We used Illumina 660W-Quad array genotype data and pooled P-values from 3108 POAG cases and 3430 controls from the combined National Eye Institute Glaucoma Human Genetics Collaboration consortium and Glaucoma Genes and Environment studies. Using information from previous literature and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways, we compiled single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 186 vascular tone-regulating genes. We used the 'Pathway Analysis by Randomization Incorporating Structure' analysis software, which performed 1000 permutations to compare the overall pathway and selected genes with comparable randomly generated pathways and genes in their association with POAG. RESULTS: The vascular tone pathway was not associated with POAG overall or POAG subtypes, defined by the type of visual field loss (early paracentral loss (n=224 cases) or only peripheral loss (n=993 cases)) (permuted P>/=0.20). In gene-based analyses, eight were associated with POAG overall at permuted P<0.001: PRKAA1, CAV1, ITPR3, EDNRB, GNB2, DNM2, HFE, and MYL9. Notably, six of these eight (the first six listed) code for factors involved in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase activity, and three of these six (CAV1, ITPR3, and EDNRB) were also associated with early paracentral loss at P<0.001, whereas none of the six genes reached P<0.001 for peripheral loss only. DISCUSSION: Although the assembled vascular tone SNP set was not associated with POAG, genes that code for local factors involved in setting vascular tone were associated with POAG.
Most genetic association studies focus on binary variants. To identify the effects of multi-allelic variation of tandem repeats (TRs) on human traits, we perform direct TR genotyping and phenome-wide association studies in 168,554 individuals from the UK Biobank, identifying 47 TRs showing fine-mapped associations with 73 traits. We replicate 23 of 31 (74%) of these associations in the All of Us cohort. While this set includes several known repeat expansion disorders, novel associations we found are attributable to common polymorphic variation in TR length rather than rare expansions and include e.g. a coding polyhistidine motif in HRCT1 influencing risk of hypertension and a poly(CGC) in the 5'UTR of GNB2 influencing heart rate. Fine-mapped TRs are strongly enriched for associations with local gene expression and DNA methylation. Our study highlights the contribution of multi-allelic TRs to the "missing heritability" of the human genome.
OBJECTIVE: Malignant melanoma is a highly invasive cancer whose pathogenesis remains unclear. We analyzed the microarray dataset GDS1375 in the Gene Expression Omnibus database to search for key genes involved in the occurrence and development of melanoma. METHODS: The dataset included 52 samples (7 normal skin and 45 melanoma samples). We identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the two groups and used integrated discovery databases for Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Gene and Genome Encyclopedia (KEGG) pathway analyses. In addition, we used the STRING and MCODE plugins of Cytoscape to visualize the protein-protein interactions (PPI) for these DEGs. RESULTS: A total of 509 upregulated and 618 downregulated DEGs were identified, which were enriched in GO terms including integrin binding, protein binding, and structural constituent of cytoskeleton, and in KEGG pathways such as melanogenesis, prostate cancer, focal adhesion, and renin secretion. Three major modules from the PPI networks and 10 hub genes were identified, including CDC20, GNB2, PPP2R1A, AURKB, POLR2E, and AGTR1. Overall survival was low when these six hub genes were highly expressed. CONCLUSION: This bioinformatics analysis identified hub genes that may promote the development of melanoma and represent potential new biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment of melanoma.
Recent studies have suggested that DDX3 functions in antiviral innate immunity, but the underlying mechanism remains elusive. We previously identified target mRNAs whose translation is controlled by DDX3. Pathway enrichment analysis of these targets indicated that DDX3 is involved in various infections and inflammation. Using immunoblotting, we confirmed that PACT, STAT1, GNB2, Rac1, TAK1, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) proteins are downregulated by DDX3 knockdown in human monocytic THP-1 cells and epithelial HeLa cells. Polysome profiling revealed that DDX3 knockdown reduces the translational efficiency of target mRNAs. We further demonstrated DDX3-mediated translational control of target mRNAs by luciferase reporter assays. To examine the effects of DDX3 knockdown on macrophage migration and phagocytosis, we performed in vitro cell migration assay and flow cytometry analysis of the uptake of green fluorescent protein-expressing Escherichia coli in THP-1 cells. The DDX3 knockdown cells exhibited impaired macrophage migration and phagocytosis. Moreover, we used a human cytokine antibody array to identify the cytokines affected by DDX3 knockdown. Several chemokines were decreased considerably in DDX3 knockdown THP-1 cells after lipopolysaccharide or poly(I.C) stimulation. Lastly, we demonstrated that DDX3 is crucial for the recruitment of phagocytes to the site of inflammation in transgenic zebrafish.
INTRODUCTION: There is a paucity of effective treatment options for advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (pNETs). Genome-wide analyses may allow for potential drugs to be identified based on differentially expressed genes (DEGs). METHODS: Oligo microarray data of RNA expression profiling of pNETs and normal pancreas tissues were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus. Functional and pathway enrichment information of the DEGs was obtained using the Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes databases. Corresponding homologous proteins were analyzed and potential therapeutic drugs for pNETs were identified using the Connectivity Map and Drug-Gene Interaction Database. RESULTS: Assessment of raw data from 12,610 pNET genes demonstrated that 1082 and 380 genes were upregulated and downregulated, respectively, compared with normal pancreas tissue. Upregulated pathways were associated with nitrogen metabolism (i.e., GABAergic synapse, and graft-versus-host disease), whereas downregulated pathways included C-type leptin receptor signaling pathway, pertussis and AMPK signaling pathway. In particular, the protein-protein interaction analysis revealed 10 upregulated hub genes (DYNLL1, GNB5, GNB2, GNG4, GNAI2, GNAI1, HIST2H2BE, NUP107, NUP133, and SNAP25) and 10 downregulated hub genes (CXCL8, F2, CXCL2, GCG, SST, INS, GALR3, CCL20, ADRA2B, and CXCL6). Using the Drug-Gene Interaction Database, candidate drugs for pNETs treatment included 3 EGFR inhibitors (canertinib, erlotinib, WZ-4-145), as well as other cell-signaling pathway inhibitors such as AG-592, acarbose, lonidamine, azacytidine, rottlerin, and HU-211. CONCLUSION: Using available genetic atlas data, potential drug candidates for treatment of pNETs were identified based on differentially expressed genes. These results may help focus efforts on identifying targeted agents with therapeutic efficacy to treat patients with pNETs.
RATIONALE: Familial sinus node and atrioventricular conduction dysfunction is a rare disorder that leads to paroxysmal dizziness, fatigue, and syncope because of a temporarily or permanently reduced heart rate. To date, only a few genes for familial sinus and atrioventricular conduction dysfunction are known, and the majority of cases remain pathogenically unresolved. OBJECTIVE: We aim to identify the disease gene in a large 3-generation family (n=25) with autosomal dominant sinus node dysfunction (SND) and atrioventricular block (AVB) and to characterize the mutation-related pathomechanisms in familial SND+AVB. METHODS AND RESULTS: Genome-wide linkage analysis mapped the SND+AVB disease locus to chromosome 7q21.1-q31.1 (2-point logarithm of the odds score: 4.64; theta=0); in this region, targeted exome sequencing identified a novel heterozygous mutation (p.Arg52Leu) in the GNB2 gene that strictly cosegregated with the SND+AVB phenotype. GNB2 encodes the beta(2) subunit (Gbeta(2)) of the heterotrimeric G-protein complex that is being released from G-protein-coupled receptors on vagal stimulation. In 2 heterologous expression systems (HEK-293T cells and Xenopus laevis oocytes), an enhanced activation of the G-protein-activated K(+) channel (GIRK; Kir3.1/Kir3.4) was shown when mutant Gbeta(2) was coexpressed with Ggamma(2); this was in contrast to coexpression of mutant Gbeta(2)-Ggamma(2) with other cardiac ion channels (HCN4, HCN2, and Cav1.2). Molecular dynamics simulations suggested a reduced binding property of mutant Gbeta(2) to cardiac GIRK channels when compared with native Gbeta(2). CONCLUSIONS: A GNB2 gene mutation is associated with familial SND+AVB and leads to a sustained activation of cardiac GIRK channels, which is likely to hyperpolarize the myocellular membrane potential and thus reduces their spontaneous activity. Our findings describe for the first time a role of a mutant G-protein in the nonsyndromic pacemaker disease because of GIRK channel activation.
Activating mutations in genes encoding G protein alpha (Galpha) subunits occur in 4-5% of all human cancers, but oncogenic alterations in Gbeta subunits have not been defined. Here we demonstrate that recurrent mutations in the Gbeta proteins GNB1 and GNB2 confer cytokine-independent growth and activate canonical G protein signaling. Multiple mutations in GNB1 affect the protein interface that binds Galpha subunits as well as downstream effectors and disrupt Galpha interactions with the Gbetagamma dimer. Different mutations in Gbeta proteins clustered partly on the basis of lineage; for example, all 11 GNB1 K57 mutations were in myeloid neoplasms, and seven of eight GNB1 I80 mutations were in B cell neoplasms. Expression of patient-derived GNB1 variants in Cdkn2a-deficient mouse bone marrow followed by transplantation resulted in either myeloid or B cell malignancies. In vivo treatment with the dual PI3K-mTOR inhibitor BEZ235 suppressed GNB1-induced signaling and markedly increased survival. In several human tumors, mutations in the gene encoding GNB1 co-occurred with oncogenic kinase alterations, including the BCR-ABL fusion protein, the V617F substitution in JAK2 and the V600K substitution in BRAF. Coexpression of patient-derived GNB1 variants with these mutant kinases resulted in inhibitor resistance in each context. Thus, GNB1 and GNB2 alterations confer transformed and resistance phenotypes across a range of human tumors and may be targetable with inhibitors of G protein signaling.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) have been associated with lung cancer (LC), one of the most common cancers, but the underlying molecular mechanisms of the specific correlation with LC carcinogenesis remain unveiled. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was applied to examine the level of circZNF609. LC cells were transfected with silenced circZNF609 by siRNAs, and cell proliferation, migration, and apoptosis were evaluated to reflect the influences of circZNF609 knockdown in LC. Biotin-coupled circRNA capture, FISH and luciferase reporter assays were performed to study the relationship between circZNF609 and miR-142-3p. In current work, it was discovered that circZNF609 functioned as an onco-circRNA, which exhibited high expression as well as facilitated the proliferation and migration in LC cells. Next, we discovered that FUS RNA-binding protein, which could bind to the ZNF609 pre-mRNA, induced circZNF609 formation, and increased circZNF609 expression in LC. Furthermore, circZNF609 was verified to sponge and sequester miR-142-3p; circZNF609 enhanced LC cell proliferative and migrative ability via targeting miR-142-3p. Finally, G protein subunit beta 2 (GNB2) was figured out to involve in circZNF609/miR-142-3p axis-induced LC development. Conclusively, the results indicated that FUS-induced circZNF609 exerts promotional effects on LC cell proliferation and migration through modulation of the miR-142-3p/GNB2 axis, which could offer new insight for understanding LC.
The MDCK cell line is perceived as better than the embryos of hen eggs for the production of influenza vaccines, but the tumorigenicity of these cells is concerning. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is likely to be a crucial target that contributes to the tumorigenicity of MDCK cells. In this study, EGFR-knockdown and EGFR-overexpression cell lines were established. EGFR's influence on cell growth, migration, clonogenic ability, and flu virus susceptibility was evaluated in vitro, and its role in cell tumorigenicity was examined in nude mice. GST pull-down coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) and bioinformatics analysis identified EGFR-interacting proteins. The expression levels of these proteins, as well as those of PI3K-AKT- and MAPK-ERK-signaling-pathway-related molecules, were confirmed at both gene and protein levels. The result indicates that EGFR overexpression can enhance cell proliferation, migration, and clonal formation; EGFR knockdown could effectively curtail tumorigenesis and amplify the titers of influenza viruses in MDCK cells. An analysis of the underlying mechanism identified a total of 21 interacting proteins implicated in tumor formation, and among these, AKT1, CDK4, GNB2, and MAPK8 were confirmed at both gene and protein levels. EGFR can activate key factors of the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway, AKT and PI3K, and promote their phosphorylation levels. Consequently, we concluded that EGFR interacts with GNB2, facilitating transmembrane signal transduction, activating the PI3K-AKT signaling cascade, controlling cell cycle alterations, stimulating cell proliferation, and promoting tumorigenesis.
The heterozygous mutation c.155G > T in GNB2 clinically leads to sinus bradycardia and sinus node dysfunction. Here, patient-specific skin fibroblasts of the mutation carrier were used for Sendai virus reprogramming into human induced-pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC). For generating the isogenic control cell line, a CRISPR/Cas9-mediated HDR-repair of the hiPSCs was carried out. Both generated cell lines (GNB2 SV5528, GNB2 K26) maintained a normal karyotype, cell morphology, pluripotency in immunofluoresence and RT-qPCR analysis. Both hiPSC-lines showed differentiation potential into all three germ layers. Differentiated cardiomyocytes of this isogenic set may pave the way for investigating pharmacological rescue strategies for sinus node dysfunction.
