Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(T) subunit beta-3; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
INTRODUCTION: Erectile dysfunction (ED) is usually developed from psychological, neurological, hormonal, and vascular pathologies or a combination of these factors. However, the possible genetic polymorphisms that might underlie this disorder were not thoroughly investigated. OBJECTIVES: This review article aimed to assess the possible involvement of gene polymorphisms in men with ED. METHODS: A systematic review was conducted until January 2020 based on a search of all relevant articles in many electronic sites such as PubMed, Medline Medical Subject Headings, Science Direct, Scopus, Cochrane Library, EMBASE, CINAHL, and Egyptian Knowledge Bank databases with no language restriction. Keywords used to assess the outcome and estimates for relevant associations were sexual health, genes, erectile dysfunction, polymorphisms, and cavernous tissues. RESULTS: Many genetic studies were carried out to inspect the contribution of different encoded genotypes and ED. Overall, 50 studies were reviewed and were classified as per the type of gene polymorphisms. These studies have investigated 10,174 men with ED compared with 6,891 healthy men as controls. 35 studies were case-controlled, 13 cross-sectional cohort studies, one retrospective study, and one genome-wide association study. So far, the most relevant gene polymorphisms linked with men with ED included endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), androgen receptor (AR) CAG repeat, G-protein beta3 (GNB3) subunit, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), TGFB1, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), ARG1, DRD2, DRD4, DDAH, and HNF4A genes. Both PROGINS and IGFBP-3 polymorphisms were investigated in only one study each but with irrelevant significance. CONCLUSIONS: Although several genetic studies exposed the association between different genotypes and men with ED with varied outcomes, such a relationship should not be overlooked. Therefore, more studies should be encouraged to elucidate the exact role, if any, for such association. Mostafa T, Taymour M. Gene Polymorphisms Affecting Erectile Dysfunction. Sex Med 2020;8:561-572.
The World Health Organization (WHO) predicts that major depressive disorder (MDD) will be the second leading cause of death and disability by 2020. Nowadays, approximately 60-70% of patients with this disorder have shown the lack of effectiveness and tolerability of the therapy with antidepressants. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicine Agency (EMA) are including pharmacogenetic information in the labeling of several antidepressants. The presence of this information represents the relevance of genetic polymorphisms in drug response. These pharmacogenetic studies have been based on the knowledge of genes involved in pharmacokinetic (CYP2D6, CYP2C19 and ABCB1) and pharmacodynamic (SLC6A4, HTR2A, BDNF, GNB3 and FKBP5) processes of antidepressant medications. The knowledge of the genotype of patients with MDD is an important tool for personalized therapy that can improve their clinical response to treatment. In this review, we highlight the most relevant genes involved in the metabolism of antidepressants (ADs) or the genes related to the presence of adverse reactions.
Functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) are a highly prevalent group of heterogeneous disorders, and their diagnostic criteria are symptom-based, with the absence of anatomical and biochemical abnormalities of the gastrointestinal tract. Chronic visceral symptoms are common both in patients with an identifiable organic disease but also in FGID patients. Patients suffering from upper gastrointestinal functional disorders typically present with various symptoms such as early satiety, postprandial fullness, bloating, nausea, vomiting, and epigastric pain. Considering their increasing prevalence, difficulties in diagnosis, and low quality of life, FGIDs have become an emerging problem in gastroenterology. We aimed to provide an updated summary of pathways involved in visceral sensitization. We examined the recent literature searching for evidence of the most important studies about the mechanisms underlying gastrointestinal symptom generation and sensitization.
Human thymic epithelial tumors (TET) are common malignancies in the anterior mediastinum with limited biological understanding. Here we show, by single cell analysis of the immune landscape, that the developmental pattern of intra-tumoral T-cells identify three types within TETs. We characterize the developmental alterations and TCR repertoires of tumor-infiltrating T cells in the context of the distinguishing epithelial tumor cell types. We demonstrate that a subset of tumor cells, featuring medullary thymic epithelial cell (TEC) phenotype and marked by KRT14/GNB3 expression, accumulate in type 1 TETs, while T-cell positive selection is inhibited. Type 2 TETs are dominated by CCL25(+) cortical TEC-like cells that appear to promote T-cell positive selection. Interestingly, the CHI3L1(+) medullary TEC-like cells that are the characteristic feature of type 3 TETs don't seem to support T-cell development, however, they may induce a tissue-resident CD8(+) T cell response. In summary, our work suggests that the molecular subtype of epithelial tumour cells in TETs determine their tumour immune microenvironment, thus GNB3 and CHI3L1 might predict the immunological behavior and hence prognosis of these tumours.
BACKGROUND: The relationship between the C825T polymorphism of GNB3 (encoding G-protein beta3 subunit) and pre-eclampsia risk is unclear. OBJECTIVE: To systematically explore the association between GNB3 C825T and pre-eclampsia. SEARCH STRATEGY: PubMed, EMBASE, Google Scholar, and Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI) databases were searched to September 1, 2020, using keywords including "GNB3 C825T" and "pre-eclampsia". SELECTION CRITERIA: Case-control and cohort studies investigating the relationship between GNB3 C825T polymorphism and pre-eclampsia were included. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers collected the data independently and calculate odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). MAIN RESULTS: The meta-analysis involved eight studies from seven publications, including 2071 cases and 3419 controls. Overall analysis showed that GNB3 C825T was associated with increased pre-eclampsia risk in the recessive model (OR, 1.21; 95% CI, 1.01-1.44; P = 0.04). Subgroup analysis stratified by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium revealed a relationship between GNB3 C825T and increased risk of pre-eclampsia in the allelic (OR, 1.66; 95% CI, 1.34-2.05; P < 0.001), homozygous (OR, 2.12, 95% CI, 1.04-4.32; P  = 0.04), dominant (OR, 1.91; 95% CI, 1.18-3.11; P = 0.009), and recessive (OR, 1.70; 95% CI, 1.03-2.81; P = 0.04) models. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal GNB3 C825T polymorphism seems to be a risk factor for pre-eclampsia.
Cluster headache (CH) is a rare, excruciating primary headache disorder. A genetic basis has been suggested by family and twin studies, but the mode of transmission seems to vary and the amount of heritability is unclear. The number of genetic association studies investigating variants implicated in the pathophysiology of CH is limited. The HCRTR2 1246G > A and the ADH4 925A > G polymorphisms have been associated with CH. The former has been confirmed and may affect the hypothalamic hypocretin system. However, it only appears to account for a part of the genetic susceptibility for CH, and additional genetic and environmental factors are likely implicated. Pharmacogenetic studies have suggested that the GNB3 825C > T polymorphism may modify treatment response to triptans among CH patients by altering the signal transduction cascade via G protein-coupled receptors. Genetic studies in CH are notoriously difficult due to the complex nature of the disorder and the low prevalence of CH.
Genetic variation underlies both the response to antidepressant treatment and the occurrence of side effects. Over the past two decades, a number of pharmacogenetic variants, among these the SCL6A4, BDNF, FKBP5, GNB3, GRIK4, and ABCB1 genes, have come to the forefront in this regard. However, small effects sizes, mixed results in independent samples, and conflicting meta-analyses results led to inherent difficulties in the field of pharmacogenetics translating these findings into clinical practice. Nearly all antidepressant pharmacogenetic variants have potentially pleiotropic effects in which they are associated with major depressive disorder, intermediate phenotypes involved in emotional processes, and brain areas affected by antidepressant treatment. The purpose of this article is to provide a comprehensive review of the advances made in the field of pharmacogenetics of antidepressant efficacy and side effects, imaging findings of antidepressant response, and the latest results in the expanding field of imaging-pharmacogenetics studies. We suggest there is mounting evidence that genetic factors exert their impact on treatment response by influencing brain structural and functional changes during antidepressant treatment, and combining neuroimaging and genetic methods may be a more powerful way to detect biological mechanisms of response than either method alone. The most promising imaging-pharmacogenetics findings exist for the SCL6A4 gene, with converging associations with antidepressant response, frontolimbic predictors of affective symptoms, and normalization of frontolimbic activity following antidepressant treatment. More research is required before imaging-pharmacogenetics informed personalized medicine can be applied to antidepressant treatment; nevertheless, inroads have been made towards assessing genetic and neuroanatomical liability and potential clinical application.
OBJECTIVE: Antidepressants are frequently prescribed and are the first-line pharmacological treatments for psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents. Although antidepressants are generally effective and well-tolerated by children, between 31% to 48% will not respond and up to 25% will experience an adverse drug reaction. Evidence from adult populations suggests pharmacogenetic information can assist with identifying individuals at greatest risk for poor response or adverse drug reactions but the evidence base in pediatric populations is less clear. METHOD: We systematically identified, reviewed, and critically evaluated the antidepressant pharmacogenetics literature among children and adolescents using standardized tools and consensus criteria. RESULTS: We identified 24 studies, most of which were of fair to moderate quality. Collectively, the studies identified 25 significant gene-antidepressant associations involving 10 genes (ABCB1, BDNF, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, FKBP5, GNB3, HTR1B, HTR2A, SLC6A4, TPH2) and nine antidepressants (amitriptyline, citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nortriptyline, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine). None of the identified associations have been independently replicated in children. LIMITATIONS: Included studies were heterogenous in terms of study design, genes and drugs assessed, and outcomes measured. CONCLUSION: The antidepressant pharmacogenetics knowledge base in pediatric populations is still emerging, but results to date echo many of the gene-antidepressant associations identified in adult populations. Given ubiquitous prescribing of antidepressants in the care of children and adolescents with psychiatric disorders, further research on identifying new and confirming current gene-antidepressant associations are warranted.
The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to identify the genetic variants of (inter)national competing long-distance runners and road cyclists compared with controls. The Medline and Embase databases were searched until 15 November 2021. Eligible articles included genetic epidemiological studies published in English. A homogenous group of endurance athletes competing at (inter)national level and sedentary controls were included. Pooled odds ratios based on the genotype frequency with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated using random effects models. Heterogeneity was addressed by Q-statistics, and I(2) . Sources of heterogeneity were examined by meta-regression and risk of bias was assessed with the Clark Baudouin scale. This systematic review comprised of 43 studies including a total of 3938 athletes and 10 752 controls in the pooled analysis. Of the 42 identified genetic variants, 13 were investigated in independent studies. Significant associations were found for five polymorphisms. Pooled odds ratio [95%CI] favoring athletes compared with controls was 1.42 [1.12-1.81] for ACE II (I/D), 1.66 [1.26-2.19] for ACTN3 TT (rs1815739), 1.75 [1.34-2.29] for PPARGC1A GG (rs8192678), 2.23 [1.42-3.51] for AMPD1 CC (rs17602729), and 2.85 [1.27-6.39] for HFE GG + CG (rs1799945). Risk of bias was low in 25 (58%) and unclear in 18 (42%) articles. Heterogeneity of the results was low (0%-20%) except for HFE (71%), GNB3 (80%), and NOS3 (76%). (Inter)national competing runners and cyclists have a higher probability to carry specific genetic variants compared with controls. This study confirms that (inter)national competing endurance athletes constitute a unique genetic make-up, which likely contributes to their performance level.
Background: Cancer-related cognitive impairment (CRCI) is a commonly reported complaint among non-CNS cancer patients. Even subtle CRCI may have detrimental effects on quality of life and identifying patients at increased risk for CRCI to improve survivorship care is important. In the present paper, we systematically reviewed available studies of possible genetic risk factors for developing CRCI. Methods: Keyword-based systematic searches were undertaken on 24 July 2018 in PubMed, Web of Science, The Cochrane Library, and CINAHL. Three authors independently evaluated full-texts of identified papers and excluded studies with registration of reasons. Seventeen studies reporting results from 14 independent samples were included for review. Two authors independently quality assessed the included studies. The review was preregistered with PROSPERO (CRD42018107689). Results: Ten studies investigated apolipoprotein E (APOE), with four studies reporting that carrying at least one risk allele (APOE4 (epsilon4)) was associated with CRCI, while six studies found no association. The remaining identified genetic risk variants associated with CRCI located in: COMT, four DNA repair genes, five oxidative stress genes, 22 genes related to breast cancer phenotype, and GNB3. No associations were found between CRCI and genes coding for interleukin-6 (IL6), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF), interleukin 1 beta (IL1B), and brain-derived neurotropic factor (BDNF). With the exception of APOE, the genetic risk factors had only been investigated in one or two studies each. Conclusions: Overall, the available evidence of possible genetic risk factors for CRCI is limited. While some research suggests a role for the epsilon4 allele, the literature is generally inconsistent, and the currently available evidence does not allow clear-cut conclusions regarding the role of genetic factors in the development of CRCI. Larger genetic studies and studies investigating additional genetic variants are needed to uncover genetic risk factors for CRCI.
OBJECTIVES: In this study the association between genetic polymorphisms and power athlete status with possible interference by race and sex was investigated to identify genetic variants favourable for becoming a power athlete. DESIGN: This meta-analysis included both, case-control and Cohort studies. METHODS: Databases of PubMed and Web of Science were searched for studies reporting on genetic polymorphisms associated with the status of being a power athlete. Thirty-five articles published between 2008 and 2016 were identified as eligible including a total number of 5834 power athletes and 14,018 controls. A series of meta-analyses were conducted for each of the identified genetic polymorphisms associated with power athlete status. Odds ratios (ORs) based on the allele and genotype frequency with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (95%CI) were calculated per genetic variant. Heterogeneity of the studies was addressed by Chi-square based Q-statistics at 5% significance level and a fixed or random effects model was used in absence or presence of heterogeneity respectively. Stratified analyses were conducted by race and sex to explore potential sources of heterogeneity. RESULTS: Significant associations were found for the genetic polymorphisms in the ACE (rs4363, rs1799752), ACTN3 (rs1815739), AGT (rs699), IL6-174 (rs1800795), MnSOD (rs1799725), NOS3 (rs1799983, rs2070744) and SOD2 (rs4880) genes. CONCLUSIONS: Nine genetic polymorphisms have been identified in the meta-analyses to have a significant association with the status of being a power athlete. Nevertheless, more research on the investigated genes needs to be done to draw comprehensive conclusions.
INTRODUCTION: Heterogeneity of therapeutic response to brain stimulation techniques has inspired scientists to uncover the secrets to success or failure of these projects. Genetic polymorphisms are one of the major causes of this heterogeneity. AREAS COVERED: More than twenty genetic variants within more than ten genes (e.g. BDNF, COMT, DRD2, TRPV1, 5-HT1A, 5-HHT, P2RX7, VEGF, TPH1, TPH2, ACE, APOE, GNB3, NET, NMDA receptors, and RGS4) have been investigated, among which the BDNF gene and its polymorphism, Val66Met, is the best documented variant. We review the genotypic combinations, which are reported to interact with the work of brain stimulation, of which the DRD2 C957T polymorphism is the most prominent type. Finally, implications of transcranial magnetic stimulation in deciphering the interaction between genetic background (e.g. SCN1A and 5-HTT) and drugs (e.g. carbamazepine and citalopram) at the cortical excitability level is explained. Expert commentary: Studies are ongoing to find missing factors responsible for heterogeneity of response to brain stimulation techniques. Further knowledge about genetic factors affecting the therapeutic response to brain stimulation techniques might provide helpful guidelines for choosing ideal candidates for treatment.
OBJECTIVE: This study surveyed the frequencies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) M235T AGT and C825T GNB3, and their association with insulin resistance, other biochemical markers and qualitative variables in subjects with high normal blood pressure and/or prehypertension in the Greek population. DESIGN: 330 men and women of Greek origin were divided into 3 groups: a) hypertensive, b) prehypertensive and c) control group. These groups were genetically tested for these polymorphisms and insulin resistance with the HOMA index. RESULTS: No statistically significant differences were found among the polymorphisms of the compared groups. However, the ? allele carriers (CT/TT vs. CC) of the C825T polymorphism were associated with an increased BMI in all 3 groups (p=0.004). The HOMA index was higher in the hypertensive (p=0.006) and prehypertensive (p=0.016) versus the control group, and similar results were found for insulin (hypertensive vs. control p=0.012, prehypertensive vs. control p=0.001) without statistical significance between the first 2 groups (p=0.522). Additionally, there was a statistically significant difference between the control group and the hypertensive and prehypertensive groups regarding cholesterol (control vs. hypertensive p=0.001, control vs. prehypertension p=0.018) and triglycerides (control vs. hypertensive p=0.0001, control vs. prehypertension p=0.007). Differences were also noted between the control and the hypertensive group regarding the value of HDL (p=0.005) and LDL (p=0.013). CONCLUSION: This study failed to demonstrate a correlation between specific SNPs, blood pressure and insulin resistance in the 3 groups. However, T allele carriers of the polymorphism C825T were found to have an increased BMI. Similarly, increased insulin resistance and lipidemia were more common in the hypertensive and prehypertensive populations.
PURPOSE: Management of schizophrenia among Blacks in the United States is affected by persistent disparities. This review explored response to atypical antipsychotics among Blacks compared with other groups to assess systematic variation that may contribute to disparities. METHODS: We conducted a quasi-systematic review of studies reporting response to atypical antipsychotics among Blacks compared with other groups, including effects of genetic variation. RESULTS: Of 48 identified research articles, 29 assessed differences in outcomes without inclusion of genetic variation and 20 explored effects of genetic variation; of note: one article included both types of data. Analysis of the 29 papers with clinical outcomes only suggests that while data on efficacy and risk of movement disorders were heterogeneous, findings indicate increased risk of metabolic effects and neutropenia among Blacks. Of the 20 articles exploring effects of genetic variation, allelic or genotypic variations involving several genes were associated with altered efficacy or safety among Blacks but not Whites, including risk of decreased response involving variation in DRD4 and DRD1, and improved efficacy associated with variants in DRD2, COMT, and RGS4. Others showed significant improvement in treatment response only among Whites, including variation in DTNBP1, DRD4, and GNB3. CONCLUSIONS: The current analysis can help tailor management among Blacks using an atypical antipsychotic. Heterogeneity in genetic variation effects and response allele frequency suggests that pharmacogenetics approaches for atypical antipsychotics will need to explicitly incorporate race and ethnicity.
The aim of the study was to develop technologies for predicting the development of preeclampsia (PE) based on biomedical and molecular-genetic predictors and the calculation of individual risks for this pregnancy complication. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study involved 457 pregnant women. Of them, 147 women had chronic arterial hypertension (CAH); 109 pregnant women had CAH and secondary preeclampsia (PE); 201 patients had PE. The control group consisted of 105 pregnant women without hypertensive disorders or proteinuria. We performed a retrospective analysis of gestation course and labor outcomes, calculated risk factors using the Open Epi system and logistic regression method. Polymorphisms of genes controlling the vascular tone were identified in venous blood. RESULTS: There were identified risk factors for developing PE, including those in women with CAH: chronic pyelonephritis; baseline mean AP above 95 mm Hg and diastolic AP above 80 mm Hg; body mass index over 30; family history of arterial hypertension. The following were identified as additional predictors of PE: perinatal loss; premature labor; spontaneous miscarriage; PE and closed craniocerebral injuries in the past medical history; threatening miscarriage in the first trimester. Additional risk factors for PE in women with CAH were found: lack of regular antihypertensive therapy before pregnancy and in the first trimester; chronic gastritis; first pregnancy; tobacco smoking.Polymorphic variants of the NOS3 (-786)C allele in the genotype in combination with the heterozygous genotype in the AGTR2 1675G/A gene are associated with a high risk of CAH. The presence of alleles NOS3 (-786)T/C and NOS3 (-786)C, as well as a combination of alleles NOS3 (-786)C and NOS3 894G/T, is associated with PE. The presence of alleles AGT 704C, CYP11B2 (-344)T, and GNB3 825T/T in the genotype, both individually and in combination, is a risk factor for the development of PE secondary to CAH. The data obtained made it possible to develop a method for predicting the onset of PE in women with CAH and a model for calculating the individual risk of PE, which formed the basis for a computer program. CONCLUSION: Calculating the individual risks of PE using the technologies proposed by the authors allows identifying pregnant women belonging to the high-risk group on a timely basis, which ensures high-quality implementation of preventive measures, provides a personalized approach and the possibility to prove the need for additional examination of this category of patients.
Heterotrimeric G proteins couple receptors for diverse extracellular signals to effector enzymes or ion channels. Each G protein comprises a specific alpha-subunit and a tightly bound betagamma dimer. Several human disorders that result from genetic G-protein abnormalities involve the imprinted GNAS gene, which encodes Gs alpha, the ubiquitously expressed alpha-subunit that couples receptors to adenylyl cyclase and cAMP generation. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations, in addition to imprinting defects, of this gene lead to diverse clinical phenotypes. Mutations of GNAT1 and GNAT2, which encode the retinal G proteins (transducins), are rare causes of specific congenital visual defects. Common polymorphisms of the GNAS and GNB3 (which encodes Gbeta3) genes have been associated with multigenic disorders (e.g. hypertension and metabolic syndrome). To date, no other G proteins have been implicated directly in human disease.
The pharmacogenetics of antidepressants has been not only a challenging but also frustrating research field since its birth in the 1990s. Indeed, great expectations followed the first evidence of familiar aggregation of antidepressant response. Despite the progress from candidate gene studies to genome-wide association studies (GWAS), results fell out the expectations and they were often inconsistent. Anyway, the cumulative evidence supports the involvement of some genes and molecular pathways in antidepressant efficacy. The best single genes are SLC6A4, HTR2A, BDNF, GNB3, FKBP5, ABCB1, and cytochrome P450 genes (CYP2D6 and CYP2C19). Molecular pathways involved in inflammation and neuroplasticity show the greatest support. The first studies evaluating benefits of genotype-guided antidepressant treatments provided encouraging results and confirmed the relevance of SLC6A4, HTR2A, ABCB1, and cytochrome P450 genes. Further progress in genotyping and data analysis would allow to move forward and complete the understanding of antidepressant pharmacogenetics and its translation into clinical applications.
OBJECTIVE: We performed the present meta-analysis in order to evaluate the influence of a common polymorphism (C825T, rs5443 C>T) in the GNB3 gene on the efficacy of antidepressants in the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD). METHOD: A relevant literature was searched using the PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, CISCOM, CINAHL, Google Scholar, CBM and CNKI databases without any language restrictions. STATA Version 12.0 software (Stata Corporation, College Station, Texas USA) was used for this meta-analysis. Odds ratio (OR) and its corresponding 95% confidence interval (95% CI) were calculated. RESULTS: Our findings suggested that the GNB3 C825T polymorphism was significantly correlated with a higher response rate to antidepressants in MDD patients under the allele and dominant models. Furthermore, we found significant associations between GNB3 C825T polymorphisms and antidepressant-induced remission in MDD patients. Ethnicity-stratified analysis indicated that GNB3 C825T polymorphisms may be strongly related to the efficacy of antidepressants in the treatment of MDD among Asians, but not in Caucasians (all P>0.05). CONCLUSION: Our findings provide empirical evidence that GNB3 C825T polymorphisms may be correlated with the efficacy of antidepressants in the treatment of MDD, especially among Asians patients.
Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is a group of rare, mainly stationary disorders of the retina, resulting from dysfunction of several specific and essential visual processing mechanisms. The inheritance is often recessive and as such, CSNB may be more common among populations with a high degree of consanguinity. Here, we present a topic update and a review of the clinical and molecular genetic spectrum of CSNB in Saudi Arabia. Since a major review article on CSNB in 2015, which described 17 genes underlying CSNB, an additional four genes have been incriminated in autosomal recessive CSNB: RIMS2, GNB3, GUCY2D and ABCA4. These have been associated with syndromic cone-rod synaptic disease, ON bipolar cell dysfunction with reduced cone sensitivity, CSNB with dysfunction of the phototransduction (Riggs type) and CSNB with cone-rod dystrophy, respectively. In Saudi Arabia, a total of 24 patients with CSNB were identified, using a combination of literature search and retrospective study of previously unpublished cases. Recessive mutations in TRPM1 and CABP4 accounted for the majority of cases (5 and 13 for each gene, respectively). These genes were associated with complete (cCSNB) and incomplete (icCSNB), respectively, and were associated with high myopia in the former and hyperopia in the latter. Four novel mutations were identified. For the first time, we describe the fundus albipunctatus in two patients from Saudi Arabia, caused by recessive mutation in RDH5 and RPE65, where the former in addition featured findings compatible with cone dystrophy. No cases were identified with any dominantly inherited CSNB.
