Alpha-2A adrenergic receptor; Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine- induced inhibition of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. The rank order of potency for agonists of this receptor is oxymetazoline > clonidine > epinephrine > norepinephrine > phenylephrine > dopamine > p-synephrine > p-tyramine > serotonin = p- octopamine. For antagonists, the rank order is yohimbine > phentolamine = mianserine > chlorpromazine = spiperone = prazosin > propanolol > alprenolol = pindolol.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a common neurogenetic disorder and its heterogeneity is a challenge for genetic diagnostics. The genetic diagnostic procedures for a CMT patient can be explored according to the electrophysiological criteria: very slow motor nerve conduction velocity (MNCV) (<15 m/s), slow MNCV (15-25 m/s), intermediate MNCV (25-45 m/s), and normal MNCV (>45 m/s). Based on the inheritance pattern, intermediate CMT can be divided into dominant (DI-CMT) and recessive types (RI-CMT). GJB1 is currently considered to be associated with X-linked DI-CMT, and MPZ, INF2, DNM2, YARS, GNB4, NEFL, and MFN2 are associated with autosomal DI-CMT. Moreover, GDAP1, KARS, and PLEKHG5 are associated with RI-CMT. Identification of these genes is not only important for patients and families but also provides new information about pathogenesis. It is hoped that this review will lead to a better understanding of intermediate CMT and provide a detailed diagnostic procedure for intermediate CMT.
BACKGROUND: Clinical and molecular data on the occurrence and frequency of inherited neuromuscular disorders (NMD) in the Lebanese population is scarce. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to provide a retrospective overview of hereditary NMDs based on our clinical consultations in Lebanon. METHODS: Clinical and molecular data of patients referred to a multi-disciplinary consultation for neuromuscular disorders over a 20-year period (1999-2019) was reviewed. RESULTS: A total of 506 patients were diagnosed with 62 different disorders encompassing 10 classes of NMDs. 103 variants in 49 genes were identified. In this cohort, 81.4% of patients were diagnosed with motor neuron diseases and muscular dystrophies, with almost half of these described with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (40.3% of patients). We estimate a high SMA incidence of 1 in 7,500 births in Lebanon. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy were the second most frequently diagnosed NMDs (17% of patients). These disorders were associated with the highest number of variants (39) identified in this study. A highly heterogeneous presentation of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease was notably identified. The least common disorders (5.5% of patients) involved congenital, metabolic, and mitochondrial myopathies, congenital myasthenic syndromes, and myotonic dystrophies. A review of the literature for selected NMDs in Lebanon is provided. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates a high prevalence and underreporting of heterogeneous forms of NMDs in Lebanon- a major challenge with many novel NMD treatments in the pipeline. This report calls for a regional NMD patient registry.
BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection causes aberrant DNA methylation and contributes to the risk of gastric cancer (GC). Guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-4 (GNB4) is involved in various tumorigenic processes. We found an aberrant methylation level of GNB4 in H. pylori-induced GC in our previous bioinformatic analysis; however, its expression and underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. METHODS: The expression, underlying signaling pathways, and clinical significance of GNB4 were analyzed in a local cohort of 107 patients with GC and several public databases. H. pylori infection was induced in in vitro and in vivo models. Methylation-specific PCR, pyrosequencing, and mass spectrometry analysis were used to detect changes in methylation levels. GNB4, TET1, and YAP1 were overexpressed or knocked down in GC cell lines. We performed gain- and loss-of-function experiments, including CCK-8, EdU, colony formation, transwell migration, and invasion assays. Nude mice were injected with genetically manipulated GC cells, and the growth of xenograft tumors and metastases was measured. Real-time quantitative PCR, western blotting, immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and co-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms. RESULTS: GNB4 expression was significantly upregulated in GC and correlated with aggressive clinical characteristics and poor prognosis. Increased levels of GNB4 were associated with shorter survival times. Infection with H. pylori strains 26695 and SS1 induced GNB4 mRNA and protein expression in GC cell lines and mice. Additionally, silencing of GNB4 blocked the pro-proliferative, metastatic, and invasive ability of H. pylori in GC cells. H. pylori infection remarkably decreased the methylation level of the GNB4 promoter region, particularly at the CpG#5 site (chr3:179451746-179451745). H. pylori infection upregulated TET1 expression via activation of the NF-kappaB. TET binds to the GNB4 promoter region which undergoes demethylation modification. Functionally, we identified that GNB4 induced oncogenic behaviors of tumors via the Hippo-YAP1 pathway in both in vitro and in vivo models. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that H. pylori infection activates the NF-kappaB-TET1-GNB4 demethylation-YAP1 axis, which may be a potential therapeutic target for GC.
Early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) can greatly improve the survival rate of patients. We aimed to develop a novel marker panel based on cell-free DNA (cfDNA) methylation for the detection of HCC. The differentially methylated CpG sites (DMCs) specific for HCC blood diagnosis were selected from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases, then validated by the whole genome bisulphite sequencing (WGBS) of 12 paired HCC and paracancerous tissues. The clinical performance of the panel was evaluated using tissue samples [32 HCC, chronic liver disease (CLD), and healthy individuals] and plasma cohorts (173 HCC, 199 CLD, and 98 healthy individuals). The combination of G protein subunit beta 4 (GNB4) and Riplet had the optimal area under the curve (AUC) in seven candidates through TCGA, GEO, and WGBS analyses. In tissue validation, the GNB4 and Riplet showed an AUC of 100% with a sensitivity and specificity of 100% for detecting any-stage HCC. In plasma, it demonstrated a high sensitivity of 84.39% at 91.92% specificity, with an AUC of 92.51% for detecting any-stage HCC. The dual-marker panel had a higher sensitivity of 78.26% for stage I HCC than alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) of 47.83%, and a high sensitivity of 70.27% for detecting a single tumour (size </=3 cm). In conclusion, we developed a novel dual-marker panel that demonstrates high accuracy in detecting HCC, surpassing the performance of AFP testing.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article focuses on recent advances in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, in particular additions to the genetic spectrum, novel paradigms in molecular techniques and an update on therapeutic strategies. RECENT FINDINGS: Several new Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-causing genes have been recently identified, further enlarging the genetic diversity and phenotypic variability, including: SBF1, DHTKD1, TFG, MARS, HARS, HINT1, TRIM1, AIFM1, PDK3 and GNB4. The increasing availability and affordability of next-generation sequencing technologies has ramped up gene discovery and drastically changed genetic screening strategies. All large-scale trials studying the effect of ascorbic acid in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1A have now been completed and were negative. Efforts have been made to design more robust outcome-measures for clinical trials. Promising results with lonaprisan, curcumin and histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors have been obtained in animal models. SUMMARY: Charcot-Marie-Tooth is the most common form of inherited peripheral neuropathy and represents the most prevalent hereditary neuromuscular disorder. The genetic spectrum spans more than 70 genes. Gene discovery has been revolutionized recently by new high-throughput molecular technologies. In addition, the phenotypic diversity has grown tremendously. This is a major challenge for geneticists and neurologists. No effective therapy is available for Charcot-Marie-Tooth. Several large trials with ascorbic acid were negative but research into novel compounds continues.
STUDY QUESTION: Does basigin (BSG) regulate human endometrial stromal cell (HESC) decidualization in vitro? SUMMARY ANSWER: BSG regulates HESCs proliferation and decidualization. WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Studies have shown that in the human endometrium, BSG expression is menstrual-cycle dependent and its expression was significantly lower in uterine endometrium during the luteal phase of women experiencing multiple implantation failures after IVF than in women with normal fertility. STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: We utilized a telomerase-immortalized HESCs in an in vitro cell culture model system to investigate whether BSG regulates decidualization of stromal cells. Further, we used microarray analysis to identify changes in the gene expression profile of HESCs treated with BSG small interfering RNA (siRNA). All experiments were repeated at least three times. PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: The effect of BSG knockdown (using siRNA) on HESC proliferation was determined by counting cell number and by tritiated thymidine incorporation assays. The effect of BSG on decidualization of HESCs was determined by RT-qPCR for the decidualization markers insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) and prolactin (PRL). Immunoblotting was used to determine the effect of BSG siRNA on the expression of MMP-2,3. Microarray analysis was used to identify BSG-regulated genes in HESCs at Day 6 of decidualization. Functional and pathway enrichment analyses were then carried out on the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The STRING online database was used to analyze protein-protein interaction (PPI) between DEG-encoded proteins, and CytoScape software was used to visualize the interaction. MCODE and CytoHubba were used to construct functional modules and screen hub genes separately. Several BSG-regulated genes identified in the microarray analysis were confirmed by qPCR. MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Knockdown of BSG expression in cultured stromal cells by siRNA significantly (P < 0.05) inhibited HESC proliferation, disrupted cell decidualization and down-regulated MMP-2 and MMP-3 expression. Microarray analysis identified 721 genes that were down-regulated, and 484 genes up-regulated with P < 0.05 in BSG siRNA treated HESCs. GO term enrichment analysis showed that the DEGs were significantly enriched in cell communication, signaling transduction and regulation, response to stimulus, cell adhesion, anatomical structure morphogenesis, extracellular matrix organization, as well as other functional pathways. KEGG pathway analysis identified upregulated gene enriched in pathways such as the MAPK signaling pathway, colorectal cancer, melanoma and axon guidance. In contrast, downregulated genes were mainly enriched in pathways including ECM-receptor interaction, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, pathways in cancer, antigen processing, type I diabetes mellitus and focal adhesion. The top 10 hub nodes were identified using 12 methods analyses. The hub genes that showed up in two methods were screened out. Among these genes, upregulated genes included EGFR, HSP90AA1, CCND1, PXN, PRKACB, MGAT4A, EVA1A, LGALS1, STC2, HSPA4; downregulated genes included WNT4/5, FOXO1, CDK1, PIK3R1, IGF1, JAK2, LAMB1, ITGAV, HGF, MXRA8, TMEM132A, UBE2C, QSOX1, ERBB2, GNB4, HSP90B1, LAMB2, LAMC1 and ITGA1. Hub genes and module genes involved in the top three modules of PPI analysis were analyzed through the string database. Analysis showed that hub and module genes were related mainly to the WNT signaling pathway, PI3K-AKT signaling pathway and pathways in cancer. LARGE SCALE DATA: The microarray data set generated in this study has been published online at databank.illinois.edu. LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Most of the findings were obtained using an in vitro cell culture system that may not necessarily reflect in vivo functions. WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our results demonstrate that BSG plays a vital role in decidualization and that downregulation of BSG in the uterine endometrium may be associated with infertility in women. The identified hub genes and pathways increase our understanding of the genetic etiology and molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of decidualization by BSG. STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This work was supported by the NIH U54 HD40093 (R.A.N.). The authors have no competing interests to declare.
Impaired human oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (hOPC) differentiation likely contributes to failed remyelination in multiple sclerosis. The characterization of molecular pathways that regulate hOPC differentiation will provide means to induce remyelination. In this study, we determined the gene expression profile of PDGFalphaR(+) hOPCs during initial oligodendrocyte commitment. Weighted gene coexpression network analysis was used to define progenitor and differentiation-specific gene expression modules and functionally important hub genes. These modules were compared with rodent OPC and oligodendrocyte data to determine the extent of species conservation. These analyses identified G-protein beta(4) (GNB4), which was associated with hOPC commitment. Lentiviral GNB4 overexpression rapidly induced human oligodendrocyte differentiation. Following xenograft in hypomyelinating shiverer/rag2 mice, GNB4 overexpression augmented myelin synthesis and the ability of hOPCs to ensheath host axons, establishing GNB4 as functionally important in human myelination. As such, network analysis of hOPC gene expression accurately predicts genes that influence human oligodendrocyte differentiation in vivo.
Data mining on a public domain detected eight potential transcripts which were upregulated in advanced UBUCs, suggesting that they may take part in UC development or/and progression. Retrospectively, immunohistochemistry along with H-score recording was carried out to evaluate the GNB4 protein levels on tissues from UC patients. Correlations between GNB4 H-score and imperative clinicopathological factors, as well as the implication of GNB4 protein level on disease-specific and metastasis-free survivals were assessed. In UTUCs (n = 340) and UBUCs (n = 295), 170 (50.0%) and 148 (50.0%) cases, respectively, were identified to be of high GNB4 expression. The GNB4 protein levels were correlated to numerous clinicopathological features and patients' survivals. Upregulation of the GNB4 protein was significantly associated with primary tumor, nodal metastasis, histological grade, vascular invasion and mitotic rate. High GNB4 protein levels independently and significantly predicted poor disease-specific and metastasis-free in UTUC and UBUC, respectively. Ingenuity pathway analysis furthermore showed that multiple signaling pathways were enriched including 'Communication between Innate and Adaptive Immune Cells' and 'NFkappaB Signaling'. Our findings demonstrated that the upregulation of the GNB4 protein is an independent unfavorable prognosticator in UC. High GNB4 gene expression plays an important role in UC progression.
Low heart rate variability (HRV) has been widely reported as a predictor for increased mortality. However, the molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. Therefore, this study aimed to identify novel genetic loci associated with HRV and assess the association of phenotypic HRV and genetically predicted HRV with mortality. In a GWAS of 46,075 European ancestry individuals from UK biobank, we identified 17 independent genome-wide significant genetic variants in 16 loci associated with HRV traits. Notably, eight of these loci (RNF220, GNB4, LINCR-002, KLHL3/HNRNPA0, CHRM2, KCNJ5, MED13L, and C160rf72) have not been reported previously. In a prospective phenotypic relationship between HRV and mortality during a median follow-up of seven years, individuals with lower HRV had higher risk of dying from any cause. Genetically predicted HRV, as determined by the genetic risk scores, was not associated with mortality. To the best of our knowledge, the findings provide novel biological insights into the mechanisms underlying HRV. These results also underline the role of the cardiac autonomic nervous system, as indexed by HRV, in predicting mortality.
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common and lethal malignancies worldwide, and its poor prognosis is mainly due to the rapid tumor progression including tumor invasion, distant metastasis, etc. Understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating GC progression lays the basis for the development of targeted therapeutic agents. Increasing evidence suggests that guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-4 (GNB4), a key subunit of heterotrimeric G protein, plays a crucial role in the initiation and progression of multiple malignancies. However, whether and how GNB4 promotes GC progression are still unknown. In this study, we found that GNB4 was highly expressed in GC tissues compared to that in non-tumor tissues and was significantly associated with tumor invasion depth, pathological stage and poor survival rate of GC patients. Both gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies revealed that GNB4 significantly enhanced GC cell growth and motility both in vitro and in vivo. Further studies revealed that GNB4 overexpression induced G1-S transition and promoted the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transformation. These tumor promoting effects were mediated by GNB4 which activates the Erk1/2 pathway through upregulating Erk1/2 phosphorylation, as U0126, an Erk1/2 phosphorylation inhibitor, could significantly inhibit GNB4-mediated cell proliferation, migration and invasion. In summary, GNB4 contributes to the proliferation and metastasis of GC cells by activating the Erk1/2 signaling pathway, and it may serve as a potential therapeutic target of GC.
BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) represents a universal malignant tumor of the digestive system. Stromal and immune cells belong to two main nontumor components exerting a vital function in the tumor microenvironment. METHODS: Based on TCGA database, this study downloaded clinical information and gene profiles of GC. The ESTIMATE algorithm was adopted for evaluating the score of immune-infiltrating cells. This work employed Sangerbox to explore the differentially denoted genes (DEGs) related to stromal, immunity, and prognosis. Besides, the STRING database was involved in order to detect the association among the proteins. The MCODE module of Cytoscape software was used to screen key genes. Oncomine and GEPIA databases were used, aiming to study the differences in key genes in healthy gastric mucosa and GC. At last, we adopted TISDIB and TIMER databases for analyzing the association of guanine nucleotide binding protein subunit-4 (GNB4) between gastric cancer and tumor immune cells. qRT-PCR was applied for exploring differential GNB4 expression between GC and normal gastric mucosa and investigating the relation of GNB4 with tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). RESULTS: Patients undergoing a great stromal score exhibited worse prognostic outcome, and cases having a low immune score had better prognosis. Overall, altogether 656 genes were upregulated with 5 genes being downregulated, which were matrix immune-related differential genes. Furthermore, 18 genes were screened as hub genes on the basis of the univariate Cox risk model of TCGA database (82 differential genes predicted poor GC survival). Oncomine and GEPIA databases revealed that GNB4 expression in gastric cancer was obviously higher in comparison with that in normal gastric mucosa. The GSEA, TISDIB, and TIMER databases revealed that GNB4 is involved in various tumor signal pathways and immune and metabolic processes. qRT-PCR demonstrated that GNB4 expression in gastric cancer was notably higher in comparison with that in normal gastric mucosa, showing significant association with matrix TILs. CONCLUSION: The selected key gene GNB4 is a potential biomarker to guide the immunotherapy of gastric cancer.
Gaucher disease (GD) caused by mutation in the GBA gene has a wide spectrum of phenotypes. Besides the storage disorder, secondary alteration of various pathways occurs with modification of the expression of many genes. In our work we analysed the expression profile of genes in adult patients with type 1 GD. METHODS: This study was an observational, cross-sectional analysis of a group of twenty patients with type 1 GD and ten healthy volunteers as a control group. First, on the group of ten persons, microarray gene analysis was performed. Afterwards, significantly regulated genes were selected, and the microarray results were confirmed by real-time PCR on the whole study group. RESULTS: Based on the microarray results in the pathway analysis, we focused on genes related to chemokines, inflammatory processes, endocytosis, autophagy, and apoptosis. Patients with GD demonstrated up-regulation of genes related to NFkB pathway (NFkB, NKkBR SQSTM1), inflammation (IL-1b), endocytosis and autophagy (BCN1, SMAD), genes coding proteins involved in apoptosis (CASP, NFkB, BCL2) as well as genes related to proteasome degradation (PSMD2, PSMB9) and SNARE complex (SNAP, STX). Simultaneously, we showed down-regulation of genes coding proteins of chemokines and their receptors (GNB4, CCL5). The qRT-PCR results confirmed changes in expression of selected genes. Parallel microarray results showed inhibition of genes related to neurones development and survival (NTRK1) and stimulation of gene expression related to neurodegeneration and apoptosis (BCN1, IL1B). CONCLUSIONS: The work revealed different pathway activation, especially inflammatory processes followed by autophagy and apoptosis. Our results also pay attention to new pathways leading to disorders of the functioning of the nervous tissue in patients with type 1 GD, which may lead to the development of polyneuropathy and chronic pain. These are clinical symptoms that severely decrease the quality of life in GD patients.
MiR-133b is considered to be lowly expressed in osteoporosis patients. This study aimed to probe the role and in-depth mechanism of miR-133b in modulating osteoblast biological behavior and differentiation. The differential expressions of miR-133b and GNB4 in patients with osteoporosis and healthy control were analyzed based on the GEO database. Osteoblastic differentiation of hFOB 1.19 cells was induced in the culture medium containing 10 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 50 nm dexamethasone, and 100 mug/ml ascorbic acid. The level of GNB4 was detected using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blot. Cell viability and apoptosis were measured by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) and flow cytometry assays, respectively. Western blot was also utilized to measure the levels of osteoblast-related proteins, including ALP, Runx2, Osterix, and OPN. GNB4 was identified and confirmed as a downstream target gene of miR-133b. The expression of miR-133b was declined while the expression of GNB4 was increased in osteoporosis patients. Importantly, up-regulation of miR-133b caused the increase of cell viability and the decrease of apoptosis, which could be blocked by overexpression of GNB4. Also, up-regulation of miR-133b promoted osteoblasts differentiation, as shown by the increase in the expression of ALP, Runx2, Osterix, and OPN. Similarly, this promoting impact resulted from miR-133b overexpression can be reversed via up-regulation of GNB4. These findings revealed that miR-133b can promote the viability and differentiation of osteoblasts by targeting GNB4, hoping to lay a feasible theoretical foundation for the clinical treatment of osteoporosis.
AIM AND OBJECTIVE: Despite the prevalence and burden of major depressive disorder (MDD), our current understanding of the pathophysiology is still incomplete. Therefore, this paper aims to explore genes and evaluate their diagnostic ability in the pathogenesis of MDD. METHODS: Firstly, the expression profiles of mRNA and microRNA were downloaded from the gene expression database and analyzed by the GEO2R online tool to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed microRNAs (DEMs). Then, the DAVID tool was used for functional enrichment analysis. Secondly, the comprehensive protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was analyzed using Cytoscape, and the network MCODE was applied to explore hub genes. Thirdly, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the core gene was drawn to evaluate clinical diagnostic ability. Finally, mirecords was used to predict the target genes of DEMs. RESULTS: A total of 154 genes were identified as DEGs, and 14 microRNAs were identified as DEMs. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that DEGs were mainly involved in hematopoietic cell lineage, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, chemokine signaling pathway, and JAK-STAT signaling pathway. Three important modules are identified and selected by the MCODE clustering algorithm. The top 12 hub genes, including CXCL16, CXCL1, GNB5, GNB4, OPRL1, SSTR2, IL7R, MYB, CSF1R, GSTM1, GSTM2, and GSTP1, were identified as important genes for subsequent analysis. Among these important hub genes, GSTM2, GNB4, GSTP1 and CXCL1 have the good diagnostic ability. Finally, by combining these four genes, the diagnostic ability of MDD can be improved to 0.905, which is of great significance for the clinical diagnosis of MDD. CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that GSTM2, GNB4, GSTP1 and CXCL1 have potential diagnostic markers and are of great significance in clinical research and diagnostic application of MDD. This result needs a large sample study to further confirm the pathogenesis of MDD.
BACKGROUND: Surveillance approaches with high sensitivity and specificity for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are still urgently needed. Previous studies have shown that methylation of GNB4 and Riplet can effectively diagnose HCC. AIMS: This study plan to analyze the performance of a blood test for detecting HCC using GNB4 and Riplet methylation. METHODS AND RESULTS: This study mainly investigated the analytical performance of the dual-target HCC blood test (DT-HBT), including cut-off value, limit of detection (LOD), precision, analytical specificity, and coincidence rate. In addition, the detection performance for HCC was validated in 1030 clinical plasma samples (214 HCC and 816 non-HCC). Plasma samples from 25 HCC patients after hepatectomy were collected to assess the feasibility of the kit for postoperative recurrence monitoring. All analytical performance of the DT-HBT met prespecified requirements. The LOD for GNB4, Riplet, and beta-actin was 1% methylation/100 copies/muL with cut-offs of 43, 43, and 35, respectively. The DT-HBT showed excellent precision, within 5% CV. It had a specificity of 91.5% for detecting other cancers, and 100% for breast, lung, and bladder cancer. No cross-reactions were observed with 9 potential interfering substances. The DT-HBT achieved a 100% coincidence rate in detecting reference and clinical samples. The clinical performance study found that the kit showed a sensitivity of 81.7% for stage I HCC, and an overall sensitivity and specificity of 87.4% and 92.3%, respectively. The detection sensitivity for postoperative recurrent patients was 95.8%, with a specificity of 100%. CONCLUSION: The analytical performance of the DT-HBT met prespecified criteria. It provided HCC patients with a reliable and high-performing new blood test for the HCC diagnosis and surveillance. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT05685524.
DNA methylation has an important role in Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)-induced gastric cancer (GC) processes and development. The aim of this study was to search genome-scale epigenetic modifications for studying pathogenesis of H. pylori-induced GC, and to find factors and powerful signature related to survival and prognosis. In this study, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of DNA methylation and gene expression profiles in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), to identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and differentially methylated genes (DMGs). Functional enrichment analysis of the screened genes was performed, and a protein-protein interaction network was constructed. The TCGA DNA methylation databases and 55 H. pylori-infected GC cases of GEO RNA sequencing (GSE62254) were utilized for prognostic value validation of hub genes. Finally, a prognosis-related risk signature was identified by a series of bioinformatics analysis for H. pylori-induced GC patients. Totally, 161 DMGs were identified. Pathway analysis showed that all MDEGs mainly associated with Ras signaling pathway, renal cell carcinoma, mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. Five hub genes including CACNB2, GNB4, GRIN2A, MEF2C, and PREX1 were screened as independent prognostic factors in H. pylori-induced GC patients. Two-gene (CACNB2 and MEF2C) risk signature was constructed for predicting the overall survival of H. pylori-induced GC patients. Our study indicated possible MDEGs and pathways in H. pylori-induced GC by bioinformatics analysis, which may provide novel insights for unraveling pathogenesis of H. pylori-induced GC. Hub genes might serve as aberrantly methylation-based biomarkers for clinical diagnostic and prognostic evaluation of H. pylori-induced GC.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women worldwide. Although the endocrine therapy that targets estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) signaling has been well established as an effective adjuvant treatment for patients with ERalpha-positive breast cancers, long-term exposure may eventually lead to the development of acquired resistance to the anti-estrogen drugs, such as fulvestrant and tamoxifen. A better understanding of the mechanisms underlying antiestrogen resistance and identification of the key molecules involved may help in overcoming antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer. METHODS: The whole-genome gene expression and DNA methylation profilings were performed using fulvestrant-resistant cell line 182(R)-6 and tamoxifen-resistant cell line TAM(R)-1 as a model system. In addition, qRT-PCR and Western blot analysis were performed to determine the levels of mRNA and protein molecules. MTT, apoptosis and cell cycle analyses were performed to examine the effect of either guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta-4 (GNB4) overexpression or knockdown on cell proliferation, apoptosis and cell cycle. RESULTS: Among 9 candidate genes, GNB4 was identified and validated by qRT-PCR as a potential target silenced by DNA methylation via DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B). We generated stable 182(R)-6 and TAM(R)-1 cell lines that are constantly expressing GNB4 and determined the effect of the ectopic GNB4 on cell proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptosis of the antiestrogen-resistant cells in response to either fulvestrant or tamoxifen. Ectopic expression of GNB4 in two antiestrogen resistant cell lines significantly promoted cell growth and shortened cell cycle in the presence of either fulvestrant or tamoxifen. The ectopic GNB4 induced apoptosis in 182(R)-6 cells, whereas it inhibited apoptosis in TAM(R)-1 cells. Many regulators controlling cell cycle and apoptosis were aberrantly expressed in two resistant cell lines in response to the enforced GNB4 expression, which may contribute to GNB4-mediated biologic and/or pathologic processes. Furthermore, knockdown of GNB4 decreased growth of both antiestrogen resistant and sensitive breast cancer cells. CONCLUSION: GNB4 is important for growth of breast cancer cells and a potential target for treatment.
BACKGROUND: Methamphetamine (meth) seeking progressively increases after withdrawal (incubation of meth craving). We previously demonstrated an association between histone deacetylase 5 (HDAC5) gene expression in the rat dorsal striatum and incubation of meth craving. Here we used viral constructs to study the causal role of dorsal striatum HDAC5 in this incubation. METHODS: In experiment 1 (overexpression), we injected an adeno-associated virus bilaterally into dorsal striatum to express either green fluorescent protein (control) or a mutant form of HDAC5, which strongly localized to the nucleus. After training rats to self-administer meth (10 days, 9 hours/day), we tested the rats for relapse to meth seeking on withdrawal days 2 and 30. In experiment 2 (knockdown), we injected an adeno-associated virus bilaterally into the dorsal striatum to express a short hairpin RNA either against luciferase (control) or against HDAC5. After training rats to self-administer meth, we tested the rats for relapse on withdrawal days 2 and 30. We also measured gene expression of other HDACs and potential HDAC5 downstream targets. RESULTS: We found that HDAC5 overexpression in dorsal striatum increased meth seeking on withdrawal day 30 but not day 2. In contrast, HDAC5 knockdown in the dorsal striatum decreased meth seeking on withdrawal day 30 but not on day 2; this manipulation also altered other HDACs (Hdac1 and Hdac4) and potential HDAC5 targets (Gnb4 and Suv39h1). CONCLUSIONS: Results demonstrate a novel role of dorsal striatum HDAC5 in incubation of meth craving. These findings also set up future work to identify HDAC5 targets that mediate this incubation.
The association of GNB4 with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) has recently been described in a publication by Soong et al. (Soong, et al., 2013). Here we present a patient with CMT in whom whole exome sequencing identified the mutation p.Lys57Glu in the GNB4 gene (NM_021629.3:c.169A>G). The patient, now 41 years old, is a sporadic case in the family. At the age of 35 he presented with severe disability (CMT neuropathy score 29), profound muscle atrophies, pes cavus and scoliosis. Previously, the patient was tested for PMP22 duplications/deletions and later also with 64 CMT gene panel, with no causal variant found. Subsequently, whole exome sequencing was performed. The p.Lys57Glu in the GNB4 gene was identified as the most probable causal variant, the mutation is not present in the patient's parents, neither in his unaffected sister, therefore we assume that the mutation arose de novo. Taken together, these findings support the causal and pathogenic character of the variant. Our report provides important evidence that GNB4 should become an established CMT gene and our findings confirm the original publication by Soong et al. (2013).
