Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-10; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction. Interacts with beta-1 and beta-2, but not with beta-3.
Tuberculosis (TB) is one of the leading causes of childhood morbidity and death globally. Lack of rapid, effective non-sputum diagnosis and prediction methods for TB in children are some of the challenges currently faced. In recent years, blood transcriptional profiling has provided a fresh perspective on the diagnosis and predicting the progression of tuberculosis. Meanwhile, combined with bioinformatics analysis can help to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and functional pathways involved in the different clinical stages of TB. Therefore, this study investigated potential diagnostic markers for use in distinguishing between latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) and active TB using children's blood transcriptome data.From the Gene Expression Omnibus database, we downloaded two gene expression profile datasets (GSE39939 and GSE39940) of whole blood-derived RNA sequencing samples, reflecting transcriptional signatures between latent and active tuberculosis in children. GEO2R tool was used to screen for DEGs in LTBI and active TB in children. Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery tools were used to perform Gene Ontology enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis. STRING and Cytoscape analyzed the protein-protein interaction network and the top 15 hub genes respectively. Receiver operating characteristics curve was used to estimate the diagnostic value of the hub genes.A total of 265 DEGs were identified, including 79 upregulated and 186 downregulated DEGs. Further, 15 core genes were picked and enrichment analysis revealed that they were highly correlated with neutrophil activation and degranulation, neutrophil-mediated immunity and in defense response. Among them TLR2, FPR2, MMP9, MPO, CEACAM8, ELANE, FCGR1A, SELP, ARG1, GNG10, HP, LCN2, LTF, ADCY3 had significant discriminatory power between LTBI and active TB, with area under the curves of 0.84, 0.84, 0.84, 0.80, 0.87, 0.78, 0.88, 0.84, 0.86, 0.82, 0.85, 0.85, 0.79, and 0.88 respectively.Our research provided several genes with high potential to be candidate gene markers for developing non-sputum diagnostic tools for childhood Tuberculosis.
BACKGROUND: The guanine nucleotide binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCRs) regulate cell growth, proliferation and differentiation. G proteins are also implicated in erythroid differentiation, and some of them are expressed principally in hematopoietic cells. GPCRs-linked NO/cGMP and p38 MAPK signaling pathways already demonstrated potency for globin gene stimulation. By analyzing erythroid progenitors, derived from hematopoietic cells through in vitro ontogeny, our study intends to determine early markers and signaling pathways of globin gene regulation and their relation to GPCR expression. RESULTS: Human hematopoietic CD34+ progenitors are isolated from fetal liver (FL), cord blood (CB), adult bone marrow (BM), peripheral blood (PB) and G-CSF stimulated mobilized PB (mPB), and then differentiated in vitro into erythroid progenitors. We find that growth capacity is most abundant in FL- and CB-derived erythroid cells. The erythroid progenitor cells are sorted as 100% CD71+, but we did not find statistical significance in the variations of CD34, CD36 and GlyA antigens and that confirms similarity in maturation of studied ontogenic periods. During ontogeny, beta-globin gene expression reaches maximum levels in cells of adult blood origin (176 fmol/mug), while gamma-globin gene expression is consistently up-regulated in CB-derived cells (60 fmol/mug). During gamma-globin induction by hydroxycarbamide, we identify stimulated GPCRs (PTGDR, PTGER1) and GPCRs-coupled genes known to be activated via the cAMP/PKA (ADIPOQ), MAPK pathway (JUN) and NO/cGMP (PRPF18) signaling pathways. During ontogeny, GPR45 and ARRDC1 genes have the most prominent expression in FL-derived erythroid progenitor cells, GNL3 and GRP65 genes in CB-derived cells (high gamma-globin gene expression), GPR110 and GNG10 in BM-derived cells, GPR89C and GPR172A in PB-derived cells, and GPR44 and GNAQ genes in mPB-derived cells (high beta-globin gene expression). CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the concomitant activity of GPCR-coupled genes and related signaling pathways during erythropoietic stimulation of globin genes. In accordance with previous reports, the stimulation of GPCRs supports the postulated connection between cAMP/PKA and NO/cGMP pathways in activation of gamma-globin expression, via JUN and p38 MAPK signaling.
The gibbon genome exhibits extensive karyotypic diversity with an increased rate of chromosomal rearrangements during evolution. In an effort to understand the mechanistic origin and implications of these rearrangement events, we sequenced 24 synteny breakpoint regions in the white-cheeked gibbon (Nomascus leucogenys, NLE) in the form of high-quality BAC insert sequences (4.2 Mbp). While there is a significant deficit of breakpoints in genes, we identified seven human gene structures involved in signaling pathways (DEPDC4, GNG10), phospholipid metabolism (ENPP5, PLSCR2), beta-oxidation (ECH1), cellular structure and transport (HEATR4), and transcription (ZNF461), that have been disrupted in the NLE gibbon lineage. Notably, only three of these genes show the expected evolutionary signatures of pseudogenization. Sequence analysis of the breakpoints suggested both nonclassical nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) and replication-based mechanisms of rearrangement. A substantial number (11/24) of human-NLE gibbon breakpoints showed new insertions of gibbon-specific repeats and mosaic structures formed from disparate sequences including segmental duplications, LINE, SINE, and LTR elements. Analysis of these sites provides a model for a replication-dependent repair mechanism for double-strand breaks (DSBs) at rearrangement sites and insights into the structure and formation of primate segmental duplications at sites of genomic rearrangements during evolution.
Heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) mediate signals between G-protein coupled receptors and their downstream pathways, and have been shown to be mutated in cancer. In particular, GNAQ was found to be frequently mutated in blue nevi of the skin and uveal melanoma, acting as an oncogene in its mutated form. To further examine the role of heterotrimeric G proteins in malignant melanoma, we performed a comprehensive mutational analysis of the 35 genes in the heterotrimeric G protein gene family in a panel of 80 melanoma samples. Somatic alterations in a G protein subunit were detected in 17% of samples spanning 7 genes. The highest rates of somatic, non-synonymous mutations were found in GNG10 and GNAZ, neither of which has been previously reported to be mutated in melanoma. Our study is the first systematic analysis of the heterotrimeric G proteins in melanoma and indicates that multiple mutated heterotrimeric G proteins may be involved in melanoma progression.
Glioma is a highly invasive brain cancer that is difficult to treat due to its complex molecular characteristics and poor prognosis. The COVID-19 pandemic has introduced additional clinical challenges for cancer patients, especially those with glioma. This study explored the molecular interactions between glioma and COVID-19 using integrated bioinformatics methods, including enrichment analysis, survival analysis, and molecular docking, focusing on the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway and the immunomodulatory role of vitamin D. From gene expression data of glioma and COVID-19, 203 common differentially expressed genes were identified, and six prognostic key genes-MYBL2, RBM6, VEPH1, AHNAK2, GNG10, and DUSP14-were further determined. After intersecting with vitamin D targets five prognostic key genes were determined-MYBL2, RBM6, VEPH1, AHNAK2 and GNG10. These genes play significant roles in the PI3K-Akt pathway and potentially interact with vitamin D. Molecular docking and single-cell RNA sequencing analyses suggest that vitamin D may improve the prognosis of glioma patients infected with COVID-19 by regulating these key genes and the PI3K-Akt pathway. The findings reveal molecular links between glioma and COVID-19, thereby providing new insights for developing targeted therapeutic strategies.
Radiotherapy is the main treatment for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC); however, radioresistance limits the therapeutic efficacy and prognosis of patients with NPC. Here, we plan to identify the genes involved in radiotherapy response. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from three paired NPC patients with pre-radiotherapy and post-radiotherapy were extracted. Next-generation deep sequencing was then performed to identify the PBMCs transcripts profiles in response to radiotherapy. Data of gene chip GSE48501 was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The gene integration of differentially expressed genes identified from RNA-Seq data and gene chip was performed using "RobustRankAggreg" package. RNA-Seq data from 44 normal and 519 Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) tissues (downloaded from TCGA) was integrated into the analysis to further support our study. Cox regression was used to identify risk factors impacting survival. Total of 45 genes were identified to be associated with radiotherapy response. Significantly enriched Gene Ontology (GO) terms and pathways were enriched. Univariate and multivariate analysis suggested the dysregulated genes, CHAC2, CLEC9A, GNG10, JCHAIN, KLRB1, NOG, OLR1, PRELID2, SYT1, VWCE, ZNF443 were associated with survival in HNSCC patients. Our data provide an overview of the profiles of radiotherapy-associated genes, which will facilitate future investigations into the function of radiotherapy resistance.
Studies were done on analysis of biological processes in the same high expression (fold change >/=2) activated PTHLH feedback-mediated cell adhesion gene ontology (GO) network of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) compared with the corresponding low expression activated GO network of no-tumor hepatitis/cirrhotic tissues (HBV or HCV infection). Activated PTHLH feedback-mediated cell adhesion network consisted of anaphase-promoting complex-dependent proteasomal ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolism, cell adhesion, cell differentiation, cell-cell signaling, G-protein-coupled receptor protein signaling pathway, intracellular transport, metabolism, phosphoinositide-mediated signaling, positive regulation of transcription, regulation of cyclin-dependent protein kinase activity, regulation of transcription, signal transduction, transcription, and transport in HCC. We proposed activated PTHLH coupling feedback phosphoinositide to G-protein receptor signal-induced cell adhesion network. Our hypothesis was verified by the different activated PTHLH feedback-mediated cell adhesion GO network of HCC compared with the corresponding inhibited GO network of no-tumor hepatitis/cirrhotic tissues, or the same compared with the corresponding inhibited GO network of HCC. Activated PTHLH coupling feedback phosphoinositide to G-protein receptor signal-induced cell adhesion network included BUB1B, GNG10, PTHR2, GNAZ, RFC4, UBE2C, NRXN3, BAP1, PVRL2, TROAP, and VCAN in HCC from GEO dataset using gene regulatory network inference method and our programming.
The pathogenesis of slow‑transit constipation (STC) remains largely unclear, with the roles of microRNAs (miRs/miRNAs) yet to be determined. Co‑expression network analysis of miRNAs in STC is crucial to elucidating potential underlying mechanisms. Weighted gene correlation network analysis was performed in the miRNA expression profile of STC (GSE57969). The key miRNA target genes were further functionally enriched by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO). A Protein‑Protein Interaction (PPI) network was constructed, with a total of 12 color‑clustered modules determined. Seven key miRNAs were established, including five miRNAs from the turquoise module (hsa‑miR‑20b, hsa‑miR‑128, hsa‑miR‑129‑3p, hsa‑miR‑30b and hsa‑miR‑340), one miRNA from the blue module (hsa‑miR‑619) and one from the black module (hsa‑miR‑486‑3p). A total of 2,077 key miRNA target genes were predicted. GO analysis revealed that the 'protein modification process' and 'cellular protein modification process' were the most significantly enriched processes in the 'Biological Processes' category, whereas the 'nucleoplasm' in 'Cellular Components' and 'enzyme binding' in 'Molecular Functions' were the most significantly enriched processes. The 'cAMP signalling pathway' was the top KEGG pathway. The hub genes identified from the PPI network included calmodulin (CALM)2, CALM1, histone deacetylase (HDAC)3, glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta, HDAC9, heat‑shock protein family A member 8, G‑protein subunit gamma (GNG)13, HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1, GNG10 and GNG7. This bioinformatics analysis demonstrated co‑expressed miRNA networks with insightful genes and pathways associated with STC.
Great concerns have raised crucial roles of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) on colorectal cancer progression due to the increasing number of studies in cancer development. Previous studies reveal that lncRNA CCAT1 plays an important role in the progression of a variety of cancers. However, the role of lncRNA CCAT1 in colorectal cancer is still unclear. In this study, we found that in both colorectal tissues and cell lines the level of lncRNA CCAT1 was increased. Downregulation of lncRNA CCAT1 inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of colorectal cell lines and promoted apoptosis. We then found that hsa-miR-4679 could bind to lncRNA CCAT1 directly, and with further functional analyses, we confirmed that lncRNA CCAT1 sponged hsa-miR-4679 to promote the progression of colorectal cancer. Next, we found that hsa-miR-4679 was directly bound to 3'UTR of GNG10 (guanine nucleotide-binding protein, gamma 10). GNG10 overexpression promoted the progression of colorectal cancer, and this phenotype could be reversed by miR-4679 mimics. At last, we knocked down CCAT1 in vivo and found that sh-CCAT1 reduced the tumor size and the number of proliferating cells. In summary, our findings revealed that lncRNA CCAT1 facilitated colorectal cancer progression via the hsa-miR-4679/GNG10 axis and provided new potential therapeutic targets for colorectal cancer.
AIMS: Insulin resistance caused by a high-fat diet induces type 2 diabetes and its complications. In this study, we investigated gene expression changes in peripheral leukocytes with insulin resistance by conducting microarray analyses in rats with high-fat diet-induced insulin resistance. MAIN METHODS: After assessing insulin resistance in rats by an oral glucose tolerance test, we performed microarray analyses using peripheral leukocytes from normal rats and insulin-resistant rats after fasting. Real-time RT-PCR analyses were performed for several upregulated genes in the microarray data after fasting and at 3h after a single oral glucose load. KEY FINDINGS: Feeding rats a high-fat diet for 77days induced moderate insulin resistance. Microarray analysis showed that the high-fat diet enhances many genes related to leukocyte activation. These upregulated genes included genes related to host defense, and many genes related to G-protein-coupled receptor/tyrosine receptor signaling. Moreover, many genes, such as Anxa1, S100a8, Il22ra2, Gng10, Csf3r and Cd302, showed further upregulation of their expression after a single oral glucose load. Exposure to high glucose and/or tumor necrosis factor-alpha which is known to be a factor that induces insulin resistance, enhanced the mRNA levels of DUSP1, ANXA1, IL1B, S100A8, IL22RA2, S100A9 and IRF1 in human monocyte-like U937 cells. SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that the expression of genes related to leukocyte activation in peripheral leukocytes is associated with the development of moderate insulin resistance.
