Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-13; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
Brain regions such as the cerebellum (CB) have been neglected for a long time in the study of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathogenesis. In reference to a new emerging hypothesis according to which there is an altered cerebellar synaptic processing in AD, we verified the possible role played by new biomarkers in the CB of AD patients compared with not-demented healthy control subjects (NDHS). Using a bioinformatics approach, we have collected several microarray datasets and obtained 626 cerebella sample biopsies belonging to subjects who did not die from causes related to neurological diseases and 199 cerebella belonging to AD. The analysis of logical relations between the transcriptome dataset highlighted guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein) gamma 13 (GNG13) as a potential new biomarker for Purkinje cells (PCs). We have correlated GNG13 expression levels with already widely existing bibliography of PC marker genes, such as Purkinje cell protein 2 (PCP2), Purkinje cell protein 4 (PCP4), and cerebellin 3 (CBLN3). We showed that expression levels of GNG13 and PCP2, PCP4, and CBLN3 were significantly correlated with each other in NDHS and in AD and significantly reduced in AD patients compared with NDHS subjects. In addition, we highlighted a negative correlation between the expression levels of PC biomarkers and age. From the outcome of our investigation, it is possible to conclude that the identification of GNG13 as a potentially biomarker in PCs represents also a state of health of CB, in association with the expression of PCP2, PCP4, and CBLN3.
Recently, change in the GNG13 expression has been shown to result in multiple congenital malformations and sexual reversal, and it was also found in the brain. The aim of this study was to measure the expression levels in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and breast cancer (BC) and assess their value as a potential prognostic marker. The correlation of GNG13 protein expression was detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 119 EOC and 125 BC tissues. Assessment of the associations between GNG13 levels and various clinicopathological features was identified, the relationship between GNG13 and prognosis in BC and EOC patients was analyzed using online resources of Oncomine and Kaplan-Meier plotter. Protein expression levels of GNG13 were both significantly lower in BC and EOC compared with normal tissues (p<0.0001 and p<0.001, respectively). Among the clinicopathological characteristics of BC, tumor grade (p=0.001) and TNM stage (p=0.001) were significantly associated with low expression of GNG13. While in EOC, low expression of GNG13 was significantly related to FIGO stage (p=0.001), presence of metastasis (p=0.001), and CA125 (p=0.001). Our data suggest that GNG13 expression maybe as a new inhibitor, which can strongly inhibit metastasis and partially attenuates tumor growth in EOC and BC.
A major challenge in therapeutic approaches applying hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is the cell quantity. The primary objective of this study was to predict the miRNAs and anti-miRNAs using bioinformatics tools and investigate their effects on the expression levels of key genes predicted in the improvement of proliferation, and the inhibition of differentiation in HSCs isolated from Human umbilical cord blood (HUCB). A network including genes related to the differentiation and proliferation stages of HSCs was constructed by enriching data of text (PubMed) and StemChecker server with KEGG signaling pathways, and was improved using GEO datasets. Bioinformatics tools predicted a profile from miRNAs containing miR-20a-5p, miR-423-5p, and chimeric anti-miRNA constructed from 5'-miR-340/3'-miR-524 for the high-score genes (RB1, SMAD4, STAT1, CALML4, GNG13, and CDKN1A/CDKN1B genes) in the network. The miRNAs and anti-miRNA were transferred into HSCs using polyethylenimine (PEI). The gene expression levels were estimated using the RT-qPCR technique in the PEI + (miRNA/anti-miRNA)-contained cell groups (n = 6). Furthermore, CD markers (90, 16, and 45) were evaluated using flow cytometry. Strong relationships were found between the high-score genes, miRNAs, and chimeric anti-miRNA. The RB1, SMAD4, and STAT1 gene expression levels were decreased by miR-20a-5p (P < 0.05). Additionally, the anti-miRNA increased the gene expression level of GNG13 (P < 0.05), whereas the miR-423-5p decreased the CDKN1A gene expression level (P < 0.01). The cellular count also increased significantly (P < 0.05) but the CD45 differentiation marker did not change in the cell groups. The study revealed the predicted miRNA/anti-miRNA profile expands HSCs isolated from HUCB. While miR-20a-5p suppressed the RB1, SMAD4, and STAT1 genes involved in cellular differentiation, the anti-miRNA promoted the GNG13 gene related to the proliferation process. Notably, the mixed miRNA/anti-miRNA group exhibited the highest cellular expansion. This approach could hold promise for enhancing the cell quantity in HSC therapy.
BACKGROUND: Keloid is a benign fibro-proliferative dermal tumor formed by an abnormal scarring response to injury and characterized by excessive collagen accumulation and invasive growth. The mechanism of keloid formation has not been fully elucidated, especially during abnormal scarring. Here, we investigated the regulatory genes, micro-RNAs (miRNAs) and transcription factors (TFs) that influence keloid development by comparing keloid and normal scar as well as keloid and normal skin. METHODS: Gene expression profiles (GSE7890, GSE92566, GSE44270 and GSE3189) of 5 normal scar samples, 10 normal skin samples and 18 keloid samples from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database were interrogated. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between keloid and normal skin samples as well as keloid and normal scar samples with R Project for Statistical Computing. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis was also performed with R software. DEG-associated protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed by STRING, followed by module selection from the PPI network based on the MCODE analysis. Regulatory relationships between TF/miRNA and target genes were predicted with miRnet and cytoscape. Core regulatory genes were verified by RT-qPCR. RESULTS: We identified 628 DEGs, of which 626 were up-regulated and 2 were down-regulated. Seven core genes [neuropeptide Y(NPY), 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1A(HTR1A), somatostatin (SST), adenylate cyclase 8 (ADCY8), neuromedin U receptor 1 (NMUR1), G protein subunit gamma 3 (GNG3), and G protein subunit gamma 13 (GNG13)] all belong to MCODE1 and were enriched in the "G protein coupled receptor signaling pathway" of the GO biological process category. Furthermore, nine core miRNAs (hsa-mir-124, hsa-let-7, hsa-mir-155, hsa-mir-26a, hsa-mir-941, hsa-mir-10b, hsa-mir-20, hsa-mir-31 and hsa-mir-372), and two core TFs (SP1 and TERT) were identified to play important roles in keloid formation. In the TF/miRNA-target gene network, both hsa-mir-372 and hsa-mir-20 had a regulatory effect on GNG13, ADCY8 was predicted to be target by hsa-mir-10b, and HTR1A and NPY were potentially by SP1. Furthermore, the expression of core regulatory genes (GNG13, ADCY8, HTR1A and NPY) was validated in clinical samples. CONCLUSIONS: GNG13, ADCY8, NPY and HTR1A may act as core genes in keloid formation and these core genes establish relationship with SP1 and miRNA (hsa-mir-372, hsa-mir-20, hsa-mir-10b), which may influence multiple signaling pathways in the pathogenesis of keloid.
BACKGROUND: Rotator cuff tear (RCT) is a common shoulder disorder in the elderly. Muscle atrophy, denervation and fatty infiltration exert secondary injuries on torn rotator cuff muscles. It has been reported that satellite cells (SCs) play roles in pathogenic process and regenerative capacity of human RCT via regulating of target genes. This study aims to complement the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of SCs that regulated between the torn supraspinatus (SSP) samples and intact subscapularis (SSC) samples, identify their functions and molecular pathways. METHODS: The gene expression profile GSE93661 was downloaded and bioinformatics analysis was made. RESULTS: Five hundred fifty one DEGs totally were identified. Among them, 272 DEGs were overexpressed, and the remaining 279 DEGs were underexpressed. Gene ontology (GO) and pathway enrichment analysis of target genes were performed. We furthermore identified some relevant core genes using gene-gene interaction network analysis such as GNG13, GCG, NOTCH1, BCL2, NMUR2, PMCH, FFAR1, AVPR2, GNA14, and KALRN, that may contribute to the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of secondary injuries in RCT. We also discovered that GNG13/calcium signaling pathway is highly correlated with the denervation atrophy pathological process of RCT. CONCLUSION: These genes and pathways provide a new perspective for revealing the underlying pathological mechanisms and therapy strategy of RCT.
The G protein subunit gamma 13 (GNG13) plays an important role in olfaction, vision, and biological behavior. However, our knowledge of the relationship between GNG13 expression and the clinicopathological features of gastrointestinal tumors is insufficient. Therefore, we used the Oncomine database to evaluate the expression of GNG13 mRNA in gastric cancer, the result showed that there was no significant difference in the expression of GNG13 between gastric cancer and adjacent normal tissues, and GNG13 mRNA expression was assessed in 32 matched pairs of Gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma tissues and adjacent normal tissues as well as 32 matched pairs of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) and adjacent normal tissues by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis. The results suggested that GNG13 is upregulated in gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis was used to detect the GNG13 in the tissues of 123 patients with GIST. High cytoplasmic expression of GNG13, which was observed in 65.85 % of GIST patients, significantly correlated with mitotic index(P = 0.036) and tumor size(P = 0.024). Multiple logistic regression analysis showed that the expression of GNG13 was significantly associated with tumor size. Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that high GNG13 expression was associated with poor prognosis of GIST. Multivariate Cox regression analysis indicated that the expression of GNG13, mitotic index and tumor size were independent adverse prognostic factors of GIST. These findings suggest that GNG13 is associated with the malignant phenotype of GIST and may serve as a marker of poor prognosis.
Osteoporosis (OP) is one of the major public health problems in the world. However, the biomarkers between the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMs) and bone tissue for prognosis of OP have not been well characterized. This study aimed to explore the similarities and differences of the gene expression profiles between the PBMs and bone tissue and identify potential genes, transcription factors (TFs) and hub proteins involved in OP. The patients were enrolled as an experimental group, and healthy subjects served as normal controls. Human whole-genome expression chips were used to analyze gene expression profiles from PBMs and bone tissue. And the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were subsequently studied using Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis. The above DEGs were constructed into protein-protein interaction network. Finally, TF-DEGs regulation networks were constructed. Microarray analysis revealed that 226 DEGs were identified between OP and normal controls in the PBMs, while 2295 DEGs were identified in the bone tissue. And 13 common DEGs were obtained by comparing the 2 tissues. The Gene Ontology analysis indicated that DEGs in the PBMs were more involved in immune response, while DEGs in bone were more involved in renal response and urea transmembrane transport. And the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis indicated almost all of the pathways in the PBMs were overlapped with those in the bone tissue. Furthermore, protein-protein interaction network presented 6 hub proteins: PI3K1, APP, GNB5, FPR2, GNG13, and PLCG1. APP has been found to be associated with OP. Finally, 5 key TFs were identified by TF-DEGs regulation networks analysis (CREB1, RUNX1, STAT3, CREBBP, and GLI1) and were supposed to be associated with OP. This study enhanced our understanding of the pathogenesis of OP. PI3K1, GNB5, FPR2, GNG13, and PLCG1 might be the potential targets of OP.
The aim of this study is to investigate the role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the inflammatory responses in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Serum levels of BDNF and the precursor form of BDNF (proBDNF) from 625 RA patients and 40 controls were analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Effects of BDNF on the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway were analyzed by Western blotting. Microarray analysis was conducted to search BDNF regulated gene expression in Jurkat cells, and the differentially expressed genes were validated using T cells from patients with RA and controls. Serum BDNF levels were significantly elevated in patients with RA compared with the controls. Low serum BDNF levels were found in RA patients with anxiety or receiving biologics treatment. BDNF (20 ng/mL) enhanced the phosphorylation of ERK, JNK, and c-Jun, but suppressed the phosphorylation of p38, whereas BDNF (200 ng/mL) enhanced the phosphorylation of ERK and p38. After validation, the expression of CAMK2A, MASP2, GNG13, and MUC5AC, regulated by BDNF and one of its receptors, NGFR, was increased in RA T cells. BDNF increased the IL-2, IL-17, and IFN-gamma expression in Jurkat cells and IL-2 and IFN-gamma secretion in activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
OBJECTIVES: A significant challenge in psychiatry is the differential diagnosis of depressive episodes in the course of mood disorders. Gene expression profiling may provide an opportunity for such distinguishment. METHODS: We studied differentially expressed genes in women with a depressive episode in the course of unipolar depression (UD) (n = 24) and bipolar disorder types I (BDI) (n = 13) and II (BDII) (n = 19), and healthy controls (n = 15). RESULTS: Different types of depression varied in the number and type of up or down-regulated genes. The pathway analysis showed: in UD, up-regulated rheumatoid arthritis pathway (including ITGB2, CXCL8, TEK, TLR4 genes), and down-regulated taste transduction pathway (TAS2R10, TAS2R46, TAS2R14, TAS2R43, TAS2R45, TAS2R19, TAS2R13, TAS2R20, GNG13); in BDI, eight down-regulated pathways: glutamatergic synapse, retrograde endocannabinoid signalling, axon guidance, calcium signalling, nicotine addiction, PI3K-Akt signalling, drug metabolism - cytochrome P450, and morphine addiction; in BDII, up-regulated osteoclast differentiation and Notch signalling pathway, and down-regulated type I diabetes mellitus pathway. Distinct expression markers analysis uncovered the unique for UD, up-regulated bladder cancer pathway (HBEGF and CXCL8 genes). CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study suggests a probability of differentiating depression in the course of UD, BDI, and II, based on transcriptomic profiling.
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (Pca) remains one of the leading adult malignancies. PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog) mutant is the top common mutated genes in prostate cancer, which makes it a promising biomarker in future individualized treatment. METHODS: We obtained gene expression data of prostate cancer from TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) database for analysis. We analyzed the DEGs (differentially expressed genes), and used online tools or software to analyze Gene ontology (GO) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins, and Molecular Complex Detection. RESULTS: Latest TCGA data showed PTEN mutation in about 22% patients. 1736 DEGs in total were identified. Results of gene functional enrichment analyses showed that muscle contraction, negative regulation of growth and multiple metabolic progression were significantly enriched. GNG13, ACTN2, POTEE, ACTA1, MYH6, MYH3, MYH7, MYL1, TNNC1 and TNNC2 were the top ten hub genes. Patients with PTEN mutation showed relatively decreased mRNA expression level of PTEN. Survival analysis indicated the risk of disease recurrence in patients with PTEN mutation. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggested that PTEN mutation in prostate cancer may induce changes in a variety of genes and pathways and affect disease progression, suggesting the significance of PTEN mutation in individualized treatment of prostate cancer.
The pathogenesis of slow‑transit constipation (STC) remains largely unclear, with the roles of microRNAs (miRs/miRNAs) yet to be determined. Co‑expression network analysis of miRNAs in STC is crucial to elucidating potential underlying mechanisms. Weighted gene correlation network analysis was performed in the miRNA expression profile of STC (GSE57969). The key miRNA target genes were further functionally enriched by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO). A Protein‑Protein Interaction (PPI) network was constructed, with a total of 12 color‑clustered modules determined. Seven key miRNAs were established, including five miRNAs from the turquoise module (hsa‑miR‑20b, hsa‑miR‑128, hsa‑miR‑129‑3p, hsa‑miR‑30b and hsa‑miR‑340), one miRNA from the blue module (hsa‑miR‑619) and one from the black module (hsa‑miR‑486‑3p). A total of 2,077 key miRNA target genes were predicted. GO analysis revealed that the 'protein modification process' and 'cellular protein modification process' were the most significantly enriched processes in the 'Biological Processes' category, whereas the 'nucleoplasm' in 'Cellular Components' and 'enzyme binding' in 'Molecular Functions' were the most significantly enriched processes. The 'cAMP signalling pathway' was the top KEGG pathway. The hub genes identified from the PPI network included calmodulin (CALM)2, CALM1, histone deacetylase (HDAC)3, glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta, HDAC9, heat‑shock protein family A member 8, G‑protein subunit gamma (GNG)13, HECT domain and ankyrin repeat containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1, GNG10 and GNG7. This bioinformatics analysis demonstrated co‑expressed miRNA networks with insightful genes and pathways associated with STC.
