Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-2; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction (By similarity).
G-protein gamma subunit 2 (GNG2) is involved in several cell signaling pathways, and is essential for cell proliferation and angiogenesis. However, the role of GNG2 in tumorigenesis and development remains unclear. In this study, 1321 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in breast cancer (BC) tissues were screened using the GEO and TCGA databases. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that most of the enriched genes were part of the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. We identified GNG2 from the first five DEGs, its expression was markedly reduced in all BC subtype tissues. Cox regression analysis showed that GNG2 was independently associated with overall survival in patients with luminal A and triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC). GNG2 over-expression could significantly block the cell cycle, inhibit proliferation, and promote apoptosis in BC cells in vitro. In animal studies, GNG2 over-expression inhibited the growth of BC cells. Further, we found that GNG2 significantly inhibited the activity of ERK and Akt in an MRAS-dependent manner. Importantly, GNG2 and muscle RAS oncogene homolog (MRAS) were co-localized in the cell membrane, and the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) experiment revealed that they had direct interaction. In conclusion, the interaction between GNG2 and MRAS likely inhibits Akt and ERK activity, promoting apoptosis and suppressing proliferation in BC cells. Increasing GNG2 expression or disrupting the GNG2-MRAS interaction in vivo could therefore be a potential therapeutic strategy to treat BC.
The ubiquitin proteasome system performs the covalent attachment of lysine 48-linked polyubiquitin chains to substrate proteins, thereby targeting them for degradation, while deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs) reverse this process. This posttranslational modification regulates key features both of innate and adaptative immunity, including antigen presentation, protein homeostasis and signal transduction. Here we show that loss of one of the most highly expressed DUBs, Otub1, results in changes in murine splenic B cell subsets, leading to a significant increase in marginal zone and transitional B cells and a concomitant decrease in follicular B cells. We demonstrate that Otub1 interacts with the gamma-subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein, Gng2, and modulates its ubiquitylation status, thereby controlling Gng2 stability. Proximal mapping of Gng2 revealed an enrichment in partners associated with chemokine signaling, actin cytoskeleton and cell migration. In line with these findings, we show that Otub1-deficient B cells exhibit greater Ca(2+) mobilization, F-actin polymerization and chemotactic responsiveness to Cxcl12, Cxcl13 and S1P in vitro, which manifests in vivo as altered localization of B cells within the spleen. Together, our data establishes Otub1 as a novel regulator of G-protein coupled receptor signaling in B cells, regulating their differentiation and positioning in the spleen.
Introduction: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an immune-mediated disorder. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs, LncR, Linc RNA) have role in many autoimmune and inflammatory disorders, including MS. LincR-Gng2-5 AS locus in T helper 1 cell (TH1) and LincR-Epas1-3AS in T helper 2 cell (TH2) cell were located in a genomic region rich in genes code for proteins with immune regulatory function. Our aim was to evaluate the LincR-Gng2-5' and LincR-Epas1-3'AS fold change in blood of MS patients versus healthy controls and correlate it with disease severity, assessed based on Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS).Material and Methods: Sixty MS patients 42 relapsing remitting (RR, RRMS), 18 Secondary progressive (SP, SPMS) and sixty controls (age-matched and sex-matched) were studied. Blood of patients and control group undergone the investigation of LincR-Gng2-5' and LincR-Epas1-3'AS fold change by real-time PCR. Fold change >2 and p < .05 represent significant result.Results: LincR-Gng2-5' was significantly upregulated in MS patients with mean fold change (2.559) and (p = .03). Meanwhile, LincR-Epas1-3'AS levels were significantly downregulated with mean fold change (0.5964) and (p < .004). Patients with SP showed a significantly higher level of LincR-Gng2-5-fold change (3.71 +/- 0.7) than that of RR (1.33 +/- 0.3). LincR-Epas1-3'AS was markedly reduced among SP (0.43 +/- 0.2) than that of RR (0.66 +/- 0.1) but with no significant difference. As regards disease severity (EDSS); there was a significant positive correlation with LincR-Gng2-5 and negative correlation with LincR-Epas1-3'AS. LincR- Gng2-5and LincR-Epas1-3'AS, both are dysregulated in MS patient suggesting a role in disease pathogenesis.Conclusion: LincR-Gng2-5 AS and LincR-Epas1-3'AS fold change are correlated to MS severity (EDSS).
Metastatic lesions leading causes of the majority of deaths in patients with the breast cancer. The present study aimed to provide a comprehensive analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the brain (MDA-MB-231 BrM2) and lung (MDA-MB-231 LM2) metastatic cell lines obtained from breast cancer patients compared with those who have primary breast cancer. We identified 981 and 662 DEGs for brain and lung metastasis, respectively. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis revealed seven shared (PLCB1, FPR1, FPR2, CX3CL1, GABBR2, GPR37, and CXCR4) hub genes between brain and lung metastasis in breast cancer. Moreover, GNG2 and CXCL8, C3, and PTPN6 in the brain and SAA1 and CCR5 in lung metastasis were found as unique hub genes. Besides, five co-regulation of clusters via seven important co-expression genes (COL1A2, LUM, SPARC, THBS2, IL1B, CXCL8, THY1) were identified in the brain PPI network. Clusters screening followed by biological process (BP) function and pathway enrichment analysis for both metastatic cell lines showed that complement receptor signalling, acetylcholine receptor signalling, and gastric acid secretion pathways were common between these metastases, whereas other pathways were site-specific. According to our findings, there are a set of genes and functional pathways that mark and mediate breast cancer metastasis to the brain and lungs, which may enable us understand the molecular basis of breast cancer development in a deeper levele to the brain and lungs, which may help us gain a more complete understanding of the molecular underpinnings of breast cancer development.
Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) performs many functions both under physiological and pathological conditions. In cancer, its expression is associated with aggressiveness, propensity to epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and metastasis. Since TG2 performs key functions both outside and inside the cell, using inhibitors with different membrane permeability we analyzed the changes in the transcriptome induced in two triple-negative cell lines (MDA-MB-436 and MDA-MB-231) with aggressive features. By characterizing pathways and gene networks, we were able to define the effects of TG2 inhibitors (AA9, membrane-permeable, and NCEG2, impermeable) in relation to the roles of the enzyme in the intra- and extracellular space within the context of breast cancer. The deregulated genes revealed p53 and integrin signaling to be the common pathways with some genes showing opposite changes in expression. In MDA-MB-436, AA9 induced apoptosis, modulated cadherin, Wnt, gastrin and cholecystokinin receptors (CCKR) mediated signaling, with RHOB and GNG2 playing significant roles, and affected the Warburg effect by decreasing glycolytic enzymes. In MDA-MB-231 cells, AA9 strongly impacted HIF-mediated hypoxia, including AKT and mTOR pathway. These effects suggest an anti-tumor activity by blocking intracellular TG2 functions. Conversely, the use of NCEG2 stimulated the expression of ATP synthase and proteins involved in DNA replication, indicating a potential promotion of cell proliferation through inhibition of extracellular TG2. To effectively utilize these molecules as an anti-tumor strategy, an appropriate delivery system should be evaluated to target specific functions and avoid adverse effects. Additionally, considering combinations with other pathway modulators is crucial.
Statins are used to treat hypercholesterolemia and function by inhibiting the production of the rate-limiting metabolite mevalonate. As such, statin treatment not only inhibits de novo synthesis of cholesterol but also isoprenoids that are involved in prenylation, the posttranslational lipid modification of proteins. The immunomodulatory effects of statins are broad and often conflicting. Previous work demonstrated that statins increased survival and inhibited myeloid cell trafficking in a murine model of sepsis, but the exact mechanisms underlying this phenomenon were unclear. Herein, we investigated the role of prenylation in chemoattractant responses. We found that simvastatin treatment abolished chemoattractant responses induced by stimulation by C5a and FMLP. The inhibitory effect of simvastatin treatment was unaffected by the addition of either farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) or squalene but was reversed by restoring geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP). Treatment with prenyltransferase inhibitors showed that the chemoattractant response to both chemoattractants was dependent on geranylgeranylation. Proteomic analysis of C15AlkOPP-prenylated proteins identified several geranylgeranylated proteins involved in chemoattractant responses, including RHOA, RAC1, CDC42, and GNG2. Chemoattractant responses in THP-1 human macrophages were also geranylgeranylation dependent. These studies provide data that help clarify paradoxical findings on the immunomodulatory effects of statins. Furthermore, they establish the role of geranylgeranylation in mediating the morphological response to chemoattractant C5a.NEW & NOTEWORTHY The immunomodulatory effect of prenylation is ill-defined. We investigated the role of prenylation on the chemoattractant response to C5a. Simvastatin treatment inhibits the cytoskeletal remodeling associated with a chemotactic response. We showed that the chemoattractant response to C5a was dependent on geranylgeranylation, and proteomic analysis identified several geranylgeranylated proteins that are involved in C5a receptor signaling and cytoskeletal remodeling. Furthermore, they establish the role of geranylgeranylation in mediating the response to chemoattractant C5a.
OBJECTIVE: Asthma is a chronic airway inflammatory disease caused by multiple genetic and environmental factors. This study mainly sought to provide potential therapeutic targets and biomarkers for neutrophilic asthma (NA). METHODS: Three gene expression profiling datasets were obtained from the Genome Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. GSE45111 and GSE41863 were used to identify hub genes and potential biomarkers, and GSE137268 was used for data verification. We verified the repeatability of intragroup data and identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Then, we conducted Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses of the DEGs, and a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed to identify the hub genes. Finally, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used to verify the ability of the hub genes to differentiate between NA and eosinophilic asthma (EA). RESULTS: In this study, we identified 411 DEGs by comprehensive analysis of NA/EA patients and NA/healthy controls (HCs). Ten hub genes (CXCR1, FCGR3B, CXCR2, SELL, S100A12, CSF3R, IL6R, JAK3, CD48, and GNG2) were identified from the PPI network. Finally, based on the ROC analysis, 7 genes showed good diagnostic value for discriminating NA from EA-CXCR1, FCGR3B, CXCR2, SELL, S100A12, CSF3R, and IL6R (AUC > 0.7). CONCLUSION: We identified 7 hub genes that can distinguish NA from EA. The IL-8-mediated signaling may be the primary pathway to determine the NA phenotype in asthma. CXCR1/2 and S100A12 may be the primary genes determining the NA phenotype. CXCR1/2 and S100A12 might be biomarkers and new therapeutic targets for NA. Supplemental data for this article is available online at at.
The claustrum has been described in the forebrain of all mammals studied so far. It has been suggested that the claustrum plays a role in the integration of multisensory information: however, its detailed structure and function remain enigmatic. The human claustrum is a thin, irregular, sheet of grey matter located between the inner surface of the insular cortex and the outer surface of the putamen. Recently, the G-protein gamma2 subunit (Gng2) was proposed as a specific claustrum marker in the rat, and used to better delineate its anatomical boundaries and connections. Additional claustral markers proposed in mammals include Netrin-G2 in the monkey and latexin in the cat. Here we report the expression and distribution of Gng2 and Netrin-G2 in human post-mortem samples of the claustrum and adjacent structures. Gng2 immunoreactivity was detected in the neuropil of the claustrum and of the insular cortex but not in the putamen. A faint labelling was present also in the external and extreme capsules. Double-labelling experiments indicate that Gng2 is also expressed in glial cells. Netrin-G2 labelling was seen in neuronal cell bodies throughout the claustrum and the insular cortex but not in the medially adjacent putamen. No latexin immunoreactive element was detected in the claustrum or adjacent structures. Our results confirm that both the Gng2 and the Netrin-G2 proteins show an affinity to the claustrum and related formations also in the human brain. The presence of Gng2 and Netrin-G2 immunoreactive elements in the insular cortex, but not in the putamen, suggests a possible common ontogeny of the claustrum and insula.
BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease, and its pathogenesis is unclear. Previous studies mainly focus on the lesions of substantia nigra (SN) and striatum (Str) in PD. However, lesions are not limited. The olfactory bulb (OB), subventricular zone (SVZ), and hippocampus (Hippo) are also affected in PD. AIM: To reveal gene expression changes in the five brain regions (OB, SVZ, Str, SN, and Hippo), and to look for potential candidate genes and pathways that may be correlated with the pathogenesis of PD. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We established control group and 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) PD model group, and detected gene expressions in the five brain regions using RNA-seq and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). We further analyzed the RNA-seq data by bioinformatics. RESULTS: We identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in all five brain regions. The DEGs were significantly enriched in the "dopaminergic synapse" and "retrograde endocannabinoid signaling," and Gi/o-GIRK is the shared cascade in the two pathways. We further identified Ephx2, Fam111a, and Gng2 as the potential candidate genes in the pathogenesis of PD for further studies. CONCLUSION: Our study suggested that gene expressions change in the five brain regions following exposure to 6-OHDA. The "dopaminergic synapse," "retrograde endocannabinoid signaling," and Gi/o-GIRK may be the key pathways and cascade of the synaptic damage in 6-OHDA PD rats. Ephx2, Fam111a, and Gng2 may play critical roles in the pathogenesis of PD.
BACKGROUND: Previous studies have revealed that heterotrimeric G protein is composed of a Galpha-subunit and a Gbetagamma-dimer and is correlated with c-Src and AKT activities. Our recent study showed reduced G protein gamma2 subunit (Gng2/GNG2) expression levels in malignant melanoma cells compared with those in benign melanocytic cells in both mice and humans. At present, however, there is no evidence showing an effect of Gng2/GNG2 alone on cancer biology. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to examine the biological significance of GNG2 in human malignant melanoma cells. METHODS: Levels of proliferation and activities of signal transduction molecules were examined in both GNG2-overexpressed and -depleted human malignant melanoma cells. RESULTS: Proliferation of GNG2-overexpressed SK-Mel28 human malignant melanoma cells was suppressed with decreased c-SRC and AKT activities and increased p21(Cip/WAF1) expression level in vitro. In contrast, proliferation of GNG2-depleted A375P human malignant melanoma cells was enhanced with increased c-SRC and AKT activities and decreased p21(Cip/WAF1) expression level in vitro. In the in vivo experiment, the mean tumor size of GNG2-overexpressed SK-Mel28 cells was less than 1/45th of that of control SK-Mel28 cells in nude mice at 95 days after inoculation. CONCLUSION: We demonstrated for the first time that increased protein expression level of GNG2 alone inhibits proliferation of malignant melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that GNG2 could be a novel molecular target for malignant melanoma therapy.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a lethal vascular degenerative disease for the elderly, but current therapeutic options are limited. This study was to explore the molecular mechanisms of AAA to screen underlying treatment targets for AAA. The gene and microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles of human AAA were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession number GSE57691, GSE62179, and GSE63541. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and microRNAs (miRNAs; DEMs) were identified using the Linear Models for Microarray data method. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, module analysis, and miRNA-mRNA regulatory network analyses were performed to screen hub genes and miRNAs that regulated the hub genes. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery was used to predict the functions of genes. GEPIA and Tumor-miRNA-Pathway online software were used to validate the expressions of crucial DEMs and DEGs in other cancers, respectively. As a result, in the GSE57691 dataset, a total of 584 DEGs were found to be specific for AAA, 521 of which were used for constructing the PPI network. ACSS2 (acyl-CoA synthetase short-chain family member 2), GNG2 (G protein subunit gamma 2), and CXCL1 (C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1) and CCR7 (C-C motif chemokine receptor 7) were believed to be hub genes by calculating their topological features in the PPI network. Upregulated GNG2 could interact with CXCL1 and CCR7 to involve in chemokine signaling pathway, while downregulated ACSS2 was associated with lipid biosynthetic process. In the miRNA-mRNA regulatory network, ACSS2 was found to be regulated by hsa-miR-15b; hsa-miR-30a could modulate the expression of GNG2. In line with our analysis in AAA, GNG2, ACSS2, hsa-miR-30a, and hsa-miR-15b were also confirmed to be significantly upregulated or downregulated in several cancer types. In conclusion, hsa-miR-30a-GNG2 and hsa-miR-15b-ACSS2 interaction pairs may represent novel mechanisms for explaining the pathogenesis of AAA. Targeted regulation of them may be potential strategies for treatment of AAA.
G-protein gamma subunit 2 (GNG2) plays a vital role in various cellular processes, yet its specific function in colorectal cancer (CRC), particularly in highly invasive cases and brain metastasis, remains unclear. This study identifies GNG2 as a key regulator in metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) through bioinformatics analysis and experimental validation. Functional enrichment analyses reveal that GNG2 is related to the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway and cell cycle regulation. These findings were further confirmed by in vitro and in vivo experiments. The overexpression of GNG2 significantly induced G0/G1 arrest and further inhibited the PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis in CRC cell lines, including suppressed proliferation, migration, and invasion and metastasis ability. In vivo studies using an orthotopic xenograft model demonstrated that GNG2 overexpression reduced brain metastasis and extended overall survival in mice. Immunohistochemistry and multiplex immunofluorescence confirmed the association between GNG2 overexpression, the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway, and G0/G1 arrest. Our study suggests that GNG2 contributes to tumor suppression in CRC, particularly in preventing brain metastasis, and could serve as a promising biomarker and treatment target for mCRC, offering fresh insights into the molecular processes driving cancer progression and metastasis.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most common malignant tumor of digestive system. The aim of this study was to identify gene signatures during CRC and uncover their potential mechanisms. The gene expression profiles of GSE21815 were downloaded from GEO database. The GSE21815 dataset contained 141 samples, including 132 CRC and 9 normal colon epitheliums. The gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway (KEGG) enrichment analyses were performed, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was constructed by Cytoscape software. In total, 3500 DEGs were identified in CRC, including 1370 up-regulated genes and 2130 down-regulated genes. GO analysis results showed that up-regulated DEGs were significantly enriched in biological processes (BP), including cell cycle, cell division, and cell proliferation; the down-regulated DEGs were significantly enriched in biological processes, including immune response, intracellular signaling cascade and defense response. KEGG pathway analysis showed the up-regulated DEGs were enriched in cell cycle and DNA replication, while the down-regulated DEGs were enriched in drug metabolism, metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450, and retinol metabolism pathways. The top 10 hub genes, GNG2, AGT, SAA1, ADCY5, LPAR1, NMU, IL8, CXCL12, GNAI1, and CCR2 were identified from the PPI network, and sub-networks revealed these genes were involved in significant pathways, including G protein-coupled receptors signaling pathway, gastrin-CREB signaling pathway via PKC and MAPK, and extracellular matrix organization. In conclusion, the present study indicated that the identified DEGs and hub genes promote our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the development of CRC, and might be used as molecular targets and diagnostic biomarkers for the treatment of CRC.
Vasovagal syncope (VVS) causes accidental harm for susceptible patients. However, pathophysiology of this disorder remains largely unknown. In an effort to understanding of molecular mechanism for VVS, genome-wide gene expression profiling analyses were performed on VVS patients at syncope state. A total of 66 Type 1 VVS child patients and the same number healthy controls were enrolled in this study. Peripheral blood RNAs were isolated from all subjects, of which 10 RNA samples were randomly selected from each groups for gene expression profile analysis using Gene ST 1.0 arrays (Affymetrix). The results revealed that 103 genes were differently expressed between the patients and controls. Significantly, two G-proteins related genes, GPR174 and GNG2 that have not been related to VVS were among the differently expressed genes. The microarray results were confirmed by qRT-PCR in all the tested individuals. Ingenuity pathway analysis and gene ontology annotation study showed that the differently expressed genes are associated with stress response and apoptosis, suggesting that the alteration of some gene expression including G-proteins related genes is associated with VVS. This study provides new insight into the molecular mechanism of VVS and would be helpful to further identify new molecular biomarkers for the disease.
BACKGROUND: Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is the most common primary glomerulonephritis and is characterized by mesangial cell proliferation and agglomeration of the mesangial matrix. METHODS: In this study, we aimed to explore the role of TNS3, PHLDB1, NTN4, and GNG2 3'untranslated region (3'UTR) polymorphisms with the risk of IgAN in a Chinese Han cohort. A logistic recession model was used to calculate the effects of candidate single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) on IgAN risk after adjusting age and gender difference. In silico prediction was conducted to identify potential functions of SNPs. RESULTS: The analysis revealed a significant relationship between the homozygotic genotype for NTN4 rs1362970 A/A and higher risk of IgAN (p = 0.003). Statistically significant associations were found when the sample was stratified by gender and Lee's grade. As a result, NTN4 rs1362970 A/A and GNG2 rs3204008 G/G genotypes were associated with enhanced IgAN risk in males (p = 0.006, p = 0.023, respectively), and the association between the PHLDB1 rs7389 G/T genotype and higher IgAN risk was found in females (p = 0.008). In the Lee's grade III-V subgroup, the rs1369270 in NTN4 was significantly correlated with the risk of IgAN (p = 0.004). Bioinformatics prediction suggested that rs1362970 within NTN4 3'UTR was located in the potential target sequence of miR-483-5p. CONCLUSIONS: Our research confirmed that NTN4, GNG2, and PHLDB1 gene polymorphisms were implicated in IgAN susceptibility in Chinese Han population. Further research should be conducted to investigate and validate the mechanism by which the above-mentioned polymorphisms affect IgAN.
Epilepsy is most common in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). However, in addition to the challenging treatment, the pathogenesis of epilepsy is still controversial. To determine the transcriptome characteristics of perituberal tissue (PT) and clarify its role in the pathogenesis of epilepsy, GSE16969 was downloaded from the GEO database for further study by comprehensive bioinformatics analysis. Identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), functional enrichment analysis, construction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, and selection of Hub genes were performed using R language, Metascape, STRING, and Cytoscape, respectively. Comparing with cortical tuber (CT), 220 DEGs, including 95 upregulated and 125 downregulated genes, were identified in PT and mainly enriched in collagen-containing extracellular matrix and positive regulation of receptor-mediated endocytosis, as well as the pathways of ECM-receptor interaction and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. As for normal cortex (NC), 1549 DEGs, including 30 upregulated and 1519 downregulated genes, were identified and mainly enriched in presynapse, dendrite and axon, and also the pathways of dopaminergic synapse and oxytocin signaling pathway. In the PPI network, 4 hub modules were found between PT and CT, and top 5 hub modules were selected between PT and NC. C3, APLNR, ANXA2, CD44, CLU, CP, MCHR2, HTR1E, CTSG, APP, and GNG2 were identified as Hub genes, of which, C3, CD44, ANXA2, HTR1E, and APP were identified as Hub-BottleNeck genes. In conclusion, PT has the unique characteristics different from CT and NC in transcriptome and makes us further understand its importance in the TSC-associated epilepsy.
Presently, as one of the three types of muscles in the human body, smooth muscle carries out many biological activities. Meanwhile, its abnormal development also leads to many diseases. Circular RNA, belonging to the noncoding RNA family, is demonstrated to function importantly in various diseases including smooth muscle. Here, we assumed circFAT1(e2) probably exhibited a primary role in vascular smooth muscle. Therefore, we conducted cell viability and cell apoptosis assay to validate the effects of circFAT1(e2) on vascular smooth muscle progression. Then, we supposed miR-298 was one target of circFAT1(e2) and executed corresponding experiments to test this hypothesis. Dual-luciferase reporter assay indicated miR-298 could bind to circFAT1(e2) and then modulated MYB level, thus regulating smooth muscle progression. Subsequently, based on the GSE41177 dataset, we identified 1982 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in atrial fibrillation, and all DEGs were upregulated, including MYB. Finally, enrichment analysis of upregulated genes indicated that they were related to endodermal cell differentiation. The protein-protein interaction network revealed that EGFR, GNG2, and FPR2 were related to atrial fibrillation. In conclusion, our data find that circFAT1(e2) sponges miR-298 and then regulates MYB expression, thus affecting atrial fibrillation progression. Our findings provide a newly produced indicator and target for vascular smooth muscle diagnosis and treatment.
Papillary thyroid carcinoma is a common malignant tumor of the endocrine system. The specific role and molecular mechanism of potassium inwardly rectifying channel subfamily J member 2 (KCNJ2) in papillary thyroid carcinoma remain unknown. In the present study, the underlying mechanism of KCNJ2 in papillary thyroid carcinoma was explored. KCNJ2 expression in thyroid cancer tissues was predicted using the Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis database, and reverse transcription‑quantitative PCR and western blot analyses were performed to detect KCNJ2 expression in papillary thyroid carcinoma cell lines. Cell transfection was performed to inhibit KCNJ2 and G protein subunit gamma2 (GNG2) expression. In addition, cell proliferation was detected via the colony formation and MTT assays. The wound healing and Transwell assays were performed to assess cell migration and invasion, respectively. Western blot analysis was performed to detect the expression levels of transport‑related proteins and interstitial related proteins. The StarBase database was used to detect GNG2 expression in thyroid cancer. The results demonstrated that KCNJ2 expression was upregulated in papillary thyroid carcinoma cells. In addition, interfering with KCNJ2 expression inhibited the proliferation, invasion and migration of papillary thyroid carcinoma cells, and inhibited the epithelial‑to‑mesenchymal transition (EMT). These processes may be influenced by the upregulation of GNG2 expression induced by KCNJ2 knockdown. Overall , the results of the present study demonstrated that interference with KCNJ2 inhibited proliferation, migration and EMT progression of papillary thyroid carcinoma cells by upregulating GNG2 expression.
PURPOSE: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) is a prevalent inflammatory disease of yet unknown etiology. The purpose of this study was to uncover key genes and pathways related to the pathogenesis of CRSwNP via bioinformatics approaches. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The gene expression profile of GSE36830 extracted from Gene Expression Omnibus database was used to screen differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between nasal polyp samples and control samples. Furthermore, functional and pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the clusterProfiler package in R language. In addition, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed by STRING database and functional modules were detected using Molecular Complex Detection algorithm. RESULTS: A total of 538 DEGs (326 up-regulated and 212 down-regulated) were identified. The most significantly enriched pathways for up-regulated and down-regulated genes were hematopoietic cell lineage and salivary secretion, respectively. Moreover, twenty hub genes with high connectivity degrees were selected from the PPI network, such as TYRO protein tyrosine kinase binding protein (TYROBP), G protein subunit gamma 2 (GNG2), CCR7, and CCR3. Besides, six important modules were obtained, which were highly associated with chemokine signaling pathway, Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation, complement and coagulation cascades, cell cycle, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Staphylococcus aureus infection. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study may provide new insights into potential molecular mechanisms of CRSwNP. Nevertheless, further experiments are needed to confirm these findings.
