Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-3; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
OBJECTIVE: The relationship between epilepsy and glioma has long been widely recognized, but the mechanisms of interaction remain unclear. This study aimed to investigate the shared genetic signature and treatment strategies between epilepsy and glioma. METHODS: We subjected hippocampal tissue samples from patients with epilepsy and glioma to transcriptomic analysis to identify differential genes and associated pathways, respectively. Weight gene co-expression network (WGCNA) analysis was performed to identify conserved modules in epilepsy and glioma and to obtain differentially expressed conserved genes. Prognostic and diagnostic models were built using lasso regression. We also focused on building transcription factor-gene interaction networks and assessing the proportion of immune invading cells in epilepsy patients. Finally, drug compounds were inferred using a drug signature database (DSigDB) based on core targets. RESULTS: We discovered 88 differently conserved genes, most of which are involved in synaptic signaling and calcium ion pathways. We used lasso regression model to reduce 88 characteristic genes, and finally screened out 14 genes (EIF4A2, CEP170B, SNPH, EPHA4, KLK7, GNG3, MYOP, ANKRD29, RASD2, PRRT3, EFR3A, SGIP1, RAB6B, CNNM1) as the features of glioma prognosis model whose ROC curve is 0.9. Then, we developed a diagnosis model for epilepsy patients using 8 genes (PRRT3, RASD2, MYPOP, CNNM1, ANKRD29, GNG3, SGIP1, KLK7) with area under ROC curve (AUC) values near 1. According to the ssGSEA method, we observed an increase in activated B cells, eosinophils, follicular helper T cells and type 2T helper cells, and a decrease in monocytes in patients with epilepsy. Notably, the great majority of these immune cells showed a negative correlation with hub genes. To reveal the transcriptional-level regulation mechanism, we also built a TF-gene network. In addition, we discovered that patients with glioma-related epilepsy may benefit more from gabapentin and pregabalin. CONCLUSION: This study reveals the modular conserved phenotypes of epilepsy and glioma and constructs effective diagnostic and prognostic markers. It provides new biological targets and ideas for the early diagnosis and effective treatment of epilepsy.
OBJECTIVES: The high morbidity and mortality of colorectal cancer (CRC) have posed great threats to human health. Circular RNA (circRNA) and microRNA (miRNA), acting as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs), have been found to play vital roles in carcinogenesis. This paper aims to construct a circRNA/miRNA/mRNA regulatory network so as to explore the molecular mechanism of CRC. METHODS: The sequencing data of circRNA from CRC were obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The differential circRNA was screened and its structure was identified by Cancer-specific CircRNA Database (CSCD); the sequencing data of miRNA and messenger RNA (mRNAs) were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and the differentially expressed genes were screened; the corresponding miRNA of differential circRNAs were predicted by CircInteractome database; DIANA, Miranda, PicTar, and TargetScan databases were used to predict the target genes of different miRNAs; the target genes from Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were enriched by R language; String database combined with Cytoscape 3.7.2 software was used to construct protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and hub genes were screened; the expressions of mRNAs in the Top10 hub genes were verified in CRC. The network diagrams of circRNAs/miRNAs/mRNAs and circRNAs/miRNAs/Top10 hub mRNAs were constructed by Cytoscape3.7.2. Real-time PCR was used to examine the expression levels of hsa_circRNA_0065173, hsa-mir-450b, hsa-mir-582, adenylate cyclase 5 (ADCY5), muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M2 (CHRM2), cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1), and lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 (LPAR1) in the CRC tissues and the adjacent normal tissues. RESULTS: A total of 14 differential circRNAs were identified, and 8 were found in CSCD; 34 miRNAs targeted by circRNAs were obtained. The PPI network was constructed, and the Top10 hub genes were identified, which were CHRM2, melanin concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCHR2), G-protein gamma 3 subunit (GNG3), neuropeptide Y receptor Y1 (NPY1R), CNR1, LPAR1, ADCY5, adenylate cyclase 2 (ADCY2), gamma 7 (GNG7) and chemokine 12 (CXCL12), respectively. The expressions of Top 10 hub genes were also verified, and the results showed that the Top 10 hub genes were down-regulated in CRC; the constructed network diagram showed that hsa_circRNA_0065173 may regulate ADCY5, CHRM2, and Hsa-mir-450b by modulating hsa-mir-450b and hsa-mir-582. CNR1 and LPAR1 genes might serve as potentially relevant targets for the treatment of CRC. Real-time PCR results showed that the expression levels of hsa_circRNA_0065173, ADCY5, CHRM2, CNR1 and LPAR1 in the CRC tissues were significantly reduced compared with the adjacent normal tissues (all P<0.05); the expression levels of hsa-mir-450b and hsa-miR-582 were significantly increased (both P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In this study, a potential circRNAs/miRNAs/mRNAs network is successfully constructed, which provides a new insight for CRC development mechanism through ceRNA mediated by circRNAs.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer disease (AD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder with distinct pathological features, with aging considered the greatest risk factor. We explored how aging contributes to increased AD risk, and determined concurrent and coordinate changes (including genetic and phenotypic modifications) commonly exhibited in both normal aging and AD. METHODS: Using the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, we collected 1 healthy aging-related and 3 AD-related datasets of the hippocampal region. The normal aging dataset was divided into 3 age groups: young (20-40 years old), middle-aged (40-60 years old), and elderly (>60 years old). These datasets were used to analyze the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The Gene Ontology (GO) terms, pathways, and function network analysis of these DEGs were analyzed. RESULTS: One thousand two hundred ninety-one DEGs were found to be shared in the natural aging groups and AD patients. Among the shared DEGs, ATP6V1E1, GNG3, NDUFV2, GOT1, USP14, and NAV2 have been previously found in both normal aging individuals and AD patients. Furthermore, using Java Enrichment of Pathways Extended to Topology (JEPETTO) analysis based on Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, we determined that changes in aging-related KEGG annotations may contribute to the aging-dependence of AD risk. Interestingly, NRXN3, the second most commonly deregulated gene identified in the present study, is known to carry a mutation in AD patients. According to functional network analysis, NRXN3 plays a critical role in synaptic functions involved in the cognitive decline associated with normal aging and AD. CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that the low expression of aging-related NRXN3 may increase AD risk, though the potential mechanism requires further clarification.
BACKGROUND: Keloid is a benign fibro-proliferative dermal tumor formed by an abnormal scarring response to injury and characterized by excessive collagen accumulation and invasive growth. The mechanism of keloid formation has not been fully elucidated, especially during abnormal scarring. Here, we investigated the regulatory genes, micro-RNAs (miRNAs) and transcription factors (TFs) that influence keloid development by comparing keloid and normal scar as well as keloid and normal skin. METHODS: Gene expression profiles (GSE7890, GSE92566, GSE44270 and GSE3189) of 5 normal scar samples, 10 normal skin samples and 18 keloid samples from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database were interrogated. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between keloid and normal skin samples as well as keloid and normal scar samples with R Project for Statistical Computing. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis was also performed with R software. DEG-associated protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed by STRING, followed by module selection from the PPI network based on the MCODE analysis. Regulatory relationships between TF/miRNA and target genes were predicted with miRnet and cytoscape. Core regulatory genes were verified by RT-qPCR. RESULTS: We identified 628 DEGs, of which 626 were up-regulated and 2 were down-regulated. Seven core genes [neuropeptide Y(NPY), 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1A(HTR1A), somatostatin (SST), adenylate cyclase 8 (ADCY8), neuromedin U receptor 1 (NMUR1), G protein subunit gamma 3 (GNG3), and G protein subunit gamma 13 (GNG13)] all belong to MCODE1 and were enriched in the "G protein coupled receptor signaling pathway" of the GO biological process category. Furthermore, nine core miRNAs (hsa-mir-124, hsa-let-7, hsa-mir-155, hsa-mir-26a, hsa-mir-941, hsa-mir-10b, hsa-mir-20, hsa-mir-31 and hsa-mir-372), and two core TFs (SP1 and TERT) were identified to play important roles in keloid formation. In the TF/miRNA-target gene network, both hsa-mir-372 and hsa-mir-20 had a regulatory effect on GNG13, ADCY8 was predicted to be target by hsa-mir-10b, and HTR1A and NPY were potentially by SP1. Furthermore, the expression of core regulatory genes (GNG13, ADCY8, HTR1A and NPY) was validated in clinical samples. CONCLUSIONS: GNG13, ADCY8, NPY and HTR1A may act as core genes in keloid formation and these core genes establish relationship with SP1 and miRNA (hsa-mir-372, hsa-mir-20, hsa-mir-10b), which may influence multiple signaling pathways in the pathogenesis of keloid.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant brain tumor of the adult central nervous system and is associated with poor prognosis. The present study aimed to identify the hub genes in GBM in order to improve the current understanding of the underlying mechanism of GBM. The RNA‑seq data were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas database. The edgeR package in R software was used to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between two groups: Glioblastoma samples and normal brain samples. Gene Ontology (GO) functional enrichment analysis and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis were performed using Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery software. Additionally, Cytoscape and Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins tools were used for the protein‑protein interaction network, while the highly connected modules were extracted from this network using the Minimal Common Oncology Data Elements plugin. Next, the prognostic significance of the candidate hub genes was analyzed using UALCAN. In addition, the identified hub genes were verified by reverse transcription‑quantitative (RT‑q) PCR. In total, 1,483 DEGs were identified between GBM and control samples, including 954 upregulated genes and 529 downregulated genes (P<0.01; fold‑change >16) and these genes were involved in different GO terms and signaling pathways. Furthermore, CDK1, BUB1, BUB1B, CENPA and GNG3 were identified as key genes in the GBM samples. The UALCAN tool verified that higher expression level of CENPA was relevant to poorer overall survival rates. In conclusion, CDK1, BUB1, BUB1B, CENPA and GNG3 were found to be potential biomarkers for GBM. Additionally, 'cell cycle' and 'gamma‑aminobutyric acid signaling' pathways may serve a significant role in the pathogenesis of GBM.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease that seriously impairs both cognitive and memory functions mainly in the elderly, and its incidence increases with age. Recent studies demonstrated that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play important roles in AD by acting as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs). OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to construct lncRNA-associated ceRNA regulatory networks composed of potential biomarkers in AD based on the ceRNA hypothesis. METHODS: A total of 20 genes (10 upregulated genes and 10 downregulated genes) were identified as the hub differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The functional enrichment analysis showed that the most significant pathways of DEGs involved include retrograde endocannabinoid signaling, synaptic vesicle circle, and AD. The upregulated hub genes were mainly enriched in the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction pathway, whereas downregulated hub genes were involved in the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway. After convergent functional genomic (CFG) ranks and expression level analysis in different brain regions of hub genes, we found that CXCR4, GFAP, and GNG3 were significantly correlated with AD. We further identified crucial miRNAs and lncRNAs of targeted genes to construct lncRNA-associated ceRNA regulatory networks. RESULTS: The results showed that two lncRNAs (NEAT1, MIAT), three miRNAs (hsa-miR-551a, hsa-miR-133b and hsa-miR-206), and two mRNA (CXCR4 and GNG3), which are highly related to AD, were preliminarily identified as potential AD biomarkers. CONCLUSION: Our study provides new insights for understanding the pathogenic mechanism underlying AD, which may potentially contribute to the ceRNA mechanism in AD.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by a complex interplay of various factors. However, a satisfactory cure for AD remains elusive. Pharmacological interventions based on drug targets are considered the most cost-effective therapeutic strategy. Therefore, it is paramount to search potential drug targets and drugs for AD. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to provide novel targets and drugs for the treatment of AD employing transcriptomic data of AD and normal control brain tissues from a new perspective. METHODS: Our study combined the use of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with differential expression analysis, variance assessment and molecular docking to screen targets and drugs for AD. RESULTS: We identified the seven differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with the most significant variation (ANKRD39, CPLX1, FABP3, GABBR2, GNG3, PPM1E, and WDR49) in transcriptomic data from AD brain. A newly built MLP was used to confirm the association between the seven DEGs and AD, establishing these DEGs as potential drug targets. Drug databases and molecular docking results indicated that arbaclofen, baclofen, clozapine, arbaclofen placarbil, BML-259, BRD-K72883421, and YC-1 had high affinity for GABBR2, and FABP3 bound with oleic, palmitic, and stearic acids. Arbaclofen and YC-1 activated GABAB receptor through PI3K/AKT and PKA/CREB pathways, respectively, thereby promoting neuronal anti-apoptotic effect and inhibiting p-tau and Abeta formation. CONCLUSIONS: This study provided a new strategy for the identification of targets and drugs for the treatment of AD using deep learning. Seven therapeutic targets and ten drugs were selected by using this method, providing new insight for AD treatment.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify the candidate genes in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and explore their potential mechanisms. METHODS: The gene expression profile GSE26168 was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The online tool GEO2R was used to obtain differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis were performed by using Metascape for annotation, visualization, and comprehensive discovery. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network of DEGs was constructed by using Cytoscape software to find the candidate genes and key pathways. RESULTS: A total of 981 DEGs were found in T2DM, including 301 upregulated genes and 680 downregulated genes. GO analyses from Metascape revealed that DEGs were significantly enriched in cell differentiation, cell adhesion, intracellular signal transduction, and regulation of protein kinase activity. KEGG pathway analysis revealed that DEGs were mainly enriched in the cAMP signaling pathway, Rap1 signaling pathway, regulation of lipolysis in adipocytes, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, MAPK signaling pathway, and so on. On the basis of the PPI network of the DEGs, the following 6 candidate genes were identified: PIK3R1, RAC1, GNG3, GNAI1, CDC42, and ITGB1. CONCLUSION: Our data provide a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of genes, functions, and pathways, which may be related to the pathogenesis of T2DM.
Emerging evidence suggests that the gamma subunit composition of an individual G protein contributes to the specificity of the hundreds of known receptor signaling pathways. Among the twelve gamma subtypes, gamma3 is abundantly and widely expressed in the brain. To identify specific functions and associations for gamma3, a gene-targeting approach was used to produce mice lacking the Gng3 gene (Gng3-/-). Confirming the efficacy and specificity of gene targeting, Gng3-/- mice show no detectable expression of the Gng3 gene, but expression of the divergently transcribed Bscl2 gene is not affected. Suggesting unique roles for gamma3 in the brain, Gng3-/- mice display increased susceptibility to seizures, reduced body weights, and decreased adiposity compared to their wild-type littermates. Predicting possible associations for gamma3, these phenotypic changes are associated with significant reductions in beta2 and alphai3 subunit levels in certain regions of the brain. The finding that the Gng3-/- mice and the previously reported Gng7-/- mice display distinct phenotypes and different alphabetagamma subunit associations supports the notion that even closely related gamma subtypes, such as gamma3 and gamma7, perform unique functions in the context of the organism.
Heterotrimeric G-protein signaling, involving alpha, beta and gamma subunits, plays a number of roles in differentiation and development. Individual gamma subunits interact with a beta subunit and as a heterodimer, is responsible for modulating many G protein-mediated cellular responses. The 12 gamma subunits in mammals have highly variable distribution and expression patterns in adult tissues. gamma3 is abundantly and widely expressed in the brain and when its expression is knocked-out, the mice show increased susceptibility to seizures, reduced body weights and decreased adiposity compared to the wild-type littermates (Schwindinger et al., 2004). Recent evidence has shown the Gng3 gene being strongly induced in activated CD4+ T-cells (Dubeykovskiy et al., 2006) and its involvement in the developing mammalian enteric nervous system (Heanue and Pachnis, 2006). Given this diversity in expression and interest in finding models of human disease, and to extend our previous investigation with zebrafish gamma3 (Kelly et al., 2001), we undertook an analysis to report the temporal and spatial expression patterns of gamma3 mRNA during mouse embryogenesis. Analysis reveals that gamma3 transcripts were first expressed in mid-late embryonic stages. Specifically, signals were predominant in the CNS and in neural crest cell derivatives including but not limited to the trigeminal and dorsal root (spinal) ganglia, and in cells of the adrenal medulla. These data indicate that G protein coupled signaling involving gamma3 participates in a number of physiological roles, not only in the CNS, but also in numerous cells derived from the neural crest.
Glioblastoma is a common malignant tumor in the central nervous system with an extremely poor outcome; understanding the mechanisms of glioblastoma at the molecular level is essential for clinical treatment. In the present study, we used bioinformatics analysis to identify potential biomarkers associated with prognosis in glioblastoma and elucidate the underlying mechanisms. The result revealed that 552 common genes were differentially expressed between glioblastoma and normal tissues based on TCGA, GSE4290, and GSE 50161 datasets. Gene Oncology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network were carried out to gain insight into the actions of differentially expressed genes (DEGs). As a result, 20 genes (CALB1, CDC20, CDCA8, CDK1, CEP55, DLGAP5, KIF20A, KIF4A, NDC80, PBK, RRM2, SYN1, SYP, SYT1, TPX2, TTK, VEGFA, BDNF, GNG3, and TOP2A) were found as hub genes via CytoHubba in Cytoscape and functioned mainly by participating in cell cycle and p53 signaling pathway; among them, RRM2 and CEP55 were considered to have relationship with the prognosis of glioblastoma, especially RRM2. High expression of RRM2 was consistent with shorter overall survival time. In conclusion, our study displayed the bioinformatic analysis methods in screening potential oncogenes in glioblastoma and underlying mechanisms. What is more is that we successfully identified RRM2 as a novel biomarker linked with prognosis, which might be expected to be a promising target for the therapy of glioblastoma.
