Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-7; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction. Plays a role in the regulation of adenylyl cyclase signaling in certain regions of the brain. Plays a role in the formation or stabilzation of a G protein heterotrimer (G(olf) subunit alpha-beta-gamma-7) that is required for adenylyl cyclase activity in t [...] 
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) is one of the most lethal malignant tumors in the world. The GSE55643 and GSE15471 microarray datasets were downloaded to screen the diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for PAAD. 143 downregulated genes and 118 upregulated genes were obtained. Next, we performed gene ontology (GO) and The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis on these genes and constructed a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. We screened out two important clusters of genes, including 13 upregulated and 5 downregulated genes. After the survival analysis, 3 downregulated genes and 10 upregulated genes were identified as the selected key genes. The KEGG analysis on 13 selected genes showed that GNG7 and ADCY1 enriched in the Pathway in Cancer. Next, the diagnostic and prognostic value of GNG7 and ADCY1 was investigated using independent cohort of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), GSE84129 and GSE62452. We observed that the expression of the GNG7 and ADCY1 was decreased in PAAD. The diagnostic receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis indicated that the GNG7 and ADCY1 could serve as sensitive diagnostic markers in PAAD. Survival analysis suggested that expression of GNG7, ADCY1 were significantly associated with PAAD overall survival (OS). The multivariate cox regression analysis showed that the expression of GNG7, ADCY1 were independent risk factors for PAAD OS. Our study indicated GNG7 and ADCY1 may be potential diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in patients with PAAD.
OBJECTIVES: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex disease with a challenging diagnosis, especially in seronegative patients. The aim of this study is to investigate whether the methylation sites associated with the overall immune response in RA can assist in clinical diagnosis, using targeted methylation sequencing technology on peripheral venous blood samples. METHODS: The study enrolled 241 RA patients, 30 osteoarthritis patients (OA), and 30 healthy volunteers control (HC). Fifty significant cytosine guanine (CG) sites between undifferentiated arthritis and RA were selected and analyzed using targeted DNA methylation sequencing. Logistic regression models were used to establish diagnostic models for different clinical features of RA, and six machine learning methods (logit model, random forest, support vector machine, adaboost, naive bayes, and learning vector quantization) were used to construct clinical diagnostic models for different subtypes of RA. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator regression and detrended correspondence analysis were utilized to screen for important CGs. Spearman correlation was used to calculate the correlation coefficient. RESULTS: The study identified 16 important CG sites, including tumor necrosis factort receptor associated factor 5 (TRAF5) (chr1:211500151), mothers against decapentaplegic homolog 3 (SMAD3) (chr15:67357339), tumor endothelial marker 1 (CD248) (chr11:66083766), lysosomal trafficking regulator (LYST) (chr1:235998714), PR domain zinc finger protein 16 (PRDM16) (chr1:3307069), A-kinase anchoring protein 10 (AKAP10) (chr17:19850460), G protein subunit gamma 7 (GNG7) (chr19:2546620), yes1 associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1) (chr11:101980632), PRDM16 (chr1:3163969), histone deacetylase complex subunit sin3a (SIN3A) (chr15:75747445), prenylated rab acceptor protein 2 (ARL6IP5) (chr3:69134502), mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 4 (MAP3K4) (chr6:161412392), wnt family member 7A (WNT7A) (chr3:13895991), inhibin subunit beta B (INHBB) (chr2:121107018), deoxyribonucleic acid replication helicase/nuclease 2 (DNA2) (chr10:70231628) and chromosome 14 open reading frame 180 (C14orf180) (chr14:105055171). Seven CG sites showed abnormal changes between the three groups (P < 0.05), and 16 CG sites were significantly correlated with common clinical indicators (P < 0.05). Diagnostic models constructed using different CG sites had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) range of 0.64-0.78 for high-level clinical indicators of high clinical value, with specificity ranging from 0.42 to 0.77 and sensitivity ranging from 0.57 to 0.88. The AUC range for low-level clinical indicators of high clinical value was 0.63-0.72, with specificity ranging from 0.48 to 0.74 and sensitivity ranging from 0.72 to 0.88. Diagnostic models constructed using different CG sites showed good overall diagnostic accuracy for the four subtypes of RA, with an accuracy range of 0.61-0.96, a balanced accuracy range of 0.46-0.94, and an AUC range of 0.46-0.94. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified potential clinical diagnostic biomarkers for RA and provided novel insights into the diagnosis and subtyping of RA. The use of targeted deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) methylation sequencing and machine learning methods for establishing diagnostic models for different clinical features and subtypes of RA is innovative and can improve the accuracy and efficiency of RA diagnosis.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is a common urinary neoplasm, looking for useful candidates to establish scientific foundation for the therapy of ccRCC is urgent. We downloaded genomic profiles of GSE781, GSE6244, GSE53757, and GSE66271 from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. GEO2R was used to analyze the derivative genes, while hub genes were screened by protein-protein interactions and cytoscape. Further, overall survival, gene methylation, gene mutation, and gene expression were all analyzed using bioinformatics tools. Colony formation and cell-cycle assay were used to detect the biological function of GNG7 in vitro. We found that GNG7 was downregulated in ccRCC tissues and negatively associated with overall survival in ccRCC patients. We also found that promoter methylation and frequent gene mutation were responsible for GNG7 gene suppression. GNG7 low expression was related to upregulation of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 and downregulation of disabled homolog 2-interacting protein. Further, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis results showed that mTOR1, E2F, G2M, and MYC pathways were all significantly altered in response to GNG7 low expression. In vitro, A498 and 786-O cells in which GNG7 expression was silenced, exhibited a lower G1 phase when compared to the negative control cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that GNG7 is a tumor suppressor gene in ccRCC progression and represents a novel candidate for ccRCC treatment.
Pituitary adenomas (PAs), usually benign lesions, can sometimes present with "aggressive" features (rapid growth, local invasiveness, scarce response to conventional treatments). Despite the fact that a few genetic alterations have been associated to this clinical behavior, the role of epigenetic modifications, mainly methylation and miRNAs activity, is now opening new frontiers in this field. We evaluated the methylation profile of 21 PA (11 GH-omas, 10 nonfunctioning tumors-NFPAs) samples from TNS surgery and 5 normal pituitaries, collected at our neurosurgery between 2015 and 2017. DNA was extracted and sequenced, selecting 184,841 target regions. Moreover, methylation profiles were correlated with demographic, radiological, and clinicopathological features. NFPAs showed higher methylation levels vs. GH-omas, with 178 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) mainly consisting of noncoding and intronic sequences, and mostly localized in the open sea regions. We also found three hypermethylated genes (C7orf50, GNG7, and BAHCC1) involved in tumorigenesis processes and potentially influencing pituitary tumor pathophysiology. Among the clinicopathological features, only the maximum diameter resulted significantly higher in NFPAs. Our data provide further evidence of the complex epigenetic background of pituitary tumors. In line with the current literature, we confirmed a significant prevalence of hypermethylation in NFPAs vs. GH-omas, whose pathophysiological consequence is yet to be defined.
Emerging studies indicate that long non-coding RNAs play important roles in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). However, the function of the majority of long non-coding RNAs is still unclear. Recently, LINC00472 has been reported to play crucial roles in multiple cancers. However, the role of LINC00472 in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is still not clear. This study found that LncRNA LINC00472 was significantly down-regulated in several squamous cell carcinoma cancer tissues and OSCC cell lines. Over-expression of LINC00472 in OSCC cells inhibited OSCC progression and alleviated OSCC immune responses. Additionally, we confirmed that LINC00472 functioned as an hsa-miR-4311 sponge and regulated the expression of GNG7 (guanine nucleotide-binding protein, gamma 7). Also, we found that LINC00472 over-expression could suppress xenograft tumor growth in vivo. Our study provides evidence that LINC00472 plays an essential role in inhibiting oral squamous cell carcinoma progression and affecting immune responses by directly binding to hsa-miR-4311 to regulate the expression of GNG7 positively.
GNG7 (G protein gamma subunit 7), a subunit of heterotrimeric G protein, is ubiquitously expressed in multiple tissues but is down-regulated in various cancers. Its expression could reduce tumor volume in mice but the mechanism was not clear. Here we show that GNG7 overexpression inhibits cell proliferation and increases cell death. GNG7 level is cell cycle-dependent and it regulates actin cytoskeleton and cell division. In addition, GNG7 is an autophagy inducer, which is the first reported Ggamma protein involved in autophagy. GNG7 knockdown reduces Rapamycin and starvation-induced autophagy. Further analysis reveals that GNG7 inhibits MTOR in cells, a central regulator for autophagy and cell proliferation. In conclusion, GNG7 inhibits MTOR pathway to induce autophagy and cell death, inhibits cell division by regulating actin cytoskeleton. These combined effects lead to the antitumor capacity of GNG7.
G protein gamma 7 (GNG7) has been found to be aberrantly expressed in some kinds of malignant tumors. In this study, we mainly discuss the antitumor role of it in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells. Protein levels of GNG7 in LUAD tissues were measured by western blot and immunohistochemical analysis. Cell proliferation, invasion and migration were detected by CCK-8 assay, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU), and Transwell assay. In our study, GNG7 was down-regulated in LUAD, which significantly correlated with survival of LUAD patients. Functional experiments revealed that GNG7 significantly inhibited LUAD cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in vitro and E2F1 overexpression reversed these properties. GNG7 suppressed xenograft tumorigenesis in nude mice models in vivo. In conclusion, GNG7 functions as a tumor suppressor in LUAD cells through inhibiting E2F1.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) is a common tumor of the urological system for which surgery is the preferred treatment, but there is a lack of therapeutic options after surgery. This study aims to explore the biological role of GNG7 on CCRCC from a genetic perspective. Differences in mRNA expression and patient survival of GNG7 in patients with CCRCC and healthy patients were analyzed using the TCGA database. It was observed that GNG7 gene expression was downregulated in CCRCC tissue compared with healthy tissue, and high GNG7 predicted better prognosis for patients, and GNG7 also showed strong variability in clinical and TMN staging. The immune relevance of GNG7 and related genes was explored using renal cancer data from CCLE and TISIDB database. It was verified that the risk score constructed by 7 GNG7-related regulators might be used as an independent prognostic risk factor for CCRCC. A CCRCC prognostic model that involved 7 immune genes was further established to predict the survival probabilities of patients. At last, the GEO database and immunochemical tissue staining were used to validate GNG7 expression in CCRCC. Our study proposed a novel panel of genes to predict CCRCC OS based on GNG7-related immune genes, which may help to accurately predict the prognosis of CCRCC patients and make better clinical decisions for individual treatment.
Activation of Toll-like receptors (TLR) 1/2 and 4 are central in inducing inflammation in sebocytes by regulating the expression of protein coding mRNAs, however the microRNA (miRNA) profile in response to TLR activation and thus the possible role of miRNAs in modulating sebocyte functions has not been elucidated. In this work we identified miR-146a to have the highest induction in the TLR1/2 and 4 activated SZ95 sebocytes and found that its increased levels led to the down-regulation of IL-8 secretion, decreased the chemoattractant potential and stimulated the proliferation of sebocytes. Assessing the gene expression profile of SZ95 sebocytes treated with a miR-146a inhibitor, the induction of GNG7 was one of the highest, while when cells were treated with a miR-146a mimic, the expression of GNG7 was down-regulated. These findings correlated with our in situ hybridization results, that compared with control, miR-146a showed an increased, while GNG7 a decreased expression in sebaceous glands of acne samples. Further studies revealed, that when inhibiting the levels of GNG7 in SZ95 sebocytes, cells increased their lipid content and decreased their proliferation. Our findings suggest, that miR-146a could be a potential player in acne pathogenesis by regulating inflammation, inducing proliferation and, through the indirect down-regulation of GNG7, promoting the lipid production of sebocytes.
Preeclampsia (PE) is a hypertensive disorder of uncertain etiology that is the leading cause of maternal and fetal morbidity or mortality. The dysregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) has been highlighted as a potential factor involved in the development of PE. Therefore, our study investigated a novel miRNA, miRNA 183 (miR-183), and its underlying association with PE. Expression of miR-183, forkhead box P1 (FOXP1), and G protein subunit gamma 7 (GNG7) in placental tissues of patients with PE was determined. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments were conducted to explore modulatory effects of miR-183, FOXP1, and GNG7 on the viability, invasion, and angiogenesis of trophoblast cells in PE. Finally, we undertook in vivo studies to explore effects of FOXP1 in the PE model. The results revealed suppressed expression of FOXP1 and significant elevations in miR-183 and GNG7 expression in placental tissues of PE patients. FOXP1 was observed to promote proliferation, invasion, and angiogenesis in human chorionic trophoblastic cells. miR-183 resulted in depletion of FOXP1 expression, while FOXP1 was capable of restraining GNG7 expression and promoting the mTOR pathway. The findings confirmed the effects of FOXP1 on PE. In conclusion, miR-183 exhibits an inhibitory role in PE through suppression of FOXP1 and upregulation of GNG7.
In this study, we constructed an eight-gene metabolic related signature for LUAD. The eight-gene prognostic signature (including PLAUR, F2, UGT2B17, GNG7, IDO2, ST3GAL6, PIK3CG, and GLS2) exhibited a good prognostic value in the TCGA LUAD training dataset and testing dataset. In addition, the risk score based on the signature model was significantly correlated with immune cell infiltration and expression levels of immune markers in LUAD patients. LUAD cohorts from GEO were used to validate the model, indicating the usefulness of the model. In summary, we developed and validated an eight-gene signature model for LUAD, which can reflect the immune microenvironment characteristics and predict the prognostic outcomes for LUAD patients.
Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world, which accounts for about 27% of all cancer deaths. However, the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of lung cancer cells remain largely elusive. In this study, we examined the role of the Forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) in lung cancer development. Our Oncomine analysis shows that FOXP1 is downregulated in lung adenocarcinoma compared with normal lung tissue. Knockdown of FOXP1 promotes the growth and invasion of PC9 and A549 cells by regulating genes of chemokine signaling molecules, including CCR1, ADCY5, GNG7, VAV3, and PLCB1. Simultaneous knockdown of CCR1 and FOXP1 attenuated FOXP1 knockdown-induced increase of lung cancer cell growth. Finally, knockdown of FOXP1 in PC9 cells promotes the tumorigenesis via CCR1 signaling in xenograft mouse model. Taken together, our data suggest that FOXP1 plays important roles in preventing lung adenocarcinoma development via suppressing chemokine signaling pathways.
BACKGROUND: We performed a bioinformatics analysis to screen for cell cycle-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and constructed a model for the prognostic prediction of patients with early-stage lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC). METHODS: From a gene expression omnibus (GEO) database, the GSE157011 dataset was randomly divided into an internal training group and an internal testing group at a 1:1 ratio, and the GSE30219, GSE37745, GSE42127, and GSE73403 datasets were merged as the external validation group. We performed single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA), univariate Cox analysis, and difference analysis, and identified 372 cell cycle-related genes. Additionally, we combined LASSO/Cox regression analysis to construct a prognostic model. Then, patients were divided into high-risk and low-risk groups according to risk scores. The internal testing group, discovery set, and external verification set were used to assess model reliability. We used a nomogram to predict patient prognoses based on clinical features and risk values. Clinical relevance analysis and the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) database were used to verify signature gene expression. RESULTS: Ten cell cycle-related DEGs (EIF2B1, FSD1L, FSTL3, ORC3, HMMR, SETD6, PRELP, PIGW, HSD17B6, and GNG7) were identified and a model based on the internal training group constructed. From this, patients in the low-risk group had a higher survival rate when compared with the high-risk group. Time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (tROC) and Cox regression analyses showed the model was efficient and accurate. Clinical relevance analysis and the HPA database showed that DEGs were significantly dysregulated in LSCC tissue. CONCLUSION: Our model predicted the prognosis of early-stage LSCC patients and demonstrated potential applications for clinical decision-making and individualized therapy.
BACKGROUND: Chronic sinusitis (CRS) was a chronic inflammation that originated in the nasal mucosa and affected the health of most people around the world. Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) was one kind of chronic sinusitis. Emerging research had suggested that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) played vital parts in inflammatories and inflammation development. METHODS: We acquired GEO data to analyze the differential expression between the miRNA, immune genes, TF, and lncRNA data in CRSWNP and the corresponding control tissues. Bioinformatic analysis by coexpression of endogenous RNA network and competitive way enrichment, analysis, and forecasting functions of these noncoding RNA. The different pathway expressions in CRSwNP patients were confirmed using GSVA to analyze the differentially expressed immune genes and TF data sets in CRSwNP patients. The differential immune gene and transcription factor data set in CRSwNP perform functional notes and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network structure. We predicted the potential genes and RNAs related to CRSWNP by constructing a ceRNA network. In addition, we also used 19 hub immune genes to predict the potential drugs of CRSWNP. lncRNA biomarkers in CRSwNP were identified by lncRNAs LASSO regression. The CIBERSORT algorithm was used to contrast the divergence in immune infiltrations between CRSwNP and usual inferior turbinate organizations in 22 immunocyte subgroups. RESULTS: We identified a total of 48 miRNAs, 304 lncRNAs, 92 TFs, and 525 immune genes as CRSwNP-specific RNAs. GO and KEGG pathways both analyzed differentially expressed immune genes and transcription factor data sets. We predicted the potential genes GNG7, TUSC8, LINC01198, and has-miR-6776-5p by constructing ceRNA and PPI networks. At the same time, we found that the above genes were involved in two important pathways: chemokine signal path and PI3K/AKT signal path. In addition, we predicted 5 small molecule drugs to treat CRSwNP by analyzing 19 central immune genes, namely, danazol, ikarugamycin, semustine, cefamandole, and molindone. Finally, we identified 5 biomarkers in CRSwNP, namely, LINC01198, LINC01094, LINC01798, LINC01829, and LINC01320. CONCLUSIONS: We had identified CRSwNP-related miRNAs, lncRNAs, TFs, and immune genes, which may be making use of latent therapeutic target for CRSwNP. At the same time, we identified 5 lncRNA biomarkers in CRSwNP. The results of this study showed that LINC01198 promoted the progression of CRSwNPs through spongy miR-6776-5p. Our studies provide a new way for further analyses of the pathogenesis of CRSwNP.
Although down-regulation of GNG7 in cancer was reported before, its role in carcinogenesis is poorly understood. It belongs to a family of large G-proteins that may be involved in cell-contact-induced growth arrest and function in tumor suppression. In the present study, we stained immunohistochemically 188 tumors derived from larynx or floor of the mouth for GNG7 protein and confronted it with clinicopathologic data. Moreover, we performed bisulfite pyrosequencing to analyze GNG7 promoter methylation. We identified recurrent loss of GNG7 protein expression in 68/188 (36%) cases and promoter hypermethylation in (42/98; 43%) primary tumors, predominantly in young patients (p < 0.001). Loss of GNG7 expression correlated with hypermethylation of GNG7 promoter region (p < 0.001). Moreover, loss of GNG7 protein expression correlated with tumor size (p = 0.012) and lack of cervical metastasis (p = 0.02) whereas sustained expression correlated with keratinization (p = 0.008). Taken together, loss of GNG7 protein expression is a frequent event in head and neck cancer. Moreover, our data suggest that hypermethylation of the promoter region of GNG7 is probably the mechanism of the observed inactivation.
PURPOSE: Dysregulation of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) plays important roles in atrial fibrillation (AF). This study aimed to identify crucial lncRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs in AF based on whole transcriptome sequencing. METHODS: Thirty Sprague Dawley rats were randomly stratified into control and chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH) groups (n = 15 in each). Hematoxylin-eosin staining, Masson staining, immunohistochemical assay, and western blotting were used to evaluate this model. Thereafter, atrial tissues were sent for whole transcriptome sequencing. Finally, fibrosis-related competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) regulatory networks were built, and the relative levels of lncRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs were validated by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) or western blotting. RESULTS: A CIH-induced atrial fibrosis rat model was successfully constructed. After sequencing, 268 differentially expressed lncRNAs (DELs), 20 differentially expressed miRNAs (DEMs), and 436 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. Functional analyses showed that these DEGs were associated with several processes and pathways, including "cell division," "IL-17 signaling pathway," "NOD-like receptor signaling pathway," and "cell adhesion molecules." Fibrosis-related ceRNA networks were then built, comprising five lncRNAs, seven miRNAs, and 19 DEGs. RT-qPCR and western blotting results showed that the patterns of lncRNAs (NONRATT016396.2, NONRATT001596.2, NONRATT011456.2), miRNAs (miR-10b-3p, miR-29b-3p), and mRNAs (Gng7 and Wnt2b) were consistent with sequencing analyses. CONCLUSIONS: The DELs, DEMs, and DEGs identified in this study may participate in atrial fibrosis processes, and the occurrence and progression of AF.
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignancies with unfavorable prognoses. The present study aimed to identify novel biomarkers or potential therapeutic targets in GC via bioinformatic analysis and in vitro experiments. The Gene Expression Omnibus and The Cancer Genome Atlas databases were used to screen the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). After protein-protein interaction network construction, both module and prognostic analyses were performed to identify prognosis-related genes in GC. The expression patterns and functions of G protein gamma subunit 7 (GNG7) in GC were then visualized in multiple databases and further verified using in vitro experiments. A total of 897 overlapping DEGs were detected and 20 hub genes were identified via systematic analysis. After accessing the prognostic value of the hub genes using the online server Kaplan-Meier plotter, a six-gene prognostic signature was identified, which was also significantly correlated with the process of immune infiltration in GC. The results of open-access database analyses suggested that GNG7 is downregulated in GC; this downregulation was associated with tumor progression. Furthermore, the functional enrichment analysis unveiled that the GNG7-coexpressed genes or gene sets were closely correlated with the proliferation and cell cycle processes of GC cells. Finally, in vitro experiments further confirmed that GNG7 overexpression inhibited GC cell proliferation, colony formation, and cell cycle progression and induced apoptosis. As a tumor suppressor gene, GNG7 suppressed the growth of GC cells via cell cycle blockade and apoptosis induction and thus may be used as a potential biomarker and therapeutic target for GC.
In the early 2000s, emerging SARS-CoV-2, which is highly pathogenic, posed a great threat to public health. During COVID-19, epigenetic regulation is deemed to be an important part of the pathophysiology and illness severity. Using the Illumina Infinium Methylation EPIC BeadChip (850 K), we investigated genome-wide differences in DNA methylation between healthy subjects and COVID-19 patients with different disease severities. We conducted a combined analysis and selected 35 "marker" genes that could indicate a SARS-CoV-2 infection, including 12 (ATHL1, CHN2, CHST15, CPLX2, CRHR2, DCAKD, GNAI2, HECW1, HYAL1, MIR510, PDE11A, and SMG6) situated in the promoter region. The functions and pathways of differentially methylated genes were enriched in biological processes, signal transduction, and the immune system. In the "Severe versus Mild" group, differentially methylated genes, after eliminating duplicates, were used for PPI analyses. The four hub genes (GNG7, GNAS, PRKCZ, and PRKAG2) that had the highest degree of nodes were identified and among them, GNG7 and GNAS genes expressions were also downregulated in the severe group in sequencing results. Above all, the results suggest that GNG7 and GNAS may play a non-ignorable role in the progression of COVID-19. In conclusion, the identified key genes and related pathways in the current study can be used to study the molecular mechanisms of COVID-19 and may provide possibilities for specific treatments.
BACKGROUND: The identification of reliable prognostic markers is crucial for optimizing patient management and improving clinical outcomes in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). METHODS: We used the GSE89563 dataset from the GEO database and the Kidney Clear Cell Carcinoma (KIRC) dataset from the TCGA database to develop a prognostic model based on weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to predict disease progression and prognosis in ccRCC. RESULT: We utilized WGCNA to identify risk genes and applied NMF to stratify high-risk populations in ccRCC. We characterized the immune gene features of these high-risk groups and ultimately developed a risk prediction model for ccRCC patients using a Lasso regression approach. The risk score was calculated as follows: Risk score = SUM (-0.136394797 ANK3 + 0.004238138 BIVM_ERCC5 - 0.046248451 C4orf19 - 0.036013206 F2RL3 - 0.125531316 GNG7 - 0.012698109 METTL7A + 0.078462369 MSTO1 - 0.050450656 PINK1 - 0.059446590 SLC16A12 - 0.039883686 SLC2A9 + 0.083310722 TLCD1 - 0.059801739 WDR72 + 0.071430088 ZNF117). CONCLUSION: We develop a prognostic model for clear cell renal cell carcinoma and analyzed immune response in subgroups and confirmed protein-level expression concordance.
