Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-8; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
BACKGROUND: The past decade has witnessed unprecedented scientific breakthroughs, including immunotherapy, which has great potential in clinical applications for liver cancer. METHODS: Public data were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) databases and analyzed with R software. RESULTS: The LASSO and SVM-RFE machine learning algorithms identified 16 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to immunotherapy, namely, GNG8, MYH1, CHRNA3, DPEP1, PRSS35, CKMT1B, CNKSR1, C14orf180, POU3F1, SAG, POU2AF1, IGFBPL1, CDCA7, ZNF492, ZDHHC22, and SFRP2. Moreover, a logistic model (CombinedScore) was established based on these DEGs, showing an excellent prediction performance for liver cancer immunotherapy. Patients with a low CombinedScore might respond better to immunotherapy. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis showed that many metabolism pathways were activated in patients with a high CombinedScore, including butanoate metabolism, bile acid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, glycine serine and threonine metabolism, and propanoate metabolism. Our comprehensive analysis showed that the CombinedScore was negatively correlated with the levels of most tumor-infiltrating immune cells and the activities of key steps of cancer immunity cycles. Continually, the CombinedScore was negatively associated with the expression of most immune checkpoints and immunotherapy response-related pathways. Moreover, patients with a high and a low CombinedScore exhibited diverse genomic features. Furthermore, we found that CDCA7 was significantly correlated with patient survival. Further analysis showed that CDCA7 was positively associated with M0 macrophages and negatively associated with M2 macrophages, suggesting that CDCA7 could influence the progression of liver cancer cells by affecting macrophage polarization. Next, single-cell analysis showed that CDCA7 was mainly expressed in prolif T cells. Immunohistochemical results confirmed that the staining intensity of CDCA7 was prominently increased in the nucleus in primary liver cancer tissues compared to adjacent non-tumor tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide novel insights into the DEGs and factors affecting liver cancer immunotherapy. Meanwhile, CDCA7 was identified as a potential therapeutic target in this patient population.
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several gene variants associated with sporadic chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma (CLL/SLL). Many of these CLL/SLL susceptibility loci are located in non-coding or intergenic regions, posing a significant challenge to determine their potential functional relevance. Here, we review the literature of all CLL/SLL GWAS and validation studies, and apply eQTL analysis to identify putatively functional SNPs that affect gene expression that may be causal in the pathogenesis of CLL/SLL. We tested 12 independent risk loci for their potential to alter gene expression through cis-acting mechanisms, using publicly available gene expression profiles with matching genotype information. Sixteen SNPs were identified that are linked to differential expression of SP140, a putative tumor suppressor gene previously associated with CLL/SLL. Three additional SNPs were associated with differential expression of DACT3 and GNG8, which are involved in the WNT/beta-catenin- and G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathways, respectively, that have been previously implicated in CLL/SLL pathogenesis. Using in silico functional prediction tools, we found that 14 of the 19 significant eQTL SNPs lie in multiple putative regulatory elements, several of which have prior implications in CLL/SLL or other hematological malignancies. Although experimental validation is needed, our study shows that the use of existing GWAS data in combination with eQTL analysis and in silico methods represents a useful starting point to screen for putatively causal SNPs that may be involved in the etiology of CLL/SLL.
BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and its related complications contribute to the high morbidity and mortality in worldwide. Skeletal muscle insulin resistance plays a critical role in the onset of T2DM due to the decreasing in the insulin-stimulated glucose uptake. T2DM is associated not only with the inherited factors but also with the noninherited factors. However, the susceptibility genes related with the two factors and the transcription factors (TF) regulating the susceptibility genes in skeletal muscle, which aggravate the development of T2DM were still ill-defined. METHODS: In the present study, the expression profiles by the array of GSE25462 were retrieved from the GEO database. GEO2R was performed to validate the susceptibility differentially expressed genes (SDEG) in skeletal muscle of T2DM. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis were conducted via The Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). A Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network was performed with the STRING. RESULTS: With the performance of GEO2R, 229 SDEGs in skeletal muscle of T2DM were identified. The biological processes (BP) of SDEGs was enriched in the cellular response to UV-B most significantly. KEGG pathway analysis revealed that the SDEGs were most significantly enriched in glycosaminoglycan degradation. 5 hub susceptibility genes (GPR84, CALCB, GCG, PTGDR, GNG8) in the skeletal muscle of T2DM were identified. Eventually, the common transcription factors regulating the hub susceptibility genes were identified by means of the online tool PROMO. CONCLUSIONS: Five hub susceptibility genes (GPR84, CALCB, GCG, PTGDR, GNG8) in the skeletal muscle of T2DM and the common transcription factors were identified. The outputs would provide new clues on the novel potential targets and the therapeutic strategies for treating T2DM and its related diseases.
Therapy with chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cells involves using reformative T lymphocytes that have three domains, antigen recognition, transmembrane, and costimulating to achieve the therapeutic purpose. CAR-T therapy on malignant hematologic has been successful; however, its effectiveness in patients with solid tumors is still limited. Few studies exist confirming the efficacy of natural products on the function of CAR-T cells. The purpose of this study is to assess the effect of gastrodin (GAS) on CAR-T cells that target interleukin-13 receptor alpha2 antigen (IL-13Ralpha2 CAR-T) in the brain against glioblastoma multiforme. Migration of IL-13Ralpha2 CAR-T was evaluated using the Transwell assay. The effects of GAS on IL-13Ralpha2 CAR-T cells were assessed both in vitro and situ glioblastoma models. The cytoskeleton was stained with Fluorescein 5-isothiocyanate (FITC)-phalloidin. Cytokines expression in cells was determined by flow cytometry and ELISA assay. Western blotting was used to detect the S1P1 expression, and quantitative PCR assay was used to determine the IL-13Ralpha2 gene level. GAS increased the migratory and destructive capacity of IL-13Ralpha2 CAR-T cells with no effect on cytokine release. By increasing the expression of S1P1, GAS encouraged the entry of CAR-T cells into the brain and bone marrow. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that genes related to skeletal migration such as add2 and gng8 showed increased expression in GAS-treated CAR-T cells. We found that GAS synergistically improves the mobility of IL-13Ralpha2 CAR-T, enhancing their ability to recognize the tumor antigen of glioblastoma, which could be advantageous for the application of CAR-T for the treatment of solid tumors.
Neuropathic pain (NP) is a debilitating disease and is associated with energy metabolism alterations. This study aimed to identify energy metabolism-related differentially expressed genes (EMRDEGs) in NP, construct a diagnostic model, and analyze immune cell infiltration and single-cell gene expression characteristics of NP. GSE89224, GSE123919, and GSE134003 were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) analysis and an intersection with highly energy metabolism-related modules in weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was performed in GSE89224. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), random forest, and logistic regression were used for model genes selection. NP samples were divided into high- and low-risk groups and different disease subtypes based on risk score of LASSO algorithm and consensus clustering analysis, respectively. Immune cell composition was estimated in different risk groups and NP subtypes. Datasets 134,003 were performed for identification of single-cell DEGs and functional enrichment. Cell-cell communications and pseudo-time analysis to reveal the expression profile of NP. A total of 38 EMRDEGs were obtained and are majorly enriched in metabolism about glioma and inflammation. LASSO, random forest, and logistic regression identified 6 model genes, which were Itpr1, Gng8, Socs3, Fscn1, Cckbr, and Camk1. The nomogram, based on six model genes, had a good predictive ability, concordance, and diagnostic value. The comparisons between different risk groups and NP subtypes identified important pathways and different immune cells component. The immune infiltration results majorly associated with inflammation and energy metabolism. Single-cell analysis revealed cell-cell communications and cells differentiation characteristics of NP. In conclusion, our results not only elucidate the involvement of energy metabolism in NP but also provides a robust diagnostic tool with six model genes. These findings might give insight into the pathogenesis of NP and provide effective therapeutic regimens for the treatment of NP.
Predictive models could indicate the clinical outcome of patients with carcinoma. Cervical cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed female malignancies. Herein, we proposed an immune infiltration-related gene signature that predicts prognosis of patients with cervical cancer and depicts the immune landscape as well. We utilized the transcriptome data of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and estimated the infiltration level of 28 immune cell types. We screened out four immune cell types conducive to patient survival and recognized their shared differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Four core genes (CHIT1, GTSF1L, PLA2G2D, and GNG8) that composed the ultimate signature were identified via univariate and multivariate Cox regression. The optimal model we built up could distinguish patients with cervical cancer into high-score and low-score subgroups. These two subgroups showed disparity in aspects of patient survival, immune infiltration landscape, and response to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Additionally, we found that GTSF1L was decreased gradually along with the severity of cervical lesions, and its potential role in immune contexture and clinical practice were also demonstrated. Our results suggested that the Immunoscore based on four immune-related genes could serve as a supplementary criterion to effectively foresee the survival outcome, tumor infiltration status, and immunotherapy efficacy of cervical cancer patients.
