Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) subunit gamma-T2; Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) are involved as a modulator or transducer in various transmembrane signaling systems. The beta and gamma chains are required for the GTPase activity, for replacement of GDP by GTP, and for G protein-effector interaction.
Fluorescent reporter lines generated in human pluripotent stem cells are a highly useful tool to track, isolate, and analyze cell types and lineages in live cultures. Here, we generate the first human cone photoreceptor reporter cell line by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing of a human embryonic stem cell (hESC) line to tag both alleles of the Guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit gamma-T2 (GNGT2) gene with a mCherry reporter cassette. Three-dimensional optic vesicle-like structures were produced to verify reporter fidelity and track cones throughout their development in culture. The GNGT2-T2A-mCherry hESC line faithfully and robustly labels GNGT2-expressing cones throughout the entirety of their differentiation in vitro, recapitulating normal fetal expression of this gene. Our observations indicate that human cones undergo significant migratory activity during the course of differentiation in vitro. Consistent with this, our analysis of human fetal retinae from different stages of development finds positional differences of the cone population depending on their state of maturation. This novel reporter line will provide a useful tool for investigating human cone development and disease.
BACKGROUND: The S209F variant of Abelson Interactor Protein 3 (ABI3) increases risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD), but little is known about its function in relation to AD pathogenesis. METHODS: Here, we use a mouse model that is deficient in Abi3 locus to study how the loss of function of Abi3 impacts two cardinal neuropathological hallmarks of AD-amyloid beta plaques and tau pathology. Our study employs extensive neuropathological and transcriptomic characterization using transgenic mouse models and adeno-associated virus-mediated gene targeting strategies. RESULTS: Analysis of bulk RNAseq data confirmed age-progressive increase in Abi3 levels in rodent models of AD-type amyloidosis and upregulation in AD patients relative to healthy controls. Using RNAscope in situ hybridization, we localized the cellular distribution of Abi3 in mouse and human brains, finding that Abi3 is expressed in both microglial and non-microglial cells. Next, we evaluated Abi3(-/-) mice and document that both Abi3 and its overlapping gene, Gngt2, are disrupted in these mice. Using multiple transcriptomic datasets, we show that expression of Abi3 and Gngt2 are tightly correlated in rodent models of AD and human brains, suggesting a tight co-expression relationship. RNAseq of the Abi3-Gngt2(-/-) mice revealed upregulation of Trem2, Plcg2, and Tyrobp, concomitant with induction of an AD-associated neurodegenerative signature, even in the absence of AD-typical neuropathology. In APP mice, loss of Abi3-Gngt2 resulted in a gene dose- and age-dependent reduction in Abeta deposition. Additionally, in Abi3-Gngt2(-/-) mice, expression of a pro-aggregant form of human tau exacerbated tauopathy and astrocytosis. Further, using in vitro culture assays, we show that the AD-associated S209F mutation alters the extent of ABI3 phosphorylation. CONCLUSIONS: These data provide an important experimental framework for understanding the role of Abi3-Gngt2 function and early inflammatory gliosis in AD. Our studies also demonstrate that inflammatory gliosis could have opposing effects on amyloid and tau pathology, highlighting the unpredictability of targeting immune pathways in AD.
BACKGROUND: Asthma is a heterogeneous inflammatory disease with two main clinical endotypes: type 2 (T2) high and low asthma. The plasticity and autophagy in dendritic cells (DCs) influence T helper (Th)2 or Th17 differentiation to regulate asthma endotypes. Enhanced autophagy in DCs fosters Th2 differentiation in allergic environments, while reduced autophagy favors Th17 cell differentiation in sensitized and infected environments. Autophagy regulation in DCs involves interaction with various pathways like G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), or phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway. However, specific molecules within DCs influencing asthma endotypes remain unclear. METHODS: Gene expression data series (GSE) 64896, 6858, 2276, and 55247 were obtained from gene expression omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between CD103+ and CD11b+ DCs after induction by ovalbumin (OVA) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were analyzed using GEO2R. DEGs were examined through Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and protein-protein interaction (PPI) analyses. The hub gene network was construct with STRING database and Cytoscape. Autophagy differences in DCs and the selected hub gene in GSE6858, GSE2276, and GSE55247 were evaluated using student t tests. RESULTS: Our analysis identified 635 upregulated and 360 downregulated genes in CD11b+ DCs, compared to CD103+ DCs. These DEGs were associated with "PI3K-AKT signaling pathway," "Ras signaling pathway," and so forth. Thirty-five hub genes were identified, in which G protein subunit gamma transduction protein 2 (Gngt2) in CD11b+ DCs exhibited a relatively specific increase in expression associated with autophagy defects under the induction environment similar to T2 low asthma model. No significant difference was found in lung Gngt2 expression between T2 high asthma model and control group. CONCLUSION: Our analysis suggested Gngt2 acted as an adapter molecule that inhibited autophagy, promoting Th17-mediated airway inflammation via the GPCR pathway in a T2 low asthma mice model. Targeting this pathway provides new asthma treatment strategies in preclinical research.
BACKGROUND: Pineal cyst is a benign lesion commonly occurring in people of any age. Until now, the underlying molecular alterations have not been explored. METHODS: We performed whole exome sequencing of 93 germline samples and 21 pineal cyst tissue samples to illustrate its genetic architecture and somatic mutations. The dominant and recessive inheritance modes were considered, and a probability was calculated to evaluate the significance of variant overrepresentation. RESULTS: By analyzing pineal cyst as a Mendelian disease with a dominant inheritance pattern, we identified 42,325 rare germline variants, and NM_001004711.1:c.476A>G was highly enriched (FDR<0.2). By analyzing it as a recessive disorder, we identified 753 homozygous rare variants detected in at least one pineal cyst sample each. One STIM2 rare variant, NM_001169117.1:c.1652C>T, was overrepresented (FDR<0.05). Analyzing at a gene-based level, we identified a list of the most commonlymutated germline genes, including POP4, GNGT2 and TMEM254. A somatic mutation analysis of 21 samples identified 16 variants in 15 genes, which mainly participated in the biological processes of gene expression and epigenetic regulation, immune response modulation, and transferase activity. CONCLUSION: These molecular profiles are novel for this condition and provide data for investigators interested in pineal cysts.
Recently, new loci related to body mass index (BMI) or blood pressure (BP) have been identified respectively in genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, limited studies focused on jointly associated genetic variance between systolic pressure (SBP), diastolic pressure (DBP) and BMI. Therefore, a bivariate twin study was performed to explore the genetic variants associated with BMI-SBP, BMI-DBP and SBP-DBP. A total of 380 twin pairs (137 dizygotic pairs and 243 monozygotic pairs) recruited from Qingdao Twin Registry system were used to access the genetic correlations (0.2108 for BMI-SBP, 0.2345 for BMI-DBP, and 0.6942 for SBP-DBP, respectively) by bivariate Cholesky decomposition model. Bivariate GWAS in 137 dizygotic pairs nominated 27 single identified 27 quantitative trait nucleotides (QTNs) for BMI and SBP, 27 QTNs for BMI and DBP, and 25 QTNs for SBP and DBP with the suggestive P-value threshold of 1x10-5. After imputation, we found eight SNPs, one for both BMI-SBP and SBP-DBP, and eight for SBP-DBP, exceed significant statistic level. Expression quantitative trait loci analysis identified rs4794029 as new significant eQTL in tissues related to BMI and SBP. Also, we found 6 new significant eQTLs (rs4400367, rs10113750, rs11776003, rs3739327, rs55978930, and rs4794029) in tissues were related to SBP and DBP. Gene-based analysis identified nominally associated genes (P < 0.05) with BMI-SBP, BMI-DBP, and SBP-DBP, respectively, such as PHOSPHO1, GNGT2, KEAP1, and S1PR5. In the pathway analysis, we found some pathways associated with BMI-SBP, BMI-DBP and SBP-DBP, such as prion diseases, IL5 pathway, cyclin E associated events during G1/S transition, TGF beta signaling pathway, G betagamma signaling through PI3Kgamma, prolactin receptor signaling etc. These findings may enrich the results of genetic variants related to BMI and BP traits, and provide some evidences to future study the pathogenesis of hypertension and obesity in the northern Chinese population.
Linkage analysis was performed on a large Dutch family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Linkage was found to the RP17 locus on chromosome 17q22, which was previously described in two South African families by Bardien et al. (1995, 1997). Assuming that the disease phenotypes in these families are caused by the same gene, the RP17 critical region is refined to a 7.7-cM interval between markers D17S1607 and D17S948. Two positional candidate genes, the retina-specific amine oxidase (RAO) gene (AOC2) and the cone transducin gamma gene (GNGT2), were excluded.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to report GNAT2-associated achromatopsia (GNAT2-ACHM) natural history, characterize photoreceptor mosaic, and determine a therapeutic window for potential intervention. METHODS: Patients with GNAT2-ACHM were recruited from a single tertiary referral eye center (Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK). We performed longitudinal clinical evaluation and ophthalmic examination, and multimodal retinal imaging, including adaptive optics scanning light ophthalmoscopy, quantitative analysis of the cone mosaic, and outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness, including cone densities evaluation in selected regions of interest and comparison with reported healthy controls. RESULTS: All nine subjects (3 women) presented with nystagmus, decreased visual acuity (VA), light sensitivity, and highly variable color vision loss. One patient had normal color vision and better VA. Mean VA was 1.01 (+/-0.10) logarithms of the minimal angle of resolution (LogMAR) at baseline, and 1.04 (+/-0.10) LogMAR after a mean follow-up (range) of 7.6 years (1.7-12.8 years). Optical coherence tomography showed preservation of the foveal ellipsoid zone (EZ; n = 8; 88.9%), and EZ disruption (n = 1; 11.1%). Mean ONL thickness (range, +/- SD) was 84.72 microm (28.57-113.33, +/- 25.46 microm) and 86.47 microm (28.57-113.33, +/- 24.65 microm) for right and left eyes, respectively. Mean cone densities (+/-SD) at 190 microm, 350 microm, and 500 microm from the foveal center, were 48.4 (+/-24.6), 37.8 (+/-14.7), and 30.7 (+/-9.9), x103 cones/mm2, respectively. Mean cone densities were lower than these of unaffected individuals, but with an overlap. CONCLUSIONS: The cone mosaic in GNAT2-ACHM is relatively well preserved, potentially allowing for a wide therapeutic window for cone-directed interventions.
Phototransduction in the vertebrate rod and cone photoreceptors is regulated by structurally homologous and yet distinct groups of signaling proteins. We have previously identified in bovine retinas a cone-specific G-protein gamma subunit (G gamma c, previously named G gamma b), which may play a key role in coupling the cone visual pigment to phosphodiesterase (O. C. Ong et al., 1995, J. Biol. Chem. 270:8495-8500). We report here the characterization of human G gamma c and its gene structure. Human G gamma c subunit shares a high degree of sequence identity with the corresponding bovine G gamma c isoform (85%) and human rod G gamma 1 (63%). The protein is specifically localized in cones, as indicated by immunohistochemical staining using anti-G gamma c antibodies. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the G gamma c gene (GNGT2) reveals a structure consisting of three exons and two introns, with the intron splice sites similar to that of the rod G gamma 1 gene (GNGT1). By using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we have further localized the human GNGT2 gene to chromosome 17q21. The elucidation of the G gamma c gene structure would facilitate the identification of genetic defects associated with cone degeneration.
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are efficacious in the treatment of asthma, which affects more than 300 million people in the world. While genome-wide association studies have identified genes involved in differential treatment responses to ICS in asthma, few studies have evaluated the effects of combined rare and common variants on ICS response among children with asthma. Among children with asthma treated with ICS with whole exome sequencing (WES) data in the PrecisionLink Biobank (91 White and 20 Black children), we examined the effect and contribution of rare and common variants with hospitalizations or emergency department visits. For 12 regions previously associated with asthma and ICS response (DPP10, FBXL7, NDFIP1, TBXT, GLCCI1, HDAC9, TBXAS1, STAT6, GSDMB/ORMDL3, CRHR1, GNGT2, FCER2), we used the combined sum test for the sequence kernel association test (SKAT) adjusting for age, sex, and BMI and stratified by race. Validation was conducted in the Biorepository and Integrative Genomics (BIG) Initiative (83 White and 134 Black children). Using a Bonferroni threshold for the 12 regions tested (i.e., 0.05/12 = 0.004), GSDMB/ORMDL3 was significantly associated with ICS response for the combined effect of rare and common variants (p-value = 0.003) among White children in the PrecisionLink Biobank and replicated in the BIG Initiative (p-value = 0.02). Using WES data, the combined effect of rare and common variants for GSDMB/ORMDL3 was associated with ICS response among asthmatic children in the PrecisionLink Biobank and replicated in the BIG Initiative. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates the power of biobanks of pediatric real-life populations in asthma genomic investigations.
Hundreds of gene families expanded in the early vertebrate tetraploidizations including many gene families in the phototransduction cascade. We have investigated the evolution of the heterotrimeric G-proteins of photoreceptors, the transducins, in relation to these events using both phylogenetic analyses and synteny comparisons. Three alpha subunit genes were identified in amniotes and the coelacanth, GNAT1-3; two of these were identified in amphibians and teleost fish, GNAT1 and GNAT2. Most tetrapods have four beta genes, GNB1-4, and teleosts have additional duplicates. Finally, three gamma genes were identified in mammals, GNGT1, GNG11 and GNGT2. Of these, GNGT1 and GNGT2 were found in the other vertebrates. In frog and zebrafish additional duplicates of GNGT2 were identified. Our analyses show all three transducin families expanded during the early vertebrate tetraploidizations and the beta and gamma families gained additional copies in the teleost-specific genome duplication. This suggests that the tetraploidizations contributed to visual specialisations.
Lung cancer, a life-threatening disease primarily affecting lung tissue, remains a significant contributor to mortality in both developed and developing nations. Accurate biomarker identification is imperative for effective cancer diagnosis and therapeutic strategies. This study introduces the Voting-Based Enhanced Binary Ebola Optimization Search Algorithm (VBEOSA), an innovative ensemble-based approach combining binary optimization and the Ebola optimization search algorithm. VBEOSA harnesses the collective power of the state-of-the-art classification models through soft voting. Moreover, our research applies VBEOSA to an extensive lung cancer gene expression dataset obtained from TCGA, following essential preprocessing steps including outlier detection and removal, data normalization, and filtration. VBEOSA aids in feature selection, leading to the discovery of key hub genes closely associated with lung cancer, validated through comprehensive protein-protein interaction analysis. Notably, our investigation reveals ten significant hub genes-ADRB2, ACTB, ARRB2, GNGT2, ADRB1, ACTG1, ACACA, ATP5A1, ADCY9, and ADRA1B-each demonstrating substantial involvement in the domain of lung cancer. Furthermore, our pathway analysis sheds light on the prominence of strategic pathways such as salivary secretion and the calcium signaling pathway, providing invaluable insights into the intricate molecular mechanisms underpinning lung cancer. We also utilize the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) method to identify gene modules exhibiting strong correlations with clinical attributes associated with lung cancer. Our findings underscore the efficacy of VBEOSA in feature selection and offer profound insights into the multifaceted molecular landscape of lung cancer. Finally, we are confident that this research has the potential to improve diagnostic capabilities and further enrich our understanding of the disease, thus setting the stage for future advancements in the clinical management of lung cancer. The VBEOSA source codes is publicly available at https://github.com/TEHNAN/VBEOSA-A-Novel-Feature-Selection-Algorithm-for-Identifying-hub-Genes-in-Lung-Cancer .
BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer is one of the most poorly diagnosed and fatal cancers in the world. Although a series of studies on esophageal cancer have been reported, the molecular pathogenesis of the disease remains elusive. AIM: To investigate comprehensively the molecular process of esophageal cancer. METHODS: Differential expression analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in different stages of esophageal cancer from The Cancer Genome Atlas data. Exacting gene interaction modules were generated, and hub genes in the module interaction network were found. Further, through survival analysis, methylation analysis, pivot analysis, and enrichment analysis, some important molecules and related functions/pathways were identified to elucidate potential mechanisms in esophageal cancer. RESULTS: A total of 7457 DEGs and 14 gene interaction modules were identified. These module genes were significantly involved in the positive regulation of protein transport, gastric acid secretion, insulin-like growth factor receptor binding, and other biological processes as well as p53 signaling pathway, epidermal growth factor signaling pathway, and epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway. Transcription factors (including hypoxia inducible factor 1A) and non-coding RNAs (including colorectal differentially expressed and hsa-miR-330-3p) that significantly regulate dysfunction modules were identified. Survival analysis showed that G protein subunit gamma transducin 2 (GNGT2) was closely related to survival of esophageal cancer. DEGs with strong methylation regulation ability were identified, including SST and SH3GL2. Furthermore, the expression of GNGT2 was evaluated by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction, and the results showed that GNGT2 expression was significantly upregulated in esophageal cancer patient samples and cell lines. Moreover, cell counting kit-8 assay revealed that GNGT2 could promote the proliferation of esophageal cancer cell lines. CONCLUSION: This study not only revealed the potential regulatory factors involved in the development of esophageal cancer but also deepens our understanding of its underlying mechanism.
BACKGROUND: Obesity and diabetes are potentially alterable risk factors for pancreatic cancer. Genetic factors that modify the associations of obesity and diabetes with pancreatic cancer have previously not been examined at the genome-wide level. METHODS: Using genome-wide association studies (GWAS) genotype and risk factor data from the Pancreatic Cancer Case Control Consortium, we conducted a discovery study of 2,028 cases and 2,109 controls to examine gene-obesity and gene-diabetes interactions in relation to pancreatic cancer risk by using the likelihood-ratio test nested in logistic regression models and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). RESULTS: After adjusting for multiple comparisons, a significant interaction of the chemokine signaling pathway with obesity (P = 3.29 x 10(-6)) and a near significant interaction of calcium signaling pathway with diabetes (P = 1.57 x 10(-4)) in modifying the risk of pancreatic cancer were observed. These findings were supported by results from IPA analysis of the top genes with nominal interactions. The major contributing genes to the two top pathways include GNGT2, RELA, TIAM1, and GNAS. None of the individual genes or single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) except one SNP remained significant after adjusting for multiple testing. Notably, SNP rs10818684 of the PTGS1 gene showed an interaction with diabetes (P = 7.91 x 10(-7)) at a false discovery rate of 6%. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variations in inflammatory response and insulin resistance may affect the risk of obesity- and diabetes-related pancreatic cancer. These observations should be replicated in additional large datasets. IMPACT: A gene-environment interaction analysis may provide new insights into the genetic susceptibility and molecular mechanisms of obesity- and diabetes-related pancreatic cancer.
Refractive errors are associated with a range of pathological conditions, such as myopic maculopathy and glaucoma, and are highly heritable. Studies of missense and putative loss of function (pLOF) variants identified via whole exome sequencing (WES) offer the prospect of directly implicating potentially causative disease genes. We performed a genome-wide association study for refractive error in 51 624 unrelated adults, of European ancestry, aged 40-69 years from the UK and genotyped using WES. After testing 29 179 pLOF and 495 263 missense variants, 1 pLOF and 18 missense variants in 14 distinct genomic regions were taken forward for fine-mapping analysis. This yielded 19 putative causal variants of which 18 had a posterior inclusion probability >0.5. Of the 19 putative causal variants, 12 were novel discoveries. Specific variants were associated with a more myopic refractive error, while others were associated with a more hyperopic refractive error. Association with age of onset of spectacle wear (AOSW) was examined in an independent validation sample (38 100 early AOSW cases and 74 243 controls). Of 11 novel variants that could be tested, 8 (73%) showed evidence of association with AOSW status. This work identified COL4A4 and ATM as novel candidate genes associated with refractive error. In addition, novel putative causal variants were identified in the genes RASGEF1, ARMS2, BMP4, SIX6, GSDMA, GNGT2, ZNF652 and CRX. Despite these successes, the study also highlighted the limitations of community-based WES studies compared with high myopia case-control WES studies.
BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer is one of the most poorly diagnosed and fatal cancers in the world. Although a series of studies on esophageal cancer have been reported, the molecular pathogenesis of the disease is still elusive. AIM: To investigate the molecular process of esophageal cancer comprehensively and deeply. METHODS: Differential expression analysis was performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in different stages of esophageal cancer. Then exacting gene interaction modules and hub genes were identified in module interaction network. Further, though survival analysis, methylation analysis, pivot analysis, and enrichment analysis, some important molecules and related function or pathway were identified to elucidate potential mechanism in esophageal cancer. RESULTS: A total of 7457 DEGs and 14 gene interaction modules were identified. These module genes were significantly involved in the positive regulation of protein transport, gastric acid secretion, insulin-like growth factor receptor binding and other biological processes (BPs), as well as p53 signaling pathway, ERBB signaling pathway and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway. Then, transcription factors (TFs) (including HIF1A) and ncRNAs (including CRNDE and hsa-mir-330-3p) significantly regulate dysfunction modules were identified. Further, survival analysis showed that GNGT2 was closely related to survival of esophageal cancer. And DEGs with strong methylation regulation ability were identified, including SST and SH3GL2. CONCLUSION: These works not only help us to reveal the potential regulatory factors in the development of disease, but also deepen our understanding of its deterioration mechanism.
BACKGROUND: Severe asthma is a chronic disease contributing to disproportionate disease morbidity and mortality. From the year of 2007, many genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have documented a large number of asthma-associated genetic variants and related genes. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism of these identified variants involved in asthma or severe asthma risk remains largely unknown. METHODS: In the current study, we systematically integrated 3 independent expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) data (N = 1977) and a large-scale GWAS summary data of moderate-to-severe asthma (N = 30,810) by using the Sherlock Bayesian analysis to identify whether expression-related variants contribute risk to severe asthma. Furthermore, we performed various bioinformatics analyses, including pathway enrichment analysis, PPI network enrichment analysis, in silico permutation analysis, DEG analysis and co-expression analysis, to prioritize important genes associated with severe asthma. RESULTS: In the discovery stage, we identified 1129 significant genes associated with moderate-to-severe asthma by using the Sherlock Bayesian analysis. Two hundred twenty-eight genes were prominently replicated by using MAGMA gene-based analysis. These 228 replicated genes were enriched in 17 biological pathways including antigen processing and presentation (Corrected P = 4.30 x 10(- 6)), type I diabetes mellitus (Corrected P = 7.09 x 10(- 5)), and asthma (Corrected P = 1.72 x 10(- 3)). With the use of a series of bioinformatics analyses, we highlighted 11 important genes such as GNGT2, TLR6, and TTC19 as authentic risk genes associated with moderate-to-severe/severe asthma. With respect to GNGT2, there were 3 eSNPs of rs17637472 (P(eQTL) = 2.98 x 10(- 8) and P(GWAS) = 3.40 x 10(- 8)), rs11265180 (P(eQTL) = 6.0 x 10(- 6) and P(GWAS) = 1.99 x 10(- 3)), and rs1867087 (P(eQTL) = 1.0 x 10(- 4) and P(GWAS) = 1.84 x 10(- 5)) identified. In addition, GNGT2 is significantly expressed in severe asthma compared with mild-moderate asthma (P = 0.045), and Gngt2 shows significantly distinct expression patterns between vehicle and various glucocorticoids (Anova P = 1.55 x 10(- 6)). CONCLUSIONS: Our current study provides multiple lines of evidence to support that these 11 identified genes as important candidates implicated in the pathogenesis of severe asthma.
Using the human WERI-Rb1 cell line as a model system, we performed a genome-wide search for retinal target genes of thyroid hormone (TH) via expression microarray analysis followed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR verification. We identified 12 novel retinal targets of TH, including 10 up-regulated genes (OPN1MW, OPN1LW, TIMP3, RP1L1, GNGT2, CRX, ARR3, GCAP1, IMPDH1, and PDE6C) and 2 down-regulated genes (GNGT1 and GNB3). In addition, we found a number of novel TH-targets that are not currently known to be retinal genes. This is the first report of human retinal targets regulated by thyroid hormone.
PURPOSE: To screen the exons of the genes encoding the beta3-subunit (GNB3) and gammac-subunit (GNGT2) of cone transducin for mutations in a large number of unrelated patients with various forms of inherited retinal disease including cone dystrophy, cone-rod dystrophy and macular dystrophy. METHODS: Exons of the two genes were screened for mutations by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and/or single strand conformation polymorphism electrophoresis (SSCP); any variants were sequenced directly. RESULTS: Although many sequence variants were found in both genes, none could be associated with disease. Additionally, the gene structure and sequence of the coding exons of GNB3 were determined and compared with those of the dog homolog. Both human and canine GNB3 have nine coding exons and their two predicted amino acid sequences have 97% identity. CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that GNB3 and GNGT2 are unlikely sites of mutations responsible for inherited retinal degenerations that predominantly effect cone-mediated function (cone and cone-rod dystrophies) or have a predilection for disease in the macula (macular dystrophies).
BACKGROUND: Previously, we detected that chloride intracellular channel 1 (CLIC1) was involved in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (AD). OBJECTIVE: In this study, we aimed to use high-throughput screening (HTS) approaches to identify critical factors associated with the function of CLIC1 in knock-down cells. METHODS: We down-regulated CLIC1 in human A549 cells via siRNA and then conducted serial HTS studies, including proteomics integrated with a microarray and the implementation of bioinformatics algorithms. RESULTS: Together, these approaches identified several important proteins and genes associated with the function of CLIC1. These proteins and genes included tumor rejection antigen (gp96) 1, nucleophosmin, annexin I, keratin 1 and 10, FLNA protein, enolase 1, and metalloprotease 1, which were found using two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) proteomics. Separately, NTNG1, SEMA5A, CLEC3A, GRPR, GNGT2, GRM5, GRM7, DNMT3B, CXCR5, CCL11, CD86, IL2, MNDA, TLR5, IL23R, DPP6, DLGAP1, CAT, GSTA1, GSTA2, GSTA5, CYP2E1, ADH1A, ESR1, ARRDC3, A1F1, CCL5, CASP8, DNTT, SQSTM1, PCYT1A, and SLCO4C1 were found using a DNA microarray integrated with PPI mapping. CONCLUSION: CCL11 is thought to be a particularly critical gene among the candidate genes detected in this study. By integrating the datasets and utilizing the strengths of HTS, we obtained new insights into the functional role of CLIC1, including the use of CLIC1-associated applications in the treatment of human diseases such as AD.
Type 1 von Willebrand disease (VWD) is a common inherited disorder characterized by mild to moderate bleeding and reduced levels of von Willebrand factor (VWF). An animal model for human type 1 VWD, the RIIIS/J mouse strain, exhibits a prolonged bleeding time and reduced plasma VWF levels. We have previously mapped the defect in RIIIS/J to distal mouse Chr 11, distinct from the Vwf locus on Chr 6. This locus, Mvwf, was localized to an approximately 0.5-cM interval, tightly linked to Gip, distal to Ngfr, and proximal to Hoxb. We have now used these genetic markers to construct a contig of yeast and bacterial artificial chromosomes and bacteriophage P1 clones spanning the approximately 300-kb Mvwf nonrecombinant interval. In a comparative mapping approach, mouse homologues of mapped human expressed sequence tags (ESTs) were localized relative to the candidate interval. Twenty-one sequence-tagged sites and ESTs from the corresponding human syntenic region 17q21.3 were ordered using the high-resolution Stanford TNG3 radiation hybrid panel. Based on the resulting radiation hybrid map and our mouse genetic and physical maps, the order of human and mouse genes in a >0.7-cM region appears to be conserved. Six genes localized to the Mvwf nonrecombinant interval by comparative mapping included orthologs of GNGT2, ATP6N1, and a nuclear domain protein. Seven other genes or ESTs were excluded from the candidate interval, including orthologs of PHB, PDK2, a speckle-type protein, and a UDP-galactose transporter. Using exon trapping, 10 additional putative expressed sequences were identified within the Mvwf nonrecombinant interval, including a previously cloned murine glycosyltransferase as well as exons showing sequence similarity to genes for Caenorhabditis elegans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae predicted proteins, an Arabidopsis thaliana ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and a Gallus gallus mRNA zipcode-binding protein. Further characterization of these putative genes could identify the dominant mutation responsible for low plasma VWF levels in RIIIS/J mice. These data may also aid in the localization of other disease loci mapped to this region, including the gene for tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and a murine locus for susceptibility to ozone-induced acute lung injury.
