Alpha-2A adrenergic receptor; Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine- induced inhibition of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. The rank order of potency for agonists of this receptor is oxymetazoline > clonidine > epinephrine > norepinephrine > phenylephrine > dopamine > p-synephrine > p-tyramine > serotonin = p- octopamine. For antagonists, the rank order is yohimbine > phentolamine = mianserine > chlorpromazine = spiperone = prazosin > propanolol > alprenolol = pindolol.
BACKGROUND: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is one of the most prevalent sustained arrhythmias, however, epidemiological data may understate its actual prevalence. Meanwhile, AF is considered to be a major cause of ischemic strokes due to irregular heart-rhythm, coexisting chronic vascular inflammation, and renal insufficiency, and blood stasis. We studied co-expressed genes to understand relationships between atrial fibrillation (AF) and stroke and reveal potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets of AF-related stroke. METHODS: AF-and stroke-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified via bioinformatic analysis Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets GSE79768 and GSE58294, respectively. Subsequently, extensive target prediction and network analyses methods were used to assess protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, Gene Ontology (GO) terms and pathway enrichment for DEGs, and co-expressed DEGs coupled with corresponding predicted miRNAs involved in AF and stroke were assessed as well. RESULTS: We identified 489, 265, 518, and 592 DEGs in left atrial specimens and cardioembolic stroke blood samples at < 3, 5, and 24 h, respectively. LRRK2, CALM1, CXCR4, TLR4, CTNNB1, and CXCR2 may be implicated in AF and the hub-genes of CD19, FGF9, SOX9, GNGT1, and NOG may be associated with stroke. Finally, co-expressed DEGs of ZNF566, PDZK1IP1, ZFHX3, and PITX2 coupled with corresponding predicted miRNAs, especially miR-27a-3p, miR-27b-3p, and miR-494-3p may be significantly associated with AF-related stroke. CONCLUSION: AF and stroke are related and ZNF566, PDZK1IP1, ZFHX3, and PITX2 genes are significantly associated with novel biomarkers involved in AF-related stroke.
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that gene alterations play a crucial role in LUAD development, progression, and prognosis. The present study aimed to identify the hub genes associated with LUAD. In the present study, we used TCGA database to screen the hub genes. Then, we validated the results by GEO datasets. Finally, we used cBioPortal, UALCAN, qRT-PCR, HPA database, TCGA database, and Kaplan-Meier plotter database to estimate the gene mutation, gene transcription, protein expression, clinical features of hub genes in patients with LUAD. A total of 5930 DEGs were screened out in TCGA database. Enrichment analysis revealed that DEGs were involved in the transcriptional misregulation in cancer, viral carcinogenesis, cAMP signaling pathway, calcium signaling pathway, and ECM-receptor interaction. The combining results of MCODE and CytoHubba showed that ADCY8, ADRB2, CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were hub genes. Then, we verified the above results by GSE118370, GSE136043, and GSE140797 datasets. Compared with normal lung tissues, the expression levels of ADCY8 and ADRB2 were lower in LUAD tissues, but the expression levels of CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were higher. In the prognosis analyses, the low expression of ADCY8 and ADRB2 and the high expression of CALCA, GCG, GNGT1, and NPSR1 were correlated with poor OS and poor PFS. The significant differences in the relationship of the expression of 6 hub genes and clinical features were observed. In conclusion, 6 hub genes will not only contribute to elucidating the pathogenesis of LUAD and may be potential therapeutic targets for LUAD.
BACKGROUND: Monoclonal antibodies, as the targeted therapeutic strategies, provide huge clinical benefits for tumor patients. However, after undergoing several times treatment, patients developed drug resistance which is a major bottleneck in clinical cancer therapy. In this study, we aimed to explore the potential molecular mechanism of trastuzumab-resistant and cancer progression, and identify valuable diagnosis biomarkers for gastric cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gene expression profiles and RNA-sequencing dataset of gastric cancer were acquired from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset, respectively. The Differently expressed genes (DEGs) were screened by R programing language, and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), Gene Ontology (GO), and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were adopted separately to analyze the function and pathway of DEGs. Subsequently, Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting (STRING) and Cytoscape was performed to establish the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and to screen hub genes. The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves were used to evaluate the diagnostic values of the hub genes. RESULTS: Integrated analysis of TCGA-STAD (Stomach adenocarcinoma) and GEO databases identified 310 common DEGs. GSEA, GO and KEGG enrichment analysis revealed several crucial enriched oncological signatures and trastuzumab-resistant signaling pathways, which may help to explain the potential modulating mechanisms of trastuzumab-resistant. Based on the PPI network, 10 hub genes were screened and five genes (GNGT1, KRT7, KRT16, SOX9, TIMP1) were identified with good performance in the diagnosis of gastric cancer by ROC analysis. Furthermore, Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank test suggested that upregulation of KRT16 was correlated with overall survival in gastric cancer. CONCLUSION: Overall, our study identified five hub genes that may play a critical role in promoting trastuzumab-resistant in gastric cancer, and would be a promising diagnostic and therapeutic biomarker for trastuzumab-resistant gastric cancer.
The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified and screened differentially in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using information from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus databases, and the correlation of DEGs in protein interaction, function, and pathway enrichment were analyzed to search for new biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets for NSCLC. Protein-protein interaction network (PPI) analysis showed that CDK1 and GNGT1 were the most significantly upregulated hub nodes, while FPR2 was the most significantly downregulated. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis showed that upregulated DEGs were significantly enriched in protein heterodimerization activity and other functions, while downregulated DEGs were enriched in functions such as heparin-binding. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis showed that upregulation of DEGs were significantly associated with neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathways, while downregulation of DEGs were significantly associated with malaria pathways. According to the analysis results, we identified hemoglobin alpha (HBA) and hemoglobin beta (HBB) as the genes of interest for further study. Through tissue level and cell level experiments, we found that the expressions of HBA and HBB in NSCLC tissues were significantly lower than those in paracancerous tissues, and downregulation of HBA and HBB could significantly affect the proliferation ability of NSCLC cells. In addition, we also found that changes in HBA and HBB may affect NSCLC cells through the p38/MAPK pathway and JNK pathway, and ultimately affect the occurrence and development of NSCLC.
Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is one of the most devastating diseases worldwide. The study is aimed at identifying reliable prognostic biomarkers and to improve understanding of cancer initiation and progression mechanisms. RNA-Seq data were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Subsequently, comprehensive bioinformatics analysis incorporating gene ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), and the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was conducted to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) closely associated with NSCLC. Eight hub genes were screened out using Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) and cytoHubba. The prognostic and diagnostic values of the hub genes were further confirmed by survival analysis and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Hub genes were validated by other datasets, such as the Oncomine, Human Protein Atlas, and cBioPortal databases. Ultimately, logistic regression analysis was conducted to evaluate the diagnostic potential of the two identified biomarkers. Screening removed 1,411 DEGs, including 1,362 upregulated and 49 downregulated genes. Pathway enrichment analysis of the DEGs examined the Ras signaling pathway, alcoholism, and other factors. Ultimately, eight prioritized genes (GNGT1, GNG4, NMU, GCG, TAC1, GAST, GCGR1, and NPSR1) were identified as hub genes. High hub gene expression was significantly associated with worse overall survival in patients with NSCLC. The ROC curves showed that these hub genes had diagnostic value. The mRNA expressions of GNGT1 and NMU were low in the Oncomine database. Their protein expressions and genetic alterations were also revealed. Finally, logistic regression analysis indicated that combining the two biomarkers substantially improved the ability to discriminate NSCLC. GNGT1 and NMU identified in the current study may empower further discovery of the molecular mechanisms underlying NSCLC's initiation and progression.
Here, we report the identification and expression analysis of the zebrafish G protein gammaT1 subunit gene (gngT1) during development. Similar to its human and mouse homologs, we confirm zebrafish gngT1 is expressed in the developing retina, where its transcription overlaps with the photoreceptor cell-specific marker, rhodopsin (rho). Surprisingly, we also show zebrafish gngT1 is expressed in the dorsal diencephalon, where its transcription overlaps with the pineal specific markers, arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase-2 (annat-2) and extra-ocular rhodopsin (exorh). Analysis of the proximal promoter sequence of the zebrafish gngT1 gene identifies several conserved binding sites for the cone-rod homeobox/orthodenticle (Crx/Otx) homeodomain family of transcription factors. Using a morpholino anti-sense approach in zebrafish, we show that targeted knockdown of otx5 potently suppresses gngT1 expression in the pineal gland, whereas knockdown of crx markedly reduces gngT1 expression in the retina. Taken together, these data indicate that pineal- and retinal-specific expression of the gngT1 gene are controlled by different transcription factors and exogenous signals.
OBJECTIVE: Taxane containing chemotherapy extends survival for breast cancer patients. However, taxane-induced peripheral neuropathy (TIPN) cannot be predicted, prevented or effectively treated. Using genome-wide analyses, we sought to identify common risk variants for TIPN. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Women with high-risk breast cancer enrolled in SWOG 0221 were genotyped using the Illumina 1M chip. Genome-wide analyses were performed in relation to >/=grade 3 Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) neuropathy in European and African Americans. Data were meta-analyzed with GW associations of CTCAE >/=grade 3 versus <grade 3 in CALGB 40101 assuming a fixed effects model. RESULTS: The percentage of >/=grade 3 TIPN in 1269 European Americans and 139 African Americans in S0221, was 11.6 and 22.3%, respectively. CALGB 40101 >/=grade 3 TOPN was 7.2%. The most significant association with >/=grade 3 TIPN was the G allele of rs1858826 in GNGT1 (Pmeta=1.1x10), which showed a decrease in risk of >/=grade 3 TIPN (odds ratio=0.29, 95% confidence interval: 0.18-0.46). CONCLUSION: The genetic variants associated with >/=grade 3 TIPN are hypothesized to have biochemical functions and reside in and near genes involved in diabetes and diabetic neuropathy. This finding is consistent with results from CALGB 40101 pathway analyses. Larger homogeneous trials with similar dosing and criteria for defining neuropathy are needed to properly assess the relationship of genomics with the neuropathy spectrum.
The transducin gamma-subunit gene (GNGT1) encodes a member (gamma1) of the family of heterotrimeric G-protein gamma-subunits that is specific to rod photoreceptors. In this report we have determined the complete structure of the GNGT1 gene and have localized it to human chromosome 7q21.3 using somatic cell hybrid and yeast artificial chromosome analysis.
Hundreds of gene families expanded in the early vertebrate tetraploidizations including many gene families in the phototransduction cascade. We have investigated the evolution of the heterotrimeric G-proteins of photoreceptors, the transducins, in relation to these events using both phylogenetic analyses and synteny comparisons. Three alpha subunit genes were identified in amniotes and the coelacanth, GNAT1-3; two of these were identified in amphibians and teleost fish, GNAT1 and GNAT2. Most tetrapods have four beta genes, GNB1-4, and teleosts have additional duplicates. Finally, three gamma genes were identified in mammals, GNGT1, GNG11 and GNGT2. Of these, GNGT1 and GNGT2 were found in the other vertebrates. In frog and zebrafish additional duplicates of GNGT2 were identified. Our analyses show all three transducin families expanded during the early vertebrate tetraploidizations and the beta and gamma families gained additional copies in the teleost-specific genome duplication. This suggests that the tetraploidizations contributed to visual specialisations.
Purpose: The study aimed to predict and explore the possible clinical value and mechanism of genetic markers in adrenal cortical carcinoma using a bioinformatics analysis method. Methods: The RNA-seqs and miRNAs data were downloaded from TCGA database to identify the differentially expressed genes and differentially expressed miRNAs. The hub-genes were screened by building protein-protein interaction sub-networks with 12 topological analysis methods. We conducted the receiver operating characteristic curve to elevate the diagnostic value of hub-genes in distinguishing the death and alive groups. The survival analysis of hub-genes and key miRNAs were conducted using Kaplan-Meier curves. Furthermore, most significant small molecules were identified as therapeutic candidates for adrenal cortical carcinoma by the CMap analysis. Results: Compared to survival group, we found 475 up-regulated genes and 354 genes and the key pathways leading to the death of different ACC individual patients. Then we used 12 topological analysis methods to found the most possible 22 hub-genes. Among these hub-genes, nine hub-genes (C3, CXCL5, CX3CR1, GRM8, HCAR2, HTR1B, SUCNR1, PTGER3 and SSTR1) could be used to distinguish the death and survival groups for patients. We also revealed that mRNA expressions of 12 genes (C3, CXCL8, CX3CR1, GNAT3, GNGT1, GRM8, HCAR2, HTR1B, HTR1D, PTGER3, SSTR1 and SUCNR1) and four key miRNAs (hsa-mir-330, hsa-mir-489, hsa-mir-508 and hsa-mir-513b) were related to survival. Three most small molecules were identified (H-9, AZ-628 and phensuximide) as potential therapeutic drugs for adrenal cortical carcinoma. Conclusion: The hub-genes expression was significant useful in adrenal cortical carcinoma, provide new diagnostic, prognosis and therapeutic approaches for adrenal cortical carcinoma. Furthermore, we also explore the possible miRNAs involved in regulation of hub-genes.
Rectal cancer is a common type of colorectal cancer with high mortality and morbidity. The objective of this study was to identify gene signatures and uncover the potential mechanisms during rectal cancer samples. The gene expression profiles of GSE87211 data set were downloaded from GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) database. The GSE87211 data set contained 2363 samples, including 203 rectal cancer samples and 160 matched mucosa control samples. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses were conducted, and protein-protein interaction network of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was performed by Cytoscape. Then, Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA) was applied to get the hub genes expression level and survival analysis between rectum adenocarcinoma (READ) tissues and normal tissues. In total, 846 DEGs were identified, including 402 upregulated genes and 444 downregulated genes. GO analysis showed that upregulated DEGs were enriched in inflammatory response, signal transduction, cell adhesion, immune response, and positive regulation of cell proliferation. KEGG pathway analysis showed that upregulated DEGs were enriched in cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, Pi3K-Akt signaling pathway, and chemokine signaling pathway. The top 20 hub genes contained IL8, CXCR1, SSTR2, SST, CXCR2, GALR1, GAL, CXCL1, SSTR1, NPY1R, NPY, AGT, PPY, PPBP, CXCL2, CXCL6, CXCL11, CXCL3, GNG4, and GNGT1, and only four genes significantly increased expression levels with obvious changes of survival analysis in READ tissues based on GEPIA. Our study indicated that identified DEGs might promote our understanding of molecular mechanisms, which might be used as molecular targets or diagnostic biomarkers for the treatment of rectal cancer.
BACKGROUND: The present work was conducted to screen the potential biomarkers affecting nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) progression through RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq), bioinformatic analysis and functional experiments. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six normal samples and five NPC clinical samples were collected for RNA-seq analysis. The expression levels in both groups were determined through student's t-test. We identified genes of P < 0.01 as the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). In addition, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was conducted. Afterwards, STRING V10 database was employed to extract protein interactions among the DEGs. Later, we established a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, and used the Cytoscape software for network visualization. qRT-PCR was conducted to verify hub genes from clinical samples. Then, the function of CXCL10 in cell proliferation, apoptosis, invasion and migration was evaluated. RESULTS: A total of 2024 DEGs were identified, among which, 1449 were down-regulated and 575 were up-regulated. The PPI was constructed, and the hub genes including Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF1), C-X-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 10 (CXCL10), Interleukin 13 (IL13), Intercellular Adhesion Molecule 1 (ICAM1), G Protein Subunit Gamma Transducin 1 (GNGT1), Matrix Metallopeptidase 1 (MMP1), Neurexin 1 (NRXN1) and Matrix Metallopeptidase 3 (MMP3) were obtained. The expression levels of CXCL10, IGF1, MMP3, MMP1, ICAM1, and IL-13 were significantly up-regulated in tumor tissues. High expression levels of CXCL10, MMP3 and ICAM1 predicted poor prognosis of NPC patients. CXCL10 silencing suppressed NPC cell proliferation and migration. CONCLUSIONS: CXCL10 may serve as a potential key gene affecting NPC genesis and progression.
Uveitis, defined as inflammation of the uveal tract of the eye, is a leading cause of blindness and visual impairment throughout the world. The etiology of uveitis is complex, and autoimmunity plays a major role in its pathogenesis. Intermediate uveitis (IU), a subtype of ocular inflammation, has been associated with systemic autoimmune disorders, specifically with multiple sclerosis (MS). This article reports a rare three-generation family with several members affected by IU (four siblings) and comorbid MS (two siblings fulfilling MS diagnostic criteria and a third sibling presenting some neurological symptoms). Based on the clinical findings, we captured and sequenced whole exomes of seven pedigree members (affected and unaffected). Using a recessive model of transmission with full penetrance, we applied genetic linkage analysis to define minimal critical regions (MCRs) in suggestive or nominal regions of linkage. In these MCRs, we defined functional (some pathogenic), novel, and rare mutations that segregated as homozygous in affected and heterozygous in unaffected family members. The genes harboring these mutations, including DGKI, TNFRSF10A, GNGT1, CPAMD8, and BAFF, which are expressed in both eye and brain tissues and/or are related to autoimmune diseases, provide new avenues to evaluate the inherited causes of these devastating autoimmune conditions.
Phototransduction in the vertebrate rod and cone photoreceptors is regulated by structurally homologous and yet distinct groups of signaling proteins. We have previously identified in bovine retinas a cone-specific G-protein gamma subunit (G gamma c, previously named G gamma b), which may play a key role in coupling the cone visual pigment to phosphodiesterase (O. C. Ong et al., 1995, J. Biol. Chem. 270:8495-8500). We report here the characterization of human G gamma c and its gene structure. Human G gamma c subunit shares a high degree of sequence identity with the corresponding bovine G gamma c isoform (85%) and human rod G gamma 1 (63%). The protein is specifically localized in cones, as indicated by immunohistochemical staining using anti-G gamma c antibodies. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the G gamma c gene (GNGT2) reveals a structure consisting of three exons and two introns, with the intron splice sites similar to that of the rod G gamma 1 gene (GNGT1). By using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we have further localized the human GNGT2 gene to chromosome 17q21. The elucidation of the G gamma c gene structure would facilitate the identification of genetic defects associated with cone degeneration.
Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic regulation in mammals in which a small subset of genes is monoallelically expressed dependent on their parental origin. A large imprinted domain, SGCE/PEG10 locus, is located on human chromosome 7q21s and mouse proximal chromosome 6. However, genomic imprinting of bovine SGCE/PEG10 cluster has not been systematically studied. In this study, we investigated allele expression of 14 genes of the SGCE/PEG10 locus in bovine somatic tissues and term placenta using a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based sequencing method. In addition to SGCE and PEG10, two conserved paternally expressed genes in human and mice, five other genes (TFPI2, GNG11, ASB4, PON1, and PON3) were paternally expressed. Three genes, BET1, COL1A2, and CASD1, exhibited tissue-specific monoallelic expression. CALCR showed monoallelic expression in tissues but biallelic expression in the placenta. Three genes, GNGT1, PPP1R9A, and PON2, showed biallelic expression in cattle. Five differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were found to be associated with the allelic expression of TFPI2, COL1A2, SGCE/PEG10, PON3, and ASB4 genes, respectively. The SGCE/PEG10 DMR is a maternally hypermethylated germline DMR, but TFPI2, COL1A2, PON3, and ASB4 DMRs are secondary DMRs. In summary, we identified five novel bovine imprinted genes (GNG11, BET1, COL1A2, CASD1, and PON1) and four secondary DMRs at the SGCE/PEG10 locus.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to characterize the expression of inflammation-related genes on the ocular surface of Sjogren syndrome (SS) patients and to evaluate their correlations with clinical symptoms and signs. METHODS: The study enrolled 30 patients with SS dry eye and 15 healthy controls. Symptoms were evaluated using OSDI questionnaire. The clinical signs were investigated using corneal fluorescein staining (CFS), tear breakup time (TBUT), Schirmer test and tear osmolarity measurement. Conjunctival superficial cells were collected using conjunctival impression cytology and total RNAs were extracted for analysis using the NanoString((R)) nCounter technology. The Mann-Whitney nonparametric statistical test and Spearman correlations were used to explore the correlations between the up/downregulated genes and the clinical signs and symptoms. RESULTS: Twenty-seven genes were upregulated and 13 were downregulated with statistically significant fold changes ranging from 1.5 to 16.7 and 0.3 to 0.8, respectively. OSDI and CFS were the most significantly correlated parameters with 21 and 19 inflammatory genes, respectively. Among all the upregulated genes, 14 were positively correlated with both OSDI and CFS. Two downregulated genes (GNGT1, HSPB2) were negatively correlated with OSDI and CFS. IL1RN was the only gene positively correlated with the Schirmer test. CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the differentially expressed genes in primary Sjogren syndrome and their relationships between the inflammatory genes expressed and the patient symptom score and corneal damage. The inflammatory genes implicated in SS-associated dry eye could be important tools to determine the pathophysiological profiles of SS and potentially useable as specific signatures.
OBJECTIVES: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a complex neurodegenerative disease with unclear pathogenesis. Some recent studies have shown that there is a close relationship between PD and ferroptosis. We aimed to identify the ferroptosis-related genes (FRGs) and construct competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks to further assess the pathogenesis of PD. METHODS: Expression of 97 substantia nigra (SN) samples were obtained and intersected with FRGs. Bioinformatics analysis, including the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), consensus cluster analysis, weight gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), and machine learning algorithms, were employed to assess the feasible differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Characteristic signature genes were used to create novel diagnostic models and construct competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) regulatory network for PD, which were further verified by in vitro experiments and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). RESULTS: A total of 453 DEGs were identified and 11 FRGs were selected. We sorted the entire PD cohort into two subtypes based on the FRGs and obtained 67 hub genes. According to the five machine algorithms, 4 features (S100A2, GNGT1, NEUROD4, FCN2) were screened and used to create a PD diagnostic model. Corresponding miRNAs and lncRNAs were predicted to construct a ceRNA network. The scRNA-seq and experimental results showed that the signature model had a certain diagnostic effect and lncRNA NEAT1 might regulate the progression of ferroptosis in PD via the NEAT1/miR-26b-5p/S100A2 axis. CONCLUSION: The diagnostic signatures based on the four FRGs had certain diagnostic and individual effects. NEAT1/miR-26b-5p/S100A2 axis is associated with ferroptosis in the pathogenesis of PD. Our findings provide new solutions for treating PD.
E-cadherin is a tumor suppressor gene in invasive lobular breast cancer. However, a proportion of high-grade ductal carcinoma shows reduced/loss of E-cadherin. In this study, we assessed the underlying mechanisms and molecular implications of E-cadherin loss in invasive ductal carcinoma. This study used large, well-characterized cohorts of early-stage breast cancer-evaluated E-cadherin expression via various platforms including immunohistochemistry, microarray analysis using Illumina HT-12 v3, copy number analysis using Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays, and next-generation sequencing for differential gene expression. Our results showed 27% of high-grade invasive ductal carcinoma showed reduced/loss of E-cadherin membranous expression. CDH1 copy number loss was in 21% of invasive ductal carcinoma, which also showed low CDH1 mRNA expression (p = 0.003). CDH1 copy number was associated with copy number loss of TP53, ATM, BRCA1, and BRCA2 (p < 0.001). Seventy-nine percent of invasive ductal carcinoma with reduced CDH1 mRNA expression showed elevated expression of E-cadherin transcription suppressors TWIST2, ZEB2, NFKB1, LLGL2, CTNNB1 (p < 0.01). Reduced/loss E-cadherin expression was associated with differential expression of 2143 genes including those regulating Wnt (FZD2, GNG5, HLTF, WNT2, and CER1) and PIK3-AKT (FGFR2, GNF5, GNGT1, IFNA17, and IGF1) signaling pathways. Interestingly, key genes differentially expressed between invasive lobular carcinoma and invasive ductal tumors did not show association with E-cadherin loss in invasive ductal carcinoma. We conclude that E-cadherin loss in invasive ductal carcinoma is likely a consequence of genomic instability occurring during carcinogenesis. Potential novel regulators controlling E-cadherin expression in invasive ductal carcinoma warrant further investigation.
Using the human WERI-Rb1 cell line as a model system, we performed a genome-wide search for retinal target genes of thyroid hormone (TH) via expression microarray analysis followed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR verification. We identified 12 novel retinal targets of TH, including 10 up-regulated genes (OPN1MW, OPN1LW, TIMP3, RP1L1, GNGT2, CRX, ARR3, GCAP1, IMPDH1, and PDE6C) and 2 down-regulated genes (GNGT1 and GNB3). In addition, we found a number of novel TH-targets that are not currently known to be retinal genes. This is the first report of human retinal targets regulated by thyroid hormone.
