Gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor; Receptor for gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) that mediates the action of GnRH to stimulate the secretion of the gonadotropic hormones luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). This receptor mediates its action by association with G- proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. Isoform 2 may act as an inhibitor of GnRH-R signaling.
Human sexual and reproductive development is regulated by the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis, which is primarily controlled by the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) acting on its receptor (GnRHR). Dysregulation of the axis leads to conditions such as congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH) and delayed puberty. The pathophysiology of GnRHR makes it a potential target for treatments in several reproductive diseases and in congenital adrenal hyperplasia. GnRHR belongs to the G protein-coupled receptor family and its GnRH ligand, when bound, activates several complex and tissue-specific signaling pathways. In the pituitary gonadotrope cells, it triggers the G protein subunit dissociation and initiates a cascade of events that lead to the production and secretion of the luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) accompanied with the phospholipase C, inositol phosphate production, and protein kinase C activation. Pharmacologically, GnRHR can be modulated by synthetic analogues. Such analogues include the agonists, antagonists, and the pharmacoperones. The agonists stimulate the gonadotropin release and lead to receptor desensitization with prolonged use while the antagonists directly block the GnRHR and rapidly reduce the sex hormone production. Pharmacoperones include the most recent GnRHR therapeutic approaches that directly correct the misfolded GnRHRs, which are caused by genetic mutations and hold serious promise for CHH treatment. Understanding of the GnRHR's genomic and protein structure is crucial for the most appropriate assessing of the mutation impact. Such mutations in the GNRHR are linked to normosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and lead to various clinical symptoms, including delayed puberty, infertility, and impaired sexual development. These mutations vary regarding their mode of inheritance and can be found in the homozygous, compound heterozygous, or in the digenic state. GnRHR expression extends beyond the pituitary gland, and is found in reproductive tissues such as ovaries, uterus, and prostate and non-reproductive tissues such as heart, muscles, liver and melanoma cells. This comprehensive review explores GnRHR's multifaceted role in human reproduction and its clinical implications for reproductive disorders.
A healthy nutritional state is required for all aspects of reproduction and is signaled by the adipokine leptin. Leptin acts in a relatively narrow concentration range: too much or too little will compromise fertility. The leptin signal timing is important to prepubertal development in both sexes. In the brain, leptin acts on ventral premammillary neurons which signal kisspeptin (Kiss1) neurons to stimulate gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons. Suppression of Kiss1 neurons occurs when agouti-related peptide neurons are activated by reduced leptin, because leptin normally suppresses these orexigenic neurons. In the pituitary, leptin stimulates production of GnRH receptors (GnRHRs) and follicle-stimulating hormone at midcycle, by activating pathways that derepress actions of the messenger ribonucleic acid translational regulatory protein Musashi. In females, rising estrogen stimulates a rise in serum leptin, which peaks at midcycle, synchronizing with nocturnal luteinizing hormone pulses. The normal range of serum leptin levels (10-20 ng/mL) along with gonadotropins and growth factors promote ovarian granulosa and theca cell functions and oocyte maturation. In males, the prepubertal rise in leptin promotes testicular development. However, a decline in leptin levels in prepubertal boys reflects inhibition of leptin secretion by rising androgens. In adult males, leptin levels are 10% to 50% of those in females, and high leptin inhibits testicular function. The obesity epidemic has elucidated leptin resistance pathways, with too much leptin in either sex leading to infertility. Under conditions of balanced nutrition, however, the secretion of leptin is timed and regulated within a narrow level range that optimizes its trophic effects.
The precise orchestration of hormonal regulation at all levels of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis is essential for normal reproductive function and fertility. The pulsatile secretion of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) stimulates the synthesis and release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) by pituitary gonadotropes. GnRH acts by binding to its high affinity seven-transmembrane receptor (GnRHR) on the cell surface of anterior pituitary gonadotropes. Different signaling cascades and transcriptional mechanisms are activated, depending on the variation in GnRH pulse frequency, to stimulate the synthesis and release of FSH and LH. While changes in GnRH pulse frequency may explain some of the differential regulation of FSH and LH, other factors, such as activin, inhibin and sex steroids, also contribute to gonadotropin production. In this review, we focus on the transcriptional regulation of the gonadotropin subunit genes and the signaling pathways activated by pulsatile GnRH.
Leuprolide acetate is a synthetic nonapeptide that is a potent gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR) agonist used for diverse clinical applications, including the treatment of prostate cancer, endometriosis, uterine fibroids, central precocious puberty and in vitro fertilization techniques. As its basic mechanism of action, leuprolide acetate suppresses gonadotrope secretion of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone that subsequently suppresses gonadal sex steroid production. In addition, leuprolide acetate is presently being tested for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease, polycystic ovary syndrome, functional bowel disease, short stature, premenstrual syndrome and even as an alternative for contraception. Mounting evidence suggests that GnRH agonist suppression of serum gonadotropins may also be important in many of the clinical applications described above. Moreover, the presence of GnRHR in a multitude of non-reproductive tissues including the recent discovery of GnRHR expression in the hippocampi and cortex of the human brain indicates that GnRH analogs such as leuprolide acetate may also act directly via tissue GnRHRs to modulate (brain) function. Thus, the molecular mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effect of GnRH analogs in the treatment of these diseases may be more complex than originally thought. These observations also suggest that the potential uses of GnRH analogs in the modulation of GnRH signaling and treatment of disease has yet to be fully realized.
BACKGROUND: Human reproduction depends on an intact hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. Hypothalamic gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) has been recognized, since its identification in 1971, as the central regulator of the production and release of the pituitary gonadotrophins that, in turn, regulate the gonadal functions and the production of sex steroids. The characteristic peculiar development, distribution and episodic activity of GnRH-producing neurons have solicited an interdisciplinary interest on the etiopathogenesis of several reproductive diseases. The more recent identification of a GnRH/GnRH receptor (GnRHR) system in both the human endometrium and ovary has widened the spectrum of action of the peptide and of its analogues beyond its hypothalamic function. METHODS: An analysis of research and review articles published in international journals until June 2015 has been carried out to comprehensively summarize both the well established and the most recent knowledge on the physiopathology of the GnRH system in the central and peripheral control of female reproductive functions and diseases. RESULTS: This review focuses on the role of GnRH neurons in the control of the reproductive axis. New knowledge is accumulating on the genetic programme that drives GnRH neuron development to ameliorate the diagnosis and treatment of GnRH deficiency and consequent delayed or absent puberty. Moreover, a better understanding of the mechanisms controlling the episodic release of GnRH during the onset of puberty and the ovulatory cycle has enabled the pharmacological use of GnRH itself or its synthetic analogues (agonists and antagonists) to either stimulate or to block the gonadotrophin secretion and modulate the functions of the reproductive axis in several reproductive diseases and in assisted reproduction technology. Several inputs from other neuronal populations, as well as metabolic, somatic and age-related signals, may greatly affect the functions of the GnRH pulse generator during the female lifespan; their modulation may offer new possible strategies for diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. A GnRH/GnRHR system is also expressed in female reproductive tissues (e.g. endometrium and ovary), both in normal and pathological conditions. The expression of this system in the human endometrium and ovary supports its physiological regulatory role in the processes of trophoblast invasion of the maternal endometrium and embryo implantation as well as of follicular development and corpus luteum functions. The GnRH/GnRHR system that is expressed in diseased tissues of the female reproductive tract (both benign and malignant) is at present considered an effective molecular target for the development of novel therapeutic approaches for these pathologies. GnRH agonists are also considered as a promising therapeutic approach to counteract ovarian failure in young female patients undergoing chemotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: Increasing knowledge about the regulation of GnRH pulsatile release, as well as the therapeutic use of its analogues, offers interesting new perspectives in the diagnosis, treatment and outcome of female reproductive disorders, including tumoral and iatrogenic diseases.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and olfactory neurons migrate together from the olfactory placode, and GnRH neurons eventually reside in the hypothalamus. Hypogonadism in male infants may be diagnosed in the first 6 months of life but cannot be diagnosed during childhood until puberty occurs. Patients with low serum testosterone and low serum gonadotropin levels have idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). Mutations in three genes (KAL1, FGFR1, and GNRHR) comprise most of the known genetic causes of IHH. Treatment with testosterone is indicated if fertility is not desired, whereas GnRH or gonadotropin treatment induces spermatogenesis and fertility.
Aberrant G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) expression is highly prevalent in cortisol-secreting primary bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PBMAH) and unilateral adenomas. The aberrant expression of diverse GPCRs and their ligands play an important role in the over-function of various endocrine tumours. Examples include aberrant expression of MC2R, 5-HT4R, AVPR1A, LHCGR, and GnRHR in primary aldosteronism; GCGR, LHCGR, and 5-HT4R in phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas; TRHR, GnRHR, GIPR, and GRP101 in pituitary somatotroph tumours; AVPR2, D2DR, and SSTR5 in pituitary corticotroph tumours; GLP1R, GIPR, and somatostatin receptors in medullary thyroid carcinoma; and SSTRs, GLP1R, and GIPR in other neuroendocrine tumours. The genetic mechanisms causing the ectopic expression of GIPR in cortisol-secreting PBMAHs and unilateral adenomas have been identified, but distinct mechanisms are implicated in other endocrine tumours. Development of functional imaging targeting aberrant GPCRs should be useful for identification and for specific therapies of this wide spectrum of tumours. The aim of this review is to show that the regulation of endocrine tumours by aberrant GPCR is not restricted to cortisol-secreting adrenal lesions, but also occurs in tumours of several other organs.
Currently, drug discovery focusses only on quantifying pharmacological parameters, sometimes including binding kinetics, of drug candidates. For a complete understanding of a drug's desired binding kinetics, the kinetics of both the target and its endogenous ligands should be considered. This is because the release and binding kinetics of endogenous ligands in addition to receptor internalization rates are significant contributors to drug-target interactions. Here, we discuss the kinetic profile of three neuropeptides and their receptors; gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR), neuropeptide Y receptors, and corticotropin-releasing factor receptor 1 (CRF(1)R). These three examples provide new insights into the importance of kinetic profiles which could improve the understanding of desired drug-target binding kinetics and advance drug discovery for various neurological and psychiatric illnesses.
OBJECTIVE: Thyroid disorders, especially Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), are observed significantly more often in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) than in the general population - approximately 27% and 8%, respectively. This is extremely important in young women, because both disorders are connected with fertility problems. As HT and PCOS occur together, fertility problems may become a serious clinical issue in these patients. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic literature review in PubMed of PCOS- and HT-related articles in English, published until December 2015 was conducted. RESULTS: The reasons for joint prevalence still remain unclear. Genetic and autoimmune backgrounds are recognized to be possible common etiological factors. Three genetic polymorphisms have been described to play a role in PCOS as well as in HT. They are polymorphism of the gene for fibrillin 3 (FBN3) regulating the activity of transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) and regulatory T cell levels, gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR) polymorphism and CYP1B1 polymorphism standing for estradiol hydroxylation. High estrogen-to-progesterone ratios owing to anovulatory cycles, as well as high estrogen levels during prenatal life, disrupt development of the thymus and its function in maintaining immune tolerance, and are suspected to enhance autoimmune response in PCOS. Vitamin D deficiency could be also involved in the pathogenesis of HT and PCOS. CONCLUSIONS: The above-mentioned common etiological factors associated with fertility problems in HT and PCOS require further research.
Determining the physiologic influences that modulate GnRH secretion, the prime initiator of reproductive function in the human, is fundamental not only to our understanding of the rare condition of congenital idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH), but also common disorders such as constitutional delay of puberty and hypothalamic amenorrhea. IHH is characterized by low levels of sex steroids and gonadotropins, normal findings on radiographic imaging of the hypothalamic-pituitary regions, and normal baseline and reserve testing of the remainder of the hypothalamic-pituitary axes. Failure of the normal pattern of episodic GnRH secretion results in delay of puberty and infertility. IHH is characterized by rich clinical and genetic heterogeneity, variable modes of inheritance, and association with other anomalies. To date, 4 genes have been identified as causes of IHH in the human; KAL [the gene for X-linked Kallmann syndrome (IHH and anosmia)], DAX1 [the gene for X-linked adrenal hypoplasia congenita (IHH and adrenal insufficiency)], GNRHR (the GnRH receptor), and PC1 (the gene for prohormone convertase 1, causing a syndrome of IHH and defects in prohormone processing). As these mutations account for less than 20% of all IHH cases, discovery of additional gene mutations will continue to advance our understanding of this intriguing syndrome.
An up-to-date review of the genetic aspects of idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH)/Kallmann syndrome (KS) is presented. Because proper development of the neuroendocrine axis must occur for normal puberty and reproductive function, gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neuron migration is outlined first, followed by an introduction to the in vitro analysis of GnRH neuron migration. The normal hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis at different ages is discussed, along with a brief overview of normal and delayed puberty in both boys and girls. The phenotype of IHH/KS is discussed in detail, with its relation to Mendelian inheritance and chromosomal translocations. The molecular basis of IHH/KS is reviewed, with particular emphasis on the three most common genes ( KAL1, FGFR1, and GNRHR) that possess mutations in these patients. However, all other known genes for which mutations occur are also addressed briefly. The goal of this review is to provide a comprehensive discussion of IHH/KS, and to include both basic science and clinical findings that should allow a more complete understanding of hypothalamic-pituitary neuroendocrinology that is important in puberty and reproduction.
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is a decapeptide responsible for the control of the reproductive functions. It shows C- and N-terminal aminoacid modifications and two other distinct isoforms have been so far identified. The biological effects of GnRH are mediated by binding to high-affinity G-protein couple receptors (GnRHR), showing characteristic very short C tail. In mammals, including humans, GnRH-producing neurons originate in the embryonic nasal compartment and during early embryogenesis they undergo rapid migration towards the hypothalamus; the increasing knowledge of such mechanisms improved diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to infertility. The pharmacological use of GnRH, or its synthetic peptide and non-peptide agonists or antagonists, provides a valid tool for reproductive disorders and assisted reproduction technology (ART). The presence of GnRHR in several organs and tissues indicates additional functions of the peptide. The identification of a GnRH/GnRHR system in the human endometrium, ovary, and prostate has extended the functions of the peptide to the physiology and tumor transformation of such tissues. Likely, the activity of a GnRH/GnRHR system at the level of the hippocampus, as well as its decreased expression in mice brain aging, raised interest in its possible involvement in neurogenesis and neuronal functions. In conclusion, GnRH/GnRHR appears to be a fascinating biological system that exerts several possibly integrated pleiotropic actions in the complex control of reproductive functions, tumor growth, neurogenesis, and neuroprotection. This review aims to provide an overview of the physiology of GnRH and the pharmacological applications of its synthetic analogs in the management of reproductive and non-reproductive diseases.
This study investigated the interplay between transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta1/T1 and TGF-beta3/T3), and sex hormone receptors using our 3D in vitro cornea stroma model. Primary human corneal fibroblasts (HCFs) from healthy donors were plated in transwells at 10(6) cells/well and cultured for four weeks. HCFs were supplemented with stable vitamin C (VitC) and stimulated with T1 or T3. 3D construct proteins were analyzed for the androgen receptor (AR), progesterone receptor (PR), estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta), luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR), KiSS1-derived peptide receptor (KiSS1R/GPR54), and follicle-stimulating hormone subunit beta (FSH-B). In female constructs, T1 significantly upregulated AR, PR, ERalpha, FSHR, GnRHR, and KiSS1R. In male constructs, T1 significantly downregulated FSHR and FSH-B and significantly upregulated ERalpha, ERbeta, and GnRHR. T3 caused significant upregulation in expressions PR, ERalpha, ERbeta, LHR, FSHR, and GNRHR in female constructs, and significant downregulation of AR, ERalpha, and FSHR in male constructs. Semi-quantitative Western blot findings present the interplay between sex hormone receptors and TGF-beta isoforms in the corneal stroma, which is influenced by sex as a biological variable (SABV). Additional studies are warranted to fully delineate their interactions and signaling mechanisms.
BACKGROUND: Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH) is a key element in sexual maturation and regulation of the reproductive cycle in the human organism. GnRH interacts with the pituitary cells through the activation of the Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone Receptors (GnRHR). Any impairments/dysfunctions of the GnRH-GnRHR complex lead to the development of various cancer types and disorders. Furthermore, the identification of GnRHR as a potential drug target has led to the development of agonist and antagonist molecules implemented in various treatment protocols. The development of these drugs was based on the information derived from the functional studies of GnRH and GnRHR. OBJECTIVE: This review aims at shedding light on the versatile function of GnRH and GnRH receptor and offers an apprehensive summary regarding the development of different agonists, antagonists and non-peptide GnRH analogues. CONCLUSION: The information derived from these studies can enhance our understanding of the GnRH-GnRHR versatile nature and offer valuable insight into the design of new more potent molecules.
GV1001 protects neural cells from amyloid-beta (Abeta) toxicity and other stressors in in vitro studies and demonstrates clinically beneficial effects in patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here, we investigated the protective effects and mechanism of action of GV1001 in triple transgenic AD (3xTg-AD) mice. We found that GV1001 improved memory and cognition in middle- and old-aged 3xTg-AD mice. Additionally, it reduced Abeta oligomer and phospho-tau (Ser202 and Thr205) levels in the brain, and mitigated neuroinflammation by promoting a neuroprotective microglial and astrocyte phenotype while diminishing the neurotoxic ones. In vitro, GV1001 bound to gonadotropin releasing hormone receptors (GnRHRs) with high affinity. Levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate, a direct downstream effector of activated GnRHRs, increased after GV1001 treatment. Furthermore, inhibition of GnRHRs blocked GV1001-induced effects. Thus, GV1001 might improve cognitive and memory functions of 3xTg-AD mice by suppressing neuroinflammation and reducing Abeta oligomers levels and phospho-tau by activating GnRHRs and their downstream signaling pathways.
The activins were discovered and named based on their abilities to stimulate FSH secretion and FSHbeta (Fshb) subunit expression by pituitary gonadotrope cells. According to subsequent in vitro observations, activins also stimulate the transcription of the GnRH receptor (Gnrhr) and the activin antagonist, follistatin (Fst). Thus, not only do activins stimulate FSH directly, they have the potential to regulate both FSH and LH indirectly by modulating gonadotrope sensitivity to hypothalamic GnRH. Moreover, activins may negatively regulate their own actions by stimulating the production of one of their principal antagonists. Here, we describe our current understanding of the mechanisms through which activins regulate Fshb, Gnrhr, and Fst transcription in vitro. The activin signaling molecules SMAD3 and SMAD4 appear to partner with the winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor, forkhead box L2 (FOXL2), to regulate expression of all 3 genes. However, in vivo data paint a different picture. Although conditional deletion of Foxl2 and/or Smad4 in murine gonadotropes produces impairments in FSH synthesis and secretion as well as in pituitary Fst expression, Gnrhr mRNA levels are either unperturbed or increased in these animals. Surprisingly, gonadotrope-specific deletion of Smad3 alone or with Smad2 does not impair FSH production or fertility; however, mice harboring these mutations may express a DNA binding-deficient, but otherwise functional, SMAD3 protein. Collectively, the available data firmly establish roles for FOXL2 and SMAD4 in Fshb and Fst expression in gonadotrope cells, whereas SMAD3's role requires further investigation. Gnrhr expression, in contrast, appears to be FOXL2, SMAD4, and, perhaps, activin independent in vivo.
Gonadotropes cells located in the anterior pituitary gland are critical for reproductive fitness. A rapid surge in the serum concentration of luteinizing hormone (LH) secreted by anterior pituitary gonadotropes is essential for stimulating ovulation and is thus required for a successful pregnancy. To meet the requirements to mount the LH surge, gonadotrope cells display plasticity at the cellular, molecular and morphological level. First, gonadotrope cells heighten their sensitivity to an increasing frequency of hypothalamic GnRH pulses by dynamically elevating the expression of the GnRH receptor (GnRHR). Following ligand binding, GnRH initiates highly organized intracellular signaling cascades that ultimately promote the synthesis of LH and the trafficking of LH vesicles to the cell periphery. Lastly, gonadotrope cells display morphological plasticity, where there is directed mobilization of cytoskeletal processes towards vascular elements to facilitate rapid LH secretion into peripheral circulation. This mini review discusses the functional and organizational plasticity in gonadotrope cells including changes in sensitivity to GnRH, composition of the GnRHR signaling platform within the plasma membrane, and changes in cellular morphology. Ultimately, multimodal plasticity changes elicited by gonadotropes are critical for the generation of the LH surge, which is required for ovulation.
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, which may be normosmic (nHH) or anosmic/hyposmic, known as Kallmann syndrome (KS), is due to gonadotropin-releasing hormone deficiency, which results in absent puberty and infertility. Investigation of the genetic basis of nHH/KS over the past 35 years has yielded a substantial increase in our understanding, as variants in 44 genes in OMIM account for ~50% of cases. The first genes for KS (ANOS1) and nHH (GNRHR) were followed by the discovery that FGFR1 variants may cause either nHH or KS. Associated anomalies include midline facial defects, neurologic deficits, cardiac anomalies, and renal agenesis, among others. Mouse models for all but one gene (ANOS1) generally support findings in humans. About half of the known genes implicated in nHH/KS are inherited as autosomal dominant and half are autosomal recessive, whereas only 7% are X-linked recessive. Digenic and oligogenic inheritance has been reported in 2-20% of patients, most commonly with variants in genes that may result in either nHH or KS inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. In vitro analyses have only been conducted for both gene variants in eight cases and for one gene variant in 20 cases. Rigorous confirmation that two gene variants in the same individual cause the nHH/KS phenotype is lacking for most. Clinical diagnosis is probably best accomplished by targeted next generation sequencing of the known candidate genes with confirmation by Sanger sequencing. Elucidation of the genetic basis of nHH/KS has resulted in an enhanced understanding of this disorder, as well as normal puberty, which makes genetic diagnosis clinically relevant.
GnRH receptors play vital roles in mammalian reproduction via regulation of gonadotropin secretion, which is essential for gametogenesis and production of gonadal steroids. GnRH receptors for more than 20 mammalian species have been sequenced, including human, mouse, and dog. This study reports the molecular cloning and sequencing of GnRH receptor (GnRHR) cDNA from the pituitary gland of the domestic cat, an important species in biomedical research. Feline GnRHR cDNA is composed of 981 nucleotides and encodes a 327 amino acid protein. Unlike the majority of mammalian species sequenced so far, but similar to canine GnRHR, feline GnRHR protein lacks asparagine in position three of the extracellular domain of the protein. At the amino acid level, feline GnRHR exhibits 95.1% identity with canine, 93.8% with human, and 88.9% with mouse GnRHR. Comparative sequence analysis of GnRHRs for multiple mammalian species led to resequencing of canine GnRHR, which differed from that previously published by a single base change that translates to a different amino acid in position 193. This single base change was confirmed in dogs of multiple breeds. Reverse transcriptase PCR analysis of GnRHR messenger RNA in different tissues from four normal cats indicated the presence of amplicons of varying lengths, including full-length as well as shortened GnRHR amplicons, pointing to the existence of truncated GnRHR transcripts in the domestic cat. This study is the first insight into molecular composition and expression of feline GnRHR and promotes better understanding of receptor organization, and distribution in various tissues of this species.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and its receptor are essential for reproduction in vertebrates. Although there are three major types of GnRH peptides and two major types of receptors in vertebrates, the pattern of distribution is unusual. Evidence is presented from genome mining that type I GnRHRs are not restricted to mammals, but can be found in the lobe-finned and cartilaginous fishes. This implies that this tail-less GnRH receptor emerged early in vertebrate evolution, followed by several independent losses in different lineages. Also, we have identified representatives from the three major GnRH peptide types (mammalian GnRH1, vertebrate GnRH2 and dogfish GnRH3) in a single cartilaginous fish, the little skate. Skate and coelacanth are the only examples of animals with both type I and II GnRH receptors and all three peptide types, suggesting this was the ancestral condition in vertebrates. Our analysis of receptor synteny in combination with phylogeny suggests that there were three GnRH receptor types present before the two rounds of whole genome duplication in early vertebrates. To further understand the origin of the GnRH peptide-receptor system, the relationship of vertebrate and invertebrate homologs was examined. Our evidence supports the hypothesis of a GnRH superfamily with a common ancestor for the vertebrate GnRHs, invertebrate (inv)GnRHs, corazonins and adipokinetic hormones. The invertebrate deuterostomes (echinoderms, hemichordates and amphioxus) have derived GnRH-like peptides, although one amphioxus GnRH with a syntenic relationship to human GnRHs has been shown to be functional. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that gene duplications in the ancestral bilaterian produced two receptor types, one of which became adipokinetic hormone receptor/GnRHR and the other corazonin receptor/invGnRHR. It appears that the ancestral deuterostome had both a GnRHR and invGnRHR, and this is still the case in amphioxus. During the transition to vertebrates both the invertebrate-type peptide and receptor were lost, leaving only the vertebrate-type system that presently exists.
