G-protein coupled receptor 176; Orphan receptor involved in normal circadian rhythm behavior. Acts through the G-protein subclass G(z)-alpha and has an agonist- independent basal activity to repress cAMP production.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute an immensely important class of drug targets with diverse clinical applications. There are still more than 120 orphan GPCRs whose cognate ligands and physiological functions are not known. A set of circadian pacemaker neurons that governs daily rhythms in behavior and physiology resides in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) in the brain. Malfunction of the circadian clock has been linked to a multitude of diseases, such as sleeping disorders, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer, which makes the clock an attractive target for drug development. Here, we review a recently identified role of Gpr176 in the SCN. Gpr176 is an SCN-enriched orphan GPCR that sets the pace of the circadian clock in the SCN. Even without known ligand, this orphan receptor has an agonist-independent basal activity to reduce cAMP signaling. A unique cAMP-repressing G-protein subclass Gz is required for the activity of Gpr176. We also provide an overview on the circadian regulation of G-protein signaling, with an emphasis on a role for the regulator of G-protein signaling 16 (RGS16). RGS16 is indispensable for the circadian regulation of cAMP in the SCN. Developing drugs that target the SCN remains an unfulfilled opportunity for the circadian pharmacology. This review argues for the potential impact of focusing on GPCRs in the SCN for the purpose of tuning the body clock.
Anacardic acid (AnAc), a potential dietary agent for preventing and treating breast cancer, inhibited the proliferation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) positive MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer cells. To characterize potential regulators of AnAc action, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells were treated for 6 h with purified AnAc 24:1n5 congener followed by next generation transcriptomic sequencing (RNA-seq) and network analysis. We reported that AnAc-differentially regulated miRNA transcriptomes in each cell line and now identify AnAc-regulated changes in mRNA and lncRNA transcript expression. In MCF-7 cells, 80 AnAc-responsive genes were identified, including lncRNA MIR22HG. More AnAc-responsive genes (886) were identified in MDA-MB-231 cells. Only six genes were commonly altered by AnAc in both cell lines: SCD, INSIG1, and TGM2 were decreased and PDK4, GPR176, and ZBT20 were increased. Modeling of AnAc-induced gene changes suggests that AnAc inhibits monounsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis in both cell lines and increases endoplasmic reticulum stress in MDA-MB-231 cells. Since modeling of downregulated genes implicated NFkappaB in MCF-7, we confirmed that AnAc inhibited TNFalpha-induced NFkappaB reporter activity in MCF-7 cells. These data identify new targets and pathways that may account for AnAc's anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activity.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
Fibrosis is characterized by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix proteins, particularly collagen, caused by myofibroblasts in response to chronic inflammation. Although G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are among the targets of current antifibrotic drugs, no drug has yet been approved to stop fibrosis progression. Herein, we aimed to identify GPCRs with profibrotic effects. In gene expression analysis of mouse lungs with induced fibrosis, eight GPCRs were identified, showing a >2-fold increase in mRNA expression after fibrosis induction. Among them, we focused on Gpr176 owing to its significant correlation with a myofibroblast marker alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA), the profibrotic factor transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1), and collagen in a human lung gene expression database. Similar to the lung fibrosis model, increased Gpr176 expression was also observed in other organs affected by fibrosis, including the kidney, liver, and heart, suggesting its role in fibrosis across various organs. Furthermore, fibroblasts abundantly expressed Gpr176 compared to alveolar epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and macrophages in the fibrotic lung. GPR176 expression was unaffected by TGFbeta1 stimulation in rat renal fibroblast NRK-49 cells, whereas knockdown of Gpr176 by siRNA reduced TGFbeta1-induced expression of alphaSMA, fibronectin, and collagen as well as Smad2 phosphorylation. This suggested that Gpr176 regulates fibroblast activation. Consequently, Gpr176 acts in a profibrotic manner, and inhibiting its activity could potentially prevent myofibroblast differentiation and improve fibrosis. Developing a GPR176 inverse agonist or allosteric modulator is a promising therapeutic approach for fibrosis.
Immunotherapy based on immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) is considered to be a promising treatment for stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD), but only a minority of patients benefit from it. It is believed that the poor therapeutic efficacy is attributed to the complex tumor immune microenvironment (TIM) of STAD. Therefore, elucidating the specific regulatory mechanism of TIM in STAD is critical. Previous study suggests that GRP176 may be involved in regulating the pace of circadian behavior, and its role in tumors has not been reported. In this study, we first found that GPR176 was highly expressed in STAD and negatively correlated with patient prognosis. Next, we investigated the relationship between GPR176 and clinical characteristics, and the results showed that the stage is closely related to the level of GPR176. In addition, our further analysis found that GRP176 expression level was significantly correlated with chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity and ICI response. KEGG and GO analyses showed that GPR176 might be involved in stromal remodeling of STAD. Furthermore, we analyzed the association between GPR176 expression and immune implication, and the results revealed that GPR176 was negatively related to the infiltration of various immune cells. Interestingly, GPR176 induced the conversion of TIM while reducing the tumor immune burden (TMB). The expression of GRP176 is closely related to the level of various immunomodulators. Moreover, we performed univariate and multivariate regression analyses on the immunomodulators and finally obtained 4 genes (CRCR4, TNSF18, PDCD1, and TGFB1). Then, we constructed a GRP176-related immunomodulator prognostic model (GRIM) based on the above 4 genes, which was validated to have good predictive power. Finally, we developed a nomogram based on the risk score of GRIM and verified its accuracy. These results suggested that GPR176 is closely related to the prognosis and TIM of STAD. GPR176 may be a new potential target for immunotherapy in STAD.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most prominent family of cell surface receptors, which can regulate various biological functions and play an essential role in many diseases. GPR176 is a member of the GPCRs family and has been rarely studied in cancer. We aim to investigate the diagnostic and prognostic value of GPR176 in gastric cancer (GC) and explore its potential mechanism. Through the TCGA database and real-time quantitative PCR, we found that the expression level of GPR176 was significantly increased in GC and had good value in the diagnosis and prognosis of GC. Vitro experiments revealed that GPR176 could promote the proliferation, migration, and invasion of GC cells and may be involved in regulating multiple tumors and immune-related signaling pathways. In addition, we found that GPR176 is associated with GC immune infiltration and may affect the immune efficacy of GC patients. In summary, the high GPR176 expression level was associated with poor prognosis, more robust immune infiltration, and worse immunotherapy efficacy in GC patients, suggesting that GPR176 may be an immune-related biomarker for GC that can promote the proliferation, migration, and invasion of GC cells.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are an important source of drug targets with diverse therapeutic applications. However, there are still more than one hundred orphan GPCRs, whose ligands and functions remain unidentified. The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is the central circadian clock of the brain, directing daily rhythms in activity-rest behavior and physiology. Malfunction of the circadian clock has been linked to a wide variety of diseases, including sleep-wake disorders, obesity, diabetes, cancer, and hypertension, making the circadian clock an intriguing target for drug development. The orphan receptor GPR176 is an SCN-enriched orphan GPCR that sets the pace of the circadian clock. GPR176 undergoes asparagine (N)-linked glycosylation, a post-translational modification required for its proper cell-surface expression. Although its ligand remains unknown, this orphan receptor shows agonist-independent basal activity. GPR176 couples to the unique G-protein subclass G(z) (or G(x)) and participates in reducing cAMP production during the night. The regulator of G-protein signaling 16 (RGS16) is equally important for the regulation of circadian cAMP synthesis in the SCN. Genome-wide association studies, employing questionnaire-based evaluations of individual chronotypes, revealed loci near clock genes and in the regions containing RGS16 and ALG10B, a gene encoding an enzyme involved in protein N-glycosylation. Therefore, increasing evidence suggests that N-glycosylation of GPR176 and its downstream G-protein signal regulation may be involved in pathways characterizing human chronotypes. This review argues for the potential impact of focusing on GPCR signaling in the SCN for the purpose of fine-tuning the entire body clock.
BACKGROUND: At present, the discovery of new biomarkers is of great significance for the early diagnosis, treatment and prognosis assessment of ovarian cancer. Previous findings indicated that aberrant G-protein-coupled receptor 176 (GPR176) expression might contribute to tumorigenesis and subsequent progression. However, the expression of GPR176 and the molecular mechanisms in ovarian cancer had not been investigated. METHODS: GPR176 expression was compared with clinicopathological features of ovarian cancer using immunohistochemical and bioinformatics analyses. GPR176-related genes and pathways were analysed using bioinformatics analysis. Additionally, the effects of GPR176 on ovarian cancer cell phenotypes were investigated. RESULTS: GPR176 expression positively correlated with elder age, clinicopathological staging, tumour residual status, and unfavourable survival of ovarian cancer, but negatively with purity loss, infiltration of B cells, and CD8+ T cells. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis showed that differential expression of GPR176 was involved in focal adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, cell adhesion molecules and so on. STRING and Cytoscape were used to determine the top 10 nodes. Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes analysis indicated that GPR176-related genes were involved in the ECM structural constituent and organisation and so on. GPR176 overexpression promoted the proliferation, anti-apoptosis, anti-pyroptosis, migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells with overexpression of N-cadherin, Zeb1, Snail, Twist1, and under-expression of gasdermin D, caspase 1, and E-cadherin. CONCLUSION: GPR176 might be involved in the progression of ovarian cancer. It might be used as a biomarker to indicate the aggressive behaviour and poor prognosis of ovarian cancer and a target of genetic therapy.
PURPOSE: As a member of the G-protein-coupled receptor 1 family, the G-protein-coupled receptor 176 (GPR176) gene encodes a glycosylated protein made up of 515 amino acids. The current study was performed to evaluate the impact of GPR176 on the clinicopathology and prognosis of oesophageal cancer, as well as uncover its molecular mechanisms. METHODS: Bioinformatics and clinical tissue samples were used to detect the expression and clinicopathological significance of GPR176 in oesophageal cancer. The expression, proliferation, migration and invasion, apoptosis and lipid droplet formation of GPR176 gene in oesophageal cancer were performed as phenotypic readouts. RESULTS: Here, RT-PCR and bioinformatic analyses revealed that GPR176 mRNA expression was significantly higher in oesophageal cancer than in normal mucosa (p < 0.05). GPR176 mRNA expression was associated with low weight and BMI, low T stage, low N and clinicopathological stage, low histological grade and favourable clinical outcome of oesophageal cancer (p < 0.05). The differential genes of GPR176 mRNA were involved in protein digestion and absorption, extracellular matrix constituent, endoplasmic reticulum lumen, among others (p < 0.05). GPR176-related genes were classified as being involved in oxidoreductase activity, actin and myosin complexes, lipid localisation and transport, among others (p < 0.05). GPR176 knockdown suppressed proliferation, anti-apoptotic and anti-pyroptotic properties, migration, invasion, chemoresistance and lipid droplet formation in oesophageal cancer cells (p < 0.05), while ACC1 and ACLY overexpression reversed the inhibitory effects of GPR176 silencing on lipid droplet formation and chemoresistance. CONCLUSION: These findings indicated that upregulated expression of GPR176 might be involved in oesophageal carcinogenesis and subsequent progression, aggressiveness, and induced chemoresistance by ACC1- and ACLY-mediated lipogenesis and lipid droplet assembly.
BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis (AT) is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by the accumulation of inflammatory cells, lipoproteins and fibrous tissue in the walls of arteries. AT is the primary cause of heart attacks and stroke and is the leading cause of death in Western countries. To date, the pathogenesis of AT is not well-defined. Studies have shown that the dedifferentiation of contractile and quiescent vascular smooth muscle cells (SMC) to the proliferative, migratory and synthetic phenotype in the intima is pivotal for the onset and progression of AT. To further delineate the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of AT, we analyzed the early molecular pathways and networks involved in the SMC phenotype transformation. METHODS: Quiescent human coronary artery SMCs were treated with minimally-oxidized LDL (moxLDL), for 3 hours and 21 hours, respectively. Transcriptomic data was generated for both time-points using microarrays and was subjected to pathway analysis using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, GeneMANIA and Ingenuity software tools. Gene expression heat maps and pathways enriched in differentially expressed genes were compared to identify functional biological themes to elucidate early and late molecular mechanisms of moxLDL-induced SMC dedifferentiation. RESULTS: Differentially expressed genes were found to be enriched in cholesterol biosynthesis, inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, cell cycle control and myogenic contraction themes. These pathways are consistent with inflammatory responses, cell proliferation, migration and ECM production, which are characteristic of SMC dedifferentiation. Furthermore, up-regulation of cholesterol synthesis and dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism was observed in moxLDL-induced SMC. These observations are consistent with the accumulation of cholesterol and oxidized cholesterol esters, which induce proinflammatory reactions during atherogenesis. Our data implicate for the first time IL12, IFN-alpha, HGF, CSF3, and VEGF signaling in SMC phenotype transformation. GPCR signaling, HBP1 (repressor of cyclin D1 and CDKN1B), and ID2 and ZEB1 transcriptional regulators were also found to have important roles in SMC dedifferentiation. Several microRNAs were observed to regulate the SMC phenotype transformation via an interaction with IFN-gamma pathway. Also, several "nexus" genes in complex networks, including components of the multi-subunit enzyme complex involved in the terminal stages of cholesterol synthesis, microRNAs (miR-203, miR-511, miR-590-3p, miR-346*/miR- 1207-5p/miR-4763-3p), GPCR proteins (GPR1, GPR64, GPRC5A, GPR171, GPR176, GPR32, GPR25, GPR124) and signal transduction pathways, were found to be regulated. CONCLUSIONS: The systems biology analysis of the in vitro model of moxLDL-induced VSMC phenotype transformation was associated with the regulation of several genes not previously implicated in SMC phenotype transformation. The identification of these potential candidate genes enable hypothesis generation and in vivo functional experimentation (such as gain and loss-of-function studies) to establish causality with the process of SMC phenotype transformation and atherogenesis.
The prognostic impact of tumour grading, cytological and architectural patterns and stromal features in diffuse pleural malignant epithelioid mesothelioma (MEM) has been partly studied but not correlated to molecular features. We performed a retrospective study on 92 MEM in our department in order to assess the prognostic role of architectural and stromal patterns, especially tumour to stroma ratio. Secondly, based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, we analysed the differentially expressed genes in prognostic groups of interest. Our results showed that tumour grading, tumour to stroma ratio and predominant pattern were related to overall survival, p</=0.001, p=0.01 and p=0.001, respectively. In univariate analysis, for high grade tumours hazard ratio (HR) was 4.75 (2.47-9.16), for stroma poor tumours HR=0.016, for predominant tubular or tubulopapillary pattern HR=0.044. In multivariate analysis, high grade tumours were related to overall survival [HR=3.09 (1.50-6.35), p=0.002] and predominant tubular or tubulopapillary pattern [HR=0.56 (0.32-0.99), p=0.045]. In TCGA analysis, after grading of diagnostic slides, we showed that KRTDAP and CXRCR1 expression was higher in low grade tumours, unlike PDZD7 and GPR176 expression which was higher in high grade tumours. FAM81B had a higher expression in stroma poor tumours. We did not find any differentially expressed genes in the architectural patterns group. Our work suggests that tumour grading is an important parameter in MEM with an underlying genomic basis. The role of tumour to stroma ratio needs to be investigated and might also have a genomic basis.
Ferroptosis is a unique form of regulated cell death that results from unrestricted lipid peroxidation, and it enhances the production of intracellular oxidative stress molecules. In this study, we investigated the effect of macrophage ferroptosis on the proliferation of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and sought potential host-directed therapy (HDT) targets for S. aureus. The study findings revealed that erastin concentrations (< 20 muM), which do not have an impact on macrophage proliferation, can effectively impede the proliferation of S. aureus within macrophages. High-throughput sequencing was used to identify DEGs and DEMIs in infected macrophages. Subsequently, the mRNA-miRNA regulatory network was successfully constructed, and two sets of molecules were selected. Experimental findings confirmed that mmu-miR-6935-5p exhibited complementary binding to specific sequences within the GM867 mRNA, and mmu-miR-7082-3p specifically bound to the GPR176 mRNA. Inducing ferroptosis in macrophages can effectively impede the proliferation of drug-resistant S. aureus. Notably, our study has identified GM867, GPR176, mmu-miR-6935-5p, and mmu-miR-7082-3p as key regulators involved in this process. These findings highlight the potential of targeting these four molecules for HDT, offering novel ways to combat drug-resistant S. aureus infection.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are important drug targets with diverse therapeutic applications. However, there are still more than a hundred orphan GPCRs, whose protein functions and biochemical features remain unidentified. Gpr176 encodes a class-A orphan GPCR that has a role in circadian clock regulation in mouse hypothalamus and is also implicated in human breast cancer transcriptional response. Here we show that Gpr176 is N-glycosylated. Peptide-N-glycosidase treatment of mouse hypothalamus extracts revealed that endogenous Gpr176 undergoes N-glycosylation. Using a heterologous expression system, we show that N-glycosylation occurs at four conserved asparagine residues in the N-terminal region of Gpr176. Deficient N-glycosylation due to mutation of these residues reduced the protein expression of Gpr176. At the molecular function level, Gpr176 has constitutive, agonist-independent activity that leads to reduced cAMP synthesis. Although deficient N-glycosylation did not compromise this intrinsic activity, the resultant reduction in protein expression was accompanied by attenuation of cAMP-repressive activity in the cells. We also demonstrate that human GPR176 is N-glycosylated. Importantly, missense variations in the conserved N-glycosylation sites of human GPR176 (rs1473415441; rs761894953) affected N-glycosylation and thereby attenuated protein expression and cAMP-repressive activity in the cells. We show that N-glycosylation is a prerequisite for the efficient protein expression of functional Gpr176/GPR176.
