Probable G-protein coupled receptor 173; Is a receptor for the SMIM20 derived peptides Phoenixin-14 and Phoenixin-20 (By similarity). It mediates the Phoenixin-14 and Phoenixin-20 augmentation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH) signaling in the hypothalamus and pituitary gland (By similarity). In the ovary, it mediates the effects of Phoenixin-14 and Phoenixin-20 induced granulosa cell proliferation during follicular growth.
Phoenixin (PNX) neuropeptide is a cleaved product of the Smim20 protein. Its most common isoforms are the 14- and 20-amino acid peptides. The biological functions of PNX are mediated via the activation of the GPR173 receptor. PNX plays an important role in the central nervous system (CNS) and in the female reproductive system where it potentiates LH secretion and controls the estrus cycle. Moreover, it stimulates oocyte maturation and increases the number of ovulated oocytes. Nevertheless, PNX not only regulates the reproduction system but also exerts anxiolytic, anti-inflammatory, and cell-protective effects. Furthermore, it is involved in behavior, food intake, sensory perception, memory, and energy metabolism. Outside the CNS, PNX exerts its effects on the heart, ovaries, adipose tissue, and pancreatic islets. This review presents all the currently available studies demonstrating the pleiotropic effects of PNX.
Phoenixin (PNX), a newly identified peptide cleaved from the C-terminus of protein C4orf52, mainly exists in two active isoforms, phoenixin-14 (PNX-14) amide and phoenixin-20 (PNX-20) amide that were first isolated from the rat hypothalamus and bovine heart, respectively. Initial studies demonstrated that PNX is a reproductive peptide, which affects the hypothalamus pituitary genital (HPG) axis through regulating the expression of kisspeptin, GnRH, GnRH receptor, LH and oestrus process. However, further studies indicated that PNX might play a wide range of roles in additional physiological process such as inhibiting visceral pain and eliciting pruritus, inducing anxiety, improving memory retention. Recently, Gpr173, also designated as SREB3, was identified as the cognate receptor of PNX. Whereas, the regulatory mechanism of PNX has not been fully clarified. This review aims to provide the current knowledge of PNX and propose some study directions for future research.
Phoenixin (PNX), well-conserved but newly discovered neuropeptide, is involved in various physiological processes, such as food intake, cardiovascular functions, reproductive functions, and stress regulation. PNX is the predicted ligand of GPR173 receptor, but due to its relatively recent discovery in 2013, there is a lack of studies describing the exact mechanism of action of the peptide. In addition, the protein was not been well-studied in specific organs, particularly in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of ruminants, including domestic cattle, which are among the world's main livestock animals. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the immunolocalization and quantification of PNX and GPR173 in the GIT of domestic cattle. Study material, including GIT sections of two age groups, calves and adult bulls (n = 6 per group), was obtained from a slaughterhouse. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses were performed. Analyses revealed low levels of PNX in the GIT of both age groups, with localization restricted to epithelial cells across all examined GIT segments, with statistically significant differences between age groups and GIT segments, which may result from the delayed development of forestomachs in calves. On the other hand, GPR173 levels were shown to be higher than those of PNX and to have a wider distribution extending beyond the epithelium to the blood vessels wall and the intrinsic nervous system. This may suggests that PNX is not the only ligand for this receptor. Overall, the results may suggest that both PNX and GPR173 could possibly play protective roles related to the immune response, regulate digestive and absorptive functions, and due to receptor presence in nerve fibres, may play a role in regulating GIT secretion and motility. These findings could potentially facilitate further research into the therapeutic potential of targeting PNX and GPR173 in managing gastrointestinal disorders in domestic cattle and other species, and can also be further used for experimental, clinical or pharmacological research into the treatment of eating disorders not only in humans, but also in farm animals.
Pulpal infection is one of the most common causes of dental emergency admission. Tooth pain due to infection caused by gram-negative bacteria is the main manifestation of this sort of dental problem. The GPR173 signaling pathway is a highly conserved G-protein-coupled receptor that mediates neurological and reproductive function. In this study, we found that GPR173 was fairly expressed in isolated human dental pulp cells, and its expression was reduced in response to pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment. The activation of GPR173 by its ligand Phoenixin-20 reduced LPS-induced cytotoxicity, as revealed by a reduction in the release of LDH. Additionally, Phoenixin-20 suppressed LPS-induced release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and inflammatory mediators, including IL-6, MCP-1, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1, as well as MMP-2 and MMP-9. Mechanistically, we showed the suppressive action of Phoenixin-20 on LPS-induced activation of TLR-4 and Myd88 as well as the activation of the NF-kappaB pathway. Collectively, our study demonstrates that the GPR173 signaling pathway is an important mediator of LPS-induced inflammation, and the activation of GPR173 by its natural ligand Phoenixin-20 exhibits robust anti-inflammatory effects in dental pulp cells, suggesting that GPR173 is an interesting target molecule in the development of pulp cell-based therapies.
Phoenixin (PNX) is a newly discovered peptide that has been linked to reproductive function, both in the hypothalamus and pituitary. This review will focus on the most recent discoveries related to this novel neuropeptide. Initially, it was found that PNX increased gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH)-stimulated luteinizing hormone (LH) release from pituitary cells. Importantly, knockdown of PNX in female rats extended the estrous cycle by 2.3 days. Using novel hypothalamic cell lines, we found that PNX has a stimulatory role on kisspeptin (Kiss) and GnRH gene expression and secretion. The PNX receptor was uncovered using siRNA knockdown of GPR173, an orphan receptor postulated to bind PNX. We have found that the PNX-R signaling through protein kinase A (PKA) in hypothalamic neurons. Althuogh a number of studies demonstrate that PNX plays an important role in reproductive function, there is also evidence that it may have other functions, regulating the heart, feeding, memory, and anxiety, both in the brain and the periphery.
There are examples of physiological conditions under which thirst is inappropriately exaggerated, and the mechanisms for these paradoxical ingestive behaviors remain unknown. We are interested in thirst mechanisms across the female life cycle and have identified a novel mechanism through which ingestive behavior may be activated. We discovered a previously unrecognized endogenous hypothalamic peptide, phoenixin (PNX), identified physiologically relevant actions of the peptide in brain and pituitary gland to control reproductive hormone secretion in female rodents, and in the process identified the previously orphaned G protein-coupled receptor Gpr173 to be a potential receptor for the peptide. Labeled PNX binding distribution in brain parallels areas known to be important in ingestive behaviors as well in areas where gonadal steroids feedback to control estrous cyclicity (Stein LM, Tullock CW, Mathews SK, Garcia-Galiano D, Elias CF, Samson WK, Yosten GLC, Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 311: R489-R496, 2016). We have demonstrated upregulation of Gpr173 during puberty, fluctuations across the estrous cycle, and, importantly, upregulation during the last third of gestation. It is during this hypervolemic, hyponatremic state that both vasopressin secretion and thirst are inappropriately elevated in humans. Here, we show that central administration of PNX stimulated water drinking in both males and females under ad libitum conditions, increased water drinking after overnight fluid deprivation, and increased both water and 1.5% NaCl ingestion under fed and hydrated conditions. Importantly, losartan pretreatment blocked the effect of PNX on water drinking, and knockdown of Gpr173 by use of short interfering RNA constructs significantly attenuated water drinking in response to overnight fluid deprivation. These actions, together with the stimulatory action of PNX on vasopressin secretion, suggest that this recently discovered neuropeptide may impact the recruitment of critically important neural circuits through which ingestive behaviors and endocrine mechanisms that maintain fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are regulated.
AIM: Endometriosis is one of the most common gynecologic diseases in women of reproductive age. The pathophysiology of endometriosis is still not fully understood. Phoenixin (PNX-14) is a newly discovered neuropeptide that regulates the hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis and reproductive functions. Recently, we reported that PNX-14, its precursor protein and receptor were expressed in human endometrium. Moreover, PNX-14 serum levels in endometriosis were reduced. This study aimed to evaluate the in vitro biological functions of physiological PNX-14 concentrations on the ectopic endometrium Z12 cells. METHODS: The proliferation and migration of Z12 cells were assessed using the xCELLigence(R) RTCA DP system following 72 h of stimulation with 0.05 and 0.2 nM of PNX-14. GPR173 and small integral membrane protein 20 (SMIM20) gene expression was evaluated using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and the protein levels of GPR173 were analyzed using Western blot analysis. RESULTS: PNX-14 at the concentration observed in the serum of patients with endometriosis (0.05 nM) reduced GPR173 and increased SMIM20 expression, while protein levels of GPR173 remained unchanged. Cell proliferation was increased by the 0.02 nM PNX-14- the concentration found in healthy subjects. The 0.2 nM of PNX-14 decreased SMIM20 expression with no change to GPR173 expression and reduced ectopic epithelial cell proliferation during the first 5 h after stimulation. However, at 72 h, the proliferation increased. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that PNX-14 at endometriosis specific concentration desensitized ectopic epithelium to PNX-14, and increased the expression of SMIM20 to restore the physiological levels of PNX-14.
Folliculogenesis is a complex process, defined by the growth and development of follicles from the primordial population. Granulosa cells (GCs) play a vital role in every stage of follicular growth through proliferation, acquisition of gonadotropic responsiveness, steroidogenesis and production of autocrine/paracrine factors. A recently discovered hypothalamic neuropeptide phoenixin is involved in the regulation of the reproductive system. Phoenixin acts through its receptor, G protein-coupled receptor 173 (GPR173), to activate the cAMP/PKA pathway leading to the phosphorylation of CREB (pCREB). Here, we demonstrated the expression patterns of phoenixin and GPR173 in human ovary and explored its role in folliculogenesis. Phoenixin and GPR173 were both expressed in the human ovarian follicle, with increased expression in GCs as the follicle grows. Phoenixin treatment at 100 nM for 24 h induced the proliferation of human non-luteinized granulosa cell line, HGrC1 and significantly increased the expression levels of CYP19A1, FSHR, LHR and KITL, but decreased NPPC expression levels. These effects were suppressed by GPR173 siRNA. The expression level of CREB1, pCREB and estradiol (E2) production in the culture medium was significantly enhanced by phoenixin treatment in a concentration-dependent manner. Phoenixin also significantly increased the follicular area in a murine ovarian tissue culture model, leading to an increased number of ovulated oocytes with a higher level of maturation. Taken together, our data demonstrate that phoenixin is an intraovarian factor that promotes follicular growth through its receptor GPR173 by accelerating proliferation of GCs, inducing E2 production and increasing the expression of genes related to follicle development.
Using a series of classical protein purification techniques, coupled with more modern molecular approaches, a family of neuropeptides, the Phoenixins, was identified to be produced in brain and heart, and to bind selectively in pituitary gland, ovary and brain. These same binding sites were revealed, using a novel receptor identification strategy, to express the orphan G protein-coupled receptor, GPR173, the expression of which was required for the actions of phoenixin both in vivo and in vitro. In fact, studies using small interfering RNA molecules to compromise GPR173 expression revealed the physiologic relevance of the initially reported pharmacologic actions of the peptides. Those include not only the reproductive actions of the peptides in brain and pituitary gland, but also a CNS site of action in the maintenance of fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. Additional pharmacologic actions of the phoenixins have been described and the race is on to establish the physiologic relevance of those actions as well as the therapeutic potential of phoenixin analogs.
GPR27, GPR85 and GPR173 constitute a small family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) that share the distinctive characteristics of being highly conserved throughout vertebrate evolution and predominantly expressed in the brain. Accordingly, they have been coined as "Superconserved Receptors Expressed in the Brain" (SREB), although their expression profile is more complex than what was originally thought. SREBs have no known validated endogenous ligands and are thus labeled as "orphan" receptors. The investigation of this particular category of uncharacterized receptors holds great promise both in terms of physiology and drug development. In the largest GPCR family, the Rhodopsin-like or Class A, around 100 receptors are considered orphans. Because GPCRs are the most successful source of drug targets, the discovery of a novel function or ligand most likely will lead to significant breakthroughs for the discovery of innovative therapies. The high level of conservation is one of the characteristic features of the SREBs. We propose herein a detailed analysis of the putative evolutionary origin of this family. We highlight the properties that distinguish SREBs from other rhodopsin-like GPCRs. We present the current evidence for these receptors downstream signaling pathways and functions. We discuss the pharmacological challenge for the identification of natural or synthetic ligands of orphan receptors like SREBs. The different SREB-related scientific questions are presented with a highlight on what should be addressed in the near future, including the confirmation of published evidence and their validation as drug targets. In particular, we discuss in which pathological conditions these receptors may be of great relevance to solve unmet medical needs.
The recently discovered peptide phoenixin was initially implicated in reproduction as a regulator of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-stimulated luteinizing hormone (LH) release from the pituitary. Subsequently, various functions of phoenixin have been demonstrated including mediation of itching sensation, stimulation of vasopressin secretion, stimulation of white adipogenesis and hypothalamic nutrient sensing. Subsequently, additional actions of phoenixin have been described, namely effects on behavior. A systematic search of four data bases was performed and original articles selected accordingly. The present systematic review will present the current knowledge on the effects of phoenixin on different behaviors such as anxiety and food intake as well as cognition. Lastly, gaps in knowledge will be mentioned to stimulate further research.
GPR27 belongs, with GPR85 and GPR173, to a small subfamily of three receptors called "Super-Conserved Receptors Expressed in the Brain" (SREB). It has been postulated to participate in key physiological processes such as neuronal plasticity, energy metabolism, and pancreatic beta-cell insulin secretion and regulation. Recently, we reported the first selective GPR27 agonist, 2,4-dichloro-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (I, pEC(50) 6.34, E(max) 100%). Here, we describe the synthesis and structure-activity relationships of a series of new derivatives and analogs of I. All products were evaluated for their ability to activate GPR27 in an arrestin recruitment assay. As a result, agonists were identified with a broad range of efficacies including partial and full agonists, showing higher efficacies than the lead compound I. The most potent agonist was 4-chloro-2,5-difluoro-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (7y, pEC(50) 6.85, E(max) 37%), and the agonists with higher efficacies were 4-chloro-2-methyl-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (7p, pEC(50) 6.04, E(max) 123%), and 2-bromo-4-chloro-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (7r, pEC(50) 5.99, E(max) 123%). Docking studies predicted the putative binding site and interactions of agonist 7p with GPR27. Selected potent agonists were found to be soluble and devoid of cellular toxicity within the range of their pharmacological activity. Therefore, they represent important new tools to further characterize the (patho)physiological roles of GPR27.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a serious disease and a burden to patients, families and society. Rodent experiments and human studies suggest that several neuropeptide systems are involved in mood regulation. The aim of this study is two-fold: (i) to monitor, with qPCR, transcript levels of the substance P/tachykinin (TAC), NPY and CCK systems in bulk samples from control and suicide subjects, targeting five postmortem brain regions including locus coeruleus (LC); and (ii) to analyse expression of neuropeptide family transcripts in LC neurons of 'normal' postmortem brains by using laser capture microdissection with Smart-Seq2 RNA sequencing. qPCR revealed distinct regional expression patterns in male and female controls with higher levels for the TAC system in the dorsal raphe nucleus and LC, versus higher transcripts levels of the NPY and CCK systems in prefrontal cortex. In suicide patients, TAC, TAC receptors and a few NPY family transcript levels were increased mainly in prefrontal cortex and LC. The second study on 'normal' noradrenergic LC neurons revealed expression of transcripts for GAL, NPY, TAC1, CCK, and TACR1 and many other peptides (e.g. Cerebellin4 and CARTPT) and receptors (e.g. Adcyap1R1 and GPR173). These data and our previous results on suicide brains indicates that the tachykinin and galanin systems may be valid targets for developing antidepressant medicines. Moreover, the perturbation of neuropeptide systems in MDD patients, and the detection of further neuropeptide and receptor transcripts in LC, shed new light on signalling in noradrenergic LC neurons and on mechanisms possibly associated with mood disorders.
BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease with female predominance, particularly affecting those of childbearing age. We performed analysis of three genome-wide genotyping datasets of populations of both Chinese and European origin. METHODS: This study involved 5695 cases and 10,357 controls in the discovery stage. The lead signal on chromosome X was followed by replication in three additional Asian cohorts, with 2300 cases and 4244 controls in total. Conditional analysis of the known associated loci on chromosome X was also performed to further explore independent signals. RESULTS: Single-nucleotide polymorphism rs13440883 in GPR173 was found to be significantly associated with SLE (P(meta) = 7.53 x 10(- 9), OR(meta)= 1.16), whereas conditional analysis provided evidence of a potential independent signal in the L1CAM-IRAK1-MECP2 region in Asian populations (rs5987175 [LCA10]). CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel SLE susceptibility locus on the X chromosome. This finding emphasizes the importance of the X chromosome in disease pathogenesis and highlights the role of sex chromosomes in the female bias of SLE.
OBJECTIVES: X chromosome has been considered as a risk factor for SLE, which is a prototype of autoimmune diseases with a significant sex difference (female:male ratio is around 9:1). Our study aimed at exploring the association of genetic variants in X chromosome and investigating the influence of trisomy X in the development of SLE. METHODS: X chromosome-wide association studies were conducted using data from both Thai (835 patients with SLE and 2995 controls) and Chinese populations (1604 patients with SLE and 3324 controls). Association analyses were performed separately in females and males, followed by a meta-analysis of the sex-specific results. In addition, the dosage of X chromosome in females with SLE were also examined. RESULTS: Our analyses replicated the association of TMEM187-IRAK1-MECP2, TLR7, PRPS2 and GPR173 loci with SLE. We also identified two loci suggestively associated with SLE. In addition, making use of the difference in linkage disequilibrium between Thai and Chinese populations, a synonymous variant in TMEM187 was prioritised as a likely causal variant. This variant located in an active enhancer of immune-related cells, with the risk allele associated with decreased expression level of TMEM187. More importantly, we identified trisomy X (47,XXX) in 5 of 2231 (0.22%) females with SLE. The frequency is significantly higher than that found in the female controls (0.08%; two-sided exact binomial test P=0.002). CONCLUSION: Our study confirmed previous SLE associations in X chromosome, and identified two loci suggestively associated with SLE. More importantly, our study indicated a higher risk of SLE for females with trisomy X.
The novel peptide phoenixin was shown to be involved in several physiological processes ranging from reproduction to food intake. Interest in this protein has steadily increased over the last few years and its known implications have become much broader, playing a role in glucose homeostasis, anxiety, nociception, and pruritus. Phoenixin is expressed in a multitude of organs such as the small intestine, pancreas, and in the hypothalamus, as well as several other brain nuclei influencing numerous physiological functions. Its highly conserved amino-acid sequence amongst species leads to the assumption, that phoenixin might be involved in essential physiological functions. Its co-expression and opposing functionality to the extensively studied peptide nesfatin-1 has given rise to the idea of a possible counterbalancing role. Several recent publications focused on phoenixin's role in stress reactions, namely restraint stress and lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation response, in which also nesfatin-1 is known to be altered. This review provides an overview on the phoenixins and nesfatin-1 properties and putative effects, and especially highlights the recent developments on their role and interaction in the response to response.
Phoenixin-14 (PNX-14) regulates energy metabolism via the G protein-coupled receptor 173 (GPR173); elevated plasma levels have been described in patients with polycystic ovary syndrome. The aims were to investigate the ovarian expression of PNX-14/GPR173 and the in vitro effect of PNX-14 on granulosa cells (Gc) function. Transcript and protein levels of PNX-14/GRP173 were analysed by real-time PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry in the porcine ovarian follicles at days 2-3, 10-12 and 16-18 of the oestrous. For in vitro experiments, Gc were isolated from follicles at days 10-12 of the oestrous (4-6 mm) and PNX-14 at doses 1-1000 nM was added for 24-72 h to determine Gc proliferation. Cell cycle progression, E2 secretion, expression of proliferating cells nuclear antigen, cyclins, mitogen-activated kinase (MAP3/1; ERK1/2), protein kinase B (AKT) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) were studied. The involvement of these kinases in PNX-14 action on Gc proliferation was analysed using pharmacological inhibitors. Levels of GPR173 were increased in the ovarian follicles with oestrous progression, while only PNX-14 protein was the highest at days 10-12 of the oestrous. Immuno-signal of PNX-14 was detected in Gc and theca cells and oocyte, while GPR173 was mostly in theca. Interestingly, PNX-14 stimulated Gc proliferation, E2 secretion, cell cycle progression and cyclins expression and had a modulatory effect on MAP3/1, AKT and STAT3 activation. Our study suggests that PNX-14 could be an important factor for porcine reproduction by influencing ovarian follicle growth through direct action on Gc function.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) plays a key role in various brain functions, including both health and disease states. Despite the extensive research conducted on CCK, there remain several important questions regarding its specific role in the brain. As a result, the existing body of literature on the subject is complex and sometimes conflicting. The primary objective of this review article is to provide a comprehensive overview of recent advancements in understanding the central nervous system role of CCK, with a specific emphasis on elucidating CCK's mechanisms for neuroplasticity, exploring its interactions with other neurotransmitters, and discussing its significant involvement in neurological disorders. Studies demonstrate that CCK mediates both inhibitory long-term potentiation (iLTP) and excitatory long-term potentiation (eLTP) in the brain. Activation of the GPR173 receptor could facilitate iLTP, while the Cholecystokinin B receptor (CCKBR) facilitates eLTP. CCK receptors' expression on different neurons regulates activity, neurotransmitter release, and plasticity, emphasizing CCK's role in modulating brain function. Furthermore, CCK plays a pivotal role in modulating emotional states, Alzheimer's disease, addiction, schizophrenia, and epileptic conditions. Targeting CCK cell types and circuits holds promise as a therapeutic strategy for alleviating these brain disorders.
The regulation of food intake occurs at multiple levels, and two of the components of this process are orexigenic and anorexigenic peptides, which stimulate or inhibit appetite, respectively. The study of the function of these compounds in domestic cattle is essential for production efficiency, animal welfare, and health, as well as for economic benefits, environmental protection, and the contribution to a better understanding of physiological aspects that can be applied to other species. In this study, the real-time PCR method was utilized to determine the expression levels of GHRL, GHSR, SMIM20, GPR173, LEP, LEPR, and NUCB2 (which encode ghrelin, its receptor, phoenixin-14, its receptor, leptin, its receptor, and nesfatin-1, respectively) in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of Polish Holstein-Friesian breed cattle. In all analyzed GIT segments, mRNA for all the genes was present in both age groups, confirming their significance in these tissues. Gene expression levels varied distinctly across different GIT segments and between young and mature subjects. The differences between calves and adults were particularly pronounced in areas such as the forestomachs, ileum, and jejunum, indicating potential changes in peptides regulating food intake based on the developmental phase. In mature individuals, the forestomachs predominantly displayed an increase in GHRL expression, while the intestines had elevated levels of GHSR, GPR173, LEP, and NUCB2. In contrast, the forestomachs in calves showed upregulated expressions of LEP, LEPR, and NUCB2, highlighting the potential importance of peptides from these genes in bovine forestomach development.
