Glucose-dependent insulinotropic receptor; Receptor for the endogenous fatty-acid ethanolamide oleoylethanolamide (OEA) and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC). Functions as a glucose-dependent insulinotropic receptor. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylate cyclase. Seems to act through a G(s) mediated pathway.
The gut microbiota is now considered as one of the key elements contributing to the regulation of host health. Virtually all our body sites are colonised by microbes suggesting different types of crosstalk with our organs. Because of the development of molecular tools and techniques (ie, metagenomic, metabolomic, lipidomic, metatranscriptomic), the complex interactions occurring between the host and the different microorganisms are progressively being deciphered. Nowadays, gut microbiota deviations are linked with many diseases including obesity, type 2 diabetes, hepatic steatosis, intestinal bowel diseases (IBDs) and several types of cancer. Thus, suggesting that various pathways involved in immunity, energy, lipid and glucose metabolism are affected.In this review, specific attention is given to provide a critical evaluation of the current understanding in this field. Numerous molecular mechanisms explaining how gut bacteria might be causally linked with the protection or the onset of diseases are discussed. We examine well-established metabolites (ie, short-chain fatty acids, bile acids, trimethylamine N-oxide) and extend this to more recently identified molecular actors (ie, endocannabinoids, bioactive lipids, phenolic-derived compounds, advanced glycation end products and enterosynes) and their specific receptors such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) and gamma (PPARgamma), aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), and G protein-coupled receptors (ie, GPR41, GPR43, GPR119, Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5).Altogether, understanding the complexity and the molecular aspects linking gut microbes to health will help to set the basis for novel therapies that are already being developed.
BACKGROUND: Cannabinoid has long been used for medicinal purposes. Cannabinoid signaling has been considered the therapeutic target for treating pain, addiction, obesity, inflammation, and other diseases. Recent studies have suggested that in addition to CB1 and CB2, there are non-CB1 and non-CB2 cannabinoid-related orphan GPCRs including GPR18, GPR55, and GPR119. In addition, CB1 and CB2 display allosteric binding and biased signaling, revealing correlations between biased signaling and functional outcomes. Interestingly, new investigations have indicated that CB1 is functionally present within the mitochondria of striated and heart muscles directly regulating intramitochondrial signaling and respiration. CONCLUSION: In this review, we summarize the recent progress in cannabinoid-related orphan GPCRs, CB1/CB2 structure, Gi/Gs coupling, allosteric ligands and biased signaling, and mitochondria-localized CB1, and discuss the future promise of this research.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a pervasive neurodegenerative disorder, and new approaches for its prevention and therapy are critically needed. Here, we elucidate a gut-microbiome-brain axis that offers actionable perspectives for achieving this objective. Using the 5xFAD mouse model, we identify increased Clostridium abundance and decreased Bacteroides abundance as key features associated with beta-amyloid (Abeta) burden. Treatment with Bacteroides ovatus, or its associated metabolite lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), significantly reduces Abeta load and ameliorates cognitive impairment. Mechanistically, LPC acts through the orphan receptor GPR119, inhibiting ACSL4 expression, thereby suppressing ferroptosis and ameliorating AD pathologies. Analysis of fecal and serum samples from individuals with AD also reveals diminished levels of Bacteroides and LPC. This study thus identifies a B.ovatus-triggered pathway regulating AD pathologies and indicates that the use of single gut microbiota, metabolite, or small molecule compound may complement current prevention and treatment approaches for AD.
The increasing incidence of Type II diabetes mellitus worldwide continues to attract the attention and resources of the pharmaceutical industry in the pursuit of more effective therapies for blood glucose control. New approaches that compare favorably with classical medicaments while avoiding hypoglycemic episodes or waning effectiveness are paramount. Recent advances toward this end have been realized based on the biology of the glucagon like peptide-1 receptor (GLP1R). This beta-cell-expressed GPCR has the ability to promote insulin release in a glucose-dependent fashion, and has been shown to elicit improved glycemic control and preservation of beta-cell mass. Direct activation of GLP1R utilizing peptide mimetics has been achieved; however, attempts to access the biology of this receptor via small-molecule approaches have thus far been elusive. In this context, GPR119 has emerged as a tractable new alternative to GLP1R. GPR119 is another GPCR expressed on the beta-cell, which, like GLP1R, signals in a glucose-dependent manner. Moreover, GPR119-mediated increases in GLP-1 and other incretins upon activation in the intestine further increase the insulinotropic activity of the beta-cell. The early success in identifying small-molecule agonists of the GPR119 has prompted a rapid increase in the number of patent applications filed in the last few years. In this review we provide a comprehensive summary of all patent activity in this field that has appeared within the 2009-2011 timeframe.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are expressed in a variety of cell types and tissues, and activation of GPCRs is involved in enormous metabolic pathways, including nutrient synthesis, transportation, storage or insulin sensitivity, etc. This review intends to summarize the regulation of metabolic homeostasis and mechanisms by a series of GPCRs, such as GPR91, GPR55, GPR119, GPR109a, GPR142, GPR40, GPR41, GPR43 and GPR120. With deep understanding of GPCR's structure and signaling pathways, it is attempting to uncover the role of GPCRs in major metabolic diseases, including metabolic syndrome, diabetes, dyslipidemia and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, for which the global prevalence has risen during last two decades. An extensive list of agonists and antagonists with their chemical structures in a nature of small molecular compounds for above-mentioned GPCRs is provided as pharmacologic candidates, and their preliminary data of preclinical studies are discussed. Moreover, their beneficial effects in correcting abnormalities of metabolic syndrome, diabetes and dyslipidemia are summarized when clinical trials have been undertaken. Thus, accumulating data suggest that these agonists or antagonists might become as new pharmacotherapeutic candidates for the treatment of metabolic diseases.
The endocannabinoids anandamide (AEA) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) are bioactive lipids derived from the n-6 family of polyunsaturated fatty acids that are essential fatty acids. Symptoms of essential fatty acid deficiency in rats - growth retardation, scaly skin, and increased transepidermal water loss - can mainly be attributed to lack of linoleic acid as a structural element of the epidermis. Arachidonic acid, however, also serve essential functions, particularly in cellular signalling via its precursor role for numerous oxygenated derivatives such as prostaglandins, leukotrienes, hepoxilins and other eicosanoids. Furthermore, arachidonic acid is also a structural part of endocannabinoids that have signalling functions in relation to modulation of neurotransmitter release, which might involve physiological and pathophysiological phenomena such as regulation of appetite, energy metabolism, pain perception, memory and learning. Furthermore, along with AEA formation other acylethanolamides are always formed - e.g., oleoylethanolamide (OEA), that can inhibit food intake, and palmitoylethanolamide, that is anti-inflammatory - possibly through activation of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR alpha) and/or GPR119. As all these unsaturated fatty acids are ingested daily in smaller or larger amounts, one can ask whether different dietary fats can affect the levels of these fatty acids in the tissues and thereby the quantitative formation of these bioactive signalling molecules. Generally, in vivo arachidonic-acid-derived eicosanoid production can be increased and decreased by prolonged feeding with pharmacological levels of arachidonic acid and long-chain (n-3) fatty acids (fish oil), respectively. Changes in levels of these two fatty acids within the traditional human diet hardly affects the eicosanoid production, however. Moreover, preliminary data suggest that dietary intake of arachidonic acid and fish oil also doesn't easily affect endocannabinoid formation; however, dietary fat in terms of saturated, polyunsaturated and monounsaturated seems to affect tissue levels of AEA, 2-AG and OEA.
GPR119 belongs to the G protein-coupled receptor family and exhibits dual modes of action upon ligand-dependent activation: pancreatic secretion of insulin in a glucose-dependent manner and intestinal secretion of incretins. Hence, GPR119 has emerged as a promising target for treating type 2 diabetes mellitus without causing hypoglycaemia. However, despite continuous efforts by many major pharmaceutical companies, no synthetic GPR119 ligand has been approved as a new class of anti-diabetic agents thus far, nor has any passed beyond phase II clinical studies. Herein, we summarize recent advances in research concerning the physiological/pharmacological effects of GPR119 and its synthetic ligands on the regulation of energy metabolism, and we speculate on future applications of GPR119 ligands for the treatment of metabolic diseases, focusing on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
The interplay between western diet and gut microbiota drives the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and its progression to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. However, the specific microbial and metabolic mediators contributing to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis remain to be identified. Here, a choline-low high-fat and high-sugar diet, representing a typical western diet, named CL-HFS, successfully induces male mouse non-alcoholic steatohepatitis with some features of the human disease, such as hepatic inflammation, steatosis, and fibrosis. Metataxonomic and metabolomic studies identify Blautia producta and 2-oleoylglycerol as clinically relevant bacterial and metabolic mediators contributing to CL-HFS-induced non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. In vivo studies validate that both Blautia producta and 2-oleoylglycerol promote liver inflammation and hepatic fibrosis in normal diet- or CL-HFS-fed mice. Cellular and molecular studies reveal that the GPR119/TAK1/NF-kappaB/TGF-beta1 signaling pathway mediates 2-oleoylglycerol-induced macrophage priming and subsequent hepatic stellate cell activation. These findings advance our understanding of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis pathogenesis and provide targets for developing microbiome/metabolite-based therapeutic strategies against non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
This review focuses on recent findings of the physiological and pharmacological role of non-endocannabinoid N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) and 2-monoacylglycerols (2-MAGs) in the intestine and their involvement in the gut-brain signalling. Dietary fat suppresses food intake, and much research concerns the known gut peptides, for example, glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and cholecystokinin (CCK). NAEs and 2-MAGs represent another class of local gut signals most probably involved in the regulation of food intake. We discuss the putative biosynthetic pathways and targets of NAEs in the intestine as well as their anorectic role and changes in intestinal levels depending on the dietary status. NAEs can activate the transcription factor PPARalpha, but studies to evaluate the role of endogenous NAEs are generally lacking. Finally, we review the role of diet-derived 2-MAGs in the secretion of anorectic gut peptides via activation of GPR119. Both PPARalpha and GPR119 have potential as pharmacological targets for the treatment of obesity and the former for treatment of intestinal inflammation. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on 8(th) European Workshop on Cannabinoid Research. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v176.10/issuetoc.
Oleoylethanolamide and palmitoylethanolamide are members of the fatty acid ethanolamide family, also known as acylethanolamides. Their physiological effects, including glucose homeostasis, anti-inflammation, anti-anaphylactic, analgesia, and hypophagia, have been reported. They have affinity for different receptor proteins, including nuclear receptors such as PPARalpha, channels such as TRPV1, and membrane receptors such as GPR119 and GPR55. In the present review, the pathophysiological functions of fatty acid ethanolamides have been discussed from the perspective of receptor pharmacology and drug discovery.
Cannabinoids have numerous physiological effects. In the years since the molecular identification of the G protein-coupled receptors CB1 and CB2, the ion channel TRPV1, and their corresponding endogenous ligand systems, many cannabinoid-evoked actions have been shown conclusively to be mediated by one of these specific receptor targets. However, there remain several examples where these classical cannabinoid receptors do not explain observed pharmacology. Studies using mice genetically deleted for the known receptors have confirmed the existence of additional targets, which have come to be known collectively as non-CB1/CB2 receptors. Despite intense research efforts, the molecular identity of these non-CB1/CB2 receptors remains for the most part unclear. Two orphan G protein-coupled receptors have recently been implicated as novel cannabinoid receptors; these are GPR119, which has been proposed as a receptor for oleoylethanolamide, and GPR55 which has been proposed as a receptor activated by multiple different cannabinoid ligands. In this review I will present an introduction to non-CB1/CB2 pharmacology, summarize information on GPR55 and GPR119 currently available, and consider their phylogenetic origin and what aspects of non-CB1/CB2 pharmacology, if any, they help explain.
Introduction: Type 2 diabetes is a rapid-growing complex chronic metabolic disease characterized by hyperglycemia due to lessened insulin secretion, insulin resistance and hepatic glucose overproduction. GPR119 is a class A of G protein-coupled receptor, expressed on certain enteroendocrine L and K cells in the small intestine and by beta-cells within the islets of Langerhans of the pancreas. Activation of GPR119 stimulates the secretion of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) in the intestinal tract and glucose-dependent release of insulin in pancreatic beta-cells.Area covered: This review summarized the reported patents on GPR119 agonists from 2014 to present. The authors described the structural features of these novel synthetic molecules and compared their biological activities (including in vitro and in vivo) as potent GPR119 agonists for the treatment of diabetes.Expert opinion: GPR119 agonists remain the advantage of stimulating both insulin and incretin release in a glucose-dependent manner over other hypoglycemic agents, although some GPR119 agonist clinical candidates have been discontinued in Phase capital I, Ukrainian or Phase II. GPR119 agonists will succeed to be developed as anti-diabetic drugs after accumulated scaffolds of agonists are discovered and the crystallographic structure of GPR119 is elucidated. The synergic effect of GPR119 agonist and DPP-4 inhibitor will also elicit a benefit for the new therapeutic of diabetes.
Agonists selectively targeting cannabinoid receptor-like G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) GPR119 hold promise for treating metabolic disorders while avoiding unwanted side effects. Here we present the cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of the human GPR119-G(s) signaling complexes bound to AR231453 and MBX-2982, two representative agonists reported for GPR119. The structures reveal a one-amino acid shift of the conserved proline residue of TM5 that forms an outward bulge, opening up a hydrophobic cavity between TM4 and TM5 at the middle of the membrane for its endogenous ligands-monounsaturated lipid metabolites. In addition, we observed a salt bridge between ICL1 of GPR119 and Gbeta(s). Disruption of the salt bridge eliminates the cAMP production of GPR119, indicating an important role of Gbeta(s) in GPR119-mediated signaling. Our structures, together with mutagenesis studies, illustrate the conserved binding mode of the chemically different agonists, and provide insights into the conformational changes in receptor activation and G protein coupling.
INTRODUCTION: Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are reaching an explosive number. Pancreatic beta cell dysfunction is the characteristic feature of the progression of T2DM and there is an increasing need for agents to improve its function. GPR119 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) expressed both in pancreatic beta cells and enteroendocrine cells and has garnered significant interest as a promising target for the next generation of T2DM drug. In vitro studies indicate that GPR119 agonists increase intracellular cAMP levels leading to enhanced glucose-induced insulin release and enhanced incretin hormone glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) secretion. In T2DM rodent models, GPR119 agonists are shown to decrease blood glucose level and preserve pancreatic beta cell function. AREAS COVERED: This review summarizes the function of GPR119 and the progresses made in the discovery of GPR119 agonists reported since 2002 in literatures. The importance of GPR119 agonists in glycemic control is discussed. EXPERT OPINION: GPR119 agonists with glucose-dependent insulin release and increased insulin promoter activity is expected to preserve pancreatic beta cell function, thereby providing great clinical benefits for T2DM patients. Both the preclinical and clinical data suggest that GPR119 agonist will be a promising anti-diabetic drug.
INTRODUCTION: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is metabolic disorder associated with a decrease in insulin activity and/or secretion from the beta-cells of the pancreas, leading to elevated circulating glucose. Current management practices for T2D are complex with varying long-term effectiveness. Agonism of the G protein-coupled receptor GPR119 has received a lot of recent interest as a potential T2D therapeutic. AREAS COVERED: This article reviews studies focused on GPR119 agonism in animal models of T2D and in patients with T2D. EXPERT OPINION: GPR119 agonists in vitro and in vivo can potentially regulate incretin hormone release from the gut, then pancreatic insulin release which regulates blood glucose concentrations. However, the success in controlling glucose homeostasis in rodent models of T2D and obesity, failed to translate to early-stage clinical trials in patients with T2D. However, in more recent studies, acute and chronic dosing with the GPR119 agonist DS-8500a had increased efficacy, although this compound was discontinued for further development. New trials on GPR119 agonists are needed, however it may be that the future of GPR119 agonists lie in the development of combination therapy with other T2D therapeutics.
The GPR119 receptor is expressed predominantly in pancreatic beta cells and in enteroendocrine cells. It is a major target for the development of anti-diabetic drugs that through GPR119 activation may stimulate both insulin and GLP-1 release. GPR119 can be activated by oleoylethanolamide and several other endogenous lipids containing oleic acid: these include N-oleoyl-dopamine, 1-oleoyl-lysophosphatidylcholine, generated in the tissue, and 2-oleoyl glycerol generated in the gut lumen. Thus, the well-known stimulation of GLP-1 release by dietary fat is probably not only mediated by free fatty acids acting through, for example, GPR40, but is also probably mediated in large part through the luminal formation of 2-monoacylglycerol acting on the 'fat sensor' GPR119. In the pancreas GPR119 may also be stimulated by 2-monoacylglycerol generated from local turnover of pancreatic triacylglycerol. Knowledge about the endogenous physiological ligands and their mode of interaction with GPR119 will be crucial for the development of efficient second-generation modulators of this important drug target.
BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a disease of systemic metabolic disorders caused by the decrease of secretion or sensitivity of insulin. In recent years, the study of insulin-related drug targets and the development of new drugs have become the popular topic of current medical research, and studies have shown that multiple signaling pathways are associated with diabetes treatment. At present, some new drugs based on the new target design have been listed on the market and have achieved good hypoglycemic effect. However, most of the drugs are still in the clinical or pre-clinical stage. The efficacy and safety of the drugs need further clinical validation. OBJECTIVE: This article will introduce the advancements of targets and drugs to promote insulin secretion.
Lipid metabolism dysregulation underlies chronic pathologies such as obesity, diabetes and cancer. Besides their role in structure and energy storage, lipids are also important signalling molecules regulating multiple biological functions. Thus, understanding the precise lipid metabolism enzymatic steps that are altered in some pathological conditions is helpful for designing better treatment strategies. Several monoacylglycerol (MAG) species are only recently being recognized as signalling lipid molecules in different tissues. Recent studies indicated the importance of the ubiquitously expressed serine hydrolase alpha/beta-hydrolase domain 6 (ABHD6), which is a MAG hydrolase, in regulating signalling competent MAG in both central and peripheral tissues. The central and peripheral function of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol, which is a 2-MAG, and its breakdown by both ABHD6 and classical MAG lipase has been well documented. ABHD6 and its substrate MAG appear to be involved in the regulation of various physiological and pathological processes including insulin secretion, adipose browning, food intake, neurotransmission, autoimmune disorders, neurological and metabolic diseases as well as cancer. Diverse cellular targets such as mammalian unc13-1 (Munc13-1), PPARs, GPR119 and CB1/2 receptors, for MAG-mediated signalling processes have been proposed in different cell types. The purpose of this review is to provide a comprehensive summary of the current state of knowledge regarding ABHD6/MAG signalling and its possible therapeutic implications.
Of the druggable group of G protein-coupled receptors in the human genome, a number remain which have yet to be paired with an endogenous ligand-orphan GPCRs. Among these 100 or so entities, 3 have been linked to the cannabinoid system. GPR18, GPR55, and GPR119 exhibit limited sequence homology with the established CB(1) and CB(2) cannabinoid receptors. However, the pharmacology of these orphan receptors displays overlap with CB(1) and CB(2) receptors, particularly for GPR18 and GPR55. The linking of GPR119 to the cannabinoid receptors is less convincing and emanates from structural similarities of endogenous ligands active at these GPCRs, but which do not cross-react. This review describes the evidence for describing these orphan GPCRs as cannabinoid receptor-like receptors.
Bone is a complex tissue with unique properties such as high strength and regeneration capabilities while carrying out multiple functions. Bone regeneration occurs both in physiological situations (bone turnover) and in pathological situations (e.g. fractures), being performed by osteoblasts and osteoclasts. If this process is inadequate, fracture nonunion or aseptic loosening of implants occurs and requires a complex treatment. Exogenous factors are currently used to increase bone regeneration process when needed, such as bisphosphonates and vitamin D, but limitations do exist. Cannabinoid system has been shown to have positive effects on bone metabolism. Cannabinoids at bone level mainly act on two receptors called CB-1 and CB-2, but GPR55, GPR119, TPRV1, TPRV4 receptors may also be involved. The CB-2 receptors are found in bone cells at higher levels compared to other receptors. Endocannabinods represented by anandamide and 2-arachidonoylglycerol, can stimulate osteoblast formation, bone formation and osteoclast activity. CB-2 agonists including HU-308, HU-433, JWH133, and JWH015 can stimulate osteoblast proliferation and activity, while CB-2 antagonists such as AM630 and SR144528 can inhibit osteoclast differentiation and function. CB-1 antagonist AM251 has been shown to inhibit osteoclast differentiation and activity, while GPR55 antagonist cannabidiol increases osteoblast activity and decreases osteoclast function. An optimal correlation of dose, duration, moment of action, and affinity can lead to an increased bone regeneration capacity, with important benefits in many pathological situations which involve bone tissue. As adverse reactions of cannabinoids have not been described in patients under controlled medication, cannabinoids can represent future treatment for bone regeneration.
