G-protein coupled receptor 135; Orphan receptor. Has spontaneous activity for beta-arrestin recruitment. Shows a reciprocal regulatory interaction with the melatonin receptor MTNR1B most likely through receptor heteromerization.
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the main mediators of signal transduction in the central nervous system. Therefore, it is not surprising that many GPCRs have long been investigated for their role in the development of anxiety and mood disorders, as well as in the mechanism of action of antidepressant therapies. Importantly, the endogenous ligands for a large group of GPCRs have not yet been identified and are therefore known as orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Nonetheless, growing evidence from animal studies, together with genome wide association studies (GWAS) and post-mortem transcriptomic analysis in patients, pointed at many oGPCRs as potential pharmacological targets. Among these discoveries, we summarize in this review how emotional behaviors are modulated by the following oGPCRs: ADGRB2 (BAI2), ADGRG1 (GPR56), GPR3, GPR26, GPR37, GPR50, GPR52, GPR61, GPR62, GPR88, GPR135, GPR158, and GPRC5B.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
BACKGROUND: Although more recent evidence has indicated COVID-19 is prone to azoospermia, the common molecular mechanism of its occurrence remains to be elucidated. The aim of the present study is to further investigate the mechanism of this complication. METHODS: To discover the common differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and pathways of azoospermia and COVID-19, integrated weighted co-expression network (WGCNA), multiple machine learning analyses, and single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) were performed. RESULTS: Therefore, we screened two key network modules in the obstructive azoospermia (OA) and non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) samples. The differentially expressed genes were mainly related to the immune system and infectious virus diseases. We then used multiple machine learning methods to detect biomarkers that differentiated OA from NOA. Enrichment analysis showed that azoospermia patients and COVID-19 patients shared a common IL-17 signaling pathway. In addition, GLO1, GPR135, DYNLL2, and EPB41L3 were identified as significant hub genes in these two diseases. Screening of two different molecular subtypes revealed that azoospermia-related genes were associated with clinicopathological characteristics of age, hospital-free-days, ventilator-free-days, charlson score, and d-dimer of patients with COVID-19 (P < 0.05). Finally, we used the Xsum method to predict potential drugs and single-cell sequencing data to further characterize whether azoospermia-related genes could validate the biological patterns of impaired spermatogenesis in cryptozoospermia patients. CONCLUSION: Our study performs a comprehensive and integrated bioinformatics analysis of azoospermia and COVID-19. These hub genes and common pathways may provide new insights for further mechanism research.
Orphan receptors have unknown endogenous ligands, are expressed in different tissues, and participate in various diseases such as diabetes, hypertension and cancer. We studied the expression profiles of GPR21, GPR39, GPR135 and GPR153 orphan receptors in several tumour tissues. Cervical, breast, skin, prostate, and astrocytoma tissues were analysed for orphan receptor gene expression using Real time PCR analysis. GPR39 is over-expressed in cervical and prostate cancer tissues, and GPR21 and GPR135 receptors are significantly decreased in cervical, breast, skin, prostate, and astrocytoma tissues, when compared with healthy human fibroblasts. In conclusion, GPR21 and GPR135 receptor gene expression is reduced in cancerous tissues. GPR39 may have a role in the development and evolution of cervical and prostate cancer. These data suggest these receptors may be alternative molecules for new diagnostic approaches, and the design of novel therapeutics against oncological pathologies.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are important mediators of signal transduction and targets for pharmacological therapeutics. Novel receptor-ligand systems have been discovered through the identification and analysis of orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Here we describe the discovery of seven novel human genes encoding oGPCRs. Each novel oGPCR gene was discovered using customized searches of the GenBank genomic databases with previously known GPCR-encoding sequences. The expressed genes can now be used in assays to determine endogenous and pharmacological ligands. GPR133, GPR134, GPR135, GPR136, and GPR137 share identities with a prostate-specific odorant-like GPCR-encoding gene (PSGR). GPR138 and GPR139 share identities with an odorant-like gene derived from human erythroid cells. Transcripts encoding GPR133, GPR134, GPR135, GPR136, and GPR137 were detected in various CNS tissues. The expression of odorant-like genes in non-olfactory tissues requires further clarification, which may be achieved through the search for endogenous cognate ligands for these and other oGPCRs.
Understanding the function of orphan G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), whose cognate ligand is unknown, is of major importance as GPCRs are privileged drug targets for many diseases. Recent phylogenetic studies classified three orphan receptors, GPR61, GPR62 and GPR135 among the melatonin receptor subfamily, but their capacity to bind melatonin and their biochemical functions are not well characterized yet. We show here that GPR61, GPR62 and GPR135 do not bind [(3)H]-melatonin nor 2-[(125)I]iodomelatonin and do not respond to melatonin in several signaling assays. In contrast, the three receptors show extensive spontaneous ligand-independent activities on the cAMP, inositol phosphate and ss-arrestin pathways with distinct pathway-specific profiles. Spontaneous ss-arrestin recruitment internalizes all three GPRs in the endosomal compartment. Co-expression of the melatonin binding MT(2) receptor with GPR61, GPR62 or GPR135 has several consequences such as (i) the formation of receptor heteromers, (ii) the inhibition of melatonin-induced ss-arrestin2 recruitment to MT(2) and (iii) the decrease of elevated cAMP levels upon melatonin stimulation in cells expressing spontaneously active GPR61 and GPR62. Collectively, these data show that GPR61, GPR62 and GPR135 are unable to bind melatonin, but show a reciprocal regulatory interaction with MT(2) receptors.
The melatonin receptor subfamily is composed of three members, MT(1) and MT(2), which are binding to melatonin, and GPR50, which shows high sequence homology to MT(1) and MT(2) but does not bind to melatonin or any other known ligand. An interesting feature of these receptors is their capacity to form homo- and heteromers between each other and also with other GPCRs. The following heteromers have been described: MT(1)/MT(2), MT(1)/GPR50, and heteromers composed of MT(2) and the serotonin 5-HT(2c) receptor or the orphan GPR61, GPR62, and GPR135 receptors. These heteromers represent novel pharmacological entities as they exhibit functional properties that are different from those of the corresponding homomers. Formation of several of these heteromers has been confirmed in tissues. MT(2)/5-HT(2c) heteromers are targeted by the clinically relevant antidepressant agomelatine, and MT(1)/MT(2) heteromers regulate nocturnal retinal light sensitivity. Here, we resume our current knowledge on melatonin receptor heteromerization and discuss how it contributes to the diversification of the function of melatonin receptors.
Previous studies have revealed a robust association between exposure to asbestos and human lung cancer. Accumulating evidence has highlighted the role of epigenome deregulation in the mechanism of carcinogen-induced malignancies. We examined the impact of asbestos on DNA methylation. Our genome-wide studies (using Illumina HumanMethylation450K BeadChip) of lung cancer tissue and paired normal lung from 28 asbestos-exposed or non-exposed patients, mostly smokers, revealed distinctive DNA methylation changes. We identified a number of differentially methylated regions (DMR) and differentially variable, differentially methylated CpGs (DVMC), with individual CpGs further validated by pyrosequencing in an independent series of 91 non-small cell lung cancer and paired normal lung. We discovered and validated BEND4, ZSCAN31 and GPR135 as significantly hypermethylated in lung cancer. DMRs in genes such as RARB (FDR 1.1 x 10(-19) , mean change in beta [Delta] -0.09), GPR135 (FDR 1.87 x 10(-8) , mean Delta -0.09) and TPO (FDR 8.58 x 10(-5) , mean Delta -0.11), and DVMCs in NPTN, NRG2, GLT25D2 and TRPC3 (all with p <0.05, t-test) were significantly associated with asbestos exposure status in exposed versus non-exposed lung tumors. Hypomethylation was characteristic to DVMCs in lung cancer tissue from asbestos-exposed subjects. When DVMCs related to asbestos or smoking were analyzed, 96% of the elements were unique to either of the exposures, consistent with the concept that the methylation changes in tumors may be specific for risk factors. In conclusion, we identified novel DNA methylation changes associated with lung tumors and asbestos exposure, suggesting that changes may be present in causal pathway from asbestos exposure to lung cancer.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) transduce external chemical cues into intracellular signals and are involved in a plethora of physiological processes, but knowledge regarding the function of these receptors in spermatozoa is limited. In the present study, we performed RNA-Seq and analyzed the expression of the all GPCRs except olfactory receptors in human spermatozoa. We revealed the expression of up to 223 different GPCR transcripts in human spermatozoa (FPKM > 0.1) and identified GPR18, a newly described cannabinoid receptor, together with GPR137 and GPR135, as one of the three most highly expressed GPCRs. To date, the expression of GPR18 was completely unknown in human spermatozoa. We confirmed GPR18 expression using RT-PCR and immuncytochemistry experiments and localized the GPR18 protein in the midpiece of human spermatozoa. Stimulation of human spermatozoa with the GPR18 ligand N-arachidonoylglycine induced the phosphorylation of 12 protein kinases, some of them are for example known to be involved in the acrosome reaction. In line with this, N-arachidonoylglycine affected the cytoskeleton by changing levels of F-actin and inducing the acrosome reaction in human spermatozoa in a concentration-dependent manner. Our results indicate that GPR18 might be involved in physiological processes of human spermatozoa, suggesting GPR18 to be a potential player in sperm physiology.
We report seven new members of the superfamily of human G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) found by searches in the human genome databases, termed GPR100, GPR119, GPR120, GPR135, GPR136, GPR141, and GPR142. We also report 16 orthologues of these receptors in mouse, rat, fugu (pufferfish) and zebrafish. Phylogenetic analysis shows that these are additional members of the family of rhodopsin-type GPCRs. GPR100 shows similarity with the orphan receptor SALPR. Remarkably, the other receptors do not have any close relative among other known human rhodopsin-like GPCRs. Most of these orphan receptors are highly conserved through several vertebrate species and are present in single copies. Analysis of expressed sequence tag (EST) sequences indicated individual expression patterns, such as for GPR135, which was found in a wide variety of tissues including eye, brain, cervix, stomach and testis. Several ESTs for GPR141 were found in marrow and cancer cells, while the other receptors seem to have more restricted expression patterns.
Cardiovascular complications are the main cause of mortality in patients with diabetes, these have been associated with changes in function and expression of receptors coupled to G proteins (GPCR), which include orphan receptors which some of them tend to modify in diabetes, although others are not known, such as GPR135. For this reason, the objective of this work was to study the expression of the orphan receptor GPR135 in brain, heart, kidney, aorta, lung, spleen and liver of diabetic rats, as well as its function by the administration of siRNA (small interfering RNA) and curves to isoproterenol. Our results showed that GPR135 is expressed in all tissues analyzed and its expression is modified due to diabetes, we also observed that the responses to isoproterenol increase in diabetic rats administered with siRNA. Therefore, we conclude that the orphan receptor GPR135 is expressed in different tissues and its expression tends to be modified due to diabetes, besides that it is functional and that it seems to be coupled to Gi/o protein which has negative chronotropic and inotropic effects, therefore, we do not rule out that it participates in the cardiovascular complications associated with diabetes.
In a screening effort based on algorithmic predictions for novel G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) peptide activators, we were able to identify and examine two novel peptides (P59 and P74) which are short, linear, and derived from a natural, previously unidentified precursor protein containing a collagen-like repeat. Both peptides seemed to show an apparent cAMP-related effect on CHO-K1 cells transiently transfected with either LGR7 or LGR8, usually after treatment with cAMP-generating forskolin, compared to the same cells treated with forskolin plus relaxin. This activation was not found for the relaxin-3 receptor (GPR135). In a set of follow-up experiments, both peptides were found to stimulate cAMP production, mostly upon initial stimulation of cAMP production by 5 micro M forskolin in cells transfected with either LGR7 or LGR8. In a dye-free cell impedance GPCR activation assay, we were able to show that these peptides were also able to activate a cellular response mediated by these receptors. Although untransfected CHO-K1 cells showed some cellular activation by both relaxin and at least one of our newly discovered peptides, both LGR7- and LGR8-transfected cells showed a stronger response, indicating stimulation of a cellular pathway through activation of these receptors. In conclusion, we were able to show that these newly discovered peptides, which have no similarity to any member of the relaxin-insulin-like peptide family, are potential ligands for the relaxin-related family of receptors and as such might serve as novel candidates for relaxin-related therapeutic indications. Both peptides are linear and were found to be active after being chemically synthesized.
