Probable G-protein coupled receptor 139; Orphan receptor. Seems to act through a G(q/11)-mediated pathway.
Human brain structure changes throughout the lifespan. Altered brain growth or rates of decline are implicated in a vast range of psychiatric, developmental and neurodegenerative diseases. In this study, we identified common genetic variants that affect rates of brain growth or atrophy in what is, to our knowledge, the first genome-wide association meta-analysis of changes in brain morphology across the lifespan. Longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging data from 15,640 individuals were used to compute rates of change for 15 brain structures. The most robustly identified genes GPR139, DACH1 and APOE are associated with metabolic processes. We demonstrate global genetic overlap with depression, schizophrenia, cognitive functioning, insomnia, height, body mass index and smoking. Gene set findings implicate both early brain development and neurodegenerative processes in the rates of brain changes. Identifying variants involved in structural brain changes may help to determine biological pathways underlying optimal and dysfunctional brain development and aging.
Opioids target the mu-opioid receptor (MOR) to produce unrivaled pain management, but their addictive properties can lead to severe abuse. We developed a whole-animal behavioral platform for unbiased discovery of genes influencing opioid responsiveness. Using forward genetics in Caenorhabditis elegans, we identified a conserved orphan receptor, GPR139, with anti-opioid activity. GPR139 is coexpressed with MOR in opioid-sensitive brain circuits, binds to MOR, and inhibits signaling to heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins). Deletion of GPR139 in mice enhanced opioid-induced inhibition of neuronal firing to modulate morphine-induced analgesia, reward, and withdrawal. Thus, GPR139 could be a useful target for increasing opioid safety. These results also demonstrate the potential of C. elegans as a scalable platform for genetic discovery of G protein-coupled receptor signaling principles.
Schizophrenia remains a sizable socio-economic burden that continues to be treated with therapeutics based on 70-year old science. All currently approved therapeutics primarily target the dopamine D(2) receptor to achieve their efficacy. Whilst dopaminergic dysregulation is a key feature in this disorder, the targeting of dopaminergic machinery has yielded limited efficacy and an appreciable side effect burden. Over the recent decades, numerous drugs that engage non-dopaminergic G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have yielded a promise of efficacy without the deleterious side effect profile, yet none have successfully completed clinical studies and progressed to the market. More recently, there has been increased attention around non-dopaminergic GPCR-targeting drugs, which demonstrated efficacy in some schizophrenia symptom domains. This provides renewed hope that effective schizophrenia treatment may lie outside of the dopaminergic space. Despite the potential for muscarinic receptor- (and other well-characterised GPCR families) targeting drugs to treat schizophrenia, they are often plagued with complications such as lack of receptor subtype selectivity and peripheral on-target side effects. Orphan GPCR studies have opened a new avenue of exploration with many demonstrating schizophrenia-relevant mechanisms and a favourable expression profile, thus offering potential for novel drug development. This review discusses centrally expressed orphan GPCRs: GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR52, GPR85, GPR88 and GPR139 and their relationship to schizophrenia. We review their expression, signalling mechanisms and cellular function, in conjunction with small molecule development and structural insights. We seek to provide a snapshot of the growing evidence and development potential of new classes of schizophrenia therapeutics. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed issue Therapeutic Targeting of G Protein-Coupled Receptors: hot topics from the Australasian Society of Clinical and Experimental Pharmacologists and Toxicologists 2021 Virtual Annual Scientific Meeting. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v181.14/issuetoc.
There are various types of receptors in the central nervous system (CNS). G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have the highest expression with a wide range of physiological functions. A newer sub group of these receptors namely orphan GPCRs have been discovered. GPR3, GPR6, GPR17, GPR26, GPR37, GPR39, GPR40, GPR50, GPR52, GPR54, GPR55, GPR85, GPR88, GPR103, and GPR139 are the selected orphan GPCRs for this article. Their roles in the central nervous system have not been understood well so far. However, recent studies show that they may have very important functions in the CNS. Hence, in the present study, we reviewed most recent findings regarding the physiological roles of the selected orphan GPCRs in the CNS. After a brief presentation of each receptor, considering the results from genetic and pharmacological manipulation of the receptors, their roles in the pathophysiology of different diseases and disorders including anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and substance abuse will be discussed. At present, our knowledge regarding the role of GPCRs in the brain is very limited. However, previous limited studies show that orphan GPCRs have an important place in psychopharmacology and these receptors are potential new targets for the treatment of major CNS diseases.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) constitute the largest family of receptors and membrane proteins in the human genome with ~800 members of which half are olfactory. GPCRs are activated by a very broad range of endogenous signalling molecules and are involved in a plethora of physiological functions. All GPCRs contain a transmembrane domain, consisting of a bundle of seven alpha-helices spanning the cell membrane, and forming the majority of the known ortho- or allosteric ligand binding sites. Due to their many physiological functions and the accessible and druggable transmembrane pocket, GPCRs constitute the largest family of drug targets mediating the actions of 34% of currently marketed drugs. GPCRs activate one or more of the four G protein families (G(q/11) , G(i/o) , G(s) and G(12/13) ) and/or ss-arrestin. About a third of the non-olfactory GPCRs are referred to as orphan receptors which means that their endogenous agonist(s) have not yet been found or firmly established. In this MiniReview, we focus on the orphan GPR139 receptor, for which the aromatic amino acids L-Trp and L-Phe as well as ACTH/alpha-MSH-related peptides have been proposed as endogenous agonists. GPR139 has been reported to activate several G protein pathways of which G(q/11) is the primary one. The receptor shows the highest expression in the striatum, thalamus, hypothalamus, pituitary and habenula of the human, rat and mouse CNS. We review the surrogate agonists and antagonists that have been published as well as the agonist pharmacophore and binding site. Finally, the putative physiological functions and therapeutic potential are outlined.
Pheochromocytomas (PC) and paragangliomas (PG) are rare neuroendocrine tumors associated with autonomic nerves. Here we use single-nuclei RNA-seq and bulk-tissue gene-expression data to characterize the cellular composition of PCPG and normal adrenal tissues, refine tumor gene-expression subtypes and make clinical and genotypic associations. We confirm seven PCPG gene-expression subtypes with significant genotype and clinical associations. Tumors with mutations in VHL, SDH-encoding genes (SDHx) or MAML3-fusions are characterized by hypoxia-inducible factor signaling and neoangiogenesis. PCPG have few infiltrating lymphocytes but abundant macrophages. While neoplastic cells transcriptionally resemble mature chromaffin cells, early chromaffin and neuroblast markers are also features of some PCPG subtypes. The gene-expression profile of metastatic SDHx-related PCPG indicates these tumors have elevated cellular proliferation and a lower number of non-neoplastic Schwann-cell-like cells, while GPR139 is a potential theranostic target. Our findings therefore clarify the diverse transcriptional programs and cellular composition of PCPG and identify biomarkers of potential clinical significance.
GPR139 is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is primarily expressed in the brain in regions known to regulate motor control and metabolism. Here, we screened a diverse 4,000 compound library in order to identify GPR139 agonists. We identified 11 initial hits in a calcium mobilization screen, including one compound, AC4, which contains a different chemical scaffold to what has previously been described for GPR139 agonists. Our mutagenesis data shows that AC4 interacts with the same hotspots in the binding site of GPR139 as those reported to interact with the reference agonists 1a and 7c. We additionally tested and validated 160 analogs in a calcium mobilization assay and found 5 compounds with improved potency compared to AC4. In total, we identified 36 GPR139 agonists with potencies in the nanomolar range (90-990 nM). The most potent compounds were confirmed as GPR139 agonists using an orthogonal ERK phosphorylation assay where they displayed a similar rank order of potency. Accordingly, we herein introduce multiple novel GPR139 agonists, including one with a novel chemical scaffold, which can be used as tools for future pharmacological and medicinal chemistry exploration of GPR139.
GPR139 is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor expressed in the brain, in particular in the habenula, hypothalamus and striatum. It has therefore been suggested that GPR139 is a possible target for metabolic disorders and Parkinson's disease. Several surrogate agonist series have been published for GPR139. Two series published by Shi et al. and Dvorak et al. included agonists 1a and 7c respectively, with potencies in the ten-nanomolar range. Furthermore, Isberg et al. and Liu et al. have previously shown that tryptophan (Trp) and phenylalanine (Phe) can activate GPR139 in the hundred-micromolar range. In this study, we produced a mutagenesis-guided model of the GPR139 binding site to form a foundation for future structure-based ligand optimization. Receptor mutants studied in a Ca(2+) assay demonstrated that residues F109(3x33), H187(5x43), W241(6x48) and N271(7x38), but not E108(3x32), are highly important for the activation of GPR139 as predicted by the receptor model. The initial ligand-receptor complex was optimized through free energy perturbation simulations, generating a refined GPR139 model in agreement with experimental data. In summary, the GPR139 reference surrogate agonists 1a and 7c, and the endogenous amino acids L-Trp and L-Phe share a common binding site, as demonstrated by mutagenesis, ligand docking and free energy calculations.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are important mediators of signal transduction and targets for pharmacological therapeutics. Novel receptor-ligand systems have been discovered through the identification and analysis of orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Here we describe the discovery of seven novel human genes encoding oGPCRs. Each novel oGPCR gene was discovered using customized searches of the GenBank genomic databases with previously known GPCR-encoding sequences. The expressed genes can now be used in assays to determine endogenous and pharmacological ligands. GPR133, GPR134, GPR135, GPR136, and GPR137 share identities with a prostate-specific odorant-like GPCR-encoding gene (PSGR). GPR138 and GPR139 share identities with an odorant-like gene derived from human erythroid cells. Transcripts encoding GPR133, GPR134, GPR135, GPR136, and GPR137 were detected in various CNS tissues. The expression of odorant-like genes in non-olfactory tissues requires further clarification, which may be achieved through the search for endogenous cognate ligands for these and other oGPCRs.
G-protein coupled receptor 139 (GPR139) is an evolutionarily conserved orphan receptor, predominantly expressing in the habenula of vertebrate species. The habenula has recently been implicated in aversive response and its associated learning. Here, we tested the hypothesis that GPR139 signalling in the habenula may play a role in fear learning in the zebrafish. We examined the effect of intraperitoneal injections of a human GPR139-selective agonist (JNJ-63533054) on alarm substance-induced fear learning using conditioned place avoidance paradigm, where an aversive stimulus is paired with one compartment, while its absence is associated with the other compartment of the apparatus. The results indicate that fish treated with 1 microg/g body weight of GPR139 agonist displayed no difference in locomotor activity and alarm substance-induced fear response. However, avoidance to fear-conditioned compartment was diminished, which suggests that the agonist blocks the consolidation of contextual fear memory. On the other hand, fish treated with 0.1 microg/g body weight of GPR139 agonist spent a significantly longer time in the unconditioned neutral compartment as compared to the conditioned (punished and unpunished) compartments. These results suggest that activation of GPR139 signalling in the habenula may be involved in fear learning and the decision-making process in the zebrafish.
The use of positron emission tomography (PET) in early-phase development of novel drugs targeting the central nervous system, is well established for the evaluation of brain penetration and target engagement. However, when novel targets are involved a suitable PET ligand is not always available. We demonstrate an alternative approach that evaluates the attenuation of amphetamine-induced synaptic dopamine release by a novel agonist of the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR139 (TAK-041). GPR139 agonism is a novel candidate mechanism for the treatment of schizophrenia and other disorders associated with social and cognitive dysfunction. Ten healthy volunteers underwent [(11)C]PHNO PET at baseline, and twice after receiving an oral dose of d-amphetamine (0.5 mg/kg). One of the post-d-amphetamine scans for each subject was preceded by a single oral dose of TAK-041 (20 mg in five; 40 mg in the other five participants). D-amphetamine induced a significant decrease in [(11)C]PHNO binding potential relative to the non-displaceable component (BP(ND)) in all regions examined (16-28%), consistent with increased synaptic dopamine release. Pre-treatment with TAK-041 significantly attenuated the d-amphetamine-induced reduction in BP(ND) in the a priori defined regions (putamen and ventral striatum: 26% and 18%, respectively). The reduction in BP(ND) was generally higher after the 40 mg than the 20 mg TAK-041 dose, with the difference between doses reaching statistical significance in the putamen. Our findings suggest that TAK-041 enters the human brain and interacts with GPR139 to affect endogenous dopamine release. [(11)C]PHNO PET is a practical method to detect the effects of novel drugs on the brain dopaminergic system in healthy volunteers, in the early stages of drug development.
Aversive learning and memories are crucial for animals to avoid previously encountered stressful stimuli and thereby increase their chance of survival. Neuropeptides are essential signaling molecules in the brain and are emerging as important modulators of learned behaviors, but their precise role is not well understood. Here, we show that neuropeptides of the evolutionarily conserved MyoInhibitory Peptide (MIP)-family modify salt chemotaxis behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans according to previous experience. MIP signaling, through activation of the G protein-coupled receptor SPRR-2, is required for short-term gustatory plasticity. In addition, MIP/SPRR-2 neuropeptide-receptor signaling mediates another type of aversive gustatory learning called salt avoidance learning that depends on de novo transcription, translation and the CREB transcription factor, all hallmarks of long-term memory. MIP/SPRR-2 signaling mediates salt avoidance learning in parallel with insulin signaling. These findings lay a foundation to investigate the suggested orphan MIP receptor orthologs in deuterostomians, including human GPR139 and GPR142.
GPR139 is an orphan class A G protein-coupled receptor found mainly in the central nervous system. It has its highest expression levels in the hypothalamus and striatum, regions regulating metabolism and locomotion, respectively, and has therefore been suggested as a potential target for obesity and Parkinson's disease. The two aromatic amino acids (L)-Trp and (L)-Phe have been proposed as putative endogenous agonists, and three structurally related benzohydrazide, glycine benzamide, and benzotriazine surrogate agonist series have been published. Herein, we assayed 158 new analogues selected from a pharmacophore model, and identified 12 new GPR139 agonists, containing previously untested bioisosteres. Furthermore, we present the first combined structure-activity relationships, and a refined pharmacophore model to serve as a rationale for future ligand identification and optimization.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play important roles in many physiological functions and numerous diseases. In addition to the classic ligand-stimulated receptor activity, an increasing number of studies have established that many GPCRs function constitutively in a receptor dose-dependent manner. Previous observations showed that following gene transfection, little or no protein was detectable for certain GPCRs (designated apparent state A), such as GPR26, GPR39, GPR78, GPR133, GPR139, BRS3, and LGR5, which showed strong constitutive activities. When we lysed cells in the immediate presence of western blot loading buffer, a significant increase of protein levels was detected (actual state B), which was much closer to the true expression levels under physiological conditions. GPR26 was chosen for further functional experiments as the actual state B. We identified an important ubiquitination site, K286, as well as the ubiquitin ligase E3 homologous to the E6-associated protein carboxyl terminus domain containing 3 interacting with GPR26. The pronounced differences in the protein expression and constitutive activity of GPR26 were a consequence of the ubiquitin-mediated rapid degradation mechanism. Furthermore, we identified in vitro and in vivo antitumor activity associated with high expression levels and constitutive activity of GPR26 in liver cancer cells. Hence, GPR26 could act as an antitumor gene for hepatocellular carcinoma. This study also represents the actual state B of a batch of GPCRs that actually play potentially important roles in physiological functions by their constitutive activity, which is controlled by rapid ubiquitin-dependent degradation.
The interplay between G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) is critical for controlling neuronal activity that shapes neuromodulatory outcomes. Recent evidence indicates that the orphan receptor GPR139 influences opioid modulation of key brain circuits by opposing the actions of the micro-opioid receptor (MOR). However, the function of GPR139 and its signaling mechanisms are poorly understood. In this study, we report that GPR139 activates multiple heterotrimeric G proteins, including members of the G(q/11) and G(i/o) families. Using a panel of reporter assays in reconstituted HEK293T/17 cells, we found that GPR139 functions via the G(q/11) pathway and thereby distinctly regulates cellular effector systems, including stimulation of cAMP production and inhibition of G protein inward rectifying potassium (GIRK) channels. Electrophysiological recordings from medial habenular neurons revealed that GPR139 signaling via G(q/11) is necessary and sufficient for counteracting MOR-mediated inhibition of neuronal firing. These results uncover a mechanistic interplay between GPCRs involved in controlling opioidergic neuromodulation in the brain.
We have evaluated copy number variants (CNVs) in six monozygotic twin pairs discordant for schizophrenia. The data from Affymetrix(R) Human SNP 6.0 arrays were analyzed using Affymetrix(R) Genotyping Console, Partek(R) Genomics Suite, PennCNV, and Golden Helix SVS. This yielded both program-specific and overlapping results. Only CNVs called by Affymetrix Genotyping Console, Partek Genomics Suite, and PennCNV were used in further analysis. This analysis included an assessment of calls in each of the six twin pairs towards identification of unique CNVs in affected and unaffected co-twins. Real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) experiments confirmed one CNV loss at 7q11.21 that was found in the affected patient but not in the unaffected twin. The results identified CNVs and genes that were previously implicated in mental abnormalities in four of the six twin pairs. It included PYY (twin pairs 1 and 5), EPHA3 (twin pair 3), KIAA1211L (twin pair 4), and GPR139 (twin pair 5). They represent likely candidate genes and CNVs for the discordance of four of the six monozygotic twin pairs for this heterogeneous neurodevelopmental disorder. An explanation for these differences is ontogenetic de novo events that differentiate in the monozygotic twins during development.
GPR139 is a Gq-coupled receptor activated by the essential amino acids L-tryptophan (L-Trp) and L-phenylalanine (L-Phe). We carried out mutagenesis studies of the human GPR139 receptor to identify the critical structural motifs required for GPR139 activation. We applied site-directed and high throughput random mutagenesis approaches using a double addition normalization strategy to identify novel GPR139 sequences coding receptors that have altered sensitivity to endogenous ligands. This approach resulted in GPR139 clones with gain-of-function, reduction-of-function or loss-of-function mutations. The agonist pharmacology of these mutant receptors was characterized and compared to wild-type receptor using calcium mobilization, radioligand binding, and protein expression assays. The structure-activity data were incorporated into a homology model which highlights that many of the gain-of-function mutations are either in or immediately adjacent to the purported orthosteric ligand binding site, whereas the loss-of-function mutations were largely in the intracellular G-protein binding area or were disrupters of the helix integrity. There were also some reduction-of-function mutations in the orthosteric ligand binding site. These findings may not only facilitate the rational design of novel agonists and antagonists of GPR139, but also may guide the design of transgenic animal models to study the physiological function of GPR139.
GPR139 is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor expressed in the central nervous system. To identify its physiologic ligand, we measured GPR139 receptor activity from recombinant cells after treatment with amino acids, orphan ligands, serum, and tissue extracts. GPR139 activity was measured using guanosine 5'-O-(3-[(35)S]thio)-triphosphate binding, calcium mobilization, and extracellular signal-regulated kinases phosphorylation assays. Amino acids L-tryptophan (L-Trp) and L-phenylalanine (L-Phe) activated GPR139, with EC50 values in the 30- to 300-muM range, consistent with the physiologic concentrations of L-Trp and L-Phe in tissues. Chromatography of rat brain, rat serum, and human serum extracts revealed two peaks of GPR139 activity, which corresponded to the elution peaks of L-Trp and L-Phe. With the purpose of identifying novel tools to study GPR139 function, a high-throughput screening campaign led to the identification of a selective small-molecule agonist [JNJ-63533054, (S)-3-chloro-N-(2-oxo-2-((1-phenylethyl)amino)ethyl) benzamide]. The tritium-labeled JNJ-63533054 bound to cell membranes expressing GPR139 and could be specifically displaced by L-Trp and L-Phe. Sequence alignment revealed that GPR139 is highly conserved across species, and RNA sequencing studies of rat and human tissues indicated its exclusive expression in the brain and pituitary gland. Immunohistochemical analysis showed specific expression of the receptor in circumventricular regions of the habenula and septum in mice. Together, these findings suggest that L-Trp and L-Phe are candidate physiologic ligands for GPR139, and we hypothesize that this receptor may act as a sensor to detect dynamic changes of L-Trp and L-Phe in the brain.
The orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR139 is highly expressed in the habenula, a small brain nucleus that has been linked to depression, schizophrenia (SCZ), and substance-use disorder. High-throughput screening and a medicinal chemistry structure-activity relationship strategy identified a novel series of potent and selective benzotriazinone-based GPR139 agonists. Herein, we describe the chemistry optimization that led to the discovery and validation of multiple potent and selective in vivo GPR139 agonist tool compounds, including our clinical candidate TAK-041, also known as NBI-1065846 (compound 56). The pharmacological characterization of these GPR139 agonists in vivo demonstrated GPR139-agonist-dependent modulation of habenula cell activity and revealed consistent in vivo efficacy to rescue social interaction deficits in the BALB/c mouse strain. The clinical GPR139 agonist TAK-041 is being explored as a novel drug to treat negative symptoms in SCZ.
