Probable G-protein coupled receptor 142; Orphan receptor.
Sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, efficacious antidiabetic agents that have cardiovascular and renal benefits, can promote pancreatic beta-cell regeneration in type 2 diabetic mice. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to use multiomics to identify the mediators involved in beta-cell regeneration induced by dapagliflozin. We showed that dapagliflozin lowered blood glucose level, upregulated plasma insulin level, and increased islet area in db/db mice. Dapagliflozin reshaped gut microbiota and modulated microbiotic and plasmatic metabolites related to tryptophan metabolism, especially l-tryptophan, in the diabetic mice. Notably, l-tryptophan upregulated the mRNA level of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) production-related gene (Gcg and Pcsk1) expression and promoted GLP-1 secretion in cultured mouse intestinal L cells, and it increased the supernatant insulin level in primary human islets, which was eliminated by GPR142 antagonist. Transplant of fecal microbiota from dapagliflozin-treated mice, supplementation of l-tryptophan, or treatment with dapagliflozin upregulated l-tryptophan, GLP-1, and insulin or C-peptide levels and promoted beta-cell regeneration in db/db mice. Addition of exendin 9-39, a GLP-1 receptor (GLP-1R) antagonist, or pancreatic Glp1r knockout diminished these beneficial effects. In summary, treatment with dapagliflozin in type 2 diabetic mice promotes beta-cell regeneration by upregulating GLP-1 production, which is mediated via gut microbiota and tryptophan metabolism.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are expressed in a variety of cell types and tissues, and activation of GPCRs is involved in enormous metabolic pathways, including nutrient synthesis, transportation, storage or insulin sensitivity, etc. This review intends to summarize the regulation of metabolic homeostasis and mechanisms by a series of GPCRs, such as GPR91, GPR55, GPR119, GPR109a, GPR142, GPR40, GPR41, GPR43 and GPR120. With deep understanding of GPCR's structure and signaling pathways, it is attempting to uncover the role of GPCRs in major metabolic diseases, including metabolic syndrome, diabetes, dyslipidemia and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, for which the global prevalence has risen during last two decades. An extensive list of agonists and antagonists with their chemical structures in a nature of small molecular compounds for above-mentioned GPCRs is provided as pharmacologic candidates, and their preliminary data of preclinical studies are discussed. Moreover, their beneficial effects in correcting abnormalities of metabolic syndrome, diabetes and dyslipidemia are summarized when clinical trials have been undertaken. Thus, accumulating data suggest that these agonists or antagonists might become as new pharmacotherapeutic candidates for the treatment of metabolic diseases.
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a gut hormone secreted from the upper small intestine, which plays an important physiological role in the control of glucose metabolism through its incretin action to enhance glucose-dependent insulin secretion. GIP has also been implicated in postprandial lipid homeostasis. GIP is secreted from enteroendocrine K-cells residing in the intestinal epithelium. K-cells sense a variety of components found in the gut lumen following food consumption, resulting in an increase in plasma GIP signal dependent on the nature and quantity of ingested nutrients. We review the evidence for an important role of sodium-coupled glucose uptake through SGLT1 for carbohydrate sensing, of free-fatty acid receptors FFAR1/FFAR4 and the monoacyl-glycerol sensing receptor GPR119 for lipid detection, of the calcium-sensing receptor CASR and GPR142 for protein sensing, and additional modulation by neurotransmitters such as somatostatin and galanin. These pathways have been identified through combinations of in vivo, in vitro and molecular approaches.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is an incretin hormone secreted by enteroendocrine K cells in the proximal small intestine. This study aimed to explore the function of human K cells at the molecular and cellular levels. METHODS: CRISPR-Cas9 homology-directed repair was used to insert transgenes encoding a yellow fluorescent protein (Venus) or an Epac-based cAMP sensor (Epac-S-H187) in the GIP locus in human duodenal-derived organoids. Fluorescently labelled K cells were purified by FACS for RNA-seq and peptidomic analysis. GIP reporter organoids were employed for GIP secretion assays, live-cell imaging of Ca(2+) using Fura-2 and cAMP using Epac-S-H187, and basic electrophysiological characterisation. The G protein-coupled receptor genes GPR142 and CASR were knocked out to evaluate roles in amino acid sensing. RESULTS: RNA-seq of human duodenal K cells revealed enrichment of several G protein-coupled receptors involved in nutrient sensing, including FFAR1, GPBAR1, GPR119, CASR and GPR142. Glucose induced action potential firing and cytosolic Ca(2+) elevation and caused a 1.8-fold increase in GIP secretion, which was inhibited by the sodium glucose co-transporter 1/2 (SGLT1/2) blocker sotagliflozin. Activation of the long-chain fatty acid receptor free fatty acid receptor 1 (FFAR1) induced a 2.7-fold increase in GIP secretion, while tryptophan and phenylalanine stimulated secretion by 2.8- and 2.1-fold, respectively. While CASR knockout blunted intracellular Ca(2+) responses, a CASR/GPR142 double knockout was needed to reduce GIP secretory responses to aromatic amino acids. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The newly generated human organoid K cell model enables transcriptomic and functional characterisation of nutrient-sensing pathways involved in human GIP secretion. Both calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) and G protein-coupled receptor 142 (GPR142) contribute to protein-stimulated GIP secretion. This model will be further used to identify potential targets for modulation of native GIP secretion in diabetes and obesity.
A novel series of benzo-[1,2,4]-triazolo-[1,4]-oxazepine GPR142 agonists are described. The series was designed to address the suboptimal PK (pharmacokinetic) and off-target profile of a class of N-aryl-benzo-[1,4]-oxazepine-4-carboxamides, represented by 1, that were identified from a high-throughput screen of the Merck compound collection for GPR142 agonists. This work led to the discovery of 3-phenoxy-benzo-[1,2,4]-triazolo-[1,4]-oxazepine 47, a potent GPR142 agonist with an off-target and PK profile suitable for in vivo studies. This compound and a related analogue 40 were shown to be active in mouse oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs). Furthermore, a GPR142 knock-out mouse OGTT study with compound 40 provides evidence that its glucose-lowering effect is mediated by GPR142.
GPR142, a putative amino acid receptor, is expressed in pancreatic islets and the gastrointestinal tract, but the ligand affinity and physiological role of this receptor remain obscure. In this study, we show that in addition to L-Tryptophan, GPR142 signaling is also activated by L-Phenylalanine but not by other naturally occurring amino acids. Furthermore, we show that Tryptophan and a synthetic GPR142 agonist increase insulin and incretin hormones and improve glucose disposal in mice in a GPR142-dependent manner. In contrast, Phenylalanine improves in vivo glucose disposal independently of GPR142. Noteworthy, refeeding-induced elevations in insulin and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide are blunted in Gpr142 null mice. In conclusion, these findings demonstrate GPR142 is a Tryptophan receptor critically required for insulin and incretin hormone regulation and suggest GPR142 agonists may be effective therapies that leverage amino acid sensing pathways for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Aversive learning and memories are crucial for animals to avoid previously encountered stressful stimuli and thereby increase their chance of survival. Neuropeptides are essential signaling molecules in the brain and are emerging as important modulators of learned behaviors, but their precise role is not well understood. Here, we show that neuropeptides of the evolutionarily conserved MyoInhibitory Peptide (MIP)-family modify salt chemotaxis behavior in Caenorhabditis elegans according to previous experience. MIP signaling, through activation of the G protein-coupled receptor SPRR-2, is required for short-term gustatory plasticity. In addition, MIP/SPRR-2 neuropeptide-receptor signaling mediates another type of aversive gustatory learning called salt avoidance learning that depends on de novo transcription, translation and the CREB transcription factor, all hallmarks of long-term memory. MIP/SPRR-2 signaling mediates salt avoidance learning in parallel with insulin signaling. These findings lay a foundation to investigate the suggested orphan MIP receptor orthologs in deuterostomians, including human GPR139 and GPR142.
GPR142 is an islet-enriched G protein-coupled receptor that has been investigated as a novel therapeutic target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes by virtue of its insulin secretagogue activity. However, the signaling pathways downstream of GPR142 and whether its stimulation of insulin release is glucose-dependent remain poorly characterized. In this study, we show that both native and synthetic GPR142 agonists can activate Gq as well as Gi signaling when GPR142 is recombinantly expressed in HEK293 cells. However, in primary pancreatic islets, a native cellular system, the insulin secretagogue activity of GPR142 agonists only requires Gq activation. In addition, our results show that stimulation of insulin secretion by GPR142 in pancreatic islets is strictly glucose-dependent.
Papillary renal cell carcinoma (PRCC) represents the second most common histological subtype of RCC, and comprises 2 subtypes. Prognosis for type 1 PRCC is relatively good, whereas type 2 PRCC is associated with poor clinical outcomes. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the clinicopathological and mutations characteristics of PRCC. Hence, we reported on 13 cases of PRCC analyzed using whole-exome sequencing. Histologically, type 2 PRCC showed a higher nuclear grade and lymphovascular invasion rate versus type 1 PRCC (P < 0.05). Immunostaining revealed type 1 PRCC had higher CK7 and lower Top IIalpha expression rates (P < 0.05). Whole-exome sequencing data analysis revealed that the mutational statuses of 373 genes (287 missense, 69 silent, 6 nonsense, and 11 synonymous mutations) differed significantly between PRCC and normal renal tissues (P < 0.05). Functional enrichment analysis was used to classify the 287 missense-mutated genes into 11 biological process clusters (comprised of 61 biological processes) and 5 pathways, involved in cell adhesion, microtubule-based movement, the cell cycle, polysaccharide biosynthesis, muscle cell development and differentiation, cell death, and negative regulation. Associated pathways included the ATP-binding cassette transporter, extracellular matrix-receptor interaction, lysosome, complement and coagulation cascades, and glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism pathways. The missense mutation status of 19 genes differed significantly between the groups (P < 0.05), and alterations in the EEF1D, RFNG, GPR142, and RAB37 genes were located in different chromosomal regions in type 1 and 2 PRCC. These mutations may contribute to future studies on pathogenic mechanisms and targeted therapy of PRCC.
OBJECTIVE: GPR142 agonists are being pursued as novel diabetes therapies by virtue of their insulin secretagogue effects. But it is undetermined whether GPR142's functions in pancreatic islets are limited to regulating insulin secretion. The current study expands research on its action. METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrated by in situ hybridization and immunostaining that GPR142 is expressed not only in beta cells but also in a subset of alpha cells. Stimulation of GPR142 by a selective agonist increased glucagon secretion in both human and mouse islets. More importantly, the GPR142 agonist also potentiated glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) production and its release from islets through a mechanism that involves upregulation of prohormone convertase 1/3 expression. Strikingly, stimulation of insulin secretion and increase in insulin content via GPR142 engagement requires intact GLP-1 receptor signaling. Furthermore, GPR142 agonist increased beta cell proliferation and protected both mouse and human islets against stress-induced apoptosis. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, we provide here evidence that local GLP-1 release from alpha cells defines GPR142's beneficial effects on improving beta cell function and mass, and we propose that GPR142 agonism may have translatable and durable efficacy for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
Backgrounds and Purpose- Although new methods for genetic analyses are rapidly evolving, there are currently knowledge gaps in how to detect Mendelian forms of stroke. Methods- We performed whole-exome sequencing in 22 probands, under 56 years at their first ischemic stroke episode, from multi-incident stroke families. With the use of a comprehensive stroke-gene panel, we searched for variants in stroke-related genes. The probands' clinical stroke subtype was related to clinical characteristics previously associated with pathogenic variants in these genes. Relatives were genotyped in 7 families to evaluate stroke-gene variants of unknown significance. In 2 larger families with embolic stroke of unknown source, whole-exome sequencing was performed in additional members to examine the possibility of identifying new stroke genes. Results- Six of 22 probands carried pathogenic or possibly pathogenic variants in genes reported to be associated with their stroke subtype. A known pathogenic variant in NOTCH3 and a possibly pathogenic variant in ACAD9 gene were identified. A novel JAK2:c.3188G>A (p.Arg1063His) mutation was seen in a proband with embolic stroke of undetermined source and prothrombotic status. However, penetrance in the family was incomplete. COL4A2:c.3368A>G (p.Glu1123Gly) was detected in 2 probands but did not cosegregate with the disease in their families. Whole-exome sequencing in multiple members of 2 pedigrees with embolic stroke of undetermined source revealed possibly pathogenic variants in genes not previously associated with stroke, GPR142:c.148C>G (p.Leu50Val), and PTPRN2:c.2416A>G (p.Ile806Val); LRRC1 c.808A>G (p.Ile270Val), SLC7A10c.1294dupG (p.Val432fs), IKBKB: c.1070C>T (p.Ala357Val), and OXGR1 c.392G>A (p.Arg131His), respectively. Conclusions- Screening with whole-exome sequencing using a comprehensive stroke-gene panel may identify rare monogenic forms of stroke, but careful evaluation of clinical characteristics and potential pathogenicity of novel variants remain important. In our study, the majority of individuals with familial aggregation of stroke lacked any identified genetic causes.
To determine the comprehensive G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) expression profile in ghrelin-producing cells and to elucidate the role of GPCR-mediated signaling in the regulation of ghrelin secretion, we determined GPCR expression profiles by RNA sequencing in the ghrelin-producing cell line MGN3-1 and analyzed the effects of ligands for highly expressed receptors on intracellular signaling and ghrelin secretion. Expression of selected GPCRs was confirmed in fluorescence-activated cell-sorted fluorescently tagged ghrelin-producing cells from ghrelin-promoter CreERT2/Rosa-CAG-LSL-ZsGreen1 mice. Expression levels of GPCRs previously suggested to regulate ghrelin secretion including adrenergic-beta1 receptor, GPR81, oxytocin receptor, GPR120, and somatostatin receptor 2 were high in MGN3-1 cells. Consistent with previous reports, isoproterenol and oxytocin stimulated the Gs and Gq pathways, respectively, whereas lactate, palmitate, and somatostatin stimulated the Gi pathway, confirming the reliability of current assays. Among other highly expressed GPCRs, prostaglandin E receptor 4 agonist prostaglandin E2 significantly stimulated the Gs pathway and ghrelin secretion. Muscarine, the canonical agonist of cholinergic receptor muscarinic 4, stimulated both the Gq and Gi pathways. Although muscarine treatment alone did not affect ghrelin secretion, it did suppress forskolin-induced ghrelin secretion, suggesting that the cholinergic pathway may play a role in counterbalancing the stimulation of ghrelin by Gs (eg, by adrenaline). In addition, GPR142 ligand tryptophan stimulated ghrelin secretion. In conclusion, we determined the comprehensive expression profile of GPCRs in ghrelin-producing cells and identified two novel ghrelin regulators, prostaglandin E2 and tryptophan. These results will lead to a greater understanding of the physiology of ghrelin and facilitate the development of ghrelin-modulating drugs.
The discovery and optimization of a novel series of GPR142 agonists are described. These led to the identification of compound 21 (LY3325656), which demonstrated anti-diabetic benefits in pre-clinical studies and ADME/PK properties suitable for human dosing. Compound 21 is the first GPR142 agonist molecule advancing to phase 1 clinic trials for the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
GPR142 is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), whose most potent and efficacious ligand has been reported as being the natural amino acid l-tryptophan. GPR142 is highly expressed in pancreatic beta-cells and immune cells, suggesting the receptor may play a role in the pathogenesis and development of diabetes or inflammatory diseases. In a previous report, we developed GPR142 agonists as insulin secretagogues. In this report, we show the discovery of a selective, potent small-molecule GPR142 antagonist, CLP-3094, and its pharmacological characteristics. These data support targeting this receptor for the treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases.
We have recently shown that the G protein-coupled receptor 142 (GPR142) is expressed in both rodent and human pancreatic beta-cells. Herein, we investigated the cellular distribution of GPR142 within islets and the effects of selective agonists of GPR142 on glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) in the mouse islets and INS-1832/13 cells. Double-immunostaining revealed that GPR142 immunoreactivity in islets mainly occurs in insulin-positive cells. Potentiation of GSIS by GPR142 activation was accompanied by increased cAMP content in INS-1832/13 cells. PKA/Epac inhibition markedly suppressed the effect of GPR142 activation on insulin release. Gpr142 knockdown (Gpr142-KD) in islets was accompanied by elevated release of MCP-1, IFNgamma, and TNFalpha during culture period and abolished the modulatory effect of GPR142 activation on the GSIS. Gpr142-KD had no effect on Ffar1, Ffar2, or Ffar3 mRNA while reducing Gpr56 and increasing Tlr5 and Tlr7 mRNA expression. Gpr142-KD was associated with an increased expression of Chrebp, Txnip, RhoA, and mitochondrial Vdac1 concomitant with a reduced Pdx1, Pax6, and mitochondrial Vdac2 mRNA levels. Long-term exposure of INS-1832/13 cells to hyperglycemia reduced Gpr142 and Vdac2 while increased Chrebp, Txnip, and Vdac1 mRNA expression. GPR142 agonists or Bt(2)-cAMP counteracted this effect. Glucotoxicity-induced decrease of cell viability in Gpr142-KD INS-1 cells was not affected by GPR142-agonists while Bt(2)-cAMP prevented it. The results show the importance of Gpr142 in the maintenance of pancreatic beta-cell function in rodents and that GPR142 agonists potentiate GSIS by an action, which most likely is due to increased cellular generation of second messenger molecule cAMP.
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are source machinery in signal transduction pathways and being one of the major therapeutic targets play a significant in drug discovery. GPR142, an orphan GPCR, has been implicated in the regulation of insulin, thereby having a crucial role in Type II diabetes management. Deciphering of the structures of orphan, GPCRs (O-GPCRs) offer better prospects for advancements in research in ion translocation and transduction of extracellular signals. As the crystallographic structure of GPR142 is not available in PDB, therefore, threading and ab initio-based approaches were used for 3D modeling of GPR142. Molecular dynamic simulations (900 ns) were performed on the 3D model of GPR142 and complexes of GPR142 with top five hits, obtained through virtual screening, embedded in lipid bilayer with aqueous system using OPLS force field. Compound 1, 3, and 4 may act as scaffolds for designing potential lead agonists for GPR142. The finding of GPR142 MD simulation study provides more comprehensive representation of the functional properties. The concern for Type II diabetes is increasing worldwide and successful treatment of this disease demands novel drugs with better efficacy.
By searching the human and mouse genomic databases we found two G-protein-coupled receptors, GPR139 and GPR142, with characteristic motifs of the rhodopsin family of receptors. The gene for GPR139 maps to chromosome 7F1 of mouse and 16p12.3 of human and that for GPR142 to 11E2 of mouse and 17q25.1 of human. We isolated GPR139 from a cDNA library of adult mouse brain and GPR142 from a cDNA library of brains from 15-day-old mouse embryos. GPR139 mRNA was predominantly expressed in specific areas of human and mouse brains, whereas GPR142 mRNA showed a more ubiquitous expression both in the brain and in various peripheral glands and organs. A 50% identity and a 67% homology at the amino-acid level between the two receptors and only 20-25% identity with other G-protein-coupled receptors established them as a new subbranch within the phylogenetic tree and hints at a common or similar ligand(s). Preliminary results suggest that the cognate ligand is present in brain extracts and is, most likely, a small peptide. GPR139 signal transduction in Chinese hamster ovary cells requires coupling to an inhibitory G-protein and is mediated by phospholipase C. Dimer formation may be necessary for proper function.
The discovery and initial optimization of a series of phenylalanine based agonists for GPR142 is described. The structure-activity-relationship around the major areas of the molecule was explored to give agonists 90 times more potent than the initial HTS hit in a human GPR142 inositol phosphate accumulation assay. Removal of CYP inhibition by exploration of the pyridine A-ring is also described.
GPR142 is a novel GPCR that is predominantly expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. GPR142 agonists potentiate glucose-dependent insulin secretion, and therefore can reduce the risk of hypoglycemia. Optimization of our lead pyridinone-phenylalanine series led to a proof-of-concept compound 22, which showed in vivo efficacy in mice with dose-dependent increase in insulin secretion and a decrease in glucose levels.
