G-protein coupled receptor 151; Proton-sensing G-protein coupled receptor.
Large-scale human exome sequencing can identify rare protein-coding variants with a large impact on complex traits such as body adiposity. We sequenced the exomes of 645,626 individuals from the United Kingdom, the United States, and Mexico and estimated associations of rare coding variants with body mass index (BMI). We identified 16 genes with an exome-wide significant association with BMI, including those encoding five brain-expressed G protein-coupled receptors (CALCR, MC4R, GIPR, GPR151, and GPR75). Protein-truncating variants in GPR75 were observed in ~4/10,000 sequenced individuals and were associated with 1.8 kilograms per square meter lower BMI and 54% lower odds of obesity in the heterozygous state. Knock out of Gpr75 in mice resulted in resistance to weight gain and improved glycemic control in a high-fat diet model. Inhibition of GPR75 may provide a therapeutic strategy for obesity.
Human genetics has been instrumental in identification of genetic variants linked to type 2 diabetes. Recently a rare, putative loss-of-function mutation in the orphan G-protein coupled receptor 151 (GPR151) was found to be associated with lower odds ratio for type 2 diabetes, but the mechanism behind this association has remained elusive. Here we show that Gpr151 is a fasting- and glucagon-responsive hepatic gene which regulates hepatic gluconeogenesis. Gpr151 ablation in mice leads to suppression of hepatic gluconeogenesis genes and reduced hepatic glucose production in response to pyruvate. Importantly, the restoration of hepatic Gpr151 levels in the Gpr151 knockout mice reverses the reduced hepatic glucose production. In this work, we establish a previously unknown role of Gpr151 in the liver that provides an explanation to the lowered type 2 diabetes risk in individuals with nonsynonymous mutations in GPR151.
The habenula, an ancient small brain area in the epithalamus, densely expresses nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and is critical for nicotine intake and aversion. As such, identification of strategies to manipulate habenular activity may yield approaches to treat nicotine addiction. Here we show that GPR151, an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) highly enriched in the habenula of humans and rodents, is expressed at presynaptic membranes and synaptic vesicles and associates with synaptic components controlling vesicle release and ion transport. Deletion of Gpr151 inhibits evoked neurotransmission but enhances spontaneous miniature synaptic currents and eliminates short-term plasticity induced by nicotine. We find that GPR151 couples to the G-alpha inhibitory protein Galpha(o1) to reduce cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels in mice and in GPR151-expressing cell lines that are amenable to ligand screens. Gpr151- knockout (KO) mice show diminished behavioral responses to nicotine and self-administer greater quantities of the drug, phenotypes rescued by viral reexpression of Gpr151 in the habenula. These data identify GPR151 as a critical modulator of habenular function that controls nicotine addiction vulnerability.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
Neuropathic pain is a major health problem that affects up to 7-10% of the population worldwide. Currently, neuropathic pain is difficult to treat because of its elusive mechanisms. Here we report that orphan G protein-coupled receptor 151 (GPR151) in nociceptive sensory neurons controls neuropathic pain induced by nerve injury. GPR151 was mainly expressed in non-peptidergic C-fibre dorsal root ganglion neurons and highly upregulated after nerve injury. Importantly, conditional knockout of Gpr151 in adult nociceptive sensory neurons significantly alleviated chronic constriction injury-induced neuropathic pain-like behaviour but did not affect basal nociception. Moreover, GPR151 in DRG neurons was required for chronic constriction injury-induced neuronal hyperexcitability and upregulation of colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF1), which is necessary for microglial activation in the spinal cord after nerve injury. Mechanistically, GPR151 coupled with P2X3 ion channels and promoted their functional activities in neuropathic pain-like hypersensitivity. Knockout of Gpr151 suppressed P2X3-mediated calcium elevation and spontaneous pain behaviour in chronic constriction injury mice. Conversely, overexpression of Gpr151 significantly enhanced P2X3-mediated calcium elevation and dorsal root ganglion neuronal excitability. Furthermore, knockdown of P2X3 in dorsal root ganglia reversed chronic constriction injury-induced CSF1 upregulation, spinal microglial activation and neuropathic pain-like behaviour. Finally, the coexpression of GPR151 and P2X3 was confirmed in small-diameter human dorsal root ganglion neurons, indicating the clinical relevance of our findings. Together, our results indicate that GPR151 in nociceptive dorsal root ganglion neurons plays a key role in the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain and could be a potential target for treating neuropathic pain.
Novel drug targets for sustained reduction in body mass index (BMI) are needed to curb the epidemic of obesity, which affects 650 million individuals worldwide and is a causal driver of cardiovascular and metabolic disease and mortality. Previous studies reported that the Arg95Ter nonsense variant of GPR151, an orphan G protein-coupled receptor, is associated with reduced BMI and reduced risk of Type 2 Diabetes (T2D). Here, we further investigate GPR151 with the Pakistan Genome Resource (PGR), which is one of the largest exome biobanks of human homozygous loss-of-function carriers (knockouts) in the world. Among PGR participants, we identify eleven GPR151 putative loss-of-function (plof) variants, three of which are present at homozygosity (Arg95Ter, Tyr99Ter, and Phe175LeufsTer7), with a cumulative allele frequency of 2.2%. We confirm these alleles in vitro as loss-of-function. We test if GPR151 plof is associated with BMI, T2D, or other metabolic traits and find that GPR151 deficiency in complete human knockouts is not associated with clinically significant differences in these traits. Relative to Gpr151+/+ mice, Gpr151-/- animals exhibit no difference in body weight on normal chow and higher body weight on a high-fat diet. Together, our findings indicate that GPR151 antagonism is not a compelling therapeutic approach to treatment of obesity.
OBJECTIVE: Both the gut microbiome and host genetics are known to play significant roles in the pathogenesis of IBD. However, the interaction between these two factors and its implications in the aetiology of IBD remain underexplored. Here, we report on the influence of host genetics on the gut microbiome in IBD. DESIGN: To evaluate the impact of host genetics on the gut microbiota of patients with IBD, we combined whole exome sequencing of the host genome and whole genome shotgun sequencing of 1464 faecal samples from 525 patients with IBD and 939 population-based controls. We followed a four-step analysis: (1) exome-wide microbial quantitative trait loci (mbQTL) analyses, (2) a targeted approach focusing on IBD-associated genomic regions and protein truncating variants (PTVs, minor allele frequency (MAF) >5%), (3) gene-based burden tests on PTVs with MAF <5% and exome copy number variations (CNVs) with site frequency <1%, (4) joint analysis of both cohorts to identify the interactions between disease and host genetics. RESULTS: We identified 12 mbQTLs, including variants in the IBD-associated genes IL17REL, MYRF, SEC16A and WDR78. For example, the decrease of the pathway acetyl-coenzyme A biosynthesis, which is involved in short chain fatty acids production, was associated with variants in the gene MYRF (false discovery rate <0.05). Changes in functional pathways involved in the metabolic potential were also observed in participants carrying rare PTVs or CNVs in CYP2D6, GPR151 and CD160 genes. These genes are known for their function in the immune system. Moreover, interaction analyses confirmed previously known IBD disease-specific mbQTLs in TNFSF15. CONCLUSION: This study highlights that both common and rare genetic variants affecting the immune system are key factors in shaping the gut microbiota in the context of IBD and pinpoints towards potential mechanisms for disease treatment.
TWIK-related acid-sensitive potassium channels TASK1 and TASK3, as well as the G-protein-coupled receptors GPR31 and GPR151, are proton-sensitive membrane proteins. They can be activated or inhibited by low extracellular pH (pHe), which is a hallmark of the tumor microenvironment in solid tumors. However, the role of these channels in the development of skin tumors is still unclear. In this study, we investigated the expression profiles of TASK1, TASK3, GPR31 and GPR151 in squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), nevus cell nevi (NCN), and malignant melanomas (MMs). We performed immunohistochemistry using paraffin-embedded tissue samples from patients and found that most skin tumors express TASK1/3 and GPR31/151. The results show that BCCs are often negative for GPR31/151 as well as for TASK1/3, while nearly all SCCs express these markers. MMs and NCN show similar expression patterns. However, some tumors show a decreasing TASK1/3 expression in deeper dermal tumor tissue, while GPCRs were expressed more evenly. The lower frequency of GPR31/151 and TSAK1/3 expression in BCCs when compared to SCCs is a novel histological feature distinguishing these two entities. Moreover, BCCs also show lower expression of GPR31/151 and TASK1/3 as compared to NCN and MMs.
Galanin exerts its biological activities through three different G protein-coupled receptors, Galr1, Galr2 and Galr3. To obtain insights into the evolution of Galrs, we searched the genomes of the deuterostomes by extensive BLAST survey and phylogenetic analyses. The Galr2 and Galr3 share similar genomic structures, and most of them are composed of 2 exons and 1 intron. However, most of Galr1 are composed of 3 extrons and 2 introns. We did not detect the typical Galr genes in the genomic databases of invertebrate deutserotomes, but three Galr1/Alstr homologs and two Galr1/Gpr151 homologs in amphioxus, two Galr1/Gpr151 homologs in sea squirt and one Galr1/Gpr151 homologs in sea urchin were identified. It is highly possible that the Galr genes in vertebrates may evolve from the homologous genes of Galr1/Alstr/Gpr151 in invertebrate deuterostomes. We also proposed that Galr3 genes were the products of Galr2 duplication during evolution, while Galr2 genes may evolve from Galr1.
The habenula is a phylogenetically conserved brain structure in the epithalamus. It is a major node in the information flow between fronto-limbic brain regions and monoaminergic brainstem nuclei, and is thus anatomically and functionally ideally positioned to regulate emotional, motivational, and cognitive behaviors. Consequently, the habenula may be critically important in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders such as addiction and depression. Here we investigated the expression pattern of GPR151, a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), whose mRNA has been identified as highly and specifically enriched in habenular neurons by in situ hybridization and translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP). In the present immunohistochemical study we demonstrate a pronounced and highly specific expression of the GPR151 protein in the medial and lateral habenula of rodent brain. Specific expression was also seen in efferent habenular fibers projecting to the interpeduncular nucleus, the rostromedial tegmental area, the rhabdoid nucleus, the mesencephalic raphe nuclei, and the dorsal tegmental nucleus. Using confocal microscopy and quantitative colocalization analysis, we found that GPR151-expressing axons and terminals overlap with cholinergic, substance P-ergic, and glutamatergic markers. Virtually identical expression patterns were observed in rat, mouse, and zebrafish brains. Our data demonstrate that GPR151 is highly conserved, specific for a subdivision of the habenular neurocircuitry, and constitutes a promising novel target for psychiatric drug development.
INTRODUCTION: Essential tremor (ET) is one of the most common movement disorders. Despite its high prevalence and heritability, its genetic etiology remains elusive with only a few susceptibility genes identified and poorly replicated. Our aim was to find novel candidate genes involved in ET predisposition through whole exome sequencing. METHODS: We studied eight multigenerational families (N = 40 individuals) with an autosomal-dominant inheritance using a comprehensive strategy combining whole exome sequencing followed by case-control association testing of prioritized variants in a separate cohort comprising 521 ET cases and 596 controls. We further performed gene-based burden analyses in an additional dataset comprising 789 ET patients and 770 healthy individuals to investigate whether there was an enrichment of rare deleterious variants within our candidate genes. RESULTS: Fifteen variants co-segregated with disease status in at least one of the families, among which rs749875462 in CCDC183, rs535864157 in MMP10 and rs114285050 in GPR151 showed a nominal association with ET. However, we found no significant enrichment of rare variants within these genes in cases compared with controls. Interestingly, MMP10 protein is involved in the inflammatory response to neuronal damage and has been previously associated with other neurological disorders. CONCLUSIONS: We prioritized a set of promising genes, especially MMP10, for further genetic and functional studies in ET. Our study suggests that rare deleterious coding variants that markedly increase susceptibility to ET are likely to be found in many genes. Future studies are needed to replicate and further infer biological mechanisms and potential disease causality for our identified genes.
BACKGROUND: Retinoblastoma (RB) is initiated by mutation in both alleles of RB1 gene. However, few cases may occur even in the absence of RB1 mutation suggesting the role of genes other than RB1. METHODOLOGY: The current study was planned to utilize targeted exome sequencing in Indian RB patients affected with unilateral non-familial RB. 75 unilateral RB patients below 5 years of age were enrolled. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood and tumor tissue. From peripheral blood DNA, all coding and exon/intron regions were amplified using PCR and direct sequencing. Cases which did not harbor pathogenic variants in peripheral blood DNA were further screened for mutations in their tumor tissue DNA using targeted exome sequencing. Three pathogenicity prediction tools (Mutation Taster, SIFT, and PolyPhen-2) were used to determine the pathogenicity of non-synonymous variations. An in-house bioinformatics pipeline was devised for the mutation screening by targeted exome sequencing. Protein modeling studies were also done to predict the effect of the mutations on the protein structure and function. RESULTS: Using the mentioned approach, we found two novel variants (g.69673_69674insT and g.48373314C>A) in RB1 gene in peripheral blood DNA. We also found novel variants in eight genes (RB1, ACAD11, GPR151, KCNA1, OTOR, SOX30, ARL11, and MYCT1) that may be associated with RB pathogenesis. CONCLUSION: The present study expands our current knowledge regarding the genomic landscape of RB and also highlights the importance of NGS technologies to detect genes and novel variants that may play an important role in cancer initiation, progression, and prognosis.
Population-based biobanks with genomic and dense phenotype data provide opportunities for generating effective therapeutic hypotheses and understanding the genomic role in disease predisposition. To characterize latent components of genetic associations, we apply truncated singular value decomposition (DeGAs) to matrices of summary statistics derived from genome-wide association analyses across 2,138 phenotypes measured in 337,199 White British individuals in the UK Biobank study. We systematically identify key components of genetic associations and the contributions of variants, genes, and phenotypes to each component. As an illustration of the utility of the approach to inform downstream experiments, we report putative loss of function variants, rs114285050 (GPR151) and rs150090666 (PDE3B), that substantially contribute to obesity-related traits and experimentally demonstrate the role of these genes in adipocyte biology. Our approach to dissect components of genetic associations across the human phenome will accelerate biomedical hypothesis generation by providing insights on previously unexplored latent structures.
Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory skin disease characterized by aberrant proliferation of keratinocytes and infiltration of immune cells. We previously found that GPR15LG protein is highly expressed in psoriasis lesional skin and it positively regulates psoriatic keratinocyte proliferation. Our data also showed that GPR15LG could regulate the activity of NF-kappaB pathway, which is associated with psoriatic inflammation. In the present study, we demonstrated that Gpr15lg (ortholog of GPR15LG) knockdown attenuated the severity of imiquimod (IMQ)-induced psoriasis-like inflammation in mice. Such an effect was achieved by down-regulating the expression of inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1alpha, IL-1beta, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and S100A7. Consistently, GPR15LG knockdown in vitro significantly downgraded the expression of inflammatory factors in the cellular model of psoriasis. These results suggested that GPR15LG could be involved in the development of psoriasis by regulating inflammation.
G-protein-coupled receptors are considered to be cell-surface sensors of extracellular signals, thereby having a crucial role in signal transduction and being the most fruitful targets for drug discovery. G-protein-coupled receptor 151 (GPR151) was reported to be expressed specifically in the habenular area. Here we report the expression and the epigenetic regulation of GRP151 in the spinal cord after spinal nerve ligation (SNL) and the contribution of GPR151 to neuropathic pain in male mice. SNL dramatically increased GPR151 expression in spinal neurons. GPR151 mutation or spinal inhibition by shRNA alleviated SNL-induced mechanical allodynia and heat hyperalgesia. Interestingly, the CpG island in the GPR151 gene promoter region was demethylated, the expression of DNA methyltransferase 3b (DNMT3b) was decreased, and the binding of DNMT3b with GPR151 promoter was reduced after SNL. Overexpression of DNMT3b in the spinal cord decreased GPR151 expression and attenuated SNL-induced neuropathic pain. Furthermore, Kruppel-like factor 5 (KLF5), a transcriptional factor of the KLF family, was upregulated in spinal neurons, and the binding affinity of KLF5 with GPR151 promoter was increased after SNL. Inhibition of KLF5 reduced GPR151 expression and attenuated SNL-induced pain hypersensitivity. Further mRNA microarray analysis revealed that mutation of GPR151 reduced the expression of a variety of pain-related genes in response to SNL, especially mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway-associated genes. This study reveals that GPR151, increased by DNA demethylation and the enhanced interaction with KLF5, contributes to the maintenance of neuropathic pain via increasing MAPK pathway-related gene expression.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are targets of various clinically approved drugs. Here we report that SNL increased GPR151 expression in the spinal cord, and mutation or inhibition of GPR151 alleviated SNL-induced neuropathic pain. In addition, SNL downregulated the expression of DNMT3b, which caused demethylation of GPR151 gene promoter, facilitated the binding of transcriptional factor KLF5 with the GPR151 promoter, and further increased GPR151 expression in spinal neurons. The increased GPR151 may contribute to the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain via activating MAPK signaling and increasing pain-related gene expression. Our study reveals an epigenetic mechanism underlying GPR151 expression and suggests that targeting GPR151 may offer a new strategy for the treatment of neuropathic pain.
Solid tumors exhibit an inversed pH gradient with increased intracellular pH (pH(i) ) and decreased extracellular pH (pH(e) ). This inside-out pH gradient is generated via sodium/hydrogen antiporter 1, vacuolar-type H + ATPases, monocarboxylate transporters, (bi)carbonate (co)transporters and carboanhydrases. Our knowledge on how pH(e) -signals are sensed and what the respective receptors induce inside cells is scarce. Some pH-sensitive receptors (GPR4, GPR65/TDAG8, GPR68/OGR1, GPR132/G2A, possibly GPR31 and GPR151) and ion channels (acid-sensing ion channels ASICs, transient receptor potential vanilloid receptors TRPVs) transduce signals inside cells. As little is known on the expression and function of these pH sensors, we used immunostainings to study tissue samples from common and rare skin cancers. Our current and future work is directed towards investigating the impact of all the pH-sensing receptors in different skin tumors using cell culture techniques with selective knockdown/knockout (siRNA/CRISPR-Cas9). To study cell migration and proliferation, novel impedance-based wound healing assays have been developed and are used. The field of pH sensing in tumors and wounds holds great promise for the development of pH-targeting therapies, either against pH regulators or sensors to inhibit cell proliferation and migration.
Less than 3% of protein-coding genetic variants are predicted to result in loss of protein function through the introduction of a stop codon, frameshift, or the disruption of an essential splice site; however, such predicted loss-of-function (pLOF) variants provide insight into effector transcript and direction of biological effect. In >400,000 UK Biobank participants, we conduct association analyses of 3759 pLOF variants with six metabolic traits, six cardiometabolic diseases, and twelve additional diseases. We identified 18 new low-frequency or rare (allele frequency < 5%) pLOF variant-phenotype associations. pLOF variants in the gene GPR151 protect against obesity and type 2 diabetes, in the gene IL33 against asthma and allergic disease, and in the gene IFIH1 against hypothyroidism. In the gene PDE3B, pLOF variants associate with elevated height, improved body fat distribution and protection from coronary artery disease. Our findings prioritize genes for which pharmacologic mimics of pLOF variants may lower risk for disease.
In this study, we aimed to identify critical factors associated with superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) in human keratinocytes through gene and protein expression profiling approaches. After recombinant SOD2 was exogenously added to culture media, we conducted serial OMICS studies, which included RNA sequencing analysis, integrated antibody-chip arrays, and the implementation of bioinformatics algorithms, in order to reveal genes and proteins that are possibly associated with SOD2 in keratinocytes. These approaches identified several novel genes and proteins in keratinocytes that are associated with exogenous SOD2. These novel genes included DCT, which was up-regulated, and CD38, GPR151, HCK, KIT, and AFP, which were down-regulated. Among them, CD38 and KIT were also predicted as hub proteins in PPI mappings. By integrating the datasets obtained from these complementary high-throughput OMICS studies and utilizing the strengths of each method, we obtained new insights into the functional role of externally added SOD2 in skin cells and into several critical genes that are thought to play important roles in SOD2-associated skin function. The approach used here could help contribute to our clinical understanding of SOD2-associated applications and may be broadly applicable to a wider range of diseases. AbbreviationsSOD2superoxide dismutase 2DAVIDthe database for annotation, visualization and integrated discoveryKEGGKyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and GenomesPPIprotein-protein interactionsHTSHigh-throughput screeningCommunicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
