G-protein coupled receptor 22; Orphan G-protein coupled receptor. Seems to act through a G(i)/G(o) mediated pathway. May be involved in ciliogenesis (By similarity).
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Members of the GPCR family are targeted by a significant fraction of the available FDA-approved drugs. However, the physiological role and pharmacological properties of many GPCRs remain unknown, representing untapped potential in drug design. Of particular interest are ~100 less-studied GPCRs known as orphans because their endogenous ligands are unknown. Intriguingly, disease-causing mutations identified in patients, together with animal studies, have demonstrated that many orphan receptors play crucial physiological roles and, thus, represent attractive drug targets. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The majority of deorphanized GPCRs demonstrate coupling to G(i/o) . However, a limited number of techniques allow the detection of intrinsically small constitutive activity associated with G(i/o) protein activation, which represents a significant barrier in our ability to study orphan GPCR signalling. Using luciferase reporter assays, we effectively detected constitutive G(s) , G(q) and G(12/13) protein signalling by unliganded receptors and introducing various G protein chimeras, we provide a novel, highly sensitive tool capable of identifying G(i/o) coupling in unliganded orphan GPCRs. KEY RESULTS: Using this approach, we measured the constitutive activity of the entire class C GPCR family that includes eight orphan receptors and a subset of 20 prototypical class A GPCR members, including 11 orphans. Excitingly, this approach illuminated the G protein coupling profile of eight orphan GPCRs (GPR22, GPR137b, GPR88, GPR156, GPR158, GPR179, GPRC5D and GPRC6A) previously linked to pathophysiological processes. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: We provide a new platform that could be utilized in ongoing studies in orphan receptor signalling and de-orphanization efforts.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis in the elderly and is influenced by both genetic and environmental risk factors. The scope of the present article is to offer an overview of recent developments in the genetic epidemiology of knee and hip osteoarthritis, with particular emphasis on published genomewide association studies (GWAS). RECENT FINDINGS: Candidate gene studies and genomewide linkage studies have identified genes in the bone morphogenetic pathway (e.g. GDF5), the thyroid regulation pathway (DIO2) and apoptotic pathways as involved in genetic risk of large joint osteoarthritis. GWAS have reported structural genes (COL6A4), inflammation-related genes (PTGS2/PLA2G4A) and a locus on chr 7q22 (GPR22 and four other genes in the same linkage disequilibrium block) associated with osteoarthritis. SUMMARY: Genetic studies have identified polymorphisms associated with osteoarthritis and related end-points. These include genes in signaling cascades involved in joint and bone biology, as well as genes in inflammatory pathways and a cluster of five genes in perfect linkage disequilibrium in the 7q22 region.
BACKGROUND: The activation of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) signaling by external stimuli has been implicated in inducing cardiac stress and stress responses. GPR22 is an orphan GPCR expressed in brains and hearts, while its expression level is associated with cardiovascular damage in diabetes. Previous studies have suggested a protective role of GPR22 in mechanical cardiac stress, as loss of its expression increases susceptibility to heart failure post-ventricular pressure overload. However, the involvement and underlying signaling of GPR22 in cardiac stress response to ischemic stress remains unexplored. METHODS: In this study, we used cultured cells and a transgenic mouse model with cardiomyocyte-specific GPR22 overexpression to investigate the impact of ischemic stress on GPR22 expression and to elucidate its role in myocardial ischemic injury. Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) was induced by left coronary artery ligation in eight-week-old male GPR22 transgenic mice, followed by histopathological and biochemical examination four weeks post-AMI induction. RESULTS: GPR22 expression in H9C2 and RL-14 cells, two cardiomyocyte cell lines, was decreased by cobalt chloride (CoCl(2)) treatment. Similarly, reduced expression of myocardial GPR22 was observed in mice with AMI. Histopathological examinations revealed a protective effect of GPR22 overexpression in attenuating myocardial infarction in mice with AMI. Furthermore, myocardial levels of Bcl-2 and activation of PI3K-Akt signaling were downregulated by ischemic stress and upregulated by GPR22 overexpression. Conversely, the expression levels of caspase-3 and phosphorylated ERK1/2 in the infarcted myocardium were downregulated with GPR22 overexpression. CONCLUSION: Myocardial ischemic stress downregulates cardiac expression of GPR22, whereas overexpression of GPR22 in cardiomyocytes upregulates Akt signaling, downregulates ERK activation, and mitigates ischemia-induced myocardial injury.
BACKGROUND: Shoulder instability is a common pathology associated with an elevated risk of osteoarthritis (OA). Little is known about gene expression in the cartilage of the glenohumeral joint after dislocation events, particularly as it relates to the risk of posttraumatic OA. This study tested the hypothesis that gene expression in glenoid cartilage varies among acute instability (<3 dislocations), chronic instability (>/=3 dislocations), and OA. METHODS: Articular cartilage was collected from the anteroinferior glenoid of consenting patients undergoing shoulder stabilization surgery (n = 17) or total shoulder arthroplasty (n = 16). Digital quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to assess the relative expression of 57 genes (36 genes from OA risk allele studies, 21 genes from differential expression studies), comparing (1) OA versus instability (acute and chronic combined), (2) acute versus chronic instability, (3) OA versus acute instability, and (4) OA versus chronic instability. RESULTS: The expression of 11 genes from OA risk allele studies and 9 genes from differential expression studies was significantly different between cartilage from patients with instability and those with OA. Pro-inflammatory genes from differential expression studies and genes from OA risk allele studies were more highly expressed in cartilage in the OA group compared with the instability group, which expressed higher levels of extracellular matrix and pro-anabolic genes. The expression of 14 genes from OA risk allele studies and 4 genes from differential expression studies, including pro-inflammatory genes, anti-anabolic genes, and multiple genes from OA risk allele studies, was higher in the acute instability group compared with the chronic instability group. Cartilage in the OA group displayed higher expression of CCL3, CHST11, GPR22, PRKAR2B, and PTGS2 than cartilage in the group with acute or chronic instability. Whereas cartilage in both the acute and chronic instability groups had higher expression of collagen genes, cartilage in the OA group had expression of a subset of genes from OA risk allele studies or from differential expression studies that was lower than in the acute group and higher than in the chronic group. CONCLUSIONS: Glenoid cartilage has an inflammatory and catabolic phenotype in shoulders with OA but an anabolic phenotype in shoulders with instability. Cartilage from shoulders with acute instability displayed greater (cellular) metabolic activity compared with shoulders with chronic instability. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This exploratory study identified genes of interest, such as CCL3, CHST11, GPR22, PRKAR2B, and PTGS2, that have elevated expression in osteoarthritic glenoid cartilage. These findings provide new biological insight into the relationship between shoulder instability and OA, which could lead to strategies to predict and potentially modify patients' risk of degenerative arthritis due to shoulder instability.
AIMS/INTRODUCTION: Diabetes mellitus is a chronic degenerative disease characterized by high blood glucose levels as a result of problems in the action or insulin secretion. Although there are many treatments for this pathology, it has been associated with a high mortality rate. For this reason, it is important to try to identify new pathways that could be involved in diabetic complications. Recently, a new class of receptors has been reported, called orphan receptors because the associated ligand and signaling pathways are unknown, these receptors have been associated with certain pathologies. Therefore, the aim of this work was to study the expression of the orphan receptors GPR22 and GPR162 in heart, aorta, brain and kidney of diabetic rats. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used Wistar male rats with 10-12 weeks of age. Diabetes was induced by a single dose of streptozotocin (60 mg/kg i.p.). After four weeks, the tissue was obtained and the expression of the mRNA was measured by RT-PCR. RESULTS: Our results showed that the orphan receptors are expressed in a different way in heart, kidney, brain and aorta of diabetic and non-diabetic rats. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that orphan receptors could be involved in the development of diabetes complications.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play an essential role in the regulation of cardiovascular function. Therapeutic modulation of GPCRs has proven to be beneficial in the treatment of human heart disease. Myocardial "orphan" GPCRs, for which the natural ligand is unknown, represent potential novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of heart disease. Here, we describe the expression pattern, signaling pathways, and possible physiological role of the orphan GPR22. GPR22 mRNA analysis revealed a highly restricted expression pattern, with remarkably abundant and selective expression in the brain and heart of humans and rodents. In the heart, GPR22 mRNA was determined to be expressed in all chambers and was comparable with transcript levels of the beta(1)-adrenergic receptor as assessed by Taqman PCR. GPR22 protein expression in cardiac myocytes and coronary arteries was demonstrated in the rat heart by immunohistochemistry. When transfected into HEK-293 cells, GPR22 coupled constitutively to G(i)/G(o), resulting in the inhibition of adenyl cyclase. No constitutive coupling to G(s) or G(q) was observed. Myocardial mRNA expression of GPR22 was dramatically reduced following aortic banding in mice, suggesting a possible role in response to the stress associated with increased afterload. The absence of detectable GPR22 mRNA expression in the hearts of GPR22(-/-) mice had no apparent effect on normal heart structure or function; however, these mice displayed increased susceptibility to functional decompensation following aortic banding. Thus, we described, for the first time, the expression pattern and signaling for GPR22 and identified a protective role for GPR22 in response to hemodynamic stress resulting from increased afterload.
OBJECTIVES: An osteoarthritis (OA) susceptibility locus has been mapped to chromosome 7q22, to a region of high-linkage disequilibrium encompassing six genes: PRKAR2B, HBP1, COG5, GPR22, DUS4L and BCAP29. The authors assessed whether these genes were subject to cis-acting regulatory polymorphisms that are active in joint tissues and which could contribute to the association signal. METHODS: Using joint tissues from 156 patients with OA, and control cartilage from 25 patients who had neck of the femur fractures, the authors measured the overall gene expression by quantitative PCR and the allelic expression of the genes, using an assay that can distinguish mRNA output from each allele of a transcript single nucleotide polymorphism. RESULTS: Five of the genes were expressed in joint tissues, the exception being GPR22, which the authors could not detect. In OA cartilage compared with control cartilage, significantly reduced expression levels were observed for these five genes. Carriers of the OA-associated alleles showed a significant reduction in expression of HBP1 in cartilage (p=0.0002) and synovium (p=0.02), and of DUS4L in fat pad (p=0.04). HBP1 and DUS4L also demonstrated allelic expression imbalance across a range of different joint tissues, with carriers of the associated allele showing an HBP1 allelic expression imbalance profile that was significantly different from non-carriers (p=0.008). CONCLUSION: Cis-acting regulatory polymorphisms acting on HBP1 contribute to the OA association signal at chromosome 7q22. HBP1 codes for a transcription factor and studies by the authors have enabled them to prioritise this gene for further investigation.
OBJECTIVE: To identify novel genes involved in osteoarthritis (OA), by means of a genome-wide association study. METHODS: We tested 500,510 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,341 Dutch Caucasian OA cases and 3,496 Dutch Caucasian controls. SNPs associated with at least 2 OA phenotypes were analyzed in 14,938 OA cases and approximately 39,000 controls. Meta-analyses were performed using the program Comprehensive Meta-analysis, with P values <1 x 10(-7) considered genome-wide significant. RESULTS: The C allele of rs3815148 on chromosome 7q22 (minor allele frequency 23%; intron 12 of the COG5 gene) was associated with a 1.14-fold increased risk (95% confidence interval 1.09-1.19) of knee and/or hand OA (P = 8 x 10(-8)) and also with a 30% increased risk of knee OA progression (95% confidence interval 1.03-1.64) (P = 0.03). This SNP is in almost complete linkage disequilibrium with rs3757713 (68 kb upstream of GPR22), which is associated with GPR22 expression levels in lymphoblast cell lines (P = 4 x 10(-12)). Immunohistochemistry experiments revealed that G protein-coupled receptor protein 22 (GPR22) was absent in normal mouse articular cartilage or synovium. However, GPR22-positive chondrocytes were found in the upper layers of the articular cartilage of mouse knee joints that were challenged with in vivo papain treatment or methylated bovine serum albumin treatment. GPR22-positive chondrocyte-like cells were also found in osteophytes in instability-induced OA. CONCLUSION: Our findings identify a novel common variant on chromosome 7q22 that influences susceptibility to prevalence and progression of OA. Since the GPR22 gene encodes a G protein-coupled receptor, this is potentially an interesting therapeutic target.
BACKGROUND: Selenium (Se)-enriched glycoproteins have been a research highlight for the role of both Se and glycoproteins in immunoregulation. Arsenic (As) is a toxicant that is potentially toxic to the immune function and consequently to human health. Several reports suggested that Se could reduce the toxicity of heavy metals. Moreover, more and more nutrients in food had been applied to relieve As-induced toxicity. Hence glycoproteins were isolated and purified from Se-enriched Grifola frondosa, and their preliminary characteristics as well as amelioration effect and mechanism on As(3+) -induced immune toxicity were evaluated. RESULTS: Four factions, namely Se-GPr11 (electrophoresis analysis exhibited one band: 14.32 kDa), Se-GPr22 (two bands: 20.57 and 31.12 kDa), Se-GPr33 (three bands: 15.08, 20.57 and 32.78 kDa) and Se-GPr44 (three bands: 16.73, 32.78 and 42.46 kDa), were obtained from Se-enriched G. frondosa via DEAE-52 and Sephacryl S-400 column. In addition, Se-GPr11 and Se-GPr44 are ideal proteins that contain high amounts of almost all essential amino acids. Thereafter, the RAW264.7 macrophage model was adopted to estimate the effect of Se-GPr11 and Se-GPr44 on As(3+) -induced immune toxicity. The results showed that the pre-intervention method was the best consequent and the potential mechanisms were, first, by improving the oxidative stress state (enhancing the activity of superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase, decreasing the levels of reactive oxygen species and malondialdehyde); secondly, through nuclear factor-kappaB and mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated upregulation cytokines (interleukin-2 and interferon-gamma) secretion induced by As(3+) . CONCLUSION: The results suggested Se-enriched G. frondosa may be a feasible supplement to improve health level of the As(3+) pollution population. (c) 2021 Society of Chemical Industry.
We report the discovery of four novel human putative G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) genes. Gene GPR20 was isolated by amplifying genomic DNA with oligos based on the opioid and somatostatin related receptor genes and subsequent screening of a genomic library. Also, using our customized search procedure of a database of expressed sequence tags (dbEST), cDNA sequences that partially encoded novel GPCRs were identified. These cDNA fragments were obtained and used to screen a genomic library to isolate the full-length coding region of the genes. This resulted in the isolation of genes GPR21, GPR22 and GPR23. The four encoded receptors share significant identity to each other and to other members of the receptor family. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of GPR20 and GPR22 in several human brain regions while GPR20 expression was detected also in liver. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to map GPR20 to chromosome 8q, region 24.3-24.2, GPR21 to chromosome 9, region q33, GPR22 to chromosome 7, region q22-q31.1, and GPR23 to chromosome X, region q13-q21.1.
We quantified genome-wide patterns of lysine H3K27 acetylation (H3K27ac) in entorhinal cortex samples from Alzheimer's disease (AD) cases and matched controls using chromatin immunoprecipitation and highly parallel sequencing. We observed widespread acetylomic variation associated with AD neuropathology, identifying 4,162 differential peaks (false discovery rate < 0.05) between AD cases and controls. Differentially acetylated peaks were enriched in disease-related biological pathways and included regions annotated to genes involved in the progression of amyloid-beta and tau pathology (for example, APP, PSEN1, PSEN2, and MAPT), as well as regions containing variants associated with sporadic late-onset AD. Partitioned heritability analysis highlighted a highly significant enrichment of AD risk variants in entorhinal cortex H3K27ac peak regions. AD-associated variable H3K27ac was associated with transcriptional variation at proximal genes including CR1, GPR22, KMO, PIM3, PSEN1, and RGCC. In addition to identifying molecular pathways associated with AD neuropathology, we present a framework for genome-wide studies of histone modifications in complex disease.
Conserved amino acid sequences within the L1 open reading frame of the human papillomavirus (HPV) genome were used as a basis to design two degenerate primers (GP17 and GP18) and one general probe (GPR22) which direct polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and subsequent detection of a 620 to 660 bp DNA fragment. The conserved nature of the primers and probe was tested experimentally on a panel of 24 cloned HPV DNAs isolated from cutaneous and mucosal lesions, including HPV-2a and -57, which are known to be associated with lesions at both anatomical sites. The sensitivity of this PCR test was at the level of genomic Southern blot analysis, indicating that HPV infections producing high copy numbers can be detected. Positive results were obtained with DNA extracted from clinical samples of genital and cutaneous origin.
OBJECTIVE: Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common childhood rheumatic disease and has a strong genomic component. To date, JIA genetic association studies have had limited sample sizes, used heterogeneous patient populations, or included only candidate regions. The aim of this study was to identify new associations between JIA patients with oligoarticular disease and those with IgM rheumatoid factor (RF)-negative polyarticular disease, which are clinically similar and the most prevalent JIA disease subtypes. METHODS: Three cohorts comprising 2,751 patients with oligoarticular or RF-negative polyarticular JIA were genotyped using the Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0 or the Illumina HumanCoreExome-12+ Array. Overall, 15,886 local and out-of-study controls, typed on these platforms or the Illumina HumanOmni2.5, were used for association analyses. High-quality single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were used for imputation to 1000 Genomes prior to SNP association analysis. RESULTS: Meta-analysis showed evidence of association (P < 1 x 10(-6) ) at 9 regions: PRR9_LOR (P = 5.12 x 10(-8) ), ILDR1_CD86 (P = 6.73 x 10(-8) ), WDFY4 (P = 1.79 x 10(-7) ), PTH1R (P = 1.87 x 10(-7) ), RNF215 (P = 3.09 x 10(-7) ), AHI1_LINC00271 (P = 3.48 x 10(-7) ), JAK1 (P = 4.18 x 10(-7) ), LINC00951 (P = 5.80 x 10(-7) ), and HBP1 (P = 7.29 x 10(-7) ). Of these, PRR9_LOR, ILDR1_CD86, RNF215, LINC00951, and HBP1 were shown, for the first time, to be autoimmune disease susceptibility loci. Furthermore, associated SNPs included cis expression quantitative trait loci for WDFY4, CCDC12, MTP18, SF3A1, AHI1, COG5, HBP1, and GPR22. CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence of both unique JIA risk loci and risk loci overlapping between JIA and other autoimmune diseases. These newly associated SNPs are shown to influence gene expression, and their bounding regions tie into molecular pathways of immunologic relevance. Thus, they likely represent regions that contribute to the pathology of oligoarticular JIA and RF-negative polyarticular JIA.
The Affymetrix GeneChip platform was used to build a gene expression database of the normal human body. Postmortem human tissues represent a valuable source of biological materials for this type of study, but their use entails some delays before harvesting such tissues. We first evaluated the RNA quality obtained from tissues obtained 3-5 h postmortem and found variations that were both tissue and donor-dependent. RNAs extracted from brain regions were of higher quality than those obtained from the gut, while the cause of death was a significant factor in donor-dependent differences. To avoid these variables, we used rat duodenum to determine the effects of RNA degradation on the analysis of gene expression. Surprisingly, even samples exhibiting significant RNA degradation yielded robust gene expression results, comparable to those obtained using intact samples at a certain signal intensity cutoff. We extended these findings to our human expression database and obtained similar results, indicating that the Affymetrix platform, which is biased to the 3' end of transcripts for detection, can tolerate significant RNA degradation, while still yielding high quality expression data. Our resulting body index expression database is a valuable research tool. As examples of potential uses, we report novel expression sites for four potential therapeutic targets--CCL27, GPR22, GPR113 and GPR128--and as well as a set of thymus-specific genes, including three not previously associated with the thymus.
OBJECTIVES: Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent form of arthritis and accounts for substantial morbidity and disability, particularly in older people. It is characterised by changes in joint structure, including degeneration of the articular cartilage, and its aetiology is multifactorial with a strong postulated genetic component. METHODS: A meta-analysis was performed of four genome-wide association (GWA) studies of 2371 cases of knee OA and 35 909 controls in Caucasian populations. Replication of the top hits was attempted with data from 10 additional replication datasets. RESULTS: With a cumulative sample size of 6709 cases and 44 439 controls, one genome-wide significant locus was identified on chromosome 7q22 for knee OA (rs4730250, p=9.2 x 10(-)(9)), thereby confirming its role as a susceptibility locus for OA. CONCLUSION: The associated signal is located within a large (500 kb) linkage disequilibrium block that contains six genes: PRKAR2B (protein kinase, cAMP-dependent, regulatory, type II, beta), HPB1 (HMG-box transcription factor 1), COG5 (component of oligomeric golgi complex 5), GPR22 (G protein-coupled receptor 22), DUS4L (dihydrouridine synthase 4-like) and BCAP29 (B cell receptor-associated protein 29). Gene expression analyses of the (six) genes in primary cells derived from different joint tissues confirmed expression of all the genes in the joint environment.
The heterotrimeric G-protein pathway controls numerous cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, migration, membrane trafficking, and embryonic development. Regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) proteins are known to function at the G-protein level. Here, the functional role of a novel RGS protein, regulator of G-protein signaling 22 (RGS22), in the testis was investigated at the mRNA and protein levels. Our results demonstrate that RGS22 is a testis-specific gene. However, significantly decreased expression of RGS22 was found in the testes of patients with azoospermia. RGS22 was translated or posttranslationally modified into multiple proteins of different molecular sizes in prokaryocytes as well as in the testes. Its protein (NP_056483) was localized in spermatogenic cells and Leydig cells and could interact with guanine nucleotide binding protein, alpha 12, 13, and 11 (GNA12, GNA13, and GNA11). Fragmental GFP-fusion protein tracking revealed that the N-terminal of RGS22 was localized in the nucleus. RGS22 and GNA13 were localized in the nucleus from the elongated spermatid stage onward. Indirect immunofluorescence studies revealed defective expression of GNA13 in macrocephalic and global nucleus spermatozoa. These findings suggest that their functions in this subcellular compartment are likely related to the postmeiotic developmental phase, spermiogenesis. RGS22 may also play a role in GNA13 translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus during spermiogenesis.
As a member of orphan G protein-coupled receptors (oGPCRs), hGPCRc was cloned from human colon tissue and analyzed by bioinformatic softwares. It was showed that the corresponding amino acids of hGPCRc formed seven-transmembrane domains as the key characteristic of GPCRs. Then, the recombinant GFP-hGPCRc was constructed by fussing hGPCRc into pEGFP-N1 carrying green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene, and CHO-K1 cells were subsequently transfected with the GFP-hGPCRc or pEGFP-N1. The green fluorescence protein expression in the two different transfected cells was observed under the laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM). It was showed that green fluorescence protein was distributed in the whole bodies of the cells transfected with pEGFP-N1, but mainly distributed on the plasma membrane and cytoplasm membrane transfected with GFP-hGPCRc. Thus, the localization on the membrane of hGPCRc was accorded with the predication by bioinformatic analysis. The expression analysis of hGPCRc by RT-PCR indicated that hGPCRc was abundantly expressed in heart, kidney, cerebel and colon etc., but absent in liver, cerebra, small intestine and muscle etc. The expressing profile of hGPCRc could provide some useful clues to understanding its effects on embryonic development and physiological functions.
