Probable G-protein coupled receptor 21; Orphan receptor.
World Health Organization (WHO) has identified diabetes as one of the fastest growing non-communicable diseases with 422 million patients around the world in 2014. Diabetes, a metabolic disease, is characterized primarily by hyperglycemia which results in various macrovascular and microvascular complications like cardiovascular disease and neuropathies which can significantly deteriorate the quality of life. The body either does not manufactures enough insulin (type 1 diabetes or T1DM) or becomes insensitive to physiologically secreted insulin or both (type 2 diabetes or T2DM). The majority of the diabetic population is affected by type 2 diabetes. Currently, hyperglycemia is treated by a broad range of molecules such as biguanides, sulfonylurea, insulin, thiazolidinediones, incretin mimetics, and DPP-4 inhibitors exerting different mechanisms. However, new drug classes have indeed come in the market such as SGLT-2 inhibitors and other are in the experimental stages such as GPR 40 agonists, GSK-3 inhibitors, GK activators and GPR21 inhibitors which definitely could be anticipated as safe and effective for diabetes therapy. This article reviews the general approach to currently approved therapies for type 2 diabetes and focusing on novel approaches that could be a panacea and might be useful in the future for diabetes patients.
GPR21 is an orphan and constitutively active receptor belonging to the superfamily of G-Protein Coupled Receptors (GPCRs). GPR21 couples to the G(q) family of G proteins and is expressed in macrophages. Studies of GPR21 knock-out mice indicated that GPR21 may be involved in promoting macrophage migration. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of GPR21 in human macrophages, analyzing (i) its involvement in cell migration and cytokine release and (ii) the consequence of its pharmacological inhibition by using the inverse agonist GRA2. THP-1 cells were activated and differentiated into either M(1) or M(2) macrophages. GPR21 expression was evaluated at gene and protein level, the signalling pathway was investigated by an IP(1) assay, and cytokine release by ELISA. Cell migration was detected by the Boyden chamber migration assay, performed on macrophages derived from both the THP-1 cell line and human peripheral blood monocytes. In addition, we compared the effect of the pharmacological inhibition of GPR21 with the effect of the treatment with a specific GPR21 siRNA to downregulate the receptor expression, thus confirming that GRA2 acts as an inverse agonist of GPR21. GRA2 does not affect cell viability at the tested concentrations, but significantly reduces the release of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta from M(1) macrophages. The analysis of the migratory ability highlighted opposite effects of GRA2 on M(1) and M(2) macrophages since it decreased M(1), while it promoted M(2) cell migration. Therefore, the pharmacological inhibition of GPR21 could be of interest for pathological conditions characterized by low grade chronic inflammation.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
GPR21 is a class-A orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) and a potential therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes and other metabolic disorders. This receptor shows high basal activity in coupling to multiple G proteins in the absence of any known endogenous agonist or synthetic ligand. Here, we present the structures of ligand-free human GPR21 bound to heterotrimeric miniGs and miniG15 proteins, respectively. We identified an agonist-like motif in extracellular loop 2 (ECL2) that occupies the orthosteric pocket and promotes receptor activation. A side pocket that may be employed as a new ligand binding site was also uncovered. Remarkably, G protein binding is accommodated by a flexible cytoplasmic portion of transmembrane helix 6 (TM6) which adopts little or undetectable outward movement. These findings will enable the design of modulators for GPR21 for understanding its signal transduction and exploring opportunity for deorphanization.
Orphan receptors have unknown endogenous ligands, are expressed in different tissues, and participate in various diseases such as diabetes, hypertension and cancer. We studied the expression profiles of GPR21, GPR39, GPR135 and GPR153 orphan receptors in several tumour tissues. Cervical, breast, skin, prostate, and astrocytoma tissues were analysed for orphan receptor gene expression using Real time PCR analysis. GPR39 is over-expressed in cervical and prostate cancer tissues, and GPR21 and GPR135 receptors are significantly decreased in cervical, breast, skin, prostate, and astrocytoma tissues, when compared with healthy human fibroblasts. In conclusion, GPR21 and GPR135 receptor gene expression is reduced in cancerous tissues. GPR39 may have a role in the development and evolution of cervical and prostate cancer. These data suggest these receptors may be alternative molecules for new diagnostic approaches, and the design of novel therapeutics against oncological pathologies.
Obesity-induced inflammation is a key component of systemic insulin resistance, which is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes. A major driver of this inflammation/insulin resistance syndrome is the accumulation of proinflammatory macrophages in adipose tissue and liver. We found that the orphan GPCR Gpr21 was highly expressed in the hypothalamus and macrophages of mice and that whole-body KO of this receptor led to a robust improvement in glucose tolerance and systemic insulin sensitivity and a modest lean phenotype. The improvement in insulin sensitivity in the high-fat diet-fed (HFD-fed) Gpr21 KO mouse was traced to a marked reduction in tissue inflammation caused by decreased chemotaxis of Gpr21 KO macrophages into adipose tissue and liver. Furthermore, mice lacking macrophage expression of Gpr21 were protected from HFD-induced inflammation and displayed improved insulin sensitivity. Results of in vitro chemotaxis studies in human monocytes suggested that the defect in chemotaxis observed ex vivo and in vivo in mice is also translatable to humans. Cumulatively, our data indicate that GPR21 has a critical function in coordinating macrophage proinflammatory activity in the context of obesity-induced insulin resistance.
INTRODUCTION: A potential role for the orphan G protein-coupled receptor, GPR21, in linking immune cell infiltration into tissues and obesity-induced insulin resistance has been proposed, although limited studies in mice are complicated by non-selective deletion of Gpr21. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We hypothesized that a Gpr21-selective knockout mouse model, coupled with type 2 diabetes patient samples, would clarify these issues and enable clear assessment of GPR21 as a potential therapeutic target. RESULTS: High-fat feeding studies in Gpr21(-/-) mice revealed improved glucose tolerance and modest changes in inflammatory gene expression. Gpr21(-/-) monocytes and intraperitoneal macrophages had selectively impaired chemotactic responses to monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1, despite unaltered expression of Ccr2. Further genotypic analysis revealed that chemotactic impairment was due to dysregulated monocyte polarization. Patient samples revealed elevated GPR21 expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in type 2 diabetes, which was correlated with both %HbA1c and fasting plasma glucose levels. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, human and mouse data suggest that GPR21 influences both glucose homeostasis and MCP-1/CCL2-CCR2-driven monocyte migration. However, a Gpr21(-/-) bone marrow transplantation and high-fat feeding study in mice revealed no effect on glucose homeostasis, suggesting that there is no (or limited) overlap in the mechanism involved for monocyte-driven inflammation and glucose homeostasis.
Metabolic syndrome (MS) has been related with alterations in expression levels of orphan G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) such as GPR21 and GPR82, which could be involved in some of the elements that characterizes the metabolic syndrome. The aim of this work was to evaluate changes in GPR21 and GPR82 receptors expression in two models of metabolic syndrome: one genetic (Zucker rats), and the other based on a diet (70% fructose for 9 weeks). GPR21 and GPR82 gene expressions were evaluated in brain, heart, aorta, liver and kidney by RT-qPCR. Rats with a high fructose diet, as well as obese Zucker rats, showed initial stages of pancreatic damage and alterations in some biochemical parameters related to the model consistent with the classification of MS. GPR21 and GPR82 receptors expressed in all tissues. The expression of GPR21 decreased in heart, aorta and kidney, but in liver the expression was different: decreased in diet model and increased in genetic model. In contrast, GPR82 expression depended of tissue and metabolic syndrome model. The results highlight the possible role of GPR21 and GPR82 receptors in the development MS. We conclude that the expression of GPR21 and GPR82 in different tissues is related with MS and depend of the origin of the syndrome, so they could be a therapeutic target for that syndrome.
Type 2 diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder primarily caused by insulin resistance to which obesity is a major contributor. Expression levels of an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), GPR21, demonstrated a trend towards a significant increase in the epididymal fat pads of wild type high fat high sugar (HFHS)-fed mice. To gain further insight into the potential role this novel target may play in the development of obesity-associated type 2 diabetes, the signalling capabilities of the receptor were investigated. Overexpression studies in HEK293T cells revealed GPR21 to be a constitutively active receptor, which couples to Galphaq type G proteins leading to the activation of mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs). Overexpression of GPR21 in vitro also markedly attenuated insulin signalling. Interestingly, the effect of GPR21 on the MAPKs and insulin signalling was reduced in the presence of serum, inferring the possibility of a native inhibitory ligand. Homology modelling and ligand docking studies led to the identification of a novel compound that inhibited GPR21 activity. Its effects offer potential as an anti-diabetic pharmacological strategy as it was found to counteract the influence of GPR21 on the insulin signalling pathway.
GPR21 is a constitutively active, orphan, G-protein-coupled receptor, with in vivo studies suggesting its involvement in the modulation of insulin sensitivity. However, its precise contribution is not fully understood. As the liver is both a major target of insulin signalling and critically involved in glucose metabolism, the aim of this study was to examine the role of GPR21 in the regulation of glucose uptake and production in human hepatocytes. In particular, HepG2 cells, which express GPR21, were adopted as cellular models. Compared with untreated cells, a significant increase in glucose uptake was measured in cells treated with siRNA to downregulate GPR21 expression or with the GPR21-inverse agonist, GRA2. Consistently, a significantly higher membrane translocation of GLUT-2 was measured under these conditions. These effects were accompanied by an increased ratio of phAKT((Ser473))/tot-AKT and phGSK-3beta((Ser9))/tot-GSK-3beta, thus indicating a marked activation of the insulin signalling pathway. Moreover, a significant reduction in ERK activation was observed with GPR21 inhibition. Collectively, these results indicate that GPR21 mediates the negative effects on glucose uptake by the liver cells. In addition, they suggest that the pharmacological inhibition of GPR21 could be a novel strategy to improve glucose homeostasis and counteract hepatic insulin resistance.
The superfamily of GPCRs have diverse biological roles, transducing signals from a range of stimuli, from photon recognition by opsins to neurotransmitter regulation of neuronal function. Of the many identified genes encoding GPCRs, >130 are orphan receptors ( i.e., their endogenous ligands are unknown), and this subset represents putative novel therapeutic targets for pharmaceutical intervention in a variety of diseases. As an initial step toward drug discovery, determining a biological function for these newly identified receptors is of vital importance, and thus identification of a natural ligand(s) is a primary aim. There are several established methods for doing this, but many have drawbacks and usually require some in-depth knowledge about how the receptor functions. The technique described here utilizes a transcription-based reporter assay in live cells. This allows the determination of the signal transduction pathway any given oGPCR uses, without any prior knowledge of the endogenous ligand. This can therefore reduce the redundancy of effort involved in screening ligands at a given receptor in multiple formats (i.e., Galpha(s), Galpha(i/0), and Galpha(q) assays), as well as ensuring that the receptor targeted is capable of signaling if appropriately activated. Such knowledge is often laboriously obtained, and for almost all oGPCRs, this kind of information is not yet available. This technology can also be used to develop inverse agonist as well as agonist sensitive high throughput assays for oGPCRs. The veracity of this approach is demonstrated, using a number of known GPCRs. The likely signaling pathways of the GPR3, GPR12, GPR19, GPR21, and HG55 oGPCRs are shown, and a high throughput assay for GPR26 receptors developed. The methods outlined here for elucidation of the signal transduction pathways for oGPCRs and development of functional assays should speed up the process of identification of ligands for this potentially therapeutically useful group of receptors.
We report the discovery of four novel human putative G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) genes. Gene GPR20 was isolated by amplifying genomic DNA with oligos based on the opioid and somatostatin related receptor genes and subsequent screening of a genomic library. Also, using our customized search procedure of a database of expressed sequence tags (dbEST), cDNA sequences that partially encoded novel GPCRs were identified. These cDNA fragments were obtained and used to screen a genomic library to isolate the full-length coding region of the genes. This resulted in the isolation of genes GPR21, GPR22 and GPR23. The four encoded receptors share significant identity to each other and to other members of the receptor family. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of GPR20 and GPR22 in several human brain regions while GPR20 expression was detected also in liver. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to map GPR20 to chromosome 8q, region 24.3-24.2, GPR21 to chromosome 9, region q33, GPR22 to chromosome 7, region q22-q31.1, and GPR23 to chromosome X, region q13-q21.1.
The special glycerophospholipids plasmalogens (Pls) are enriched in the brain and reported to prevent neuronal cell death by enhancing phosphorylation of Akt and ERK signaling in neuronal cells. Though the activation of Akt and ERK was found to be necessary for the neuronal cells survival, it was not known how Pls enhanced cellular signaling. To answer this question, we searched for neuronal specific orphan GPCR (G-protein coupled receptor) proteins, since these proteins were believed to play a role in cellular signal transduction through the lipid rafts, where both Pls and some GPCRs were found to be enriched. In the present study, pan GPCR inhibitor significantly reduced Pls-induced ERK signaling in neuronal cells, suggesting that Pls could activate GPCRs to induce signaling. We then checked mRNA expression of 19 orphan GPCRs and 10 of them were found to be highly expressed in neuronal cells. The knockdown of these 10 neuronal specific GPCRs by short hairpin (sh)-RNA lentiviral particles revealed that the Pls-mediated phosphorylation of ERK was inhibited in GPR1, GPR19, GPR21, GPR27 and GPR61 knockdown cells. We further found that the overexpression of these GPCRs enhanced Pls-mediated phosphorylation of ERK and Akt in cells. Most interestingly, the GPCRs-mediated cellular signaling was reduced significantly when the endogenous Pls were reduced. Our cumulative data, for the first time, suggest a possible mechanism for Pls-induced cellular signaling in the nervous system.
The G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family share a structural motif of seven transmembrane segments with large numbers of conserved residues in those regions. Here, we report the identification and cloning of two novel human intronless GPCR genes, GPR52, GPR55 and a pseudogene PsiGPR53. GPR55 was identified from the expressed sequence tags (EST) database whereas GPR52 and pseudogene PsiGPR53 originated from the high throughput genome (HTG) database. A partial cDNA clone obtained from the IMAGE Consortium of GPR55 was used to screen a human genomic library to acquire the full length gene. GPR52 and PsiGPR53 were amplified from human genomic DNA using primers based on the HTG sequences. GPR55 and GPR52 encode receptors of 319 and 361 amino acids, respectively. GPR55 gene was mapped to chromosome 2q37, using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and its mRNA transcripts have been detected in the caudate nucleus and putamen, but not in five other brain regions. Human receptors showing the highest amino acid identity to GPR55 include P2Y5 (29%), GPR23 (30%), GPR35 (27%) and CCR4 (23%). GPR52 gene localized to chromosome 1q24 shares the highest identity with GPR21 (71%), histamine H2 (27%) and 5-HT4 (26%) human receptors. PsiGPR53 is a pseudogene mapped to chromosome 6p21 that demonstrates the highest similarity to the MRG (35%), MAS (28%) and C5a (24%) human receptor genes.
