Probable G-protein coupled receptor 27; Orphan receptor. Possible candidate for amine-like G-protein coupled receptor.
GPR27, GPR85 and GPR173 constitute a small family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) that share the distinctive characteristics of being highly conserved throughout vertebrate evolution and predominantly expressed in the brain. Accordingly, they have been coined as "Superconserved Receptors Expressed in the Brain" (SREB), although their expression profile is more complex than what was originally thought. SREBs have no known validated endogenous ligands and are thus labeled as "orphan" receptors. The investigation of this particular category of uncharacterized receptors holds great promise both in terms of physiology and drug development. In the largest GPCR family, the Rhodopsin-like or Class A, around 100 receptors are considered orphans. Because GPCRs are the most successful source of drug targets, the discovery of a novel function or ligand most likely will lead to significant breakthroughs for the discovery of innovative therapies. The high level of conservation is one of the characteristic features of the SREBs. We propose herein a detailed analysis of the putative evolutionary origin of this family. We highlight the properties that distinguish SREBs from other rhodopsin-like GPCRs. We present the current evidence for these receptors downstream signaling pathways and functions. We discuss the pharmacological challenge for the identification of natural or synthetic ligands of orphan receptors like SREBs. The different SREB-related scientific questions are presented with a highlight on what should be addressed in the near future, including the confirmation of published evidence and their validation as drug targets. In particular, we discuss in which pathological conditions these receptors may be of great relevance to solve unmet medical needs.
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most typical cancerous neoplasms occurring in the digestive system. For advanced GC, immunotherapy is the final option for them to prolong survival time. Hence, we aimed to identify new molecular targets to enhance the immunotherapy response in GC individuals. Then we applied bioinformatic analysis to explore the expression profiles of G-protein-coupled receptor 27 (GPR27) transcription and GPR27 methylation. The associations between survival of GC patients and GPR27 transcription and methylation were then analyzed. We also studied the link between GPR27 expression and levels of immune cell infiltration. Finally, we gained insights into the prognostic role of GPR27 protein in 97 cases of GC individuals. According to datasets gained from TCGA, GPR27 mRNA is expressed lower in GC tissues. Down-regulation of GPR27 transcription was related with better survival in GC individuals, and GPR27 cg03024619 had the most significant prognostic value (HR=0.553, P<0.0001). In addition, the expression level of GPR27 has a clear interaction with immune cells' infiltration and their markers. Single-cell analysis displayed that GPR27 is mainly expressed in macrophages. Finally, down-regulation of GPR27 protein was observed in GC tissues and correlated with better survival outcomes. GPR27 can serve as an important prognostic biomarker and exert an immunomodulatory role in GC. Our findings highlight the significance of GPR27 in a variety of cancers, including GC, and provide clues for a better understanding of GPR27 from bioinformatics and clinically validated perspective.
INTRODUCTION: Food allergic reactions can be severe and potentially life-threatening and the underlying immunological processes that contribute to the severity of reactions are poorly understood. The aim of this study is to integrate bulk RNA-sequencing of human and mouse peripheral blood mononuclear cells during food allergic reactions and in vivo mouse models of food allergy to identify dysregulated immunological processes associated with severe food allergic reactions. METHODS: Bulk transcriptomics of whole blood from human and mouse following food allergic reactions combined with integrative differential expressed gene bivariate and module eigengene network analyses to identify the whole blood transcriptome associated with food allergy severity. In vivo validation immune cell and gene expression in mice following IgE-mediated reaction. RESULTS: Bulk transcriptomics of whole blood from mice with different severity of food allergy identified gene ontology (GO) biological processes associated with innate and inflammatory immune responses, dysregulation of MAPK and NFkB signalling and identified 429 genes that correlated with reaction severity. Utilizing two independent human cohorts, we identified 335 genes that correlated with severity of peanut-induced food allergic reactions. Mapping mouse food allergy severity transcriptome onto the human transcriptome revealed 11 genes significantly dysregulated and correlated with severity. Analyses of whole blood from mice undergoing an IgE-mediated reaction revealed a rapid change in blood leukocytes particularly inflammatory monocytes (Ly6C(hi) Ly6G(-) ) and neutrophils that was associated with changes in CLEC4E, CD218A and GPR27 surface expression. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, IgE-mediated food allergy severity is associated with a rapid innate inflammatory response associated with acute cellular stress processes and dysregulation of peripheral blood inflammatory myeloid cell frequencies.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) represent a family with over 800 members in humans, and one-third of these are targets for approved drugs. A large number of GPCRs have unknown physiologic roles. Here, we investigated GPR27, an orphan GPCR belonging to the family of super conserved receptor expressed in the brain, with unknown functions. Cytosolic levels of L-lactate ([lactate](i)), the end product of aerobic glycolysis, were measured with the Laconic fluorescence resonance energy transfer nanosensor. In single 3T3 wild-type (WT) embryonic cells, the application of 8535 (1 microM), a surrogate agonist known to activate GPR27, resulted in an increase in [lactate](i). Similarly, an increase was recorded in primary rat astrocytes, a type of neuroglial cell abundant in the brain, which contain glycogen and express enzymes of aerobic glycolysis. In CRISPR-Cas9 GPR27 knocked out 3T3 cells, the 8535-induced increase in [lactate](i) was reduced compared with WT controls. Transfection of the GPR27-carrying plasmid into the 3T3KOGPR27 cells rescued the 8535-induced increase in [lactate](i). These results indicate that stimulation of GPR27 enhances aerobic glycolysis and L-lactate production in 3T3 cells and astrocytes. Interestingly, in the absence of GPR27 in 3T3 cells, resting [lactate](i) was increased in comparison with controls, further supporting the view that GPR27 regulates L-lactate homeostasis.
BACKGROUNDS: Glioma is a highly aggressive type of brain tumor, and its prognosis is still poor despite recent progress in treatment strategies. G protein-coupled receptor 27 (GPR27) is a member of the G protein-coupled receptor family and has been reported to be involved in various cellular processes, including tumor progression. Nevertheless, the clinical potential and tumor-related role of GPR27 in glioma remain unknown. Here we aimed to explore the function and role of GPR27 in gliomas. METHODS: In the current study, we evaluated the expression and clinical significance of GPR27 in gliomas using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets. We also conducted cellular experiments to evaluate the functional role of GPR27 in glioma cell growth. RESULTS: We found that GPR27 expression level was closely associated with disease status of glioma. Of note, GPR27 was negatively correlated with WHO grade, with grade IV samples showing the lowest GPR27 levels, while grade II samples showed the highest levels. Patients with IDH mutation or 1p/19q co-deletion exhibited higher GPR27 levels. In addition, lower GPR27 levels were correlated with higher death possibilities. In cellular experiments, we confirmed that GPR27 inhibited glioma cell growth. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that GPR27 may function as a potential prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target in gliomas. Further studies are needed to illustrate the signaling mechanism and clinical implications of GPR27 in gliomas.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) comprise the largest group of membrane receptors in eukaryotic genomes and collectively they regulate nearly all cellular processes. Despite the widely recognized importance of this class of proteins, many GPCRs remain understudied. G protein-coupled receptor 27 (Gpr27) is an orphan GPCR that displays high conservation during vertebrate evolution. Although, GPR27 is known to be expressed in tissues that regulate metabolism including the pancreas, skeletal muscle, and adipose tissue, its functions are poorly characterized. Therefore, to investigate the potential roles of Gpr27 in energy metabolism, we generated a whole body gpr27 knockout zebrafish line. Loss of gpr27 potentiated the elevation in glucose levels induced by pharmacological or nutritional perturbations. We next leveraged a mass spectrometry metabolite profiling platform to identify other potential metabolic functions of Gpr27. Notably, genetic deletion of gpr27 elevated medium-chain acylcarnitines, in particular C6-hexanoylcarnitine, C8-octanoylcarnitine, C9-nonanoylcarnitine, and C10-decanoylcarnitine, lipid species known to be associated with insulin resistance in humans. Concordantly, gpr27 deletion in zebrafish abrogated insulin-dependent Akt phosphorylation and glucose utilization. Finally, loss of gpr27 increased the expression of key enzymes in carnitine shuttle complex, in particular the homolog to the brain-specific isoform of CPT1C which functions as a hypothalamic energy senor. In summary, our findings shed light on the biochemical functions of Gpr27 by illuminating its role in lipid metabolism, insulin signaling, and glucose homeostasis.
We report here the molecular cloning, tissue distribution, and chromosomal localization of novel genes encoding G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). A search of a mouse database of expressed sequence tags revealed an EST partially encoding a GPCR, which was used to screen a mouse genomic library to obtain the translational open reading frame (ORF). The resultant clone, GPR27, contained an intronless ORF, encoding a receptor of 379 amino acids. In an alternate strategy, human genomic DNA was subjected to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification, using degenerate oligonucleotides based on GPR1. Two PCR products partially encoding GPCRs were isolated and used to screen a genomic library to obtain the translational ORF. One of the resultant clones, GPR30, contained an intronless ORF encoding a receptor of 375 amino acids. The other clone, GPR35, also contained an intronless ORF encoding a receptor of 309 amino acids. Transcripts corresponding to GPR27 and GPR30 were detected in several areas of human and rat CNS, While GPR35 expression was detected only in the rat intestine. Through fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis the gene encoding GPR30 was localized to chromosome 7p22 and GPR35 to chromosome 2q37.3.
GPR27 belongs, with GPR85 and GPR173, to a small subfamily of three receptors called "Super-Conserved Receptors Expressed in the Brain" (SREB). It has been postulated to participate in key physiological processes such as neuronal plasticity, energy metabolism, and pancreatic beta-cell insulin secretion and regulation. Recently, we reported the first selective GPR27 agonist, 2,4-dichloro-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (I, pEC(50) 6.34, E(max) 100%). Here, we describe the synthesis and structure-activity relationships of a series of new derivatives and analogs of I. All products were evaluated for their ability to activate GPR27 in an arrestin recruitment assay. As a result, agonists were identified with a broad range of efficacies including partial and full agonists, showing higher efficacies than the lead compound I. The most potent agonist was 4-chloro-2,5-difluoro-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (7y, pEC(50) 6.85, E(max) 37%), and the agonists with higher efficacies were 4-chloro-2-methyl-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (7p, pEC(50) 6.04, E(max) 123%), and 2-bromo-4-chloro-N-(4-(N-phenylsulfamoyl)phenyl)benzamide (7r, pEC(50) 5.99, E(max) 123%). Docking studies predicted the putative binding site and interactions of agonist 7p with GPR27. Selected potent agonists were found to be soluble and devoid of cellular toxicity within the range of their pharmacological activity. Therefore, they represent important new tools to further characterize the (patho)physiological roles of GPR27.
G protein-coupled receptors are the most important drug targets for human diseases. An important number of them remain devoid of confirmed ligands. GPR27 is one of these orphan receptors, characterized by a high level of conservation among vertebrates and a predominant expression in the central nervous system. In addition, it has recently been linked to insulin secretion. However, the absence of endogenous or surrogate ligands for GPR27 complicates the examination of its biologic function. Our aim was to validate GPR27 signaling pathways, and therefore we sought to screen a diversity-oriented synthesis library to identify GPR27-specific surrogate agonists. To select an optimal screening assay, we investigated GPR27 ligand-independent activity. Both in G protein-mediated pathways and in beta-arrestin 2 recruitment, no ligand-independent activity could be measured. However, we observed a recruitment of beta-arrestin 2 to a GPR27V(2) chimera in the presence of membrane-anchored G protein-coupled receptor kinase-2. Therefore, we optimized a firefly luciferase complementation assay to screen against this chimeric receptor. We identified two compounds [N-[4-(anilinocarbonyl)phenyl]-2,4-dichlorobenzamide (ChemBridge, San Diego, CA; ID5128535) and 2,4-dichloro-N-4-[(1,3-thiazol-2-ylamino)sulfonyl]phenylbenzamide (ChemBridge ID5217941)] sharing a N-phenyl-2,4-dichlorobenzamide scaffold, which were selective for GPR27 over its closely related family members GPR85 and GPR173. The specificity of the activity was confirmed with a NanoLuc Binary Technology beta-arrestin 2 assay, imaging of green fluorescent protein-tagged beta-arrestin 2, and PathHunter beta-arrestin 2 assay. Interestingly, no G protein activation was detected upon activation of GPR27 by these compounds. Our study provides the first selective surrogate agonists for the orphan GPR27.
Single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) associated with Parkinson's disease (PD) have been investigated mainly through genome-wide association studies. However, other genomic alterations, including copy number variations, remain less explored. In this study, we conducted whole-genome sequencing of primary (310 PD patients and 100 healthy individuals) and independent (100 PD patients and 100 healthy individuals) cohorts from the Korean population to identify high-resolution small genomic deletions, gains, and SNVs. Global small genomic deletions and gains were found to be associated with an increased and decreased risk of PD development, respectively. Thirty significant locus deletions were identified in PD, with most being associated with an increased PD risk in both cohorts. Small genomic deletions in clustered loci located in the GPR27 region had high enhancer signals and showed the closest association with PD. GPR27 was found to be expressed specifically in brain tissue, and GPR27 copy number loss was associated with upregulated SNCA expression and downregulated dopamine neurotransmitter pathways. Clustering of small genomic deletions on chr20 in exon 1 of the GNAS isoform was detected. In addition, we found several PD-associated SNVs, including one in the enhancer region of the TCF7L2 intron, which exhibited a cis-acting regulatory mode and an association with the beta-catenin signaling pathway. These findings provide a global, whole-genome view of PD and suggest that small genomic deletions in regulatory domains contribute to the risk of PD development.
Super-conserved Receptors Expressed in Brain (SREB) are a highly conserved family of orphan G protein-coupled receptors that consist of three members in most vertebrates: SREB1 (GPR27), SREB2 (GPR85), and SREB3 (GPR173). Each receptor is associated with diverse physiological processes and expressed in both ovaries and testes, but reproductive functions are only beginning to be understood. In addition, some fishes gained a novel fourth gene, SREB3B, which may have unique functions. The purpose of this study was to conduct a spatial and quantitative analysis of SREBs in the gonads of pufferfish (Dichotomyctere nigroviridis), which expresses all four genes. Multiplex RNAscope and absolute qPCR were used to assess gene expression patterns in both ovaries and testes. Expression was detected in early ovaries and dominated by sreb1 (approximately 2500 copies/ng RNA vs. 300 or less for others), with notable expression of all receptors in primary oocytes, granulosa cells, and small numbers of extra-follicular cells. Within primary oocytes, sreb1 and sreb3b exhibited diffuse patterns that may indicate early functions, while sreb2 and sreb3a were granular and may reflect stored mRNA. Early testicular development was dominated by sreb1 and sreb2 ( approximately 5000 copies/ng RNA) in spermatogonia. These patterns were somewhat reduced in late testes ( approximately 1000-2600 copies/ng RNA), but sreb3b exhibited a novel spatial pattern ( approximately 380 copies/ng RNA) within spermatogenic cysts. These results highlight diverse roles for the SREB family, and sreb3b is hypothesized to have unique roles in fish reproduction.
The special glycerophospholipids plasmalogens (Pls) are enriched in the brain and reported to prevent neuronal cell death by enhancing phosphorylation of Akt and ERK signaling in neuronal cells. Though the activation of Akt and ERK was found to be necessary for the neuronal cells survival, it was not known how Pls enhanced cellular signaling. To answer this question, we searched for neuronal specific orphan GPCR (G-protein coupled receptor) proteins, since these proteins were believed to play a role in cellular signal transduction through the lipid rafts, where both Pls and some GPCRs were found to be enriched. In the present study, pan GPCR inhibitor significantly reduced Pls-induced ERK signaling in neuronal cells, suggesting that Pls could activate GPCRs to induce signaling. We then checked mRNA expression of 19 orphan GPCRs and 10 of them were found to be highly expressed in neuronal cells. The knockdown of these 10 neuronal specific GPCRs by short hairpin (sh)-RNA lentiviral particles revealed that the Pls-mediated phosphorylation of ERK was inhibited in GPR1, GPR19, GPR21, GPR27 and GPR61 knockdown cells. We further found that the overexpression of these GPCRs enhanced Pls-mediated phosphorylation of ERK and Akt in cells. Most interestingly, the GPCRs-mediated cellular signaling was reduced significantly when the endogenous Pls were reduced. Our cumulative data, for the first time, suggest a possible mechanism for Pls-induced cellular signaling in the nervous system.
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in the United States is projected to double or triple by 2050. We reasoned that the genes that modulate insulin production might be new targets for diabetes therapeutics. Therefore, we developed an siRNA screening system to identify genes important for the activity of the insulin promoter in beta cells. We created a subclone of the MIN6 mouse pancreatic beta cell line that expresses destabilized GFP under the control of a 362 base pair fragment of the human insulin promoter and the mCherry red fluorescent protein under the control of the constitutively active rous sarcoma virus promoter. The ratio of the GFP to mCherry fluorescence of a cell indicates its insulin promoter activity. As G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) have emerged as novel targets for diabetes therapies, we used this cell line to screen an siRNA library targeting all known mouse GPCRs. We identified several known GPCR regulators of insulin secretion as regulators of the insulin promoter. One of the top positive regulators was Gpr27, an orphan GPCR with no known role in beta cell function. We show that knockdown of Gpr27 reduces endogenous mouse insulin promoter activity and glucose stimulated insulin secretion. Furthermore, we show that Pdx1 is important for Gpr27's effect on the insulin promoter and insulin secretion. Finally, the over-expression of Gpr27 in 293T cells increases inositol phosphate levels, while knockdown of Gpr27 in MIN6 cells reduces inositol phosphate levels, suggesting this orphan GPCR might couple to Gq/11. In summary, we demonstrate a MIN6-based siRNA screening system that allows rapid identification of novel positive and negative regulators of the insulin promoter. Using this system, we identify Gpr27 as a positive regulator of insulin production.
The identification of novel synthetic ligands for G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) is important not only for understanding human physiology, but also for the development of novel drugs, especially for orphan GPCRs for which endogenous ligands are unknown. One of the orphan GPCR subfamilies, Super conserved Receptor Expressed in Brain (SREB), consists of GPR27, GPR85 and GPR173 and is expressed in the central nervous system. We report herein the identification of inverse agonists for the SREB family without their agonists. We carried out an in vitro screening of 5472 chemical compounds from the RIKEN NPDepo chemical library. The binding of [(35) S]GTPgammaS to the GPR173-Gsalpha fusion protein expressed in Sf9 cells was measured and resulted in the identification of 8 novel GPR173 inverse agonists. The most potent compound showed an IC50 of approximately 8 mum. The identified compounds were also antagonists for other SREB members, GPR27 and GPR85. These results indicated that the SREB family could couple Gs-type G proteins, and SREB-Gsalpha fusion proteins showed significant constitutive activities. Moreover, a molecular model of GPR173 was constructed using the screening results. The combination of computational and biological methods will provide a unique approach to ligand identification for orphan GPCRs and brain research.
Loss of 3p11-p14 is a frequent event in epithelial cancer and a candidate prognostic biomarker in cervical cancer. In addition to loss, promoter methylation can participate in gene silencing and promote tumor aggressiveness. We have performed a complete mapping of promoter methylation at 3p11-p14 in two independent cohorts of cervical cancer patients (n = 149, n = 121), using Illumina 450K methylation arrays. The aim was to investigate whether hyperm-ethylation was frequent and could contribute to gene silencing and disease aggressiveness either alone or combined with loss. By comparing the methylation level of individual CpG sites with corresponding data of normal cervical tissue, 26 out of 41 genes were found to be hypermethylated in both cohorts. The frequency of patients with hypermethylation of these genes was found to be higher at tumor stages of 3 and 4 than in stage 1 tumors. Seventeen of the 26 genes were transcriptionally downregulated in cancer compared to normal tissue, whereof 6 genes showed a significant correlation between methylation and expression. Integrated analysis of methylation, gene dosage, and expression of the 26 hypermethylated genes identified 3 regulation patterns encompassing 8 hypermethylated genes; a methylation driven pattern (C3orf14, GPR27, ZNF717), a gene dosage driven pattern (THOC7, PSMD6), and a combined methylation and gene dosage driven pattern (FHIT, ADAMTS9, LRIG1). In survival analysis, patients with both hypermethylation and loss of LRIG1 had a worse outcome compared to those harboring only hypermethylation or none of the events. C3orf14 emerged as a novel methylation regulated suppressor gene, for which knockdown was found to promote invasive growth in human papilloma virus (HPV)-transformed keratinocytes. In conclusion, hypermethylation at 3p11-p14 is common in cervical cancer and may exert a selection pressure during carcinogenesis alone or combined with loss. Information on both events could lead to improved prognostic markers.
SREB is a subfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors, which consists of SREB1 (GPR27), SREB2 (GPR85), and SREB3 (GPR173). Its high evolutionary conservation and predominant expression in the CNS suggest that SREB family members and their undiscovered ligand(s) may have significant functions in the nervous system. SREB2 is the most conserved receptor throughout vertebrate evolution. As a first step in understanding the function of the SREB family, we have determined the anatomical gene expression profile of SREB2 in adult human, monkey, and rat forebrain using in situ hybridization histochemistry. The expression pattern of SREB2 mRNA was well conserved across three mammalian species. SREB2 mRNA was expressed in neurons throughout the brain and the most abundant expression was detected in the hippocampal dentate gyrus in all species examined. The areas expressing high levels of SREB2 mRNA overlap with brain structures known to possess high levels of plasticity, namely, the hippocampal formation, olfactory system, and supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei. Further, the anatomical expression of SREB1 and SREB3 overlapped with that of SREB2 in the adult monkey brain. Together, these data suggest a possible link between SREB family and neural plasticity, which may explain its extremely high conservation throughout vertebrate evolution.
BACKGROUND: Exceptionally, a single nucleotide sequence can be translated in vivo in two different frames to yield distinct proteins. In the case of the G-protein alpha subunit XL-alpha-s transcript, a frameshifted open reading frame (ORF) in exon 1 is translated to yield a structurally distinct protein called Alex, which plays a role in platelet aggregation and neurological processes. We carried out a novel bioinformatics screen for other possible dual-frame translated sequences, based on comparative genomics. RESULTS: Our method searched human, mouse and rat transcripts in frames +1 and -1 for ORFs which are unusually well conserved at the amino acid level. We name these conserved frameshifted overlapping ORFs 'matreshkas' to reflect their nested character. Select findings of our analysis revealed that the G-protein coupled receptor GPR27 is entirely contained within a frame -1 matreshka, thrombopoietin contains a matreshka which spans ~70% of its length, platelet glycoprotein IIIa (ITGB3) contains a matreshka with the predicted characteristics of a secreted peptide hormone, while the potassium channel KCNK12 contains a matreshka spanning >400 amino acids. CONCLUSION: Although the in vivo existence of translated matreshkas has not been experimentally verified, this genome-wide analysis provides strong evidence that substantial overlapping coding sequences exist in a number of human and rodent transcripts.
We describe the case of a 22-month-old boy with developmental and psychomotor retardation as well as craniofacial dysmorphism, including a cleft lip. Analysis of G-banded chromosomes of the propositus showed a de novo interstitial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 3, del(3)(p13p11). Fine mapping of the deletion was performed using fluorescence in situ hybridisation analysis with region-specific BAC clones. Eight BACs were absent from one chromosome 3 from the patient. Molecular analyses of eleven polymorphic DNA markers helped to narrow down the breakpoints and demonstrated that the derivative chromosome 3 is of paternal origin. The deleted segment encompasses about 15 Mb between marker D3S3551 and the centromere. Only a small number of known genes, including PROK2, GPR27, RYBP, PPP4R2, ROBO1, and GBE1, which map in the 3p13-p11 region are included in the deletion.
We report a child with a 785kb deletion of the 3p14.1p13 region including the genes FOXP1, EIF4E3, PROK2, GPR27 resulting in speech delay, contractures, hypertonia and blepharophimosis. FOXP1 and FOXP2 are transcription factors containing a polyglutamine tract and a forkhead DNA binding domain. They both play a role in the developing human foregut and brain [W. Shu, M.M. Lu, Y. Zhang, P. Tucker, D. Zhou, E.E. Morrisey, Foxp2 and Foxp1 cooperatively regulate lung and esophagus development, Development 134 (2007) 1991-2000, E. Spiteri, G. Konopka, G. Coppola, J. Bomar, M. Oldham, J. Ou, et al. Identification of the transcriptional targets of FOXP2, a gene linked to speech and language, in developing human brain, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81 (2007) 1144-1157, S. Tamura, Y. Morikawa, H. Iwanishi, T. Hisaoka, E. Senba. Expression pattern of the winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 in the developing central nervous system, Gene Expr. Patterns. 3 (2003) 193-197.]. Mutations in FOXP2 are known to cause severe speech and language abnormalities [C.S.L. Lai, S.E. Fisher, J.A. Hurst, F. Vargha-Khadem, A.P. Monaco, A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder, Nature 413 (2001) 519-523.] in humans and animals. It has been suggested that overlap of FOXP1 and FOXP2 expression in the songbird and human brain may indicate that mutations in FOXP1 would also result in speech and language abnormalities. The roles of EIF4E3, PROK2 and GPR27 are also evaluated.
