G-protein coupled receptor 39; Zn(2+) acts as an agonist. This receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol- calcium second messenger system. Its effect is mediated mainly through G(q)-alpha and G(12)/G(13) proteins. Involved in regulation of body weight, gastrointestinal mobility, hormone secretion and cell death (By similarity); Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Several studies proposed the importance of zinc ion in male fertility. Here, we describe the properties, roles and cellular mechanisms of action of Zn(2+) in spermatozoa, focusing on its involvement in sperm motility, capacitation and acrosomal exocytosis, three functions that are crucial for successful fertilization. The impact of zinc supplementation on assisted fertilization techniques is also described. The impact of zinc on sperm motility has been investigated in many vertebrate and invertebrate species. It has been reported that Zn(2+) in human seminal plasma decreases sperm motility and that Zn(2+) removal enhances motility. Reduction in the intracellular concentration of Zn(2+) during epididymal transit allows the development of progressive motility and the subsequent hyper activated motility during sperm capacitation. Extracellular Zn(2+) affects intracellular signaling pathways through its interaction with the Zn(2+) sensing receptor (ZnR), also named GPR39. This receptor was found in the sperm tail and the acrosome, suggesting the possible involvement of Zn(2+) in sperm motility and acrosomal exocytosis. Our studies showed that Zn(2+) stimulates bovine sperm acrosomal exocytosis, as well as human sperm hyper-activated motility, were both mediated by GPR39. Zn(2+) binds and activates GPR39, which activates the trans-membrane-adenylyl-cyclase (tmAC) to catalyze cAMP production. The NHE (Na(+)/H(+)-exchanger) is activated by cAMP, leading in increased pHi and activation of the sperm-specific Ca(2+) channel CatSper, resulting in an increase in [Ca(2+)](i), which, together with HCO(3)(-), activates the soluble adenylyl-cyclase (sAC). The increase in [cAMP](i) activates protein kinase A (PKA), followed by activation of the Src-epidermal growth factor receptor-Pphospholipase C (Src-EGFR-PLC) cascade, resulting in inositol-triphosphate (IP(3)) production, which mobilizes Ca(2+) from the acrosome, causing a further increase in [Ca(2+)](i) and the development of hyper-activated motility. PKA also activates phospholipase D1 (PLD1), leading to F-actin formation during capacitation. Prior to the acrosomal exocytosis, PLC induces phosphadidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)) hydrolysis, leading to the release of the actin-severing protein gelsolin to the cytosol, which is activated by Ca(2+), resulting in F-actin breakdown and the occurrence of acrosomal exocytosis.
G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) senses the change of extracellular divalent zinc ion and signals through multiple G proteins to a broad spectrum of downstream effectors. Here, we found that GPR39 was prevalent at inhibitory synapses of spinal cord somatostatin-positive (SOM(+)) interneurons, a mechanosensitive subpopulation that is critical for the conveyance of mechanical pain. GPR39 complexed specifically with inhibitory glycine receptors (GlyRs) and helped maintain glycinergic transmission in a manner independent of G protein signalings. Targeted knockdown of GPR39 in SOM(+) interneurons reduced the glycinergic inhibition and facilitated the excitatory output from SOM(+) interneurons to spinoparabrachial neurons that engaged superspinal neural circuits encoding both the sensory discriminative and affective motivational domains of pain experience. Our data showed that pharmacological activation of GPR39 or augmenting GPR39 interaction with GlyRs at the spinal level effectively alleviated the sensory and affective pain induced by complete Freund's adjuvant and implicated GPR39 as a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of inflammatory mechanical pain.
The G-protein coupled receptor GPR39 is abundantly expressed in various tissues and can be activated by changes in extracellular Zn(2+) in physiological concentrations. Previously, genetically modified rodent models have been able to shed some light on the physiological functions of GPR39, and more recently the utilization of novel synthetic agonists has led to the unraveling of several new functions in the variety of tissues GPR39 is expressed. Indeed, GPR39 seems to be involved in many important metabolic and endocrine functions, but also to play a part in inflammation, cardiovascular diseases, saliva secretion, bone formation, male fertility, addictive and depression disorders and cancer. These new discoveries offer opportunities for the development of novel therapeutic approaches against many diseases where efficient therapeutics are still lacking. This review focuses on Zn(2+) as an endogenous ligand as well as on the novel synthetic agonists of GPR39, placing special emphasis on the recently discovered physiological functions and discusses their pharmacological potential.
Ischemic events lead to many diseases and deaths worldwide. Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) occurs due to reduced blood circulation in tissues followed by blood reflow. Reoxygenation of ischemic tissues is characterized by oxidative stress, inflammation, energy distress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress. There are still no adequate clinical protocols or pharmacological approaches to address the consequences of I/R damage. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are important therapeutic targets. They compose a large family of seven transmembrane-spanning proteins that are involved in many biological functions. Orphan GPCRs are a large subgroup of these receptors expressed in different organs. In the present review, we summarized the literature regarding the role of orphan GPCRs in I/R in different organs. We focused on the effect of these receptors on modulating cellular and molecular processes underlying ischemia including apoptosis, inflammation, and autophagy. The study showed that GPR3, GPR4, GPR17, GPR30, GPR31, GPR35, GPR37, GPR39, GPR55, GPR65, GPR68, GPR75, GPR81, and GPR91 are involved in ischemic events, mainly in the brain and heart. These receptors offer new possibilities for treating I/R injuries in the body.
Evidence from both preclinical and clinical studies suggest the importance of zinc homeostasis in seizures/epilepsy. Undoubtedly, zinc, via modulation of a variety of targets, is necessary for maintaining the balance between neuronal excitation and inhibition, while an imbalance between excitation and inhibition underlies seizures. However, the relationship between zinc signaling and seizures/epilepsy is complex as both extracellular and intracellular zinc may produce either protective or detrimental effects. This review provides an overview of preclinical/behavioral, functional and molecular studies, as well as clinical data on the involvement of zinc in the pathophysiology and treatment of seizures/epilepsy. Furthermore, the potential of targeting elements associated with zinc signaling or homeostasis and zinc levels as a therapeutic strategy for epilepsy is discussed.
Elements (bioelements) are necessary factors required for the physiological function of organisms. They are critically involved in fundamental processes of life. Extra- and intracellular message and metabolic pathway factors as well as structural components include one or many elements in their functional structure. Recent years have seen an intensification in terms of knowledge gained about the roles of elements in anxiety disorders. In this chapter we present a review of the most important current data concerning the involvement of zinc, magnesium, copper, lithium, iron, and manganese, and their deficiency, in the pathophysiology and treatment of anxiety.
A distinct G-protein coupled receptor that senses changes in extracellular Zn(2+), ZnR/GPR39, was found in cells from tissues in which Zn(2+) plays a physiological role. Most prominently, ZnR/GPR39 activity was described in prostate cancer, skin keratinocytes, and colon epithelial cells, where zinc is essential for cell growth, wound closure, and barrier formation. ZnR/GPR39 activity was also described in neurons that are postsynaptic to vesicular Zn(2+) release. Activation of ZnR/GPR39 triggers Galphaq-dependent signaling and subsequent cellular pathways associated with cell growth and survival. Furthermore, ZnR/GPR39 was shown to regulate the activity of ion transport mechanisms that are essential for the physiological function of epithelial and neuronal cells. Thus, ZnR/GPR39 provides a unique target for therapeutically modifying the actions of zinc in a specific and selective manner.
As one of the most important elements in our body, zinc plays a part in both the pathophysiology of depression and the antidepressant response. Patients suffering from major depression show significantly reduced zinc levels, which are normalized following successful antidepressant treatment. Recent studies have shown the interaction between zinc, GPR39 and neuropeptides, including galanin and neuropeptide Y (NPY). The zinc-sensing receptor GPR39 forms heterotrimers with 5-HT(1A) and the galanin receptor GalR(1) upon their co-expression in mammalian cells. The oligomerization of these heterotrimers is regulated by the zinc concentration, and this may have an influence on depressive-like behavior. The antidepressant-like effect of zinc is linked to elevated levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in brain structures associated with emotion, such as the hippocampus and the amygdala. BDNF regulates neuropeptides, including NPY, cholecystokinin (CCK), and substance P or galanin, which are also implicated in mood disorders. This review focuses for the first time on the interaction between zinc, the GPR39 zinc receptor, BDNF and selected neuropeptides in terms of depression in order to determine its possible role in the neuropharmacology of that illness.
G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39), a member of the growth hormone-releasing peptide family, exhibits widespread expression across various tissues and demonstrates high constitutive activity, primarily activated by zinc ions. It plays critical roles in cell proliferation, differentiation, survival, apoptosis, and ion transport through the recruitment of Gq/11, Gs, G12/13, and beta-arrestin proteins. GPR39 is involved in anti-inflammatory and antioxidant responses, highlighting its diverse pathophysiological functions. Recent discoveries of endogenous ligands have enhanced our understanding of GPR39's physiological roles. Aberrant expression and reactivation of GPR39 have been implicated in a range of diseases, particularly central nervous system disorders, endocrine disruptions, cardiovascular diseases, cancers, and liver conditions. These findings position GPR39 as a promising therapeutic target, with the efficacy of synthetic ligands validated in various in vivo models. Nonetheless, their clinical applicability remains uncertain, necessitating further exploration of novel agonists-especially biased agonists-and antagonists. This review examines the unique residues contributing to the high constitutive activity of GPR39, its endogenous and synthetic ligands, and its pathophysiological implications, aiming to elucidate its pharmacological potential for clinical application in disease treatment.
GPR39, a member of the ghrelin family of G protein-coupled receptors, is zinc-responsive and contributes to the regulation of diverse neurovascular and neurologic functions. Accumulating evidence suggests a role as a homeostatic regulator of neuronal excitability, vascular tone, and the immune response. We review GPR39 structure, function, and signaling, including constitutive activity and biased signaling, and summarize its expression pattern in the central nervous system. We further discuss its recognized role in neurovascular, neurological, and neuropsychiatric disorders.
BACKGROUND: G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) is a transmembrane zinc receptor with two splice variants, which belongs to the G-protein-coupled receptor growth hormone-releasing peptide family. Its expression is induced by zinc, which activates GPR39, and its activation mediates cell proliferation, ion homeostasis, and anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and other pathophysiological effects via different signaling pathways. AIMS: The article reviews the latest literature in this field. In particular, the role of GPR39 in nervous system is discussed. MATERIALS AND METHODS: GPR39 can be a promising target in neurological diseases for targeted therapy, which will help doctors overcome the associated problems. DISCUSSION: GPR39 is expressed in vivo at several sites. Increasing evidence suggests that GPR39 plays an important role as a neuroprotective agent in vivo and regulates various neurological functions, including neurodegeneration, neuroelectrophysiology, and neurovascular homeostasis. CONCLUSION: This review aims to provide an overview of the functions, signal transduction pathways, and pathophysiological role of GPR39 in neurological diseases and summarize the GPR39 agonists that have been identified in the recent years.
While zinc has had a well-established structural role for many years, it is only during the last two decades that its role as a signaling molecule has been recognized. Ionic zinc, Zn(2+), that is endogenously released during physiological activity acts as a first messenger, triggering the activity of a distinct Zn(2+)-sensing-receptor, ZnR. The ZnR is a member of the Gq-coupled receptor family, and the molecular moiety mediating its activity is GPR39. In this review, we will discuss the role of the ZnR/GPR39 in mediating Zn(2+)-dependent signaling in epithelial tissues and in neurons, where Zn(2+) homeostasis plays physiological as well as pathological roles. Importantly, ZnR/GPR39 activates signaling that regulates a remarkably wide range of cell functions, including proliferation, differentiation and survival, as well as modulation of ion transport, and thereby, regulation of Na(+), H(+) and Cl(-) homeostasis. Moreover, signaling activated by ZnR/GPR39 plays a key role in mediating effects of Zn(2+) in health and disease. Thus, ZnR/GPR39 provides a unique target for therapeutically modifying the actions of zinc in a specific and selective manner.
We report a significant decrease in transcription of the G protein-coupled receptor GPR39 in striatal neurons of Parkinson's disease patients compared to healthy controls, suggesting that a positive modulator of GPR39 may beneficially impact neuroprotection. To test this notion, we developed various structurally diverse tool molecules. While we elaborated on previously reported starting points, we also performed an in silico screen which led to completely novel pharmacophores. In vitro studies indicated that GPR39 agonism does not have a profound effect on neuroprotection.
The endothelium-dependent vascular injury, a primary pathological feature of angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced hypertension. This study aimed to explore the role and underlying mechanisms of G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) in the pathogenesis of Ang II-induced hypertension. For in vivo studies, GPR39 knockout (KO) mice (C57BL/6 J, male) were generated and administered Ang II for 4 weeks. GPR39 expression was upregulated in the aorta of hypertensive patients and mice. The ablation of GPR39 mitigated vascular fibrosis, augmented endothelium-dependent vasodilation, and inhibited endothelial inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis in mice. Additionally, GPR39 KO decreased NOD-like receptor protein 3 (Nlrp3) gene expression in Ang II-stimulated endothelial cells. Notably, Nlrp3 activation counteracted the therapeutic benefits of GPR39 KO. We identified the potential ligand of GPR39 using structure-based high throughput virtual screening (HTVS) and validated its antihypertensive function in vitro and in vivo. The small molecule ligand Z1780628919 of GPR39 can also reduce Ang II-induced hypertension and improve vascular function. GPR39 KO and the small molecule ligand Z1780628919 potentially downregulates Nlrp3, thereby mitigating vascular fibrosis, endothelial inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis. This effect contributes to the alleviation of Ang II-induced hypertension and the rectification of vascular dysfunctions. These findings suggest new avenues for therapeutic intervention.
GPR39, an orphan receptor belonging to the family of G protein-coupled receptors, was originally reported to be the receptor of obestatin. However recently, numerous reports have questioned this conclusion. In mammals, GPR39 was reported to be involved in the regulation of gastrointestinal and the metabolic functions. In this article, a latest and brief review on the receptor family, structure, distribution and physiological functions of GPR39 has been reported.
Obestatin was identified in 2005 by Zhang and colleagues as a ghrelin-associated peptide, derived from posttranslational processing of the prepro-ghrelin gene. Initially, obestatin was reported to activate the G-protein-coupled receptor GPR39 and to reduce food intake and gastric emptying. However, obestatin remains a controversial peptide, as these findings have been questioned and its receptor is still a matter of debate, as well as its effects on feeding behavior. Recently, interaction with the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor has been suggested, in line with obestatin-positive effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. In addition, obestatin displays a variety of cellular effects, by regulating metabolic cell functions, increasing cell survival and proliferation, and inhibiting apoptosis and inflammation in different cell types. Finally, like ghrelin, obestatin is produced in the gastrointestinal tract, including the pancreas and adipose tissue, and exerts both local actions in peripheral tissues, and distant effects at the central level. Therefore, obestatin may indeed be considered a hormone, although additional studies are required to clarify its physiopathological role and to definitely identify its receptor.
OBJECTIVES: Obesity is a complex disease associated with a high risk of comorbidities. Gastric bypass surgery, an invasive procedure with low patient eligibility, is currently the most effective intervention that achieves sustained weight loss. This beneficial effect is attributed to alterations in gut hormone signaling. An attractive alternative is to pharmacologically mimic the effects of bariatric surgery by targeting several gut hormonal axes. The G protein-coupled receptor 39 (GPR39) expressed in the gastrointestinal tract has been shown to mediate ghrelin signaling and control appetite, food intake, and energy homeostasis, but the broader effect on gut hormones is largely unknown. A potent and efficacious GPR39 agonist (Cpd1324) was recently discovered, but the in vivo function was not addressed. Herein we studied the efficacy of the GPR39 agonist, Cpd1324, on metabolism and gut hormone secretion. METHODS: Body weight, food intake, and energy expenditure in GPR39 agonist-treated mice and GPR39 KO mice were studied in calorimetric cages. Plasma ghrelin, glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and peptide YY (PYY) levels were measured. Organoids generated from murine and human small intestine and mouse colon were used to study GLP-1 and PYY release. Upon GPR39 agonist administration, dynamic changes in intracellular GLP-1 content were studied via immunostaining and changes in ion transport across colonic mucosa were monitored in Ussing chambers. The G protein activation underlying GPR39-mediated selective release of gut hormones was studied using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer biosensors. RESULTS: The GPR39 KO mice displayed a significantly increased food intake without corresponding increases in respiratory exchange ratios or energy expenditure. Oral administration of a GPR39 agonist induced an acute decrease in food intake and subsequent weight loss in high-fat diet (HFD)-fed mice without affecting their energy expenditure. The tool compound, Cpd1324, increased GLP-1 secretion in the mice as well as in mouse and human intestinal organoids, but not in GPR39 KO mouse organoids. In contrast, the GPR39 agonist had no effect on PYY or GIP secretion. Transepithelial ion transport was acutely affected by GPR39 agonism in a GLP-1- and calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)-dependent manner. Analysis of Cpd1324 signaling properties showed activation of Galpha(q) and Galpha(i/o) signaling pathways in L cells, but not Galpha(s) signaling. CONCLUSIONS: The GPR39 agonist described in this study can potentially be used by oral administration as a weight-lowering agent due to its stimulatory effect on GLP-1 secretion, which is most likely mediated through a unique activation of Galpha subunits. Thus, GPR39 agonism may represent a novel approach to effectively treat obesity through selective modulation of gastrointestinal hormonal axes.
HNF4A and HNF1A encode transcription factors that are important for the development and function of the pancreas and liver. Mutations in both genes have been directly linked to Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk. To better define the pleiotropic gene regulatory roles of HNF4A and HNF1A, we generated a comprehensive genome-wide map of their binding targets in pancreatic and hepatic cells using ChIP-Seq. HNF4A was found to bind and regulate known (ACY3, HAAO, HNF1A, MAP3K11) and previously unidentified (ABCD3, CDKN2AIP, USH1C, VIL1) loci in a tissue-dependent manner. Functional follow-up highlighted a potential role for HAAO and USH1C as regulators of beta cell function. Unlike the loss-of-function HNF4A/MODY1 variant I271fs, the T2D-associated HNF4A variant (rs1800961) was found to activate AKAP1, GAD2 and HOPX gene expression, potentially due to changes in DNA-binding affinity. We also found HNF1A to bind to and regulate GPR39 expression in beta cells. Overall, our studies provide a rich resource for uncovering downstream molecular targets of HNF4A and HNF1A that may contribute to beta cell or hepatic cell (dys)function, and set up a framework for gene discovery and functional validation.
Obestatin, encoded by the same gene as ghrelin, was first described as a physiological opponent of ghrelin through an interaction with the orphan receptor GPR39. However, the effects of obestatin were not totally contrary to the effects of ghrelin in cardiovascular regulations based on the recent studies. We summarize here the current evidences surrounding the cardiovascular actions of obestatin, and the possible implications of obestatin as a therapeutic agent in common conditions such as hypertension and heart failure.
GPR39 is an orphan GPCR receptor belonging to the ghrelin/motilin receptor subfamily. The receptor is constitutively active and Zn(2+) is a physiological agonist of GPR39. The receptor is emerging as an important regulator of gastrointestinal motility and secretion. Although GPR39 does not seem to be involved in the regulation of food intake, contradictory results are available on the role of GPR39 in the regulation of body weight. A well-established stimulatory role for GPR39 has been defined in insulin secretion which makes the receptor an attractive target for the treatment of type 1 or 2 diabetes. GPR39 signaling also inhibits apoptosis and mediates neural synaptic signaling. Novel ligands of GPR39 are warranted to reveal the main physiological role of this receptor.
