G-protein coupled receptor 3; Orphan receptor with constitutive G(s) signaling activity that activate cyclic AMP. Has a potential role in modulating a number of brain functions, including behavioral responses to stress (By similarity), amyloid-beta peptide generation in neurons and neurite outgrowth (By similarity). Maintains also meiotic arrest in oocytes (By similarity).
Kupffer cells are liver resident macrophages and play critical role in fatty liver disease, yet the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we show that activation of G-protein coupled receptor 3 (GPR3) in Kupffer cells stimulates glycolysis and protects mice from obesity and fatty liver disease. GPR3 activation induces a rapid increase in glycolysis via formation of complexes between beta-arrestin2 and key glycolytic enzymes as well as sustained increase in glycolysis through transcription of glycolytic genes. In mice, GPR3 activation in Kupffer cells results in enhanced glycolysis, reduced inflammation and inhibition of high-fat diet induced obesity and liver pathogenesis. In human fatty liver biopsies, GPR3 activation increases expression of glycolytic genes and reduces expression of inflammatory genes in a population of disease-associated macrophages. These findings identify GPR3 activation as a pivotal mechanism for metabolic reprogramming of Kupffer cells and as a potential approach for treating fatty liver disease.
Thermogenic adipocytes possess a therapeutically appealing, energy-expending capacity, which is canonically cold-induced by ligand-dependent activation of beta-adrenergic G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Here, we uncover an alternate paradigm of GPCR-mediated adipose thermogenesis through the constitutively active receptor, GPR3. We show that the N terminus of GPR3 confers intrinsic signaling activity, resulting in continuous Gs-coupling and cAMP production without an exogenous ligand. Thus, transcriptional induction of Gpr3 represents the regulatory parallel to ligand-binding of conventional GPCRs. Consequently, increasing Gpr3 expression in thermogenic adipocytes is alone sufficient to drive energy expenditure and counteract metabolic disease in mice. Gpr3 transcription is cold-stimulated by a lipolytic signal, and dietary fat potentiates GPR3-dependent thermogenesis to amplify the response to caloric excess. Moreover, we find GPR3 to be an essential, adrenergic-independent regulator of human brown adipocytes. Taken together, our findings reveal a noncanonical mechanism of GPCR control and thermogenic activation through the lipolysis-induced expression of constitutively active GPR3.
The dialog between oocyte and cumulus cells brings a major contribution for oocyte meiotic and developmental competence. On the one hand, the oocyte will modulate follicle growth through specific gene expression (Figalpha, GDF-9, BMP15) as well as its meiosis (GPR3 et PDE3A). Beyond its action on proliferation, oocyte will control in part the differentiation of cumulus cells with a particular involvement of GDF-9, BMP15 in this late maturation process. On the other hand, somatic cells are the main targets of gonadotropins and will modulate both oocyte growth and maturation. Gap-junctions between oocyte and cumulus cells have a major role in this interaction, since they allow the action of some oocyte specific genes (GDF9) but also the control of its own metabolism and calcium movements. While ovulation will involve gonadotropins action on somatic cells, EGF-like factors recruited at the cumulus level will participate in this process. Finally we may suspect that improving the knowledge on oocyte-cumulus dialog will contribute to better define oocyte competence, while bringing some clues for in vitro maturation.
Ischemic events lead to many diseases and deaths worldwide. Ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) occurs due to reduced blood circulation in tissues followed by blood reflow. Reoxygenation of ischemic tissues is characterized by oxidative stress, inflammation, energy distress, and endoplasmic reticulum stress. There are still no adequate clinical protocols or pharmacological approaches to address the consequences of I/R damage. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are important therapeutic targets. They compose a large family of seven transmembrane-spanning proteins that are involved in many biological functions. Orphan GPCRs are a large subgroup of these receptors expressed in different organs. In the present review, we summarized the literature regarding the role of orphan GPCRs in I/R in different organs. We focused on the effect of these receptors on modulating cellular and molecular processes underlying ischemia including apoptosis, inflammation, and autophagy. The study showed that GPR3, GPR4, GPR17, GPR30, GPR31, GPR35, GPR37, GPR39, GPR55, GPR65, GPR68, GPR75, GPR81, and GPR91 are involved in ischemic events, mainly in the brain and heart. These receptors offer new possibilities for treating I/R injuries in the body.
The G protein-coupled receptors 3, 6, and 12 (GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12) comprise a family of closely related orphan receptors with no confirmed endogenous ligands. These receptors are constitutively active and capable of signaling through G protein-mediated and non-G protein-mediated mechanisms. These orphan receptors have previously been reported to play important roles in many normal physiological functions and to be involved in a variety of pathological conditions. Although they are orphans, GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12 are phylogenetically most closely related to the cannabinoid receptors. Using beta-arrestin2 recruitment and cAMP accumulation assays, we recently found that the nonpsychoactive phytocannabinoid cannabidiol (CBD) is an inverse agonist for GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12. This discovery highlights these orphan receptors as potential new molecular targets for CBD, provides novel mechanisms of action, and suggests new therapeutic uses of CBD for illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, cancer, and infertility. Furthermore, identification of CBD as a new inverse agonist for GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12 provides the initial chemical scaffolds upon which potent and efficacious agents acting on these receptors can be developed, with the goal of developing chemical tools for studying these orphan receptors and ultimately new therapeutic agents.
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the main mediators of signal transduction in the central nervous system. Therefore, it is not surprising that many GPCRs have long been investigated for their role in the development of anxiety and mood disorders, as well as in the mechanism of action of antidepressant therapies. Importantly, the endogenous ligands for a large group of GPCRs have not yet been identified and are therefore known as orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Nonetheless, growing evidence from animal studies, together with genome wide association studies (GWAS) and post-mortem transcriptomic analysis in patients, pointed at many oGPCRs as potential pharmacological targets. Among these discoveries, we summarize in this review how emotional behaviors are modulated by the following oGPCRs: ADGRB2 (BAI2), ADGRG1 (GPR56), GPR3, GPR26, GPR37, GPR50, GPR52, GPR61, GPR62, GPR88, GPR135, GPR158, and GPRC5B.
GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12 are three orphan receptors that belong to the Class A family of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). These GPCRs share over 60% of sequence similarity among them. Because of their close phylogenetic relationship, GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12 share a high percentage of homology with other lipid receptors such as the lysophospholipid and the cannabinoid receptors. On the basis of sequence similarities at key structural motifs, these orphan receptors have been related to the cannabinoid family. However, further experimental data are required to confirm this association. GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12 are predominantly expressed in mammalian brain. Their high constitutive activation of adenylyl cyclase triggers increases in cAMP levels similar in amplitude to fully activated GPCRs. This feature defines their physiological role under certain pathological conditions. In this review, we aim to summarize the knowledge attained so far on the understanding of these receptors. Expression patterns, pharmacology, physiopathological relevance, and molecules targeting GPR3, GPR6, and GPR12 will be analyzed herein. Interestingly, certain cannabinoid ligands have been reported to modulate these orphan receptors. The current debate about sphingolipids as putative endogenous ligands will also be addressed. A special focus will be on their potential role in the brain, particularly under neurological conditions such as Parkinson or Alzheimer's disease. Reported physiological roles outside the central nervous system will also be covered. This critical overview may contribute to a further comprehension of the physiopathological role of these orphan GPCRs, hopefully attracting more research towards a future therapeutic exploitation of these promising targets.
Schizophrenia remains a sizable socio-economic burden that continues to be treated with therapeutics based on 70-year old science. All currently approved therapeutics primarily target the dopamine D(2) receptor to achieve their efficacy. Whilst dopaminergic dysregulation is a key feature in this disorder, the targeting of dopaminergic machinery has yielded limited efficacy and an appreciable side effect burden. Over the recent decades, numerous drugs that engage non-dopaminergic G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have yielded a promise of efficacy without the deleterious side effect profile, yet none have successfully completed clinical studies and progressed to the market. More recently, there has been increased attention around non-dopaminergic GPCR-targeting drugs, which demonstrated efficacy in some schizophrenia symptom domains. This provides renewed hope that effective schizophrenia treatment may lie outside of the dopaminergic space. Despite the potential for muscarinic receptor- (and other well-characterised GPCR families) targeting drugs to treat schizophrenia, they are often plagued with complications such as lack of receptor subtype selectivity and peripheral on-target side effects. Orphan GPCR studies have opened a new avenue of exploration with many demonstrating schizophrenia-relevant mechanisms and a favourable expression profile, thus offering potential for novel drug development. This review discusses centrally expressed orphan GPCRs: GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR52, GPR85, GPR88 and GPR139 and their relationship to schizophrenia. We review their expression, signalling mechanisms and cellular function, in conjunction with small molecule development and structural insights. We seek to provide a snapshot of the growing evidence and development potential of new classes of schizophrenia therapeutics. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed issue Therapeutic Targeting of G Protein-Coupled Receptors: hot topics from the Australasian Society of Clinical and Experimental Pharmacologists and Toxicologists 2021 Virtual Annual Scientific Meeting. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v181.14/issuetoc.
BACKGROUND: In the central nervous system (CNS), G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most fruitful targets for neuropsychopharmacological drug development. Rhodopsin (class A) is the most studied class of GPCR and includes orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligand is not known or is unclear. Characterization of orphan GPCRs has proven to be challenging, and the production pace of GPCR-based drugs has been incredibly slow. OBJECTIVE: Determination of the functions of these receptors may provide unexpected insight into physiological and neuropathological processes. Advances in various methods and techniques to investigate orphan receptors including in situ hybridization and knockdown/knockout (KD/KO) showed extensive expression of these receptors in the mammalian brain and unmasked their physiological and neuropathological roles. Due to these rapid progress and development, orphan GPCRs are rising as a new and promising class of drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSION: This review presents a neuropsychopharmacological perspective of 26 orphan receptors of rhodopsin (class A) family, namely GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR17, GPR26, GPR35, GPR39, GPR48, GPR49, GPR50, GPR52, GPR55, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63, GPR68, GPR75, GPR78, GPR83, GPR84, GPR85, GPR88, GPR153, GPR162, GPR171, and TAAR6. We discussed the expression of these receptors in mammalian brain and their physiological roles. Furthermore, we have briefly highlighted their roles in neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, neuroinflammation, inflammatory pain, bipolar and schizophrenic disorders, epilepsy, anxiety, and depression.
GPR3 and GPR6 are members of a family of constitutively active, Gs protein-coupled receptors. Previously, it has been reported that GPR3 is involved in Alzheimer's disease whereas GPR6 plays potential roles in Parkinson's disease. GPR3 and GPR6 are considered orphan receptors because there are no confirmed endogenous agonists for them. However, GPR3 and GPR6 are phylogenetically related to the cannabinoid receptors. In this study, the activities of endocannabinoids and phytocannabinoids were tested on GPR3 and GPR6 using a beta-arrestin2 recruitment assay. Among the variety of cannabinoids tested, cannabidiol (CBD), the major non-psychoactive component of marijuana, significantly reduced beta-arrestin2 recruitment to both GPR3 and GPR6. In addition, the inhibitory effects of CBD on beta-arrestin2 recruitment were concentration-dependent for both GPR3 and GPR6, with a higher potency for GPR6. These data show that CBD acts as an inverse agonist at both GPR3 and GPR6 receptors. These results demonstrate for the first time that both GPR3 and GPR6 are novel molecular targets for CBD. Our discovery that CBD acts as a novel inverse agonist on both GPR3 and GPR6 indicates that some of the potential therapeutic effects of CBD (e.g. treatment of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease) may be mediated through these important receptors.
The Reggio group has constructed computer models of the inactive and G-protein-activated states of the cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 receptors, as well as, several orphan receptors that recognize a subset of cannabinoid compounds, including GPR55 and GPR18. These models have been used to design ligands, mutations, and covalent labeling studies. The resultant second-generation models have been used to design ligands with improved affinity, efficacy, and subtype selectivity. Herein, we provide a guide for the development of GPCR models using the most recent orphan receptor studied in our lab, GPR3. GPR3 is an orphan receptor that belongs to the Class A family of G-protein-coupled receptors. It shares high sequence similarity with GPR6, GPR12, the lysophospholipid receptors, and the cannabinoid receptors. GPR3 is predominantly expressed in mammalian brain and oocytes and it is known as a Galpha(s)-coupled receptor activated constitutively in cells. GPR3 represents a possible target for the treatment of different pathological conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, oocyte maturation, or neuropathic pain. However, the lack of potent and selective GPR3 ligands is delaying the exploitation of this promising therapeutic target. In this context, we aim to develop a homology model that helps us to elucidate the structural determinants governing ligand-receptor interactions at GPR3. In this chapter, we detail the methods and rationale behind the construction of the GPR3 active-and inactive-state models. These homology models will enable the rational design of novel ligands, which may serve as research tools for further understanding of the biological role of GPR3.
PURPOSE: Diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) affects 10 % of women seeking fertility treatment. Although it is much more prevalent than premature ovarian failure, less is known about its etiology. The purpose of this article is to review the possible genetic causes of, and associations with, pathologic DOR. METHODS: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed from 1966 through November 2013. RESULTS: Twenty-one articles identified genes associated with DOR: one gene mutation (FMR1), three polymorphisms (GDF9, FSHR, and ESR1), and seven genes differentially expressed between women with DOR and controls (AMH, LHCGR, IGF1, IGF2, IGF1R, IGF2R and GREM1). Six candidate genes were discovered in mice, including Foxl2, Gdf9, Bmp15, Aire, Wnt4, and Gpr3. Two case reports of chromosomal translocations were also identified. CONCLUSIONS: While the etiology of pathologic DOR is likely multifactorial, it is possible that many cases attributed to an idiopathic cause may have a genetic component. Larger studies are needed to expose the impact gene mutations, polymorphisms, and epigenetics have on pathologic DOR.
The G protein-coupled receptor gene GPR3 is expressed predominantly in oocytes, and functions in the early development of oocytes in the ovarian follicle. GPR3 is essential for meiotic arrest maintenance in mice, which makes it a candidate gene for premature ovarian failure (POF). The coding region of GPR3 was screened in 100 Chinese POF patients for variants of the GPR3 gene. Except for one novel variant in the 3'UTR region in three subjects and another novel synonymous c.135G-->A variant in one subject, no perturbations were found in the coding region. The results of this study suggested that mutations in GPR3 are not a common cause of POF in Chinese women.
There are various types of receptors in the central nervous system (CNS). G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have the highest expression with a wide range of physiological functions. A newer sub group of these receptors namely orphan GPCRs have been discovered. GPR3, GPR6, GPR17, GPR26, GPR37, GPR39, GPR40, GPR50, GPR52, GPR54, GPR55, GPR85, GPR88, GPR103, and GPR139 are the selected orphan GPCRs for this article. Their roles in the central nervous system have not been understood well so far. However, recent studies show that they may have very important functions in the CNS. Hence, in the present study, we reviewed most recent findings regarding the physiological roles of the selected orphan GPCRs in the CNS. After a brief presentation of each receptor, considering the results from genetic and pharmacological manipulation of the receptors, their roles in the pathophysiology of different diseases and disorders including anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and substance abuse will be discussed. At present, our knowledge regarding the role of GPCRs in the brain is very limited. However, previous limited studies show that orphan GPCRs have an important place in psychopharmacology and these receptors are potential new targets for the treatment of major CNS diseases.
G protein-coupled receptor 3 (GPR3) constitutively activates Galphas proteins without any ligands and is predominantly expressed in neurons. Since the expression and physiological role of GPR3 in immune cells is still unknown, we examined the possible role of GPR3 in T lymphocytes. The expression of GPR3 was upregulated 2 h after phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)/ionomycin stimulation and was sustained in Jurkat cells, a human T lymphocyte cell line. In addition, the expression of nuclear receptor 4 group A member 2 (NR4A2) was highly modulated by GPR3 expression. Additionally, GPR3 expression was linked with the transcriptional promoter activity of NR4A in Jurkat cells. In mouse CD4(+) T cells, transient GPR3 expression was induced immediately after the antigen receptor stimulation. However, the expression of NR4A2 was not modulated in CD4(+) T cells from GPR3-knockout mice after stimulation, and the population of Treg cells in thymocytes and splenocytes was not affected by GPR3 knockout. By contrast, spontaneous effector activation in both CD4(+) T cells and CD8(+) T cells was observed in GPR3-knockout mice. In summary, GPR3 is immediately induced by T cell stimulation and play an important role in the suppression of effector T cell activation.
BACKGROUND: Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a highly heterogeneous disease, and up to 25% of the cases can be explained by genetic causes. G protein-coupled receptor 3 (GPR3) plays an important role in oocyte arrest, and Gpr3-deficient mice exhibited POI-like phenotypes. CASE PRESENTATION: We identified two heterozygous missense variants of GPR3: NM_005281: c.C973T (p.R325C) and c.G772A (p.A258T) in two sporadic Han Chinese POI cases through whole exome sequencing and genetic analysis. The two patients were diagnosed as POI in their late 20s, presenting elevated serum levels of follicle stimulating hormone and secondary amenorrhea. Both variants are very rare in the population databases of ExAC, gnomAD and PGG.Han. The affected amino acids are conserved across species and the mutated amino acids are predicted deleterious with bioinformatics prediction tools and the protein three-dimensional structure analysis. CONCLUSIONS: It is the first report of rare GPR3 variants associated with POI women, providing an important piece of evidence for GPR3 as a candidate gene which should be screened in POI. This finding suggested the necessity of including GPR3 in etiology study and genetic counseling of POI patients.
G protein-coupled receptor 3 (GPR3) is a constitutively active receptor that maintains high 3'-5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels required for meiotic arrest in oocytes and CNS function. Ligand-activated G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) signal at the cell surface and are silenced by phosphorylation and beta-arrestin recruitment upon endocytosis. Some GPCRs can also signal from endosomes following internalization. Little is known about the localization, signaling, and regulation of constitutively active GPCRs. We demonstrate herein that exogenously-expressed GPR3 localizes to the cell membrane and undergoes internalization in HEK293 cells. Inhibition of endocytosis increased cell surface-localized GPR3 and cAMP levels while overexpression of GPCR-Kinase 2 (GRK2) and beta-arrestin-2 decreased cell surface-localized GPR3 and cAMP levels. GRK2 by itself is sufficient to decrease cAMP production but both GRK2 and beta-arrestin-2 are required to decrease cell surface GPR3. GRK2 regulates GPR3 independently of its kinase activity since a kinase inactive GRK2-K220R mutant significantly decreased cAMP levels. However, GRK2-K220R and beta-arrestin-2 do not diminish cell surface GPR3, suggesting that phosphorylation is required to induce GPR3 internalization. To understand which residues are targeted for desensitization, we mutated potential phosphorylation sites in the third intracellular loop and C-terminus and examined the effect on cAMP and receptor surface localization. Mutation of residues in the third intracellular loop dramatically increased cAMP levels whereas mutation of residues in the C-terminus produced cAMP levels comparable to GPR3 wild type. Interestingly, both mutations significantly reduced cell surface expression of GPR3. These results demonstrate that GPR3 signals at the plasma membrane and can be silenced by GRK2/beta-arrestin overexpression. These results also strongly implicate the serine and/or threonine residues in the third intracellular loop in the regulation of GPR3 activity.
G protein-coupled receptor 3 (GPR3) is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) predominantly expressed in mammalian brain and oocytes. GPR3 plays important roles in these two organs and is known as a Galphas-coupled receptor-activated constitutively in cells. However, the signal transduction pathway and pharmacological function of GPR3 remain unclear because of the lack of a specific ligand. By use of a human embryonic kidney 293 cell line stably expressing FLAG-GPR3-green fluorescent protein, a chemical screening for GPR3 ligands was performed using homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence cAMP assay. Diphenyleneiodonium chloride (DPI) was identified as a novel agonist of GPR3 with weak or no cross-reactivity with other GPCRs. DPI was further characterized to activate several GPR3-mediated signal transduction pathways, including Ca(2+) mobilization, cAMP accumulation, membrane recruitment of beta-arrestin2, and receptor desensitization. Parallel studies revealed that the activity of DPI is much more pronounced than sphingosine 1-phosphate, a previously reported GPR3 agonist. Our study identified a novel and specific agonist of GPR3, which provides a useful tool for further study of this orphan GPCR.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) comprise a large number of receptors. Orphan GPCRs are divided into six families. These groups contain orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligands are unclear. They have various physiological effects in the body and have the potential to be used in the treatment of different diseases. Considering their important role in the central and peripheral nervous system, their role in the treatment of pain has been the subject of some recent studies. At present, there are effective therapeutics for the treatment of pain including opioid medications and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. However, the side effects of these drugs and the risks of tolerance and dependence remain a major problem. In addition, neuropathic pain is a condition that does not respond to currently available analgesic medications well. In the present review article, we aimed to review the most recent findings regarding the role of orphan GPCRs in the treatment of pain. Accordingly, based on the preclinical findings, the role of GPR3, GPR7, GPR8, GPR18, GPR30, GPR35, GPR40, GPR55, GPR74, and GPR147 in the treatment of pain was discussed. The present study highlights the role of orphan GPCRs in the modulation of pain and implies that these receptors are potential new targets for finding better and more efficient therapeutics for the management of pain particularly neuropathic pain.
Activation of thermogenic adipocytes, a process canonically driven by norepinephrine through beta-adrenergic receptors, presents an appealing therapeutic approach to combat obesity. Recent work by Sveidahl Johansen et al., 2021 published in Cell has identified a noncanonical mechanism of brown adipocyte activation, in which lipolysis transcriptionally drives the constitutive activation of the G(s) protein-coupled receptor, GPR3, to induce thermogenesis.
