G-protein coupled receptor 52; Gs-coupled receptor activated by antipsychotics reserpine leading to an increase in intracellular cAMP and its internalization. May play a role in locomotor activity through modulation of dopamine, NMDA and ADORA2A-induced locomotor activity. These behavioral changes are accompanied by modulation of the dopamine receptor signaling pathway in striatum. Modulates HTT level via cAMP-dependent but PKA independent mechanisms throught activation of RAB39B that translocates HTT to the endoplasmic reticulum, thus avoiding proteasome degradation.
GPR52 is a highly conserved, brain-enriched, G(s/olf)-coupled orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that controls various cyclic AMP (cAMP)-dependent physiological and pathological processes. Stimulation of GPR52 activity might be beneficial for the treatment of schizophrenia, psychiatric disorders and other human neurological diseases, whereas inhibition of its activity might provide a potential therapeutic approach for Huntington's disease. Excitingly, HTL0048149 (HTL'149), an orally available GPR52 agonist, has been advanced into phase I human clinical trials for the treatment of schizophrenia. In this concise review, we summarize the current understanding of GPR52 receptor distribution as well as its structure and functions, highlighting the recent advances in drug discovery efforts towards small-molecule GPR52 ligands. The opportunities and challenges presented by targeting GPR52 for novel therapeutics are also briefly discussed.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are activated by manifold neurotransmitters, and their activation, in turn, evokes slow synaptic transmission. They are profoundly related to numerous psychiatric and neurological disorders such as schizophrenia and Parkinson's disease. The significant malady indications for GPCR modulators demonstrate a change towards obesity, diabetes, and Alzheimer's disease, while other central nervous system disorders persist highly represented. GPR52, GPR6, and GPR8 are recognised as orphan GPCRs, co-exist either with both the dopamine D2 and D1 receptors in neurons of the basal ganglia or with the dopamine D2 receptor alone, and recommend that between these orphan receptors, GPR52 has the maximum potential of being a therapeutic psychiatric receptor. Genetically modified creature models and molecular biological investigations have suggested that these improved GPCRs could be potential therapeutic psychiatric receptors. In this perspective, the role of molecular targets in GPCR-mediated signalling has been discussed that would be novel drug design and discovery options for a scientist to elaborate previous knowledge with modern techniques.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most common targets of the neuropharmacological drugs in the central nervous system (CNS). GPCRs are activated by manifold neurotransmitters, and their activation in turn evokes slow synaptic transmission. They are deeply involved in multiple neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. In the brain, the striatum is strongly innervated by the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and plays a central role in manifestation of psychiatric disorders. Recently, anatomical and comprehensive transcriptome analysis of the non-odorant GPCR superfamily revealed that the orphan GPCRs GPR88, GPR6, and GPR52, as well as dopamine D1 and D2 receptors and the adenosine A2a receptor, are the most highly enriched in the rodent striatum. Genetically engineered animal models and molecular biological studies have suggested that these striatally enriched GPCRs have a potential to be therapeutic psychiatric receptors. This review summarizes the current understanding of the therapeutic GPCR candidates for psychiatric disorders.
BACKGROUND: In the central nervous system (CNS), G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most fruitful targets for neuropsychopharmacological drug development. Rhodopsin (class A) is the most studied class of GPCR and includes orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligand is not known or is unclear. Characterization of orphan GPCRs has proven to be challenging, and the production pace of GPCR-based drugs has been incredibly slow. OBJECTIVE: Determination of the functions of these receptors may provide unexpected insight into physiological and neuropathological processes. Advances in various methods and techniques to investigate orphan receptors including in situ hybridization and knockdown/knockout (KD/KO) showed extensive expression of these receptors in the mammalian brain and unmasked their physiological and neuropathological roles. Due to these rapid progress and development, orphan GPCRs are rising as a new and promising class of drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSION: This review presents a neuropsychopharmacological perspective of 26 orphan receptors of rhodopsin (class A) family, namely GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR17, GPR26, GPR35, GPR39, GPR48, GPR49, GPR50, GPR52, GPR55, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63, GPR68, GPR75, GPR78, GPR83, GPR84, GPR85, GPR88, GPR153, GPR162, GPR171, and TAAR6. We discussed the expression of these receptors in mammalian brain and their physiological roles. Furthermore, we have briefly highlighted their roles in neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, neuroinflammation, inflammatory pain, bipolar and schizophrenic disorders, epilepsy, anxiety, and depression.
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the main mediators of signal transduction in the central nervous system. Therefore, it is not surprising that many GPCRs have long been investigated for their role in the development of anxiety and mood disorders, as well as in the mechanism of action of antidepressant therapies. Importantly, the endogenous ligands for a large group of GPCRs have not yet been identified and are therefore known as orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Nonetheless, growing evidence from animal studies, together with genome wide association studies (GWAS) and post-mortem transcriptomic analysis in patients, pointed at many oGPCRs as potential pharmacological targets. Among these discoveries, we summarize in this review how emotional behaviors are modulated by the following oGPCRs: ADGRB2 (BAI2), ADGRG1 (GPR56), GPR3, GPR26, GPR37, GPR50, GPR52, GPR61, GPR62, GPR88, GPR135, GPR158, and GPRC5B.
GPR52 is a class-A orphan G-protein-coupled receptor that is highly expressed in the brain and represents a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of Huntington's disease and several psychiatric disorders(1,2). Pathological malfunction of GPR52 signalling occurs primarily through the heterotrimeric G(s) protein(2), but it is unclear how GPR52 and G(s) couple for signal transduction and whether a native ligand or other activating input is required. Here we present the high-resolution structures of human GPR52 in three states: a ligand-free state, a G(s)-coupled self-activation state and a potential allosteric ligand-bound state. Together, our structures reveal that extracellular loop 2 occupies the orthosteric binding pocket and operates as a built-in agonist, conferring an intrinsically high level of basal activity to GPR52(3). A fully active state is achieved when G(s) is coupled to GPR52 in the absence of an external agonist. The receptor also features a side pocket for ligand binding. These insights into the structure and function of GPR52 could improve our understanding of other self-activated GPCRs, enable the identification of endogenous and tool ligands, and guide drug discovery efforts that target GPR52.
GPR52 is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that has been recently implicated as a potential drug target of Huntington's disease (HD), an incurable monogenic neurodegenerative disorder. In this research, we found that striatal knockdown of GPR52 reduces mHTT levels in adult HdhQ140 mice, validating GPR52 as an HD target. In addition, we discovered a highly potent and specific GPR52 antagonist Comp-43 with an IC(50) value of 0.63 muM by a structure-activity relationship (SAR) study. Further studies showed that Comp-43 reduces mHTT levels by targeting GPR52 and promotes survival of mouse primary striatal neurons. Moreover, in vivo study showed that Comp-43 not only reduces mHTT levels but also rescues HD-related phenotypes in HdhQ140 mice. Taken together, our study confirms that inhibition of GPR52 is a promising strategy for HD therapy, and the GPR52 antagonist Comp-43 might serve as a lead compound for further investigation.
Schizophrenia remains a sizable socio-economic burden that continues to be treated with therapeutics based on 70-year old science. All currently approved therapeutics primarily target the dopamine D(2) receptor to achieve their efficacy. Whilst dopaminergic dysregulation is a key feature in this disorder, the targeting of dopaminergic machinery has yielded limited efficacy and an appreciable side effect burden. Over the recent decades, numerous drugs that engage non-dopaminergic G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have yielded a promise of efficacy without the deleterious side effect profile, yet none have successfully completed clinical studies and progressed to the market. More recently, there has been increased attention around non-dopaminergic GPCR-targeting drugs, which demonstrated efficacy in some schizophrenia symptom domains. This provides renewed hope that effective schizophrenia treatment may lie outside of the dopaminergic space. Despite the potential for muscarinic receptor- (and other well-characterised GPCR families) targeting drugs to treat schizophrenia, they are often plagued with complications such as lack of receptor subtype selectivity and peripheral on-target side effects. Orphan GPCR studies have opened a new avenue of exploration with many demonstrating schizophrenia-relevant mechanisms and a favourable expression profile, thus offering potential for novel drug development. This review discusses centrally expressed orphan GPCRs: GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR52, GPR85, GPR88 and GPR139 and their relationship to schizophrenia. We review their expression, signalling mechanisms and cellular function, in conjunction with small molecule development and structural insights. We seek to provide a snapshot of the growing evidence and development potential of new classes of schizophrenia therapeutics. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed issue Therapeutic Targeting of G Protein-Coupled Receptors: hot topics from the Australasian Society of Clinical and Experimental Pharmacologists and Toxicologists 2021 Virtual Annual Scientific Meeting. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v181.14/issuetoc.
Orphan GPR52 is emerging as a promising neurotherapeutic target. Optimization of previously reported lead 4a employing an iterative drug design strategy led to the identification of a series of unique GPR52 agonists, such as 10a (PW0677), 15b (PW0729), and 24f (PW0866), with improved potency and efficacy. Intriguingly, compounds 10a and 24f showed greater bias for G protein/cAMP signaling and induced significantly less in vitro desensitization than parent compound 4a, indicating that reducing GPR52 beta-arrestin activity with biased agonism results in sustained GPR52 activation. Further exploration of compounds 15b and 24f indicated improved potency and efficacy, and excellent target selectivity, but limited brain exposure warranting further optimization. These balanced and biased GPR52 agonists provide important pharmacological tools to study GPR52 activation, signaling bias, and therapeutic potential for neuropsychiatric and neurological diseases.
Despite tremendous efforts, approximately 120 GPCRs remain orphan. Their physiological functions and their potential roles in diseases are poorly understood. Orphan GPCRs are extremely important because they may provide novel therapeutic targets for unmet medical needs. As a complement to experimental approaches, molecular modeling and virtual screening are efficient techniques to discover synthetic surrogate ligands which can help to elucidate the role of oGPCRs. Constitutively activated mutants and recently published active structures of GPCRs provide stimulating opportunities for building active molecular models for oGPCRs and identifying activators using virtual screening of compound libraries. We describe the molecular modeling and virtual screening process we have applied in the discovery of surrogate ligands, and provide examples for CCKA, a simulated oGPCR, and for two oGPCRs, GPR52 and GPR34.
There are various types of receptors in the central nervous system (CNS). G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have the highest expression with a wide range of physiological functions. A newer sub group of these receptors namely orphan GPCRs have been discovered. GPR3, GPR6, GPR17, GPR26, GPR37, GPR39, GPR40, GPR50, GPR52, GPR54, GPR55, GPR85, GPR88, GPR103, and GPR139 are the selected orphan GPCRs for this article. Their roles in the central nervous system have not been understood well so far. However, recent studies show that they may have very important functions in the CNS. Hence, in the present study, we reviewed most recent findings regarding the physiological roles of the selected orphan GPCRs in the CNS. After a brief presentation of each receptor, considering the results from genetic and pharmacological manipulation of the receptors, their roles in the pathophysiology of different diseases and disorders including anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and substance abuse will be discussed. At present, our knowledge regarding the role of GPCRs in the brain is very limited. However, previous limited studies show that orphan GPCRs have an important place in psychopharmacology and these receptors are potential new targets for the treatment of major CNS diseases.
See Huang and Gitler (doi:10.1093/brain/awy112) for a scientific commentary on this article.Lowering the levels of disease-causing proteins is an attractive treatment strategy for neurodegenerative disorders, among which Huntington's disease is an appealing disease for testing this strategy because of its monogenetic nature. Huntington's disease is mainly caused by cytotoxicity of the mutant HTT protein with an expanded polyglutamine repeat tract. Lowering the soluble mutant HTT may reduce its downstream toxicity and provide potential treatment for Huntington's disease. This is hard to achieve by small-molecule compound drugs because of a lack of effective targets. Here we demonstrate Gpr52, an orphan G protein-coupled receptor, as a potential Huntington's disease drug target. Knocking-out Gpr52 significantly reduces mutant HTT levels in the striatum and rescues Huntington's disease-associated behavioural phenotypes in a knock-in Huntington's disease mouse model expressing endogenous mutant Htt. Importantly, a novel Gpr52 antagonist E7 reduces mutant HTT levels and rescues Huntington's disease-associated phenotypes in cellular and mouse models. Our study provides an entry point for Huntington's disease drug discovery by targeting Gpr52.
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) regulate 3',5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels in T cells. cAMP as ubiquitous second messenger is crucial for adequate physiology of T cells by mediating effector T cell (Teff) function as well as regulatory T cell (Treg)-mediated immunosuppression. Several GPCRs have been identified to be crucial for Teff and Treg function. However, the role of the orphan, constitutively active Gs-coupled GPCR GPR52 is unknown. Here we show that GPR52 regulates cAMP levels in T cells but does not affect T cell function. We found that stimulation of transfected HEK cells or primary T cells with a GPR52 agonist results in a rise of intracellular cAMP. However, neither Gpr52 deficiency nor pharmacological modulation of GPR52 by antagonists or agonists affected T cell activation, differentiation, and proliferation or Treg-mediated immunosuppression. Moreover, Gpr52 deletion did not modify the clinical disease course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Our results demonstrate that a modulation of cAMP levels in T cells does not inevitably result in altered T cell function. While we could not identify an obvious role of GPR52 in in vitro T cell assays and in vivo CNS autoimmunity, it might regulate T cell function in a different context or affect the function of other GPR52-expressing cells.
Huntington's disease (HD) represents an important model for neurodegenerative disorders and proteinopathies. It is mainly caused by cytotoxicity of the mutant huntingtin protein (Htt) with an expanded polyQ stretch. While Htt is ubiquitously expressed, HD is characterized by selective neurodegeneration of the striatum. Here we report a striatal-enriched orphan G protein-coupled receptor(GPCR) Gpr52 as a stabilizer of Htt in vitro and in vivo. Gpr52 modulates Htt via cAMP-dependent but PKA independent mechanisms. Gpr52 is located within an intron of Rabgap1l, which exhibits epistatic effects on Gpr52-mediated modulation of Htt levels by inhibiting its substrate Rab39B, which co-localizes with Htt and translocates Htt to the endoplasmic reticulum. Finally, reducing Gpr52 suppresses HD phenotypes in both patient iPS-derived neurons and in vivo Drosophila HD models. Thus, our discovery reveals modulation of Htt levels by a striatal-enriched GPCR via its GPCR function, providing insights into the selective neurodegeneration and potential treatment strategies.
The G protein-coupled receptor 52 (GPR52) is an orphan receptor that is selectively expressed in the striatum and regulates various brain functions through activation of cAMP-dependent pathways. GPR52 has been identified as a promising therapeutic target for central nervous system disorders including schizophrenia and substance use disorders. Here, a series of novel GPR52 agonists were designed, synthesized, and evaluated based on compound 4. Several potent and efficacious GPR52 agonists (12c, 23a, 23d, 23e, 23f, and 23h) were identified with nanomolar range potency based on a systematic structure-activity relationship exploration. Further studies of 12c indicate enhanced efficacy, excellent target selectivity, and pharmacokinetic properties including good brain permeability. In vivo proof-of-concept investigations revealed that 12c displayed antipsychotic-like activity by significantly inhibiting amphetamine-induced hyperlocomotor behavior in mice. Collectively, our findings have resulted in an efficacious, brain-penetrant GPR52 agonist as a valuable pharmacological tool for investigating the physiological and therapeutic potential of GPR52 activation.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
G protein-coupled receptor 52 (GPR52) agonists are expected to improve the symptoms of psychiatric disorders. During exploration for a novel class of GPR52 agonists with good pharmacokinetic profiles, we synthesized 4-(3-(3-fluoro-5-(trifluoromethyl)benzyl)-5-methyl-1H-1,2,4-triazol-1-yl)-2-methylbenzamide (4u; half maximal effective concentration (EC(50))=75nM, maximal response (E(max))=122%) starting from a high-throughput screening hit 3 (EC(50)=470nM, E(max)=56%). The structural features of a reported GPR52 agonist were applied to 3, led to design 4-azolylbenzamides as novel GPR52 agonists. A structure-activity relationship study of 4-azolylbenzamide resulted in the design of the 1,2,4-triazole derivative 4u, which demonstrated excellent bioavailability in rats (F=53.8%). Oral administration of 4u (10mg/kg) significantly suppressed methamphetamine-induced hyperlocomotion in mice. Thus, 4u is a promising lead compound for drug discovery research of GPR52 agonists.
GPR52 is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) highly expressed in the brain, especially in the striatum, and represents an emerging therapeutic target for Huntington's disease (HD), an incurable monogenic neurodegenerative disorder caused by the mutation of the huntingtin (mHTT) gene. This Viewpoint discusses the discovery, published in this journal, that a highly potent and specific GPR52 antagonist was identified through high-throughput screening and structure-activity relationship study, which diminishes not only mHTT protein levels, but also ameliorates HD-like phenotypes in the animal disease models. This strategy offers intriguing promise as a surprising approach for HD therapy, where nucleic acid medicine approaches such as small interference RNAs have been the main focus and encounter obstacles such as delivery efficiency.
