Probable G-protein coupled receptor 63; Orphan receptor. May play a role in brain function.
BACKGROUND: In the central nervous system (CNS), G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most fruitful targets for neuropsychopharmacological drug development. Rhodopsin (class A) is the most studied class of GPCR and includes orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligand is not known or is unclear. Characterization of orphan GPCRs has proven to be challenging, and the production pace of GPCR-based drugs has been incredibly slow. OBJECTIVE: Determination of the functions of these receptors may provide unexpected insight into physiological and neuropathological processes. Advances in various methods and techniques to investigate orphan receptors including in situ hybridization and knockdown/knockout (KD/KO) showed extensive expression of these receptors in the mammalian brain and unmasked their physiological and neuropathological roles. Due to these rapid progress and development, orphan GPCRs are rising as a new and promising class of drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSION: This review presents a neuropsychopharmacological perspective of 26 orphan receptors of rhodopsin (class A) family, namely GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR17, GPR26, GPR35, GPR39, GPR48, GPR49, GPR50, GPR52, GPR55, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63, GPR68, GPR75, GPR78, GPR83, GPR84, GPR85, GPR88, GPR153, GPR162, GPR171, and TAAR6. We discussed the expression of these receptors in mammalian brain and their physiological roles. Furthermore, we have briefly highlighted their roles in neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, neuroinflammation, inflammatory pain, bipolar and schizophrenic disorders, epilepsy, anxiety, and depression.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Rupture of intracranial aneurysms (IAs) causes subarachnoid hemorrhage, leading to immediate death or severe disability. Identification of the genetic factors involved is critical for disease prevention and treatment. We aimed to identify the susceptibility genes for IAs. METHODS: Exome sequencing was performed in 12 families with histories of multiple cases of IA (number of cases per family >/=3), with a total of 42 cases. Various filtering strategies were used to select the candidate variants. Replicate association studies of several candidate variants were performed in probands of 24 additional IA families and 426 sporadic IA cases. Functional analysis for the mutations was conducted. RESULTS: After sequencing and filtering, 78 variants were selected for the following reasons: allele frequencies of variants in 42 patients was significantly (P<0.05) larger than expected; variants were completely shared by all patients with IA within >/=1 family; variants predicted damage to the structure or function of the protein by PolyPhen-2 (Polymorphism Phenotyping V2) and SIFT (Sorting Intolerance From Tolerant). We selected 10 variants from 9 genes (GPR63, ADAMST15, MLL2, IL10RA, PAFAH2, THBD, IL11RA, FILIP1L, and ZNF222) to form 78 candidate variants by considering commonness in families, known disease genes, or ontology association with angiogenesis. Replicate association studies revealed that only p.E133Q in ADAMTS15 was aggregated in the familial IA cases (odds ratio, 5.96; 95% confidence interval, 2.40-14.82; P=0.0001; significant after the Bonferroni correction [P=0.05/78=0.0006]). Silencing ADAMTS15 and overexpression of ADAMTS15 p.E133Q accelerated endothelial cell migration, suggesting that ADAMTS15 may have antiangiogenic activity. CONCLUSIONS: ADAMTS15 is a candidate gene for IAs.
The (lyso)phospholipid mediators sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), sphingosylphosphorylcholine (SPC), and phosphatidic acid (PA) regulate diverse cellular responses such as proliferation, survival and death, cytoskeletal rearrangements, cell motility, and differentiation among many others. Signaling is complex and many signaling events are mediated through the activation of cell surface seven transmembrane (7TM) G protein coupled receptors. Five high affinity receptors for S1P have been identified so far and named S1P(1, 2,3,4,5) (formerly referred to as endothelial differentiation gene (edg)1, 5, 3, 6, 8). Recently, the orphan receptor GPR63 was identified a low affinity S1P receptor structurally distant from the S1P(1-5) family. The orphan GPR3, 6, 12 cluster, phylogenetically related to the edg and melanocortin receptors appears to be subject to modulation by S1P and SPC although all three receptors are strong constitutive stimulators of the Galphas-adenylyl cyclase (AC) pathway and would not require additional ligand stimulation but rather inverse agonism to control activity. Ovarian cancer G protein coupled receptor 1 (OGR1) and GPR4, two structurally closely related receptors were assigned in functional and binding studies as high affinity molecular targets for SPC. Very recently, however, both OGR1 and GPR4 were described as receptors endowed with the ability to signal cells in response to protons. LPA exerts its biological effects through the activation of G protein coupled LPA(1-3) receptors (formerly referred to as edg2, 4, 7). A fourth high affinity LPA receptor has been identified: P2Y9 (GPR23) structurally related to nucleotide receptors and phylogenetically quite distant from the high affinity LPA(1-3) cluster. This review attempts to give an overview about the existing families of lysophosholipid receptors and the spectrum of lipid agonists they use as high or low affinity ligands to relay extracellular signals into intracellular responses. Recently deorphaned lipid receptors, within and outside the known lipid receptor clusters will receive particular attention.
The primary cilium is a signaling center critical for proper embryonic development. Previous studies have demonstrated that mice lacking Ttc21b have impaired retrograde trafficking within the cilium and multiple organogenesis phenotypes, including microcephaly. Interestingly, the severity of the microcephaly in Ttc21baln/aln homozygous null mutants is considerably affected by the genetic background and mutants on an FVB/NJ (FVB) background develop a forebrain significantly smaller than mutants on a C57BL/6J (B6) background. We performed a Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analysis to identify potential genetic modifiers and identified two regions linked to differential forebrain size: modifier of alien QTL1 (Moaq1) on chromosome 4 at 27.8 Mb and Moaq2 on chromosome 6 at 93.6 Mb. These QTLs were validated by constructing congenic strains. Further analysis of Moaq1 identified an orphan G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR), Gpr63, as a candidate gene. We identified a SNP that is polymorphic between the FVB and B6 strains in Gpr63 and creates a missense mutation predicted to be deleterious in the FVB protein. We used CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to create two lines of FVB congenic mice: one with the B6 sequence of Gpr63 and the other with a deletion allele leading to a truncation of the GPR63 C-terminal tail. We then demonstrated that Gpr63 can localize to the cilium in vitro. These alleles affect ciliary localization of GPR63 in vitro and genetically interact with Ttc21baln/aln as Gpr63;Ttc21b double mutants show unique phenotypes including spina bifida aperta and earlier embryonic lethality. This validated Gpr63 as a modifier of multiple Ttc21b neural phenotypes and strongly supports Gpr63 as a causal gene (i.e., a quantitative trait gene, QTG) within the Moaq1 QTL.
Hematological metastasis was the main metastatic method of colorectal cancer and the main reason for failure of radical surgery. Vascular endothelial cells played an important role in tumor hematologic metastasis. We previously performed RNA-Seq on primary and metastatic colorectal carcinoma (CRC) tissues and then identified GPR63 as a potential metastasis-promoting gene, but its role and mechanisms in the interaction between cancer cells and vascular endothelial cells were still unknown. In this study, GPR63 was significantly elevated in CRC tissues compared with paracarcinoma tissues. GPR63 expression was closely related to lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis in 147 CRC tissues. GPR63 promoted cell migration and stemness. Moreover, endothelial cell-derived S1P enhanced the migration and sphere-forming ability of CRC through activation of GPR63. Mechanistically, S1P promoted GPR63 binding to Src to activate JAK2/STAT3 pathway, and therefore promoted CRC cell migration. Our study revealed a novel mechanism by which endothelial cells promoted metastasis of CRC cells, which might have potential as a promising target for CRC therapy.
A growing number of orphan G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have been reported to be activated by lipid ligands, such as lysophosphatidic acid, sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), and cannabinoids, for which there are already well established receptors. These new ligand claims are controversial due to either lack of independent confirmations or conflicting reports. We used the beta-arrestin PathHunter assay system, a newly developed, generic GPCR assay format that measures beta-arrestin binding to GPCRs, to evaluate lipid receptor and ligand pairing. This assay eliminates interference from endogenous receptors on the parental cells because it measures a signal that is specifically generated by the tagged receptor and is immediately downstream of receptor activation. We screened a large number of newly "deorphaned" receptors (GPR23, GPR92, GPR55, G2A, GPR18, GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, and GPR63) and control receptors against a collection of approximately 400 lipid molecules to try to identify the receptor ligand in an unbiased fashion. GPR92 was confirmed to be a lysophosphatidic acid receptor with weaker responses to farnesyl pyrophosphate and geranylgeranyl diphosphate. The putative cannabinoid receptor GPR55 responded strongly to AM251, rimonabant, and lysophosphatidylinositol but only very weakly to endocannabinoids. G2A receptor was confirmed to be an oxidized free fatty acid receptor. In addition, we discovered that 3,3'-diindolylmethane, a dietary molecule from cruciferous vegetables, which has known anti-cancer properties, to be a CB(2) receptor partial agonist, with binding affinity around 1 microm. The anti-inflammatory effect of 3,3'-diindolylmethane in RAW264.7 cells was shown to be partially mediated by CB(2).
We report the discovery and tissue distributions of four novel human genes, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63 and GPR77, all of which encode G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). GPR61 was discovered in a search of the patent literature which retrieved a rabbit DNA sequence partially encoding a novel GPCR. This sequence was used to obtain a full-length human cDNA encoding GPR61, a receptor of 417 amino acid length. A search of the GenBank genomic sequence databases revealed three previously unrecognized intronless genes encoding the orphan GPCrs (oGPCRs) GPR62, GPR63 and GPR77, with respective amino acid lengths of 368, 419 and 337. Sequence analysis revealed that GPR61 and GPR62, and a published orphan receptor p47MNR, shared the highest level of identities to each other, ranging from 36 to 45% in the transmembrane (TM) domains. Together, these three oGPCRs appear to comprise a novel subfamily of GPCRs, most closely related to the serotonin 5-HT(6) receptor. Sequence analysis of GPR63 and GPR77 revealed highest sequence identities in the TM regions with the oGPCR PSP24 (58%) and the anaphylatoxin C5a receptor (49%) respectively. Tissue distribution analyses detected the expression of all four novel genes in the human brain. GPR61 mRNA expression was detected in the caudate, putamen and thalamus of human brain, with a more widespread expression pattern in rat brain, with mRNA signals in areas of the cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, hypothalamus and midbrain. GPR62 mRNA expression was detected in the basal forebrain, frontal cortex, caudate, putamen, thalamus and hippocampus. GPR63 mRNA expression was detected in the frontal cortex, with lower levels in the thalamus, caudate, hypothalamus and midbrain. Analysis of GPR77 mRNA expression revealed signals in the frontal cortex, hippocampus and hypothalamus with high transcript levels in the liver.
BACKGROUND: Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a neuropsychiatric disorder in children characterized by motor and verbal tics. Although several genes have been suggested in the etiology of TS, the genetic mechanisms remain poorly understood. METHODS: Using cytogenetics and FISH analysis, we identified an apparently balanced t(6,22)(q16.2;p13) in a male patient with TS and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). In order to map the breakpoints and to identify additional submicroscopic rearrangements, we performed whole genome mate-pair sequencing and CGH-array analysis on DNA from the proband. RESULTS: Sequence and CGH array analysis revealed a 400 kb deletion located 1.3 Mb telomeric of the chromosome 6q breakpoint, which has not been reported in controls. The deletion affects three genes (GPR63, NDUFA4 and KLHL32) and overlaps a region previously found deleted in a girl with autistic features and speech delay. The proband's mother, also a carrier of the translocation, was diagnosed with OCD and shares the deletion. We also describe a further potentially related rearrangement which, while unmapped in Homo sapiens, was consistent with the chimpanzee genome. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that genome-wide sequencing at relatively low resolution can be used for the identification of submicroscopic rearrangements. We also show that large rearrangements may escape detection using standard analysis of whole genome sequencing data. Our findings further provide a candidate region for TS and OCD on chromosome 6q16.
Five high affinity G-protein-coupled receptors for sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) have been characterised so far (S1P(1,2,3,4,5) formerly referred to as edg1,5,3,6,8). In this study, we show that S1P, dihydro-sphingosine 1-phosphate (dihydro-S1P) and dioleoylphosphatidic acid (doPA) are agonists for the orphan receptor GPR63. All three phospholipids mobilise intracellular calcium in CHO cells transiently transfected with GPR63. Calcium signals required cotransfection of a chimeric Galpha(q/i) protein in a fluorometric imaging plate reader (FLIPR) assay but did not require overexpressed G proteins in an aequorin assay, using a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-aequorin fusion protein as a bioluminescent Ca(2+) reporter. GPR63 expression in CHO cells confers proliferative responses to S1P in a pertussis toxin (PTX)-insensitive manner. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) indicated highest expression in brain, especially in the thalamus and the nucleus caudatus. In peripheral tissues, highest expression was observed in thymus, stomach and small intestine; lower abundance of transcripts was detected in kidney, spleen, pancreas and heart. The discovery that S1P, dihydro-S1P and dioleoylphosphatidic acid activate GPR63 will facilitate the identification of agonists and antagonists, and help to unravel the biological function of this receptor.
