G-protein coupled receptor 62; Orphan G-protein coupled receptor. Constitutively activates the G(q/11)/inositol phosphate and the G(s)-alpha/cAMP signaling pathways. Has spontaneous activity for beta-arrestin recruitment. Shows a reciprocal modulation of signaling functions with the melatonin receptor MTNR1B most likely through receptor heteromerization.
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the main mediators of signal transduction in the central nervous system. Therefore, it is not surprising that many GPCRs have long been investigated for their role in the development of anxiety and mood disorders, as well as in the mechanism of action of antidepressant therapies. Importantly, the endogenous ligands for a large group of GPCRs have not yet been identified and are therefore known as orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Nonetheless, growing evidence from animal studies, together with genome wide association studies (GWAS) and post-mortem transcriptomic analysis in patients, pointed at many oGPCRs as potential pharmacological targets. Among these discoveries, we summarize in this review how emotional behaviors are modulated by the following oGPCRs: ADGRB2 (BAI2), ADGRG1 (GPR56), GPR3, GPR26, GPR37, GPR50, GPR52, GPR61, GPR62, GPR88, GPR135, GPR158, and GPRC5B.
BACKGROUND: In the central nervous system (CNS), G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most fruitful targets for neuropsychopharmacological drug development. Rhodopsin (class A) is the most studied class of GPCR and includes orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligand is not known or is unclear. Characterization of orphan GPCRs has proven to be challenging, and the production pace of GPCR-based drugs has been incredibly slow. OBJECTIVE: Determination of the functions of these receptors may provide unexpected insight into physiological and neuropathological processes. Advances in various methods and techniques to investigate orphan receptors including in situ hybridization and knockdown/knockout (KD/KO) showed extensive expression of these receptors in the mammalian brain and unmasked their physiological and neuropathological roles. Due to these rapid progress and development, orphan GPCRs are rising as a new and promising class of drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSION: This review presents a neuropsychopharmacological perspective of 26 orphan receptors of rhodopsin (class A) family, namely GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR17, GPR26, GPR35, GPR39, GPR48, GPR49, GPR50, GPR52, GPR55, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63, GPR68, GPR75, GPR78, GPR83, GPR84, GPR85, GPR88, GPR153, GPR162, GPR171, and TAAR6. We discussed the expression of these receptors in mammalian brain and their physiological roles. Furthermore, we have briefly highlighted their roles in neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, neuroinflammation, inflammatory pain, bipolar and schizophrenic disorders, epilepsy, anxiety, and depression.
The melatonin receptor subfamily is composed of three members, MT(1) and MT(2), which are binding to melatonin, and GPR50, which shows high sequence homology to MT(1) and MT(2) but does not bind to melatonin or any other known ligand. An interesting feature of these receptors is their capacity to form homo- and heteromers between each other and also with other GPCRs. The following heteromers have been described: MT(1)/MT(2), MT(1)/GPR50, and heteromers composed of MT(2) and the serotonin 5-HT(2c) receptor or the orphan GPR61, GPR62, and GPR135 receptors. These heteromers represent novel pharmacological entities as they exhibit functional properties that are different from those of the corresponding homomers. Formation of several of these heteromers has been confirmed in tissues. MT(2)/5-HT(2c) heteromers are targeted by the clinically relevant antidepressant agomelatine, and MT(1)/MT(2) heteromers regulate nocturnal retinal light sensitivity. Here, we resume our current knowledge on melatonin receptor heteromerization and discuss how it contributes to the diversification of the function of melatonin receptors.
Understanding the function of orphan G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), whose cognate ligand is unknown, is of major importance as GPCRs are privileged drug targets for many diseases. Recent phylogenetic studies classified three orphan receptors, GPR61, GPR62 and GPR135 among the melatonin receptor subfamily, but their capacity to bind melatonin and their biochemical functions are not well characterized yet. We show here that GPR61, GPR62 and GPR135 do not bind [(3)H]-melatonin nor 2-[(125)I]iodomelatonin and do not respond to melatonin in several signaling assays. In contrast, the three receptors show extensive spontaneous ligand-independent activities on the cAMP, inositol phosphate and ss-arrestin pathways with distinct pathway-specific profiles. Spontaneous ss-arrestin recruitment internalizes all three GPRs in the endosomal compartment. Co-expression of the melatonin binding MT(2) receptor with GPR61, GPR62 or GPR135 has several consequences such as (i) the formation of receptor heteromers, (ii) the inhibition of melatonin-induced ss-arrestin2 recruitment to MT(2) and (iii) the decrease of elevated cAMP levels upon melatonin stimulation in cells expressing spontaneously active GPR61 and GPR62. Collectively, these data show that GPR61, GPR62 and GPR135 are unable to bind melatonin, but show a reciprocal regulatory interaction with MT(2) receptors.
C1q plays a key role as a recognition molecule in the immune system, driving autocatalytic complement cascade activation and acting as an opsonin. We have previously reported a non-immune role of complement C1q modulating the migration and fate of human neural stem cells (hNSC); however, the mechanism underlying these effects has not yet been identified. Here, we show for the first time that C1q acts as a functional hNSC ligand, inducing intracellular signaling to control cell behavior. Using an unbiased screening strategy, we identified five transmembrane C1q signaling/receptor candidates in hNSC (CD44, GPR62, BAI1, c-MET, and ADCY5). We further investigated the interaction between C1q and CD44 , demonstrating that CD44 mediates C1q induced hNSC signaling and chemotaxis in vitro, and hNSC migration and functional repair in vivo after spinal cord injury. These results reveal a receptor-mediated mechanism for C1q modulation of NSC behavior and show that modification of C1q receptor expression can expand the therapeutic window for hNSC transplantation.
We report the discovery and tissue distributions of four novel human genes, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63 and GPR77, all of which encode G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). GPR61 was discovered in a search of the patent literature which retrieved a rabbit DNA sequence partially encoding a novel GPCR. This sequence was used to obtain a full-length human cDNA encoding GPR61, a receptor of 417 amino acid length. A search of the GenBank genomic sequence databases revealed three previously unrecognized intronless genes encoding the orphan GPCrs (oGPCRs) GPR62, GPR63 and GPR77, with respective amino acid lengths of 368, 419 and 337. Sequence analysis revealed that GPR61 and GPR62, and a published orphan receptor p47MNR, shared the highest level of identities to each other, ranging from 36 to 45% in the transmembrane (TM) domains. Together, these three oGPCRs appear to comprise a novel subfamily of GPCRs, most closely related to the serotonin 5-HT(6) receptor. Sequence analysis of GPR63 and GPR77 revealed highest sequence identities in the TM regions with the oGPCR PSP24 (58%) and the anaphylatoxin C5a receptor (49%) respectively. Tissue distribution analyses detected the expression of all four novel genes in the human brain. GPR61 mRNA expression was detected in the caudate, putamen and thalamus of human brain, with a more widespread expression pattern in rat brain, with mRNA signals in areas of the cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, hypothalamus and midbrain. GPR62 mRNA expression was detected in the basal forebrain, frontal cortex, caudate, putamen, thalamus and hippocampus. GPR63 mRNA expression was detected in the frontal cortex, with lower levels in the thalamus, caudate, hypothalamus and midbrain. Analysis of GPR77 mRNA expression revealed signals in the frontal cortex, hippocampus and hypothalamus with high transcript levels in the liver.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) participate in diverse physiological functions and are promising targets for drug discovery. However, there are still over 140 orphan GPCRs whose functions remain to be elucidated. Gpr62 is one of the orphan GPCRs that is expressed in the rat and human brain. In this study, we found that Gpr62 is also expressed in male germ cells in mice, and its expression increases along with sperm differentiation. GPR62 lacks the BBXXB and DRY motifs, which are conserved across many GPCRs, and it was able to induce cAMP signaling in the absence of a ligand. These structural and functional features are conserved among mammals, and the mutant analysis of GPR62 has revealed that lacking of these motifs is involved in the constitutive activity. We also found that GPR62 can homooligomerize, but it is not sufficient for its constitutive activity. We further investigated its physiological function by using Gpr62 knockout (Gpr62(-/-)) mice. Gpr62(-/-) mice were born normally and did not show any abnormality in growth and behavior. In addition, both male and female Gp62(-/-) mice were fertile, and the differentiation and motility of spermatozoa were normal. We also found that Gpr61, the gene most similar to Gpr62 in the GPCR family shows a constitutive activity and an expression pattern similar to those of Gpr62 Our results suggest that GPR62 constitutively activates the cAMP pathway in male germ cells but is dispensable for male fertility, which is probably due to its functional redundancy with GPR61.
The primary structure analysis of the gag gene products of human T-cell leukemia virus (HTLV)-ICR has been nearly completed. A comparison of the amino acid sequences with the published nucleotide sequence of HTLV-IATK established that i) p19 which is known to share antigenic determinants with a protein present in normal thymic epithelium, is nevertheless virally coded. ii) The gene order and complete primary structure of the gag precursor (Pr55) which has been shown to be myristylated (My) at its N-terminus is My-p19-p24-p15-OH; and iii) the Pr55gag amino acid sequences of HTLV-ICR and HTLV-IATK are nearly identical showing only a single residue difference in the C-terminal region of p15. Antibodies to synthetic peptides inferred from the nucleotide sequence of the env gene of HTLV-IATK were also raised and used to identify and purify env precursor gPr62-68, surface glycoprotein gp46-51 and transmembrane protein p21. While most of the peptide sera were shown to be subgroup specific some of them detected antigenic determinants shared between protein homologs of viruses of subgroups I and II. Partial or complete amino acid sequences of both the gag and env gene coded proteins of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) structural proteins have also been determined. These extensive protein data together with nucleotide sequences confirm and extend our initial finding that HTLV and BLV are structurally and antigenically related and may have originated from common ancestor. The structural and immunological studies revealed also relationships between HTLV and a number of type C and type D retroviruses studied. One of the highly conserved sequences is shared by the transmembrane proteins of these retroviruses which have been implicated in immunosuppression. It is conceivable that these common regions have common biological function. Two previously unidentified proteins of BLV have also been purified and structurally characterized. Nucleotide sequences capable of coding for related products are present in HTLV. The nature and possible biological functions of these new BLV proteins and the putative HTLV gene products will be discussed. The size and complexity of the genome of the replication competent retroviruses are similar but not identical. The 35S RNA of all replication competent helper viruses is divided into three genes encoding the viral structural proteins: the gag (group-specific antigen) gene codes for the internal structural proteins, the pol (polymerase) gene codes for the enzymes protease, reverse transcriptase and endonuclease and the env (envelope) gene codes for the proteins of the viral envelope.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
