Probable G-protein coupled receptor 83; Orphan receptor. Could be a neuropeptide Y receptor.
Neuropeptides are chemical messengers that act to regulate a number of physiological processes, including feeding, reward, pain, and memory, among others. PEN is one of the most abundant hypothalamic neuropeptides; however, until recently, its target receptor remained unknown. In this Review, we summarize recent developments in research focusing on PEN and its receptor GPR83. We describe the studies leading to the deorphanization of GPR83 as the receptor for PEN. We also describe the signaling mediated by the PEN-GPR83 system, as well as the physiological roles in which PEN-GPR83 has been implicated. As studies have suggested a role for the PEN-GPR83 system in food intake and body weight regulation, as well as in drug addiction and reward disorders, a thorough understanding of this novel neuropeptide-receptor system will help identify novel therapeutic targets to treat pathophysiological conditions involving PEN-GPR83.
Pubertal timing varies considerably and is associated with later health outcomes. We performed multi-ancestry genetic analyses on ~800,000 women, identifying 1,080 signals for age at menarche. Collectively, these explained 11% of trait variance in an independent sample. Women at the top and bottom 1% of polygenic risk exhibited ~11 and ~14-fold higher risks of delayed and precocious puberty, respectively. We identified several genes harboring rare loss-of-function variants in ~200,000 women, including variants in ZNF483, which abolished the impact of polygenic risk. Variant-to-gene mapping approaches and mouse gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron RNA sequencing implicated 665 genes, including an uncharacterized G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR83, which amplified the signaling of MC3R, a key nutritional sensor. Shared signals with menopause timing at genes involved in DNA damage response suggest that the ovarian reserve might signal centrally to trigger puberty. We also highlight body size-dependent and independent mechanisms that potentially link reproductive timing to later life disease.
Our recent study confirmed that the mature neuropeptide FAM237A, also known as neurosecretory protein GL (NPGL), is an efficient agonist for GPR83. The paralog FAM237B was previously reported as a weak agonist for GPR83. In the present study, we prepared mature human FAM237B via an intein-fusion approach and demonstrated that it could cause a significant activation effect at the nanomolar range (1‒10 nM) in a NanoBiT-based beta-arrestin recruitment assay. Thus, FAM237B appears to be another endogenous agonist for GPR83 and future in vivo studies will be required to confirm this.
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are a superfamily of receptors responsible for initiation of a myriad of intracellular signaling cascades. Currently, GPCRs represent approximately 34% of marketed pharmaceuticals, a large portion of which have no known endogenous ligand. These orphan GPCRs represent a large pool of novel targets for drug development. Very recently, the neuropeptide PEN, derived from the proteolytic processing of the precursor proSAAS, has been identified as a selective, high-affinity endogenous ligand for the orphan receptor, GPR83. GPR83 is highly expressed in the brain, spleen and thymus, indicating that this receptor may be a target to treat neurological and immune disorders. In the brain GPR83 is expressed in regions involved in the reward pathway, stress/anxiety responses, learning and memory and metabolism. However, the cell type specific expression of GPR83 in these regions has only recently begun to be characterized. In the immune system, GPR83 expression is regulated by Foxp3 in T-regulatory cells that are involved in autoimmune responses. Moreover, in the brain this receptor is regulated by interactions with other GPCRs, such as the recently deorphanized receptor, GPR171, and other hypothalamic receptors such as MC4R and GHSR. The following review will summarize the properties of GPR83 and highlight its known and potential significance in health and disease, as well as its promise as a novel target for drug development.
G protein-coupled receptor 83 (GPR83) is primarily expressed in the brain and is implicated in the regulation of energy metabolism and some anxiety-related behaviours. Recently, the PCSK1N/proSAAS-derived peptide PEN, the procholecystokinin-derived peptide proCCK56-63, and family with sequence similarity 237 member A (FAM237A) were all reported as efficient agonists of GPR83. However, these results have not yet been reproduced by other laboratories and thus GPR83 is still officially an orphan receptor. The peptide PEN and proCCK56-63 share sequence similarity; however, they are completely different from FAM237A. To identify its actual ligand(s), in the present study we developed NanoLuc Binary Technology (NanoBiT)-based ligand-binding assay, fluorescent ligand-based visualization, and NanoBiT-based beta-arrestin recruitment assay for human GPR83. Using these assays, we demonstrated that mature human FAM237A could bind to GPR83 with nanomolar range affinity, and could activate this receptor and induce its internalization with nanomolar range efficiency in transfected human embryonic kidney 293T cells. However, we did not detect any interaction of PEN and proCCK56-63 with GPR83 using these assays. Thus, our results confirmed that FAM237A is an efficient agonist of GPR83, but did not support PEN and proCCK56-63 as ligands of this receptor. Clarification of their pairing paves the way for further functional studies of the brain-specific receptor GPR83 and the so far rarely studied neuropeptide FAM237A in the future.
PEN is an abundant peptide in the brain that has been implicated in the regulation of feeding. We identified a receptor for PEN in mouse hypothalamus and Neuro2A cells. PEN bound to and activated GPR83, a G protein (heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide)-binding protein)-coupled receptor (GPCR). Reduction of GPR83 expression in mouse brain and Neuro2A cells reduced PEN binding and signaling, consistent with GPR83 functioning as the major receptor for PEN. In some brain regions, GPR83 colocalized with GPR171, a GPCR that binds the neuropeptide bigLEN, another neuropeptide that is involved in feeding and is generated from the same precursor protein as is PEN. Coexpression of these two receptors in cell lines altered the signaling properties of each receptor, suggesting a functional interaction. Our data established PEN as a neuropeptide that binds GPR83 and suggested that these two ligand-receptor systems-PEN-GPR83 and bigLEN-GPR171-may be functionally coupled in the regulation of feeding.
Neuropeptides are the largest class of intercellular signaling molecules, contributing to a wide variety of physiological processes. Neuropeptide receptors are therapeutic targets for a broad range of drugs, including medications to treat pain, addiction, sleep disorders, and nausea. In addition to >100 peptides with known functions, many peptides have been identified in mammalian brain for which the cognate receptors have not been identified. Similarly, dozens of "orphan" G protein-coupled receptors have been identified in the mammalian genome. While it would seem straightforward to match the orphan peptides and receptors, this is not always easily accomplished. In this review we focus on peptides named PEN and big LEN, which are among the most abundant neuropeptides in mouse brain, and their recently identified receptors: GPR83 and GPR171. These receptors are co-expressed in some brain regions and are able to interact. Because PEN and big LEN are produced from the same precursor protein and co-secreted, the interaction of GPR83 and GPR171 is physiologically relevant. In addition to interactions of these two peptides/receptors, PEN and LEN are co-localized with neuropeptide Y and Agouti-related peptide in neurons that regulate feeding. In this review, using these peptide receptors as an example, we highlight the multiple modes of regulation of receptors and present the emerging view that neuropeptides function combinatorially to generate a network of signaling messages. The complexity of neuropeptides, receptors, and their signaling pathways is important to consider both in the initial deorphanization of peptides and receptors, and in the subsequent development of therapeutic applications.
BACKGROUND: In the central nervous system (CNS), G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most fruitful targets for neuropsychopharmacological drug development. Rhodopsin (class A) is the most studied class of GPCR and includes orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligand is not known or is unclear. Characterization of orphan GPCRs has proven to be challenging, and the production pace of GPCR-based drugs has been incredibly slow. OBJECTIVE: Determination of the functions of these receptors may provide unexpected insight into physiological and neuropathological processes. Advances in various methods and techniques to investigate orphan receptors including in situ hybridization and knockdown/knockout (KD/KO) showed extensive expression of these receptors in the mammalian brain and unmasked their physiological and neuropathological roles. Due to these rapid progress and development, orphan GPCRs are rising as a new and promising class of drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSION: This review presents a neuropsychopharmacological perspective of 26 orphan receptors of rhodopsin (class A) family, namely GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR17, GPR26, GPR35, GPR39, GPR48, GPR49, GPR50, GPR52, GPR55, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63, GPR68, GPR75, GPR78, GPR83, GPR84, GPR85, GPR88, GPR153, GPR162, GPR171, and TAAR6. We discussed the expression of these receptors in mammalian brain and their physiological roles. Furthermore, we have briefly highlighted their roles in neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, neuroinflammation, inflammatory pain, bipolar and schizophrenic disorders, epilepsy, anxiety, and depression.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
GPR83, the receptor for the neuropeptide PEN, exhibits high expression in the nucleus accumbens of the human and rodent brain, suggesting that it plays a role in modulating the mesolimbic reward pathway. However, the cell-type specific expression of GPR83, its functional impact in the reward pathway, and in drug reward-learning has not been fully explored. Using GPR83/eGFP mice, we show high GPR83 expression on cholinergic interneurons in the nucleus accumbens and moderate expression on ventral tegmental area dopamine neurons. In GPR83 knockout mice, baseline dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens is enhanced which disrupts the ratio of tonic vs phasic release. Additionally, GPR83 knockout leads to changes in the expression of dopamine-related genes. Using the morphine conditioned place preference model, we identify sex differences in morphine reward-learning, show that GPR83 is upregulated in the nucleus accumbens following morphine conditioned place preference, and show that shRNA-mediated knockdown of GPR83 in the nucleus accumbens leads to attenuation morphine reward. Together, these findings detect GPR83 expression in the reward-pathway, and show its involvement in dopamine release and morphine reward-learning.
The G-protein coupled receptor 83 (GPR83) is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor for which the natural ligand(s) and signaling pathway(s) remain to be identified. Previous studies suggest a role of GPR83 in the regulation of thermogenesis and the control of circulating adiponectin. The aim of this study was to gain insights into the molecular underpinnings underlying GPR83 signaling. In particular, we aimed to assess the underlying G-protein activated signaling pathway of GPR83 and how this pathway is affected by mutational activation and zinc(II) challenge. Finally, we assessed the capacity of GPR83 for homodimerization. Our results show for the first time that mouse (m) GPR83 has high basal Gq/11 activity without affecting Gi or Gs signaling. Furthermore, we found that, under physiological conditions, zinc(II) (but not calcium(II) and magnesium(II)) potently activates mGPR83, thus identifying zinc(II) as an endogenous molecule with agonistic capability to activate mGPR83. In line with the observation that zinc(II)-ions activate mGPR83, we identified a cluster of ion-binding sensitive amino acids (e.g. His145, His204, Cys207, Glu217) in an activation sensitive receptor region of mGPR83. The occurrence of a constitutive activating mutant and a zinc(II)-binding residue at the N-terminal part corroborate the importance of this region in mGPR83 signal regulation. Finally, our results indicate that mGPR83 forms homodimers, which extend the current knowledge and molecular facets of GPR83 signaling.
The G protein-coupled receptor 83 (Gpr83) is widely expressed in brain regions regulating energy metabolism. Here we report that hypothalamic expression of Gpr83 is regulated in response to nutrient availability and is decreased in obese mice compared with lean mice. In the arcuate nucleus, Gpr83 colocalizes with the ghrelin receptor (Ghsr1a) and the agouti-related protein. In vitro analyses show heterodimerization of Gpr83 with Ghsr1a diminishes activation of Ghsr1a by acyl-ghrelin. The orexigenic and adipogenic effect of ghrelin is accordingly potentiated in Gpr83-deficient mice. Interestingly, Gpr83 knock-out mice have normal body weight and glucose tolerance when fed a regular chow diet, but are protected from obesity and glucose intolerance when challenged with a high-fat diet, despite hyperphagia and increased hypothalamic expression of agouti-related protein, Npy, Hcrt and Ghsr1a. Together, our data suggest that Gpr83 modulates ghrelin action but also indicate that Gpr83 regulates systemic metabolism through other ghrelin-independent pathways.
Regulatory T (Treg) cells are emerging as key players in the regulation of different immune responses, thereby representing potential candidates for therapeutic interventions in a broad variety of immunological disorders. While the reduction or loss in function would be of benefit during the treatment of cancer, induction and/or expansion of Treg cell function might be helpful to interfere with unwanted immune responses in transplantation medicine, during autoimmunity, allergy and inflammation. However, a better understanding of Treg cell biology is a prerequisite to specifically modulate its function during immune responses in vivo. In the present review we will discuss current concepts on different cell types, components and some novel surface receptors expressed by Treg cells, namely Neuropilin-1, CD83 and G protein-coupled receptor 83 which might represent promising targets for the modulation of Treg cell function in human disease.
The murine G-protein coupled receptor 83 (mGPR83) is expressed in the hypothalamus and was previously suggested to be involved in the regulation of metabolism. The neuropeptide PEN has been recently identified as a potent GPR83 ligand. Moreover, GPR83 constitutes functionally relevant hetero-oligomers with other G-protein coupled receptors (GPCR) such as the ghrelin receptor (GHSR) or GPR171. Previous deletion studies also revealed that the long N-terminal extracellular receptor domain (eNDo) of mGPR83 may act as an intra-molecular ligand, which participates in the regulation of basal signaling activity, which is a key feature of GPCR function. Here, we investigated particular amino acids at the eNDo of human GPR83 (hGPR83) by side-directed mutagenesis to identify determinants of the internal ligand. These studies were accompanied by structure homology modeling to combine functional insights with structural information. The capacity for hetero-oligomer formation of hGPR83 with diverse family A GPCRs such as the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) was also investigated, with a specific emphasis on the impact of the eNDo on oligomerization and basal signaling properties. Finally, we demonstrate that hGPR83 exhibits an unusual basal signaling for different effectors, which also supports signaling promiscuity. hGPR83 interacts with a variety of hypothalamic GPCRs such as the MC4R or GHSR. These interactions are not dependent on the ectodomain and most likely occur at interfaces constituted in the transmembrane regions. Moreover, several amino acids at the transition between the eNDo and transmembrane helix 1 were identified, where mutations lead also to biased basal signaling modulation.
Most recently, we have described the G-protein coupled receptor 83 (GPR83), which is highly expressed by CD4(+)CD25(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) to be involved in the induction of CD4(+)Foxp3(+) Tregs in the course of an ongoing immune response. Four GPR83 isoforms have been described. Here, we have shown that GPR83 isoform-4, which differs from GPR83 isoform-1 by 20 additional aminoacids in the second cytoplasmatic loop, is predominantly expressed by Tregs. Interestingly, GPR83 isoform-4 but not GPR83 isoform-1 retrovirally transduced T cells were able to interfere with inflammatory responses in vivo. Re-analysis of GPR83 transduced T cells revealed that this in vivo acquisition of suppressive activity was associated with the induction of Treg-associated molecules including Foxp3 in GPR83 isoform-4 but not GPR83 isoform-1 transduced CD4(+) T cells under inflammatory conditions. Our results suggest that the 20 additional aminoacids within GPR83 isoform-4 are involved in Treg induction during inflammatory immune responses.
Human GnRH deficiency, both clinically and genetically, is a heterogeneous disorder comprising of congenital GnRH deficiency with anosmia (Kallmann syndrome), or with normal olfaction [normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH)], and adult-onset hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Our understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying GnRH secretion and GnRH signaling continues to increase at a rapid rate and strikingly, the heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCRs) continue to emerge as essential players in these processes. GPCRs were once viewed as binary on-off switches, where in the "on" state they are bound to their Galpha protein, but now we understand that view is overly simplistic and does not adequately characterize GPCRs. Instead, GPCRs have emerged as masterful signaling molecules exploiting different physical conformational states of itself to elicit an array of downstream signaling events via their G proteins and the beta-arrestins. The "one receptor-multiple signaling conformations" model is likely an evolved strategy that can be used to our advantage as researchers have shown that targeting specific receptor conformations via biased ligands is proving to be a powerful tool in the effective treatment of human diseases. Can biased ligands be used to selectively modulate signaling by GPCR regulators of the neuroendocrine axis in the treatment of IHH? As discussed in this review, the grand possibility exists. However, while we are still very far from developing these treatments, this exciting likelihood can happen through a much greater mechanistic understanding of how GPCRs signal within the cell.
The intestinal immune system is constantly challenged by foreign antigens and commensal bacteria. Therefore, proper control of the intestinal microenvironment is required. One important arm of this regulatory network consists of regulatory T cells. In contrast to CD4(+) Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells, which have been well characterized, immunomodulatory CD8(+) T cells that express Foxp3 are less well defined in terms of their generation and function. Failures of these regulatory mechanisms contribute to the development of inflammatory bowel disease. In this study we demonstrate that the frequency of CD8(+) Foxp3(+) T cells is reduced in the peripheral blood of patients with ulcerative colitis. As these cells might play a currently underestimated role in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis, we have investigated human and murine CD8(+) Foxp3(+) T cells generated by stimulating naive CD8(+) T cells in the presence of transforming growth factor-beta and retinoic acid, mediators that are abundantly produced in the intestinal mucosa. These CD8(+) Foxp3(+) fully competent regulatory T cells show strong expression of regulatory molecules CD25, Gpr83 and CTLA-4 and exhibit cell-cell contact-dependent immunosuppressive activity in vitro. Our study illustrates a previously unappreciated critical role of CD8(+) Foxp3(+) T cells in controlling potentially dangerous T cells and in the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis.
The mouse glucocorticoid-induced receptor (GIR) is an orphan G protein-coupled receptor highly expressed in brain and thymus (Harrigan et al., 1989; 1991). We have cloned the mouse GIR gene (Gpr83), determined its genomic organization and compared it with the human gene. The genomic organization of the gene is similar in both species although differences leading to specific splicing variants in the mouse have been found. Three introns interrupting the coding sequence are common to both mouse and human. A short sequence in the second intron of the mouse gene can be alternatively spliced in, leading to an insertion in the second intracellular loop of the receptor. This insertion constitutes an additional exon which is not present in the human genome. The human GIR polypeptide shares 89.5% and 91.5% identity with its mouse and dog orthologs respectively. Splice variants lacking the first extracellular loop and the third transmembrane domain have been found in human and mouse species. The receptor variants resulting from these minor transcripts are likely to be non functional. Comparative genetic mapping of the Gpr83 gene showed that it maps to regions of conserved synteny on mouse chromosome 9 (A2-3 region) and human chromosome 11 (q21 region).
