Probable G-protein coupled receptor 88; Probable G-protein coupled receptor implicated in a large repertoire of behavioral responses that engage motor activities, spatial learning, and emotional processing. May play a role in the regulation of cognitive and motor function.
Although G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are recognized as pivotal drug targets involved in multiple physiological and pathological processes, the majority of GPCRs including orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs) are unexploited. GPR88, a brain-specific oGPCR with particularly robust expression in the striatum, regulates diverse brain and behavioral functions, including cognition, mood, movement control, and reward-based learning, and is thus emerging as a novel drug target for central nervous system disorders including schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, anxiety, and addiction. Nevertheless, no effective GPR88 synthetic ligands have yet entered into clinical trials, and GPR88 endogenous ligands remain unknown. Despite the recent discovery and early stage study of several GPR88 agonists, such as 2-PCCA, RTI-13951-33, and phenylglycinol derivatives, further research into GPR88 pharmacology, medicinal chemistry, and chemical biology is urgently needed to yield structurally diversified GPR88-specific ligands. Drug-like pharmacological tool function and relevant signaling elucidation will also accelerate the evaluation of this receptor as a viable neurotherapeutic target.
G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the main mediators of signal transduction in the central nervous system. Therefore, it is not surprising that many GPCRs have long been investigated for their role in the development of anxiety and mood disorders, as well as in the mechanism of action of antidepressant therapies. Importantly, the endogenous ligands for a large group of GPCRs have not yet been identified and are therefore known as orphan GPCRs (oGPCRs). Nonetheless, growing evidence from animal studies, together with genome wide association studies (GWAS) and post-mortem transcriptomic analysis in patients, pointed at many oGPCRs as potential pharmacological targets. Among these discoveries, we summarize in this review how emotional behaviors are modulated by the following oGPCRs: ADGRB2 (BAI2), ADGRG1 (GPR56), GPR3, GPR26, GPR37, GPR50, GPR52, GPR61, GPR62, GPR88, GPR135, GPR158, and GPRC5B.
There are various types of receptors in the central nervous system (CNS). G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have the highest expression with a wide range of physiological functions. A newer sub group of these receptors namely orphan GPCRs have been discovered. GPR3, GPR6, GPR17, GPR26, GPR37, GPR39, GPR40, GPR50, GPR52, GPR54, GPR55, GPR85, GPR88, GPR103, and GPR139 are the selected orphan GPCRs for this article. Their roles in the central nervous system have not been understood well so far. However, recent studies show that they may have very important functions in the CNS. Hence, in the present study, we reviewed most recent findings regarding the physiological roles of the selected orphan GPCRs in the CNS. After a brief presentation of each receptor, considering the results from genetic and pharmacological manipulation of the receptors, their roles in the pathophysiology of different diseases and disorders including anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and substance abuse will be discussed. At present, our knowledge regarding the role of GPCRs in the brain is very limited. However, previous limited studies show that orphan GPCRs have an important place in psychopharmacology and these receptors are potential new targets for the treatment of major CNS diseases.
Schizophrenia remains a sizable socio-economic burden that continues to be treated with therapeutics based on 70-year old science. All currently approved therapeutics primarily target the dopamine D(2) receptor to achieve their efficacy. Whilst dopaminergic dysregulation is a key feature in this disorder, the targeting of dopaminergic machinery has yielded limited efficacy and an appreciable side effect burden. Over the recent decades, numerous drugs that engage non-dopaminergic G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have yielded a promise of efficacy without the deleterious side effect profile, yet none have successfully completed clinical studies and progressed to the market. More recently, there has been increased attention around non-dopaminergic GPCR-targeting drugs, which demonstrated efficacy in some schizophrenia symptom domains. This provides renewed hope that effective schizophrenia treatment may lie outside of the dopaminergic space. Despite the potential for muscarinic receptor- (and other well-characterised GPCR families) targeting drugs to treat schizophrenia, they are often plagued with complications such as lack of receptor subtype selectivity and peripheral on-target side effects. Orphan GPCR studies have opened a new avenue of exploration with many demonstrating schizophrenia-relevant mechanisms and a favourable expression profile, thus offering potential for novel drug development. This review discusses centrally expressed orphan GPCRs: GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR52, GPR85, GPR88 and GPR139 and their relationship to schizophrenia. We review their expression, signalling mechanisms and cellular function, in conjunction with small molecule development and structural insights. We seek to provide a snapshot of the growing evidence and development potential of new classes of schizophrenia therapeutics. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed issue Therapeutic Targeting of G Protein-Coupled Receptors: hot topics from the Australasian Society of Clinical and Experimental Pharmacologists and Toxicologists 2021 Virtual Annual Scientific Meeting. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v181.14/issuetoc.
Delta opioid receptor (DOR) displays a unique, highly conserved, structure and an original pattern of distribution in the central nervous system, pointing to a distinct and specific functional role among opioid peptide receptors. Over the last 15 years, in vivo pharmacology and genetic models have allowed significant advances in the understanding of this role. In this review, we will focus on the involvement of DOR in modulating different types of hippocampal- and striatal-dependent learning processes as well as motor function, motivation, and reward. Remarkably, DOR seems to play a key role in balancing hippocampal and striatal functions, with major implications for the control of cognitive performance and motor function under healthy and pathological conditions.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most common targets of the neuropharmacological drugs in the central nervous system (CNS). GPCRs are activated by manifold neurotransmitters, and their activation in turn evokes slow synaptic transmission. They are deeply involved in multiple neurological and psychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia. In the brain, the striatum is strongly innervated by the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and plays a central role in manifestation of psychiatric disorders. Recently, anatomical and comprehensive transcriptome analysis of the non-odorant GPCR superfamily revealed that the orphan GPCRs GPR88, GPR6, and GPR52, as well as dopamine D1 and D2 receptors and the adenosine A2a receptor, are the most highly enriched in the rodent striatum. Genetically engineered animal models and molecular biological studies have suggested that these striatally enriched GPCRs have a potential to be therapeutic psychiatric receptors. This review summarizes the current understanding of the therapeutic GPCR candidates for psychiatric disorders.
GPR88 is an orphan class A G-protein-coupled receptor that is highly expressed in the striatum and regulates diverse brain and behavioral functions. Here we present cryo-EM structures of the human GPR88-Gi1 signaling complex with or without a synthetic agonist (1R, 2R)-2-PCCA. We show that (1R, 2R)-2-PCCA is an allosteric modulator binding to a herein identified pocket formed by the cytoplasmic ends of transmembrane segments 5, 6, and the extreme C terminus of the alpha5 helix of Gi1. We also identify an electron density in the extracellular orthosteric site that may represent a putative endogenous ligand of GPR88. These structures, together with mutagenesis studies and an inactive state model obtained from metadynamics simulations, reveal a unique activation mechanism for GPR88 with a set of distinctive structure features and a water-mediated polar network. Overall, our results provide a structural framework for understanding the ligand binding, activation and signaling mechanism of GPR88, and will facilitate the innovative drug discovery for neuropsychiatric disorders and for deorphanization of this receptor.
Decreased activity and expression of the G-protein coupled receptor GPR88 is linked to many behavior-linked neurological disorders. Published preclinical GPR88 allosteric agonists all have in vivo pharmacokinetic properties that preclude their progression to the clinic, including high lipophilicity and poor brain penetration. Here, we describe our attempts to improve GPR88 agonists' drug-like properties and our analysis of the trade-offs required to successfully target GPR88's allosteric pocket. We discovered two new GPR88 agonists: One that reduced morphine-induced locomotor activity in a murine proof-of-concept study, and the atropoisomeric BI-9508, which is a brain penetrant and has improved pharmacokinetic properties and dosing that recommend it for future in vivo studies in rodents. BI-9508 still suffers from high lipophilicity, and research on this series was halted. Because of its utility as a tool compound, we now offer researchers access to BI-9508 and a negative control free of charge via Boehringer Ingelheim's open innovation portal opnMe.com.
The neural orphan G protein coupled receptor GPR88 is predominant in the striatum and cortex of both rodents and humans, and considered a potential target for brain disorders. Previous studies have shown multiple behavioral phenotypes in Gpr88 knockout mice, and human genetic studies have reported association with psychosis. Here we tested the possibility that GPR88 contributes to Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). In the mouse, we tested Gpr88 knockout mice in three behavioral paradigms, best translatable between rodents and humans, and found higher motor impulsivity and reduced attention together with the reported hyperactivity. Atomoxetine, a typical ADHD drug, reduced impulsivity in mutant mice. Conditional Gpr88 knockout mice in either D1R-type or D2R-type medium spiny neurons revealed distinct implications of the two receptor populations in waiting and stopping impulsivity. Thus, animal data demonstrate that deficient GPR88 activity causally promotes ADHD-like behaviors, and identify circuit mechanisms underlying GPR88-regulated impulsivity. In humans, we performed a family-based genetic study including 567 nuclear families with DSM-IV diagnosis of ADHD. There was a minor association for SNP rs2036212 with diagnosis, treatment response and cognition. A stronger association was found for SNP rs2809817 upon patient stratification, suggesting that the T allele is a risk factor when prenatal stress is involved. Human data therefore identify GPR88 variants associated with the disease, and highlight a potential role of life trajectories to modulate GPR88 function. Overall, animal and human data concur to suggest that GPR88 signaling should be considered a key factor for diagnostic and treatment of ADHD.
BACKGROUND: In the central nervous system (CNS), G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most fruitful targets for neuropsychopharmacological drug development. Rhodopsin (class A) is the most studied class of GPCR and includes orphan receptors for which the endogenous ligand is not known or is unclear. Characterization of orphan GPCRs has proven to be challenging, and the production pace of GPCR-based drugs has been incredibly slow. OBJECTIVE: Determination of the functions of these receptors may provide unexpected insight into physiological and neuropathological processes. Advances in various methods and techniques to investigate orphan receptors including in situ hybridization and knockdown/knockout (KD/KO) showed extensive expression of these receptors in the mammalian brain and unmasked their physiological and neuropathological roles. Due to these rapid progress and development, orphan GPCRs are rising as a new and promising class of drug targets for neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSION: This review presents a neuropsychopharmacological perspective of 26 orphan receptors of rhodopsin (class A) family, namely GPR3, GPR6, GPR12, GPR17, GPR26, GPR35, GPR39, GPR48, GPR49, GPR50, GPR52, GPR55, GPR61, GPR62, GPR63, GPR68, GPR75, GPR78, GPR83, GPR84, GPR85, GPR88, GPR153, GPR162, GPR171, and TAAR6. We discussed the expression of these receptors in mammalian brain and their physiological roles. Furthermore, we have briefly highlighted their roles in neurodegenerative diseases and psychiatric disorders including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, neuroinflammation, inflammatory pain, bipolar and schizophrenic disorders, epilepsy, anxiety, and depression.
MicroRNAs (or miRNAs) are short nucleotide sequences (~17-22 bp long) that play important roles in gene regulation through targeting genes in the 3'untranslated regions (UTRs). Variants located in genomic regions might have different biological consequences in changing gene expression. Exonic variants (e.g., coding variant and 3'UTR variant) are often causative of diseases due to their influence on gene product. Variants harbored in the 3'UTR region where miRNAs perform their targeting function could potentially alter the binding relationships for target pairs, which could relate to disease causation. We gathered miRNA-mRNA targeting pairs from published studies and then employed the database of microRNA Target Site single nucleotide variants (SNVs) (dbMTS) to discover novel SNVs within the selected pairs. We identified a total of 183 SNVs for the 114 pairs of accurate miRNA-mRNA targeting pairs selected. Detailed bioinformatics analysis of the three genes with identified variants that were exclusively located in the 3'UTR section indicated their association with intellectual disability (ID). Our result showed an exceptionally high expression of GPR88 in brain tissues based on GTEx gene expression data, while WNT7A expression data were relatively high in brain tissues when compared to other tissues. Motif analysis for the 3'UTR region of WNT7A showed that five identified variants were well-conserved across three species (human, mouse, and rat); the motif that contains the variant identified in GPR88 is significant at the level of the 3'UTR of the human genome. Studies of pathways, protein-protein interactions, and relations to diseases further suggest potential association with intellectual disability of our discovered SNVs. Our results demonstrated that 3'UTR variants could change target interactions of miRNA-mRNA pairs in the context of their association with ID. We plan to automate the methods through developing a bioinformatics pipeline for identifying novel 3'UTR SNVs harbored by miRNA-targeted genes in the future.
GPR88 is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor originally characterized as a striatal-enriched transcript and is a potential target for neuropsychiatric disorders. At present, gene knockout studies in the mouse have essentially focused on striatal-related functions and a comprehensive knowledge of GPR88 protein distribution and function in the brain is still lacking. Here, we first created Gpr88-Venus knock-in mice expressing a functional fluorescent receptor to fine-map GPR88 localization in the brain. The receptor protein was detected in neuronal soma, fibers and primary cilia depending on the brain region, and remarkably, whole-brain mapping revealed a yet unreported layer-4 cortical lamination pattern specifically in sensory processing areas. The unique GPR88 barrel pattern in L4 of the somatosensory cortex appeared 3 days after birth and persisted into adulthood, suggesting a potential function for GPR88 in sensory integration. We next examined Gpr88 knockout mice for cortical structure and behavioral responses in sensory tasks. Magnetic resonance imaging of live mice revealed abnormally high fractional anisotropy, predominant in somatosensory cortex and caudate putamen, indicating significant microstructural alterations in these GPR88-enriched areas. Further, behavioral analysis showed delayed responses in somatosensory-, visual- and olfactory-dependent tasks, demonstrating a role for GPR88 in the integration rather than perception of sensory stimuli. In conclusion, our data show for the first time a prominent role for GPR88 in multisensory processing. Because sensory integration is disrupted in many psychiatric diseases, our study definitely positions GPR88 as a target to treat mental disorders perhaps via activity on cortical sensory networks.
Addiction is a chronic relapsing brain disease characterized by compulsive reward-seeking despite harmful consequences. The mechanisms underlying addiction are orchestrated by transcriptional reprogramming in the reward system of vulnerable subjects. This study aims at revealing gene expression alterations across different types of addiction. We analyzed publicly available transcriptome datasets of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) from a palatable food and a cocaine addiction study. We found 56 common genes upregulated in the PFC of addicted mice in these two studies, whereas most of the differentially expressed genes were exclusively linked to either palatable food or cocaine addiction. Gene ontology analysis of shared genes revealed that these genes contribute to learning and memory, dopaminergic synaptic transmission, and histone phosphorylation. Network analysis of shared genes revealed a protein-protein interaction node among the G protein-coupled receptors (Drd2, Drd1, Adora2a, Gpr6, Gpr88) and downstream targets of the cAMP signaling pathway (Ppp1rb1, Rgs9, Pde10a) as a core network in addiction. Upon extending the analysis to a cell-type specific level, some of these common molecular players were selectively expressed in excitatory neurons, oligodendrocytes, and endothelial cells. Overall, computational analysis of publicly available whole transcriptome datasets provides new insights into the molecular basis of addiction-like behaviors in PFC.
Current methods of G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) phylogenetic classification are sequence based and therefore inappropriate for highly divergent sequences, sharing low sequence identity. In this study, sequence structure profile based alignment generated by PROMALS3D was used to understand the GPCR Class A Rhodopsin superfamily evolution using the MEGA 5 software. Phylogenetic analysis included a combination of Neighbor-Joining method and Maximum Likelihood method, with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Our study was able to identify potential ligand association for Class A Orphans and putative/unclassified Class A receptors with no cognate ligand information: GPR21 and GPR52 with fatty acids; GPR75 with Neuropeptide Y; GPR82, GPR18, GPR141 with N-arachidonylglycine; GPR176 with Free fatty acids, GPR10 with Tachykinin & Neuropeptide Y; GPR85 with ATP, ADP & UDP glucose; GPR151 with Galanin; GPR153 and GPR162 with Adrenalin, Noradrenalin; GPR146, GPR139, GPR142 with Neuromedin, Ghrelin, Neuromedin U-25 & Thyrotropin-releasing hormone; GPR171 with ATP, ADP & UDP Glucose; GPR88, GPR135, GPR161, GPR101with 11-cis-retinal; GPR83 with Tackykinin; GPR148 with Prostanoids, GPR109b, GPR81, GPR31with ATP & UTP and GPR150 with GnRH I & GnRHII. Furthermore, we suggest that this study would prove useful in re-classification of receptors, selecting templates for homology modeling and identifying ligands which may show cross reactivity with other GPCRs as signaling via multiple ligands play a significant role in disease modulation.
The striatum is anatomically and behaviorally implicated in behaviors that promote efficient foraging. To investigate this function, we studied instrumental choice behavior in mice lacking GPR88, a striatum-enriched orphan G-protein-coupled receptor that modulates striatal medium spiny neuron excitability. Our results reveal that hungry mice lacking GPR88 (KO mice) were slow to acquire food-reinforced lever press but could lever press similar to controls on a progressive ratio schedule. Both WT and KO mice discriminated between reward and no-reward levers; however, KO mice failed to discriminate based on relative quantity-reward (1 vs 3 food pellets) or effort (3 vs 9 lever presses). We also demonstrate preference for the high-reward (3 pellet) lever was selectively reestablished when GPR88 expression was restored to the striatum. We propose that GPR88 expression within the striatum is integral to efficient action-selection during foraging.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Evolutionary pressure driving energy homeostasis favored detection and comparison of caloric value. In wild and laboratory settings, neural systems involved in energy homeostasis bias foraging to maximize energy efficiency. This is observed when foraging behaviors are guided by superior nutritional density or minimized caloric expenditure. The striatum is anatomically and functionally well placed to perform the sensory and motor integration necessary for efficient action selection during foraging. However, few studies have examined this behavioral phenomenon or elucidated underlying molecular mechanisms. Both humans and mice with nonfunctional GPR88 have been shown to present striatal dysfunctions and impaired learning. We demonstrate that GPR88 expression is necessary to efficiently integrate effort and energy density information guiding instrumental choice.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Members of the GPCR family are targeted by a significant fraction of the available FDA-approved drugs. However, the physiological role and pharmacological properties of many GPCRs remain unknown, representing untapped potential in drug design. Of particular interest are ~100 less-studied GPCRs known as orphans because their endogenous ligands are unknown. Intriguingly, disease-causing mutations identified in patients, together with animal studies, have demonstrated that many orphan receptors play crucial physiological roles and, thus, represent attractive drug targets. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The majority of deorphanized GPCRs demonstrate coupling to G(i/o) . However, a limited number of techniques allow the detection of intrinsically small constitutive activity associated with G(i/o) protein activation, which represents a significant barrier in our ability to study orphan GPCR signalling. Using luciferase reporter assays, we effectively detected constitutive G(s) , G(q) and G(12/13) protein signalling by unliganded receptors and introducing various G protein chimeras, we provide a novel, highly sensitive tool capable of identifying G(i/o) coupling in unliganded orphan GPCRs. KEY RESULTS: Using this approach, we measured the constitutive activity of the entire class C GPCR family that includes eight orphan receptors and a subset of 20 prototypical class A GPCR members, including 11 orphans. Excitingly, this approach illuminated the G protein coupling profile of eight orphan GPCRs (GPR22, GPR137b, GPR88, GPR156, GPR158, GPR179, GPRC5D and GPRC6A) previously linked to pathophysiological processes. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: We provide a new platform that could be utilized in ongoing studies in orphan receptor signalling and de-orphanization efforts.
Small molecule modulators of GPR88 activity (agonists, antagonists, or modulators) are of interest as potential agents for the treatment of a variety of psychiatric disorders including schizophrenia. A series of phenylglycinol and phenylamine analogs have been prepared and evaluated for their GPR88 agonist activity and pharmacokinetic (PK) properties.
The orphan receptor GPR88 is an attractive therapeutic target because of its implications in a number of basal ganglia-associated disorders. To date, pharmacological characterization of GPR88 has been limited due to the lack of potent and selective agonists and antagonists appropriate for CNS investigations. We have previously reported that GPR88 couples to Galpha(i) proteins and modulates cAMP levels upon treatment with a small molecule agonist 2-PCCA. Recently, another chemotype of GPR88 agonist, represented by 2-AMPP [(2S)-N-((1R)-2-amino-1-(4-(2-methylpentyloxy)-phenyl)ethyl)-2-phenylpropanamide], has also been discovered. In this report, a new series of 2-AMPP structurally related 4-hydroxyphenylglycine and 4-hydroxyphenylglycinol derivatives have been designed and evaluated for agonist activity at GPR88. The structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies suggest that the amine group in 2-AMPP can be replaced by hydroxyl, ester and amide groups, resulting in analogues with good to moderate potency, whereas the phenyl group on the amide cap is essential for activity and has limited size, shape and electronic tolerance.
BACKGROUND: In addition to motor disability, another characteristic feature of Parkinson disease is the early appearance of psychiatric symptoms, including apathy, depression, anxiety and cognitive deficits; treatments for these symptoms are limited by the development of adverse effects such as impulse-control disorders. In this context, we investigated the orphan G protein-coupled receptor 88 (GPR88) as a novel therapeutic target. METHODS: We used lentiviral-mediated expression of specifically designed microRNA to knock down Gpr88 in a translational male rat model of early Parkinson disease obtained by dopamine loss in the dorsolateral striatum as a result of 6-hydroxydopamine lesions. We evaluated the impact of Gpr88 knockdown on the Parkinson disease model using behavioural, immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization studies. RESULTS: Knockdown of Gpr88 in associative territories of the dorsal striatum efficiently reduced alterations in mood, motivation and cognition through modulation of the regulator of the G-protein signalling 4 and of the truncated splice variant of the FosB transcription factor. Knockdown of Gpr88 also reduced allostatic changes in striatal activity markers that may be related to patterns observed in patients and that provide support for an "overload" hypothesis for the etiology of the psychiatric symptoms of Parkinson disease. LIMITATIONS: Behavioural tests assessing specific cognitive and motivational parameters are needed to further characterize the effects of the lesion and of Gpr88 knockdown in early-stage and advanced Parkinson disease models, presenting more extensive dopamine loss. Additional studies focusing on the direct and indirect striatal output pathways are also required, because little is known about the signalling pathways regulated by GPR88 in different striatal cell types. CONCLUSION: GPR88 may constitute a highly relevant target for the treatment of the psychiatric symptoms of Parkinson disease.
The GPR88 orphan G protein-coupled receptor is expressed throughout the striatum, being preferentially localised in medium spiny neurons. It is also present in lower densities in frontal cortex and thalamus. Rare mutations in humans suggest a role in cognition and motor function, while common variants are associated with psychosis. Here we evaluate the influence of genetic deletion of GPR88 upon performance in translational tasks interrogating motivation, reward evaluation and cognitive function. In an automated radial arm maze 'N-back' working memory task, Gpr88 KO mice showed impaired correct responding, suggesting a role for GPR88 receptors in working memory circuitry. Associative learning performance was similar to wild-type controls in a touchscreen task but performance was impaired at the reversal learning stage, suggesting cognitive inflexibility. Gpr88 KO mice showed higher breakpoints, reduced latencies and lengthened session time in a progressive ratio task consistent with enhanced motivation. Simultaneously, locomotor hyperactivity was apparent in this task, supporting previous findings of actions of GPR88 in a cortico-striatal-thalamic motor loop. Evidence for a role of GPR88 in reward processing was demonstrated in a touchscreen-based equivalent of the Iowa gambling task. Although both Gpr88 KO and wild-type mice showed a preference for an optimum contingency choice, Gpr88 KO mice selected more risky choices at the expense of more advantageous lower risk options. Together these novel data suggest that striatal GPR88 receptors influence activity in a range of procedures integrated by prefrontal, orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortico-striatal-thalamic loops leading to altered cognitive, motivational and reward evaluation processes.
