5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1E; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various alkaloids and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity.
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified many genetic variations associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in Asians, but understanding the functional genetic variants that influence traits is often a complex process. In this study, fine mapping and other analytical strategies were performed to investigate the effects of G protein signaling modulator 1 (GPSM1) on insulin resistance in skeletal muscle. A total of 128 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within GPSM1 were analysed in 21,897 T2DM cases and 32,710 healthy controls from seven GWASs. The SNP rs28539249 in intron 9 of GPSM1 showed a nominally significant association with T2DM in Asians (OR = 1.07, 95% CI = 1.04-1.10, P < 10(-4)). The GPSM1 mRNA was increased in skeletal muscle and correlated with T2DM traits across obese mice model. An eQTL for the cis-acting regulation of GPSM1 expression in human skeletal muscle was identified for rs28539249, and the increased GPSM1 expression related with T2DM traits within GEO datasets. Another independent Asian cohort showed that rs28539249 is associated with the skeletal muscle expression of CACFD1, GTF3C5, SARDH, and FAM163B genes, which are functionally enriched for endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) and unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways. Moreover, rs28539249 locus was predicted to disrupt regulatory regions in human skeletal muscle with enriched epigenetic marks and binding affinity for CTCF. Supershift EMSA assays followed luciferase assays demonstrated the CTCF specifically binding to rs28539249-C allele leading to decreased transcriptional activity. Thus, the post-GWAS annotation confirmed the Asian-specific association of genetic variant in GPSM1 with T2DM, suggesting a role for the variant in the regulation in skeletal muscle.
BACKGROUND: Spatial chromatin structure is intricately linked with somatic aberrations, and somatic mutations of various cancer-related genes, termed co-mutations (CoMuts), occur in certain patterns during cancer initiation and progression. The functional mechanisms underlying these genetic events remain largely unclear in thyroid cancer (TC). With discrepant differentiation, papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) differ greatly in characteristics and prognosis. We aimed to reveal the spatial gene alterations and regulations between the two TC subtypes. METHODS: We systematically investigated and compared the spatial co-mutations between ATC (8305C), PTC (BCPAP and TPC-1), and normal thyroid cells (Nthy-ori-3-1). We constructed a framework integrating whole-genome sequencing (WGS), high-throughput chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C), and transcriptome sequencing, to systematically detect the associations between the somatic co-mutations of cancer-related genes, structural variations (SVs), copy number variations (CNVs), and high-order chromatin conformation. RESULTS: Spatial co-mutation hotspots were enriched around topologically associating domains (TADs) in TC. A common set of 227 boundaries were identified in both ATC and PTC, with significant overlaps between them. The spatial proximities of the co-mutated gene pairs in the two TC types were significantly greater than in the gene-level and overall backgrounds, and ATC cells had higher TAD contact frequency with CoMuts > 10 compared with PTC cells. Compared with normal thyroid cells, in ATC the number of the created novel three-dimensional chromatin structural domains increased by 10%, and the number of shifted TADs decreased by 7%. We found five TAD blocks with CoMut genes/events specific to ATC with certain mutations in genes including MAST-NSUN4, AM129B/TRUB2, COL5A1/PPP1R26, PPP1R26/GPSM1/CCDC183, and PRAC2/DLX4. For the majority of ATC and PTC cells, the HOXA10 and HIF2alpha signals close to the transcription start sites of CoMut genes within TADs were significantly stronger than those at the background. CNV breakpoints significantly overlapped with TAD boundaries in both TC subtypes. ATCs had more CNV losses overlapping with TAD boundaries, and noncoding SVs involved in intrachromosomal SVs, amplified inversions, and tandem duplication differed between ATC and PTC. TADs with short range were more abundant in ATC than PTC. More switches of A/B compartment types existed in ATC cells compared with PTC. Gene expression was significantly synchronized, and orchestrated by complex epigenetics and regulatory elements. CONCLUSION: Chromatin interactions and gene alterations and regulations are largely heterogeneous in TC. CNVs and complex SVs may function in the TC genome by interplaying with TADs, and are largely different between ATC and PTC. Complexity of TC genomes, which are highly organized by 3D genome-wide interactions mediating mutational and structural variations and gene activation, may have been largely underappreciated. Our comprehensive analysis may provide key evidence and targets for more customized diagnosis and treatment of TC.
GoLoco motif-containing proteins regulate the nucleotide-binding state of Galpha proteins in various signaling pathways. As guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors (GDIs), they bind Galpha.GDP and inhibit GDP to GTP exchange. GoLoco proteins show binding selectivity toward different members of the Galpha family. Although the Galpha(i1).GDP/RGS14 crystal structure explains the specific binding selectivity of the RGS14 GoLoco domain well, the mechanism of selective binding has not been understood for the more general features of short GoLoco domains found in tandem arrays in proteins like GPSM2/LGN/ dPins and GPSM1/AGS3. We explored the mechanism of differential interactions of GoLoco protein LGN with hGalpha(i3) and hGalpha(o). By combining mutagenesis experiments and molecular dynamics simulations, we identified a residue (Asp229 in hGalpha(i3)) away from the binding interface that remarkably affects the interaction between LGN and hGalpha(i/o). A negatively charged residue at this position is required for high binding affinity. This affinity regulation mechanism was further verified by the cases of hGalpha(i2) and dGalpha(o), suggesting that this pathway is conserved among members of the Galpha family.
BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapies, particularly anti-PD-1, benefit only a limited subset of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. G-protein signaling modulator 1 (GPSM1) is implicated in immunity and oncology, yet its role in regulating the CRC tumor microenvironment (TME) and contributing to anti-PD-1 resistance remains poorly understood. METHODS: We employed single-cell RNA sequencing and multiplex immunofluorescence on tumor samples from anti-PD-1-resistant CRC patients to evaluate GPSM1 expression and its impact on macrophage polarization. An orthotopic CRC xenograft model in C57BL/6 mice was used to assess the role of GPSM1 in vivo. An in vitro co-culture system, alongside mass cytometry and flow cytometry, explored GPSM1's biological functions within the TME. We further used ChIP-PCR, mass spectrometry, and co-immunoprecipitation to elucidate the mechanisms regulating GPSM1 activity. RESULTS: GPSM1 expression was significantly elevated in anti-PD-1-resistant CRC tissues. Enhanced GPSM1 levels promoted anti-PD-1 resistance by driving macrophage polarization toward an immunosuppressive M2 phenotype, facilitating their infiltration into the TME. We identified the deubiquitinase USP9X as a key factor preventing GPSM1 degradation through K63-polyubiquitination. This stabilization of GPSM1 led to MEIS3 nuclear translocation, activating macrophage colony-stimulating factor expression. Importantly, ruxolitinib emerged as a promising GPSM1-targeting candidate, demonstrating improved efficacy in combination with anti-PD-1 therapy in both microsatellite instability-high and microsatellite stable CRC models. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the pivotal role of GPSM1-driven M2 macrophage infiltration in mediating anti-PD-1 resistance in CRC. Targeting GPSM1 offers a novel therapeutic strategy to enhance ICB efficacy, potentially broadening the patient population that may benefit from these therapies.
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is the common type of blood cancer. Although the remission rate has increased, the current treatment options for B-ALL are usually related to adverse reactions and recurrence, so it is necessary to find other treatment options. G protein signaling modulator 1 (GPSM1) is one of several factors that affect the basic activity of the G protein signaling system, but its role in B-ALL has not yet been clarified. In this study, we analyzed the expression of GPSM1 in the Oncomine database and found that the GPSM1 levels were higher in B-ALL cells than in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Analyses of the Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA) demonstrated that patients with high GPSM1 levels had shorter survival times than those with low levels. Additionally, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) suggested that GPSM1 was positively correlated with proliferation, G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) ligand binding, Galphas signaling and calcium signaling pathways. In further experiments, GPSM1 was found to be highly expressed in Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines, and downregulation of GPSM1 inhibited proliferation and promoted cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in BALL-1 and Reh cells. Moreover, knockdown of GPSM1 suppressed ADCY6 and RAPGEF3 expression in BALL-1 and Reh cells. Furthermore, we reported that GPSM1 regulated JNK expression via ADCY6-RAPGEF3. The present study demonstrates that GPSM1 promotes tumor growth in BALL-1 and Reh cells by modulating ADCY6-RAPGEF3-JNK signaling.
Activator of G-protein signaling 3 (AGS3, also known as GPSM1) exhibits broad functional diversity and oscillates among different subcellular compartments in a regulated manner. AGS3 consists of a tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain and a G-protein regulatory (GPR) domain. Here, we tested the hypothesis that phosphorylation of the AGS3 GPR domain regulates its subcellular distribution and functionality. In contrast to the cortical and/or diffuse non-homogeneous distribution of wild-type (WT) AGS3, an AGS3 construct lacking all 24 potential phosphorylation sites in the GPR domain localized to cytosolic puncta. This change in localization was revealed to be dependent upon phosphorylation of a single threonine amino acid (T602). The punctate distribution of AGS3-T602A was rescued by co-expression of Galpha(i) and Galpha(o) but not Galpha(s) or Galpha(q) Following treatment with alkaline phosphatase, both AGS3-T602A and WT AGS3 exhibited a gel shift in SDS-PAGE as compared to untreated WT AGS3, consistent with a loss of protein phosphorylation. The punctate distribution of AGS3-T602A was lost in an AGS3-A602T conversion mutant, but was still present upon T602 mutation to glutamate or aspartate. These results implicate dynamic phosphorylation as a discrete mechanism to regulate the subcellular distribution of AGS3 and associated functionality.
BACKGROUND: Genetic causes of premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) account for approximately 20 ~ 25% of patients. So far, only a few genes have been identified. RESULTS: Here, we first identified the c.1840C > A on G-protein signaling modulator 1 (GPSM1) as a susceptibility locus for POI in 10 sporadic POI patients by whole-exome sequencing. The frequency of GPSM1 c.1840C > A was then verified as 3/20 in a POI sample of 20 patients (including the above 10 patients) by Sanger sequencing. RT-PCR and western blot analysis showed the expression of GPSM1 in rat ovaries was increased in the large antral follicle stage compared to the primordial follicle stage (P < 0.01). The cell proliferation assay (CCK8) and flow cytometry suggested that the small-interfering RNA-induced silencing of Gpsm1 significantly increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation of rat ovarian granulosa cells (GCs) (P < 0.01). Furthermore, suppression of Gpsm1 in GCs reduced levels of cAMP, PKAc, p-CREB as well as the ratio of Bcl-2/Bax, and increased the expression of Caspase-3 and Cleaved Caspase-3 (P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: In summary, this study identified a susceptibility variant GPSM1 c.1840C > A of POI for the first time. Gpsm1 was related to rat follicle development, and silencing of Gpsm1 increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation in rat GCs, possibly through inhibition of the cAMP-PKA-CREB pathway.
Drug addiction is marked by continued drug-seeking behavior despite deleterious consequences and a heightened propensity to relapse not withstanding long, drug-free periods. The enduring nature of addiction has been hypothesized to arise from perturbations in intracellular signaling, gene expression, and brain circuitry induced by substance abuse. Ameliorating some of these aberrations should abate behavioral and neurochemical markers associated with an 'addiction phenotype'. This review summarizes data showing that protein expression and signaling through the nonreceptor activator of G-protein signaling 3 (AGS3) are altered by commonly abused substances in rat and in in-vitro addiction models. AGS3 structure and function are unrelated to the more broadly studied regulator of G-protein signaling family. Thus, the unique role of AGS3 is the focus of this review. Intriguingly, AGS3 protein changes persist into drug abstinence. Accordingly, studies probing the role of AGS3 in the neurochemistry of drug-seeking behavior and relapse are studied in detail. To illuminate this study, AGS3 structure, cellular localization, and function are covered so that an idealized AGS3-targeted pharmacotherapy can be proposed.
Abnormal DNA methylation is known as playing an important role in the tumorgenesis. It is helpful for distinguishing the specificity of diagnosis and therapeutic targets for cancers based on characteristics of DNA methylation patterns across cancers. High throughput DNA methylation analysis provides the possibility to comprehensively filter the epigenetics diversity across various cancers. We integrated whole-genome methylation data detected in 798 samples from seven cancers. The hierarchical clustering revealed the existence of cancer-specific methylation pattern. Then we identified 331 differentially methylated genes across these cancers, most of which (266) were specifically differential methylation in unique cancer. A DNA methylation correlation network (DMCN) was built based on the methylation correlation between these genes. It was shown the hubs in the DMCN were inclined to cancer-specific genes in seven cancers. Further survival analysis using the part of genes in the DMCN revealed high-risk group and low-risk group were distinguished by seven biomarkers (PCDHB15, WBSCR17, IGF1, GYPC, CYGB, ACTG2, and PRRT1) in breast cancer and eight biomarkers (ZBTB32, OR51B4, CCL8, TMEFF2, SALL3, GPSM1, MAGEA8, and SALL1) in colon cancer, respectively. At last, a protein-protein interaction network was introduced to verify the biological function of differentially methylated genes. It was shown that MAP3K14, PTN, ACVR1 and HCK sharing different DNA methylation and gene expression across cancers were relatively high degree distribution in PPI network. The study suggested that not only the identified cancer-specific genes provided reference for individual treatment but also the relationship across cancers could be explained by differential DNA methylation.
Activator of G-protein signaling 3 (AGS3; also known as GPSM1), a receptor-independent activator of G-protein signaling, oscillates among defined subcellular compartments and biomolecular condensates (BMCs) in a regulated manner that is likely related to the functional diversity of the protein. We determined the influence of cell stress on the cellular distribution of AGS3 and core material properties of AGS3 BMCs. Cellular stress (oxidative, pHi and thermal) induced the formation of AGS3 BMCs in HeLa and COS-7 cells, as determined by fluorescent microscopy. Oxidative stress-induced AGS3 BMCs were distinct from G3BP1 stress granules and from RNA processing BMCs defined by the P-body protein Dcp1a. Immunoblots indicated that cellular stress shifted AGS3, but not the stress granule protein G3BP1 to a membrane pellet fraction following cell lysis. The stress-induced generation of AGS3 BMCs was reduced by co-expression of the signaling protein Galphai3, but not the AGS3-binding partner DVL2. Fluorescent recovery following photobleaching of individual AGS3 BMCs indicated that there are distinct diffusion kinetics and restricted fluidity for AGS3 BMCs. These data suggest that AGS3 BMCs represent a distinct class of stress granules that serve as a previously unrecognized signal processing node.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer is the second most common malignant tumor worldwide. A deeper insight into the mechanisms underlying colorectal cancer metastasis is urgently needed. G-protein signaling modulator 1 and autophagy play critical roles in tumor migration and invasion. However, the biological functions and regulatory networks of G-protein signaling modulator 1 and autophagy have not yet been fully studied. METHODS: We performed immunohistochemistry and clinic-pathological characteristic analysis in 328 human colorectal cancer specimens to identify the clinical role of G-protein signaling modulator 1 in colorectal cancer. An in vitro coculture system and a tumor metastasis mouse model were used to explore the biological function of G-protein signaling modulator 1 on tumor metastasis. Autophagic flux detection like GFP-LC3B signal immunofluorescence and electron microscope observation of autophagic vesicles and confocal microscope detection were used to gain insights into the underlying role of G-protein signaling modulator 1 in autophagy. RESULTS: We found that G-protein signaling modulator 1 was abundantly expressed in colorectal cancer tissues and was associated with lymph node metastasis and poor prognosis. Furthermore, our bioinformatic and functional studies demonstrated that G-protein signaling modulator 1 significantly promoted cell migration and invasion, both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that G-protein signaling modulator 1 could promote colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion and inhibit autophagy and by activating the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. CONCLUSIONS: We proposed that G-protein signaling modulator 1 promotes colorectal cancer metastasis by modulating autophagy through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway.
Previous studies have demonstrated that activator of G-protein signaling 3 (AGS3; also known as GPSM1), a member of the AGS family, plays an important anti-apoptotic role through enhancing the phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (p-CREB). In this report, we delineate the anti-apoptotic role of AGS3 in multiple myeloma (MM). To do this, we developed a cell apoptotic model induced by doxorubicin in MM. Our data indicate that decreased expression of AGS3 is correlated with reduced levels of p-CREB in the apoptotic model. The negative role of AGS3 in cell apoptosis was further confirmed by knocking down AGS3. The microenvironment has been shown to influence tumor cell phenotype in response to chemotherapy. Since cell adhesion-mediated drug resistance remains a major obstacle for successful treatment of MM, we constructed a cell adhesion model in MM and detected the changing of AGS3 protein expression. AGS3 siRNA reversed the high rate of MM cell adhesion to either fibronectin or HS-5 cells. Consistent with the reduced adhesion rate, the cells also exhibited reduced drug resistance to doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and dexamethasone. Collectively, these data indicate that AGS3 may be represented as a good candidate for pursuing clinical trials in MM. Moreover, our data provide a clinical therapeutic target for MM and potentially other tumors that home and/or metastasize to the bone.
The G-protein regulatory (GPR) motif serves as a docking site for Galphai-GDP free of Gbetagamma. The GPR-Galpha complex may function at the cell cortex and/or at intracellular sites. GPR proteins include the Group II Activators of G-protein signaling identified in a functional screen for receptor-independent activators of G-protein signaling (GPSM1-3, RGS12) each of which contain 1-4 GPR motifs. GPR motifs are also found in PCP2/L7(GPSM4), Rap1-Gap1 Transcript Variant 1, and RGS14. While the biochemistry of the interaction of GPR proteins with purified Galpha is generally understood, the dynamics of this signaling complex and its regulation within the cell remains undefined. Major questions in the field revolve around the factors that regulate the subcellular location of GPR proteins and their interaction with Galphai and other binding partners in the cell. As an initial approach to this question, we established a platform to monitor the GPR-Galphai complex in intact cells using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is a common complication of pregnancy that has substantial short- and long-term adverse health implications for women and their children. However, large-scale studies on genetic risk loci for GDM remain sparse. METHODS: We conducted a case-control study among 2636 women with GDM and 6086 non-GDM control women from the Nurses' Health Study II and the Danish National Birth Cohort. A total of 112 susceptibility genetic variants confirmed by genome-wide association studies for type 2 diabetes were selected and measured. A weighted genetic risk score (GRS) was created based on variants that were significantly associated with risk of GDM after correcting for the false discovery rate. RESULTS: For the first time, we identified eight variants associated with GDM, namely rs7957197 (HNF1A), rs10814916 (GLIS3), rs3802177 (SLC30A8), rs9379084 (RREB1), rs34872471 (TCF7L2), rs7903146 (TCF7L2), rs11787792 (GPSM1) and rs7041847 (GLIS3). In addition, we confirmed three variants, rs10830963 (MTNR1B), rs1387153 (MTNR1B) and rs4506565 (TCF7L2), that had previously been significantly associated with GDM risk. Furthermore, compared with participants in the first (lowest) quartile of weighted GRS based on these 11 SNPs, the ORs for GDM were 1.07 (95% CI 0.93, 1.22), 1.23 (95% CI 1.07, 1.41) and 1.53 (95% CI 1.34, 1.74) for participants in the second, third and fourth (highest) quartiles, respectively. The significant positive associations between the weighted GRS and risk of GDM persisted across most of the strata of major risk factors for GDM, including family history of type 2 diabetes, smoking status, BMI and age. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In this large-scale case-control study with women from two independent populations, eight novel GDM SNPs were identified. These findings offer the potential to improve our understanding of the aetiology of GDM, and particularly of biological mechanisms related to beta cell function.
Dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) are multipotent adult stem cells capable of differentiating along the osteoblast, adipocyte, and chondrocyte lineages. Regulating differentiation of DPSCs may be a useful tool for regenerative medicine and cell-based therapy in oral diseases. Multisignaling pathways are involved in osteogenic differentiation of DPSCs. Recent studies show that cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling could stimulate the expression of genes such as bone morphogenic proteins 2 (BMP2), inhibitor of DNA binding 2 (ID2), bone sialoprotein, osteocalcin, and type XXIV collagen, which have been implicated in osteogenesis and bone formation. Activator of G-protein signaling 3 (AGS3, gene name G-protein signaling modulator-1, Gpsm1), an accessory protein for G-protein signaling, plays an important role in regulating the phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (p-CREB). However, the involvement of AGS3 in osteogenic differentiation of DPSCs has not been explored. Our data indicated that increased expression of AGS3 would inhibit osteogenic differentiation of DPSCs exposed to inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) via cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling. The negative role of AGS3 in osteogenic differentiation was further confirmed by knocking down and over expression of AGS3. Our findings may provide clinical implications for osteoporosis.
Although over 60 loci for type 2 diabetes (T2D) have been identified, there still remains a large genetic component to be clarified. To explore unidentified loci for T2D, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 6 209 637 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which were directly genotyped or imputed using East Asian references from the 1000 Genomes Project (June 2011 release) in 5976 Japanese patients with T2D and 20 829 nondiabetic individuals. Nineteen unreported loci were selected and taken forward to follow-up analyses. Combined discovery and follow-up analyses (30 392 cases and 34 814 controls) identified three new loci with genome-wide significance, which were MIR129-LEP [rs791595; risk allele = A; risk allele frequency (RAF) = 0.080; P = 2.55 x 10(-13); odds ratio (OR) = 1.17], GPSM1 [rs11787792; risk allele = A; RAF = 0.874; P = 1.74 x 10(-10); OR = 1.15] and SLC16A13 (rs312457; risk allele = G; RAF = 0.078; P = 7.69 x 10(-13); OR = 1.20). This study demonstrates that GWASs based on the imputation of genotypes using modern reference haplotypes such as that from the 1000 Genomes Project data can assist in identification of new loci for common diseases.
Transient receptor potential canonical 4 (TRPC4) forms non-selective cation channels implicated in the regulation of diverse physiological functions. Previously, TRPC4 was shown to be activated by the Gi/o subgroup of heterotrimeric G-proteins involving Galphai/o, rather than Gbetagamma, subunits. Because the lifetime and availability of Galpha-GTP are regulated by regulators of G-protein signalling (RGS) and Galphai/o-Loco (GoLoco) domain-containing proteins via their GTPase-activating protein (GAP) and guanine-nucleotide-dissociation inhibitor (GDI) functions respectively, we tested how RGS and GoLoco domain proteins affect TRPC4 currents activated via Gi/o-coupled receptors. Using whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, we show that both RGS and GoLoco proteins [RGS4, RGS6, RGS12, RGS14, LGN or activator of G-protein signalling 3 (AGS3)] suppress receptor-mediated TRPC4 activation without causing detectable basal current or altering surface expression of the channel protein. The inhibitory effects are dependent on the GAP and GoLoco domains and facilitated by enhancing membrane targeting of the GoLoco protein AGS3. In addition, RGS, but not GoLoco, proteins accelerate desensitization of receptor-activation evoked TRPC4 currents. The inhibitory effects of RGS and GoLoco domains are additive and are most prominent with RGS12 and RGS14, which contain both RGS and GoLoco domains. Our data support the notion that the Galpha, but not Gbetagamma, arm of the Gi/o signalling is involved in TRPC4 activation and unveil new roles for RGS and GoLoco domain proteins in fine-tuning TRPC4 activities. The versatile and diverse functions of RGS and GoLoco proteins in regulating G-protein signalling may underlie the complexity of receptor-operated TRPC4 activation in various cell types under different conditions.
BACKGROUND: Activator of G-protein Signaling 3 (AGS3, also known as GPSM1), is related to cell cycle progression. We investigated the expression of AGS3 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and the therapeutic effect of chemotherapy drugs. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis were performed for AGS3 in 85ESCC samples. The data were correlated with clinicopathological features. The univariate and multivariate survival analyses were also performed to determine its prognostic significance. The effect of overexpression of AGS3 on proliferation of esophageal carcinoma TE1 cells was analyzed by serum starvation. RESULTS: AGS3 was down regulated in ESCC as compared with the adjacent normal tissue. Low expression of AGS3 was associated with tumor grade (P=0.002), and AGS3 was negatively correlated with proliferation marker Ki-67 (P<0.01). Univariate analysis showed that AGS3 expression did have a remarkable prediction for poor prognosis (P=0.004), while in vitro, the expression of AGS3 was down regulated with release from serum starvation of TE1 cells. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that AGS3 is an important regulator of ESCC proliferation.
OBJECTIVE: PKD is a genetic disease that is characterized by abnormally proliferative epithelial cells in the kidney and liver. Urinary exosomes have been previously examined as a source of unique proteins that may be used to diagnose and monitor the progression of PKD. Previous studies by our group have shown that AGS3, which is a receptor-independent regulator G-proteins, was markedly upregulated in RTECs during kidney injury including PKD. In this study, our goal was to determine whether AGS3 could be measured in exosomes using animals and humans with PKD. RESULTS: In our study, urinary exosomes were isolated from PCK rats and the control Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats. AGS3 expression was significantly increased (P < 0.05) in PKD versus SD rats at 16 weeks of age. This increase was detectable in a time-dependent manner from 8 weeks of age and peaked at ~ 16-20 weeks (length of study). Similarly, in exosomes from human urine samples with PKD, AGS3 expression was significantly increased (P < 0.05) compared to healthy human controls where AGS3 was largely undetectable. In conclusion, the detection of AGS3 in urinary exosomes may be a novel biomarker for PKD, and provide new insight into the biology of tubular epithelial cell function during cystic disease progression.
Approximately 90% of alcoholics relapse within 4 years, in part because of an enhanced motivation to seek alcohol (EtOH). A novel G protein modulator (Gpsm1/AGS3) was up-regulated in the rat nucleus accumbens core (NAcore) but not in other limbic nuclei during abstinence from operant EtOH self-administration. Furthermore, NAcore AGS3 knockdown reduced EtOH seeking to pre-abstinence levels in a novel rat model of compulsive, human EtOH seeking. AGS3 can both inhibit G protein G i alpha-mediated signaling and stimulate G betagamma-mediated signaling. Accordingly, sequestration of G betagamma, but not G i alpha knockdown, significantly reduced EtOH seeking to pre-abstinence levels. Thus, AGS3 and G betagamma are hypothesized to gate the uncontrolled motivation to seek EtOH during abstinence. AGS3 up-regulation during abstinence may be a key determinant of the transition from social consumption to compulsion-like seeking during relapse.
