5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2C; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances, including ergot alkaloid derivatives, 1-2,5,- dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane (DOI) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathway [...] 
Previous genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of stroke - the second leading cause of death worldwide - were conducted predominantly in populations of European ancestry(1,2). Here, in cross-ancestry GWAS meta-analyses of 110,182 patients who have had a stroke (five ancestries, 33% non-European) and 1,503,898 control individuals, we identify association signals for stroke and its subtypes at 89 (61 new) independent loci: 60 in primary inverse-variance-weighted analyses and 29 in secondary meta-regression and multitrait analyses. On the basis of internal cross-ancestry validation and an independent follow-up in 89,084 additional cases of stroke (30% non-European) and 1,013,843 control individuals, 87% of the primary stroke risk loci and 60% of the secondary stroke risk loci were replicated (P < 0.05). Effect sizes were highly correlated across ancestries. Cross-ancestry fine-mapping, in silico mutagenesis analysis(3), and transcriptome-wide and proteome-wide association analyses revealed putative causal genes (such as SH3PXD2A and FURIN) and variants (such as at GRK5 and NOS3). Using a three-pronged approach(4), we provide genetic evidence for putative drug effects, highlighting F11, KLKB1, PROC, GP1BA, LAMC2 and VCAM1 as possible targets, with drugs already under investigation for stroke for F11 and PROC. A polygenic score integrating cross-ancestry and ancestry-specific stroke GWASs with vascular-risk factor GWASs (integrative polygenic scores) strongly predicted ischaemic stroke in populations of European, East Asian and African ancestry(5). Stroke genetic risk scores were predictive of ischaemic stroke independent of clinical risk factors in 52,600 clinical-trial participants with cardiometabolic disease. Our results provide insights to inform biology, reveal potential drug targets and derive genetic risk prediction tools across ancestries.
Beta-blockers are widely used medications for a variety of indications, including heart failure, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypertension. Genetic variability in pharmacokinetic (e.g., CYP2D6) and pharmacodynamic (e.g., ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRA2C, GRK4, GRK5) genes have been studied in relation to beta-blocker exposure and response. We searched and summarized the strength of the evidence linking beta-blocker exposure and response with the six genes listed above. The level of evidence was high for associations between CYP2D6 genetic variation and both metoprolol exposure and heart rate response. Evidence indicates that CYP2D6 poor metabolizers experience clinically significant greater exposure and lower heart rate in response to metoprolol compared with those who are not poor metabolizers. Therefore, we provide therapeutic recommendations regarding genetically predicted CYP2D6 metabolizer status and metoprolol therapy. However, there was insufficient evidence to make therapeutic recommendations for CYP2D6 and other beta-blockers or for any beta-blocker and the other five genes evaluated (updates at www.cpicpgx.org).
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a significant contributor to morbidity and mortality. To advance our understanding of the biology contributing to VTE, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of VTE and a transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) based on imputed gene expression from whole blood and liver. We meta-analyzed GWAS data from 18 studies for 30 234 VTE cases and 172 122 controls and assessed the association between 12 923 718 genetic variants and VTE. We generated variant prediction scores of gene expression from whole blood and liver tissue and assessed them for association with VTE. Mendelian randomization analyses were conducted for traits genetically associated with novel VTE loci. We identified 34 independent genetic signals for VTE risk from GWAS meta-analysis, of which 14 are newly reported associations. This included 11 newly associated genetic loci (C1orf198, PLEK, OSMR-AS1, NUGGC/SCARA5, GRK5, MPHOSPH9, ARID4A, PLCG2, SMG6, EIF5A, and STX10) of which 6 replicated, and 3 new independent signals in 3 known genes. Further, TWAS identified 5 additional genetic loci with imputed gene expression levels differing between cases and controls in whole blood (SH2B3, SPSB1, RP11-747H7.3, RP4-737E23.2) and in liver (ERAP1). At some GWAS loci, we found suggestive evidence that the VTE association signal for novel and previously known regions colocalized with expression quantitative trait locus signals. Mendelian randomization analyses suggested that blood traits may contribute to the underlying risk of VTE. To conclude, we identified 16 novel susceptibility loci for VTE; for some loci, the association signals are likely mediated through gene expression of nearby genes.
The development of small-molecule inhibitors targeting G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2 (GRK2) and G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) for the treatment of chronic degenerative diseases has attracted wide attention. GRK2 and GRK5 can regulate essential physiological processes by phosphorylating G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). Alterations in the functional levels of GRK2 and GRK5 have been found in a variety of chronic degenerative diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative diseases, cancers, type 2 diabetes, and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Abnormal GRK2 and GRK5 expression contribute to the development of chronic degenerative diseases through environmental molecular mechanisms, making them promising molecular targets for treating chronic degenerative diseases. To date, many novel GRK2 and GRK5 inhibitors have been reported for the treatment of chronic degenerative diseases. We focus on the recent progress of single and dual-target inhibitors of GRK2/GRK5. This review summarizes the structural optimization rationale, structure-activity relationships (SARs), and the latest application in the treatment of chronic degenerative diseases. We believe it will shed light on the future development of small molecule inhibitors of GRK2 and GRK5, as well as the clinical applications in chronic degenerative diseases.
One in every four deaths in the United States is attributed to cardiovascular disease, hence the development and employment of novel and effective therapeutics are necessary to improve the quality of life and survival of affected patient. Pathological hypertrophy is a maladaptive response by the heart to relieve wall stress that could result from cardiovascular disease. Maladaptive hypertrophy can lead to further disease progression and complications such as heart failure; hence, efforts to target hypertrophy to prevent and treat further morbidity and mortality are necessary. Areas covered: This review summarizes the compelling literature that describes the mechanistic role of GRK2 and GRK5 in maladaptive cardiac hypertrophy; it examines the approaches to inhibit these kinases in hypertrophic animal models and furthermore, it assesses the potential of GRK2 and GRK5 as therapeutic targets for hypertrophy. Expert opinion: GRK2 and GRK5 are novel therapeutic targets for pathological hypertrophy and may have added benefits of ameliorating morbidity and mortality. Despite the lesser researched role of GRK2 in cardiac hypertrophy, it may be the advantageous strategy for treating cardiac hypertrophy because of its role in other maladaptive pathways. Anti-GRK2 therapy optimization and the discovery and development of specific GRK2 and GRK5 small-molecule inhibitors is necessary for the eventual application of successful, effective therapeutics.
Renal fibrosis is a common pathological feature of chronic kidney diseases (CKD), poses a significant burden in the aging population, and is a major cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). In this study, we investigated the role of G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) 5 in the pathogenesis of renal fibrosis. GRK5 is a serine/threonine kinase that regulates G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. GRK5 has been shown to play a role in various diseases including cardiac disorders and cancer. However, the role of GRK5 in renal fibrosis remains largely unknown. Our finding revealed that GRK5 was significantly overexpressed in renal fibrosis. Specifically, GRK5 was transferred into the nucleus via its nuclear localization sequence to regulate histone deacetylases (HDAC) 5 expression under renal fibrosis. GRK5 acted as an upstream regulator of HDAC5/Smad3 signaling pathway. HDAC5 regulated and prevented the transcriptional activity of myocyte enhancer factor 2A (MEF2A) to repress the transcription of Smad7 which leading to the activation of Smad3. These findings first revealed that GRK5 may be a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of renal fibrosis. Inhibition of GRK5 activity may be a promising strategy to attenuate the progression of renal fibrosis.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are critical cellular sensors that mediate numerous physiological processes. In the heart, multiple GPCRs are expressed on various cell types, where they coordinate to regulate cardiac function by modulating critical processes such as contractility and blood flow. Under pathological settings, these receptors undergo aberrant changes in expression levels, localization and capacity to couple to downstream signalling pathways. Conventional therapies for heart failure work by targeting GPCRs, such as beta-adrenergic receptor and angiotensin II receptor antagonists. Although these treatments have improved patient survival, heart failure remains one of the leading causes of mortality worldwide. GPCR kinases (GRKs) are responsible for GPCR phosphorylation and, therefore, desensitization and downregulation of GPCRs. In this Review, we discuss the GPCR signalling pathways and the GRKs involved in the pathophysiology of heart disease. Given that increased expression and activity of GRK2 and GRK5 contribute to the loss of contractile reserve in the stressed and failing heart, inhibition of overactive GRKs has been proposed as a novel therapeutic approach to treat heart failure.
The Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway plays important roles in embryonic development and tissue homeostasis, and is implicated in human disease. Wnts transduce signals via transmembrane receptors of the Frizzled (Fzd/Fz) family and the low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5/6 (Lrp5/6). A key mechanism in their signal transduction is that Wnts induce Lrp6 signalosomes, which become phosphorylated at multiple conserved sites, notably at PPSPXS motifs. Lrp6 phosphorylation is crucial to beta-catenin stabilization and pathway activation by promoting Axin and Gsk3 recruitment to phosphorylated sites. Here, we summarize how proline-directed kinases (Gsk3, PKA, Pftk1, Grk5/6) and non-proline-directed kinases (CK1 family) act upon Lrp6, how the phosphorylation is regulated by ligand binding and mitosis, and how Lrp6 phosphorylation leads to beta-catenin stabilization.
Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is a leading diabetic complication causing significant mortality among people around the globe. People with poor glycemic control accompanied by hyperinsulinemia, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and obesity develop diabetic complications. These diabetic patients develop epigenetic changes and suffer from diabetic kidney complications even after subsequent glucose control, the phenomenon that is recognized as metabolic memory. DNA methylation is an essential epigenetic modification that contributes to the development and progression of several diabetic complications, including DKD. The aberrant DNA methylation pattern at CpGs sites within several genes, such as mTOR, RPTOR, IRS2, GRK5, SLC27A3, LCAT, and SLC1A5, associated with the accompanying risk factors exacerbate the DKD progression. Although drugs such as azacytidine and decitabine have been approved to target DNA methylation for diseases such as hematological malignancies, none have been approved for the treatment of DKD. More importantly, no DNA hypomethylation-targeting drugs have been approved for any disease conditions. Understanding the alteration in DNA methylation and its association with the disease risk factors is essential to target DKD effectively. This review has discussed the abnormal DNA methylation pattern and the kidney tissue-specific expression of critical genes involved in DKD onset and progression. Moreover, we also discuss the new possible therapeutic approach that can be exploited for treating DNA methylation aberrancy in a site-specific manner against DKD.
As the average world-wide lifespan continues to increase, heart failure (HF) has dramatically increased in incidence leading to the highest degree of mortality and morbidity of any disease presently studied. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play a prominent role in regulation of cardiovascular function. GPCRs are effectively "turned off" by GPCR kinases (GRKs) in a process known as "desensitization". GRKs 2 and 5 are highly expressed in the heart, and known to be upregulated in HF. Over the last 20years, the role of GRK2 in HF has been widely studied. However, until recently, the role of GRK5 in cardiac pathophysiology had yet to be elucidated. In the present review, we will focus on GRK5's role in the myocardium in normal physiology, and its apparent critical role in the progression of HF. Further, we will also present potential therapeutic strategies (i.e. small molecule inhibition, gene therapy) that may have potential in combating the deleterious effects of GRK5 in HF.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are mainly regulated by GPCR kinase (GRK) phosphorylation and subsequent beta-arrestin recruitment. The ubiquitously expressed GRKs are classified into cytosolic GRK2/3 and membrane-tethered GRK5/6 subfamilies. GRK2/3 interact with activated G protein betagamma-subunits to translocate to the membrane. Yet, this need was not linked as a factor for bias, influencing the effectiveness of beta-arrestin-biased agonist creation. Using multiple approaches such as GRK2/3 mutants unable to interact with Gbetagamma, membrane-tethered GRKs and G protein inhibitors in GRK2/3/5/6 knockout cells, we show that G protein activation will precede GRK2/3-mediated beta-arrestin2 recruitment to activated receptors. This was independent of the source of free Gbetagamma and observable for Gs-, Gi- and Gq-coupled GPCRs. Thus, beta-arrestin interaction for GRK2/3-regulated receptors is inseparably connected with G protein activation. We outline a theoretical framework of how GRK dependence on free Gbetagamma can determine a GPCR's potential for biased agonism. Due to this inherent cellular mechanism for GRK2/3 recruitment and receptor phosphorylation, we anticipate generation of beta-arrestin-biased ligands to be mechanistically challenging for the subgroup of GPCRs exclusively regulated by GRK2/3, but achievable for GRK5/6-regulated receptors, that do not demand liberated Gbetagamma. Accordingly, GRK specificity of any GPCR is foundational for developing arrestin-biased ligands.
Pathological remodeling of the heart is a hallmark of chronic heart failure (HF) and these structural changes further perpetuate the disease. Cardiac fibroblasts are the critical cell type that is responsible for maintaining the structural integrity of the heart. Stress conditions, such as a myocardial infarction (MI), can activate quiescent fibroblasts into synthetic and contractile myofibroblasts. G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) is an important mediator of cardiovascular homeostasis through dampening of GPCR signaling, and is expressed in the heart and up-regulated in human HF. Of note, GRK5 has been demonstrated to translocate to the nucleus in cardiomyocytes in a calcium-calmodulin (Ca(2+)-CAM)-dependent manner, promoting hypertrophic gene transcription through activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). Interestingly, NFAT is also involved in fibroblast activation. GRK5 is highly expressed and active in cardiac fibroblasts; however, its pathophysiological role in these crucial cardiac cells is unknown. We demonstrate using adult cardiac fibroblasts that genetic deletion of GRK5 inhibits angiotensin II (AngII)-mediated fibroblast activation. Fibroblast-specific deletion of GRK5 in mice led to decreased fibrosis and cardiac hypertrophy after chronic AngII infusion or after ischemic injury compared to nontransgenic littermate controls (NLCs). Mechanistically, we show that nuclear translocation of GRK5 is involved in fibroblast activation. These data demonstrate that GRK5 is a regulator of fibroblast activation in vitro and cardiac fibrosis in vivo. This adds to previously published data which demonstrate the potential beneficial effects of GRK5 inhibition in the context of cardiac disease.
Prevention of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a high priority mission while searching for a disease modifying therapy for AD, a devastating major public health crisis. Clinical observations have identified a prodromal stage of AD for which the patients have mild cognitive impairment (MCI) though do not yet meet AD diagnostic criteria. As an identifiable transitional stage before the onset of AD, MCI should become the high priority target for AD prevention, assuming successful prevention of MCI and/or its conversion to AD also prevents the subsequent AD. By pulling this string, one demonstrated cause of amnestic MCI appears to be the deficiency of G protein-coupled receptor-5 (GRK5). The most compelling evidence is that GRK5 knockout (GRK5KO) mice naturally develop into aMCI during aging. Moreover, GRK5 deficiency was reported to occur during prodromal stage of AD in CRND8 transgenic mice. When a GRK5KO mouse was crossbred with Tg2576 Swedish amyloid precursor protein transgenic mouse, the resulted double transgenic GAP mice displayed exaggerated behavioral and pathological changes across the spectrum of AD pathogenesis. Therefore, the GRK5 deficiency possesses unique features and advantage to serve as a prophylactic therapeutic target for MCI due to AD.
The link between bipolar disorder (BP) and immune dysfunction remains controversial. While epidemiological studies have long suggested an association, recent research has found only limited evidence of such a relationship. To clarify this, we performed an exploratory study of the contributions of immune-relevant genetic factors to the response to lithium (Li) treatment and the clinical presentation of BP. First, we assessed the association of a large collection of immune-related genes (4925) with Li response, defined by the Retrospective Assessment of the Lithium Response Phenotype Scale (Alda scale), and clinical characteristics in patients with BP from the International Consortium on Lithium Genetics (ConLi(+)Gen, N = 2374). Second, we calculated here previously published polygenic scores (PGSs) for immune-related traits and evaluated their associations with Li response and clinical features. Overall, we observed relatively weak associations (p < 1 x 10(-4)) with BP phenotypes within immune-related genes. Network and functional enrichment analyses of the top findings from the association analyses of Li response variables showed an overrepresentation of pathways participating in cell adhesion and intercellular communication. These appeared to converge on the well-known Li-induced inhibition of GSK-3beta. Association analyses of age-at-onset, number of mood episodes, and presence of psychosis, substance abuse and/or suicidal ideation suggested modest contributions of genes such as RTN4, XKR4, NRXN1, NRG1/3 and GRK5 to disease characteristics. PGS analyses returned weak associations (p < 0.05) between inflammation markers and the studied BP phenotypes. Our results suggest a modest relationship between immunity and clinical features in BP. More research is needed to assess the potential therapeutic relevance.
Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) is an enigmatic disease with a multifactorial and still unresolved pathogenesis. A genetic predisposition has been suggested based on the few familial TTS cases. Conflicting results have been published regarding the role of functional polymorphisms in relevant candidate genes, such as alpha1-, beta1-, and beta2-adrenergic receptors; G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5; and estrogen receptors. Further research is required to help clarify the role of genetic susceptibility in TTS.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest family of cell-surface receptors and they are responsible for the transduction of extracellular signals, regulating almost all aspects of mammalian physiology. These receptors are specifically regulated by a family of serine/threonine kinases, called GPCR kinases (GRKs). Given the biological role of GPCRs, it is not surprising that GRKs are also involved in several pathophysiological processes. Particular importance is emerging for GRK5, which is a multifunctional protein, expressed in different cell types, and it has been found located in single or multiple subcellular compartments. For instance, when anchored to the plasma membrane, GRK5 exerts its canonical function, regulating GPCRs. However, under certain conditions (e.g., pro-hypertrophic stimuli), GRK5 translocates to the nucleus of cells where it can interact with non-GPCR-related proteins as well as DNA itself to promote "non-canonical" signaling, including gene transcription. Importantly, due to these actions, several studies have demonstrated that GRK5 has a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of chronic-degenerative disorders. This is true in the cardiac cells, tumor cells, and neurons. For this reason, in this review article, we will inform the readers of the most recent evidence that supports the importance of targeting GRK5 to prevent the development or progression of cancer, cardiovascular, and neurological diseases.
INTRODUCTION: beta-blockers are among the most widely prescribed of all drugs, used for treatment of a large number of cardiovascular diseases. Herein we evaluate literature pertaining to pharmacogenetics of beta-blocker therapy, provide insight into the robustness of the genetic associations, and determine the appropriateness for translating these genetic associations into clinical practice. AREAS COVERED: A literature search was conducted using PubMed to collate evidence on associations between CYP2D6, ADRB1, ADRB2, and GRK5 genetic variation and drug-response outcomes in the presence of beta-blocker exposure. Pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and clinical outcomes studies were included if genotype data and beta-blocker exposure were documented. EXPERT OPINION: Substantial data suggest that specific ADRB1 and GRK5 genotypes are associated with improved beta-blocker efficacy and have potential for use to guide therapy decisions in the clinical setting. While the data do not justify ordering a CYP2D6 pharmacogenetic test, if CYP2D6 genotype is available in the electronic health record, there may be clinical utility for understanding dosing of beta-blockers.
beta-adrenergic receptors (beta-ARs) play a major role in the physiological regulation of cardiac function through signaling routes tightly controlled by G protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs). Although the acute stimulation of beta-ARs and the subsequent production of cyclic AMP (cAMP) have beneficial effects on cardiac function, chronic stimulation of beta-ARs as observed under sympathetic overdrive promotes the development of pathological cardiac remodeling and heart failure (HF), a leading cause of mortality worldwide. This is accompanied by an alteration in cAMP compartmentalization and the activation of the exchange protein directly activated by cAMP 1 (Epac1) signaling. Among downstream signals of beta-ARs, compelling evidence indicates that GRK2, GRK5, and Epac1 represent attractive therapeutic targets for cardiac disease. Here, we summarize the pathophysiological roles of GRK2, GRK5, and Epac1 in the heart. We focus on their signalosome and describe how under pathological settings, these proteins can cross-talk and are part of scaffolded nodal signaling systems that contribute to a decreased cardiac function and HF development.
The efficiency of mu-opioid receptor signalling is tightly regulated and ultimately limited by the coordinated phosphorylation of intracellular serine and threonine residues. Here, we review and discuss recent progress in the generation and application of phosphosite-specific mu-opioid receptor antibodies, which have proved to be excellent tools for monitoring the spatial and temporal dynamics of receptor phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Agonist-induced phosphorylation of mu-opioid receptors occurs at a conserved 10 residue sequence (370) TREHPSTANT(379) in the receptor's carboxyl-terminal cytoplasmic tail. Diverse opioids induce receptor phosphorylation at S375, present in the middle of this sequence, but only high-efficacy opioids have the ability to drive higher order phosphorylation on flanking residues (T370, T376 and T379). S375 is the initiating residue in a hierarchical phosphorylation cascade. In contrast, agonist-independent heterologous mu-opioid receptor phosphorylation occurs primarily at T370. The combination of phosphosite-specific antibodies and siRNA knockdown screening also facilitated the identification of relevant kinases and phosphatases. In fact, morphine induces a selective S375 phosphorylation that is predominantly catalysed by GPCR kinase 5 (GRK5), whereas multisite phosphorylation induced by high-efficacy opioids specifically requires GRK2/3. By contrast, T370 phosphorylation stimulated by phorbol esters or heterologous activation of Gq -coupled receptors is mediated by PKCalpha. Rapid mu-opioid receptor dephosphorylation occurs at or near the plasma membrane and is catalysed by protein phosphatase 1gamma (PP1gamma). These findings suggest that there are distinct phosphorylation motifs for homologous and heterologous regulation of mu-opioid receptor phosphorylation. However, it remains to be seen to what extent different mu-opioid receptor phosphorylation patterns contribute to the development of tolerance and dependence in vivo. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Opioids: New Pathways to Functional Selectivity. To view the other articles in this section visit http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bph.2015.172.issue-2.
