Metabotropic glutamate receptor 7; G-protein coupled receptor for glutamate. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity.
IMPORTANCE: Autosomal recessive inherited neurodevelopmental disorders are highly heterogeneous, and many, possibly most, of the disease genes are still unknown. OBJECTIVES: To promote the identification of disease genes through confirmation of previously described genes and presentation of novel candidates and provide an overview of the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing in consanguineous families. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Autozygosity mapping in families and exome sequencing of index patients were performed in 152 consanguineous families (the parents descended from a same ancestor) with at least 1 offspring with intellectual disability (ID). The study was conducted from July 1, 2008, to June 30, 2015, and data analysis was conducted from July 1, 2015, to August 31, 2016. RESULTS: Of the 152 consanguineous families enrolled, 1 child (in 45 families [29.6%]) or multiple children (107 families [70.4%]) had ID; additional features were present in 140 of the families (92.1%). The mean (SD) age of the children was 10.3 (9.0) years, and 171 of 297 (57.6%) were male. In 109 families (71.7%), potentially protein-disrupting and clinically relevant variants were identified. Of these, a clear clinical genetic diagnosis was made in 56 families (36.8%) owing to 57 (likely) pathogenic variants in 50 genes already established in neurodevelopmental disorders (46 autosomal recessive, 2 X-linked, and 2 de novo) or in 7 previously proposed recessive candidates. In 5 of these families, potentially treatable disorders were diagnosed (mutations in PAH, CBS, MTHFR, CYP27A1, and HIBCH), and in 1 family, 2 disease-causing homozygous variants in different genes were identified. In another 48 families (31.6%), 52 convincing recessive variants in candidate genes that were not previously reported in regard to neurodevelopmental disorders were identified. Of these, 14 were homozygous and truncating in GRM7, STX1A, CCAR2, EEF1D, GALNT2, SLC44A1, LRRIQ3, AMZ2, CLMN, SEC23IP, INIP, NARG2, FAM234B, and TRAP1. The diagnostic yield was higher in individuals with severe ID (35 of 77 [45.5%]), in multiplex families (42 of 107 [39.3%]), in patients with additional features (30 of 70 [42.9%]), and in those with remotely related parents (15 of 34 [44.1%]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Because of the high diagnostic yield of 36.8% and the possibility of identifying treatable diseases or the coexistence of several disease-causing variants, using exome sequencing as a first-line diagnostic approach in consanguineous families with neurodevelopmental disorders is recommended. Furthermore, the literature is enriched with 52 convincing candidate genes that are awaiting confirmation in independent families.
The metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 (mGlu(7)), encoded by the GRM7 gene in humans, is a presynaptic, G protein-coupled glutamate receptor that is essential for modulating neurotransmission. Mutations in or reduced expression of GRM7 have been identified in different genetic neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), and rare biallelic missense variants have been proposed to underlie a subset of NDDs. Clinical GRM7 variants have been associated with a range of symptoms consistent with neurodevelopmental molecular features, including hypomyelination, brain atrophy and defects in axon outgrowth. Here, we review the newest findings regarding the cellular and molecular defects caused by GRM7 variants in NDD patients.
Infection with Lassa virus (LASV) can cause Lassa fever, a haemorrhagic illness with an estimated fatality rate of 29.7%, but causes no or mild symptoms in many individuals. Here, to investigate whether human genetic variation underlies the heterogeneity of LASV infection, we carried out genome-wide association studies (GWAS) as well as seroprevalence surveys, human leukocyte antigen typing and high-throughput variant functional characterization assays. We analysed Lassa fever susceptibility and fatal outcomes in 533 cases of Lassa fever and 1,986 population controls recruited over a 7 year period in Nigeria and Sierra Leone. We detected genome-wide significant variant associations with Lassa fever fatal outcomes near GRM7 and LIF in the Nigerian cohort. We also show that a haplotype bearing signatures of positive selection and overlapping LARGE1, a required LASV entry factor, is associated with decreased risk of Lassa fever in the Nigerian cohort but not in the Sierra Leone cohort. Overall, we identified variants and genes that may impact the risk of severe Lassa fever, demonstrating how GWAS can provide insight into viral pathogenesis.
Age-related hearing loss (ARHL) has recently been confirmed as a common complex trait, that is, it is heritable with many genetic variants each contributing a small amount of risk, as well as environmental determinants. Historically, attempts to identify the genetic variants underlying the ARHL have been of limited success, relying on the selection of candidate genes based on the limited knowledge of the pathophysiology of the condition, and linkage studies in samples comprising related individuals. More recently genome-wide association studies have been performed, but these require very large samples having consistent and reliable phenotyping for hearing loss (HL), and early attempts suffered from lack of reliable replication of their findings. Replicated variants shown associated with ARHL include those lying in genes GRM7, ISG20, TRIOBP, ILDR1, and EYA4. The availability of large biobanks and the development of collaborative consortia have led to a breakthrough over the last couple of years, and many new genetic variants associated with ARHL are becoming available, through the analysis publicly available bioresources and electronic health records. These findings along with immunohistochemistry and mouse models of HL look set to help disentangle the genetic architecture of ARHL, and highlight the need for standardization of phenotyping methods to facilitate data sharing and collaboration across research networks.
OBJECTIVE: Hashimoto's thyroiditis, also known as chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, is a common autoimmune thyroiditis, which mostly occurs in young and middle-aged women. It can be manifested as hyperthyroidism in the early stage; hypothyroidism may appear with the progression of the disease. Studies have shown that multiple factors such as heredity, environment, and autoimmunity are involved in the pathogenesis, but the specific mechanism is not clear. In our study, we tried to find key genes and potential molecular mechanisms of Hashimoto's thyroiditis to provide new ideas for the therapeutic targets of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. METHOD: GSE138198 and GSE54958 were downloaded from the GEO database, and two datasets were combined for analysis. The combined data were normalized to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), and GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks and hub genes between DEGs were identified. We also used the miRWalk database to identify regulatory miRNAs associated with expressions of DEGs. RESULT: We identified 182 DEGs (160 upregulated and 22 downregulated) between Hashimoto's disease patients and the healthy control group. GO analysis showed that DEGs were mostly concentrated in detection of chemical stimulus involved in sensory perception, intermediate filament cytoskeleton, and olfactory receptor activity. KEGG pathway analysis showed that DEGs were mainly related to olfactory transduction. Some members of the KRTAP family and HTR5A, KNG1, DRD3, HTR1D, TAS2R16, INSL5, TAS2R42, and GRM7 are the most important hub genes in the PPI network. In addition, we recognized that OTUD4, LLPH, and ECHDC1 were the most important hub genes in the miRNA-target gene network. CONCLUSION: In this study, a series of bioinformatics analyses of DEGs were performed to identify the key genes and pathways associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. These genes and pathways provide a more detailed understanding of the pathogenesis of Hashimoto's disease and provide new ideas for the therapeutic targets of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
Genome-wide association study (GWAS) has determined the metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 (GRM7) gene as potential locus for schizophrenia risk variants; However, the relationship between the GRM7 variants and the risk of schizophrenia is still uncertain, and there are significant individual variations in response to the antipsychotic drugs. In order to identify susceptible gene and drug-response-related markers, 2413 subjects in our research were chosen for determining drug-response-related markers in schizophrenia. The rs1516569 variant (OR = 0.95, P < 3.47 x 10(-4)) was a significant risk factor, and a single-nucleotide polymorphism of GRM7 gene- rs9883258 (OR = 0.84, P = 2.18 x 10(-3)) has been determined as potential biomarkers for therapeutic responses of seven commonly used antipsychotic drugs (aripiprazole, haloperidol, olanzapine, perphenazine, quetiapine, risperidone and ziprasidone) in Chinese Han population; Significant associations with treatment response for several single-nucleotide polymorphisms in every antipsychotic drugs, such as rs779746 (OR = 1.39, P = 0.03), rs480409 (OR = 0.73, P = 0.04), rs78137319 (OR = 3.09, P = 0.04), rs1154370 (OR = 1.51, P = 0.006) have been identified in our study. Hence our research elucidates that GRM7 variants play the critical role of predicting the risk of schizophrenia and antipsychotic effect of seven common drugs.
The pathogenesis of depression involves cAMP-response element binding protein1 (CREB1) and metabotropic glutamate receptor 7 (GRM7), and their genetic polymorphisms may affect susceptibility to depression. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the CREB1 polymorphisms rs2253206 and rs10932201 and the GRM7 polymorphism rs162209 are associated with the risk of depression. Using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism and DNA sequencing, we analyzed the rs2253206, rs10932201, and rs162209 frequencies in 479 patients with depression and 329 normal controls. The results showed that the rs2253206 and rs10932201 polymorphisms were significantly associated with an increased risk of depression. However, no association was found between rs162209 and depression risk. When the data were stratified for several disease-related variables, none of the three polymorphisms were found to be correlated to onset, disease severity, family history, or suicidal tendency. Thus, the present findings indicate that the CREB1 polymorphisms rs2253206 and rs10932201 may be related to the occurrence of depression.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common childhood behavioral condition which affects 2-10% of school age children worldwide. Although the underlying molecular mechanism for the disorder is poorly understood, familial, twin and adoption studies suggest a strong genetic component. Here we provide a state-of-the-art review of the molecular genetics of ADHD incorporating evidence from candidate gene and linkage designs, as well as genome-wide association (GWA) studies of common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and rare copy number variations (CNVs). Bioinformatic methods such as functional enrichment analysis and protein-protein network analysis are used to highlight biological processes of likely relevance to the aetiology of ADHD. Candidate gene associations of minor effect size have been replicated across a number of genes including SLC6A3, DRD5, DRD4, SLC6A4, LPHN3, SNAP-25, HTR1B, NOS1 and GIT1. Although case-control SNP-GWAS have had limited success in identifying common genetic variants for ADHD that surpass critical significance thresholds, quantitative trait designs suggest promising associations with Cadherin13 and glucose-fructose oxidoreductase domain 1 genes. Further, CNVs mapped to glutamate receptor genes (GRM1, GRM5, GRM7 and GRM8) have been implicated in the aetiology of the disorder and overlap with bioinformatic predictions based on ADHD GWAS SNP data regarding enriched pathways. Although increases in sample size across multi-center cohorts will likely yield important new results, we advocate that this must occur in parallel with a shift away from categorical case-control approaches that view ADHD as a unitary construct, towards dimensional approaches that incorporate endophenotypes and statistical classification methods.
Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the aggregation of misfolded proteins in the brain. Among these disorders are the prion diseases, which are transmissible, and in which the misfolded proteins ("prions") are also the infectious agent. Increasingly, it appears that misfolded proteins in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases and the tauopathies also propagate in a "prion-like" manner. However, the association between prion formation, spread, and neurotoxicity is not clear. Recently, we showed that in prion disease, protein misfolding leads to neurodegeneration through dysregulation of generic proteostatic mechanisms, specifically, the unfolded protein response. Genetic and pharmacological manipulation of the unfolded protein response was neuroprotective despite continuing prion replication, hence dissociating this from neurotoxicity. The data have clear implications for treatment across the spectrum of these disorders, targeting pathogenic processes downstream of protein misfolding.
PURPOSE: Limited data exists on potential genetic contributors to acute kidney injury. This review examines current knowledge of AKI genomics. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 32 studies were selected from PubMed and GWAS Catalog queries for original data studies of human AKI genetics. Hand search of references identified 3 additional manuscripts. RESULTS: 33 of 35 studies were hypothesis-driven investigations of candidate polymorphisms that either did not consistently replicate statistically significant findings, or obtained significant results only in few small-scale studies. Vote-counting meta-analysis of 9 variants examined in >1 candidate gene study showed >/=50% non-significant studies, with larger studies generally finding non-significant results. The remaining 2 studies were large-scale unbiased investigations: One examining 2,100 genes linked with cardiovascular, metabolic, and inflammatory syndromes identified BCL2, SERPINA4, and SIK3 variants, while a genome-wide association study (GWAS) identified variants in BBS9 and the GRM7|LMCD1-AS1 intergenic region. All studies had relatively small sample sizes (<2300 subjects). Study heterogeneity precluded candidate gene and GWA meta-analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Most studies of AKI genetics involve hypothesis-driven (rather than hypothesis-generating) candidate gene investigations that have failed to identify contributory variants consistently. A limited number of unbiased, larger-scale studies have been carried out, but there remains a pressing need for additional GWA studies.
Efforts to unlock the biology of major depressive disorder (MDD) are proceeding on multiple fronts. In this article, the authors review the current understanding of epidemiological evidence for a heritable component to MDD risk, as well as recent advances in linkage, candidate gene, and genome-wide association analyses of MDD and related disease subtypes and endophenotypes. While monoamine signaling has preoccupied the bulk of scientific investigation to date, nontraditional gene candidates such as PCLO and GRM7 are now emerging and beginning to change the landscape for future human and animal research on depression.
Schizophrenia is a severe and complex mental disorder with high heritability. There is an evidence that metabotropic glutamate receptors (GRM) are associated with schizophrenia. GRM7 has been identified as a candidate gene for many psychiatric disorders especially schizophrenia. In this study, we investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in GRM7 were associated with schizophrenia. Four SNPs (rs9814881, rs13353402, rs9870680 and rs1531939) were genotyped in 1034 schizophrenic patients and 1034 healthy controls of Chinese Han origin. The results showed that the two SNPs rs13353402 and rs1531939 demonstrated significant difference between schizophrenic patients and control subjects in allele frequencies (rs13353402: P value=0.0307, rs1531939: P value=0.0328, respectively). Nevertheless, there was no significant discrepancies in genotype distribution. In summary, our results indicate that the GRM7 SNPs rs13353402 and rs1531939 might be associated with schizophrenia in Chinese Han population.
BACKGROUND: Personal variations in genetic risk for schizophrenia relate to its phenotypic heterogeneity-both in disorder development and clinical manifestations. Abnormal glutamatergic neurotransmitter system functioning is integrated in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. METHODS: A sample of 805 Russian schizophrenia patients from the Siberian Federal region was investigated. We examined the association of 39 single nucleotide polymorphisms in eight genes (GRIN2A, GRIN2B, SLC1A2, SLC1A3, SLC17A7, GRM3, GRM7, and GRM8) involved in the glutamatergic system with the development of clinical heterogeneity of schizophrenia. The MassARRAY Analyzer 4 was used for genotyping. RESULTS: GRIN2A rs11644461, rs8057394 and GRIN2B rs7313149 are associated with the continuous type of schizophrenia. The GRIN2A rs8057394*G allele is a relative risk factor (p = 0.019) for developing the continuous type of schizophrenia. We found a nominally significant association between negative symptoms of schizophrenia and SLC17A7 rs62126236. The SLC17A7 rs62126236*T allele has a protective effect (p = 0.039) against predominant negative symptoms in schizophrenia. The total Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) scores were significantly associated with GRIN2A rs9788936 after adjusting for multiple testing (p = 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In this study the contribution of the glutamatergic gene polymorphisms to the clinical heterogeneity of schizophrenia has been demonstrated.
Recent work using a mouse model has identified the glutamate metabotropic receptor 7 (Grm7) gene as a strong candidate gene for alcohol consumption. Although there has been some work examining the effect of human glutamate metabotropic receptor 7 (GRM7) polymorphisms on human substance use disorders, the majority of the work has focused on other psychiatric disorders such as ADHD, major depressive disorder, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, panic disorder, and autism spectrum disorders. The current study aimed to evaluate evidence for association between GRM7 and alcohol behaviors in humans using a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) approach, as well as a gene-based approach. Using 1803 non-Hispanic European Americans (EAs) (source: the Colorado Center on Antisocial Drug Dependence [CADD]) and 1049 EA subjects from an independent replication sample (source: the Genetics of Antisocial Drug Dependence [GADD]), two SNPs in GRM7 were examined for possible association with alcohol consumption using two family-based association tests implemented in FBAT and QTDT. Rs3749380 was suggestively associated with alcohol consumption in the CADD sample (p = 0.010) with the minor T allele conferring risk. There was no evidence for association in the GADD sample. A gene-based test using four Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) revealed no association between variation in GRM7 and alcohol consumption. This study had several limitations: the SNPs chosen likely do not tag expression quantitative trait loci; a human alcohol consumption phenotype was used, complicating the interpretation with respect to rodent studies that found evidence for a cis-regulatory link between alcohol preference and Grm7; and only common SNPs imputed in all four datasets were included in the gene-based test. These limitations highlight the fact that rare variants, some potentially important common signals in the gene, and regions farther upstream were not examined.
INTRODUCTION: Glutamate dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. The metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are G-protein-coupled receptors. GRM7, the gene that encodes mGluR7, is expressed in many regions of the human central nervous system. The GRM7 gene is located on human chromosome 3p26, which has been suggested by linkage analysis to contain a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia. METHODS: We screened for mutations in all exons, exon/intron junctions, and promoter regions of the GRM7 gene in Japanese patients with schizophrenia and evaluated associations between the detected polymorphisms and schizophrenia. We examined the influence of one polymorphism associated with schizophrenia on the expression of GRM7 by dual-luciferase assay in transfected cells. RESULTS: Twenty-five polymorphisms/mutations were detected in GRM7. Case-control analysis revealed a potential association of a synonymous polymorphism (371T/C, rs3749380) in exon 1 with schizophrenia in our case-control study of 2293 Japanese patients with schizophrenia and 2382 Japanese control subjects (allelic p=0.009). Dual-luciferase assay revealed suppression of transcription activity by exon 1 containing this polymorphism and a statistically significant difference in the promoter activity between the T and C alleles. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the possible association of a GRM7 gene polymorphism with genetic susceptibility to schizophrenia.
African American (AA) men have the highest incidence and mortality rate from Prostate cancer (PCa) than any other racial/ethnic group. To date, PCa genomic studies have largely under-represented tumour samples from AA men. We measured genome-wide DNA methylation in benign and tumor prostate tissues from AA men using the Illumina Infunium 850 K EPIC array. mRNA expression database from a subset of the AA biospecimen were used to assess correlation of transcriptome and methylation datasets. Genome-wide methylation analysis identified 11,460 probes that were significant (p < 0.01) and differentially methylated in AA PCa compared to normal prostate tissues and showed significant (p < 0.01) inverse-correlation with mRNA expression. Ingenuity pathway analysis and Gene Ontology analysis in our AA dataset compared with TCGA dataset showed similarities in methylation patterns: top candidate genes with significant hypermethylation and corresponding down-regulated gene expression were associated with biological pathways in hemidesmosome assembly, mammary gland development, epidermis development, hormone biosynthesis, and cell communication. In addition, top candidate genes with significant hypomethylation and corresponding up-regulated gene expression were associated with biological pathways in macrophage differentiation, cAMP-dependent protein kinase activity, protein destabilization, transcription co-repression, and fatty acid biosynthesis. In contrast, differences in genome-wide methylation in our AA dataset compared with TCGA dataset were enriched for genes in steroid signalling, immune signalling, chromatin structure remodelling and RNA processing. Overall, differential methylation of AMIGO3, IER3, UPB1, GRM7, TFAP2C, TOX2, PLSCR2, ZNF292, ESR2, MIXL1, BOLL, and FGF6 were significant and uniquely associated with PCa progression in our AA cohort.
Clinical symptom response to antipsychotic medications is highly variable. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) provide a 'hypothesis-free' method of interrogating the genome for biomarkers of antipsychotic response. We performed a systematic review of GWAS findings for antipsychotic efficacy or effectiveness. 14 studies met our inclusion criteria, ten of which examined antipsychotic response using quantitative rating scales to measure symptom improvement. 15 genome-wide significant loci were identified, seven of which were replicated in other antipsychotic GWAS publications: CNTNAP5, GRID2, GRM7, 8q24 (KCNK9), PCDH7, SLC1A1 and TNIK. Notably, four replicated loci are involved in glutamatergic pathways. Additional validation and evaluation of the biological significance of these markers is warranted. These markers should also be evaluated for clinical utility, especially in the context of other validated pharmacogenomic variants (e.g., CYP450 genes). These findings may generate new avenues for development of novel antipsychotic treatments.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) refer to a group of severe epileptic syndromes characterized by seizures as well as a developmental delay which can be a consequence of the underlying etiology and/or the epileptic encephalopathy. The genes responsible for DEEs are numerous and their number is increasing since the availability of Next-Generation Sequencing. Pathogenic variants in GRM7, encoding the metabotropic glutamate receptor 7, were recently shown as a cause of a severe DEE with autosomal recessive inheritance. To date, only ten patients have been reported in the literature, generally with severe phenotypes including early-onset epilepsy, microcephaly, brain anomalies, and spasticity. We report here 5 patients from 3 independent families with biallelic variants in the GRM7 gene. We review the literature and provide further elements for the understanding of the genotype-phenotype correlation of this rare syndrome.
L-glutamate is the chief excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system (CNS) which activates metabotropic receptors including the metabotropic glutamate receptor GRM7. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within GRM7 gene have been associated with several psychiatric conditions. In the present study, we assessed association between two GRM7 SNPs (rs6782011 and rs779867) and two neuropsychiatric disorders including attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) and mood disorders. There were no significant differences in genotype, allele and haplotypes frequencies of the rs6782011 and rs779867 between bipolar disorder 1 (BPD1) patients and controls. The CC genotype of the rs6782011 was significantly associated with BPD2 in recessive model (OR (95% CI) = 1.78 (1.09-2.91), adjusted P value = 0.04) and with ADHD in dominant and co-dominant models (OR (95% CI) = 1.98 (1.11-3.53), adjusted P value = 0.04; OR (95% CI) = 2.27 (1.23-4.17), adjusted P value = 0.04 respectively). The C G haplotype (rs6782011 and rs779867 respectively) was more prevalent among both BPD2 patients (OR (95%CI) = 2.03 (1.36-3.01), adjusted P value = 0.002) and MDD patients (OR (95%CI) = 2.08 (1.37-3.16), adjusted P value = 0.002) compared with controls. The current study provides further evidences for participation of GRM7 variants in conferring risk of neuropsychiatric disorders.
