Gastrin-releasing peptide receptor; Receptor for gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP). Signals via association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system, resulting in Akt phosphorylation. Contributes to the regulation of food intake. Contributes to the perception of prurient stimuli and transmission of itch signals in the spinal cord that promote scratching behavior, but does not play a role in the perception of pain. Contributes primarily to nonhistaminergic itch sensation. Contributes to long-term fear memory, but not normal spatial memory (By si [...] 
Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer death in men worldwide. Among the various treatment options, radiopharmaceutical therapy has shown notable success in metastatic, castration-resistant disease. Radiopharmaceutical therapy is a systemic approach that delivers cytotoxic radiation doses precisely to the malignant tumors and/or tumor microenvironment. Therapeutic radiopharmaceuticals are composed of a therapeutic radionuclide and a high-affinity, tumor-targeting carrier molecule. Therapeutic radionuclides used in preclinical prostate cancer studies are primarily alpha-, beta(-)-, or Auger-electron-emitting radiometals or radiohalogens. Monoclonal antibodies, antibody-derived fragments, peptides, and small molecules are frequently used as tumor-targeting molecules. Over the years, several important membrane-associated proteases and receptors have been identified, validated, and subsequently used for preclinical radiotherapeutic development for prostate cancer. Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is the most well-studied prostate cancer-associated protease in preclinical literature. PSMA-targeting radiotherapeutic agents are being investigated using high-affinity antibody- and small-molecule-based agents for safety and efficacy. Early generations of such agents were developed simply by replacing radionuclides of the imaging agents with therapeutic ones. Later, extensive structure-activity relationship studies were conducted to address the safety and efficacy issues obtained from initial patient data. Recent regulatory approval of the (177)Lu-labeled low-molecular-weight agent, (177)Lu-PSMA-617, is a significant accomplishment. Current preclinical experiments are focused on the structural modification of (177)Lu-PSMA-617 and relevant investigational agents to increase tumor targeting and reduce off-target binding and toxicity in healthy organs. While lutetium-177 ((177)Lu) remains the most widely used radionuclide, radiolabeled analogs with iodine-131 ((128)I), yttrium-90 ((89)Y), copper-67 ((67)Cu), and terbium-161 ((161)Tb) have been evaluated as potential alternatives in recent years. In addition, agents carrying the alpha-particle-emitting radiohalogen, astatine-211 ((211)At), or radiometals, actinium-225 ((225)Ac), lead-212 ((212)Pb), radium-223 ((223)Ra), and thorium-227 ((227)Th), have been increasingly investigated in preclinical research. Besides PSMA-based radiotherapeutics, other prominent prostate cancer-related proteases, for example, human kallikrein peptidases (HK2 and HK3), have been explored using monoclonal-antibody-(mAb)-based targeting platforms. Several promising mAbs targeting receptors overexpressed on the different stages of prostate cancer have also been developed for radiopharmaceutical therapy, for example, Delta-like ligand 3 (DLL-3), CD46, and CUB domain-containing protein 1 (CDCP1). Progress is also being made using peptide-based targeting platforms for the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR), a well-established membrane-associated receptor expressed in localized and metastatic prostate cancers. Furthermore, mechanism-driven combination therapies appear to be a burgeoning area in the context of preclinical prostate cancer radiotherapeutics. Here, we review the current developments related to the preclinical radiopharmaceutical therapy of prostate cancer. These are summarized in two major topics: (1) therapeutic radionuclides and (2) tumor-targeting approaches using monoclonal antibodies, small molecules, and peptides.
Itch is one of the most primal sensations, being both ubiquitous and important for the well-being of animals. For more than a century, a desire to understand how itch is encoded by the nervous system has prompted the advancement of many theories. Within the past 15 years, our understanding of the molecular and neural mechanisms of itch has undergone a major transformation, and this remarkable progress continues today without any sign of abating. Here I describe accumulating evidence that indicates that itch is distinguished from pain through the actions of itch-specific neuropeptides that relay itch information to the spinal cord. According to this model, classical neurotransmitters transmit, inhibit and modulate itch information in a context-, space- and time-dependent manner but do not encode itch specificity. Gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) is proposed to be a key itch-specific neuropeptide, with spinal neurons expressing GRP receptor (GRPR) functioning as a key part of a convergent circuit for the conveyance of peripheral itch information to the brain.
Human bombesin receptors, GRPR and NMBR, are two of the most frequently overexpressed G-protein-coupled-receptors by lung-cancers. Recently, GRPR/NMBR are receiving considerable attention because they act as growth factor receptors often in an autocrine manner in different lung-cancers, affect tumor angiogenesis, their inhibition increases the cytotoxic potency of tyrosine-kinase inhibitors reducing lung-cancer cellular resistance/survival and their overexpression can be used for sensitive tumor localization as well as to target cytotoxic agents to the cancer. The orphan BRS-3-receptor, because of homology is classified as a bombesin receptor but has received little attention, despite the fact that it is also reported in a number of studies in lung-cancer cells and has growth effects in these cells. To address its potential importance, in this study, we examined the frequency/relative quantitative expression of human BRS-3 compared to GRPR/NMBR and the effects of its activation on cell-signaling/growth in 13 different human lung-cancer cell-lines. Our results showed that BRS-3 receptor is expressed in 92% of the cell-lines and that it is functional in these cells, because its activation stimulates phospholipase-C with breakdown of phosphoinositides and changes in cytosolic calcium, stimulates ERK/MAPK and stimulates cell growth by EGFR transactivation in some, but not all, the lung-cancer cell-lines. These results suggest that human BRS-3, similar to GRPR/NMBR, is frequently ectopically-expressed by lung-cancer cells in which, it is functional, affecting cell signaling/growth. These results suggest that similar to GRPR/NMBR, BRS-3 should receive increased attention as possible approach for the development of novel treatments and/or diagnosis in lung-cancer.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The common characteristics of alcohol-associated liver injury (ALI) include abnormal liver function, infiltration of inflammatory cells, and generation of oxidative stress. The gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) is activated by its neuropeptide ligand, gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP). GRP/GRPR appears to induce the production of cytokines in immune cells and promotes neutrophil migration. However, the effects of GRP/GRPR in ALI are unknown. APPROACH AND RESULTS: We found high GRPR expression in the liver of patients with alcohol-associated steatohepatitis and increased pro-GRP levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of these patients compared with that of the control. Increased expression of GRP may be associated with histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation induced by alcohol, which promotes the expression of GRP and then GRPR binding. Grpr-/- and Grprflox/floxLysMCre mice alleviated ethanol-induced liver injury with relieved steatosis, lower serum alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, triglycerides, malondialdehyde, and superoxide dismutase levels, reduced neutrophil influx, and decreased expression and release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Conversely, the overexpression of GRPR showed opposite effects. The pro-inflammatory and oxidative stress roles of GRPR might be dependent on IRF1-mediated Caspase-1 inflammasome and NOX2-dependent reactive oxygen species pathway, respectively. In addition, we verified the therapeutic and preventive effects of RH-1402, a novel GRPR antagonist, for ALI. CONCLUSIONS: A knockout or antagonist of GRPR during excess alcohol intake could have anti-inflammatory and antioxidative roles, as well as provide a platform for histone modification-based therapy for ALI.
Bombesin (Bn) receptor subtype 3(BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor of the Bn family, which does not bind any natural Bn peptide with high affinity. Receptor knockout studies show that the animals develop diabetes, obesity, altered temperature control, and other central nervous system (CNS)/endocrine/gastrointestinal changes. It is present in CNS, peripheral tissues, and tumors; however, its role in normal physiology/pathophysiology, as well as its receptor localization/pharmacology is largely unknown, in part due to the lack of a convenient, specific, direct radiolabeled ligand. This study was designed to address this problem and to develop and characterize a specific radiolabeled ligand for BRS-3. The peptide antagonist Bantag-1 had >10,000-fold selectivity for human BRS-3 (hBRS-3) over other mammalian Bn receptors (BnRs) [i.e., gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) and neuromedin B receptor (NMBR)]. Using iodogen and basic conditions, it was radiolabeled to high specific activity (2200 Ci/mmol) and found to bind with high affinity/specificity to hBRS-3. Binding was saturable, rapid, and reversible. The ligand only interacted with known BRS-3 ligands, and not with other specific GRPR/NMBR ligands or ligands for unrelated receptors. The magnitude of (125)I-Bantag-1 binding correlated with BRS-3 mRNA expression and the magnitude of activation of phospholipase C in lung cancer cells, as well as readily identifying BRS-3 in lung cancer cells and normal tissues, allowing the direct assessment of BRS-3 receptor pharmacology/numbers on cells containing BRS-3 with other BnRs, which is usually the case. This circumvents the need for subtraction assays, which are now frequently used to assess BRS-3 indirectly using radiolabeled pan-ligands, which interact with all BnRs.
Neuromedin B (NMB) is one of the bombesin (BN)-related peptides in mammals. It was originally purified from pig spinal cords, and it has been shown to be present in central nervous system as well as in gastrointestinal tract. BN and its related peptides have various physiological effects. These include regulation of exocrine and endocrine secretions, smooth muscle contraction, feeding, blood pressure, blood glucose, body temperature and cell growth. NMB exerts its effect by binding to the cell surface receptor. A high affinity receptor, NMB receptor (NMB-R) has been identified. This is a G-protein coupled receptor with seven membrane-spanning regions. Upon agonist binding, several intracellular signaling cascades including phospholipase activation, calcium mobilization and protein kinase C (PKC) activation lead to expression of several genes, DNA synthesis or cellular effects such as secretion. Existence of NMB-R has been demonstrated in several brain regions, notably in olfactory and thalamic regions, and in gastrointestinal tracts. Recent analysis using NMB-R-deficient mice, generated by gene-targeting technique, enables to distinguish functional properties of NMB-R from GRP-R. In this review, molecular characterization, anatomical distribution and pharmacological properties of NMB and NMB-R will be presented. Moreover, physiological roles of NMB and its receptor demonstrated by the analysis of NMB-R-deficient mice will be reported. Comparison with GRP/GRP-R system will provide important information about BN-like peptide systems in mammals.
Molecular imaging is advancing rapidly with promising new molecular targets emerging for theragnostic, ie, imaging and treatment with the same compound, to provide targeted, personalized medicine. Gastrin-releasing peptide receptors (GRPR) are overexpressed in prostate cancer. Gallium-68 (68Ga) RM2 is a GRPR antagonist and shows high sensitivity and specificity for the detection of primary prostate cancer and recurrent disease. However, compared with the widely used 68Ga-PSMA11 and 18F-DCFPyL, a discordance in uptake pattern is seen reflecting the heterogeneity in tumor biology of prostate cancer. In this review, we present the background, current status, and future perspectives of PET imaging using 68Ga-RM2.
The gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) binds to ligands such as gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and plays a variety of biological roles. In this study, we investigated the therapeutic effect of a novel gastrin-releasing peptide receptor antagonist RH-1402 in hyperuricemia-induced kidney fibrosis and its underlying mechanisms. We conducted enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and immunohistochemical analyses and found that proGRP and GRPR expression levels were significantly increased in patients with hyperuricemic nephropathy (HN) and HN mice. GRPR knockdown significantly attenuated inflammatory and fibrotic responses in adenosine-treated human proximal tubule epithelial cells. GRPR knockout or GRPR conditional knockout in renal tubular epithelial cells significantly alleviated the decline in renal function and fibrosis in HN mice in vivo. RNA-seq and String database analysis revealed that GRP/GRPR promoted HN by suppressing the ABCG2/PDZK1 and increasing TGF-beta/Smad3 levels by activating the NF-kappaB pathway. Overexpression of GRPR increased TGF-beta/Smad3 levels, where as it reduced ABCG2/PDZK1 levels in adenosine-treated HK2 cells, which was reversed by the NF-kappaB inhibitor. Furthermore, we evaluated the therapeutic effects of the novel GRPR inhibitor RH-1402 on hyperuricaemia-induced renal injury and evaluated the inflammatory and fibrosis responses in vivo and in vitro. Pre-treatment with RH-1402 attenuated hyperuricaemia-induced renal injury, restored renal function, and suppressed renal inflammation and fibrosis. Taken together, GRPR enhances hyperuricaemia-induced tubular injury, inflammation, and renal fibrosis via ABCG2-dependent mechanisms and may serve as a promising therapeutic target for HN treatment.
Peptide targeted (6)(4)Cu-labelled diagnostic agents for positron emission tomography are viable candidates for molecular imaging of cancer. In a clinical setting, optimal image quality relies on selective tumor uptake of the (6)(4)Cu-labelled radiotracer. The three components of the radiotracer construct--the chelate group, linker and targeting peptide--all influence the biodistribution of the (6)(4)Cu-labelled radiotracer in vivo. Low or moderate Cu complex stability in vivo results in transmetallation of (6)(4)Cu to endogenous proteins, giving rise to high background activity. The length and the nature of the linker group affect the affinity of the (6)(4)Cu-labelled radiotracer for the target receptor. Variations in the peptide sequence can impact on the metabolic stability and therefore the bioavailability and tumor retention of the (6)(4)Cu-labelled radiotracer in vivo. Lastly, the hydrophilicity of the construct can influence radiotracer metabolism and clearance pathways. Recent advances in the field of peptide targeted (6)(4)Cu-labelled radiopharmaceuticals involve GRPR-targeted and alphavbeta3 integrin receptor-targeted constructs. These constructs are based on the bombesin peptide sequence and the RGD recognition motif respectively. These examples are reviewed as case studies in the optimisation of (6)(4)Cu radiotracer design.
Given the high incidence of prostate cancer, there is a continuing need for advances in early detection and in effective treatments. Over the last several years, radiolabeled peptides have been developed, which can target receptors on prostate tumors with high affinity and specificity. These peptides are eliminated from normal tissues rapidly, producing high contrast for PET and SPECT imaging. Receptors of interest for tumor imaging include prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA), gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR), and alpha(v)beta(3) integrin. Because radiolabeled peptides afford high tumor-to-normal tissue uptake ratios, the potential of peptide-based targeted radiotherapy of prostate cancer is being explored. In addition, targeting either of two receptors with one peptide may allow more tumors to be detected and aid in the delineation of early versus advanced disease. Taken together, all these developments in peptide-based imaging and therapy of prostate cancer offer the promise of personalized, molecular medicine for individual patients.
GRPR is a type of seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor that belongs to the bombesin protein receptor family. It is highly expressed in various cancers, including prostate cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer, gastrointestinal cancer, and so on. As a result, molecular imaging studies have been conducted using radiolabeled GRPR ligands for tumor diagnosis, as well as monitoring of recurrence and metastasis. In this paper, we provided a comprehensive overview of relevant literature from the past two decades, with a specific focus on the advancements made in radiolabeled GRPR ligands for imaging prostate cancer and breast cancer.
The gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR), a member of the G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), binds to ligands such as gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and plays a variety of biological roles. GRP/GRPR signalling is involved in the pathophysiological processes of many diseases, including inflammatory diseases, cardiovascular diseases, neurological diseases, and various cancers. In the immune system, the unique function of GRP/GRPR in neutrophil chemotaxis suggests that GRPR can be directly stimulated through GRP-mediated neutrophils to activate selective signalling pathways, such as PI3K, PKC, and MAPK, and participate in the occurrence and development of inflammation-related diseases. In the cardiovascular system, GRP increases intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and induces vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). GRP activates ERK1/2, MAPK, and AKT, leading to cardiovascular diseases, including myocardial infarction. Central nervous system signal transduction mediated by the GRP/GRPR axis plays a vital role in emotional responses, social interaction, and memory. The GRP/GRPR axis is elevated in various cancers, including lung, cervical, colorectal, renal cell, and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. GRP is a mitogen in a variety of tumour cell lines. Its precursor, pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (ProGRP), may play an important role as an emerging tumour marker in early tumour diagnosis. GPCRs serve as therapeutic targets for drug development, but their function in each disease remains unclear, and their involvement in disease progression has not been well explored or summarised. This review lays out the above mentioned pathophysiological processes based on previous research conclusions. The GRP/GRPR axis may be a potential target for treating multiple diseases, and the study of this signalling axis is particularly important.
Gastrin-releasing peptide receptors (GRPRs), part of the bombesin (BBN) family, are aberrantly overexpressed in many cancers, including those of the breast, prostate, pancreas, and lung, and therefore present an attractive target for cancer diagnosis and therapy. Different bombesin analogs have been radiolabeled and used for imaging diagnosis, staging, evaluation of biochemical recurrence, and assessment of metastatic disease in patients with prostate cancer. Recently, interest has shifted from BBN-like receptor agonists to antagonists, because the latter does not induce adverse effects and demonstrate superior in vivo pharmacokinetics. We review the preclinical and clinical literatures on the use of GRPRs as targets for imaging and therapy of prostate cancer, with a focus on the newer developments and theranostic potential of GRPR peptides.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The current review aims to update the important findings about molecular and cellular biology of mammalian bombesin-like peptides (BLPs) and their receptors. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent identification of synaptic communication between gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) neurons and GRP receptor (GRPR) neurons in spinal itch relay provides us novel insights into physiology of itch sensation. Neuromedin B (NMB) neurons were found to form connections with subcortical areas associated with arousal, hippocampal theta oscillation, and premotor processing and project to multiple downstream stations to regulate locomotion and hippocampal theta power. In addition to researches regarding the roles of BLPs and their receptors in central nervous system, recent findings reveal that NMB receptor is expressed on helminth-induced type 2 innate lymphoid cells and is regulated by basophils, suggesting an important function of NMB in helminth-induced immune responses. Bombesin transactivates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), and HER3 receptors on human nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells and elicits downstream signaling cascades and induces formation of both human epidermal growthfactor receptor 3 (HER3)/EGFR and HER3/HER2 heterodimers. Several high-affinity ligands for bombesin receptors were characterized, providing useful tools in investigation of biological roles of those peptides and their receptors. SUMMARY: The most exciting findings of BLPs and their receptors in the past year come from studies in central nervous system. In addition, more researches are still underway to probe the molecular mechanisms of those peptides in peripheral tissues and characterize novel synthetic ligands with high affinity for mammalian bombesin receptors.
Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor which is classified in the bombesin receptor (BnR) family with which it shares high homology. It is present widely in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues and primarily receptor-knockout studies suggest it is involved in metabolic-glucose-insulin homeostasis, feeding and other CNS behaviors, gastrointestinal motility and cancer growth. However, the role of BRS-3 physiologically or in pathologic disorders has been not well defined because the natural ligand is unknown. Until recently, no selective agonists/antagonists were available; however, recently synthetic high-affinity agonists, chiral-diazepines nonpeptide-analogs (3F, 9D, 9F, 9G) with low CNS penetrance, were described, but are not well-categorized pharmacologically or in different labarotory species. The present study characterizes the affinities, potencies, selectivities of the chiral-diazepine BRS-3 agonists in human and rodents (mice,rat). In human BRS-3 receptors, the relative affinities of the chiral-diazepines was 9G>9D>9F>3F; each was selective for BRS-3. For stimulating PLC activity, in h-BRS-3 each of the four chiral diazepine analogs was fully efficacious and their relative potencies were: 9G (EC50: 9 nM)>9D (EC50: 9.4 nM)>9F (EC50: 39 nM)>3F (EC50: 48 nM). None of the four chiral diazepine analogs activated r,m,h-GRPR/NMBR. The nonpeptide agonists showed marked differences from each other and a peptide agonist in receptor-coupling-stiochiometry and in affinities/potencies in different species. These results demonstrate that chiral diazepine analogs (9G, 9D, 9F, 3F) have high/affinity/potency for the BRS-3 receptor in human and rodent cells, but different coupling-relationships and species differences from a peptide agonist.
The pathogenesis of acute and chronic (> 6 weeks duration) pruritus is complex and involves in the skin a network of resident cells (e. g., mast cells, keratinocytes, sensory neurons) and transient inflammatory cells (e. g., eosinophils). Though pruritus and pain show overlapping mechanisms, recent studies have provided evidence that pruritus and pain pathogenesis differ in important points. In the skin, the sensory C-nerve fibers have been investigated intensively. Several classes of histamine-sensitive or histamine-insensitve C-fibers have been described. Epidermal and dermal sensory nerve fibres are now assumed to be of major importance in pruritus induction. They interact with keratinocytes, inflammatory cells such as T lymphocytes, eosinophils and basophils which have been shown to release multiple pruritogenic mediators (e.g., nerve growth factor, interleukin-31) which lead to activation, sensitization and sprouting of skin nerves. Specific receptors have been discovered on cutaneous and spinal neurons to be exclusively involved in the processing of pruritic signals. Just recently, the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) was identified on spinal neurons that are crucially involved in pruritus but not pain processing. Chronic pruritus is notoriously difficult to treat. Newer insights into the underlying pathogenesis of pruritus have enabled novel treatment approaches that target the pruritus-specific pathophysiological mechanism. For example, kappa-opioid receptor agonists and neurokinin-1 antagonists have been found to relieve chronic pruritus.
Receptor targeted nuclear imaging directed against molecular markers overexpressed on breast cancer (BC) cells offers a sensitive and specific method for BC imaging. Currently, a few targets such as estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), somatostatin receptor (SSTR), and the gastrin releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) are being investigated for this purpose. Expression of these targets is BC subtype dependent and information that can be gained from lesion visualization is dependent on the target; ER-targeting radiotracers, e.g., can be used to monitor response to anti-estrogen treatment. Here we give an overview of the studies currently under investigation for receptor targeted nuclear imaging of BC. Main findings of imaging studies are summarized and (potential) purposes of lesion visualization by targeting these molecular markers are discussed. Since BC is a very heterogeneous disease and molecular target expression can vary per subtype, but also during disease progression or under influence of treatment, radiotracers for selected imaging purposes should be chosen carefully.
Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) and gastrin-releasing peptide receptors are both overexpressed in prostate cancer (PC) but may provide complementary information.(68)Ga-PSMA-R2 and (68)Ga-NeoB (DOTA-p-aminomethylaniline-diglycolic acid-DPhe-Gln-Trp-Ala-Val-Gly-His-NH-CH[CH(2)-CH(CH(3))(2)](2)) are novel PET radiopharmaceuticals that were developed for theranostic use. In this phase II imaging study, we assessed the feasibility, safety, and diagnostic performance of (68)Ga-NeoB and (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 PET/MRI for detection of biochemically recurrent PC. Methods: We prospectively enrolled 27 men with suspected biochemically recurrent PC after initial treatment but noncontributory conventional imaging results (negative or equivocal findings on MRI, CT, and/or bone scan). Participants underwent (68)Ga-NeoB and (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 PET/MRI within 2 wk in noncontrolled order. The SUV(max) of putative PC lesions was measured and compared with a composite reference standard (histopathology, follow-up imaging, prostate-specific antigen change). The SUV(max) and SUV(mean) of background organs were measured. Vital signs were recorded before injection of the radiopharmaceuticals and after the scans. Adverse events were recorded up to 72 h after each scan. Results: The prostate-specific antigen level at enrollment was 3.5 +/- 3.9 ng/mL (range, 0.3-13.5 ng/mL). (68)Ga-NeoB PET/MRI detected 31 lesions in 18 patients (66.7%), whereas (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 identified 20 lesions in 15 participants (55.6%). (68)Ga-NeoB PET/MRI showed higher sensitivity (85.7% vs. 71.4%), accuracy (88.9% vs. 77.8%), and negative predictive value (66.7% vs. 50.0%) than (68)Ga-PSMA-R2, whereas specificity and positive predictive value were equally high (100.0% for both). In 6 patients, (68)Ga-NeoB PET/MRI identified 14 lesions that were false-negative on (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 PET/MRI. The mean lesion SUV(max) was 6.6 +/- 3.2 (range, 2.9-13.2) for (68)Ga-NeoB and 4.4 +/- 1.5 (range, 2.6-8.8) for (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 (P = 0.019). Overall lower uptake was noted in tumors and background organs for (68)Ga-PSMA-R2. There were no significant changes in vital signs before and after the scans. No adverse events were reported in the 72-h period after scans. Conclusion: (68)Ga-NeoB and (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 are safe for diagnostic imaging. (68)Ga-NeoB PET/MRI showed better diagnostic performance than (68)Ga-PSMA-R2. (68)Ga-PSMA-R2 showed overall lower uptake, equally in background organs and tumors, and might therefore not be an ideal theranostic compound. Further evaluation in larger cohorts is needed to confirm our preliminary data.
