Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta; Constitutively active protein kinase that acts as a negative regulator in the hormonal control of glucose homeostasis, Wnt signaling and regulation of transcription factors and microtubules, by phosphorylating and inactivating glycogen synthase (GYS1 or GYS2), EIF2B, CTNNB1/beta-catenin, APC, AXIN1, DPYSL2/CRMP2, JUN, NFATC1/NFATC, MAPT/TAU and MACF1. Requires primed phosphorylation of the majority of its substrates. In skeletal muscle, contributes to insulin regulation of glycogen synthesis by phosphorylating and inhibiting GYS1 activity and hence glyc [...] 
Posttranslational modifications (PTM) of PD-L1 have emerged as important regulatory mechanisms that modulate immunosuppression in patients with cancer. In exposure to inflammatory cytokines, cancer cells and antigen-presenting cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, express PD-L1 to inhibit the activity of effector T cells through PD-1 engagement. Recent studies suggested that glycosylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, sumoylation, and acetylation play important roles in the regulation of PD-L1 protein stability and translocation and protein-protein interactions. Aberrant alterations of PTMs directly influence PD-L1-mediated immune resistance. On the basis of the newly identified regulatory signaling pathways of PD-L1 PTMs, researchers have investigated the cancer therapeutic potential of natural food compounds, small-molecule inhibitors, and mAbs by targeting PD-L1 PTMs. Results of these preclinical studies demonstrated that targeting PTMs of PD-L1 yields promising antitumor effects and that clinical translation of these therapeutic strategies is warranted. Cancer Res; 78(22); 6349-53. (c)2018 AACR.
As life expectancy continues to increase, clinicians are challenged by age-related renal impairment that involves podocyte senescence and glomerulosclerosis. There is now compelling evidence that lithium has a potent antiaging activity that ameliorates brain aging and increases longevity in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans. As the major molecular target of lithium action and a multitasking protein kinase recently implicated in a variety of renal diseases, glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) is overexpressed and hyperactive with age in glomerular podocytes, correlating with functional and histological signs of kidney aging. Moreover, podocyte-specific ablation of GSK3beta substantially attenuated podocyte senescence and glomerular aging in mice. Mechanistically, key mediators of senescence signaling, such as p16INK4A and p53, contain high numbers of GSK3beta consensus motifs, physically interact with GSK3beta, and act as its putative substrates. In addition, therapeutic targeting of GSK3beta by microdose lithium later in life reduced senescence signaling and delayed kidney aging in mice. Furthermore, in psychiatric patients, lithium carbonate therapy inhibited GSK3beta activity and mitigated senescence signaling in urinary exfoliated podocytes and was associated with preservation of kidney function. Thus, GSK3beta appears to play a key role in podocyte senescence by modulating senescence signaling and may be an actionable senostatic target to delay kidney aging.
Emerging evidence links type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and Alzheimer's disease (AD), with brain insulin resistance (BIR) as a key factor. In a recent study, Lanzillotta et al. reveal that reduced biliverdin reductase-A (BVR-A) impairs glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) phosphorylation, causing mitochondrial dysfunction and exacerbating brain insulin resistance in the progression of both T2DM and AD.
GSK3B is the mRNA form of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3beta), which is a critical repressor of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and generally inhibited in cancer cells. Plenty of researches have disclosed that circular RNAs, namely circRNAs exert important functions in the progression of various human malignancies including lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Therefore, we attempted to explore whether there existed certain circRNAs that could mediate LUAD development by regulating GSK3B expression and Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. In the present research, circ-GSK3B (hsa_circ_0066903) was found to be significantly down-regulated in LUAD tissues and cells and it suppressed the proliferation, migration and stemness of LUAD cells. Furthermore, it was discovered that circ-GSK3B competitively sponged miR-3681-3p and miR-3909 to elevate GSK3B expression. Circ-GSK3B could impair the binding ability of FKBP51 to GSK-3beta to inhibit the phosphorylation of GSK-3beta(S9), resulting in the inactivation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. In addition, the regulatory effect of circ-GSK3B on LUAD tumorigenesis and cell progression was testified through in vitro and in vivo rescue experiments. In conclusion, circ-GSK3B suppressed LUAD development through up-regulating and activating GSK3B.
Understanding the molecular signaling pathways that go awry in Alzheimer's disease (AD) would provide insights into developing novel therapies for this devastating neurodegenerative disease. Previous work has established that hyperactive glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) is linked to both "sporadic" and "genetic" forms of AD, suggesting a crucial role of GSK3 in AD pathogenesis. Therefore, inhibition of GSK3 activity has been intensely investigated as a potential therapeutic intervention for AD. GSK3 exists in two isoforms: GSK3alpha and GSK3beta. Markedly, recent studies indicate specific contributions of each of the alpha and beta isoforms of GSK3 to AD pathogenesis, suggesting a role of both isoforms in the disease. Here I review recent relevant work investigating isoform-specific roles of GSK3 in AD pathophysiology, highlighting the emerging role of GSK3alpha, which has been largely overlooked in favor of the more extensive studies of GSK3beta.
To explore the effects of beta-Sitosterol upon hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and to investigate the underlying mechanism using network pharmacology. Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Huh-7 and HCCLM3) were expose to gradient concentrations of beta-Sitosterol (5 mug/mL, 10 mug/mL, and 20 mug/mL). Cell viability and proliferation were assessed using MTT, CCK-8, colony formation, and EdU assays.Flow cytometry was employed to evaluate cell cycle and apoptosis. Scratch and Transwell assays were performed, respectively, to detect cell migration and invasion. The levels of apoptosis-associated proteins (BAX, BCL2, and cleaved caspase3) as well as EMT-associated proteins (E-cadherin, N-cadherin, Snail, and Vimentin) were detected in Huh-7 and HCCLM3 cell lines using Western blot analysis. The drug target gene for beta-Sitosterol was screened via PubChem and subsequently evaluated for expression in the GSE112790 dataset. In addition, the expression level of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3B) within the Cancer Genome Atlas-Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (TCGA-LIHC) database was analyzed, along with its correlation to the survival outcomes of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. The diagnostic efficiency of GSK3B was assessed by analyzing the ROC curve. Subsequently, Huh-7 and HCCLM3 cell lines were transfected with the overexpression vector of GSK3B and then treated with beta-Sitosterol to further validate the association between GSK3B and beta-Sitosterol. GSK3B demonstrated a significantly elevated expression in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, which could predict hepatocellular carcinoma patients' impaired prognosis based on GEO dataset and TCGA database. GSK3B inhibitor (CHIR-98014) notably inhibited cell proliferation and invasion, promoted cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. beta-Sitosterol treatment further promoted the efffects of GSK3B inhibitor on hepatocellular carcinoma cells. GSK3B overexpression has been found to enhance the proliferative and invasive capabilities of hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Furthermore it has been observed that GSK3B overexpression, it has been obsear can partially reverse the inhibitory effect of beta-Sitosterol upon hepatocellular. beta-Sitosterol suppressed hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and invasion, and enhanced apoptosis via inhibiting GSK3B expression.
OBJECTIVES: NFKB1 was associated with treatment-refractory schizophrenia (SZ) and response to antipsychotics; however, the underlying mechanisms through which NFKB1 confers its risk for SZ are largely unknown. We aimed to investigate the potential role of NFKB1 in SZ. METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the association of the risk SNP rs230529 of NFKB1 with gray matter density and with NFKB1 mRNA levels in various human brain regions. The spatiotemporal expression pattern of NFKB1 in human brains was explored. We constructed a miRNA-NFKB1-target gene regulatory network and analyzed its druggability through targeting NFKB1 for SZ treatment. RESULTS: NFKB1 showed the highest expression levels in the cerebellum, in which these levels were stratified by genotypes of rs230529. Interestingly, the allelic state of rs230529 was significantly associated with regional gray matter density in multiple brain regions (including the cerebellum), which also differed between patients with schizophrenia and controls. Furthermore, regulatory targets of NFKB1 were enriched among SZ susceptibility genes. A substantial proportion of NFKB1 target genes were subject to combinatorial regulation by NFKB1 and miRNAs, constituting a hybrid NFKB1-miRNA-gene regulatory network. Some components of this network showed expression changes relevant to both the disease and the treatment. Finally, we detected the dynamic changes of NFKB1-miR-155-5p-GSK3B and NFKB1-miR-155-5p/let-7a-5p-IL6 networks in course of the treatment of SZ. CONCLUSION: Taken together, our findings support the involvement of NFKB1-mediated dysregulation in the development of SZ.
GSK3beta, a ubiquitously expressed Ser/Thr kinase, regulates cell metabolism, proliferation and differentiation. Its activity is spatially and temporally regulated dependent on external stimuli and interacting partners, and its deregulation is associated with various human disorders. In this study, we identify C3G (RapGEF1), a protein essential for mammalian embryonic development as an interacting partner and substrate of GSK3beta. In vivo and in vitro interaction assays demonstrated that GSK3beta and Akt are present in complex with C3G. Molecular modelling and mutational analysis identified a domain in C3G that aids interaction with GSK3beta, and overlaps with its nuclear export sequence. GSK3beta phosphorylates C3G on primed as well as unprimed sites, and regulates its subcellular localization. Over-expression of C3G resulted in activation of Akt and inactivation of GSK3beta. Huntingtin aggregate formation, dependent on GSK3beta inhibition, was enhanced upon C3G overexpression. Stable clones of C2C12 cells generated by CRISPR/Cas9 mediated knockdown of C3G, that cannot differentiate, show reduced Akt activity and S9-GSK3beta phosphorylation compared to wild type cells. Co-expression of catalytically active GSK3beta inhibited C3G induced myocyte differentiation. C3G mutant defective for GSK3beta phosphorylation, does not alter S9-GSK3beta phosphorylation and, is compromised for inducing myocyte differentiation. Our results show complex formation and reciprocal regulation between GSK3beta and C3G. We have identified a novel function of C3G as a negative regulator of GSK3beta, a property important for its ability to induce myogenic differentiation.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequently occurring and devastating human brain malignancy, retaining almost universal mortality and a median survival of only 14 months, even with recent advances in multimodal treatments. Gliomas are characterised as being both highly resistant to chemo- and radiotherapy and highly invasive, rendering conventional interventions palliative. The continual dismal prognosis for GBM patients identifies an urgent need for the evolutionary development of new treatment modalities. This includes molecular targeted therapies as many signaling molecules and associated pathways have been implicated in the development and survival of malignant gliomas including the protein kinase, glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3beta). Here we review the activity and function of GSK-3beta in a number of signaling pathways and its role in gliomagenesis.
BACKGROUND: Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3B) is reported to be a protective factor for the degradation of chondrocytes by extracellular mechanisms. Nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 3 (NR4A3) is a proinflammatory factor in osteoarthritis. Their regulation mechanism in posttraumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA) is not fully understood. METHODS: GSK3B expression in the cartilage tissue of PTOA patients was analyzed by western blotting. IL-1beta-induced chondrocytes were transfected with pcDNA-GSK3B, and then, the cell viability, apoptosis, expression of the chondrocyte extracellular matrix degradation-related genes MMP13, aggrecan, and type II collagen, and secretion of inflammatory factors TNF-alpha and IL-6 were detected. Co-IP was used to analyze the interaction between GSK3B and DNMT1. Ch-IP and methylation-specific PCR assays were used for methylation. Also, cells were transfected with pcDNA-GSK3B or together with pcDNA-NR4A3, as well as transfected with si-NR4A3, and then, cell functions were tested. Then, the mice subjected to destabilization of medial meniscus (DMM) surgery were intra-articular injected with 100 muL of the following adeno-related virus vectors (empty vector, Ad-GSK3B, scrambled shRNA, and sh-NR4A3), respectively, and the virus titer was 2 x 10(8) TU/mL. Cartilage integrity was evaluated by safranin O/fast green staining, HE staining, and Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) score. RESULTS: The expression of GSK3B protein was downregulated in PTOA patients. GSK3B overexpression alleviated IL-1beta-induced chondrocyte apoptosis and extracellular matrix degradation, as well as cartilage mineralization in PTOA model mice. NR4A3 overexpression reversed the effect of GSK3B on IL-1beta-induced chondrocyte functions. GSK3B could recruit DNMT1 to the NR4A3 promoter region to promote the methylation of NR4A3 and inhibit the expression of NR4A3 protein. Similarly, NR4A3 interference alleviated cartilage degradation under stimulating conditions by inhibiting the activation of the JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: GSK3B recruits DNMT1 to the NR4A3 promoter region and inhibits the activation of the NR4A3-mediated JAK2/STAT3 signaling pathway, thereby alleviating PTOA.
Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (TLE) is a chronic neurological disorder characterized by recurrent focal seizures originating in the temporal lobe. Despite the variety of antiseizure drugs currently available to treat TLE, about 30% of cases continue to have seizures. The etiology of TLE is complex and multifactorial. Increasing evidence indicates that Alzheimer's disease (AD) and drug-resistant TLE present common pathological features that may induce hyperexcitability, especially aberrant hyperphosphorylation of tau protein. Genetic polymorphic variants located in genes of the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3B) have been associated with the risk of developing AD. The APOE epsilon4 allele is a major genetic risk factor for AD. Likewise, a gene-dose-dependent effect of epsilon4 seems to influence TLE. The present study aimed to investigate whether the APOE varepsilon4 allele and genetic variants located in the MAPT and GSK3B genes are associated with the risk of developing AD and drug-resistant TLE in a cohort of the Mexican population. A significant association with the APOE epsilon4 allele was observed in patients with AD and TLE. Additional genetic interactions were identified between this allele and variants of the MAPT and GSK3B genes.
OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been confirmed to play an essential role in modulating cancer cell proliferation, metastasis, and sensitivity to chemotherapy. However, the correlation between miR-132-3p expression and etoposide (VP16) induced apoptosis in human breast cancer cells remains poorly understood. METHODS: Six datasets, including three gene expression profile datasets and three microRNA (miRNA) expression profile datasets, were downloaded from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database to identify miR-132-3p and GSK3B expression in breast cancer. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank testing were performed to evaluate the effect of miR-132-3p and GSK3B on the survival of breast cancer. Flow cytometry analysis was used to determine the effects of miR-132-3p and GSK3B on breast cancer cell apoptosis. Luciferase reporter assay, Western blot, and real-time PCR were used to determine the regulatory effect of miR-132-3p on GSK3B. RESULTS: miR-132-3p was significantly downregulated in breast cancer tissues compared with normal breast epithelial cells, whereas GSK3B expression was remarkably over-expressed in breast cancer tissues. The patients with low miR-132-3p or high GSK3B expression had worse overall survival. Luciferase reporter assay, Western blot, and real-time PCR confirmed that miR-132-3p could inhibit GSK3B protein and mRNA expression via binding to the 3'-UTR of GSK3B. Furthermore, miR-132-3p enhanced VP16-induced breast cancer cell apoptosis through targeting GSK3B. CONCLUSION: Collectively, the results of this study indicated that miR-132-3p was downregulated in breast cancer tissues and directly targeted GSK3B to be implicated in the modulation of breast cancer cell apoptosis, suggesting that miR-132-3p/GSK3B might be a novel, effective therapeutic target for treating patients with breast cancer.
Hepatic glycolipid metabolism disorder is considered as one of the key pathogenic factors for many chronic diseases. Revealing the molecular mechanism of metabolic disorder and exploring drug targets are crucial for the treatment of glucose and lipid metabolic diseases. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) has been reported to be associated with the pathogenesis of various metabolic diseases. Herein, GAPDH-knockdown ZFL cells and GAPDH-downregulation zebrafish exhibited significant lipid deposition increase and glycogen reduction, thus inducing glucose and lipid metabolism disorders. Using high-sensitivity mass spectrometry-based proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis, we identified 6838 proteins and 3738 phosphorylated proteins in GAPDH-knockdown ZFL cells. The protein-protein interaction network and DEPPs analyses showed that gsk3ba(Y216) were involved in lipid and glucose metabolism, which was verified by In vitro study. The enzyme activity analysis and cell staining results showed that HepG2 and NCTC-1469 cells transfected with GSK3B(Y216F) plasmid had significantly lower glucose and insulin levels, the decreased lipid deposition, and the increased glycogen synthesis than those transfected with GSK3B(Y216E) plasmid, suggesting that inhibition of GSK3B phosphorylation could significantly improve GSK3B hyperphosphorylation-induced glucose tolerance impairment and insulin sensitivity reduction. To our knowledge, this is the first multi-omic study of GAPDH-knockdown ZFL cells. This study provides insights into the molecular mechanism of glucose and lipid metabolic disorder, and provides potential targets (kinases) for the treatments of human glucose and lipid metabolic diseases.
The aim of this study was to identify angiogenic microRNAs (miRNAs) that could be used in the treatment of hindlimb ischemic tissues. miRNAs contained in extracellular vesicles (EVs) deriving from the plasma were analyzed in C57BL/6 mice, which have ischemia tolerance, and in BALB/c mice without ischemia tolerance as part of a hindlimb ischemia model; as a result 43 angiogenic miRNA candidates were identified. An aortic ring assay was employed by using femoral arteries isolated from BALC/c mice and EVs containing miRNA; as a result, the angiogenic miRNA candidates were limited to 14. The blood flow recovery was assessed after injecting EVs containing miRNA into BALB/c mice with hindlimb ischemia, and miR-709 was identified as a promising angiogenic miRNA. miR-709-encapsulating EVs were found to increase the expression levels of the fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) mRNA in the thigh tissues of hindlimb ischemia model BALB/c mice. miR-709 was also found to bind to the 3'UTR of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3B) in three places. GSK3B-knockdown human artery-derived endothelial cells were found to express high levels of FGF2, and were characterized by increased cell proliferation. These findings indicate that miR-709 induces an upregulation of FGF2 through the downregulation of GSK3B.
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the nasal mucosa. M2 macrophage polarization can reduce inflammation and repair tissue injury during AR development. Studies have substantiated the involvement of miRNAs in AR pathogenesis. Herein, the molecular mechanism of miR-214-3p in AR development was explored. To mimic the AR environment, ovalbumin (OVA) was used to treat macrophages. MiR-214-3p and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3B) expression in nasal mucus tissues and macrophages was assessed by RT-qPCR. The M2 phenotypic signature of CD206 in macrophages was assessed by flow cytometry. The protein expression of GSK3B and M2 macrophage markers (ARG-1 and IL-10) was evaluated by western blotting. The correlation between miR-214-3p and GSK3B was validated by a luciferase reporter assay. We found that miR-214-3p was overexpressed in macrophages and nasal mucus tissues from AR patients. MiR-214-3p facilitated M2 polarization of macrophages upon OVA stimulation. Mechanistically, miR-214-3p targeted the GSK3B 3' untranslated region in macrophages. In addition, GSK3B was downregulated in macrophages and nasal mucus tissues from AR patients. In rescue assays, GSK3B downregulation reversed the inhibitory effects of miR-214-3p silencing on M2 polarization of macrophages treated with OVA. Overall, miR-214-3p facilitates M2 macrophage polarization by targeting GSK3B.
The microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) codes for a protein that plays an integral role in stabilisation of microtubules and axonal transport in neurons. As well as its role in susceptibility to neurodegeneration, previous studies have found an association between the MAPT haplotype and intracranial volume and regional grey matter volumes in healthy adults. The glycogen synthase kinase-3beta gene (GSK3B) codes for a serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates various proteins, including tau, and has also been associated with risk for neurodegenerative disorders and schizophrenia. We examined the effects of MAPT and two functional promoter polymorphisms in GSK3B (rs3755557 and rs334558) on total grey matter and intracranial volume in three independent cohorts totaling 776 neurologically healthy individuals. In vitro analyses revealed a significant effect of rs3755557 on gene expression, and altered binding of at least two transcription factors, Octamer transcription factor 1 (Oct-1) and Pre-B-cell leukemia transcription factor 1 (Pbx-1), to the GSK3B promoter. Meta-analysis across the three cohorts revealed a significant effect of rs3755557 on total grey matter volume (summary B = 0.082, 95% confidence interval = 0.037-0.128) and intracranial volume (summary B = 0.113, 95% confidence interval = 0.082-0.144). No significant effect was observed for MAPT H1/H2 diplotype or GSK3B rs334558 on total grey matter or intracranial volume. Our genetic and biochemical analyses have identified a role for GSK3B in brain development, which could have important aetiological implications for neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders.
Increasing evidence supports a role for inflammation in the early development and progression of retinal complications caused by diabetes. We recently demonstrated that the stress response protein regulated in development and DNA damage response 1 (REDD1) promotes diabetes-induced retinal inflammation by sustaining canonical activation of nuclear transcription factor, NF-kappaB. The studies here were designed to identify signaling events whereby REDD1 promotes NF-kappaB activation in the retina of diabetic mice. We observed increased REDD1 expression in the retina of mice after 16 weeks of streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes and found that REDD1 was essential for diabetes to suppress inhibitory phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK3beta) at S9. In human retinal MIO-M1 Muller cell cultures, REDD1 deletion prevented dephosphorylation of GSK3beta and increased NF-kappaB activation in response to hyperglycemic conditions. Expression of a constitutively active GSK3beta variant restored NF-kappaB activation in cells deficient for REDD1. In cells exposed to hyperglycemic conditions, GSK3beta knockdown inhibited NF-kappaB activation and proinflammatory cytokine expression by preventing inhibitor of kappaB kinase complex autophosphorylation and inhibitor of kappaB degradation. In both the retina of STZ-diabetic mice and in Muller cells exposed to hyperglycemic conditions, GSK3 inhibition reduced NF-kappaB activity and prevented an increase in proinflammatory cytokine expression. In contrast with STZ-diabetic mice receiving a vehicle control, macrophage infiltration was not observed in the retina of STZ-diabetic mice treated with GSK3 inhibitor. Collectively, the findings support a model wherein diabetes enhances REDD1-dependent activation of GSK3beta to promote canonical NF-kappaB signaling and the development of retinal inflammation.
GPCR mediator beta-arrestins (beta-arr1 and beta-arr2) regulate a variety of physiologic and pathologic processes, including hepatocellular carcinogenesis. However, the role of beta-arrestins in liver fibrosis remains unknown. beta-arr1, but not beta-arr2, was upregulated in liver fibrotic tissues in both humans and mice; moreover, autophagy was increased. beta-arr1 deficiency or autophagic inhibitor 3-methyladenine (3-MA) significantly blocked autophagy and downregulated liver fibrosis. Furthermore, beta-arr1 enhanced hepatocyte compensatory proliferation, and hepatic stellate cell growth with activation via autophagy resulted in liver fibrosis. In the fibrosis, beta-arr1 promoted nuclear translocation of Snail by downregulation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, and the nuclear translocation of Snail was abrogated either by beta-arr1 deficiency or by 3-MA. These results suggest that beta-arr1 promotes liver fibrosis via autophagy-mediated Snail signaling, and beta-arr1 may be a therapeutic target for liver fibrosis.-Tan, S., Lu, Y., Xu, M., Huang, X., Liu, H., Jiang, J., Wu, B. beta-Arrestin1 enhances liver fibrosis through autophagy-mediated Snail signaling.
Depressive disorders have increased in global prevalence, making improved management of these disorders a public health priority. Prior research has linked circadian clock genes to depression, either through direct interactions with mood-related pathways in the brain or by modulating the phase of circadian rhythms. Using machine learning and statistical techniques, we explored associations between 157,347 SNP variants from 51 circadian-related genes and depression scores from the patient health questionnaire 9 (PHQ-9) in 99,939 UK Biobank participants. Our results highlight multiple pathways linking the circadian system to mood, including metabolic, monoamine, immune, and stress-related pathways. Notably, genes regulating glucose metabolism and inflammation (GSK3B, LEP, RORA, and NOCT) were prominent factors in females, in addition to DELEC1 and USP46, two genes of unknown function. In contrast, FBXL3 and DRD4 emerged as significant risk factors for male depression. We also found epistatic interactions involving RORA, NFIL3, and ZBTB20 as either risk or protective factors for depression, underscoring the importance of transcription factors (ZBTB20, NFIL3) and hormone receptors (RORA) in depression etiology. Understanding the complex, sex-specific links between circadian genes and mood disorders will facilitate the development of therapeutic interventions and enhance the efficacy of multi-target treatments for depression.
The translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO) is localized in the outer mitochondrial membrane of many cell types and its expression is found to be up-regulated under various pathological conditions such as cancer, inflammation, mechanical lesions, and neurological diseases, e.g. amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Its primary function is to mediate the transport of cholesterol into the inner compartments of mitochondria. Moreover, TSPO is interacting and building up functional complexes with other mitochondrial proteins such as the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), the adenine nucleotide transporter (ANT), hexokinase I and II and Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3beta). This mini review will focus on the role of TSPO as a central regulator of mitochondrial function with regard to pathologic states and as a target for new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of psychiatric disorders.
