Glutathione reductase, mitochondrial; Maintains high levels of reduced glutathione in the cytosol.
Sorafenib, a first-line drug for advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), shows a favorable anti-tumor effect while resistance is a barrier impeding patients from benefiting from it. Thus, more efforts are needed to lift this restriction. Herein, we first find that solute carrier family 27 member 5 (SLC27A5/FATP5), an enzyme involved in the metabolism of fatty acid and bile acid, is downregulated in sorafenib-resistant HCC. SLC27A5 deficiency facilitates the resistance towards sorafenib in HCC cells, which is mediated by suppressing ferroptosis. Further mechanism studies reveal that the loss of SLC27A5 enhances the glutathione reductase (GSR) expression in a nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2)-dependent manner, which maintains glutathione (GSH) homeostasis and renders insensitive to sorafenib-induced ferroptosis. Notably, SLC27A5 negatively correlates with GSR, and genetic or pharmacological inhibition of GSR strengthens the efficacy of sorafenib through GSH depletion and the accumulation of lipid peroxide products in SLC27A5-knockout and sorafenib-resistant HCC cells. Based on our results, the combination of sorafenib and carmustine (BCNU), a selective inhibitor of GSR, remarkably hamper tumor growth by enhancing ferroptotic cell death in vivo. In conclusion, we describe that SLC27A5 serves as a suppressor in sorafenib resistance and promotes sorafenib-triggered ferroptosis via restraining the NRF2/GSR pathway in HCC, providing a potential therapeutic strategy for overcoming sorafenib resistance.
Our body is made of flesh and bones. We know it, and in our daily lives all the senses constantly provide converging information about this simple, factual truth. But is this always the case? Here we report a surprising bodily illusion demonstrating that humans rapidly update their assumptions about the material qualities of their body, based on their recent multisensory perceptual experience. To induce a misperception of the material properties of the hand, we repeatedly gently hit participants' hand with a small hammer, while progressively replacing the natural sound of the hammer against the skin with the sound of a hammer hitting a piece of marble. After five minutes, the hand started feeling stiffer, heavier, harder, less sensitive, unnatural, and showed enhanced Galvanic skin response (GSR) to threatening stimuli. Notably, such a change in skin conductivity positively correlated with changes in perceived hand stiffness. Conversely, when hammer hits and impact sounds were temporally uncorrelated, participants did not spontaneously report any changes in the perceived properties of the hand, nor did they show any modulation in GSR. In two further experiments, we ruled out that mere audio-tactile synchrony is the causal factor triggering the illusion, further demonstrating the key role of material information conveyed by impact sounds in modulating the perceived material properties of the hand. This novel bodily illusion, the 'Marble-Hand Illusion', demonstrates that the perceived material of our body, surely the most stable attribute of our bodily self, can be quickly updated through multisensory integration.
Notopterol, an active component isolated from the traditional Chinese medicine Notopterygium incisum Ting ex H.T. Chang, exerts anti-inflammatory activity in rheumatoid arthritis. However, its roles in suppression of inflammatory insults and halting progression of tissue destruction in periodontitis remain elusive. In this study, we reveal that notopterol can inhibit osteoclastogenesis, thereby limiting alveolar bone loss in vivo. In vitro results demonstrated that notopterol administration inhibited synthesis of inflammatory mediators such as IL-1beta, IL-32, and IL-8 in LPS-stimulated human gingival fibroblasts. Mechanistically, notopterol inhibits activation of the NF-kappaB signaling pathway, which is considered a prototypical proinflammatory signaling pathway. RNA sequencing data revealed that notopterol activates the PI3K/protein kinase B (Akt)/NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) signaling pathway in LPS-stimulated human gingival fibroblasts, a phenomenon validated via Western blot assay. Additionally, notopterol treatment suppressed reactive oxygen species levels by upregulating the expression of antioxidant genes, including heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), NAD(P)H quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), catalase (CAT), and glutathione reductase (GSR), indicating that notopterol confers protection against oxidative stress. Notably, inhibition of Akt activity by the potent inhibitor, MK-2206, partially attenuated both anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects of notopterol. Collectively, these results raise the possibility that notopterol relieves periodontal inflammation by suppressing and activating the NF-kappaB and PI3K/AKT/Nrf2 signaling pathways in periodontal tissue, respectively, suggesting its potential as an efficacious treatment therapy for periodontitis.
AIMS: The interleukin-1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP) is a co-receptor required for signalling through the IL-1, IL-33, and IL-36 receptors. Using a novel anti-IL1RAP-blocking antibody, we investigated the role of IL1RAP in atherosclerosis. METHODS AND RESULTS: Single-cell RNA sequencing data from human atherosclerotic plaques revealed the expression of IL1RAP and several IL1RAP-related cytokines and receptors, including IL1B and IL33. Histological analysis showed the presence of IL1RAP in both the plaque and adventitia, and flow cytometry of murine atherosclerotic aortas revealed IL1RAP expression on plaque leucocytes, including neutrophils and macrophages. High-cholesterol diet fed apolipoprotein E-deficient (Apoe-/-) mice were treated with a novel non-depleting IL1RAP-blocking antibody or isotype control for the last 6 weeks of diet. IL1RAP blockade in mice resulted in a 20% reduction in subvalvular plaque size and limited the accumulation of neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages in plaques and of T cells in adventitia, compared with control mice. Indicative of reduced plaque inflammation, the expression of several genes related to leucocyte recruitment, including Cxcl1 and Cxcl2, was reduced in brachiocephalic arteries of anti-IL1RAP-treated mice, and the expression of these chemokines in human plaques was mainly restricted to CD68+ myeloid cells. Furthermore, in vitro studies demonstrated that IL-1, IL-33, and IL-36 induced CXCL1 release from both macrophages and fibroblasts, which could be mitigated by IL1RAP blockade. CONCLUSION: Limiting IL1RAP-dependent cytokine signalling pathways in atherosclerotic mice reduces plaque burden and plaque inflammation, potentially by limiting plaque chemokine production.
A review of the literature concerning the fate and behavior of gunshot residue (GSR) is presented. A number of concomitant parameters including firearm and ammunition type, plume and GSR material characteristics, travel distances, chemical composition and GSR morphology are critically discussed in relation to their effects on the distribution and deposition, transfer and persistence processes of GSR. The underlying mechanisms associated with such processes are also considered. Knowledge of these processes on GSR materials could provide valuable information concerning scene preservation and subsequent forensic sampling. The number of GSR particles deposited can vary significantly with each firearm discharge, highlighting the potential to produce distinctive data in each individual case. With the continual development and compositional changes of new ammunition types, further evaluation of the effect these processes may have on GSR evidence and their possible influence on the interpretation of the analytical results should be given due consideration.
Purpose: Changes in biophysiological markers related to perceived burnout and self-comfort were tested in this study. Method: Forty-two student-athletes from middle and high school grades were evaluated for burnout, salivary cortisol levels, measures of arousal-related physiological markers (i.e., blood volume pulse; BVP), galvanic skin response (GSR), and respiratory rate, and self-comfort variables during the last two weeks of the season. Using self-comfort theory as its conceptual framework, we examined burnout through a conceptual model in which feeling of discomfort with the self was related to biophysiological markers affecting perceived burnout. The proposed model was tested by using a partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM). Results: The main findings indicate that increased self-discomfort is significantly (p < .001) associated with increased salivary cortisol (beta = - 0.189) along with a significant (p = .050) decrease in GSR (beta = - 0.259). Increased salivary cortisol is significantly (p < .001) associated with increased burnout (beta = 0.242). Conclusion: The findings partially support the model and encourage further effort to capture the burnout syndrome through the integration of biological and psychological markers.
Gunshot residue (GSR) stemming from the discharge of firearms has been essential to advancements in the field of forensic science however the human and environmental health impacts from GSR are far less researched. GSR represents a multifaceted concern: it contains a complex mixture of inorganic and organic components and produces airborne particles with variable sizes, depositions, and fates. Herein we evaluate studies in the literature examining GSR collection, deposition, composition, environmental contamination, and potential remediation techniques within the last two decades (2000 - 2020). Throughout we reflect upon key findings and weaknesses in relation to environmental characterization of GSR and associated firearm contaminants. Research focused on techniques to analyze both inorganic and organic GSR simultaneously has begun, but requires additional effort. A vast majority of the available environmental characterization literature focuses on soil contamination at outdoor firing ranges for a select number of elements (Cu, Pb, Sb) with comparisons between ranges or at different collection distances and depths. There is limited ability for between study comparisons due to collection and analysis differences as well as a lack of background soil sampling. Notably, these studies lack direct quantification of the contribution of contaminants from GSR as well as analysis of organic compounds. Currently, there is a need for air monitoring to determine the composition, deposition, and fate of GSR, particularly in outdoor settings. This review summarizes the collection, characterization, and environmental studies related to GSR and highlights areas of research needed to establish the environmental health impacts.
Oxidation and S-nitrosylation of cysteinyl thiols (Cys-SH) to sulfenic (Cys-SOH), sulfinic (Cys-SO2H), sulfonic acids (Cys-SO3H), disulphides and S-nitrosothiols are suggested as important post-translational modifications that can activate or deactivate the function of many proteins. Non-enzymatic post-translational modifications to cysteinyl thiols have been implicated in a wide variety of physiological and pathophysiological states but have been difficult to monitor in a physiological setting because of a lack of experimental tools. The purpose of this review is to bring together the approaches that have been developed for stably trapping cysteine either in its reduced or oxidised forms for enrichment and or subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. These tools are providing insight into potential targets for post-translational modifications to cysteine modification in vivo. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Special Issue: Posttranslational Protein modifications in biology and Medicine.
Pharmacological intervention is a mainstay for treatment of epilepsy. However, a third of patients with epilepsy remain drug resistant. Behavioural treatments such as biofeedback training can be potential effective alternative interventions for drug resistant epilepsy. This paper describes a biofeedback therapy in which the training of patients to control peripheral autonomic tone (galvanic skin response) changes in central control of seizure occurrence. This paper introduces; 1) the theoretical development of methodology, 2) the effect of GSR biofeedback in reducing seizure frequency in drug resistant epilepsy, 3) insights into the neural mechanisms of effective GSR biofeedback through neuromodulatory autonomic control and 3) future prospects of this approach as a therapeutic tool instantiated as an Autonomic Cognitive Rehabituation Training (ACRT).
BACKGROUND: Sepsis-induced myopathy (SIM) a complication of sepsis that results in prolonged mechanical ventilation, long-term functional disability, and increased patient mortality. This study was performed to identify potential key oxidative stress-related genes (OS-genes) as biomarkers for the diagnosis of SIM using bioinformatics. METHODS: The GSE13205 was obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, including 13 SIM samples and 8 healthy samples, and the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by limma package in R language. Simultaneously, we searched for the genes related to oxidative stress in the Gene Ontology (GO) database. The intersection of the genes selected from the GO database and the genes from the GSE13205 was considered as OS-genes of SIM, where the differential genes were regarded as OS-DEGs. OS-DEGs were analyzed using GO enrichment, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks. Hub genes in OS-DEGs were selected based on degree, and diagnostic genes were further screened by gene expression and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Finally, a miRNA-gene network of diagnostic genes was constructed. RESULTS: A total of 1089 DEGs were screened from the GSE13205, and 453 OS-genes were identified from the GO database. The overlapping DEGs and OS-genes constituted 25 OS-DEGs, including 15 significantly upregulated and 10 significantly downregulated genes. The top 10 hub genes, including CD36, GPX3, NQO1, GSR, TP53, IDH1, BCL2, HMOX1, JAK2, and FOXO1, were screened. Furthermore, 5 diagnostic genes were identified: CD36, GPX3, NQO1, GSR, and TP53. The ROC analysis showed that the respective area under the curves (AUCs) of CD36, GPX3, NQO1, GSR, and TP53 were 0.990, 0.981, 0.971, 0.971, and 0.971, which meant these genes had very high diagnostic values of SIM. Finally, based on these 5 diagnostic genes, we found that miR-124-3p and miR-16-5p may be potential targets for the treatment of SIM. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that OS-genes might play an important role in SIM. CD36, GPX3, NQO1, GSR, and TP53 have potential as specific biomarkers for the diagnosis of SIM.
BACKGROUND: Virtual reality (VR) research probes stress environments that are infeasible to create in the real world. However, because research simulations are applied to narrow populations, it remains unclear if VR simulations can stimulate a broadly applicable stress-response. This systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted on studies using VR stress tasks and biomarkers. METHODS: Included papers (N = 52) measured cortisol, heart rate (HR), galvanic skin response (GSR), systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), parasympathetic activity (RMSSD), sympathovagal balance (LF/HF), and/or salivary alpha-amylase (sAA). Effect sizes (ES) and confidence intervals (CI) were calculated based on standardized mean change of baseline-to-peak biomarker levels. RESULTS: From baseline-to-peak (ES, CI), analyses showed a statistically significant change in cortisol (0.56, 0.28-0.83), HR (0.68, 0.53-0.82), GSR (0.59, 0.36-0.82), SBP (.55, 0.19-0.90), DBP (.64, 0.23-1.05), RSA (-0.59, -0.88 to -0.30), and sAA (0.27, 0.092-0.45). There was no effect for RMSSD and LF/HF. CONCLUSION: VR stress tasks elicited a varied magnitude of physiological stress reactivity. VR may be an effective tool in stress research.
The DNA damage response (DDR) has been broadly defined as a complex network of cellular pathways that cooperate to sense and repair lesions in DNA. Multiple types of DNA damage, some natural DNA sequences, nucleotide pool deficiencies and collisions with transcription complexes can cause replication arrest to elicit the DDR. However, in practice, the term DDR as applied to eukaryotic/mammalian cells often refers more specifically to pathways involving the activation of the ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM-Rad3-related) kinases in response to double-strand breaks or arrested replication forks, respectively. Nevertheless, there are distinct responses to particular types of DNA damage that do not involve ATM or ATR. In addition, some of the aberrations that cause replication arrest and elicit the DDR cannot be categorized as direct DNA damage. These include nucleotide pool deficiencies, nucleotide sequences that can adopt non-canonical DNA structures, and collisions between replication forks and transcription complexes. The response to these aberrations can be called the genomic stress response (GSR), a term that is meant to encompass the sensing of all types of DNA aberrations together with the mechanisms involved in coping with them. In addition to fully functional cells, the consequences of processing genomic aberrations may include mutagenesis, genomic rearrangements and lethality.
Continuous daily stress and high workload can have negative effects on individuals' physical and mental well-being. It has been shown that physiological signals may support the prediction of stress and workload. However, previous research is limited by the low diversity of signals concurring to such predictive tasks and controlled experimental design. In this paper we present 1) a pipeline for continuous and real-life acquisition of physiological and inertial signals 2) a mobile agent application for on-the-go event annotation and 3) an end-to-end signal processing and classification system for stress and workload from diverse signal streams. We study physiological signals such as Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), Skin Temperature (ST), Inter Beat Interval (IBI) and Blood Volume Pulse (BVP) collected using a non-invasive wearable device; and inertial signals collected from accelerometer and gyroscope sensors. We combine them with subjects' inputs (e.g. event tagging) acquired using the agent application, and their emotion regulation scores. In our experiments we explore signal combination and selection techniques for stress and workload prediction from subjects whose signals have been recorded continuously during their daily life. The end-to-end classification system is described for feature extraction, signal artifact removal, and classification. We show that a combination of physiological, inertial and user event signals provides accurate prediction of stress for real-life users and signals.
BACKGROUND: As interest in job-related psychology increased, the need to focus on understanding workplace stress was emphasized. Negative emotional states such as anxiety and stress permeate the organization and, if uncontrolled, can negatively impact the health and work performance of workers. Therefore, attempts to analyze various signals to understand human emotional states or attitudes may be important for future technological development. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify what biological variables can discriminate emotions that can significantly affect work results. METHODS: Databases (Embase, PsychINFO, PubMed, and CINAHL) were searched for all relevant literature published as of December 31, 2019. RESULTS: Brain activity (BA) and heart rate (HR) or heart rate variability (HRV) are adequate for assessing negative emotions, while BA, galvanic skin response (GSR), and salivary samples (SS) can confirm positive and negative emotions. CONCLUSION: In the future, researchers should study measurement tools and bio-related variables while workers perform tasks and develop intervention strategies to address emotions associated with work. This may enable workers to perform tasks more efficiently, prevent accidents, and satisfy clients.
Clopidogrel is an antiplatelet drug commonly used to prevent coagulation. This review aimed to investigate the effect of polymorphisms of G6PD, GCLC, GCLM, GSS, GST, GSR, HK and GLRX genes on clopidogrel during phase II metabolism through exploring previous studies. The results revealed that low glutathione plasma levels caused by several alleles related to these genes could affect the bioactivation process of the clopidogrel prodrug, making it unable to inhibit platelet aggregation perfectly and thus leading to severe consequences in patients with a high risk of blood coagulation. However, the study recommends platelet reactivity tests to predict clopidogrel efficacy rather than studying gene mutations, as most of these mutations are rare and other nongenetic factors could affect the drug's efficacy.
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is one of the fastest growing liver diseases worldwide, and oxidative stress is one of NASH main key drivers. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is the ultimate donor of reductive power to a number of antioxidant defences. Here, we explored the potential of increasing NADPH levels to prevent NASH progression. We used nicotinamide riboside (NR) supplementation or a G6PD-tg mouse line harbouring an additional copy of the human G6PD gene. In a NASH mouse model induced by feeding mice a methionine-choline deficient (MCD) diet for three weeks, both tools increased the hepatic levels of NADPH and ameliorated the NASH phenotype induced by the MCD intervention, but only in female mice. Boosting NADPH levels in females increased the liver expression of the antioxidant genes Gsta3, Sod1 and Txnrd1 in NR-treated mice, or of Gsr for G6PD-tg mice. Both strategies significantly reduced hepatic lipid peroxidation. NR-treated female mice showed a reduction of steatosis accompanied by a drop of the hepatic triglyceride levels, that was not observed in G6PD-tg mice. NR-treated mice tended to reduce their lobular inflammation, showed a reduction of the NK cell population and diminished transcription of the damage marker Lcn2. G6PD-tg female mice exhibited a reduction of their lobular inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning induced by the MCD diet, that was related to a reduction of the monocyte-derived macrophage population and the Tnfa, Ccl2 and Lcn2 gene expression. As conclusion, boosting hepatic NADPH levels attenuated the oxidative lipid damage and the exhausted antioxidant gene expression specifically in female mice in two different models of NASH, preventing the progression of the inflammatory process and hepatic injury.
The articles in this issue include experimental research and clinical studies on the bidirectional process of connecting experience and words, which we term the Referential Process (RP). These concluding notes focus on new questions and new directions for research. Studies now under way include characterization and measurement of the Arousal function of the referential process, which involves how people talk when the connection to specific ideas is not yet fully developed, and new research on paralinguistic features of interpersonal communication. Further work in these areas will involve automatic transcription technology to incorporate pitch, rate of speech and loudness, as well as development of a Time-DAAP program to enable such assessment. Research is also needed to investigate the relationship between language and underlying physiological and neurological mechanisms. These relationships can be examined using physiological measures such as galvanic skin response (GSR) and changes in heart rate and respiration. While fMRI scans are not compatible with tasks requiring speech production, fMRI compatible tablet systems are available for writing tasks. Participants may also be scanned while reading literary passages that show differences in RP functions. A major goal of our research program is the application of RP measures in large scale treatment efficacy and effectiveness studies evaluating particular treatment forms. The computerized referential process procedures have the potential to study whole trajectories of large numbers of treatments; and also to identify important turning points within treatments and within sessions. The interpretation of these measures in the context of a systematic theory of treatment process has the value of enabling results that are not only statistically powerful but clinically significant as well. Other potential areas of study include application of the language measures in large scale studies of political, religious and literary discourse.
Misophonia is an affective sound-processing disorder characterized by the experience of strong negative emotions (anger and anxiety) in response to everyday sounds, such as those generated by other people eating, drinking, chewing, and breathing [1-8]. The commonplace nature of these sounds (often referred to as "trigger sounds") makes misophonia a devastating disorder for sufferers and their families, and yet nothing is known about the underlying mechanism. Using functional and structural MRI coupled with physiological measurements, we demonstrate that misophonic subjects show specific trigger-sound-related responses in brain and body. Specifically, fMRI showed that in misophonic subjects, trigger sounds elicit greatly exaggerated blood-oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) responses in the anterior insular cortex (AIC), a core hub of the "salience network" that is critical for perception of interoceptive signals and emotion processing. Trigger sounds in misophonics were associated with abnormal functional connectivity between AIC and a network of regions responsible for the processing and regulation of emotions, including ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), posteromedial cortex (PMC), hippocampus, and amygdala. Trigger sounds elicited heightened heart rate (HR) and galvanic skin response (GSR) in misophonic subjects, which were mediated by AIC activity. Questionnaire analysis showed that misophonic subjects perceived their bodies differently: they scored higher on interoceptive sensibility than controls, consistent with abnormal functioning of AIC. Finally, brain structural measurements implied greater myelination within vmPFC in misophonic individuals. Overall, our results show that misophonia is a disorder in which abnormal salience is attributed to particular sounds based on the abnormal activation and functional connectivity of AIC.
Soy isoflavones are dietary components for which an association has been demonstrated with reduced risk of prostate cancer (PCa) in Asian populations. However, the exact mechanism by which these isoflavones may prevent the development or progression of PCa is not completely understood. There are a growing number of animal and in vitro studies that have attempted to elucidate these mechanisms. The predominant and most biologically active isoflavones in soy products, genistein, daidzein, equol, and glycetin, inhibit prostate carcinogenesis in some animal models. Cell-based studies show that soy isoflavones regulate genes that control cell cycle and apoptosis. In this review, we discuss the literature relevant to the molecular events that may account for the benefit of soy isoflavones in PCa prevention or treatment. These reports show that although soy isoflavone-induced growth arrest and apoptosis of PCa cells are plausible mechanisms, other chemo protective mechanisms are also worthy of consideration. These possible mechanisms include antioxidant defense, DNA repair, inhibition of angiogenesis and metastasis, potentiation of radio- and chemotherapeutic agents, and antagonism of estrogen- and androgen-mediated signaling pathways. Moreover, other cells in the cancer milieu, such as the fibroblastic stromal cells, endothelial cells, and immune cells, may be targeted by soy isoflavones, which may contribute to soy-mediated prostate cancer prevention. In this review, these mechanisms are discussed along with considerations about the doses and the preclinical models that have been used.
Zinc is an essential micronutrient that regulates a wide range of physiological processes, most often through zinc binding to protein cysteine residues. Despite being critical for modulation of protein function, the cysteine sites in the majority of the human proteome that are subject to zinc binding remain undefined. Here, we develop ZnCPT, a deep and quantitative mapping of the zinc-binding cysteine proteome. We define 6,173 zinc-binding cysteines, uncovering protein families across major domains of biology that are subject to constitutive or inducible zinc binding. ZnCPT enables systematic discovery of zinc-regulated structural, enzymatic, and allosteric functional domains. On this basis, we identify 52 cancer genetic dependencies subject to zinc binding and nominate malignancies sensitive to zinc-induced cytotoxicity. We discover a mechanism of zinc regulation over glutathione reductase (GSR), which drives cell death in GSR-dependent lung cancers. We provide ZnCPT as a resource for understanding mechanisms of zinc regulation of protein function.
