Glutathione S-transferase A1, N-terminally processed; Glutathione S-transferase that catalyzes the nucleophilic attack of the sulfur atom of glutathione on the electrophilic groups of a wide range of exogenous and endogenous compounds (Probable). Involved in the formation of glutathione conjugates of both prostaglandin A2 (PGA2) and prostaglandin J2 (PGJ2). It also catalyzes the isomerization of D5-androstene-3,17-dione (AD) into D4-androstene- 3,17-dione and may therefore play an important role in hormone biosynthesis. Through its glutathione-dependent peroxidase activity toward the f [...] 
Lipotoxicity, induced by saturated fatty acid (SFA)-mediated cell death, plays an important role in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). The KEAP1 (kelch like ECH associated protein 1)-NFE2L2/NRF2 (nuclear factor, erythroid 2 like 2) pathway is a pivotal defense mechanism against lipotoxicity. We previously reported that SQSTM1/p62 has a cytoprotective role against lipotoxicity through activation of the noncanonical KEAP1- NFE2L2 pathway in hepatocytes. However, the underlying mechanisms and physiological relevance of this pathway have not been clearly defined. Here, we demonstrate that NFE2L2-mediated induction of SQSTM1 activates the noncanonical KEAP1-NFE2L2 pathway under lipotoxic conditions. Furthermore, we identified that SQSTM1 induces ULK1 (unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1) phosphorylation by facilitating the interaction between AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) and ULK1, leading to macroautophagy/autophagy induction, followed by KEAP1 degradation and NFE2L2 activation. Accordingly, the activity of this SQSTM1-mediated noncanonical KEAP1-NFE2L2 pathway conferred hepatoprotection against lipotoxicity in the livers of conventional sqstm1- and liver-specific sqstm1-knockout mice. Moreover, this pathway activity was evident in the livers of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver. This axis could thus represent a novel target for NAFLD treatment. Abbreviations: ACACA: acetyl-CoA carboxylase alpha; ACTB: actin beta; BafA1: bafilomycin A(1); CM-H2DCFDA:5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate; CQ: chloroquine; CUL3: cullin 3; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; FASN: fatty acid synthase; GSTA1: glutathione S-transferase A1; HA: hemagglutinin; Hepa1c1c7: mouse hepatoma cells; HMOX1/HO-1: heme oxygenase 1; KEAP1: kelch like ECH associated protein 1; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; MEF: mouse embryonic fibroblast; MTORC1: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1; MTT: 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; NAC: N-acetyl-L-cysteine; NAFLD: nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH: nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; NFE2L2/NRF2: nuclear factor, erythroid 2 like 2; NQO1: NAD(P)H quinone dehydrogenase 1; PA: palmitic acid; PARP: poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1; PRKAA1/2: protein kinase AMP-activated catalytic subunits alpha1/2; RBX1: ring-box 1; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SESN2: sestrin 2; SFA: saturated fatty acid; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; SREBF1: sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 1; TBK1: TANK binding kinase 1; TUNEL: terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease is a prevalent disease with a heavy global burden. Proteomics is the systematic study of proteins and peptides to provide comprehensive descriptions. Aiming to obtain a more accurate and convenient clinical diagnosis, researchers are working for better biomarkers. Urine is more convenient which could reflect the change of disease at an earlier stage. Thus, we conducted a cross-sectional study to investigate novel diagnostic panels. METHODS: We firstly enrolled participants from China-Japan Friendship Hospital from April 2022 to November 2022, collected urine samples, and conducted an LC-MS/MS analysis. In parallel, clinical data were collected, and clinical examinations were performed. After statistical and bioinformatics analyses, significant risk factors and differential urinary proteins were determined. We attempt to investigate diagnostic panels based on machine learning including LASSO and SVM. RESULTS: Fifty-seven AD patients, 43 MCI patients, and 62 CN subjects were enrolled. A total of 3366 proteins were identified, and 608 urine proteins were finally included in the analysis. There were 33 significantly differential proteins between the AD and CN groups and 15 significantly differential proteins between the MCI and CN groups. AD diagnostic panel included DDC, CTSC, EHD4, GSTA3, SLC44A4, GNS, GSTA1, ANXA4, PLD3, CTSH, HP, RPS3, CPVL, age, and APOE epsilon4 with an AUC of 0.9989 in the training test and 0.8824 in the test set while MCI diagnostic panel included TUBB, SUCLG2, PROCR, TCP1, ACE, FLOT2, EHD4, PROZ, C9, SERPINA3, age, and APOE epsilon4 with an AUC of 0.9985 in the training test and 0.8143 in the test set. Besides, diagnostic proteins were weakly correlated with cognitive functions. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the procedure is convenient, non-invasive, and useful for diagnosis, which could assist physicians in differentiating AD and MCI from CN.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetic condition that results in dysmotile cilia. The repercussions of cilia dysmotility and gene variants on the multiciliated cell remain poorly understood. We used single-cell RNA-Seq, proteomics, and advanced microscopy to compare primary culture epithelial cells from patients with PCD, their heterozygous mothers, and healthy individuals, and we induced pluripotent stem cells (iPScs) generated from a patient with PCD. Transcriptomic analysis revealed unique signatures in PCD airway cells compared with their mothers' cells and the cells of healthy individuals. Gene expression in heterozygous mothers' cells diverged from both control and PCD cells, marked by increased inflammatory and cellular stress signatures. Primary and iPS-derived PCD multiciliated cells had increased expression of glutathione-S-transferases GSTA2 and GSTA1, as well as NRF2 target genes, accompanied by elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Immunogold labeling in human cilia and proteomic analysis of the ciliated organism Chlamydomonas reinhardtii demonstrated that GSTA2 localizes to motile cilia. Loss of human GSTA2 and C. reinhardtii GSTA resulted in slowed cilia motility, pointing to local cilia regulatory roles. Our findings identify cellular responses unique to PCD variants and independent of environmental stress and uncover a dedicated ciliary GSTA2 pathway essential for normal motility that may be a therapeutic target.
PURPOSE: Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are involved in the detoxification of carcinogens, and may be linked to carcinogenesis. As a vital component of GSTs, GSTA1 plays an important role in carcinogenesis. However, the studies about the effect of GSTA1 polymorphisms on cancer risk are limited and the conclusions are contradictory. This meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the association between GSTA1 polymorphisms (-567T>G, (69C>T and -52G>A) and cancer risk. METHODS: A literature search of PubMed and Web of Science databases was conducted from their inception through December 2013. Crude odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated to assess the association of GSTA1 polymorphisms and cancer risk. RESULTS: A total of 15 studies were enrolled, and the results indicated that GSTA1 BB genotype was associated with elevated cancer risk, especially in colorectal cancer. Further stratifications showed that GSTA1 BB genotype was associated with increased cancer risk in Caucasian populations and in the study with population-based controls. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggested that GSTA1 BB genotype was a risk factor for colorectal cancer, especially in Caucasian populations.
BACKGROUND: Sepsis is organ dysfunction due to the host's deleterious response to infection, and the kidneys are one of the organs damaged in common sepsis. Sepsis-associated acute kidney injury (SA-AKI) increases the mortality in patients with sepsis. Although a substantial volume of research has improved the prevention and treatment of the disease, SA-SKI is still a significant clinical concern. PURPOSE: Aimed to use weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) and immunoinfiltration analysis to study SA-AKI-related diagnostic markers and potential therapeutic targets. METHODS: Immunoinfiltration analysis was performed on SA-AKI expression datasets from the Gene Expression Synthesis (GEO) database. A weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) analysis was performed on immune invasion scores as trait data, and modules associated with immune cells of interest were identified as hub modules. Screening hub geneset in the hub module using protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis. The hub gene was identified as a target by intersecting with significantly different genes screened by differential expression analysis and validated using two external datasets. Finally, the correlation between the target gene, SA-AKI, and immune cells was verified experimentally. RESULTS: Green modules associated with monocytes were identified using WGCNA and immune infiltration analysis. Differential expression analysis and PPI network analysis identified two hub genes (AFM and GSTA1). Further validation using additional AKI datasets GSE30718 and GSE44925 showed that AFM was significantly downregulated in AKI samples and correlated with the development of AKI. The correlation analysis of hub genes and immune cells showed that AFM was significantly associated with monocyte infiltration and hence, selected as a critical gene. In addition, Gene single-enrichment analysis (GSEA) and PPI analyses results showed that AFM was significantly related to the occurrence and development of SA-AKI. CONCLUSIONS: AFM is inversely correlated with the recruitment of monocytes and the release of various inflammatory factors in the kidneys of AKI. AFM can be a potential biomarker and therapeutic target for monocyte infiltration in sepsis-related AKI.
Epidemiological studies have shown the association of genetic variants with risks of occupational and environmentally induced cancers, including bladder (BC). The current review summarizes the effects of variants in genes encoding phase I and II enzymes in well-designed studies to highlight their contribution to BC susceptibility and prognosis. Polymorphisms in genes codifying drug-metabolizing proteins are of particular interest because of their involvement in the metabolism of exogenous genotoxic compounds, such as tobacco and agrochemicals. The prognosis between muscle-invasive and non-muscle-invasive diseases is very different, and it is difficult to predict which will progress worse. Web of Science, PubMed, and Medline were searched to identify studies published between January 1, 2010, and February 2023. We included 73 eligible studies, more than 300 polymorphisms, and 46 genes/loci. The most studied candidate genes/loci of phase I metabolism were CYP1B1, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP3A4, CYP2D6, CYP2A6, CYP3E1, and ALDH2, and those in phase II were GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2, GSTP1, GSTA1, GSTO1, and UGT1A1. We used the 46 genes to construct a network of proteins and to evaluate their biological functions based on the Reactome and KEGG databases. Lastly, we assessed their expression in different tissues, including normal bladder and BC samples. The drug-metabolizing pathway plays a relevant role in BC, and our review discusses a list of genes that could provide clues for further exploration of susceptibility and prognostic biomarkers.
Mutations in the TRPV4 ion channel can lead to a range of skeletal dysplasias. However, the mechanisms by which TRPV4 mutations lead to distinct disease severity remain unknown. Here, we use CRISPR-Cas9-edited human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) harboring either the mild V620I or lethal T89I mutations to elucidate the differential effects on channel function and chondrogenic differentiation. We found that hiPSC-derived chondrocytes with the V620I mutation exhibited increased basal currents through TRPV4. However, both mutations showed more rapid calcium signaling with a reduced overall magnitude in response to TRPV4 agonist GSK1016790A compared to wildtype (WT). There were no differences in overall cartilaginous matrix production, but the V620I mutation resulted in reduced mechanical properties of cartilage matrix later in chondrogenesis. mRNA sequencing revealed that both mutations up-regulated several anterior HOX genes and down-regulated antioxidant genes CAT and GSTA1 throughout chondrogenesis. BMP4 treatment up-regulated several essential hypertrophic genes in WT chondrocytes; however, this hypertrophic maturation response was inhibited in mutant chondrocytes. These results indicate that the TRPV4 mutations alter BMP signaling in chondrocytes and prevent proper chondrocyte hypertrophy, as a potential mechanism for dysfunctional skeletal development. Our findings provide potential therapeutic targets for developing treatments for TRPV4-mediated skeletal dysplasias.
The emergence of sorafenib resistance has become a predominant impediment and formidable dilemma in the therapeutic approach for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although the approval of next-generation drugs as alternatives to sorafenib is a significant development, the concurrent use of inhibitors that target additional key molecular pathways remains an effective strategy to mitigate the acquisition of resistance. Here, we identified Glutathione S-Transferase Alpha 1 (GSTA1) as a critical modulator of sorafenib resistance (SR) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) based on our findings from experiments conducted on recurrent liver cancer tissues, xenograft mouse models, organoids, and sorafenib-resistant cells. Elevated GSTA1 levels are strongly associated with adverse clinical prognoses. The knockout of GSTA1 reinstates sorafenib sensitivity, whereas its overexpression attenuates drug efficacy. Mechanistically, GSTA1 enhances the accumulation of lipid peroxides and suppresses ferroptosis by exerting its peroxidase function to regulate the SR. Notably, the upregulation of GSTA1 expression is mediated by the transcription factor CTNNB1 (beta-catenin), resulting in the formation of a cytoplasmic complex between GSTA1 and CTNNB1. This complex facilitates the nuclear translocation of CTNNB1, establishing a positive feedback loop. The combined use of GSTA1 and CTNNB1 inhibitors demonstrated synergistic anti-tumour effects through the induction of ferroptosis both in vitro and in vivo. Our findings reveal a novel regulatory role of the GSTA1/CTNNB1 axis in ferroptosis, suggesting that targeting GSTA1 and CTNNB1 could be a promising strategy to circumvent sorafenib resistance in HCC.
Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) catalyse reactions between glutathione and lipophilic compounds with electrophilic centres, leading to neutralisation of toxic compounds, xenobiotics and products of oxidative stress. Controversy exists about whether GST polymorphisms (GSTM1 null/present genotype, GSTT1 null/present genotype, GSTP1 Ile105Val and GSTA1 *A/*B) represent risk factors for colorectal cancer. This meta-analysis aims to examine the associations between the above-mentioned polymorphisms and colorectal cancer risk. Forty-four studies were eligible for GSTM1 (11,998 colorectal cancer cases, 17,552 controls), 34 studies for GSTT1 (8596 cases, 13,589 controls), 19 studies for GSTP1 (5421 cases, 7671 controls) and four studies for GSTA1 polymorphism (1648 cases, 2039 controls). Pooled odds ratios (ORs) were appropriately derived from fixed-effects or random-effects models. Separate analyses were conducted on Caucasian and Chinese populations. Where appropriate, sensitivity analysis concerning the deviation of genotype frequencies in controls from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was performed. GSTM1 null allele carriers exhibited increased colorectal cancer risk in Caucasian populations (pooled OR=1.150, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.060-1.248, random effects); no significant association was detected for Chinese subjects (pooled OR=1.025, 95% CI: 0.903-1.163, fixed effects). Similarly, GSTT1 null allele carriers exhibited increased colorectal cancer risk in Caucasian populations (pooled OR=1.312, 95% CI: 1.119-1.538, random effects); the association in Chinese subjects was not significant (pooled OR=1.068, 95% CI: 0.788-1.449, random effects). Concerning GSTP1 Ile105Val no significant associations were demonstrated in either race. GSTA1 *A/*B polymorphism was not associated with colorectal cancer risk. GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes confer additional risk for colorectal cancer in Caucasian populations.
INTRODUCTION: Natural menopause is an inevitable biological process with significant implications for women's health. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying menopause are not well understood. This study aimed to investigate the molecular and cellular changes occurring in the ovary before and after perimenopause. METHODS: Single-cell sequencing data from the GTEx V8 cohort (30-39: 14 individuals; 40-49: 37 individuals; 50-59: 61 individuals) and transcriptome sequencing data from ovarian tissue were analyzed. Seurat was used for single-cell sequencing data analysis, while harmony was employed for data integration. Cell differentiation trajectories were inferred using CytoTrace. CIBERSORTX assessed cell infiltration scores in ovarian tissue. WGCNA evaluated co-expression network characteristics in pre- and post-perimenopausal ovarian tissue. Functional enrichment analysis of co-expression modules was conducted using ClusterprofileR and Metascape. DESeq2 performed differential expression analysis. Master regulator analysis and signaling pathway activity analysis were carried out using MsViper and Progeny, respectively. Machine learning models were constructed using Orange3. RESULTS: We identified the differentiation trajectory of follicular cells in the ovary as ARID5B+ Granulosa -> JUN+ Granulosa -> KRT18+ Granulosa -> MT-CO2+ Granulosa -> GSTA1+ Granulosa -> HMGB1+ Granulosa. Genes driving Granulosa differentiation, including RBP1, TMSB10, SERPINE2, and TMSB4X, were enriched in ATP-dependent activity regulation pathways. Genes involved in maintaining the Granulosa state, such as DCN, ARID5B, EIF1, and HSP90AB1, were enriched in the response to unfolded protein and chaperone-mediated protein complex assembly pathways. Increased contents of terminally differentiated HMGB1+ Granulosa and GSTA1+ Granulosa were observed in the ovaries of individuals aged 50-69. Signaling pathway activity analysis indicated a gradual decrease in TGFb and MAPK pathway activity with menopause progression, while p53 pathway activity increased. Master regulator analysis revealed significant activation of transcription factors FOXR1, OTX2, MYBL2, HNF1A, and FOXN4 in the 30-39 age group, and GLI1, SMAD1, SMAD7, APP, and EGR1 in the 40-49 age group. Additionally, a diagnostic model based on 16 transcription factors (Logistic Regression L2) achieved reliable performance in determining ovarian status before and after perimenopause. CONCLUSION: This study provides insights into the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying natural menopause in the ovary. The findings contribute to our understanding of perimenopausal changes and offer a foundation for health management strategies for women during this transition.
We aimed to review the pharmacokinetics (PK) of intravenous busulfan in paediatric patients, identify covariate factors influencing exposure, investigate evidence of changes in PK behaviour over time, and correlate exposure with efficacy and toxicity outcomes. A literature review was undertaken of original research published between 2007 and 2019, investigating the PK and pharmacodynamics (PD) of intravenous busulfan in patients </= 18 years of age. The review identified 41 publications characterising the PK, and 45 publications describing the PD, of busulfan. Median typical clearance (CL) was 0.22 L/h/kg and median typical volume of distribution was 0.69 L/kg. Patient weight, age, glutathione-S-transferase A1 (GSTA1) genotype and busulfan dosing day/time were the most commonly identified factors affecting CL. Of nine studies investigating changes in CL, seven reported reduced CL over the 4-day course of treatment. Exposure monitoring methods and therapeutic targets were heterogeneous across studies. Relationships between busulfan exposure and patient outcomes were observed in five studies. One study observed a cumulative area under the concentration-time curve over all days of treatment of between 78 and 101 mg/L.h, and two studies observed an average concentration at first dose of < 600 ng/mL improved overall survival, transplant-related mortality, or relapse. One study observed increased sinusoidal obstructive syndrome with maximum busulfan concentration > 1.88 ng/mL. Patient weight, age and GSTA1 genotype are important covariates to consider when individualising busulfan therapy. Reduced busulfan CL over time may need to be accounted for, particularly in patients not receiving phenytoin co-therapy. Standardised monitoring of busulfan exposure over the entire course of treatment and further investigation of the role of busulfan metabolites and pharmacogenomics is warranted.
BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a common cancer with a poor prognosis. Pyroptosis is an important process in the development and progression of LUAD. We analyzed the risk factors affecting the prognosis of patients and constructed a nomogram to predict the overall survival of patients based on different pyroptosis-related genes (PRGs) subtypes. METHODS: The genomic data of LUAD were downloaded from the TCGA and GEO databases, and all data were filtered and divided into TCGA and GEO cohorts. The process of data analysis and visualization was performed via R software. The data were classified based on different PRGs subtypes using the K-means clustering method. Then, the differentially expressed genes were identified between two different subtypes, and risk factors analysis, survival analysis, functional enrichment analysis, and immune cells infiltration landscape analysis were conducted. The COX regression analysis was used to construct the prediction model. RESULTS: Based on the PRGs of LUAD, the patients were divided into two subtypes. We found the survival probability of patients in subtype 1 is higher than that in subtype 2. The results of the logistics analysis showed that gene risk score was closely associated with the prognosis of LUAD patients. The results of GO analysis and KEGG analysis revealed important biological processes and signaling pathways involved in the differentially expressed proteins between the two subtypes. Then we constructed a prediction model of patients' prognosis based on 13 genes, including IL-1A, P2RX1, GSTM2, ESYT3, ZNF682, KCNF1, STK32A, HHIPL2, GDF10, NDC80, GSTA1, BCL2L10, and CCR2. This model was strongly related to the overall survival (OS) and also reflects the immune status in patients with LUAD. CONCLUSION: In our study, we examined LUAD heterogeneity with reference to pyroptosis and found different prognoses between the two subtypes. And a novel prediction model was constructed to predict the OS of LUAD patients based on different PRGs signatures. The model has shown excellent predictive efficiency through validation.
Glutathione transferases (GSTs) are generally recognized for their role in phase II detoxification reactions. However, it is becoming increasingly apparent that members of the GST family also have a diverse range of other functions that are, in general, unrelated to detoxification. One such action is a specific inhibition of the cardiac isoform of the ryanodine receptor (RyR2) intracellular Ca(2+) release channel. In this review, we compare functional and physical interactions between members of the GST family, including GSTO1-1, GSTA1-1, and GSTM2-2, with RyR2 and with the skeletal isoform of the ryanodine receptor (RyR1). The active part of the muscle-specific GSTM2-2 is localized to its nonenzymatic C-terminal alpha-helical bundle, centered around alpha-helix 6. The GSTM2-2 binding site is in divergent region 3 (DR3 region) of RyR2. The sequence differences between the DR3 regions of RyR1 and RyR2 explain the specificity of the GSTs for one isoform of the protein. GSTM2-2 is one of the few known endogenous inhibitors of the cardiac RyR and is likely to be important in maintaining low RyR2 activity during diastole. We discuss interactions between a nonenzymatic member of the GST structural family, the CLIC-2 (type 2 chloride intracellular channel) protein, which inhibits both RyR1 and RyR2. The possibility that the GST and CLIC2 proteins bind to different sites on the RyR, and that different structures within the GST and CLIC proteins bind to RyR channels, is discussed. We conclude that the C-terminal part of GSTM2-2 may provide the basis of a therapeutic compound for use in cardiac disorders.
1. Asthma and allergies are characterized by variable and subjective symptoms influenced by many genes, molecular mechanisms and environmental factors. The presence of inflammation and oxidative stress in the airways are important biochemical features of asthma and respiratory allergies. Glutathione S-transferase (GSTs) enzymes play an important role in cellular protection against inflammation, and functional genetic polymorphisms in GST genes show a significant association with asthma and allergy risk. Specifically, our previous study on asthmatic children highlighted GSTA1 and GSTO2 as novel susceptibility loci for asthma. 2. In the present study we focused our attention on GSTA1*-69C/T (rs3957357) and GSTO2*N142D (rs156697) polymorphisms to confirm our previous results in an independent adult study population and to clarify whether GSTA1 and GSTO2 gene polymorphisms are involved in a non-discriminative pathway towards asthma and respiratory allergy. 3. To accomplish this, we recruited 103 patients with respiratory allergies, 199 patients with asthma and 200 healthy controls. Genomic DNA extracted from buccal cells was screened for GSTA1*-69C/T and GSTO2*N142D single nucleotide polymorphisms. 4. The GSTA1*-69T and GSTO2*D142 variants are both associated with a significantly increased risk of asthma, whereas only GSTA1*-69C/T is significantly associated with allergies. These outcomes confirm the involvement of GSTO2 loci in asthma and suggest that GSTA1 is a common risk factor for asthma and allergies.
GSTA1 encodes a member of a family of enzymes that function to add glutathione to target electrophilic compounds, including carcinogens, therapeutic drugs, environmental toxins, and products of oxidative stress. GSTA1 has several functional SNPs within its promoter region that are responsible for a change in its expression by altering promoter function. This study aims to investigate distributions of GSTA1 promoter haplotypes across different human populations and to assess their impact on the expression of GSTA1. PHASE 2.1.1 was used to infer haplotypes and diplotypes of six GSTA1 promoter SNPs on 2501 individuals from 26 populations classified by the 1000 Genomes Project into five super-populations that included Africa (N = 660), America (N = 347), East Asia (N = 504), Europe (N = 502), and South Asia (N = 488). We used pairwise FST analysis to compare sub-populations and luciferase reporter assay (LRA) to evaluate the impact of each SNP on activation of transcription and interaction with other SNPs. The distributions of GSTA1 promoter haplotypes and diplotypes were significantly different among the different human populations. Three new promoter haplotypes were found in the African super-population. LRA demonstrated that SNPs at -52 and -69 has the most impact on GSTA1 expression, however other SNPs have a significant impact on transcriptional activity. Based on LRA, a new model of cis-elements interaction is presented. Due to the significant differences in GSTA1 diplotype population frequencies, future pharmacogenomics or disease-related studies would benefit from the inclusion of the complete GSTA1 promoter haplotype based on the newly proposed metabolic grouping derived from the LRA results.
Aflatoxin B(1) (AFB(1)) widely contaminates staple food and feed crops and is well-known as the most potent natural hepatocarcinogen in humans and domesticated animals. This review highlights significant advances in our understanding of the pivotal role of phase I and II metabolizing enzymes in the bioactivation and detoxification of AFB(1) and its metabolites across species. In humans, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 in liver and CYP2A13 in lung are essential for the bioactivation of AFB(1) to the extremely toxic exo-AFB(1)-8,9-epoxide (AFBO), whereas CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and CYP3A4 are important in the turkey and duck, CYP1A1 and CYP2A6 are important in the chicken and quail, CYP3A11 and CYP3A13 are important in mice, and CYP2A5 are important in the hamster. In contrast, glutathione-S-transferase (GST) M1 and GSTT1 are primary responsible for detoxification of the AFB(1) by catalyzing the conjugation of GSH to AFBO in humans, whereas GSTM2 in a nonhuman primate, GSTA3 in mice, GSTA5 in rats, and GSTA1, GSTA2, GSTA3 and GSTA4 in the turkey are important. Additionally, microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) and aflatoxin-aldehyde reductase (AFAR) have also been shown to play key roles in AFB(1) detoxification in the human, rat, and pig. Moreover, an overview of the chemoprotective agents, including synthetic compounds and naturally occurring plant compounds, which can be used to reduce aflatoxicosis is provided based on their ability to regulate these key enzymes. Collectively, this review summarizes the pivotal enzymes in the metabolism of AFB(1) among humans, experimental and farm animals, as well as the chemoprotective agents that can be used to minimize risk of aflatoxicosis.
OBJECTIVES: Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are a family of enzymes involved in detoxification. Genes encoding for GSTA1, GSTM1, GSTP1, and GSTT1 proteins are polymorphic, which can result in complete or partial loss of enzyme activity. Previous studies have associated polymorphisms of GSTA1, GSTM1, and GSTP1 genes with a higher risk of bladder cancer, but this is still controversial. Potential role of GSTA1 polymorphism in susceptibility to bladder cancer in Whites is lacking. We examined association between GSTA1, GSTM1, GSTP1, and GSTT1 gene variants and bladder cancer risk and evaluated whether they were modified by smoking. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A hospital-based case-control study recruited 201 incidence cases and 122 age-matched controls. Deletion polymorphism of GSTM1 and GSTT1 was identified by polymerase chain reaction method. Single nucleotide polymorphism of GSTA1 and GSTP1 was identified by restriction fragment length polymorphism method. Uniconditional multivariate logistic regression was applied to model association between genetic polymorphisms and bladder cancer risk, as well as effect modification by smoking. RESULTS: No significant difference was observed in the distributions of GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTA1, and GSTP1 gene variants between patients and controls. None of the examined polymorphisms was significantly associated with bladder cancer risk independently. The results of gene-smoking interaction analyses indicated a significant combined effect of smoking and all common GST polymorphisms tested (P for trend = 0.001). However, the most significant effect on bladder cancer risk was observed in smokers carrying lower activity GSTA1-AB/BB and GSTM-null genotype (OR = 3.5, P < 0.05) compared with GSTA1-AA and GSTM1-active non-smokers. Overall, the risk observed did not significantly differ with respect to quantity of cigarettes smoked. However, heavy smokers with GSTM1-null genotype had 2 times higher risk of bladder cancer than GSTM1-null light smokers (OR = 4.8 vs. OR = 2.0) when GSTM1-active non-smokers served as reference group. Smokers carrying both GSTM1-null and GSTA1-AB + BB genotypes exhibited the highest risk of bladder cancer (OR = 2.00, P = 0.123). CONCLUSIONS: Null or low-activity genotypes of the GSTA1, GSTM1, GSTT1, and GSTP1 did not contribute independently towards the risk of bladder cancer in our patients. However, in association with smoking, both low activity GSTA1 and GSTM1-null genotype increase individual susceptibility to bladder cancer.
Busulfan (Bu) combined with cyclophosphamide (Cy) is commonly used as a myeloablative conditioning regimen for allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (allo-HCT). There is inter-individual variability of Bu pharmacokinetics (PK) and hence in toxicity and efficacy. The introduction of therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) of Bu has decreased toxicity of the regimen. Hepatic metabolism of Bu is mediated through Glutathione-S-Transferases (GSTs), mainly GSTA1. Patients with GSTA1*A variants are considered normal metabolizers and GSTA1*B corresponds to poor metabolism, defined by nucleotide changes at -52 or -69 locus in GSTA1 promoter region. The aim of the study was to explore the correlation between GSTA1 polymorphisms and Bu-PK in 60 adult patients receiving an allo-HCT in the BuCyBu clinical study (ClinicalTrials.gov I, ID NCT01779882) comparing the sequence BuCy to CyBu. DNA samples prior to conditioning were genotyped for candidate variants at -52 (rs3957356) and -69 (rs3957357) loci in the GSTA1 promoter. Thirty-three % of patients were GSTA1*A*A, 49% GSTA1*A*B and 18% GSTA1*B*B. In GSTA1*A*A patients, median Bu-AUC was 3.6 +/- 0.7 mg*h/L, in GSTA1*A*B 4.5 +/- 1.6 and in GSTA1*B*B 4.9 +/- 1.4 (AUC 35% higher than GSTA1*A*A, p = 0.03), with a similar significant correlation with Bu-clearance (p = 0.04). The correlation between GSTA1 polymorphism and AUC remained significant in multivariate linear regression analysis. There was a trend for lower non-relapse mortality (NRM) in patients with low AUC. We could not demonstrate a correlation between GSTA1 polymorphisms and NRM, acute graft-versus-host disease (aGvHD) in this small cohort, but there is a trend of higher aGvHD incidence in GSTA1*B*B patients.
BACKGROUND: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease has been a significant risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma. In the study, we aimed to identify the key genes associated with the transition from non-alcoholic fatty liver disease to hepatocellular carcinoma through bioinformatics analysis. METHODS: The GSE164760 dataset was used for identifying differentially expressed genes. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis were performed to explore the potential function of the differentially expressed genes. Subsequently, the protein-protein interaction network was constructed to select hub genes, and the immune cell infiltration was analyzed. Finally, the receiver operating characteristic analysis was performed to assess the diagnostic ability of the crucial genes. RESULTS: A total of 156 differentially expressed genes were identified. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis indicated that differentially expressed genes were strongly associated with cellular hormone metabolic process, response to xenobiotic stimulus, collagen-containing extracellular matrix, detoxification, and regulation of growth. In the protein-protein interaction network, ESR1, CAT, CXCL8, CD4, SPP1, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, UGT2B7, GSTA1 and THBS1 were selected as the hub genes. Immune infiltration analysis demonstrated that M0 macrophages, plasma cells, CD8+T cell and M2 macrophages were significantly changed in tumor tissues. Finally, we verified the hub gene expression and selected CD4, UGT2B7, and CYP3A4 as the potential diagnostic biomarkers. CONCLUSION: CD4, UGT2B7, and CYP3A4 were selected as the potential diagnostic biomarkers of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease-hepatocellular carcinoma.
The capacity of cells to maintain homeostasis during oxidative stress resides in activation or induction of protective enzymes. Nuclear-factor-E2-related factor (Nrf)-2 as a member of bZIP transcription factors is expressed in a variety of tissues. Transcriptional activation of antioxidant genes through an antioxidant response element (ARE) is largely dependent upon Nrf2. The genes that contain a functional ARE include those encoding GSTA1, GSTA2, NAD(P)H:quinone reductase, and gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase heavy and light subunits that play a role in defense against oxidative stress. Previously, we showed that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) controls nuclear translocation of Nrf2 in response to oxidative stress, which involves rearrangement of actin microfilaments. Now, we report that PI3-kinase is responsible for the rise of cellular Ca(2+), which is requisite for nuclear translocation of Nrf2. Immunocytochemistry and subcellular fractionation analyses revealed that Nrf2 relocated from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane prior to its nuclear translocation. We further found that CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBPbeta), peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma), and retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimer serve as the activating transcription factors for the phase II gene induction. Hence, PI3-kinase-mediated Nrf2 activation in combination with activating PPARgamma-RXR and C/EBPbeta contributes to antioxidant phase II enzyme induction via coordinate gene transactivation.
