Glutathione S-transferase A3; Conjugation of reduced glutathione to a wide number of exogenous and endogenous hydrophobic electrophiles. Catalyzes isomerization reactions that contribute to the biosynthesis of steroid hormones. Efficiently catalyze obligatory double-bond isomerizations of delta(5)-androstene-3,17-dione and delta(5)-pregnene-3,20-dione, precursors to testosterone and progesterone, respectively.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease is a prevalent disease with a heavy global burden. Proteomics is the systematic study of proteins and peptides to provide comprehensive descriptions. Aiming to obtain a more accurate and convenient clinical diagnosis, researchers are working for better biomarkers. Urine is more convenient which could reflect the change of disease at an earlier stage. Thus, we conducted a cross-sectional study to investigate novel diagnostic panels. METHODS: We firstly enrolled participants from China-Japan Friendship Hospital from April 2022 to November 2022, collected urine samples, and conducted an LC-MS/MS analysis. In parallel, clinical data were collected, and clinical examinations were performed. After statistical and bioinformatics analyses, significant risk factors and differential urinary proteins were determined. We attempt to investigate diagnostic panels based on machine learning including LASSO and SVM. RESULTS: Fifty-seven AD patients, 43 MCI patients, and 62 CN subjects were enrolled. A total of 3366 proteins were identified, and 608 urine proteins were finally included in the analysis. There were 33 significantly differential proteins between the AD and CN groups and 15 significantly differential proteins between the MCI and CN groups. AD diagnostic panel included DDC, CTSC, EHD4, GSTA3, SLC44A4, GNS, GSTA1, ANXA4, PLD3, CTSH, HP, RPS3, CPVL, age, and APOE epsilon4 with an AUC of 0.9989 in the training test and 0.8824 in the test set while MCI diagnostic panel included TUBB, SUCLG2, PROCR, TCP1, ACE, FLOT2, EHD4, PROZ, C9, SERPINA3, age, and APOE epsilon4 with an AUC of 0.9985 in the training test and 0.8143 in the test set. Besides, diagnostic proteins were weakly correlated with cognitive functions. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the procedure is convenient, non-invasive, and useful for diagnosis, which could assist physicians in differentiating AD and MCI from CN.
Glutathione S-transferase A3-3 is the most catalytically efficient steroid isomerase enzyme known in humans, transforming Delta(5)-androstene-3-17-dione into Delta(4)-androstene-3-17-dione. GSTA3-3 catalyzes this reaction with ten-fold greater efficiency than GSTA1-1, its closest competitor in the Alpha class of GSTs. In order to examine the differences between Alpha class GSTs and to better elucidate the mechanism of GSTA3-3 the roles of Tyr9 and Arg15 were examined. Tyr9 is the major catalytic residue of Alpha class GSTs and Arg15 is proposed to be catalytically important to GSTA3-3 but never before experimentally examined. While the structure and stability of the Alpha class enzymes are highly comparable, subtle differences at the G-site of the enzymes account for GSTA3-3 having a ten-fold greater affinity for the substrate GSH. Y9F and R15L mutations, singly or together, have no effect on the structure and stability of GSTA3-3 (the same effect they have on GSTA1-1) despite the R15L mutation removing an interdomain salt-bridge at the active site. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry also revealed that neither mutation had a significant effect on the conformational dynamics of GSTA3-3. The R15L and Y9F mutations are equally important to the specific activity of the steroid isomerase reaction; however, Arg15 is more important for lowering the pK(a) of GSH. Lowering the pK(a) of GSH being how GSTs catalyze their reactions. Additionally, there is evidence to suggest that Arg15 is integral to allowing GSTA3-3 to differentiate between Delta(5)-androstene-3-17-dione and Delta(4)-androstene-3-17-dione, indicating that Arg15 is a more important active-site residue than previously known.
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is one of the fastest growing liver diseases worldwide, and oxidative stress is one of NASH main key drivers. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) is the ultimate donor of reductive power to a number of antioxidant defences. Here, we explored the potential of increasing NADPH levels to prevent NASH progression. We used nicotinamide riboside (NR) supplementation or a G6PD-tg mouse line harbouring an additional copy of the human G6PD gene. In a NASH mouse model induced by feeding mice a methionine-choline deficient (MCD) diet for three weeks, both tools increased the hepatic levels of NADPH and ameliorated the NASH phenotype induced by the MCD intervention, but only in female mice. Boosting NADPH levels in females increased the liver expression of the antioxidant genes Gsta3, Sod1 and Txnrd1 in NR-treated mice, or of Gsr for G6PD-tg mice. Both strategies significantly reduced hepatic lipid peroxidation. NR-treated female mice showed a reduction of steatosis accompanied by a drop of the hepatic triglyceride levels, that was not observed in G6PD-tg mice. NR-treated mice tended to reduce their lobular inflammation, showed a reduction of the NK cell population and diminished transcription of the damage marker Lcn2. G6PD-tg female mice exhibited a reduction of their lobular inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning induced by the MCD diet, that was related to a reduction of the monocyte-derived macrophage population and the Tnfa, Ccl2 and Lcn2 gene expression. As conclusion, boosting hepatic NADPH levels attenuated the oxidative lipid damage and the exhausted antioxidant gene expression specifically in female mice in two different models of NASH, preventing the progression of the inflammatory process and hepatic injury.
The glutathione transferase A3-3 (GST A3-3) homodimeric enzyme is the most efficient enzyme that catalyzes isomerization of the precursors of testosterone, estradiol, and progesterone in the gonads of humans and horses. However, the presence of GST A3-3 orthologs with equally high ketosteroid isomerase activity has not been verified in other mammalian species, even though pig and cattle homologs have been cloned and studied. Identifying GSTA3 genes is a challenge because of multiple GSTA gene duplications (e.g., 12 in the human genome); consequently, the GSTA3 gene is not annotated in most genomes. To improve our understanding of GSTA3 gene products and their functions across diverse mammalian species, we cloned homologs of the horse and human GSTA3 mRNAs from the testes of a dog, goat, and gray short-tailed opossum, the genomes of which all currently lack GSTA3 gene annotations. The resultant novel GSTA3 mRNA and inferred protein sequences had a high level of conservation with human GSTA3 mRNA and protein sequences (>/=70% and >/=64% identities, respectively). Sequence conservation was also apparent for the 12 residues of the "H-site" in the 222 amino acid GSTA3 protein that is known to interact with the steroid substrates. Modeling predicted that the dog GSTA3-3 may be a more active ketosteroid isomerase than the corresponding goat or opossum enzymes. However, expression of the GSTA3 gene was higher in liver than in other dog tissue. Our results improve understanding of the active sites of mammalian GST A3-3 enzymes, inhibitors of which might be useful for reducing steroidogenesis for medical purposes, such as fertility control or treatment of steroid-dependent diseases.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of GSTA3 within the PI3K-Keap1/Nrf2 pathway in renal interstitial fibrosis (RIF). METHODS: An in vitro RIF model with TGF-beta1 stimulation in NRK-52E cells was established to identify potential signaling pathways that modulate GSTA3. Changes in GSTA3 expression were observed in the RIF model after silencing or enhancing Nrf2 expression. Changes in GSTA3, Keap1, and Nrf2 expression were detected after blocking the upstream of the Keap1/Nrf2 signaling pathway (including MAPK and PI3K/Akt). The effect of Nrf2 on GSTA3 expression was evaluated by overexpressing Nrf2. RESULTS: Protein and mRNA levels of GSTA3, FN, Nrf2, and Keap1 were significantly increased after TGF-beta1 stimulation. GSTA3 was also upregulated following overexpression of Nrf2. TGF-beta1 activated the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, leading to RIF. After blocking this pathway, the production of superoxide dismutase, reactive oxygen species, and fibronectin were reduced. The MAPK pathway was not involved in the development of RIF via regulating GSTA3 expression. CONCLUSIONS: The PI3K-KEAP1/Nrf2-GSTA3 signaling pathway is a possible mechanism of resisting external stimulation of renal fibrosis factors, regulating oxidative stress, and preventing RIF.
Tubular epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been widely accepted as the underlying mechanisms of renal interstitial fibrosis (RIF). The production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) plays a vital role in tubular EMT process. The purpose of this study was to investigate the involved molecular mechanisms in TGF-beta-induced EMT and identify the potential role of glutathione S-transferase alpha 3 (GSTA3) in this process. The iTRAQ screening was performed to identify protein alterations of the rats underwent unilateral-ureteral obstruction (UUO). Protein expression of GSTA3 in patients with obstructive nephropathy and UUO rats was detected by immunohistochemistry. Protein and mRNA expression of GSTA3 in UUO rats and NRK-52E cells were determined by Western blot and RT-PCR. siRNA and overexpression plasmid were transfected specifically to assess the role of GSTA3 in RIF. The generation of ROS was measured by dichlorofluorescein fluorescence analysis. GSTA3 protein and mRNA expression was significantly reduced in UUO rats. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that GSTA3 expression was reduced in renal cortex in UUO rats and patients with obstructive nephropathy. Treating with TGF-beta1 down-regulated GSTA3 expression in NRK-52E cells, which have been found to be correlated with the decreased expression in E-cadherin and megalin and increased expression in alpha-smooth muscle actin. Furthermore, knocking down GSTA3 in NRK-52 cells led to increased production of ROS and tubular EMT, whereas overexpressing GSTA3 ameliorated ROS production and prevented the occurrence of tubular EMT. GSTA3 plays a protective role against tubular EMT in renal fibrosis, suggesting GSTA3 is a potential therapeutic target for RIF.
Aflatoxin B(1) (AFB(1)) widely contaminates staple food and feed crops and is well-known as the most potent natural hepatocarcinogen in humans and domesticated animals. This review highlights significant advances in our understanding of the pivotal role of phase I and II metabolizing enzymes in the bioactivation and detoxification of AFB(1) and its metabolites across species. In humans, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 in liver and CYP2A13 in lung are essential for the bioactivation of AFB(1) to the extremely toxic exo-AFB(1)-8,9-epoxide (AFBO), whereas CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and CYP3A4 are important in the turkey and duck, CYP1A1 and CYP2A6 are important in the chicken and quail, CYP3A11 and CYP3A13 are important in mice, and CYP2A5 are important in the hamster. In contrast, glutathione-S-transferase (GST) M1 and GSTT1 are primary responsible for detoxification of the AFB(1) by catalyzing the conjugation of GSH to AFBO in humans, whereas GSTM2 in a nonhuman primate, GSTA3 in mice, GSTA5 in rats, and GSTA1, GSTA2, GSTA3 and GSTA4 in the turkey are important. Additionally, microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) and aflatoxin-aldehyde reductase (AFAR) have also been shown to play key roles in AFB(1) detoxification in the human, rat, and pig. Moreover, an overview of the chemoprotective agents, including synthetic compounds and naturally occurring plant compounds, which can be used to reduce aflatoxicosis is provided based on their ability to regulate these key enzymes. Collectively, this review summarizes the pivotal enzymes in the metabolism of AFB(1) among humans, experimental and farm animals, as well as the chemoprotective agents that can be used to minimize risk of aflatoxicosis.
BACKGROUND: Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) is the second most common cutaneous malignancy with an incidence rate increasing each year. Glutathione S-transferase A3 (GSTA3), a member of the glutathione S-transferase family, is considered an antioxidative protease, but its role in cSCC remains unclear. AIM: The present study was designed to explore the effect of GSTA3 on cSCC. PATIENTS/METHODS: Through previous systematic studies, we screened GSTA3 to be a key gene with lower expression in cSCC. In the present study, we selected cSCC tissues and para-carcinoma tissue specimens from 20 patients in plastic surgery department. A431 cells were treated with GSTA3 transfection. The cell proliferation, apoptosis, colony formation, and cell migration as well as invasion were examined, respectively. And the expressions of GSTA3, TGF-beta/Smad, and HIF-1alpha signalings were measured by Western blot and qRT-PCR. RESULTS: GSTA3 was downregulated in both cSCC tissues and A431 cells. Additionally, overexpression of GSTA3 induced a phenotype with a lower degree of malignancy, while GSTA3 silencing induced more malignant phenotypes, including cell proliferation, colony formation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion. Moreover, we found that the TGF-beta/Smad2/3 and HIF-1alpha signalings were activated in cSCC under hypoxic conditions. CONCLUSION: GSTA3 could inhibit cSCC progression through suppression of the TGF-beta/Smad and HIF-1alpha signalings. Therefore, GSTA3 may prove to be a prospective therapeutic target for cSCC.
It has been reported that many people with psoriasis have been diagnosed with secondary IgA nephropathy (IgAN). However, the mechanisms behind the association between psoriasis and IgAN have not been well clarified. The connection between psoriasis and IgAN deserves deeper exploration. Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis would be employed to explore the link of causality between IgAN and psoriasis, psoriasis vulgaris, other and unspecified psoriasis, guttate psoriasis, and arthropathic psoriasis. Transcriptomic analyses were carried out against the Gene Expression Omnibus databases. We identified crosstalk genes through the analysis of Differentially expressed genes and weight gene co-expression network analysis. Functional annotations were enriched for these crosstalk genes. Subsequently, we established a protein-protein interaction network, and candidate genes would be discovered through the utilization of the MCODE and CytoHubba plug-in applications. Lastly, the predictive efficacy of these genes was examined via creating receiver operating characteristic curves. The MR analysis suggested that psoriasis vulgaris patients were at a higher risk for IgAN. [OR = 1.040, 95%CI (1.005,1.076), p = 0.026 < 0.05]. Additionally, arthropathic psoriasis may augment the incidence of IgAN [OR = 1.081, 95%CI (1.040-1.124), p < 0.01] in the European population. Through the analysis of DEGs and WGCNA, we identified 12 significant genes (NETO2, RRM2, SLAMF7, GBP1, KIF20A, CCL4, MMP1, IL1beta, NDC80, CXCL9, C15orf48, GSTA3), which may be potential crosstalk genes between the two diseases. Then, the functional annotation results indicated that the crosstalk genes seemed primarily involved in immune and inflammatory responses. By establishing the PPI network, we further discovered that CXCL9, IL1beta, CCL4, and MMP1 play a vital part in psoriasis and IgAN, and all have good diagnostic values. Our MR analysis provided evidence that genetic vulnerability to IgAN may be associated with an elevated risk of psoriasis vulgaris and arthropathic psoriasis respectively among Europeans. Doctors should be aware of these associations when patients with psoriasis present with renal dysfunction, especially those with psoriasis vulgaris and arthropathic psoriasis. Chronic inflammation, drug effects, and immunity may contribute to the generation and development of both diseases. IL1beta, CXCL9, CCL4, and MMP1 may be core biomarkers for psoriasis and IgAN.
IN BRIEF: The insulin-like 3 (INSL3) hormone produced by Leydig cells is essential for proper male sex differentiation, but the regulation of Insl3 expression remains poorly understood. This study describes a new physical and functional cooperation between the nuclear receptors SF1 and COUP-TFII in Insl3 expression. ABSTRACT: INSL3, a hormone abundantly produced by Leydig cells, is essential for testis descent during fetal life and bone metabolism in adults. The mechanisms regulating Insl3 expression in Leydig cells have been studied in several species but remain poorly understood. To date, only a handful of transcription factors are known to activate the Insl3 promoter and include the nuclear receptors AR, NUR77, COUP-TFII, and SF1, as well as the Kruppel-like factor KLF6. Some of these transcription factors are known to transcriptionally cooperate on the Insl3 promoter, but the mechanisms at play remain unknown. Here, we report that COUP-TFII and SF1 functionally cooperate on the Insl3 promoter from various species but not on the Inha, Akr1c14, Cyp17a1, Hsd3b1, Star, Gsta3, and Amhr2 promoters that are known to be regulated by COUP-TFII and/or SF1. The Insl3 promoter contains species-conserved binding sites for COUP-TFII (-91 bp) and SF1 (-134 bp). Mutation of either the COUP-TFII or the SF1 sequence had no impact on the COUP-TFII/SF1 cooperation, but the mutation of both binding sites abolished the cooperation. In agreement with this, we found that COUP-TFII and SF1 physically interact in Leydig cells. Finally, we report that the transcriptional cooperation is not limited to COUP-TFII and SF1 as it also occurred between all NR2F and NR5A family members. Our data provide new mechanistic insights into the cooperation between the orphan nuclear receptors COUP-TFII and SF1 in the regulation of Insl3 gene expression in Leydig cells.
In rodents, livestock and primate species, a single dose of the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone acutely lowers testosterone biosynthesis. To determine the mechanism of decreased testosterone biosynthesis, stallions were treated with 0.1mg/kg dexamethasone 12h prior to castration. Dexamethasone decreased serum concentrations of testosterone by 60% compared to saline-treated control stallions. Transcriptome analyses (microarrays, northern blots and quantitative PCR) of testes discovered that dexamethasone treatment decreased concentrations of glucocorticoid receptor alpha (NR3C1), alpha actinin 4 (ACTN4), luteinizing hormone receptor (LHCGR), squalene epoxidase (SQLE), 24-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR24), glutathione S-transferase A3 (GSTA3) and aromatase (CYP19A1) mRNAs. Dexamethasone increased concentrations of NFkB inhibitor A (NFKBIA) mRNA in testes. SQLE, DHCR24 and GSTA3 mRNAs were predominantly expressed by Leydig cells. In man and livestock, the GSTA3 protein provides a major 3-ketosteroid isomerase activity: conversion of Delta(5)-androstenedione to Delta(4)-androstenedione, the immediate precursor of testosterone. Consistent with the decrease in GSTA3 mRNA, dexamethasone decreased the 3-ketosteroid isomerase activity in testicular extracts. In conclusion, dexamethasone acutely decreased the expression of genes involved in hormone signaling (NR3C1, ACTN4 and LHCGR), cholesterol synthesis (SQLE and DHCR24) and steroidogenesis (GSTA3 and CYP19A1) along with testosterone production. This is the first report of dexamethasone down-regulating expression of the GSTA3 gene and a very late step in testosterone biosynthesis. Elucidation of the molecular mechanisms involved may lead to new approaches to modulate androgen regulation of the physiology of humans and livestock in health and disease.
Microarray data were collected from bile duct samples from subjects with malignant biliary strictures by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography to screen for key genes associated with this disease. A predicted interaction network was constructed for these genes to interpret their functions. The gene expression dataset GSE34166 (10 samples: 6 malignant and 4 benign control samples) was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. R package scripts were used to process the data and screen for differentially expressed genes. Genes identified were uploaded to the analysis tool String 8.3 to generate a gene interaction network. A hub gene was identified by calculating the node degree. The interaction network of the hub gene with other genes in the human genome was constructed and screened (score >0.9), and pathway-enrichment analysis was performed to elucidate the hub gene function. In total, 377 differentially expressed genes were identified and a network comprising 209 pairs of interactions was constructed. The most critical hub gene was identified as GSTA1, and a GSTA1-based interaction network was constructed consisting of 25 genes (containing the differentially expressed gene GSTA3). The cytochrome P450 (CYP450)-metabolic pathway displayed the most significant enrichment. Additionally, 4 transcription factors and their binding sites were also identified. In conclusion, we have identified the differentially expressed genes GSTA1 (a hub gene) and GSTA3, which may cause abnormal gene expression and tumorigenesis through CYP450-metabolic pathways. The transcription factors and their binding sites in the promoter of the hub gene provide potential directions for future drug design.
Gastric cancer (GC) is the fifth most common malignancy and the third leading cause of cancer‑associated mortality in the world. However, its mechanisms of occurrence and development have not been clearly elucidated. Furthermore, there is no effective tumor marker for GC. Using DNA microarray analysis, the present study revealed genetic alterations, screened out core genes as novel markers and discovered pathways for potential therapeutic targets. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between GC and adjacent normal tissues were identified, followed by pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs. Next, the protein‑protein interaction (PPI) network of DEGs was built and visualized. Analyses of modules in the PPI network were then performed to identify the functional core genes. Finally, survival analysis of core genes was conducted. A total of 256 genes were identified as DEGs between the GC samples and normal samples, including 169 downregulated and 87 upregulated genes. Through Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis, the present study identified a total of 143 GO terms and 21 pathways. Six clusters of functional modules were identified, and the genes associated with these modules were screened out as the functional core genes. Certain core genes, including collagen type 12 alpha1 chain (COL12A1), glutathione S‑transferase alpha3 (GSTA3), fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA) and fibrinogen gamma chain (FGG), were the first reported to be associated with GC. Survival analysis suggested that these four genes, COL12A1 (P=0.002), GSTA3 (P=3.4x10‑6), FGA (P=0.00075) and FGG (P=1.4x10‑5), were significant poor prognostic factors and therefore, potential targets to improve diagnosis, optimize chemotherapy and predict prognostic outcomes.
The common marmoset is an important primate species used in drug metabolism studies. However, glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), essential drug-metabolizing enzymes involved in the conjugation of various endogenous and exogenous substrates, have not been identified or characterized in this species. In this study, 20 GSTs [including 3 microsomal GSTs (MGSTs)] were identified and characterized in marmosets. Marmoset GSTs had amino acid sequences highly identical (86-99%) to human GSTs, except for GSTA4L, which had lower identities (59-62%) with human GSTAs. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that marmoset GSTs were closely clustered with their human counterparts. Marmoset GSTs had gene and genomic structures generally similar to their human counterparts, with some differences in GSTA, GSTM, and GSTT clusters. Marmoset GST mRNAs exhibited distinct tissue expression patterns: GSTA1, GSTA3, GSTA4L, GSTK1, GSTT1, GSTZ1, and MGST1 mRNAs were expressed most abundantly in liver. Other GST mRNAs were expressed most abundantly in small intestine, lung, brain, or kidney. Expression of GSTT4 and GSTT4L mRNAs was detected only in testis. Among all 20 marmoset GST mRNAs, the most abundant mRNAs were GSTA1 mRNA in liver, small intestine, and kidney; GSTM3 mRNA in testis; and MSGT3 mRNA in brain and lung. All 20 GSTs mediated the conjugation of GST substrates 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene; 1,2-epoxy-3-(p-nitrophenoxy)propane; styrene 7,8-oxide; and/or 1-iodohexane, but with different activity levels. Kinetic analyses showed that marmoset GSTM2/GSTM5 and GSTM5/GSTT1 effectively conjugated styrene 7,8-oxide and 1-iodohexane, respectively, with the highest affinity. These results suggest that the 20 newly identified marmoset GSTs were functional drug-metabolizing enzymes able to conjugate typical GST substrates.
Urothelial carcinoma associated 1alpha (UCA1alpha) is a novel long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) that regulates bladder cancer proliferation, migration, and invasion. The target genes of UCA1alpha have, however, not been identified. To address this, a pCDNA3.1(+)-UCA1alpha over-expression vector was transfected into UM-UC-2 bladder cancer cells. Genes differentially expressed between pCDNA3.1(+)-UCA1alpha and pCDNA3.1(+) transfected cell were then detected by microarray and bioinformatics analysis. A total of 71 differentially expressed genes were identified, including 52 up-regulated genes and 19 down-regulated genes. As expected, the lncRNA UCA1alpha expression level was significantly increased when compared to that of pCDNA3.1(+) transfected cells. The five most significantly up-regulated and five most significantly down-regulated genes were selected, and their expression levels were also assessed by real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. The mRNA and protein expression levels of FOXI3 and GSTA3 were found to be significantly increased, and those of MED18 and TEX101 were found to be significantly decreased. Gene ontology (GO) clustering identified several significant biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions, associated with lncRNA UCA1alpha over-expression. The differentially expressed genes were involved in several significant pathways as shown by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway clustering. Cell proliferation activity was significantly increased following overexpression of lncRNA UCA1alpha increasing over culture time. The present study identifies, for the first time, potential target genes for lncRNA UCA1alpha in bladder cancer, and provides a significant reference for studying the role of lncRNA UCA1alpha in bladder cancer.
STUDY QUESTION: Does oral Vitamin D supplementation alter the hormonal milieu of follicular fluid (FF) and the transcriptomic profile of luteinised granulosa cells (GCs) in women with Vitamin D deficiency undergoing IVF? SUMMARY ANSWER: A transcriptomic signature relevant to oral Vitamin D supplementation in luteinised GCs was demonstrated, although Vitamin D supplementation did not alter hormone levels in FF. WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Vitamin D deficiency is linked to lower live birth rates among women undergoing IVF. It is unclear whether Vitamin D elicits a targeted action in reproductive physiology or is a surrogate marker of overall well-being. Several in-vitro studies, but none in vivo, have examined the impact of Vitamin D on the periovulatory follicle, focusing on GCs as a proxy marker of oocyte competence. STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: We present a report of secondary outcomes from the SUNDRO clinical trial, which was launched in 2016 to determine whether Vitamin D supplementation can improve the IVF outcomes of women who are deficient in Vitamin D (<30 ng/ml). FF samples of 145 women who were randomised to receive Vitamin D or placebo from March 2017 to January 2019 were collected. All follicles that were aspirated in our study measured >/=11 mm on the day of hCG trigger. The first cohort of samples was collected from the dominant follicle of each participant and utilised for hormone profiling (n = 50 Vitamin D, n = 45 Placebo). For the second cohort, the follicle aspirates of each participant were pooled to create a single FF sample, which was used for the isolation of GCs for gene expression studies (n = 20 Vitamin D, n = 30 placebo). Six of the samples from the second cohort were used for RNA-sequencing analysis (n = 3 Vitamin D, n = 3 placebo). PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Two academic infertility units were involved in the recruitment of the participants, who received a single dose of oral 25-hydroxyvitamin D (600 000 IU) or placebo, 2-12 weeks before oocyte retrieval. Women in both groups were deficient in Vitamin D, aged 18-39 years with a normal BMI (18-25 kg/m2) and <3 previous IVF cycles. The FF was aspirated at the time of oocyte retrieval and stored. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry was used to measure FF abundance of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, aldosterone, androstenedione, cortisol, cortisone, corticosterone, 11-deoxycorticosterone, 11-deoxycortisol, 21-deoxycortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, dihydrotestosterone, oestradiol (E2), 17-OH-hydroxyprogesterone, progesterone (P4) and testosterone. GCs were isolated from pooled FFs and the transcriptome was evaluated by RNA-sequencing and RT-PCR. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) was used to assess the top canonical pathways and upstream regulators mediating the action of Vitamin D. MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: At oocyte retrieval, FF concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D was 2.8-fold higher (P < 0.001) in the Vitamin D group (39.5 ng/ml; n = 50) compared to placebo (13.8 ng/ml; n = 45) but no other hormonal differences were detected. In the placebo group, but not the Vitamin D group, weak correlations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration with P4 (r = 0.31, P = 0.03) and E2 (r = 0.45, P = 0.002) were observed. RNA-sequencing identified 44 differentially expressed genes in the GCs of patients who received Vitamin D (n = 3) compared to placebo (n = 3). RT-PCR demonstrated upregulation of VDR (vitamin D receptor), GSTA3 (glutathione S-transferase A3) and IL21R (interleukin 21 receptor), and downregulation of P T GS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), KLF4 (kruppel-like factor 4), T RP C4 (transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily C member 4), VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), RXRB (retinoid X receptor beta) and AGER (advanced glycosylation end-product specific receptor) genes in the Vitamin D (n = 17) versus placebo (n = 27) group. IPA suggested roles of Vitamin D in antioxidant defence. LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Interpretation of the data is influenced by our intervention strategy (2-12 weeks prior to retrieval). As folliculogenesis may last 5-6 months, our protocol can only examine with confidence the impact of Vitamin D on the final stages of follicular growth. Furthermore, we examined the hormonal profile of the dominant follicle only, while the GC data reflect the transcriptome of all (pooled) follicles large enough to be used for IVF. Luteinised GCs from controlled ovarian stimulation were used in this study, which may be functionally distinct from the GCs of developing follicles. Moreover, the sample size for RNA-sequencing analysis was low (n = 3 per group), regardless of validation by RT-PCR that was performed on a larger cohort, introducing complexity to the IPA analysis, which required an input of data with P-adjusted <0.08 instead of <0.05 to be informative. WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This is the first in-vivo study to show that Vitamin D supplementation alters gene expression in luteinised GCs. In contrast to some in-vitro evidence, no effect of the intervention on expression of genes encoding steroidogenic enzymes was observed. Unlike other studies, our results suggest that supplementation with Vitamin D is unlikely to directly influence hormone availability in FF. Our findings instead reinforce the hypothesis that Vitamin D could be considered one of the gatekeepers in protecting against an exaggerated response to ovarian stimulation. STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): The study has been funded by the Italian Ministry of Health (RF-2013-02358757) following peer review in the competitive 'Bando di Ricerca Finalizzata e Giovani Ricercatori 2013' for the clinical trial SUNDRO (EudraCT registration number 2015-004233-27). There are no competing interests. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: EudraCT registration number 2015-004233-27.
In this study, a total of 20 7-day-old chicks were randomly divided into an experimental group and a control group. The experimental group was administered aluminum sulfate (Al(2)(SO(4))(3)) once by gavage, and the control group was sacrificed after 24 h of fasting with distilled water. Serum and kidney tissue samples from both groups were collected and compared using hematoxylin-eosin staining (H&E) and microscopy. The Paller scores increased (p < 0.01) for biochemical kidney function, redox-related indicators, and mRNA expression of nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) downstream related genes. The results showed that in the kidneys of the experimental group, renal tubular epithelial cells appeared to swell, and there was necrosis and shedding; the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and uric acid (UA) decreased, serum creatinine (CREA) increased; nitric oxide (NO), glutathione (GSH), and malondialdehyde (MDA) contents increased; NO synthase (NOS), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PX), and superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme activities increased; tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNF-R1), tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 (TNF -R2), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kappaB), and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) mRNA expression levels increased (p < 0.05 or p < 0.01); Nrf2, glutathione S-transferase A3 (GSTA3), glutathione-S-transferase mu-1 (GSTM1), glutathione synthetase (GSS), glutamate cysteine ligase (GCLC and GCLM), quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1), and Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) mRNA expression levels decreased (p < 0.05 or p < 0.01) compared to the control group. Acute aluminum poisoning can cause obvious pathological changes in the structure of the kidney tissue of the chick, resulting in damage to the kidney function, as well as triggering inflammation and oxidative stress in the kidney.
OBJECTIVE: CD73 (ecto-5'-nucleotidase, NT5E), a cell-surface enzyme converting 5'-AMP to adenosine, is crucial for cancer progression. However, its role in the tumorigenesis process remains mostly obscure. We aimed to demonstrate CD73's role in breast cancer (BC) tumorigenesis through metabolic rewiring of fatty acid metabolism, a process recently indicated to be regulated by BC major prognostic markers, hormone receptors (HR) for estrogen (ER), and progesterone (PR). METHODS: A murine model of chemically induced mammary gland tumorigenesis was applied to analyze CD73 knock-out (KO)-induced changes at the transcriptome (RNA-seq), proteome (IHC, WB), and lipidome (GC-EI-MS) levels. CD73 KO-induced changes were correlated with scRNA-seq and bulk RNA-seq data for human breast tissues and BCs from public collections and confirmed at the proteome level with IHC or WB analysis of BC tissue microarrays and cell lines. RESULTS: CD73 KO delayed the onset of HR/PR-negative mammary tumors in a murine model. This delay correlated with increased expression of genes related to biosynthesis and beta-oxidation of fatty acids (FAs) in the CD73 KO group at the initiation stage. STRING analysis based on RNA-seq data indicated an interplay between CD73 KO, up-regulated expression of PR-coding gene, and DEGs involved in FA metabolism, with PPARgamma, a main regulator of FA synthesis, as a main connective node. In epithelial cells of mammary glands, PPARgamma expression correlated with CD73 at the RNA level. With cancer progression, CD73 KO increased the levels of PUFAn3/6 (polyunsaturated omega 3/6 FAs), known ligands of PPARgamma and target for lipid peroxidation, which may lead to oxidative DNA damage. It correlated with the downregulation of genes involved in cellular stress response (Mlh1, Gsta3), PR-or CD73-dependent changes in the intracellular ROS levels and expression or activation of proteins involved in DNA repair or oxidative stress response in mammary tumor or human BC cell lines, increased tumor mutational burden (TMB) and genomic instability markers in CD73 low HR-negative human BCs, and the prolonged onset of tumors in the CD73 KO HR/PR-negative group. CONCLUSIONS: CD73 has a significant role in tumorigenesis driving the reprogramming of lipid metabolism through the regulatory loop with PR and PPARgamma in epithelial cells of mammary glands. Low CD73 expression/CD73 KO might enhance mutational burden by disrupting this regulatory loop, delaying the onset of HR-negative tumors. Our results support combining therapy targeting the CD73-adenosine axis and tumor lipidome against HR-negative tumors, especially at their earliest developmental stage.
Delayed ischemic neurological deficit (DIND) is a severe complication after subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Previous studies have suggested that bilirubin oxidation end products (BOXes) are probably associated with the DIND after SAH, but there is a lack of direct evidence yet even on cellular levels. In the present study, we aim to explore the potential role of BOXes and the involved mechanisms in neuronal function. We synthesized high-purity (>97%) BOX A and BOX B isomers. The pharmacokinetics showed they are permeable to the blood-brain barrier. Exposure of a moderate concentration (10 or 30 muM) of BOX A or BOX B to isolated primary cortical neurons increased the production of reactive oxygen species. In the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, BOX A and BOX B decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential and enhanced nuclear accumulation of the protein Nrf2 implicated in oxidative injury repair. In addition, both chemicals increased the mRNA and protein expression levels of multiple antioxidant response genes including Hmox1, Gsta3, Blvrb, Gclm, and Srxn1, indicating that the antioxidant response element (ARE) transcriptional cascade driven by Nrf2 is activated. In conclusion, we demonstrated that primary cortical neurons and neuroblastoma cells undergo an adaptive response against BOX A- and BOX B-mediated oxidative stress by activation of multiple antioxidant responses, in part through the Nrf2 pathway, which provides in-depth insights into the pathophysiological mechanism of DIND after SAH or other neurological dysfunctions related to cerebral hemorrhage.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Glutathione S-transferase A3 (GSTA3) is known as an antioxidative protease, however, the crucial role of GSTA3 in liver fibrosis remains unclear. As a recently we developed water-soluble pyridone agent with antifibrotic features, fluorofenidone (AKF-PD) can attenuate liver fibrosis, present studies were designed to explore the role of GSTA3 in liver fibrosis and its modulation by AKF-PD in vivo and in vitro. METHODS: Rats liver fibrosis models were induced by dimethylnitrosamine (DMN) or carbon tetrachloride (CCl4). The two activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) lines, rat CFSC-2G and human LX2 were treated with AKF-PD respectively. The lipid peroxidation byproduct malondialdehyde (MDA) in rat serum was determined by ELISA. The accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was measured by dichlorodihydrofluorescein fluorescence analysis. The expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), fibronectin (FN), and phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 (ERK1/2), p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3beta) were detected by western blotting (WB). RESULTS: GSTA3 was substantially reduced in the experimental fibrotic livers and transdifferentiated HSCs. AKF-PD alleviated rat hepatic fibrosis and potently inhibited HSCs activation correlated with restoring GSTA3. Moreover, GSTA3 overexpression prevented HSCs activation and fibrogenesis, while GSTA3 knockdown enhanced HSCs activation and fibrogenesis resulted from increasing accumulation of ROS and subsequent amplified MAPK signaling and GSK-3beta phosphorylation. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated firstly that GSTA3 inhibited HSCs activation and liver fibrosis through suppression of the MAPK and GSK-3beta signaling pathways. GSTA3 may represent a promising target for potential therapeutic intervention in liver fibrotic diseases.
