Cytochrome P450 1A2; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids, steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Exhibits high catalytic activity for the formation of hydroxyestrogens from estrone (E1) and 17beta- estradiol (E2), namely 2-hydroxy E1 and  [...] 
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has become the most common chronic liver disease worldwide. The advanced stage of NAFLD, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), has been recognized as a leading cause of end-stage liver injury for which there are no FDA-approved therapeutic options. Glutathione S-transferase Mu 2 (GSTM2) is a phase II detoxification enzyme. However, the roles of GSTM2 in NASH have not been elucidated. METHODS: Multiple RNA-seq analyses were used to identify hepatic GSTM2 expression in NASH. In vitro and in vivo gain- or loss-of-function approaches were used to investigate the role and molecular mechanism of GSTM2 in NASH. RESULTS: We identified GSTM2 as a sensitive responder and effective suppressor of NASH progression. GSTM2 was significantly downregulated during NASH progression. Hepatocyte GSTM2 deficiency markedly aggravated insulin resistance, hepatic steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis induced by a high-fat diet and a high-fat/high-cholesterol diet. Mechanistically, GSTM2 sustained MAPK pathway signaling by directly interacting with apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1). GSTM2 directly bound to the N-terminal region of ASK1 and inhibited ASK1 N-terminal dimerization to subsequently repress ASK1 phosphorylation and the activation of its downstream JNK/p38 signaling pathway under conditions of metabolic dysfunction. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrated that hepatocyte GSTM2 is an endogenous suppressor that protects against NASH progression by blocking ASK1 N-terminal dimerization and phosphorylation. Activating GSTM2 holds promise as a therapeutic strategy for NASH. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: IIT-2021-277. LAY SUMMARY: New therapeutic strategies for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis are urgently needed. We identified that the protein GSTM2 exerts a protective effect in response to metabolic stress. Therapies that aim to increase the activity of GSTM2 could hold promise for the treatment of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
Aging is a process of cellular and tissue dysfunction characterized by different hallmarks, including cellular senescence. However, there is proof that certain features of aging and senescence can be ameliorated. Here, we provide evidence that small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) isolated from primary fibroblasts of young human donors ameliorate certain biomarkers of senescence in cells derived from old and Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome donors. Importantly, sEVs from young cells ameliorate senescence in a variety of tissues in old mice. Mechanistically, we identified sEVs to have intrinsic glutathione-S-transferase activity partially due to the high levels of expression of the glutathione-related protein (GSTM2). Transfection of recombinant GSTM2 into sEVs derived from old fibroblasts restores their antioxidant capacity. sEVs increase the levels of reduced glutathione and decrease oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation both in vivo and in vitro. Altogether, our data provide an indication of the potential of sEVs as regenerative therapy in aging.
Skin aging is characterized by the disruption of skin homeostasis and impaired skin injury repair. Treatment of aging skin has long been limited by the unclear intervention targets and delivery techniques. Engineering extracellular vesicles (EVs) as an upgraded version of natural EVs holds great potential in regenerative medicine. In this study, we found that the expression of the critical antioxidant and detoxification gene Gstm2 was significantly reduced in aging skin. Thus, we constructed the skin primary fibroblasts-derived EVs encapsulating Gstm2 mRNA (EVs(Gstm2)), and found that EVs(Gstm2) could significantly improve skin homeostasis and accelerate wound healing in aged mice. Mechanistically, we found that EVs(Gstm2) alleviated oxidative stress damage of aging dermal fibroblasts by modulating mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, and promoted dermal fibroblasts to regulate skin epidermal cell function by paracrine secretion of Nascent Polypeptide-Associated Complex Alpha subunit (NACA). Furthermore, we confirmed that NACA is a novel skin epidermal cell protective molecule that regulates skin epidermal cell turnover through the ROS-ERK-ETS-Cyclin D pathway. Our findings demonstrate the feasibility and efficacy of EVs-mediated delivery of Gstm2 for aged skin treatment and unveil novel roles of GSTM2 and NACA for improving aging skin.
PURPOSE: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is characterized by reproductive dysfunctions and metabolic disorders. This study aims to compare the therapeutic effectiveness of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP-1RA) + Metformin (Met) versus cyproterone acetate/ethinylestradiol (CPA/EE) + Met in overweight PCOS women and identify potential proteomic biomarkers of disease risk in women with PCOS. METHODS: In this prospective, open-label randomized controlled trial, we recruited 60 overweight PCOS women into two groups at a 1:1 ratio to receive CPA/EE (2 mg/day: 2 mg cyproterone acetate and 35-mug ethinylestradiol,) +Met (1500 mg/day) or GLP-1 RA (liraglutide, 1.2-1.8 mg/day) +Met (1500 mg/day) for 12 weeks. The clinical effectiveness and adverse effects were evaluated, followed by plasma proteomic analysis and verification of critical biomarkers by ELISA. RESULTS: Eighty(80%) patients completed the study. Both interventions improved menstrual cycle, polycystic ovaries, LH(luteinizing hormone) and HbA1c(hemoglobin A1c) levels after the 12-week treatment. GLP-1RA + Met was more effective than CPA/EE + Met in reducing body weight, BMI (Body Mass Index), and waist circumference, FBG(fasting blood glucose), AUCI(area under curve of insulin),TC (Total Cholesterol), IL-6(Interleukin-6) and improving insulin sensitivity, and ovulation in overweight women with PCOS, with acceptable short-term side effects. CPA/EE + Met was more effective in improving hyperandrogenemia, including T(total testosterone), LH, LH/FSH(Luteinizing hormone/follicle-stimulating hormone), SHBG(sex hormone-binding globulin) and FAI (free androgen index). By contract, GLP-1RA+Met group only improved LH. Plasma proteomic analysis revealed that the interventions altered proteins involved in reactive oxygen species detoxification (PRDX6, GSTO1, GSTP1, GSTM2), platelet degranulation (FN1), and the immune response (SERPINB9). CONCLUSIONS: Both CPA/EE+Met and GLP-1RA + Met treatment improved reproductive functions in overweight PCOS women. GLP-1RA + Met was more effective than CPA/EE + Met in reducing body weight, BMI, and waist, and improving metabolism, and ovulation in overweight women with PCOS, with acceptable short-term side effects. CPA/EE + Met was more effective in reducing hyperandrogenemia. The novel plasma biomarkers PRDX6, FN1, and SERPINB9, might be indicators and targets for PCOS treatment. TRIAL REGISTRATION CLINICALTIALS. GOV TRIAL NO: NCT03151005. Registered 12 May, 2017, https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03151005 .
Over the past decade, extensive efforts have focused on understanding age-associated diseases and how to prolong a healthy lifespan. The induction of dietary protocols such as caloric restriction (CR) and protein restriction (PR) has positively affected a healthy lifespan. These intervention ideas (nutritional protocols) have been the subject of human cohort studies and clinical trials to evaluate their effectiveness in alleviating age-related diseases (such as type II diabetes, cardiovascular disease, obesity, and musculoskeletal fragility) and promoting human longevity. This study summarizes the literature on the nutritional protocols, emphasizing their impacts on bone and muscle biology. In addition, we analyzed several CR studies using Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and identified common transcriptome changes to understand the signaling pathway involved in musculoskeletal tissue. We identified nine novel common genes, out of which five were upregulated (Emc3, Fam134b, Fbxo30, Pip5k1a, and Retsat), and four were downregulated (Gstm2, Per2, Fam78a, and Sel1l3) with CR in muscles. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis revealed that CR regulates several signaling pathways (e.g., circadian gene regulation and rhythm, energy reserve metabolic process, thermogenesis) involved in energy metabolism. In conclusion, this study summarizes the beneficiary role of CR and identifies novel genes and signaling pathways involved in musculoskeletal biology.
Prostate cancer (PCa) continues to threaten men's health, and treatment targeting the androgen receptor (AR) pathway is the major therapy for PCa patients. Several second-generation androgen receptor inhibitors (SG-ARIs), including enzalutamide (ENZ), apalutamide (APA) and darolutamide (DARO), have been developed to better block the activity of AR. Unavoidably, emergence of resistance to these novel drugs still persists. Herein, we identified glutathione S-transferase Mu 2 (GSTM2) as an important determinant in the acquisition of resistance to SG-ARIs. Elevated GSTM2 was detected in enzalutamide-resistant (ENZ-R) PCa, and overexpression of GSTM2 in naive enzalutamide-sensitive (ENZ-S) cells effectively transformed them to ENZ-R PCa. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), the upstream transcription factor, was implicated in the overexpression of GSTM2 in ENZ-R cells. Mechanistically, GSTM2 antagonized the effect of ENZ by rescuing cells from oxidative stress-associated damage and activation of p38 MAPK pathway. Surprisingly, high GSTM2 levels also associated with cross-resistance to APA and DARO. Taking together, these results provide new insight to ameliorate resistance to SG-ARIs and improve treatment outcome.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a group of epigenetic regulators that have been implicated in kidney diseases including acute kidney injury (AKI). However, very little is known about the specific lncRNAs involved in AKI and the mechanisms underlying their pathologic roles. Here, we report a new lncRNA derived from the pseudogene GSTM3P1, which mediates ischemic AKI by interacting with and promoting the degradation of mir-668, a kidney-protective microRNA. GSTM3P1 and its mouse orthologue Gstm2-ps1 were induced by hypoxia in cultured kidney proximal tubular cells. In mouse kidneys, Gstm2-ps1 was significantly upregulated in proximal tubules at an early stage of ischemic AKI. This transient induction of Gstm2-ps1 depends on G3BP1, a key component in stress granules. GSTM3P1 overexpression increased kidney proximal tubular apoptosis after ATP depletion, which was rescued by mir-668. Notably, kidney proximal tubule-specific knockout of Gstm2-ps1 protected mice from ischemic AKI, as evidenced by improved kidney function, diminished tubular damage and apoptosis, and reduced kidney injury biomarker (NGAL) induction. To test the therapeutic potential, Gstm2-ps1 siRNAs were introduced into cultured mouse proximal tubular cells or administered to mice. In cultured cells, Gstm2-ps1 knockdown suppressed ATP depletion-associated apoptosis. In mice, Gstm2-ps1 knockdown ameliorated ischemic AKI. Mechanistically, both GSTM3P1 and Gstm2-ps1 possessed mir-668 binding sites and downregulated the mature form of mir-668. Specifically, GSTM3P1 directly bound to mature mir-668 to induce its decay via target-directed microRNA degradation. Thus, our results identify GSTM3P1 as a novel lncRNA that promotes kidney tubular cell death in AKI by binding mir-668 to inducing its degradation.
Glutathione-S-transferases (GSTs) not only show cytoprotective role and their involvement in the development of anticancer drug resistance, but also transmit signals that control cell proliferation and apoptosis. However, the role of GST isoforms in chemotherapy resistance remains elusive in pancreatic cancer. Here, we demonstrated that gemcitabine treatment increased the GSTM2 expression in pancreatic cancer cell lines. Knockdown of GSTM2 by siRNA elevated apoptosis and decreased viability of pancreatic cancer cells treated with gemcitabine. Moreover, in vivo experiments further showed that shRNA induced GSTM2 downregulation enhanced drug sensitivity of gemcitabine in orthotopic pancreatic tumor mice. We also found that GSTM2 levels were lower in tumor tissues than in non-tumor tissues and higher GSTM2 expression was significantly associated with longer overall survival. In conclusion, our findings indicate that GSTM2 expression is essential for the survival of pancreatic cancer cells undergoing gemcitabine treatment and leads to chemo resistance. Downregulation of GSTM2 in pancreatic cancer may benefit gemcitabine treatment. GSTM2 expression in patients also shows significant correlation with overall survival. Thus, our study suggests that GSTM2 is a potential target for chemotherapy optimization and prognostic biomarker of pancreatic cancer.
Glutathione transferases (GSTs) are generally recognized for their role in phase II detoxification reactions. However, it is becoming increasingly apparent that members of the GST family also have a diverse range of other functions that are, in general, unrelated to detoxification. One such action is a specific inhibition of the cardiac isoform of the ryanodine receptor (RyR2) intracellular Ca(2+) release channel. In this review, we compare functional and physical interactions between members of the GST family, including GSTO1-1, GSTA1-1, and GSTM2-2, with RyR2 and with the skeletal isoform of the ryanodine receptor (RyR1). The active part of the muscle-specific GSTM2-2 is localized to its nonenzymatic C-terminal alpha-helical bundle, centered around alpha-helix 6. The GSTM2-2 binding site is in divergent region 3 (DR3 region) of RyR2. The sequence differences between the DR3 regions of RyR1 and RyR2 explain the specificity of the GSTs for one isoform of the protein. GSTM2-2 is one of the few known endogenous inhibitors of the cardiac RyR and is likely to be important in maintaining low RyR2 activity during diastole. We discuss interactions between a nonenzymatic member of the GST structural family, the CLIC-2 (type 2 chloride intracellular channel) protein, which inhibits both RyR1 and RyR2. The possibility that the GST and CLIC2 proteins bind to different sites on the RyR, and that different structures within the GST and CLIC proteins bind to RyR channels, is discussed. We conclude that the C-terminal part of GSTM2-2 may provide the basis of a therapeutic compound for use in cardiac disorders.
Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) belong to one class of phase 2 detoxification enzymes which are important in metabolism and/or detoxification of various electrophilic endogenous metabolites and xenobiotics. From the available database, we found that GSTM2 gene expression is lower in high stages of bladder urothelial carcinoma than in stage 1 and normal bladder tissue. GSTM2 overexpression retards invasion, migration and tumor sphere formation of bladder cancer cells. Analysis of GSTM2 promoter activity shows that one SP1 site located at - 48 to - 40 bp is important for GSTM2 gene expression in BFTC 905 cells. An SP1 inhibitor, mithramycin A, inhibits GSTM2 promoter activity and protein expression. SP1 overexpression also increases GSTM2 expression in BFTC 905 and 5637 cells. Eight potential phytochemicals were analyzed for GSTM2 promoter activation, and results indicated that baicalein, berberrubine, chalcone, curcumin, resveratrol, and wogonin can increase promoter activity. In endogenous GSTM2 expression, berberrubine and resveratrol activated GSTM2 mRNA and protein expression the most. A DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-aza-deoxycytidine, can decrease GSTM2 gene methylation level and then increase its gene expression; 50 muM berberrubine decreased the GSTM2 gene methylation level, providing a mechanism for activating GSTM2 gene expression. Berberrubine and resveratrol also increased SP1 protein expression as one of the mechanisms for GSTM2 gene expression. In summary, berberrubine and resveratrol activates GSTM2 expression which inhibits cell proliferation, migration, and invasion of bladder cancer cells. The GSTM2 expression mechanism is partially via SP1 activation, and the effect of berberrubine is also partly via DNA CpG demethylation.
Liver regeneration after liver tumor resection or liver transplantation is crucial, the remaining liver frequently fails to regenerate in some patients. Oleanolic acid (OA), a pentacyclic triterpenoid compound which has been shown to protect against various liver diseases. However, the effect of OA on liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy (PHx) is still unclear. In this study, the results showed that OA (50 mg/kg, twice daily) treatment induced liver mass restoration and increased the liver-to-body weight ratio of mice following PHx. Meanwhile, OA promoted hepatocyte proliferation and increased the number of BrdU-, Ki67-and PCNA-positive cells. Furthermore, OA increased the nuclear accumulation of PXR and induced the expression of PXR downstream proteins such as CYP3A11, UGT1A1 and GSTM2 in mice, as well as in AML12 and HepRG cells. Luciferase reporter assay and nuclear localization of PXR further demonstrated the effect of OA on PXR activation in vitro. Molecular docking simulation showed that OA could interact with the PXR active sites. Moreover, OA inhibited the expression of FOXO1, RBL2 and CDKN1B, and increased the expression of PCNA, CCND1 and CCNE1 in vivo and in vitro. Silencing of Pxr further confirmed that OA-mediated upregulation of proliferation-related proteins depended on PXR. The current study illustrated that OA exhibited a significant promoting effect on liver regeneration following PHx, potentially through regulation of the PXR signaling pathway to accelerate liver recovery.
The glutathione S-transferase mu 2 gene (GSTM2) encodes a GST functioning in the elimination of electrophilic compounds and the regulation of cell growth. In this study, the sequence of porcine GSTM2 gene that contains the complete sequence encoding a protein of 218 amino acids was cloned. The deduced amino acid sequence shared 76%, 78% and 76% identity with that of human, mouse and rat, respectively. mRNA expression analysis showed that the porcine GSTM2 gene was expressed at a high level in liver and testis, at a medium level in longissimus dorsi muscle, adipose tissue, spleen and lung, at a low level in kidney, and at a very low level in heart and embryo. A nonsense mutation (CGA-->TGA) resulted from C27T substitution in the fifth exon to produce a premature translation termination codon was identified, and it was discovered that nonsense-mediated mRNA decay might have an effect on the regulation of porcine GSTM2 gene expression. This polymorphism was analyzed in Large White, Landrace, Meishan and Qingping pig populations using the Taq I-polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism method. The result showed that allele C had a higher frequency than allele T in each population.
U373MG cells are able to take up aminochrome that induces glutathione transferase M2-2 (GSTM2) expression in a concentration-dependent manner where 100 microM aminochrome increases GSTM2 expression by 2.1-fold (P < 0.001) at 3 h. The uptake of (3)H-aminochrome into U373MG cells was significantly reduced in the presence of 2 microM nomifensine (P < 0.001) 100 microM imipramine (P < 0.001) and 50 mM dopamine (P < 0.001). Interestingly, U373MG cells excrete GSTM2 into the conditioned medium and the excretion was significantly increased (2.7-fold; P < 0.001) when the cells were pretreated with 50 microM aminochrome for 3 h. The U373MG-conditioned medium containing GSTM2 protects SH-SY5Y cells incubated with 10 microM aminochrome. The significant protection provided by U373MG-conditioned medium in SH-SY5Y cells incubated with aminochrome was dependent on GSTM2 internalization into SH-SY5Y cells as evidenced by (i) uptake of (14)C-GSTM2 released from U373MG cells into SH-SY5Y cells, a process inhibited by anti-GSTM2 antiserum; (ii) lack of protection of U373MG-conditioned medium in the presence of anti-GSTM2 antiserum on SH-SY5Y cells treated with aminochrome; and (iii) lack of protection of conditioned medium from U373MGsiGST6 that expresses an siRNA directed against GSTM2 on SH-SY5Y cells treated with aminochrome. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that U373MG cells protect SH-SY5Y cells against aminochrome neurotoxicity by releasing GSTM2 into the conditioned medium and subsequent internalization of GSTM2 into SH-SY5Y cells. These results suggest a new mechanism of protection of dopaminergic neurons mediated by astrocytes by releasing GSTM2 into the intersynaptic space and subsequent internalization into dopaminergic neuron in order to protect these cells against aminochrome neurotoxicity.
The muscle specific glutathione transferase GSTM2-2 inhibits the activity of cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) calcium release channels with high affinity and activates skeletal RyR (RyR1) channels with lower affinity. To determine which overall region of the GSTM2-2 molecule supports binding to RyR2, we examined the effects of truncating GSTM2-2 on its ability to alter Ca(2+) release from sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) vesicles and RyR channel activity. The C-terminal half of GSTM2-2 which lacks the critical GSH binding site supported the inhibition of RyR2, but did not support activation of RyR1. Smaller fragments of GSTM2-2 indicated that the C-terminal helix 6 was crucial for the action of GSTM2-2 on RyR2. Only fragments containing the helix 6 sequence inhibited Ca(2+) release from cardiac SR. Single RyR2 channels were strongly inhibited by constructs containing the helix 6 sequence in combination with adjacent helices (helices 5-8 or 4-6). Fragments containing helices 5-6 or helix 6 sequences alone had less well-defined effects. Chemical cross-linking indicated that C-terminal helices 5-8 bound to RyR2, but not RyR1. Structural analysis with circular dichroism showed that the helical content was greater in the longer helix 6 containing constructs, while the helix 6 sequence alone had minimal helical structure. Therefore the active centre of GSTM2-2 for inhibition of cardiac RyR2 involves the helix 6 sequence and the helical nature of this region is essential for its efficacy. GSTM2-2 helices 5-8 may provide the basis for RyR2-specific compounds for experimental and therapeutic use.
The molecular mechanisms causing the loss of dopaminergic neurons containing neuromelanin in the substantia nigra and responsible for motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease are still unknown. The discovery of genes associated with Parkinson's disease (such as alpha synuclein (SNCA), E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (parkin), DJ-1 (PARK7), ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase isozyme L1 (UCHL-1), serine/threonine-protein kinase (PINK-1), leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), cation-transporting ATPase 13A1 (ATP13A), etc.) contributed enormously to basic research towards understanding the role of these proteins in the sporadic form of the disease. However, it is generally accepted by the scientific community that mitochondria dysfunction, alpha synuclein aggregation, dysfunction of protein degradation, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation are involved in neurodegeneration. Dopamine oxidation seems to be a complex pathway in which dopamine o-quinone, aminochrome and 5,6-indolequinone are formed. However, both dopamine o-quinone and 5,6-indolequinone are so unstable that is difficult to study and separate their roles in the degenerative process occurring in Parkinson's disease. Dopamine oxidation to dopamine o-quinone, aminochrome and 5,6-indolequinone seems to play an important role in the neurodegenerative processes of Parkinson's disease as aminochrome induces: (i) mitochondria dysfunction, (ii) formation and stabilization of neurotoxic protofibrils of alpha synuclein, (iii) protein degradation dysfunction of both proteasomal and lysosomal systems and (iv) oxidative stress. The neurotoxic effects of aminochrome in dopaminergic neurons can be inhibited by: (i) preventing dopamine oxidation of the transporter that takes up dopamine into monoaminergic vesicles with low pH and dopamine oxidative deamination catalyzed by monoamino oxidase (ii) dopamine o-quinone, aminochrome and 5,6-indolequinone polymerization to neuromelanin and (iii) two-electron reduction of aminochrome catalyzed by DT-diaphorase. Furthermore, dopamine conversion to NM seems to have a dual role, protective and toxic, depending mostly on the cellular context. Dopamine oxidation to dopamine o-quinone, aminochrome and 5,6-indolequinone plays an important role in neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease since they induce mitochondria and protein degradation dysfunction; formation of neurotoxic alpha synuclein protofibrils and oxidative stress. However, the cells have a protective system against dopamine oxidation composed by dopamine uptake mediated by Vesicular monoaminergic transporter-2 (VMAT-2), neuromelanin formation, two-electron reduction and GSH-conjugation mediated by Glutathione S-transferase M2-2 (GSTM2).
The present research study investigated the potential protective effect of Bifurcaria bifurcata extract on cell viability and antioxidant defences of cultured human Caco-2 cells submitted to oxidative stress induced by tert-butylhydroperoxide (tert-BOOH). Aqueous extracts were firstly characterized in terms of total phenolic contents. Concentrations of reduced glutathione (GSH) and malondialdehyde (MDA), generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), nitric oxide (NO) production, antioxidant enzymes activities [NADPH quinone dehydrogenase 1 (NQO1) and glutathione S-transferase (GST)], caspase 3/7 activity and gene expression linked to apoptosis, proinflammation and oxidative stress signaling pathways were used as markers of cellular oxidative status. B. bifurcata extract prevented the cytotoxicity, the decrease of GSH, the increase of MDA levels and the ROS generation induced by tert-BOOH. B. bifurcata extract prevented the significant decrease of NQO1 and GST activities, and the significant increase of caspase 3/7 activity induced by tert-BOOH. B. bifurcata extract also caused an over-expression of GSTM2, Nrf2 and AKT1 transcriptors, as well as reduced ERK1, JNK1, Bax, BNIP3, NFkappaB1, IL-6 and HO-1 gene expressions induced by tert-BOOH suggesting an increase in cellular resistance against oxidative stress. The results of the biomarkers analyzed show that treatment of Caco-2 cells with B. bifurcata extract enhance antioxidant defences, which imply an improved cell response to an oxidative challenge. B. bifurcata extract possesses strong antioxidant properties and may be a potential effective alternative to oxidant agents in the functional food industry.
We show that a glutathione transferase (GST) protein, which is recognised by an antibody against the muscle-specific human GSTM2-2 (hGSTM2-2), is associated with the lumen of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) of cardiac muscle, but not skeletal muscle. We further show that hGSTM2-2 modifies both cardiac and skeletal ryanodine receptor (RyR) activity when it binds to the luminal domain of the RyR channel complex. The properties of hGSTM2-2 were compared with those of the calsequestrin (CSQ), a Ca(2+) binding protein also present in the lumen of the SR which, like GSTM2-2, contains a thioredoxin-fold structure and modifies RyR activity (Wei, L., Varsanyi, M., Dulhunty, A. F., Beard, N. A. (2006). The Biophysical Journal, 91, 1288-1301). The glutathione transferase activity of hGSTM2-2 is strong, while CSQ is essentially inactive. Conversely CSQ is a strong Ca(2+) binder, but hGSTM2-2 is not. The effects of luminal hGSTM2-2 on RyR activity differ from those of CSQ in that hGSTM2-2 activates RyRs by increasing their open probability and conductance and the effects are independent of luminal Ca(2+) concentration. The results suggest that GSTM2-2 can interact with specific luminal sites on the RyR complex and that the interaction is likely to be within the pore of the RyR channel. The differences between the effects of CSQ and hGSTM2-2 suggest that the thioredoxin fold is not a major determinant of the luminal actions of either protein. The results indicate that GSTM2-2 is a novel luminal regulator of the RyR channels in the heart.
Aflatoxin B(1) (AFB(1)) widely contaminates staple food and feed crops and is well-known as the most potent natural hepatocarcinogen in humans and domesticated animals. This review highlights significant advances in our understanding of the pivotal role of phase I and II metabolizing enzymes in the bioactivation and detoxification of AFB(1) and its metabolites across species. In humans, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 in liver and CYP2A13 in lung are essential for the bioactivation of AFB(1) to the extremely toxic exo-AFB(1)-8,9-epoxide (AFBO), whereas CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, and CYP3A4 are important in the turkey and duck, CYP1A1 and CYP2A6 are important in the chicken and quail, CYP3A11 and CYP3A13 are important in mice, and CYP2A5 are important in the hamster. In contrast, glutathione-S-transferase (GST) M1 and GSTT1 are primary responsible for detoxification of the AFB(1) by catalyzing the conjugation of GSH to AFBO in humans, whereas GSTM2 in a nonhuman primate, GSTA3 in mice, GSTA5 in rats, and GSTA1, GSTA2, GSTA3 and GSTA4 in the turkey are important. Additionally, microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) and aflatoxin-aldehyde reductase (AFAR) have also been shown to play key roles in AFB(1) detoxification in the human, rat, and pig. Moreover, an overview of the chemoprotective agents, including synthetic compounds and naturally occurring plant compounds, which can be used to reduce aflatoxicosis is provided based on their ability to regulate these key enzymes. Collectively, this review summarizes the pivotal enzymes in the metabolism of AFB(1) among humans, experimental and farm animals, as well as the chemoprotective agents that can be used to minimize risk of aflatoxicosis.
Dietary fibres are indigestible food ingredients that reach the colon and are then fermented by colonic bacteria, resulting mainly in the formation of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) such as acetate, propionate, and butyrate. Those SCFA, especially butyrate, are recognised for their potential to act on secondary chemoprevention by slowing growth and activating apoptosis in colon cancer cells. Additionally, SCFA can also act on primary prevention by activation of different drug metabolising enzymes. This can reduce the burden of carcinogens and, therefore, decrease the number of mutations, reducing cancer risk. Activation of GSTs by butyrate has been studied on mRNA, protein, and enzyme activity level by real-time RT-PCR, cDNA microarrays, Western blotting, or photometrical approaches, respectively. Butyrate had differential effects in colon cells of different stages of cancer development. In HT29 tumour cells, e.g., mRNA GSTA4, GSTP1, GSTM2, and GSTT2 were induced. In LT97 adenoma cells, GSTM3, GSTT2, and MGST3 were induced, whereas GSTA2, GSTT2, and catalase (CAT) were elevated in primary colon cells. Colon cells of different stages of carcinogenesis differed in post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms because butyrate increased protein levels of different GST isoforms and total GST enzyme activity in HT29 cells, whereas in LT97 cells, GST protein levels and activity were slightly reduced. Because butyrate increased histone acetylation and phosphorylation of ERK in HT29 cells, inhibition of histone deacetylases and the influence on MAPK signalling are possible mechanisms of GST activation by butyrate. Functional consequences of this activation include a reduction of DNA damage caused by carcinogens like hydrogen peroxide or 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) in butyrate-treated colon cells. Treatment of colon cells with the supernatant from an in vitro fermentation of inulin increased GST activity and decreased HNE-induced DNA damage in HT29 cells. Additional animal and human studies are needed to define the exact role of dietary fibre and butyrate in inducing GST activity and reducing the risk of colon cancer.
BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a common cancer with a poor prognosis. Pyroptosis is an important process in the development and progression of LUAD. We analyzed the risk factors affecting the prognosis of patients and constructed a nomogram to predict the overall survival of patients based on different pyroptosis-related genes (PRGs) subtypes. METHODS: The genomic data of LUAD were downloaded from the TCGA and GEO databases, and all data were filtered and divided into TCGA and GEO cohorts. The process of data analysis and visualization was performed via R software. The data were classified based on different PRGs subtypes using the K-means clustering method. Then, the differentially expressed genes were identified between two different subtypes, and risk factors analysis, survival analysis, functional enrichment analysis, and immune cells infiltration landscape analysis were conducted. The COX regression analysis was used to construct the prediction model. RESULTS: Based on the PRGs of LUAD, the patients were divided into two subtypes. We found the survival probability of patients in subtype 1 is higher than that in subtype 2. The results of the logistics analysis showed that gene risk score was closely associated with the prognosis of LUAD patients. The results of GO analysis and KEGG analysis revealed important biological processes and signaling pathways involved in the differentially expressed proteins between the two subtypes. Then we constructed a prediction model of patients' prognosis based on 13 genes, including IL-1A, P2RX1, GSTM2, ESYT3, ZNF682, KCNF1, STK32A, HHIPL2, GDF10, NDC80, GSTA1, BCL2L10, and CCR2. This model was strongly related to the overall survival (OS) and also reflects the immune status in patients with LUAD. CONCLUSION: In our study, we examined LUAD heterogeneity with reference to pyroptosis and found different prognoses between the two subtypes. And a novel prediction model was constructed to predict the OS of LUAD patients based on different PRGs signatures. The model has shown excellent predictive efficiency through validation.
