Histone H2A-Bbd type 1; Atypical histone H2A which can replace conventional H2A in some nucleosomes and is associated with active transcription and mRNA processing. Nucleosomes wrap and compact DNA into chromatin, limiting DNA accessibility to the cellular machineries which require DNA as a template. Histones thereby play a central role in transcription regulation, DNA repair, DNA replication and chromosomal stability. Nucleosomes containing this histone are less rigid and organize less DNA than canonical nucleosomes in vivo. They are enriched in actively transcribed genes and associat [...] 
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by neuroinflammation, progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons, and accumulation of alpha-synuclein (alpha-Syn) into insoluble aggregates called Lewy pathology. The Line 61 alpha-Syn mouse is an established preclinical model of PD; Thy-1 is used to promote human alpha-Syn expression, and features of sporadic PD develop at 9-18 months of age. To accelerate the PD phenotypes, we injected sonicated human alpha-Syn preformed fibrils (PFFs) into the striatum, which produced phospho-Syn (p-alpha-Syn) inclusions in the substantia nigra pars compacta and significantly increased MHC Class II-positive immune cells. Additionally, there was enhanced infiltration and activation of innate and adaptive immune cells in the midbrain. We then used this new model, Line 61-PFF, to investigate the effect of inhibiting the JAK/STAT signaling pathway, which is critical for regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses. After administration of the JAK1/2 inhibitor AZD1480, immunofluorescence staining showed a significant decrease in p-alpha-Syn inclusions and MHC Class II expression. Flow cytometry showed reduced infiltration of CD4(+) T-cells, CD8(+) T-cells, CD19(+) B-cells, dendritic cells, macrophages, and endogenous microglia into the midbrain. Importantly, single-cell RNA-Sequencing analysis of CD45(+) cells from the midbrain identified 9 microglia clusters, 5 monocyte/macrophage (MM) clusters, and 5 T-cell (T) clusters, in which potentially pathogenic MM4 and T3 clusters were associated with neuroinflammatory responses in Line 61-PFF mice. AZD1480 treatment reduced cell numbers and cluster-specific expression of the antigen-presentation genes H2-Eb1, H2-Aa, H2-Ab1, and Cd74 in the MM4 cluster and proinflammatory genes such as Tnf, Il1b, C1qa, and C1qc in the T3 cluster. Together, these results indicate that inhibiting the JAK/STAT pathway suppresses the activation and infiltration of innate and adaptive cells, reducing neuroinflammation in the Line 61-PFF mouse model.
Aging is associated with increased monocyte production and altered monocyte function. Classical monocytes are heterogenous and a shift in their subset composition may underlie some of their apparent functional changes during aging. We have previously shown that mouse granulocyte-monocyte progenitors (GMPs) produce "neutrophil-like" monocytes (NeuMo), whereas monocyte-dendritic cell progenitors (MDPs) produce monocyte-derived dendritic cell (moDC)-producing monocytes (DCMo). Here, we demonstrate that classical monocytes from the bone marrow of old male and female mice have higher expression of DCMo signature genes (H2-Aa, H2-Ab1, H2-Eb1, Cd74), and that more classical monocytes express MHCII and CD74 protein. Moreover, we show that bone marrow MDPs and classical monocytes from old mice yield more moDC. We also demonstrate higher expression of Aw112010 in old monocytes and that Aw112010 lncRNA activity regulates MHCII induction in macrophages, which suggests that elevated Aw112010 levels may underlie increased MHCII expression during monocyte aging. Finally, we show that classical monocyte expression of MHCII is also elevated during healthy aging in humans. Thus, aging-associated changes in monocyte production may underlie altered monocyte function and have implications for aging-associated disorders.
INTRODUCTION: Even during physiologic aging, the kidney experiences a loss of mass and a progressive functional decline. This is clinically relevant as it leads to an increased risk of acute and chronic kidney disease. The kidney tubular system plays an important role in the underlying aging process, but the involved cellular mechanisms remain largely elusive. METHODS: Kidneys of 3-, 12- and 24-month-old male C57BL/6J mice were used for RNA sequencing, histological examination, immunostaining and RNA-in-situ-hybridization. Single cell RNA sequencing data of differentially aged murine and human kidneys was analyzed to identify age-dependent expression patterns in tubular epithelial cells. Senescent and non-senescent primary tubular epithelial cells from mouse kidney were used for in vitro experiments. RESULTS: During normal kidney aging, tubular cells adopt an inflammatory phenotype, characterized by the expression of MHC class II related genes. In our analysis of bulk and single cell transcriptional data we found that subsets of tubular cells show an age-related expression of Cd74, H2-Eb1 and H2-Ab1 in mice and CD74, HLA-DQB1 and HLADRB1 in humans. Expression of MHC class II related genes was associated with a phenotype of tubular cell senescence, and the selective elimination of senescent cells reversed the phenotype. Exposure to the Cd74 ligand MIF promoted a prosenescent phenotype in tubular cell cultures. DISCUSSION: Together, these data suggest that during normal renal aging tubular cells activate a program of 'tubuloinflammaging', which might contribute to age-related phenotypical changes and to increased disease susceptibility.
BACKGROUND: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease of vascular remodeling characterized by persistent pulmonary arterial pressure elevation, which can lead to right heart failure and premature death. Given the complex pathogenesis and poor prognosis of PAH, the identification and investigation of biomarkers become increasingly critical for advancing further understanding of the disease. METHODS: PAH-related datasets, GSE49114, GSE180169 and GSE154959, were downloaded from the publicly available GEO database. By performing WGCNA on the GSE49114 dataset, a total of 906 PAH-related key module genes were screened out. By carrying out differential analysis on the GSE180169 dataset, a total of 576 differentially expressed genes were identified. Additionally, the GSE154959 single-cell sequencing dataset was also subjected to differential analysis, leading to the identification of 34 DEGs within endothelial cells. By taking intersection of the above three groups of DEGs, five PAH-related hub genes were screened out, namely Plvap, Cyp4b1, Foxf1, H2-Ab1, and H2-Eb1, among which H2-Ab1 was selected for subsequent experiments. RESULTS: A SuHx mouse model was prepared using the SU5416/hypoxia method, and the successful construction of the model was evaluated through Hematoxylin-Eosin staining, hemodynamic detection, fulton index, and Western Blot (WB). The results of WB and qRT-PCR demonstrated a significant upregulation of H2-Ab1 expression in SuHx mice. Consistent with the results of bioinformatics analysis, a time-dependent increase was observed in H2-Ab1 expression in hypoxia-treated mouse pulmonary artery endothelial cells (PAECs). To investigate whether H2-Ab1 affects the development and progression of PAH, we knocked down H2-Ab1 expression in PAECs, and found that its knockdown inhibited the viability, adhesion, migration, and angiogenesis, while concurrently promoted the apoptosis of PAECs. CONCLUSION: H2-Ab1 could regulate the proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion, migration, and angiogenesis of PAECs.
Reports on Chinese patent medicines preparations containing Epimedii Folium (EF) and Psoraleae Fructus (PF) resulting in idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (IDILI) have received widespread attention. Previous studies have shown that bavachin and epimedin B-two active ingredients derived from both EF and PF-are potential components associated with IDILI, but the underlying mechanism remains unclear. We evaluated bavachin and epimedin B-induced IDILI under TNF-alpha-mediated immunological stress conditions and generated liver lipid metabolism profiles using lipidomics and multivariate statistical analysis. We next applied transcriptomics to identify the differential gene expression on the transcription level. Our results showed that co-exposure to bavachin, epimedin B under immunological stress conditions resulted in obvious liver injury. The differential metabolites screened in our study were closely related to the immune homeostasis of the liver. Sixteen differentially expressed genes were found, Zc3h6 and R3hdml were upregulated, while Sumo2, Cd74, Banp, Oas3, Oas2, Gbp8, Slfn8, Gbp2b, Serpina3g, Zbtb40, H2-Ab1, Osgin1, Tgtp1 and Hspa1b were all downregulated. These differentially expressed genes were associated with biological processes concerning metabolic process and immune system process. Further integrative analysis indicated that bavachin combined with epimedin B affected genes that were not only related to immune system processes, but also to lipid metabolism. Ultimately, this led to an imbalance in the immune microenvironment in the liver and may have contributed to the observed liver injury.
Immunomodulation is considered a potential therapeutic approach for chronic kidney disease (CKD). Although it has been previously reported that CD4(+) T cells contribute to the development of renal fibrosis, the role of MHC class II (MHCII) in the development of renal fibrosis remains largely unknown. The present study reports that the expression of MHCII molecules in renal cortical tubules is upregulated in mouse renal fibrosis models generated by unilateral ureter obstruction (UUO) and folic acid (FA). Proximal tubule epithelial cells (PTECs) are functional antigen-presenting cells that promote the proliferation of CD4(+) T cells in an MHCII-dependent manner. PTECs from mice with renal fibrosis had a stronger ability to induce T cell proliferation and cytokine production than control cells. Global or renal tubule-specific ablation of H2-Ab1 significantly alleviated renal fibrosis following UUO or FA treatment. Renal expression of profibrotic genes showed a consistent reduction in H2-Ab1 gene-deficient mouse lines. Moreover, there was a marked increase in renal tissue CD4(+) T cells after UUO or FA treatment and a significant decrease following renal tubule-specific ablation of H2-Ab1. Furthermore, renal tubule-specific H2-Ab1 gene knockout mice exhibited higher proportions of regulatory T cells (Tregs) and lower proportions of Th2 cells in the UUO- or FA-treated kidneys. Finally, Immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies showed increased renal expression of MHCII and the profibrotic gene alpha smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) in CKD patients. Together, our human and mouse data demonstrate that renal tubular MHCII plays an important role in the pathogenesis of renal fibrosis.
Myocarditis is a complex disease characterized by myocardial inflammatory cell infiltration. The purpose of our study was to investigate the gene and single-cell signature to explore the involvement of immune cells in myocarditis. Gene expressions merged from GSE35182 and GSE35182 datasets were subjected to differential expression gene (DEG) analysis and PPI network construction. The correlation analysis of DEGs with immune cell infiltration was performed. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was downloaded from GSE174458. A total of 58 DEGs were identified, including 51 DEGs upregulated and 7 DEGs downregulated in the myocarditis group compared with the control group. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses revealed that myocarditis triggered DEGs mainly involved in immune-related processes and pathways. PPI network analysis identified 20 central hub genes. Occurrence of myocarditis induced significant enrichment of conventional dendritic cell 2 (cDC2), plasmacytoid DC, and plasma cell in myocardial tissue. Mmp12, Gpnmb, and Atp6v0d2 expressions were positively correlated with cDC abundance, of which only Mmp1 and Gpnmb were shared with hub gene list. A total of 20972 cells in scRNA-seq yielded 26 cell clusters and annotated 9 cell types, including fibroblasts, neutrophils, stromal cells, monocytes, basophils, B cells, natural killer T cells, innate lymphoid cells, and T cells, and only proportion of natural killer T cells and monocytes were higher in the myocarditis than in control. Monocytes annotated 3 subclusters including DC, macrophage, and monocytes. Hub genes of Ctss, Mpeg1, Cybb, H2-Ab1, Ly86, CD74, and Lgals3 were highly expressed in monocytes cluster. Among DC-correlated DEGs, Mmp12 was mainly expressed in monocyte cluster, and Gpnmb was mainly expressed in fibroblast cluster, whereas Atp6v0d2 expression has a weaker signal and weaker cell preference. In conclusion, DC infiltration and its associated pivotal genes may be responsible for progression of myocarditis. Our study expands and provides novel information on the immune cell engagement of myocarditis.
The number of imprinted genes in the mammalian genome is predicted to be small, yet we show here, in a survey of 97 traits measured in outbred mice, that most phenotypes display parent-of-origin effects that are partially confounded with family structure. To address this contradiction, using reciprocal F1 crosses, we investigated the effects of knocking out two nonimprinted candidate genes, Man1a2 and H2-ab1, that reside at nonimprinted loci but that show parent-of-origin effects. We show that expression of multiple genes becomes dysregulated in a sex-, tissue-, and parent-of-origin-dependent manner. We provide evidence that nonimprinted genes can generate parent-of-origin effects by interaction with imprinted loci and deduce that the importance of the number of imprinted genes is secondary to their interactions. We propose that this gene network effect may account for some of the missing heritability seen when comparing sibling-based to population-based studies of the phenotypic effects of genetic variants.
The normal aging process is accompanied by cognitive decline, and previous studies have indicated the crucial role of the hypothalamus in regulating both aging and cognition. However, the precise molecular mechanism underlying this relationship remains unclear. Therefore, this present study aimed to identify potential predictors of cognitive decline associated with aging specifically within the hypothalamus. To achieve this, we employed Morris water maze (MWM) testing to assess learning and memory differences between young and aged mice. Additionally, transcriptome sequencing was conducted on the hypothalamus of young and aged mice to identify potential genes. Subsequently, GO and KEGG analyses were performed to investigate the functions of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and their associated biological pathways. Finally, the results obtained from sequencing analysis were further validated using qRT-PCR. Notably, MWM testing revealed a significant decrease in spatial learning and memory ability among aged mice. According to KEGG analysis, the DEGs primarily encompassed various biochemical signaling pathways related to immune system (e.g., C3; C4b; Ccl2; Ccl7; Cebpb; Clec7a; Col3a1; Cxcl10; Cxcl2; Fosb; Fosl1; Gbp5; H2-Ab1; Hspa1a; Hspa1b; Icam1; Il1b; Itga5; Itgax; Lilrb4a; Plaur; Ptprc; Serpine1; Tnfrsf10b; Tnfsf10), neurodegenerative disease (e.g., Atp2a1; Creb5; Fzd10; Hspa1a; Hspa1b; Il1b; Kcnj10; Nxf3; Slc6a3; Tubb6; Uba1y; Wnt9b), nervous system function (e.g., Chrna4; Chrna6; Creb5; Slc6a3),and aging (e.g., Creb5; Hspa1a; Hspa1b) among others. These identified genes may serve as potential predictors for cognitive function in elderly individuals and will provide a crucial foundation for further exploration into the underlying molecular mechanisms.
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer related deaths worldwide. The present study investigated the effects of naproxen (NSAID) on lung adenocarcinoma in spontaneous lung cancer mouse model. Six-week-old transgenic Kras(G12V) mice (n = 20; male + female) were fed modified AIN-76A diets containing naproxen (0/400 ppm) for 30 wk and euthanized at 36 wk of age. Lungs were evaluated for tumor incidence, multiplicity, and histopathological stage (adenoma and adenocarcinoma). Lung tumors were noticeable as early as 12 wk of age exclusively in the Kras(G12V) mice. By 36 wk age, 100% of Kras(G12V) mice on control diet developed lung tumors, mostly adenocarcinomas. Kras(G12V) mice fed control diet developed 19.8 +/- 0.96 (Mean +/- SEM) lung tumors (2.5 +/- 0.3 adenoma, 17.3 +/- 0.7 adenocarcinoma). Administration of naproxen (400 ppm) inhibited lung tumor multiplicity by  approximately 52% (9.4 +/- 0.85; P < 0001) and adenocarcinoma by  approximately 64% (6.1 +/- 0.6; P < 0001), compared with control-diet-fed mice. However, no significant difference was observed in the number of adenomas in either diet, suggesting that naproxen was more effective in inhibiting tumor progression to adenocarcinoma. Biomarker analysis showed significantly reduced inflammation (COX-2, IL-10), reduced tumor cell proliferation (PCNA, cyclin D1), and increased apoptosis (p21, caspase-3) in the lung tumors exposed to naproxen. Decreased serum levels of PGE(2) and CXCR4 were observed in naproxen diet fed Kras(G12V) mice. Gene expression analysis of tumors revealed a significant increase in cytokine modulated genes (H2-Aa, H2-Ab1, Clu), which known to further modulate the cytokine signaling pathways. Overall, the results suggest a chemopreventive role of naproxen in inhibiting spontaneous lung adenocarcinoma formation in Kras(G12V) mice.
Special AT-rich sequence-binding protein 1 (Satb1) governs genome-wide transcriptional programs. Using a conditional knockout mouse, we find that Satb1 is required for normal differentiation of conventional dendritic cells (DCs). Furthermore, Satb1 governs the differentiation of inflammatory DCs by regulating major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC II) expression through Notch1 signaling. Mechanistically, Satb1 binds to the Notch1 promoter, activating Notch expression and driving RBPJ occupancy of the H2-Ab1 promoter, which activates MHC II transcription. However, tumor-driven, unremitting expression of Satb1 in activated Zbtb46(+) inflammatory DCs that infiltrate ovarian tumors results in an immunosuppressive phenotype characterized by increased secretion of tumor-promoting Galectin-1 and IL-6. In vivo silencing of Satb1 in tumor-associated DCs reverses their tumorigenic activity and boosts protective immunity. Therefore, dynamic fluctuations in Satb1 expression govern the generation and immunostimulatory activity of steady-state and inflammatory DCs, but continuous Satb1 overexpression in differentiated DCs converts them into tolerogenic/pro-inflammatory cells that contribute to malignant progression.
OBJECTIVE: Endothelial cells are central to the initiation of atherosclerosis, yet there has been limited success in studying their gene expression in the mouse aorta. To address this, we developed a method for determining the global transcriptional changes that occur in the mouse endothelium in response to atherogenic conditions and applied it to investigate inflammatory stimuli. APPROACH AND RESULTS: We characterized a method for the isolation of endothelial cell RNA with high purity directly from mouse aortas and adapted this method to allow for the treatment of aortas ex vivo before RNA collection. Expression array analysis was performed on endothelial cell RNA isolated from control and hyperlipidemic prelesion mouse aortas, and 797 differentially expressed genes were identified. We also examined the effect of additional atherogenic conditions on endothelial gene expression, including ex vivo treatment with inflammatory stimuli, acute hyperlipidemia, and age. Of the 14 most highly differentially expressed genes in endothelium from prelesion aortas, 8 were also perturbed significantly by >/= 1 atherogenic conditions: 2610019E17Rik, Abca1, H2-Ab1, H2-D1, Pf4, Ppbp, Pvrl2, and Tnnt2. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that RNA can be isolated from mouse aortic endothelial cells after in vivo and ex vivo treatments of the murine vessel wall. We applied these methods to identify a group of genes, many of which have not been described previously as having a direct role in atherosclerosis, that were highly regulated by atherogenic stimuli and may play a role in early atherogenesis.
DNA cytosine methylation is an epigenetic modification involved in the transcriptional repression of genes controlling a variety of physiological processes, including hematopoiesis. DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1) is a key enzyme involved in the somatic inheritance of DNA methylation and thus plays a critical role in epigenomic stability. Aberrant methylation contributes to the pathogenesis of human cancer and of hematologic malignancies in particular. To gain deeper insight into the function of Dnmt1 in lymphoid malignancies, we genetically inactivated Dnmt1 in a mouse model of MYC-induced T-cell lymphomagenesis. We show that loss of Dnmt1 delays lymphomagenesis by suppressing normal hematopoiesis and impairing tumor cell proliferation. Acute inactivation of Dnmt1 in primary lymphoma cells rapidly induced apoptosis, indicating that Dnmt1 is required to sustain T-cell lymphomas. Using high-resolution genome-wide profiling, we identified differentially methylated regions between control and Dnmt1-deficient lymphomas, demonstrating a locus-specific function for Dnmt1 in both maintenance and de novo promoter methylation. Dnmt1 activity is independent of the presence of Dnmt3a or Dnmt3b in de novo promoter methylation of the H2-Ab1 gene. Collectively, these data show for the first time that Dnmt1 is critical for the prevention and maintenance of T-cell lymphomas and contributes to aberrant methylation by both de novo and maintenance methylation.
Documented worldwide, impaired immunity is a cardinal signature resulting from loss of dietary zinc, an essential micronutrient. A steady supply of zinc to meet cellular requirements is regulated by an array of zinc transporters. Deletion of the transporter Zip14 (Slc39a14) in mice produced intestinal inflammation. Elevated fecal lipocalin-2, calprotectin, IgG levels, and dysbiosis support the inflammatory phenotype. Here, we show through RNA-sequencing, using purified intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), that Zip14 deletion produces markedly reduced expression of major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII) molecules and the master MHCII transactivator (Ciita). qPCR, western analysis, and immunohistochemistry confirmed loss of MHCII. Spectrofluorimetry with zinc probe FluoZin-3 showed reduced labile zinc in IECs from knockout mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, using Ciita antibody and IEC chromatin, suggest decreased transcription accounts for depressed expression of specific MHCII genes. Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin (ATAC) sequencing (ATAC-seq) demonstrated that H2-Aa, H2-Ab1 and other MHCII genes result from chromatin remodeling yielding closed chromatin at regulatory regions of these genes. In agreement, ATAC-seq showed peak density of the chromosomal regulatory region of Ciita is consistent with down regulation of specific MHCII genes in IECs with Zip14 loss. Finally, dietary zinc supplementation of knockout mice and zinc supplementation of intestinal organoids with Zip14 deletion restored transcript levels. Taken together, our data suggest that cellular zinc delivery, via Zip14, is necessary for proper chromatin occupancy, required for normal MHCII expression and effective immune functions, and to preclude inflammatory disorders of the small intestine.
Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is the most common cause of poor long-term outcomes after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT), but the pathophysiology of chronic GVHD still remains poorly understood. We tested the hypothesis that the impaired thymic negative selection of the recipients will permit the emergence of pathogenic T cells that cause chronic GVHD. Lethally irradiated C3H/HeN (H-2k) recipients were reconstituted with T-cell-depleted bone marrow cells from major histocompatibility complex [MHC] class II-deficient (H2-Ab1-/-) B6 (H-2b) mice. These mice developed diseases that showed all of the clinical and histopathological features of human chronic GVHD. Thymectomy prevented chronic GVHD, thus confirming the causal association of the thymus. CD4+ T cells isolated from chronic GVHD mice were primarily donor reactive, and adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells generated in these mice caused chronic GVHD in C3H/HeN mice in the presence of B6-derived antigen-presenting cells. Our results demonstrate for the first time that T cells that escape from negative thymic selection could cause chronic GVHD after allogeneic BMT. These results also suggest that self-reactivity of donor T cells plays a role in this chronic GVHD, and improvement in the thymic function may have a potential to decrease chronic GVHD.
The level of susceptibility to tuberculosis (TB) infection depends upon allelic variations in numerous interacting genes. In our mouse model system, the whole-genome quantitative trait loci (QTLs) scan revealed three QTLs involved in TB control on chromosomes 3, 9, and in the vicinity of the H2 complex on chromosome 17. For the present study, we have established a panel of new congenic, MHC-recombinant mouse strains bearing differential small segments of chromosome 17 transferred from the TB-susceptible I/St (H2j) strain onto the genetic background of TB-resistant C57BL/6 (B6) mice (H2b). This allowed narrowing the QTL interval to 17Ch: 33, 77-34, 34 Mb, containing 36 protein-encoding genes. Cloning and sequencing of the H2j allelic variants of these genes demonstrated profound polymorphic variations compare to the H2b haplotype. In two recombinant strains, B6.I-249.1.15.100 and B6.I-249.1.15.139, recombination breakpoints occurred in different sites of the H2-Abeta 1 gene (beta-chain of the Class II heterodimer H2-A), providing polymorphic variations in the domain beta1 of the Abeta-chain. These variations were sufficient to produce different TB-relevant phenotypes: the more susceptible B6.I-249.1.15.100 strain demonstrated shorter survival time, more rapid body weight loss, higher mycobacterial loads in the lungs and more severe lung histopathology compared to the more resistant B6.I-249.1.15.139 strain. CD4+ T cells recognized mycobacterial antigens exclusively in the context of the H2-A Class II molecule, and the level of IFN-gamma-producing CD4+ T cells in the lungs was significantly higher in the resistant strain. Thus, we directly demonstrated for the first time that the classical H2- Ab1 Class II gene is involved in TB control. Molecular modeling of the H2-Aj product predicts that amino acid (AA) substitutions in the Abeta-chain modify the motif of the peptide-MHC binding groove. Moreover, unique AA substitutions in both alpha- and beta-chains of the H2-Aj molecule might affect its interactions with the T-cell receptor (TCR).
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is a life-threatening complication of human allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Non-obese diabetic (NOD)-scid IL2rgamma(null) (NSG) mice injected with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) engraft at high levels and develop a robust xenogeneic (xeno)-GVHD, which reproduces many aspects of the clinical disease. Here we show that enriched and purified human CD4 T cells engraft readily in NSG mice and mediate xeno-GVHD, although with slower kinetics compared to injection of whole PBMC. Moreover, purified human CD4 T cells engraft but do not induce a GVHD in NSG mice that lack murine MHC class II (NSG-H2-Ab1(tm1Gru), NSG-Ab degrees ), demonstrating the importance of murine major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II in the CD4-mediated xeno-response. Injection of purified human CD4 T cells from a DR4-negative donor into a newly developed NSG mouse strain that expresses human leucocyte antigen D-related 4 (HLA-DR4) but not murine class II (NSG-Ab degrees  DR4) induces an allogeneic GVHD characterized by weight loss, fur loss, infiltration of human cells in skin, lung and liver and a high level of mortality. The ability of human CD4 T cells to mediate an allo-GVHD in NSG-Ab degrees DR4 mice suggests that this model will be useful to investigate acute allo-GVHD pathogenesis and to evaluate human specific therapies.
In murine periodontitis, the T helper (Th)17 response against Porphyromonas gingivalis in cervical lymph node is abrogated by diphtheria toxin-driven depletion of Langerhans cells (LCs). We determined the impact of major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) presentation in LCs on Th17 cells in the oral mucosa of mice. Using an established human-Langerin promoter-Cre mouse model, we generated LC-specific deletion of the H2-Ab1 (MHC-II) gene. MHC-II expression was ablated in 81.2% of oral-resident LCs compared with >99% of skin-resident LCs. MHC-II (LC(DeltaMHC-II)) depletion did not reduce the number of CD4 T cells nor the frequency of Th17 cells compared with that in wild-type mice. However, the frequencies of Th1 cells decreased, and Helios(+) T-regulatory cells increased. In ligature-induced periodontitis, the numbers of CD4 T cells and Th17 cells were similar in LC(DeltaMHC-II) and wild-type mice. Normal numbers of Th17 cells can therefore be sustained by as little as 18.8% of MHC-II-expressing LCs in oral mucosa. Unexpectedly, oral mucosa CD8 T cells increased >25-fold in LC(DeltaMHC-II) mice. Hence, these residual MHC-II-expressing LCs appear unable to suppress the local expansion of CD8 T cells while sufficient to sustain a homeostatic CD4 T-cell response. Reducing the expression of MHC-II on specific LC subpopulations may ultimately boost CD8-mediated intraepithelial surveillance at mucosal surfaces.
Chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) remains a major late complication of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). In a previous study, impaired thymic negative selection of the recipients permitted the emergence of pathogenic T cells that cause chronic GVHD using MHC class II-deficient (H2-Ab1 KO) B6 into C3H model and CD4(+) T cells isolated from chronic GVHD mice caused chronic GVHD when administered into the secondary recipients. In this study, we evaluated the kinetics of regulatory T cell (Treg) reconstitution in wild type B6 into C3H model. After myeloablative conditioning, host Tregs disappeared rapidly, followed by expansion of Tregs derived from the donor splenic T cell inoculum. However, the donor splenic T cell-derived Treg pool contracted gradually and was almost completely replaced by newly generated donor bone marrow (BM)-derived Tregs in the late post-transplantation period. Next, we compared the effects of cyclosporine (CSA) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors on Treg reconstitution. Administration of CSA significantly impaired Treg reconstitution in the spleen and thymus. In contrast, BM-derived Treg reconstitution was not impaired in mTOR inhibitor-treated mice. Histopathological examination indicated that mice treated with CSA, but not mTOR inhibitors, showed pathogenic features of chronic GVHD on day 120. Mice treated with CSA until day 60, but not mTOR inhibitors, developed severe chronic GVHD followed by adoptive transfer of the pathogenic CD4(+) T cells isolated from H2-Ab1 KO into C3H model. These findings indicated that long-term use of CSA impairs reconstitution of BM-derived Tregs and increases the liability to chronic GVHD. The choice of immunosuppression, such as calcineurin inhibitor-free GVHD prophylaxis with mTOR inhibitor, may have important implications for the control of chronic GVHD after BMT.
