Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 3; Receptor for 3-OH-octanoid acid mediates a negative feedback regulation of adipocyte lipolysis to counteract prolipolytic influences under conditions of physiological or pathological increases in beta- oxidation rates. Acts as a low affinity receptor for nicotinic acid. This pharmacological effect requires nicotinic acid doses that are much higher than those provided by a normal diet.
Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptors (HCAR1, HCAR2, and HCAR3) transduce G(i/o) signaling upon biding to molecules such as lactic acid, butyric acid and 3-hydroxyoctanoic acid, which are associated with lipolytic and atherogenic activity, and neuroinflammation. Although many reports have elucidated the function of HCAR2 and its potential as a therapeutic target for treating not only dyslipidemia but also neuroimmune disorders such as multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease, the structural basis of ligand recognition and ligand-induced G(i)-coupling remains unclear. Here we report three cryo-EM structures of the human HCAR2-G(i) signaling complex, each bound with different ligands: niacin, acipimox or GSK256073. All three agonists are held in a deep pocket lined by residues that are not conserved in HCAR1 and HCAR3. A distinct hairpin loop at the HCAR2 N-terminus and extra-cellular loop 2 (ECL2) completely enclose the ligand. These structures also reveal the agonist-induced conformational changes propagated to the G-protein-coupling interface during activation. Collectively, the structures presented here are expected to help in the design of ligands specific for HCAR2, leading to new drugs for the treatment of various diseases such as dyslipidemia and inflammation.
BACKGROUND: Even though new therapies are available against melanoma, novel approaches are needed to overcome resistance and high-toxicity issues. In the present study the anti-melanoma activity of Nicotinamide (NAM), the amide form of Niacin, was assessed in vitro and in vivo. METHODS: Human (A375, SK-MEL-28) and mouse (B16-F10) melanoma cell lines were used for in vitro investigations. Viability, cell-death, cell-cycle distribution, apoptosis, Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide(+) (NAD(+)), Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP), and Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) levels were measured after NAM treatment. NAM anti-SIRT2 activity was tested in vitro; SIRT2 expression level was investigated by in silico transcriptomic analyses. Melanoma growth in vivo was measured in thirty-five C57BL/6 mice injected subcutaneously with B16-F10 melanoma cells and treated intraperitoneally with NAM. Interferon (IFN)-gamma-secreting murine cells were counted with ELISPOT assay. Cytokine/chemokine plasmatic levels were measured by xMAP technology. Niacin receptors expression in human melanoma samples was also investigated by in silico transcriptomic analyses. RESULTS: NAM reduced up to 90% melanoma cell number and induced: i) accumulation in G1-phase (40% increase), ii) reduction in S- and G2-phase (about 50% decrease), iii) a 10-fold increase of cell-death and 2.5-fold increase of apoptosis in sub-G1 phase, iv) a significant increase of NAD(+), ATP, and ROS levels, v) a strong inhibition of SIRT2 activity in vitro. NAM significantly delayed tumor growth in vivo (p </= 0.0005) and improved survival of melanoma-bearing mice (p </= 0.0001). About 3-fold increase (p </= 0.05) of Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) producing cells was observed in NAM treated mice. The plasmatic expression levels of 6 cytokines (namely: Interleukin 5 (IL-5), Eotaxin, Interleukin 12 (p40) (IL12(p40)), Interleukin 3 (IL-3), Interleukin 10 (IL-10) and Regulated on Activation Normal T Expressed and Secreted (RANTES) were significantly changed in the blood of NAM treated mice, suggesting a key role of the immune response. The observed inhibitory effect of NAM on SIRT2 enzymatic activity confirmed previous evidence; we show here that SIRT2 expression is significantly increased in melanoma and inversely related to melanoma-patients survival. Finally, we show for the first time that the expression levels of Niacin receptors HCAR2 and HCAR3 is almost abolished in human melanoma samples. CONCLUSION: NAM shows a relevant anti-melanoma activity in vitro and in vivo and is a suitable candidate for further clinical investigations.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers of the gastrointestinal tract and ranks third in cancer-related deaths worldwide. This study was conducted to identify novel biomarkers related to the pathogenesis of CRC based upon a bioinformatics analysis, and further verify the biomarkers in clinical tumor samples and CRC cell lines. METHODS: A series of bioinformatics analyses were performed using datasets from NCBI-GEO and constructed a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. This analysis enabled the identification of Hub genes, for which the mRNA expression and overall survival of CRC patients data distribution was explored in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) colon cancer and rectal cancer (COADREAD) database. Furthermore, the differential expression of HCAR3 and INLS5 was validated in clinical tumor samples by Real-time quantitative PCR analysis, western blotting analysis, and immunohistochemistry analysis. Finally, CRC cells over-expressing INSL5 were constructed and used for CCK8, cell cycle, and cell apoptosis validation assays in vitro. RESULTS: A total of 286 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened, including 64 genes with increased expression and 143 genes with decreased expression in 2 CRC database, from which 10 key genes were identified: CXCL1, HCAR3, CXCL6, CXCL8, CXCL2, CXCL5, PPY, SST, INSL5, and NPY1R. Among these genes, HCAR3 and INSL5 had not previously been explored and were further verified in vitro. CONCLUSIONS: HCAR3 expression was higher in CRC tissues and associated with better overall survival of CRC patients. INSL5 expression in normal tissue was higher than that in tumor tissue and its high expression was associated with a better prognosis for CRC. The overexpression of INSL5 significantly inhibited the proliferation and promoted the shearing of PARP of CRC cells. This integrated bioinformatics study presented 10 key hub genes associated with CRC. HCAR3 and INSL5 were expressed in tumor tissue and these were associated with poor survival and warrant further studies as potential therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: Three genes clustered together on chromosome 12 comprise a group of hydroxycarboxylic acid receptors (HCARs): HCAR1, HCAR2, and HCAR3. These paralogous genes encode different G-protein coupled receptors responsible for detecting glycolytic metabolites and controlling fatty acid oxidation. Though better known for regulating lipid metabolism in adipocytes, more recently, HCARs have been functionally associated with breast cancer proliferation/survival; HCAR2 has been described as a tumor suppressor and HCAR1 and HCAR3 as oncogenes. Thus, we sought to identify germline variants in HCAR1, HCAR2, and HCAR3 that could potentially be associated with breast cancer risk. METHODS: Two different cohorts of breast cancer cases were investigated, the Alabama Hereditary Cancer Cohort and The Cancer Genome Atlas, which were analyzed through nested PCRs/Sanger sequencing and whole-exome sequencing, respectively. All datasets were screened for rare, non-synonymous coding variants. RESULTS: Variants were identified in both breast cancer cohorts, some of which appeared to be associated with breast cancer BC risk, including HCAR1 c.58C > G (p.P20A), HCAR2 c.424C > T (p.R142W), HCAR2 c.517_518delinsAC (p.G173T), HCAR2 c.1036A > G (p.M346V), HCAR2 c.1086_1090del (p.P363Nfs*26), HCAR3 c.560G > A (p.R187Q), and HCAR3 c.1117delC (p.Q373Kfs*82). Additionally, HCAR2 c.515C > T (p.S172L), a previously identified loss-of-function variant, was identified. CONCLUSIONS: Due to the important role of HCARs in breast cancer, it is vital to understand how these genetic variants play a role in breast cancer risk and proliferation and their consequences on treatment strategies. Additional studies will be needed to validate these findings. Nevertheless, the identification of these potentially pathogenic variants supports the need to investigate their functional consequences.
A meta-analysis of publicly available transcriptomic datasets was performed to identify metabolic pathways profoundly implicated in the progression and treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The analysis revealed that genes involved in tryptophan (Trp) metabolism are upregulated in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) and return to baseline after successful treatment with infliximab. Microarray and mRNAseq profiles from multiple experiments confirmed that enzymes responsible for Trp degradation via the kynurenine pathway (IDO1, KYNU, IL4I1, KMO, and TDO2), receptor of Trp metabolites (HCAR3), and enzymes catalyzing NAD(+) turnover (NAMPT, NNMT, PARP9, CD38) were synchronously coregulated in IBD, but not in intestinal malignancies. The modeling of Trp metabolite fluxes in IBD indicated that changes in gene expression shifted intestinal Trp metabolism from the synthesis of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT, serotonin) towards the kynurenine pathway. Based on pathway modeling, this manifested in a decline in mucosal Trp and elevated kynurenine (Kyn) levels, and fueled the production of downstream metabolites, including quinolinate, a substrate for de novo NAD(+) synthesis. Interestingly, IBD-dependent alterations in Trp metabolites were normalized in infliximab responders, but not in non-responders. Transcriptomic reconstruction of the NAD(+) pathway revealed an increased salvage biosynthesis and utilization of NAD(+) in IBD, which normalized in patients successfully treated with infliximab. Treatment-related changes in NAD(+) levels correlated with shifts in nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT) expression. This enzyme helps to maintain a high level of NAD(+)-dependent proinflammatory signaling by removing excess inhibitory nicotinamide (Nam) from the system. Our analysis highlights the prevalent deregulation of kynurenine and NAD(+) biosynthetic pathways in IBD and gives new impetus for conducting an in-depth examination of uncovered phenomena in clinical studies.
BACKGROUND: Coronary atherosclerotic heart disease (CHD) is the most common cardiovascular disease and has become a leading cause of death globally. Various molecular typing methods are available for the diagnosis and treatment of tumors. However, molecular typing results are not routinely used for CHD. METHODS AND RESULTS: Aiming to uncover the underlying molecular features of different types of CHD, we screened the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with CHD based on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) data and expanded those with the NCBI-gene and OMIM databases to finally obtain 2021 DEGs. The weighted gene co-expression analysis (WGCNA) was performed on the candidate genes, and six distinctive WGCNA modules were identified, two of which were associated with CHD. Moreover, DEGs were mined as key genes for co-expression based on the module network relationship. Furthermore, the differentially expressed miRNAs in CHD and interactions in the database were mined in the GEO data set to build a multifactor regulatory network of key genes for co-expression. Based on the network, the CHD samples were further classified into five clusters and we defined FTH1, HCAR3, RGS2, S100A9, and TYROBP as the top genes of the five subgroups. Finally, the mRNA levels of FTH1, S100A9, and TYROBP were found to be significantly increased, while the expression of HCAR3 was decreased in the blood of CHD patients. We did not detect measurable levels of RGS2. CONCLUSION: The screened core clusters of genes may be a target for the diagnosis and treatment of CHD as a molecular typing module.
Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 3 (HCAR3), a class A G-protein-coupled receptor, is an important cellular energy metabolism sensor with a key role in the regulation of lipolysis in humans. HCAR3 is deeply involved in many physiological processes and serves as a valuable target for the treatment of metabolic diseases, tumors, and immune diseases. Here, we report four cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of human HCAR3-Gi1 complexes with or without agonists: the endogenous ligand 3-hydroxyoctanoic acid, the drug niacin, the highly subtype-specific agonist compound 5c (4-(n-propyl)amino-3-nitrobenzoic acid), and the apo form. Together with mutagenesis and functional analyses, we revealed the recognition mechanisms of HCAR3 for different agonists. In addition, the key residues that determine the ligand selectivity between HCAR2 and HCAR3 were also illuminated. Overall, these findings provide a structural basis for the ligand recognition, activation, and selectivity and G-protein coupling mechanisms of HCAR3, which contribute to the design of HCAR3-targeting drugs with high efficacy and selectivity.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the recent progress in niacin research that is made in two major areas: new preparations to decrease flushing and niacin's mechanism of action. RECENT FINDINGS: Flushing, an adverse effect of niacin, results from GPR109A-mediated production of prostaglandin D2 and E2 in Langerhans' cells which act on DP1 and EP2/4 receptors in dermal capillaries causing their vasodilatation. DP1 receptor antagonist (laropiprant) attenuates the niacin flush in animals and humans. A reformulated preparation of extended-release niacin lowers flushing compared with the extended-release niacin (Niaspan, Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, Illinois, USA). Aspirin pretreatment attenuates flushing from Niaspan. Recent data on niacin's mechanism of action indicate that it directly inhibits hepatic diacylglycerolacyl transferase 2 resulting in an inhibition of triglyceride synthesis and decreased apolipoprotein B-containing lipoproteins; niacin, by inhibiting the surface expression of hepatic ATP synthase beta chain, decreases the hepatic holoparticle high-density lipoprotein catabolism and raises high-density lipoprotein levels; and niacin increases redox potential in arterial endothelial cells resulting in the inhibition of redox-sensitive genes. SUMMARY: Recent developments suggest that the niacin receptor GPR109A is involved in flushing, but it does not explain multiple actions of niacin. Actions of niacin on diacylglycerolacyl transferase 2, ATP synthase beta chain, and redox state may explain the multiple actions of niacin.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in both men and women worldwide. The 5-year relative survival rate for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is 10%, which is the lowest among all cancers. This study aimed to find more effective targets to improve the diagnosis, prognostic prediction, and treatment of PDAC. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three datasets were selected from the GEO database. Correlation analysis was used to screen the datasets and samples. Differentially expressed genes were identified using GEO2R. Metascape was used to perform pathway and process enrichment analysis. Survival analysis using the GEPIA2 and Kaplan-Meier plotter databases was conducted to filter hub genes. Principal component analysis and LASSO regression analyses were used to further filter the key genes. Gene expression in PDAC and normal tissues and in different pathological stages was analyzed using the GEPIA2 database. Thereafter, gene expression was detected in three PDAC and HPDE cell lines using real-time polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: LPAR5, CYP2C18, SERPINH1, ACSL5, and HCAR3 exhibited higher transcription levels in PDAC tissues compared to matched normal tissues, whereas the PNLIP expression was lower. LPAR5, CYP2C18, SERPINH1 and ACSL5 were markedly upregulated in stage IV PDAC. LPAR5, CYP2C18, SERPINH1 and ACSL5 were upregulated in PDAC cell lines. Further verification suggested that the expression levels of these four genes were closely related to histological type, pathologic stage, therapeutic effects and prognosis of pancreatic cancer. CONCLUSION: LPAR5, CYP2C18, SERPINH1 and ACSL5 may serve as potential diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic targets for PDAC.
Epithelial cells in the skin and other tissues rely on signals from their environment to maintain homeostasis and respond to injury, and GPCRs play a critical role in this communication. A better understanding of the GPCRs expressed in epithelial cells will contribute to understanding the relationship between cells and their niche and could lead to developing new therapies to modulate cell fate. This study used human primary keratinocytes as a model to investigate the specific GPCRs regulating epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation. We identified 3 key receptors-HCAR3, LTB4R, and GPR137-and found that knockdown of these receptors led to changes in numerous gene networks that are important for maintaining cell identity and promoting proliferation while inhibiting differentiation. Our study also revealed that the metabolite receptor HCAR3 regulates keratinocyte migration and cellular metabolism. Knockdown of HCAR3 led to reduced keratinocyte migration and respiration, which could be attributed to altered metabolite use and aberrant mitochondrial morphology caused by the absence of the receptor. This study contributes to understanding the complex interplay between GPCR signaling and epithelial cell fate decisions.
The G-protein-coupled receptors GPR81, GPR109A, and GPR109B share significant sequence homology and form a small group of receptors, each of which is encoded by clustered genes. In recent years, endogenous ligands for all three receptors have been described. These endogenous ligands have in common that they are hydroxy-carboxylic acid metabolites, and we therefore have proposed that this receptor family be named hydroxy-carboxylic acid (HCA) receptors. The HCA(1) receptor (GPR81) is activated by 2-hydroxy-propanoic acid (lactate), the HCA(2) receptor (GPR109A) is a receptor for the ketone body 3-hydroxy-butyric acid, and the HCA(3) receptor (GPR109B) is activated by the beta-oxidation intermediate 3-hydroxy-octanoic acid. HCA(1) and HCA(2) receptors are found in most mammalian species, whereas the HCA(3) receptor is present only in higher primates. The three receptors have in common that they are expressed in adipocytes and are coupled to G(i)-type G-proteins mediating antilipolytic effects in fat cells. HCA(2) and HCA(3) receptors are also expressed in a variety of immune cells. HCA(2) is a receptor for the antidyslipidemic drug nicotinic acid (niacin) and related compounds, and there is an increasing number of synthetic ligands mainly targeted at HCA(2) and HCA(3) receptors. The aim of this article is to give an overview on the discovery and pharmacological characterization of HCAs, and to introduce an International Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology (IUPHAR)-recommended nomenclature. We will also discuss open questions regarding this receptor family as well as their physiological role and therapeutic potential.
Our laboratory previously reported that accumulation of nonsterol isoprenoids following treatment with the squalene synthase inhibitor, squalestatin 1 (SQ1) markedly induced cytochrome P450 (CYP)2B1 mRNA and reporter activity in primary cultured rat hepatocytes, which was dependent on activation of the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR). The objective of the current study was to evaluate whether isoprenoids likewise activate murine CAR (mCAR) or one or more isoforms of human CAR (hCAR) produced by alternative splicing (SPTV, hCAR2; APYLT, hCAR3). We found that SQ1 significantly induced Cyp2b10 mRNA ( approximately 3.5-fold) in primary hepatocytes isolated from both CAR-wild-type and humanized CAR transgenic mice, whereas the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase inhibitor pravastatin had no effect. In the absence of CAR, basal Cyp2b10 mRNA levels were reduced by 28-fold and the effect of SQ1 on Cyp2b10 induction was attenuated. Cotransfection with an expression plasmid for hCAR1, but not hCAR2 or hCAR3, mediated SQ1-induced CYP2B1 and CYP2B6 reporter activation in hepatocytes isolated from CAR-knockout mice. This effect was also observed following treatment with the isoprenoid trans,trans-farnesol. The direct agonist CITCO increased interaction of hCAR1, hCAR2, and hCAR3 with steroid receptor coactivator-1. However, no significant effect on coactivator recruitment was observed with SQ1, suggesting an indirect activation mechanism. Further results from an in vitro ligand binding assay demonstrated that neither farnesol nor other isoprenoids are direct ligands for hCAR1. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that SQ1 activates CYP2B transcriptional responses through farnesol metabolism in an hCAR1-dependent manner. Further, this effect probably occurs through an indirect mechanism.
Nicotinic acid (niacin) favorably affects very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and lipoprotein (a) (LP[a]) and increases high-density lipoprotein (HDL). Emerging data indicates vascular anti-inflammatory properties to additionally account for niacin's proven effects in cardiovascular disease. Recent evidence indicates that niacin acts on GPR109A and GPR109B (HM74A and HM74, respectively), receptors expressed in adipocytes and immune cells. In adipocytes, GPR109A activation reduces triglyceride (TG) lipolysis, resulting in decreased free fatty acid (FFA) mobilization to the liver. In humans, this mechanism has yet to be confirmed because the plasma FFA decrease is transient and is followed by a rebound increase in FFA levels. New evidence indicates niacin directly inhibits diacylglycerol acyltransferase 2 (DGAT2) isolated from human hepatocytes, resulting in accelerated hepatic apolipoprotein (apo)B degradation and decreased apoB secretion, thus explaining reductions in VLDL and LDL. This raises important questions as to whether stimulation of GPR109A in adipocytes or inhibition of DGAT2 in liver by niacin best explain the reduction in VLDL and LDL in dyslipidemic patients. Kinetic and in vitro studies indicate that niacin retards the hepatic catabolism of apoA-I but not liver scavenger receptor B1-mediated cholesterol esters, suggesting that niacin inhibits hepatic holoparticle HDL removal. Indeed, recent preliminary evidence suggests that niacin decreases surface expression of hepatic beta-chain of adenosine triphosphate synthase, which has been implicated in apoA-I/HDL holoparticle catabolism. GPR109A-mediated production of prostaglandin D2 in macrophages and Langerhan cells causes skin capillary vasodilation and explains, in part, niacin's effect on flushing. Development of niacin receptor agonists would, theoretically, result in adipocyte TG accumulation (and clinical adiposity) and increased flushing. This raises questions about niacin receptor agonists as therapeutic agents. Several niacin receptor agonists have been developed and patented, but their clinical effects have not been described. Future research is needed to determine whether niacin receptor agonists will demonstrate all the beneficial properties of nicotinic acid on atherosclerosis and without significant adverse effects.
The human constitutive androstane receptor (hCAR; NR1I3) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. The activity of hCAR is regulated by a variety of xenobiotics including clotrimazole and acetaminophen metabolites. hCAR, in turn, regulates a number of genes responsible for xenobiotic metabolism and transport including several cytochrome P450s (CYP 2B5, 2C9, and 3A4) and the multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2, ABCC2). Thus, hCAR is believed to be a mediator of drug-drug interactions. We identified two novel hCAR splice variants: hCAR2 encodes a receptor in which alternative splice acceptor sites are utilized resulting in a 4 amino acid insert between exons 6 and 7, and a 5 amino acid insert between 7 and 8, and hCAR3 encodes a receptor with exon 7 completely deleted resulting in a 39 amino acid deletion. Both hCAR2 and hCAR3 mRNAs are expressed in a pattern similar to the initially described MB67 (hCAR1) with some key distinctions. Although the levels of expression vary depending on the tissue examined, hCAR2 and hCAR3 contribute 6-8% of total hCAR mRNA in liver. Analysis of the activity of these variants indicates that both hCAR2 and hCAR3 lose the ability to heterodimerize with RXR and lack transactivation activity in cotransfection experiments where either full-length receptor or GAL4 DNA-binding domain/CAR ligand binding domain chimeras were utilized. Although the role of hCAR2 and hCAR3 is currently unclear, these additional splice variants may provide for increased diversity in terms of responsiveness to xenobiotics.
The bacteriostat triclosan (2,4,4'-trichloro-2'-hydroxydiphenylether) (TCS) decreases rat serum thyroxine via putative nuclear receptor (NR) interaction(s) and subsequent transcriptional up-regulation of hepatic catabolism and clearance. However, due to the evolutionary divergence of the constitutive androstane and pregnane-X receptors (CAR, PXR), TCS-mediated downstream effects may be species-dependent. To test the hypothesis that TCS activates xenobiotic NRs across species, cell-based NR reporter assays were employed to assess potential activation of rat, mouse, and human PXR, and rat, mouse, and three splice variants of human CAR. TCS activated hPXR, acted as an inverse agonist of hCAR1, and as a weak agonist of hCAR3. TCS failed to activate rPXR in full-length receptor reporter assays, and instead acted as a modest inverse agonist of rCAR. Consistent with the rat data, TCS also failed to activate mPXR and was a modest inverse agonist of mCAR. These data suggest that TCS may interact with multiple NRs, including hPXR, hCAR1, hCAR3, and rCAR in order to potentially affect hepatic catabolism. Overall these data support the conclusion that TCS may interact with NRs to regulate hepatic catabolism and downstream thyroid hormone homeostasis in both rat and human models, though perhaps by divergent mechanisms.
1. Induction of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes can affect drug efficacy and cause toxicity. However, so far, limited information is available regarding the molecular mechanism how herbal medicines induce human CYP2B6, which metabolizes many of the clinically used therapeutics and activates several pro-carcinogens or toxicants. Accumulated evidence suggests that the human constitutive androstane receptor (hCAR) and the human pregnane X receptor (hPXR) play important roles in trans-activation of CYP2B6. In this study, we investigated the effects of 68 Chinese herbal ingredients on the receptor specificity of hPXR/hCAR-mediated CYP2B6 induction by luciferase reporter gene assays in transiently transfected HepG2 cells and on the expression of CYP2B6 in LS174T cells. 2. The HepG2 cells were transiently transfected with human CYP2B6 luciferase promoter reporter plasmids along with hPXR or hCAR3. The results indicated that apigenin (Api), curcumol (Cur) and praeruptorin A (Pra A) were identified as potent activators of hPXR, and Pra A was also a ligand of hCAR. 3. Furthermore, CYP2B6 mRNA expression in LS174T cells treated with the three herbal ingredients was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction. By combining western blot and LC-MS/MS, CYP2B6 protein expression and catalytic activity induced by the three herbal ingredients were measured. 4. Our observation showed Api and Cur up-regulated CYP2B6 expression by transactivation of hPXR, and Pra A acted as the ligand of both hPXR and hCAR to induce CYP2B6 expression.
More than 800 G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) comprise the largest class of membrane receptors in humans. While there is ample biological understanding and many approved drugs for prototypic GPCRs, most GPCRs still lack well-defined biological ligands and drugs. Here, we report our efforts to tap the potential of understudied GPCRs by developing yeast-based technologies for high-throughput clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) engineering and GPCR ligand discovery. We refer to these technologies collectively as Dynamic Cyan Induction by Functional Integrated Receptors, or DCyFIR. A major advantage of DCyFIR is that GPCRs and other assay components are CRISPR-integrated directly into the yeast genome, making it possible to decode ligand specificity by profiling mixtures of GPCR-barcoded yeast strains in a single tube. To demonstrate the capabilities of DCyFIR, we engineered a yeast strain library of 30 human GPCRs and their 300 possible GPCR-Galpha coupling combinations. Profiling of these 300 strains, using parallel (DCyFIRscreen) and multiplex (DCyFIRplex) DCyFIR modes, recapitulated known GPCR agonism with 100% accuracy, and identified unexpected interactions for the receptors ADRA2B, HCAR3, MTNR1A, S1PR1, and S1PR2. To demonstrate DCyFIR scalability, we profiled a library of 320 human metabolites and discovered several GPCR-metabolite interactions. Remarkably, many of these findings pertained to understudied pharmacologically dark receptors GPR4, GPR65, GPR68, and HCAR3. Experiments on select receptors in mammalian cells confirmed our yeast-based observations, including our discovery that kynurenic acid activates HCAR3 in addition to GPR35, its known receptor. Taken together, these findings demonstrate the power of DCyFIR for identifying ligand interactions with prototypic and understudied GPCRs.
To reconstruct the ceRNA biological network of cervical squamous cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma (CESC) and to select an appropriate mRNA as a biomarker that could be used for CESC early diagnosis and prognosis evaluation. We downloaded CESC data from the TCGA public database, and statistical analysis was conducted with the R software to find out differential expressed genes encoding for lncRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs. The differentially expressed mRNAs (DEmRNAs) screened in the ceRNA network were analyzed for survival to find the mRNAs with significantly linked to the survival prognosis. These mRNAs were searched in the Pathological Atlas to identify the final appropriate mRNAs. Differential expression analysis revealed 773 lncRNAs, 94 miRNAs, and 2466 mRNAs. Survival analysis of DEmRNAs in the ceRNA network indicated that ADGRF4, ANXA8L1, HCAR3, IRF6, and PDE2A (P < 0.05) were negatively correlated with survival time. Verification of these six DEmRNAs in the Pathology Atlas indicated that PDE2A was a possible biomarker for CESC patients. PDE2A might be a biomarker for early diagnosis and prognosis evaluation of CESC patients, but due to the lack of available data, further studies may be needed for confirmation.
