5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2C; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances, including ergot alkaloid derivatives, 1-2,5,- dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane (DOI) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathway [...] 
Cataplexy is the pathognomonic and the most striking symptom of narcolepsy. It has originally been, and still is now, widely considered as an abnormal manifestation of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep during wakefulness due to the typical muscle atonia. The neurocircuits of cataplexy, originally confined to the brainstem as those of REM sleep atonia, now include the hypothalamus, dorsal raphe (DR), amygdala and frontal cortex, and its neurochemistry originally focused on catecholamines and acetylcholine now extend to hypocretin (HCRT) and other neuromodulators. Here, we review the neuroanatomy and neurochemistry of cataplexy and propose that cataplexy is a distinct brain state that, despite similarities with REM sleep, involves cataplexy-specific features.
Narcolepsy type 1 (NT1) is a chronic sleep disorder resulting from the loss of a small population of hypothalamic neurons that produce wake-promoting hypocretin (HCRT; also known as orexin) peptides. An immune-mediated pathology for NT1 has long been suspected given its exceptionally tight association with the MHC class II allele HLA-DQB1*06:02, as well as recent genetic evidence showing associations with polymorphisms of T cell receptor genes and other immune-relevant loci and the increased incidence of NT1 that has been observed after vaccination with the influenza vaccine Pandemrix. The search for both self-antigens and foreign antigens recognized by the pathogenic T cell response in NT1 is ongoing. Increased T cell reactivity against HCRT has been consistently reported in patients with NT1, but data demonstrating a primary role for T cells in neuronal destruction are currently lacking. Animal models are providing clues regarding the roles of autoreactive CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells in the disease. Elucidation of the pathogenesis of NT1 will allow for the development of targeted immunotherapies at disease onset and could serve as a model for other immune-mediated neurological diseases.
The hypothalamus plays a central role in the integrated control of feeding and energy homeostasis. We have identified two novel neuropeptides, both derived from the same precursor by proteolytic processing, that bind and activate two closely related (previously) orphan G protein-coupled receptors. These peptides, termed orexin-A and -B, have no significant structural similarities to known families of regulatory peptides. prepro-orexin mRNA and immunoreactive orexin-A are localized in neurons within and around the lateral and posterior hypothalamus in the adult rat brain. When administered centrally to rats, these peptides stimulate food consumption. prepro-orexin mRNA level is up-regulated upon fasting, suggesting a physiological role for the peptides as mediators in the central feedback mechanism that regulates feeding behavior.
The last two decades have seen an explosion in our understanding of the clinical nature of narcolepsy and its pathogenesis, fuelling new approaches to potentially effective treatments. It is now recognised that the full narcoleptic syndrome has significant adverse effects on sleep regulation across the full 24-h period and is often associated with clinical features outside the sleep-wake domain. The discovery that most narcoleptic subjects specifically lack a hypothalamic neuropeptide (hypocretin, also called orexin) was a truly original and landmark observation in 1999, greatly furthering our understanding both of the syndrome itself and sleep biology in general. An autoimmune pathophysiology has long been suggested by the tight association with specific histocompatibility antigens and very recently partly confirmed by detailed analysis of T-cell immunological function in affected subjects. Drug treatments remain symptomatic but may soon become more focussed by restoring central hypocretin signalling with replacement therapy. Potentially disease-modifying, immunological approaches have yet to be studied systematically, although the interval between disease onset and development of the full clinical syndrome may be longer than previously appreciated, affording a realistic window of opportunity for limiting neuronal damage in this disabling condition.
The multifunctional, hypothalamic hypocretin/orexin (HCRT)-producing neurons regulate an array of physiological and behavioral states including arousal, sleep, feeding, emotions, stress, and reward. How a presumably uniform HCRT neuron population regulates such a diverse set of functions is not clear. The role of the HCRT neuropeptides may vary depending on the timing and localization of secretion and neuronal activity. Moreover, HCRT neuropeptides may not mediate all functions ascribed to HCRT neurons. Some could be orchestrated by additional neurotransmitters and neuropeptides that are expressed in HCRT neurons. We hypothesize that HCRT neurons are segregated into genetically, anatomically and functionally distinct subpopulations. We discuss accumulating data that suggest the existence of such HCRT neuron subpopulations that may effectuate the diverse functions of these neurons in mammals and fish.
Narcolepsy type 1 (NT1) is a sleep-wake disorder in which people typically experience excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy and other sleep-wake disturbances impairing daily life activities. NT1 symptoms are due to hypocretin deficiency. The cause for the observed hypocretin deficiency remains unclear, even though the most likely hypothesis is that this is due to an auto-immune process. The search for autoantibodies and autoreactive T-cells has not yet produced conclusive evidence for or against the auto-immune hypothesis. Other mechanisms, such as reduced corticotrophin-releasing hormone production in the paraventricular nucleus have recently been suggested. There is no reversive treatment, and the therapeutic approach is symptomatic. Early diagnosis and appropriate NT1 treatment is essential, especially in children to prevent impaired cognitive, emotional and social development. Hypocretin receptor agonists have been designed to replace the attenuated hypocretin signalling. Pre-clinical and clinical trials have shown encouraging initial results. A better understanding of NT1 pathophysiology may contribute to faster diagnosis or treatments, which may cure or prevent it.
The hypocretins (Hcrts), also known as orexins, are two neuropeptides produced exclusively in the lateral hypothalamus. They act on two specific receptors that are widely distributed across the brain and involved in a myriad of neurophysiological functions that include sleep, arousal, feeding, reward, fear, anxiety and cognition. Hcrt cell loss in humans leads to narcolepsy with cataplexy (narcolepsy type 1), a disorder characterized by intrusions of sleep into wakefulness, demonstrating that the Hcrt system is nonredundant and essential for sleep/wake stability. The causal link between Hcrts and arousal/wakefulness stabilisation has led to the development of a new class of drugs, Hcrt receptor antagonists to treat insomnia, based on the assumption that blocking orexin-induced arousal will facilitate sleep. This has been clinically validated: currently, two Hcrt receptor antagonists are approved to treat insomnia (suvorexant and lemborexant), with a New Drug Application recently submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration for a third drug (daridorexant). Other therapeutic applications under investigation include reduction of cravings in substance-use disorders and prevention of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, given the apparent bidirectional relationship between poor sleep and worsening of the disease. Circuit neuroscience findings suggest that the Hcrt system is a hub that integrates diverse inputs modulating arousal (e.g., circadian rhythms, metabolic status, positive and negative emotions) and conveys this information to multiple output regions. This neuronal architecture explains the wealth of physiological functions associated with Hcrts and highlights the potential of the Hcrt system as a therapeutic target for a number of disorders. We discuss present and future possible applications of drugs targeting the Hcrt system for the treatment of circuit-related neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative conditions.
Narcolepsy is a chronic sleep disorder caused by the loss of neurons that produce hypocretin. The close association with HLA-DQB1*06:02, evidence for immune dysregulation and increased incidence upon influenza vaccination together suggest that this disorder has an autoimmune origin. However, there is little evidence of autoreactive lymphocytes in patients with narcolepsy. Here we used sensitive cellular screens and detected hypocretin-specific CD4(+) T cells in all 19 patients that we tested; T cells specific for tribbles homologue 2-another self-antigen of hypocretin neurons-were found in 8 out of 13 patients. Autoreactive CD4(+) T cells were polyclonal, targeted multiple epitopes, were restricted primarily by HLA-DR and did not cross-react with influenza antigens. Hypocretin-specific CD8(+) T cells were also detected in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid of several patients with narcolepsy. Autoreactive clonotypes were serially detected in the blood of the same-and even of different-patients, but not in healthy control individuals. These findings solidify the autoimmune aetiology of narcolepsy and provide a basis for rapid diagnosis and treatment of this disease.
What are the molecular and cellular mechanisms that link neurological disorders and sleep disturbances? The transparent zebrafish model could bridge this gap in knowledge due to its unique genetic and imaging toolbox, and amenability to high-throughput screening. Sleep is well-characterized in zebrafish and key regulators of the sleep/wake cycle are conserved, including melatonin and hypocretin/orexin (Hcrt), whereas novel sleep regulating proteins are continually being identified, such as Kcnh4a, Neuromedin U, and QRFP. Sleep deficiencies have been observed in various zebrafish models for genetic neuropsychiatric disorders, ranging from psychomotor retardation and autism to anxiety disorders. Understanding the link between neuropsychiatric disorders and sleep phenotypes in zebrafish may ultimately provide a platform for identifying therapeutic targets for clinical trials in humans.
The hypocretins/orexins were discovered in 1998. Within 2 years, this led to the discovery of the cause of human narcolepsy, a 90% loss of hypothalamic neurons containing these peptides. Further work demonstrated that these neurons were not simply linked to waking. Rather these neurons were active during pleasurable behaviors in waking and were silenced by aversive stimulation. This was seen in wild-type mice, rats, cats, and dogs. It was also evident in humans, with increased Hcrt release during pleasurable activities and decreased release, to the levels seen in sleep, during pain. We found that human heroin addicts have, on average, an increase of 54% in the number of detectable Hcrt neurons compared to "control" human brains and that these Hcrt neurons are substantially smaller than those in control brains. We found that in mice, chronic morphine administration induced the same changes in Hcrt neuron number and size. Our studies in the mouse allowed us to determine the specificity, dose response relations, time course of the change in the number of Hcrt neurons, and that the increased number of Hcrt neurons after opiates was not due to neurogenesis. Furthermore, we found that it took a month or longer for these anatomical changes in the mouse brain to return to baseline. Human narcoleptics, despite their prescribed use of several commonly addictive drugs, do not show significant evidence of dose escalation or substance use disorder. Similarly, mice in which the peptide has been eliminated are resistant to addiction. These findings are consistent with the concept that an increased number of Hcrt neurons may underlie and maintain opioid or cocaine use disorders.
The discovery that hypocretins are involved in narcolepsy, a disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepiness, cataplexy and unusually rapid transitions to rapid-eye-movement sleep, opens a new field of investigation in the area of sleep control physiology. Hypocretin-1 and -2 (also called orexin-A and -B) are newly discovered neuropeptides processed from a common precursor, preprohypocretin. Hypocretin-containing cells are located exclusively in the lateral hypothalamus, with widespread projections to the entire neuroaxis. Two known receptors, Hcrtr1 and Hcrtr2, have been reported. The functional significance of the hypocretin system is rapidly emerging in both animals and humans. Hypocretin abnormalities cause narcolepsy in dogs, human and mice. The role of the hypocretin system in normal sleep regulation is more uncertain. We believe hypocretin cells drive cholinergic and monoaminergic activity across the sleep cycle. Input from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to hypocretin-containing neurons may explain the occurrence of clock-dependent alertness. Other functions are suggested by pharmacological and neurochemical experiments. These include regulation of food intake, neuroendocrine function, autonomic nervous system activity and energy balance.
The lateral hypothalamus (LH) is a functionally and anatomically complex brain region that is involved in the regulation of many behavioral and physiological processes including feeding, arousal, energy balance, stress, reward and motivated behaviors, pain perception, body temperature regulation, digestive functions and blood pressure. Despite noteworthy experimental efforts over the past decades, the circuit, cellular and synaptic bases by which these different processes are regulated by the LH remains incompletely understood. This knowledge gap links in large part to the high cellular heterogeneity of the LH. Fortunately, the rapid evolution of newer genetic and electrophysiological tools is now permitting the selective manipulation, typically genetically-driven, of discrete LH cell populations. This, in turn, permits not only assignment of function to discrete cell groups, but also reveals that considerable synergistic and antagonistic interactions exist between key LH cell populations that regulate feeding and arousal. For example, we now know that while LH melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and orexin/hypocretin neurons both function as sensors of the internal metabolic environment, their roles regulating sleep and arousal are actually opposing. Additional studies have uncovered similarly important roles for subpopulations of LH GABAergic cells in the regulation of both feeding and arousal. Herein we review the role of LH MCH, orexin/hypocretin and GABAergic cell populations in the regulation of energy homeostasis (including feeding) and sleep-wake and discuss how these three cell populations, and their subpopulations, may interact to optimize and coordinate metabolism, sleep and arousal. This article is part of the Special Issue entitled 'Hypothalamic Control of Homeostasis'.
The orexin, or hypocretin, neuropeptides (orexin-A and orexin-B) are produced on neurons in the hypothalamus which project to key areas of the brain that control sleep-wake states, modulation of food intake, panic, anxiety, emotion, reward and addictive behaviors. These neuropeptides exert their effects on a pair of G-protein coupled receptors termed the orexin-1 (OX1) and orexin-2 (OX2) receptors. Emerging biology suggests the involvement of these receptors in psychiatric disorders as they are thought to play a key role in the regulation of multiple systems. This review is intended to highlight key selective OX1 or OX2 small-molecule antagonists.
Histamine appears early during brain development, has been shown to regulate fetal and adult brain-derived stem cells in a receptor type-dependent manner, and has widespread actions on systems involved in arousal and movement. Developmental studies in both rodents and zebrafish have elucidated the spatiotemporal patterning of the histaminergic system and, in zebrafish, have revealed the mechanisms whereby histamine regulates the number of hypocretin/orexin (hcrt) neurons, which in turn may regulate the number of histaminergic cells. Recent demonstrations of increased numbers of histaminergic neurons in patients with narcolepsy highlight the importance, for our understanding of both normal and pathological brain function, of understanding these interactions. Here, we review recent research into the developmental roles of histamine and suggest key areas for future research.
Accumulating evidence has shown that sleep disturbance is a common symptom in Alzheimer's disease (AD), which is regarded as a modifiable risk factor for AD. Orexin is a key modulator of the sleep-wake cycle and has been found to be dysregulated in AD patients. The increased orexin in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is associated with decreased sleep efficiency and REM sleep, as well as cognitive impairment in AD patients. The orexin system has profuse projections to brain regions that are implicated in arousal and cognition and has been found to participate in the progression of AD pathology. Conversely the orexin receptor antagonists are able to consolidate sleep and reduce AD pathology. Therefore, improved understanding of the mechanisms linking orexin system, sleep disturbance and AD could make orexin receptor antagonists a promising target for the prevention or treatment of AD.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: After the connection between AS03-adjuvanted pandemic H1N1 vaccine Pandemrix and narcolepsy was recognized in 2010, research on narcolepsy has been more intensive than ever before. The purpose of this review is to provide the reader with current concepts and recent findings on the Pandemrix-associated narcolepsy. RECENT FINDINGS: After the Pandemrix vaccination campaign in 2009-2010, the risk of narcolepsy was increased 5- to 14-fold in children and adolescents and 2- to 7-fold in adults. According to observational studies, the risk of narcolepsy was elevated for 2 years after the Pandemrix vaccination. Some confounding factors and potential diagnostic biases may influence the observed narcolepsy risk in some studies, but it is unlikely that they would explain the clearly increased incidence in all the countries where Pandemrix was used. An increased risk of narcolepsy after natural H1N1 infection was reported from China, where pandemic influenza vaccination was not used. There is more and more evidence that narcolepsy is an autoimmune disease. All Pandemrix-associated narcolepsy cases have been positive for HLA class II DQB1*06:02 and novel predisposing genetic factors directly linking to the immune system have been identified. Even though recent studies have identified autoantibodies against multiple neuronal structures and other host proteins and peptides, no specific autoantigens that would explain the disease mechanism in narcolepsy have been identified thus far. There was a marked increase in the incidence of narcolepsy after Pandemrix vaccination, especially in adolescents, but also in young adults and younger children. All vaccine-related cases were of narcolepsy type 1 characterized by hypocretin deficiency in the central nervous system. The disease phenotype and the severity of symptoms varied considerably in children and adolescents suffering from Pandemrix-associated narcolepsy, but they were indistinguishable from the symptoms of idiopathic narcolepsy. Narcolepsy type 1 is most likely an autoimmune disease, but the mechanisms have remained elusive.
Obesity has increased in prevalence worldwide, attributed in part to the influences of an obesity-promoting environment and genetic factors. While obesity and overweight increasingly seem to be the norm, there remain individuals who resist obesity. We present here an overview of data supporting the idea that hypothalamic neuropeptide orexin A (OXA; hypocretin 1) may be a key component of brain mechanisms underlying obesity resistance. Prior work with models of obesity and obesity resistance in rodents has shown that increased orexin and/or orexin sensitivity is correlated with elevated spontaneous physical activity (SPA), and that orexin-induced SPA contributes to obesity resistance via increased non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT). However, central hypothalamic orexin signaling mechanisms that regulate SPA remain undefined. Our ongoing studies and work of others support the hypothesis that one such mechanism may be upregulation of a hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF-1alpha)-dependent pathway, suggesting that orexin may promote obesity resistance both by increasing SPA and by influencing the metabolic state of orexin-responsive hypothalamic neurons. We discuss potential mechanisms based on both animal and in vitro pharmacological studies, in the context of elucidating potential molecular targets for obesity prevention and therapy.
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a chronic, relapsing disorder that is characterized by the compulsive use of alcohol despite numerous health, social, and economic consequences. Initially, the use of alcohol is driven by positive reinforcement. Over time, however, alcohol use can take on a compulsive quality that is driven by the desire to avoid the negative consequences of abstinence, including negative affect and heightened stress/anxiety. This transition from positive reinforcement- to negative reinforcement-driven consumption involves the corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) system, although mounting evidence now suggests that the CRF system interacts with other neural systems to ultimately produce behaviors that are symptomatic of compulsive alcohol use, such as the hypocretin (Hcrt) system. Hypocretins are produced exclusively in the hypothalamus, but Hcrt neurons project widely throughout the brain and reach regions that perform regulatory functions for numerous behavioral and physiological responses-including the infralimbic cortex (IL) of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). Although the entire mPFC undergoes neuroadaptive changes following prolonged alcohol exposure, the IL appears to undergo more robust changes compared with other mPFC substructures. Evidence to date suggests that the IL is likely involved in EtOH-seeking behavior, but ambiguities with respect to the specific role of the IL in this regard make it difficult to draw definitive conclusions. Furthermore, the manner in which CRF interacts with Hcrt in this region as it pertains to alcohol-seeking behavior is largely unknown, although immunohistochemical and electrophysiological experiments have shown that CRF and Hcrt directly interact in the mPFC, suggesting that the interaction between CRF and Hcrt in the IL may be critically important for the development and subsequent maintenance of compulsive alcohol seeking. This review aims to consolidate recent literature regarding the role of the IL in alcohol-seeking behavior and to discuss evidence that supports a functional interaction between Hcrt and CRF in the IL.
While it is well known that there is an interaction between sleep disorders and substance abuse, it is certainly more complex than was previously thought. There is a positive relationship both between having a substance use disorder and suffering from a sleep disorder, and vice versa. The effects on sleep depend on the substance used, but it has been shown that both during use and in withdrawal periods consumers have various sleep problems, and basically more fragmented sleep. We know that sleep problems must be taken into account to prevent addiction relapses. Recent research shows that the hypocretinergic system defined by neuropeptide hypocretin / orexin (Hcrt / ox), located in the lateral hypothalamus and involved in, among other things, the regulation of the sleep-wake cycle, may play an important role in addictive behaviors. Different studies have demonstrated interactions between the hypocretinergic system, acute response to stress circuits and reward systems. We also know that selective optogenetic activation of the hypocretinergic system increases the probability of transition from sleep to wakefulness, and is sufficient for initiating an addictive compulsive behavior relapse. Hypocretinergic system activation could explain the hyperarousal associated with stress and addiction. Improved knowledge of this interaction would help us to understand better the mechanisms of addiction and find new strategies for the treatment of addictions.
The neuropeptide hypocretin/orexin plays a broad and important role in physiological functions ranging from addiction, stress, and anxiety to sleep, energy metabolism, and homeostatic regulation. A number of recent reviews addressing the importance of orexin for different addictive behaviors, especially the contribution of orexin-1-receptors (Ox1Rs) in responding for intoxicants in higher-motivation individuals and situations, and orexin-2-receptor (Ox2Rs) in stress-related aspects of addictive responding. This may parallel the importance of more lateral orexin neurons in the hypothalamus for reward and more medial for stress and arousal. However, there is clearly also some crossover, which may reflect, in part, where positive and negative conditioning (reward- and relief-seeking) are both present concurrently in established addiction, and also where orexin signaling can differ in subregions of a particular brain region. Here, we attempt to examine and synthesize some of the most recent work addressing orexin functions in addiction, including a particular role for Ox1Rs for driving responding in higher-motivation individuals and under higher levels of effort. While there are some commonalities across addictive substances addressed here (alcohol, cocaine, opiates), there are also some differences, which may relate to several factors including the speed of intoxication with a given substance. Together, recent findings have shed important insight and clues into what a more unified role of Ox1Rs might entail, and critical areas for future work. In addition, these many studies support the development of Ox1R blockers for use in humans to counteract addiction and other disorders of motivation. This article is part of the special issue on Neuropeptides.
