Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is a common aging-associated condition with increased risk of hematologic malignancy. Knowledge of the mechanisms driving evolution from CH to overt malignancy has been hampered by a lack of in vivo models that orthogonally activate mutant alleles. Here, we develop independently regulatable mutations in DNA methyltransferase 3A (Dnmt3a) and nucleophosmin 1 (Npm1), observed in human CH and AML, respectively. We find Dnmt3a mutation expands hematopoietic stem and multipotent progenitor cells (HSC/MPPs), modeling CH. Induction of mutant Npm1 after development of Dnmt3a-mutant CH causes progression to myeloproliferative disorder (MPD), and more aggressive MPD is observed with longer latency between mutations. MPDs uniformly progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following transplant, accompanied by a decrease in HSC/MPPs and an increase in myeloid-restricted progenitors, the latter of which propagate AML in tertiary recipient mice. At a molecular level, progression of CH to MPD is accompanied by selection for mutations activating Ras/Raf/MAPK signaling. Progression to AML is characterized by additional oncogenic signaling mutations (Ptpn11, Pik3r1, Flt3) and/or mutations in epigenetic regulators (Hdac1, Idh1, Arid1a). Together, our study demonstrates that Npm1 mutation drives evolution of Dnmt3a-mutant CH to AML and rate of disease progression is accelerated with longer latency of CH.
Gene expression is controlled through the recruitment of large coregulator complexes to specific gene loci to regulate chromatin structure by modifying epigenetic marks on DNA and histones. Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is an essential component of the nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex that acts as a scaffold protein to assemble enzymatic activity and nucleosome targeting proteins. MTA1 consists of four characterised domains, a number of interaction motifs, and regions that are predicted to be intrinsically disordered. The ELM2-SANT domain is one of the best-characterised regions of MTA1, which recruits histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and activates the enzyme in the presence of inositol phosphate. MTA1 is highly upregulated in several types of aggressive tumours and is therefore a possible target for cancer therapy. In this review, we summarise the structure and function of the four domains of MTA1 and discuss the possible functions of less well-characterised regions of the protein.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are essential for maintaining homeostasis by catalyzing histone deacetylation. Aberrant expression of HDACs is associated with various human diseases. Although HDAC inhibitors are used as effective chemotherapeutic agents in clinical practice, their applications remain limited due to associated side effects induced by weak isoform selectivity. HDAC1 displays unique structure and cellular localization as well as diverse substrates and exhibits a wider range of biological functions than other isoforms. HDAC1 displays a unique structure primarily found in the nucleus and involved in epigenetic and transcriptional regulation. HDAC1 is ubiquitously expressed and associated with Sin3, NuRD, and CoRest transcription repressive complexes responsible for distinct cellular processes like cell proliferation and survival. HDAC1 inhibitors have been effectively used to treat various cancers such as gastric, breast, colorectal, prostate, colon, lung, ovarian, pancreatic, and inflammation without exerting significant toxic effects. In this review, we summarize four major structural classes of HDAC1 inhibitors (i.e., hydroxamic acid derivatives, benzamides, hydrazides, and thiols) with their structural activity relationship. This review is a comprehensive work on HDAC1 inhibitors to achieve deep insight of knowledge about the structural information of HDAC1 inhibitors. It may provide up-to-date direction for developing new selective HDAC1 inhibitors as anticancer agents.
Transcriptional co-regulators have been widely pursued as targets for disrupting oncogenic gene regulatory programs. However, many proteins in this target class are universally essential for cell survival, which limits their therapeutic window. Here we unveil a genetic interaction between histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and HDAC2, wherein each paralog is synthetically lethal with hemizygous deletion of the other. This collateral synthetic lethality is caused by recurrent chromosomal deletions that occur in diverse solid and hematological malignancies, including neuroblastoma and multiple myeloma. Using genetic disruption or dTAG-mediated degradation, we show that targeting HDAC2 suppresses the growth of HDAC1-deficient neuroblastoma in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we find that targeted degradation of HDAC2 in these cells prompts the degradation of several members of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex, leading to diminished chromatin accessibility at HDAC2-NuRD-bound sites of the genome and impaired control of enhancer-associated transcription. Furthermore, we reveal that several of the degraded NuRD complex subunits are dependencies in neuroblastoma and multiple myeloma, providing motivation to develop paralog-selective HDAC1 or HDAC2 degraders that could leverage HDAC1/2 synthetic lethality to target NuRD vulnerabilities. Altogether, we identify HDAC1/2 collateral synthetic lethality as a potential therapeutic target and reveal an unexplored mechanism for targeting NuRD-associated cancer dependencies.
KRAS is one of the most frequently mutated oncogenes in cancers. Currently no direct and effective anti-KRAS therapies are available. Using the powerful CRISPR-Cas9 technology to target the mutant KRAS promoter, we designed an epigenetic repressor to silence KRAS through epigenome editing. Catalytically dead Cas9 (dCas9) functioned as a DNA binding device, which was fused with a transcriptional repressor histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). We designed a panel of three CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) covering 1500-bp range of the KRAS promoter and identified that crRNA1 and crRNA2 efficiently silenced KRAS. The suppression of K-Ras resulted in a significant inhibition of cell growth, suppression of colony formation in soft agar and induction of cell death in cancer cells with KRAS mutations. In addition, the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay demonstrated dCas9-HDAC1 modified histone acetylation on the KRAS promoter. Furthermore, transfection of dCas9-HDAC1 protein and gRNA ribonucleoprotein complex also inhibited K-Ras and suppressed cell proliferation. In summary, we have developed a new strategy that combines CRISPR-Cas9 technology with HDAC1 epigenetic silencing to target cancers driven by KRAS mutations.
Cancer mutations can create neomorphic protein-protein interactions to drive aberrant function(1,2). As a substrate receptor of the CULLIN3-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, KBTBD4 is recurrently mutated in medulloblastoma(3), the most common embryonal brain tumour in children(4). These mutations impart gain-of-function to KBTBD4 to induce aberrant degradation of the transcriptional corepressor CoREST(5). However, their mechanism remains unresolved. Here we establish that KBTBD4 mutations promote CoREST degradation through engaging HDAC1/2 as the direct target of the mutant substrate receptor. Using deep mutational scanning, we chart the mutational landscape of the KBTBD4 cancer hotspot, revealing distinct preferences by which insertions and substitutions can promote gain-of-function and the critical residues involved in the hotspot interaction. Cryo-electron microscopy analysis of two distinct KBTBD4 cancer mutants bound to LSD1-HDAC1-CoREST reveals that a KBTBD4 homodimer asymmetrically engages HDAC1 with two KELCH-repeat beta-propeller domains. The interface between HDAC1 and one of the KBTBD4 beta-propellers is stabilized by the medulloblastoma mutations, which insert a bulky side chain into the HDAC1 active site pocket. Our structural and mutational analyses inform how this hotspot E3-neosubstrate interface can be chemically modulated. First, we unveil a converging shape-complementarity-based mechanism between gain-of-function E3 mutations and a molecular glue degrader, UM171. Second, we demonstrate that HDAC1/2 inhibitors can block the mutant KBTBD4-HDAC1 interface and proliferation of KBTBD4-mutant medulloblastoma cells. Altogether, our work reveals the structural and mechanistic basis of cancer mutation-driven neomorphic protein-protein interactions.
Post-translational modifications of proteins have critical roles in many cellular processes because they can cause rapid changes in the functions of preexisting proteins, multiprotein complexes and subcellular structures. Sumoylation, a ubiquitin-like dynamic and reversible post-translational modification system, is an enzymatic cascade leading to the covalent attachment of SUMO to it target proteins. This modification involves three steps and different enzymes: SUMO-activating enzyme E1 (SAE1/SAE2), SUMO-conjugating enzyme E2 (UBC9), SUMO ligases E3s, and SUMO cleaving enzymes. Although the identification of SUMO-modified substrates has progressed rapidly, the biological function of SUMO and regulation of SUMO conjugation are still not well understood. Some viral proteins have been identified as substrates for SUMO modification as well as altering the sumoylation status of host cell proteins. We have been studying an unusual adenoviral protein, Gam1, a strong and global transcriptional activator of both viral and cellular genes that inactivates HDAC1. We have recently expanded the known functions of Gam1 by demonstrating that Gam1 also inhibits the SUMO pathway by interfering with the activity of E1 heterodimer (SAE1/SAE2), leading to the accumulation of SUMO-unmodified substrates. Our data provides a clear example of the effects of a viral infection on host sumoylation and supports the idea that viruses have multifunctional protein that can target essential biochemical pathways.
Post-translational modifications of histones are important regulators of the DNA damage response (DDR). By using affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) we discovered that genetic suppressor element 1 (GSE1) forms a complex with the HDAC1/CoREST deacetylase/demethylase co-repressor complex. In-depth phosphorylome analysis revealed that loss of GSE1 results in impaired DDR, ATR signalling and gammaH2AX formation upon DNA damage induction. Altered profiles of ATR target serine-glutamine motifs (SQ) on DDR-related hallmark proteins point to a defect in DNA damage sensing. In addition, GSE1 knock-out cells show hampered DNA damage-induced phosphorylation on SQ motifs of regulators of histone post-translational modifications, suggesting altered histone modification. While loss of GSE1 does not affect the histone deacetylation activity of CoREST, GSE1 appears to be essential for binding of the deubiquitinase USP22 to CoREST and for the deubiquitination of H2B K120 in response to DNA damage. The combination of deacetylase, demethylase, and deubiquitinase activity makes the USP22-GSE1-CoREST subcomplex a multi-enzymatic eraser that seems to play an important role during DDR. Since GSE1 has been previously associated with cancer progression and survival our findings are potentially of high medical relevance.
Sin3/HDAC complexes function by deacetylating histones, condensing chromatin, and modulating gene expression. Although components used to build these complexes have been well defined, we still have only a limited understanding of the structure of the Sin3/HDAC subunits assembled around the scaffolding protein SIN3A. To characterize the spatial arrangement of Sin3 subunits, we combined Halo affinity capture, chemical crosslinking, and high-resolution mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to determine intersubunit distance constraints, identifying 66 interprotein and 63 self-crosslinks for 13 Sin3 subunits. Having assessed crosslink authenticity by mapping self-crosslinks onto existing structures, we used distance restraints from interprotein crosslinks to guide assembly of a Sin3 complex substructure. We identified the relative positions of subunits SAP30L, HDAC1, SUDS3, HDAC2, and ING1 around the SIN3A scaffold. The architecture of this subassembly suggests that multiple factors have space to assemble to collectively influence the behavior of the catalytic subunit HDAC1.
BACKGROUND: Lung cancer stands as the second most prevalent malignant neoplasm worldwide. Addressing the underlying mechanisms propelling the progression of non-small cell lung cancer is of paramount importance. In this study, we have elucidated the pivotal role of PHF12 in this context. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We harnessed clinical lung cancer tissue samples and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines to discern the expression pattern of PHF12. In vitro assays probing cell proliferation were conducted to substantiate the functional impact of PHF12. Furthermore, an in vivo Xenograft model was employed to dissect the role of PHF12. Employing ChIP assays and qRT-PCR, we delved into the intricate binding dynamics between PHF12 and HDAC1. Mechanistic insights into the PHF12-HDAC1 axis in lung cancer progression were pursued via RNA-seq and GSEA analyses. RESULTS: Notably, PHF12 exhibited a substantial upregulation within tumor tissue, concomitant with its correlation to HDAC1. The trilogy of cell proliferation assays, transwell assays, and the Xenograft model collectively underscored the promoting influence of PHF12 on lung cancer proliferation, both in vitro and in vivo. The ChIP assay unveiled the transcriptional regulatory role of PHF12 in governing HDAC1 expression. This correlation extended to both mRNA and protein levels. PHF12 promotes NSCLC progression through regulating HDCA1 expression. Intriguingly, the rescue of function within NSCLC cell lines post PHF12 knockdown was achievable through HDAC1 overexpression. Additionally, our findings unveiled the capacity of the PHF12-HDAC1 axis to activate the EGFR/AKT signaling pathway, thereby further corroborating its significance in lung cancer progression. CONCLUSION: Our study identified PHF12 as an oncogenic role in lung cancer proliferation and migration for the first time. PHF12 transcriptionally regulate HDAC1 and activate EGFR/AKT signaling pathway in NSCLC progression. PHF12 may serve as an important target in lung cancer therapy.
ABIN1, an important immune regulator, has been shown to be involved in various cellular functions, such as immunity, development, tissue homeostasis, and tumor progression. It inhibits TNF- and TLR-induced NF-kappaB signaling activation and the consequent gene expression. Despite its functional significance, the mechanism of ABIN1 in the regulation of various cellular functions remains unclear. In this study, we identified HDAC1, a key regulator of eukaryotic gene expression and many important cellular events, including cell proliferation, differentiation, cancer and immunity, as an interacting partner of ABIN1. The results showed that ABIN1 acted as a modulator to down-regulate HDAC1 ubiquitination via three different linkages, thereby stabilizing HDAC1 by inhibiting its lysosomal and proteasomal degradation. Interestingly, the inhibitory function of ABIN1 required direct binding with HDAC1. Moreover, the level of p53, which was a tumor suppressor and a well-studied substrate of HDAC1, was under the regulation of ABIN1 via the modulation of HDAC1 levels, suggesting that ABIN1 was physiologically significant in tumor progression. This study has revealed a new function of ABIN1 in mediating HDAC1 modification and stability.
BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) and exosomes are implicated in endometriosis development. We measured the expression of an exosomal lncRNA, homeobox transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), and explored its molecular mechanism in endometriosis progression. METHODS: Expression of HOTAIR and microRNA (miR)-761 in different endometrial tissues was measured. Exosomes were isolated from a culture medium of endometrial stromal cells (ESCs). RT-qPCR was used to measure HOTAIR expression in different exosome types. CCK-8, Edu, wound healing, transwell assays, flow cytometry and tube formation were used to detect the role of exosomal HOTAIR on ESCs and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). The relationship among miR-761, HOTAIR, and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) was verified by dual-luciferase reporter assay. ESCs were transfected with miR-761 mimics or HDAC1 small interfering RNA (si-RNA) to ascertain if alterations in expression of miR-761 or HDAC1 could reverse the effect of exosomal HOTAIR. Then, we detected the effect of the HOTAIR/miR-761/HDAC1 axis on signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-mediated inflammation. In vivo experiments were conducted to verify in vitro results. RESULTS: HOTAIR expression was upregulated and miR-761 expression was downregulated in ectopic endometrium tissues. HOTAIR was packaged into exosomes and transported from ESCs to surrounding cells. Exosomal HOTAIR promoted the proliferation, migration, and invasion, and inhibited the apoptosis of ESCs. Angiogenesis of HUVECs was enhanced after cultured with exosomal HOTAIR. HOTAIR acted as a competing endogenous RNA to downregulate miR-761 and increase HDAC1 expression. miR-761 overexpression or HDAC1 knockdown reversed the role of exosomal HOTAIR on ESCs and HUVECs. The HOTAIR/miR-761/HDAC1 axis could activate STAT3-related proinflammatory cytokines and stattic (inhibitor of phosphorylated-STAT3) could reverse the effect of HOTAIR on ESCs and HUVECs. In vivo experiments suggested that exosomal HOTAIR promoted the growth of endometrial lesions in vivo. CONCLUSION: Exosomal HOTAIR promoted the progression and angiogenesis of endometriosis by regulating the miR-761/HDAC1 axis and activating STAT3-mediated inflammation in vitro and in vivo, which may provide promising treatment for endometriosis.
Access to DNA is the first level of control in regulating gene transcription, a control that is also critical for maintaining DNA integrity. Cellular senescence is characterized by profound transcriptional rearrangements and accumulation of DNA lesions. Here, we discovered an epigenetic complex between HDAC4 and HDAC1/HDAC2 that is involved in the erase of H2BK120 acetylation. The HDAC4/HDAC1/HDAC2 complex modulates the efficiency of DNA repair by homologous recombination, through dynamic deacetylation of H2BK120. Deficiency of HDAC4 leads to accumulation of H2BK120ac, impaired recruitment of BRCA1 and CtIP to the site of lesions, accumulation of damaged DNA and senescence. In senescent cells this complex is disassembled because of increased proteasomal degradation of HDAC4. Forced expression of HDAC4 during RAS-induced senescence reduces the genomic spread of gammaH2AX. It also affects H2BK120ac levels, which are increased in DNA-damaged regions that accumulate during RAS-induced senescence. In summary, degradation of HDAC4 during senescence causes the accumulation of damaged DNA and contributes to the activation of the transcriptional program controlled by super-enhancers that maintains senescence.
HDAC1 is the prototypical human histone deacetylase (HDAC) enzyme responsible for catalyzing the removal of acetyl group from lysine residues on many substrate proteins. By deacetylating histones and non-histone proteins, HDAC1 has a profound effect on the regulation of gene transcription and many processes related to cell growth and cell death, including cell cycle progression, DNA repair, and apoptosis. Early studies reveal that, like most eukaryotic proteins, the functions and activities of HDAC1 are regulated by post-translational modifications. For example, serine phosphorylation of HDAC1 by protein kinase CK2 promotes HDAC1 deacetylase enzymatic activity and alters its interactions with proteins in corepressor complexes. Here, we describe an alternative signaling pathway by which HDAC1 activities are regulated. Specifically, we discover that EGFR activity promotes the tyrosine phosphorylation of HDAC1, which is necessary for its protein stability. A key EGFR phosphorylation site on HDAC1, Tyr72, mediates HDAC1's anti-apoptotic function. Given that HDAC1 overexpression and EGFR activity are strongly related with tumor progression and cancer cell survival, HDAC1 tyrosine phosphorylation may present a possible target to manipulate HDAC1 protein levels in future potential cancer treatment strategies.
The higher-order inositol phosphate second messengers inositol tetrakisphosphate (IP4), inositol pentakisphosphate (IP5) and inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) are important signaling molecules that regulate DNA-damage repair, cohesin dynamics, RNA-editing, retroviral assembly, nuclear transport, phosphorylation, acetylation, crotonylation, and ubiquitination. This functional diversity has made understanding how inositol polyphosphates regulate cellular processes challenging to dissect. However, some inositol phosphates have been unexpectedly found in X-ray crystal structures, occasionally revealing structural and mechanistic details of effector protein regulation before functional consequences have been described. This review highlights a sampling of crystal structures describing the interaction between inositol phosphates and protein effectors. This list includes the RNA editing enzyme "adenosine deaminase that acts on RNA 2" (ADAR2), the Pds5B regulator of cohesin dynamics, the class 1 histone deacetylases (HDACs) HDAC1 and HDAC3, and the PH domain of Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk). One of the most important enzymes responsible for higher-order inositol phosphate synthesis is inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK), which plays dual roles in both inositol and phosphoinositide signaling. Structures of phosphoinositide lipid binding proteins have also revealed new aspects of protein effector regulation, as mediated by the nuclear receptors Steroidogenic Factor-1 (SF-1, NR5A2) and Liver Receptor Homolog-1 (LRH-1, NR5A2). Together, these studies underscore the structural diversity in binding interactions between effector proteins and inositol phosphate small signaling molecules, and further support that detailed structural studies can lead to new biological discovery.
Aging liver is characterized by alterations of liver biology and by a reduction of many functions which are important for the maintenance of body homeostasis. The main dysfunctions include appearance of enlarged hepatocytes, impaired liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy (PH), development of hepatic steatosis, reduction of secretion of proteins and alterations in the hepatic sinusoid. RNA binding proteins are involved in the regulation of gene expression in all tissues including regulation of biological processes in the liver. This review is focused on the role of a conserved, multi-functional RNA-binding protein, CUGBP1, in the development of aging phenotype in the liver. CUGBP1 has been identified as a protein which binds to RNA CUG repeats expanded in Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1). CUGBP1 is highly expressed in the liver and regulates translation of proteins which are critical for maintenance of liver functions. In livers of young mice, CUGBP1 forms complexes with eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2 and supports translation of C/EBPbeta and HDAC1 proteins, which are involved in liver growth, differentiation and liver cancer. Aging changes several signaling pathways which lead to the elevation of the CUGBP1-eIF2alpha complex and to an increase of translation of C/EBPbeta and HDAC1. These proteins form multi-protein complexes with additional transcription factors and with chromatin remodeling proteins causing epigenetic alterations of gene expression in livers of old mice. It appears that CUGBP1-mediated translational elevation of HDAC1 is one of the key events in the epigenetic changes in livers of old mice, leading to the development of age-associated dysfunctions of the liver. This review will also discuss a possible role of CUGBP1 in liver dysfunction in patients affected with DM1.
Dynamic deacetylation of non-histone proteins by histone deacetylases (HDACs) is a key regulator of protein functions, interactions, and turnover. Among class I HDACs, human HDAC1 and HDAC2 share more than 80% global homology at the amino acid level. However, despite the high redundancy, there are examples for differential substrate specificities of HDAC1 and HDAC2. Until now it remains quite unclear how specific and overlapping functions of HDAC1/HDAC2 are regulated in different contexts. Here, we describe molecular cloning techniques for the generation of HDAC1/HDAC2 hybrid proteins, HDAC1/HDAC2 mutants lacking known interaction domains, and HDAC1/HDAC2 hybrid proteins with interchanged N-terminal domains. These proteins are tools for the analysis of specific protein interactions and functions in mammalian cells.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) play important roles in transcriptional regulation in eukaryotic cells. Class I deacetylase HDAC1/2 often associates with repressor complexes, such as Sin3 (Switch Independent 3), NuRD (Nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase) and CoREST (Corepressor of RE1 silencing transcription factor) complexes. It has been shown that HDAC1 interacts with and modulates all essential transcription factors for erythropoiesis. During erythropoiesis, histone deacetylase activity is dramatically reduced. Consistently, inhibition of HDAC activity promotes erythroid differentiation. The reduction of HDAC activity not only results in the activation of transcription activators such as GATA-1 (GATA-binding factor 1), TAL1 (TAL BHLH Transcription Factor 1) and KLF1 (Krupple-like factor 1), but also represses transcription repressors such as PU.1 (Putative oncogene Spi-1). The reduction of histone deacetylase activity is mainly through HDAC1 acetylation that attenuates HDAC1 activity and trans-repress HDAC2 activity through dimerization with HDAC1. Therefore, the acetylation of HDAC1 can convert the corepressor complex to an activator complex for gene activation. HDAC1 also can deacetylate non-histone proteins that play a role on erythropoiesis, therefore adds another layer of gene regulation through HDAC1. Clinically, it has been shown HDACi can reactivate fetal globin in adult erythroid cells. This review will cover the up to date research on the role of HDAC1 in modulating key transcription factors for erythropoiesis and its clinical relevance.
RGS10 is an important regulator of cell survival and chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. We recently showed that RGS10 transcript expression is suppressed during acquired chemoresistance in ovarian cancer. The suppression of RGS10 is due to DNA hypermethylation and histone deacetylation, two important mechanisms that contribute to silencing of tumor suppressor genes during cancer progression. Here, we fully investigate the molecular mechanisms of epigenetic silencing of RGS10 expression in chemoresistant A2780-AD ovarian cancer cells. We identify two important epigenetic regulators, HDAC1 and DNMT1, that exhibit aberrant association with RGS10 promoters in chemoresistant ovarian cancer cells. Knockdown of HDAC1 or DNMT1 expression, and pharmacological inhibition of DNMT or HDAC enzymatic activity, significantly increases RGS10 expression and cisplatin-mediated cell death. Finally, DNMT1 knock down also decreases HDAC1 binding to the RGS10 promoter in chemoresistant cells, suggesting HDAC1 recruitment to RGS10 promoters requires DNMT1 activity. Our results suggest that HDAC1 and DNMT1 contribute to the suppression of RGS10 during acquired chemoresistance and support inhibition of HDAC1 and DNMT1 as an adjuvant therapeutic approach to overcome ovarian cancer chemoresistance.
Histone deacetylases 1 and 2 (HDAC1,2) belong to the class I HDAC family, which are targeted by the FDA-approved small molecule HDAC inhibitors currently used in cancer therapy. HDAC1,2 are recruited to DNA break sites during DNA repair and to chromatin around forks during DNA replication. Cancer cells use DNA repair and DNA replication as survival mechanisms and to evade chemotherapy-induced cytotoxicity. Hence, it is vital to understand how HDAC1,2 function during the genome maintenance processes (DNA replication and DNA repair) in order to gain insights into the mode-of-action of HDAC inhibitors in cancer therapeutics. The first-in-class HDAC1,2-selective inhibitors and Hdac1,2 conditional knockout systems greatly facilitated dissecting the precise mechanisms by which HDAC1,2 control genome stability in normal and cancer cells. In this perspective, I summarize the findings on the mechanistic functions of class I HDACs, specifically, HDAC1,2 in genome maintenance, unanswered questions for future investigations and views on how this knowledge could be harnessed for better-targeted cancer therapeutics for a subset of cancers.
