Mu-type opioid receptor; Receptor for endogenous opioids such as beta-endorphin and endomorphin. Receptor for natural and synthetic opioids including morphine, heroin, DAMGO, fentanyl, etorphine, buprenorphin and methadone. Agonist binding to the receptor induces coupling to an inactive GDP-bound heterotrimeric G-protein complex and subsequent exchange of GDP for GTP in the G-protein alpha subunit leading to dissociation of the G-protein complex with the free GTP-bound G-protein alpha and the G-protein beta-gamma dimer activating downstream cellular effectors. The agonist- and cell typ [...] 
BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to the development of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), but the genetic pathophysiology was not fully elucidated. We employed Mendelian randomization and colocalization analyses to investigate the associations between mitochondrial-related genes and IBD via integrating multi-omics. METHODS: Summary-level data of mitochondrial gene methylation, expression and protein abundance levels were obtained from corresponding methylation, expression and protein quantitative trait loci studies, respectively. We obtained genetic associations with IBD and its two subtypes from the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Genetics Consortium (discovery), the UK Biobank (replication), and the FinnGen study (replication). We performed summary-data-based Mendelian randomization analysis to assess the associations of mitochondrial gene-related molecular features with IBD. Colocalization analysis was further conducted to assess whether the identified signal pairs shared a causal genetic variant. FINDINGS: After integrating the multi-omics data between mQTL-eQTL and eQTL-pQTL, we identified two mitochondrial genes, i.e., PARK7 and ACADM, with tier 1 evidence for their associations with IBD and ulcerative colitis (UC). PDK1 and FISI genes were associated with UC risk with tier 2 and tier 3 evidence, respectively. The methylation of cg05467918 in ACADM was associated with lower expression of ACADM, which fits with the positive effect of cg05467918 methylation on UC risk. Consistently, the inverse associations between gene methylation and gene expression were also observed in PARK7 (cg10385390) and PDK1 (cg17679246), which were corroborated with the protective role in UC. At circulating protein level, genetically predicted higher levels of PARK7 (OR 0.36, 95% CI 0.25-0.52) and HINT1 (OR 0.47, 95% CI 0.30-0.74) were inversely associated with IBD risk; genetically predicted higher level of HINT1 was associated with a decreased risk of Crohn's disease (CD) (OR 0.26, 95% CI 0.14-0.49) and a higher level of ACADM (OR 0.67, 95% CI 0.55-0.83), PDK1 (OR 0.63, 95% CI 0.49-0.81), FIS1 (OR 0.63, 95% CI 0.47-0.83) was associated with a decreased risk of UC. INTERPRETATION: We found that the mitochondrial PARK7 gene was putatively associated with IBD risk, and mitochondrial FIS1, PDK1, and ACADM genes were associated with UC risk with evidence from multi-omics levels. This study identified mitochondrial genes in relation to IBD, which may enhance the understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms of IBD development. FUNDING: XL is supported by the Natural Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of Zhejiang Province (LR22H260001) and Healthy Zhejiang One Million People Cohort (K-20230085).
BACKGROUND: Cardiac hypertrophy is an important prepathology of, and will ultimately lead to, heart failure. However, the mechanisms underlying pathological cardiac hypertrophy remain largely unknown. This study aims to elucidate the effects and mechanisms of HINT1 (histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1) in cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. METHODS: HINT1 was downregulated in human hypertrophic heart samples compared with nonhypertrophic samples by mass spectrometry analysis. Hint1 knockout mice were challenged with transverse aortic constriction surgery. Cardiac-specific overexpression of HINT1 mice by intravenous injection of adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9)-encoding Hint1 under the cTnT (cardiac troponin T) promoter were subjected to transverse aortic construction. Unbiased transcriptional analyses were used to identify the downstream targets of HINT1. AAV9 bearing shRNA against Hoxa5 (homeobox A5) was administrated to investigate whether the effects of HINT1 on cardiac hypertrophy were HOXA5-dependent. RNA sequencing analysis was performed to recapitulate possible changes in transcriptome profile.Coimmunoprecipitation assays and cellular fractionation analyses were conducted to examine the mechanism by which HINT1 regulates the expression of HOXA5. RESULTS: The reduction of HINT1 expression was observed in the hearts of hypertrophic patients and pressure overloaded-induced hypertrophic mice, respectively. In Hint1-deficient mice, cardiac hypertrophy deteriorated after transverse aortic construction. Conversely, cardiac-specific overexpression of HINT1 alleviated cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction. Unbiased profiler polymerase chain reaction array showed HOXA5 is 1 target for HINT1, and the cardioprotective role of HINT1 was abolished by HOXA5 knockdown in vivo. Hoxa5 was identified to affect hypertrophy through the TGF-beta (transforming growth factor beta) signal pathway. Mechanically, HINT1 inhibited PKCbeta1 (protein kinase C beta type 1) membrane translocation and phosphorylation via direct interaction, attenuating the MEK/ERK/YY1 (mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase/yin yang 1) signal pathway, downregulating HOXA5 expression, and eventually attenuating cardiac hypertrophy. CONCLUSIONS: HINT1 protects against cardiac hypertrophy through suppressing HOXA5 expression. These findings indicate that HINT1 may be a potential target for therapeutic interventions in cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure.
BACKGROUND: Clinical and molecular data on the occurrence and frequency of inherited neuromuscular disorders (NMD) in the Lebanese population is scarce. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to provide a retrospective overview of hereditary NMDs based on our clinical consultations in Lebanon. METHODS: Clinical and molecular data of patients referred to a multi-disciplinary consultation for neuromuscular disorders over a 20-year period (1999-2019) was reviewed. RESULTS: A total of 506 patients were diagnosed with 62 different disorders encompassing 10 classes of NMDs. 103 variants in 49 genes were identified. In this cohort, 81.4% of patients were diagnosed with motor neuron diseases and muscular dystrophies, with almost half of these described with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (40.3% of patients). We estimate a high SMA incidence of 1 in 7,500 births in Lebanon. Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy were the second most frequently diagnosed NMDs (17% of patients). These disorders were associated with the highest number of variants (39) identified in this study. A highly heterogeneous presentation of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease was notably identified. The least common disorders (5.5% of patients) involved congenital, metabolic, and mitochondrial myopathies, congenital myasthenic syndromes, and myotonic dystrophies. A review of the literature for selected NMDs in Lebanon is provided. CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicates a high prevalence and underreporting of heterogeneous forms of NMDs in Lebanon- a major challenge with many novel NMD treatments in the pipeline. This report calls for a regional NMD patient registry.
Inherited peripheral neuropathy (IPN) is a heterogeneous group of disorders due to pathogenic variation in more than 100 genes. In 2012, the first cases of IPN associated with HINT1 pathogenic variations were described in 33 families sharing the same phenotype characterized by an axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia and autosomal recessive inheritance (NMAN: OMIM #137200). Histidine Triad Nucleotide Binding Protein 1 regulates transcription, cell-cycle control, and is possibly involved in neuropsychiatric pathophysiology. Herein, we report seven French patients with NMAN identified by Next Generation Sequencing. We conducted a literature review and compared phenotypic and genotypic features with our cohort. We identified a new HINT1 pathogenic variation involved in NMAN: c.310G>C p.(Gly104Arg). This cohort is comparable with literature data regarding age of onset (7,4yo), neuronal involvement (sensorimotor 3/7 and motor pure 4/7), and skeletal abnormalities (scoliosis 3/7, feet anomalies 6/7). We expand the phenotypic spectrum of HINT1-related neuropathy by describing neurodevelopmental or psychiatric features in six out of seven individuals such as generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), mood disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). However, only 3/128 previously described patients had neuropsychiatric symptomatology or neurodevelopmental disorder. These features could be part of HINT1-related disease, and we should further study the clinical phenotype of the patients.
Although many studies have investigated the functions of histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1), its roles in neurobiological processes remain to be fully elucidated. As a member of the histidine triad (HIT) enzyme superfamily, HINT1 is distributed in almost every organ and has both enzymatic and nonenzymatic activity. Accumulating clinical and preclinical evidence suggests that HINT1 may play an important role as a neuroplastic mediator in neuropsychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia, inherited peripheral neuropathies, mood disorders, and drug addiction. Though our knowledge of HINT1 is limited, it is believed that further research on the neuropathological functions of HINT1 would eventually benefit patients with neuropsychiatric and even psychosomatic diseases.
BACKGROUND: KCNJ10 and CAPN1 variants cause "spinocerebellar" ataxia in dogs, but their association with generalized myokymia and neuromyotonia remains unclear. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between KCNJ10 and CAPN1 and myokymia or neuromyotonia, with or without concurrent spinocerebellar ataxia. ANIMALS: Thirty-three client-owned dogs with spinocerebellar ataxia, myokymia neuromytonia, or a combination of these signs. METHODS: Genetic analysis of a cohort of dogs clinically diagnosed with spinocerebellar ataxia, myokymia or neuromyotonia. KCNJ10 c.627C>G and CAPN1 c.344G>A variants and the coding sequence of KCNA1, KCNA2, KCNA6, KCNJ10 and HINT1 were sequenced using DNA extracted from blood samples. RESULTS: Twenty-four Jack Russell terriers, 1 Jack Russell terrier cross, 1 Dachshund and 1 mixed breed with spinocerebellar ataxia were biallelic (homozygous) for the KCNJ10 c.627C>G variant. Twenty-one of those dogs had myokymia, neuromyotonia, or both. One Parson Russell terrier with spinocerebellar ataxia alone was biallelic for the CAPN1 c.344G>A variant. Neither variant was found in 1 Jack Russell terrier with ataxia alone, nor in 3 Jack Russell terriers and 1 Yorkshire terrier with myokymia and neuromyotonia alone. No other causal variants were found in the coding sequence of the investigated candidate genes in these latter 5 dogs. CONCLUSION: The KCNJ10 c.627C>G variant, or rarely the CAPN1 c.344G>A variant, was confirmed to be the causal variant of spinocerebellar ataxia. We also report the presence of the KCNJ10 c.627C>G variant in the Dachshund breed. In dogs with myokymia and neuromyotonia alone the reported gene variants were not found. Other genetic or immune-mediated causes should be investigated to explain the clinical signs of these cases.
Recessive mutations in the gene encoding the histidine triad nucleotide binding protein 1 (HINT1) were recently shown to cause a motor-predominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. About 80% of the patients exhibit neuromyotonia, a striking clinical and electrophysiological hallmark that can help to distinguish this disease and to guide diagnostic screening. HINT1 neuropathy has worldwide distribution and is particularly prevalent in populations inhabiting central and south-eastern Europe. With 12 different mutations identified in more than 60 families, it ranks among the most common subtypes of axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. This article provides an overview of the present knowledge on HINT1 neuropathy with the aim to increase awareness and spur interest among clinicians and researchers in the field. We propose diagnostic guidelines to recognize and differentiate this entity and suggest treatment strategies to manage common symptoms. As a recent player in the field of hereditary neuropathies, the role of HINT1 in peripheral nerves is unknown and the underlying disease mechanisms are unexplored. We provide a comprehensive overview of the structural and functional characteristics of the HINT1 protein that may guide further studies into the molecular aetiology and treatment strategies of this peculiar Charcot-Marie-Tooth subtype.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article focuses on recent advances in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, in particular additions to the genetic spectrum, novel paradigms in molecular techniques and an update on therapeutic strategies. RECENT FINDINGS: Several new Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-causing genes have been recently identified, further enlarging the genetic diversity and phenotypic variability, including: SBF1, DHTKD1, TFG, MARS, HARS, HINT1, TRIM1, AIFM1, PDK3 and GNB4. The increasing availability and affordability of next-generation sequencing technologies has ramped up gene discovery and drastically changed genetic screening strategies. All large-scale trials studying the effect of ascorbic acid in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 1A have now been completed and were negative. Efforts have been made to design more robust outcome-measures for clinical trials. Promising results with lonaprisan, curcumin and histone deacetylase 6 inhibitors have been obtained in animal models. SUMMARY: Charcot-Marie-Tooth is the most common form of inherited peripheral neuropathy and represents the most prevalent hereditary neuromuscular disorder. The genetic spectrum spans more than 70 genes. Gene discovery has been revolutionized recently by new high-throughput molecular technologies. In addition, the phenotypic diversity has grown tremendously. This is a major challenge for geneticists and neurologists. No effective therapy is available for Charcot-Marie-Tooth. Several large trials with ascorbic acid were negative but research into novel compounds continues.
The pathogenesis of ocular diseases (ODs) remains unclear, although genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified numerous associated genetic risk loci. We integrated protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL) datasets and five large-scale GWAS summary statistics of ODs under a cutting-edge systematic analytic framework. Proteome-wide association studies (PWAS) identified plasma and brain proteins associated with ODs, and 11 plasma proteins were identified by Mendelian randomization (MR) and colocalization (COLOC) analyses as being potentially causally associated with ODs. Five of these proteins (protein-coding genes ECI1, LCT, and NPTXR for glaucoma, WARS1 for age-related macular degeneration (AMD), and SIGLEC14 for diabetic retinopathy (DR)) are newly reported. Twenty brain-protein-OD pairs were identified by COLOC analysis. Eight pairs (protein-coding genes TOM1L2, MXRA7, RHPN2, and HINT1 for senile cataract, WARS1 and TDRD7 for AMD, STAT6 for myopia, and TPPP3 for DR) are newly reported in this study. Phenotype-disease mapping analysis revealed 10 genes related to the eye/vision phenotype or ODs. Combined with a drug exploration analysis, we found that the drugs related to C3 and TXN have been used for the treatment of ODs, and another eight genes (GSTM3 for senile cataract, IGFBP7 and CFHR1 for AMD, PTPMT1 for glaucoma, EFEMP1 and ACP1 for myopia, SIRPG and CTSH for DR) are promising targets for pharmacological interventions. Our study highlights the role played by proteins in ODs, in which brain proteins were taken into account due to the deepening of eye-brain connection studies. The potential pathogenic proteins finally identified provide a more reliable reference range for subsequent medical studies.
The histidine triad nucleotide binding protein1(HINT1),which belongs to the histidine triad(HIT) enzyme superfamily,exerts its enzymic activities as hydrolase or transferase. Its physiological functions are still unclear. HINT1 protein is expressed in various tissues and plays an important role in transcription and signal transduction. Earlier studies have identified HINT1 as a haplo-insufficient tumor suppressor. Other evidences indicate that HINT1 is involved in a wide variety of physiological processes,some of which are irrelevant with its basic enzymic activities. Investigations recently suggest that HINT1 is closely related to many peripheral and central nervous system diseases,and plays a vital role in some of neuropsychiatric diseases such as inherited peripheral neuropathies,schizophrenia,mood disorder,drug addiction,and Down's syndrome. In this review,the role of HINT1 in above-mentioned neuropsychiatric disorders was summarised,and the research findings of HINT1 in each of the above diseases were summarized and analyzed,in order to provide some guidance for further research on this protein.
The use of morphine as a first-line agent for moderate-to-severe pain is limited by the development of analgesic tolerance. Initially opioid receptor desensitization in response to repeated stimulation, thought to underpin the establishment of tolerance, was linked to a compensatory increase in adenylate cyclase responsiveness. The subsequent demonstration of cross-talk between N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptors and opioid receptors led to the recognition of a role for nitric oxide (NO), wherein blockade of NO synthesis could prevent tolerance developing. Investigations of the link between NO levels and opioid receptor desensitization implicated a number of events including kinase recruitment and peroxynitrite-mediated protein regulation. Recent experimental advances and the identification of new cellular constituents have expanded the potential signaling candidates to include unexpected, intermediary compounds not previously linked to this process such as zinc, histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1), micro-ribonucleic acid (mi-RNA) and regulator of G protein signaling Z (RGSZ). A further complication is a lack of consistency in the protocols used to create tolerance, with some using acute methods measured in minutes to hours and others using days. There is also an emphasis on the cellular changes that are extant only after tolerance has been established. Although a review of the literature demonstrates a lack of spatio-temporal detail, there still appears to be a pivotal role for nitric oxide, as well as both intracellular and intercellular cross-talk. The use of more consistent approaches to verify these underlying mechanism(s) could provide an avenue for targeted drug development to rescue opioid efficacy.
BACKGROUND: Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia has been linked to loss of functional HINT1. The disease is particularly prevalent in Central and South-East Europe, Turkey and Russia due to the high carrier frequency of the c.110G > C (p.Arg37Pro) founder variant. RESULTS: In a cohort of 748 Norwegian patients with suspected peripheral neuropathy, we identified two seemingly unrelated individuals, compound heterozygous for a new variant (c.284G > A, p.Arg95Gln) and the most common pathogenic founder variant (c.110G > C, p.Arg37Pro) in the HINT1 gene. Probands presented with motor greater than sensory neuropathy of various onset, accompanied by muscle stiffness and cramps in the limbs. Furthermore, they displayed non-classical symptoms, including pain in the extremities and signs of central nervous system involvement. Haplotype analysis in both patients revealed a common chromosomal background for p.Arg95Gln; moreover, the variant was identified in Swedish carriers. Functional characterization in HINT1-knockout and patient-derived cellular models, and in HNT1-knockout yeast, suggested that the new variant is deleterious for the function of HINT1 and provided mechanistic insights allowing patient stratification for future treatment strategies. CONCLUSION: Our findings broaden the genetic epidemiology of HINT1-neuropathy and have implications for molecular diagnostics of inherited peripheral neuropathies in Scandinavia.
Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia (ARAN-NM) is a rare hereditary neuropathy within the Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) spectrum, linked to mutations in the histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1) gene. HINT1-related neuropathy is particularly common in selected populations from Central and Eastern Europe but rare in Western European cohorts. It has not been investigated to date in the Greek population. We presently investigated the frequency of HINT1-neuropathy in a selected cohort of 42 Greek index patients with autosomal recessive or sporadic axonal hereditary neuropathy according to standard molecular genetics procedures. We identified 4 patients with biallelic mutations in HINT1, comprising 9.5% of all cases and 44.4% of cases also displaying neuromyotonia. The c.110G> C (p.Arg37Pro) HINT1 mutation was present in all cases (2 homozygous) and the c.250T> C (p.Cys84Arg) in 2 cases (compound heterozygous). HINT1-related neuropathy patients were characterized by early onset and neuromyotonia. Two patients had noteworthy clinical features, one case developing myoclonic epilepsy and the other displaying "adducted thumbs." We conclude that HINT1-related neuropathy is common in selected Greek patients with hereditary neuropathy within the CMT spectrum, in accordance with some, but not all, European populations.
Histidine triad (HIT) proteins represent a small family of nucleotide-binding and -hydrolyzing proteins, which attracted the attention of cancer biologists because their expression is lost in multiple human malignancies. To some of the family members including Fhit, Hint1 and Hint2, a tumor suppressive activity was assigned. Although highly similar in structure, their mode of action appears to be different as they are not able to compensate each other's function. Surprisingly, in any reported assay system the enzymatic activity of the histidine triad proteins was not required for their tumor suppressor function. Until recently, little was known about the molecular mechanisms mediating the tumor suppressor activities of histidine triad proteins. The identification of new interaction partners started to shed light on the signaling pathways modulated by the HIT proteins. Here, we summarize these findings with special emphasis on the histidine triad proteins Hint1 and Fhit and their repressive activity on the beta-catenin signaling function.
We have briefly summarized what is known about these proteins, but in closing wish to feature the outstanding questions. Hint1 was discovered mistakenly as an inhibitor of Protein Kinase C and designated Pkci, a designation that still confuses the literature. The other Hint family members were discovered by homology to Hint1. Aprataxin was discovered as a result of the hunt for a gene responsible for AOA1. Fhit was discovered through cloning of a familial chromosome translocation breakpoint on chromosome 3 that interrupts the large FHIT gene within an intron, in the FRA3B chromosome region (Ohta et al., 1996), now known to be the region of the human genome most susceptible to DNA damage due to replication stress (Durkin et al., 2008). The NitFhit fusion genewas discovered during searches for Fhit homologs in flies and worms because the fly/worm Nit polypeptide is fused to the 5'-end of the Fhit gene; the mammalian Nit gene family was discovered because of the NitFhit fusion gene, in searches for homologs to the Nit polypeptide of the NitFhit gene. Each of the Hit family member proteins is reported to have enzymatic activities toward putative substrates involving nucleosides or dinucleosides. Most surprisingly, each of the Hit family proteins discussed has been implicated in important DNA damage response pathways and/or tumor suppression pathways. And for each of them it has been difficult to assign definite substrates, to know if the substrates and catalytic products have biological functions, to know if that function is related to the DNA damage response and suppressor functions, and to precisely define the pathways through which tumor suppression occurs. When the fly Nit sequence was found at the 5'-end of the fly Fhit gene, this gene was hailed as a Rosetta stone gene/protein that would help in discovery of the function of Fhit, because the Nit protein should be in the same signal pathway (Pace et al., 2000). However, the mammalian Nit family proteins have turned out to be at least as mysterious as the Fhit proteins, with the Nit1 substrate still unknown and the surprising finding that Nit proteins also appear to behave as tumor suppressor proteins. Whether the predicted enzymatic functions of these proteins are relevant to the observed biological functions, remain among the outstanding unanswered puzzles and raise the question: have these mammalian proteins evolved beyond the putative original enzymatic purpose, such that the catalytic function is now vestigial and subservient to signal pathways that use the protein-substrate complexes in pathways that signal apoptosis or DNA damage response? Or can these proteins be fulfilling catalytic functions independently but in parallel with signal pathway functions, as perhaps observed for Aprataxin? Or is the catalytic function indeed part of the observed biological functions, such as apoptosis and tumor suppression? Perhaps the recent, post-genomic focus on metabolomics and genome-wide investigations of signal pathway networks will lead to answers to some of these outstanding questions.
Human histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1) has recently become a protein of interest due to its involvement in several CNS processes, including neuroplasticity and the development of several neuropsychiatric disorders. Crucially, HINT1 behaves as a mediator for cross-regulation of the mu-opioid receptor (MOR) and N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR). Active site inhibition of HINT1 using small-molecule inhibitors has been demonstrated to have a significant impact on this cross-regulatory relationship in vivo. Herein, we describe the development of a series of ethenoadenosine HINT1 inhibitors to further evaluate the effect of HINT1 inhibition on morphine's blockade of NMDA-evoked behaviors, the development of acute endomorphin-2 tolerance, and analgesia. X-ray crystallographic analysis and HINT1 binding experiments demonstrate that modifications to the inhibitor nucleobase greatly impact the inhibitor binding interactions with HINT1. Our results reveal a complex structure-activity relationship for HINT1 inhibitors, in which minor modifications to the ethenoadenosine scaffold resulted in dramatic changes to their activity in these assays modeling MOR-NMDAR interaction. Specifically, we observed the ability of HINT1 inhibitors to selectively affect individual pathways of MOR-NMDAR crosstalk. Furthermore, we observed that a carbamate ethenoadenosine inhibitor of HINT1 can induce analgesia while not affecting opioid tolerance. Additionally, although past studies have indicated that the loss of HINT1 expression can result in the downregulation of p53, we have shown that the inhibition of HINT1 has no effect on either the expression of HINT1 or p53. These studies highlight the critical role of HINT1 in MOR-NMDAR crosstalk and demonstrate the intriguing potential of using HINT1 active-site inhibitors as tools to probe its role in these biochemical pathways and its potential as a novel pain target.
The 14 kDa histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1) is critical to maintain the normal function of motor neurons. Thus, a series of human HINT1 mutants cause autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia. HINT1 establishes a series of regulatory interactions with signaling proteins, some of which are enriched in motor neurons, such as the type 1 sigma receptor or intracellular domain (ICD) of transmembrane teneurin 1, both of which are also implicated in motor disturbances. In a previous study, we reported the capacity of HINT1 to remove the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) from a series of substrates and the influence of HINT1 mutants on this activity. We now report how human HINT1 mutations affect the interaction of HINT1 with the regulator of its SUMOylase activity, calcium-activated calmodulin, and its substrate SUMO. Moreover, HINT1 mutants exhibited anomalous interactions with G protein coupled receptors, such as the mu-opioid, and with glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors as well. Additionally, these HINT1 mutants showed impaired associations with transcriptional regulators such as the regulator of G protein signaling Z2 protein and the cleaved N-terminal ICD of teneurin 1. Thus, the altered enzymatic activity of human HINT1 mutants and their anomalous interactions with partner proteins may disrupt signaling pathways essential to the normal function of human motor neurons.
Gene expression changes in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, and gene responses to therapeutic drugs, provide new ways to identify central nervous system (CNS) targets for drug discovery. This review summarizes gene and pathway targets replicated in expression profiling of human postmortem brain, animal models, and cell culture studies. Analysis of isolated human neurons implicates targets for Alzheimer's disease and the cognitive decline associated with normal aging and mild cognitive impairment. In addition to tau, amyloid-beta precursor protein, and amyloid-beta peptides (Abeta), these targets include all three high-affinity neurotrophin receptors and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) system, synapse markers, glutamate receptors (GluRs) and transporters, and dopamine (DA) receptors, particularly the D2 subtype. Gene-based candidates for Parkinson's disease (PD) include the ubiquitin-proteosome system, scavengers of reactive oxygen species, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), its receptor, TrkB, and downstream target early growth response 1, Nurr-1, and signaling through protein kinase C and RAS pathways. Increasing variability and decreases in brain mRNA production from middle age to old age suggest that cognitive impairments during normal aging may be addressed by drugs that restore antioxidant, DNA repair, and synaptic functions including those of DA to levels of younger adults. Studies in schizophrenia identify robust decreases in genes for GABA function, including glutamic acid decarboxylase, HINT1, glutamate transport and GluRs, BDNF and TrkB, numerous 14-3-3 protein family members, and decreases in genes for CNS synaptic and metabolic functions, particularly glycolysis and ATP generation. Many of these metabolic genes are increased by insulin and muscarinic agonism, both of which are therapeutic in psychosis. Differential genomic signals are relatively sparse in bipolar disorder, but include deficiencies in the expression of 14-3-3 protein members, implicating these chaperone proteins and the neurotransmitter pathways they support as possible drug targets. Brains from persons with major depressive disorder reveal decreased expression for genes in glutamate transport and metabolism, neurotrophic signaling (eg, FGF, BDNF and VGF), and MAP kinase pathways. Increases in these pathways in the brains of animals exposed to electroconvulsive shock and antidepressant treatments identify neurotrophic and angiogenic growth factors and second messenger stimulation as therapeutic approaches for the treatment of depression.
BACKGROUND: Histidine triad nucleotide-binding protein 1 (HINT1) is regarded as a haplo-insufficient tumor suppressor and is closely associated with diverse neuropsychiatric diseases. Moreover, HINT1 is related to gender-specific acute behavior changes in schizophrenia and in response to nicotine. Stress has a range of molecular effects in emotional disorders, which can cause a reduction in brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression in the hippocampus, resulting in hippocampal atrophy and neuronal cell loss. METHODS: This study examined the role of HINT1 deficiency in anxiety-related and depression-like behaviors and BDNF expression in the hippocampus under chronic immobilization stress, and investigated whether the sex-specific and haplo-insufficient effects exist in emotional-like behaviors under the same condition. RESULTS: In a battery of behavior tests, the results of the control group, not exposed to stress, showed that knockout (KO) and heterozygosity (HT) of Hint1 had anxiolytic-like and antidepression-like effects on the male and female mice. However, both male and female Hint1-KO mice showed elevated anxiety-related and antidepression-like behavior under chronic immobilization stress; moreover, both male and female Hint1-HT mice displayed elevated anxiety-related behavior and increased depression-like behavior under chronic immobilization stress. There were no significant differences in general locomotor activity between Hint1-KO and -HT mice and their wild-type (WT) littermates. Hint1-KO mice under basal and chronic immobilization stress conditions expressed more BDNF in the hippocampus than did Hint1-HT and WT mice; overall, there were no significant sex differences in emotional-like behaviors of Hint1-KO and -HT mice. Additionally, Hint1-HT mice showed haplo-insufficient effects on emotional-like behaviors under basic conditions, rather than under chronic immobilization stress. CONCLUSIONS: Both male and female HINT 1 KO and HT mice had a trend of anxiolytic-like behavior and antidepression-like behavior at control group. However, both male and female HINT1 KO mice showed elevated anxiety-related and antidepression-like behavior under chronic immobilization stress; moreover, both male and female HINT1 HT mice displayed elevated anxiety-related behavior and increased depression-like behavior under chronic immobilization stress.
INTRODUCTION: Autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy with neuromyotonia (ARAN-NM) is a rare disease entity linked to mutations in the histidine triad nucleotide binding protein 1 (HINT1) gene. The diagnosis and treatment of ARAN-NM are challenging. There have been few reports of ARAN-NM in East Asia. METHODS: A 15-year-old Chinese ARAN-NM patient developed muscle weakness, cramps and atrophy in the lower limbs at the age of 12. Electromyography (EMG) showed motor axonal degeneration and neuromyotonic discharges. Whole exome sequencing was performed. Bioinformatic methods and computational 3D structure modeling were used to analyze the identified variant. According to literature review, carbamazepine was prescribed to the patient. RESULTS: Genetic tests identified a homozygous mutation c.356G > T (p.R119L) in the HINT1 gene, which has never been reported before according to HGMD database. Several bioinformatic approaches predicted the variant was damaging. Computational 3D modeling indicated the variant changed the structure of HINT1 protein. Notably, we demonstrated the positive effects of carbamazepine in treating muscle stiffness and cramps of ARAN-NM. DISCUSSION: 22 variants have been reported in the HINT1 gene, and we identified a novel c.356G > T (p.R119L) variant. Our study expands the genetic spectrum of ARAN-NM. Moreover, large clinical trials are required to further demonstrate the role of carbamazepine in ARAN-NM.
