C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; Receptor for the C-X-C chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1 that transduces a signal by increasing intracellular calcium ion levels and enhancing MAPK1/MAPK3 activation. Involved in the AKT signaling cascade. Plays a role in regulation of cell migration, e.g. during wound healing. Acts as a receptor for extracellular ubiquitin; leading to enhanced intracellular calcium ions and reduced cellular cAMP levels. Binds bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) et mediates LPS-induced inflammatory response, including TNF secretion by monocytes. Involved in hematopoiesis and in car [...] 
Lysosome-mediated autophagy and caspase-dependent apoptosis are dynamic processes that maintain cellular homeostasis, ensuring cell health and functionality. The intricate interplay and reciprocal regulation between autophagy and apoptosis are implicated in various human diseases, including cancer. High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), a nonhistone chromosomal protein, plays a pivotal role in coordinating autophagy and apoptosis levels during tumor initiation, progression, and therapy. The regulation of autophagy machinery and the apoptosis pathway by HMGB1 is influenced by various factors, including the protein's subcellular localization, oxidative state, and interactions with binding partners. In this narrative review, we provide a comprehensive overview of the structure and function of HMGB1, with a specific focus on the interplay between autophagic degradation and apoptotic death in tumorigenesis and cancer therapy. Gaining a comprehensive understanding of the significance of HMGB1 as a biomarker and its potential as a therapeutic target in tumor diseases is crucial for advancing our knowledge of cell survival and cell death.
BACKGROUND: Sodium/iodide symporter (NIS)-mediated iodide uptake plays an important physiological role in regulating thyroid gland function, as well as in diagnosing and treating Graves' disease and thyroid cancer. High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), a highly conserved nuclear protein, is a positive regulator of autophagy conferring resistance to chemotherapy, radiotherapy and immunotherapy in cancer cells. Here the authors intended to identify the role of HMGB1 in Hank's balanced salt solution (HBSS)-induced autophagy, explore NIS protein degradation through a autophagy-lysosome pathway in thyroid cancer cells and elucidate the possible molecular mechanisms. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) were performed for detecting the expression of HMGB1 in different tissues. HMGB1 was knocked down by lentiviral transfection in FTC-133/TPC-1 cells. Autophagic markers LC3-II, p62, Beclin1 and autophagosomal formation were employed for evaluating HMGB1-mediated autophagy in HBSS-treated cells by Western blot, immunofluorescence and electron microscopy. Western blot, quantitative RT-PCR and gamma counter analysis were performed for detecting NIS expression and iodide uptake in HMGB1-knockdown cells after different treatments. The reactive oxygen species (ROS) level, ROS-mediated LC3-II expression and HMGB1 cytosolic translocation were detected by fluorospectrophotometer, flow cytometry, Western blot and immunofluorescence. HMGB1-mediated AMPK, mTOR and p70S6K phosphorylation (p-AMPK, p-mTOR & p-p70S6K) were detected by Western blot. Furthermore, a nude murine model with transplanted tumor was employed for examining the effect of HMGB1-mediated autophagy on imaging and biodistribution of (99m)TcO4(-). NIS, Beclin1, p-AMPK and p-mTOR were detected by immunohistochemical staining and Western blot in transplanted tumor samples. RESULTS: HMGB1 was a critical regulator of autophagy-mediated NIS degradation in HBSS-treated FTC-133/TPC-1 cells. And HMGB1 up-regulation was rather prevalent in thyroid cancer tissues and closely correlated with worse overall lymph node metastasis and clinical stage. HMGB1-knockdown dramatically suppressed autophagy, NIS degradation and boosted iodide uptake in HBSS-treated cells. Moreover, HBSS enhanced ROS-sustained autophagy and promoted the cytosolic translocation of HMGB1. A knockdown of HMGB1 suppressed LC3-II conversion and NIS degradation via an AMPK/mTOR-dependent signal pathway through a regulation of ROS generation, rather than ATP. Furthermore, these data were further supported by our in vivo experiment of xenografts formed by HMGB1 knockdown cells reverting the uptake of (99m)TcO4(-) as compared with control shRNA-transfected cells in hunger group. CONCLUSIONS: Acting as a critical regulator of autophagy-mediated NIS degradation via ROS/AMPK/mTOR pathway, HMGB1is a potential intervention target of radioiodine therapy in thyroid cancer.
RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end products) is a multi-ligand receptor that belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily of transmembrane proteins. RAGE binds AGEs (advanced glycation end products), HMGB1 (high-mobility group box-1; also designated as amphoterin), members of the S100 protein family, glycosaminoglycans and amyloid beta peptides. Recent studies using tools of structural biology have started to unravel common molecular patterns in the diverse set of ligands recognized by RAGE. The distal Ig domain (V1 domain) of RAGE has a positively charged patch, the geometry of which fits to anionic surfaces displayed at least in a proportion of RAGE ligands. Association of RAGE to itself, to HSPGs (heparan sulfate proteoglycans), and to Toll-like receptors in the cell membrane plays a key role in cell signaling initiated by RAGE ligation. Ligation of RAGE activates cell signaling pathways that regulate migration of several cell types. Furthermore, RAGE ligation has profound effects on the transcriptional profile of cells. RAGE signaling has been mainly studied as a pathogenetic factor of several diseases, where acute or chronic inflammation plays a role. Recent studies have suggested a physiological role for RAGE in normal lung function and in neuronal signaling.
Malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) is an asbestos-related neoplasm that can only be treated successfully when correctly diagnosed and treated early. The asbestos-exposed population is a high-risk group that could benefit from sensitive and specific blood- or tissue-based biomarkers. We review recent work with biomarker development in MPM and literature of the last 20 years on the most promising blood- and tissue-based biomarkers. Proteomic, genomic, and epigenomic platforms are covered. SMRP is the only validated blood-based biomarker with diagnostic, monitoring and prognostic value. To strengthen development and testing of MPM biomarkers, cohorts for validation must be established by enlisting worldwide collaborations.
The High-Mobility Group Box-1 (HMGB1), a non-histone chromatin-associated protein, plays a crucial role in cancer growth and response to therapy as it retains a pivotal role in promoting both cell death and survival. HMGB1 has been reported to regulate several signaling pathways engaged in inflammation, genome stability, immune function, cell proliferation, cell autophagy, metabolism, and apoptosis. However, the association between HMGB1 and cancer is complex and its mechanism in tumorigenesis needs to be further elucidated. This review aims to understand the role of HMGB1 in human malignancies and discuss the signaling pathways linked to this process to provide a comprehensive understanding on the association of HMGB1 with carcinogenesis. Further, we will review the role of HMGB1 as a target/biomarker for cancer therapy, the therapeutic strategies used to target this protein, and its potential role in preventing or treating cancers. In light of the recent growing evidence linking HMGB1 to cancer progression, we think that it may be suggested as a novel and emergent therapeutic target for cancer therapy. Hence, HMGB1 warrants paramount investigation to comprehensively map its role in tumorigenesis.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to investigate the role of high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) in placental development and fetal growth. METHODS: We employed the Cre-loxP recombination system to establish a placenta-specific HMGB1 knockout mouse model. Breeding HMGB1flox/flox mice with Elf5-Cre mice facilitated the knockout, leveraging Elf5 expression in extra-embryonic ectoderm, ectoplacental cone, and trophoblast giant cells at 12.5 days of embryonic development. The primary goal of this model was to elucidate the molecular mechanism of HMGB1 in placental development, assessing parameters such as placental weight, fetal weight, and bone development. Additionally, we utilized lentiviral interference and overexpression of HMGB1 in human trophoblast cells to further investigate HMGB1's functional role. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that the HMGB1flox/floxElf5cre/+ mouse displays fetal growth restriction, characterized by decreased placental and fetal weight and impaired bone development. The absence of HMGB1 inhibits autophagosome formation, impairs lysosomal degradation, and disrupts autophagic flux. Depletion of HMGB1 in human trophoblast cells also suppresses cell viability, proliferation, migration, and invasion by inhibiting the ERK signaling pathway. Overexpression of HMGB1 observed the opposite phenotypes. CONCLUSIONS: HMGB1 participates in the regulation of autophagy through the ERK signaling pathway and affects placental development.
High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein is a highly abundant protein that can promote the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases once it is in an extracellular location. This translocation can occur with immune cell activation as well as cell death, with the conditions for release associated with the expression of different isoforms. These isoforms result from post-translational modifications, with the redox states of three cysteines at positions 23, 45 and 106 critical for activity. Depending on the redox states of these residues, HMGB1 can induce cytokine production via toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) or promote chemotaxis by binding the chemokine CXCL12 for stimulation via CXCR4. Fully oxidized HMGB1 is inactive. During the course of inflammatory disease, HMGB1 can therefore play a dynamic role depending on its redox state. As a mechanism to generate alarmins, cell death is an important source of HMGB1, although each major cell death form (necrosis, apoptosis, pyroptosis and NETosis) can lead to different isoforms of HMGB1 and variable levels of association of HMGB1 with nucleosomes. The association of HMGB1 with nucleosomes may contribute to the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus by producing nuclear material whose immunological properties are enhanced by the presence of an alarmin. Since HMGB1 levels in blood or tissue are elevated in many inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, this molecule can serve as a unique biomarker as well as represent a target of novel therapies to block its various activities.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the most fatal disease that causes sudden death, and inflammation contributes substantially to its occurrence and progression. The prevalence of CVD increases as the population ages, and the pathophysiology is complex. Anti-inflammatory and immunological modulation are the potential methods for CVD prevention and treatment. High-Mobility Group (HMG) chromosomal proteins are one of the most abundant nuclear nonhistone proteins which act as inflammatory mediators in DNA replication, transcription, and repair by producing cytokines and serving as damage-associated molecular patterns in inflammatory responses. The most common and well-studied HMG proteins are those with an HMGB domain, which participate in a variety of biological processes. HMGB1 and HMGB2 were the first members of the HMGB family to be identified and are present in all investigated eukaryotes. Our review is primarily concerned with the involvement of HMGB1 and HMGB2 in CVD. The purpose of this review is to provide a theoretical framework for diagnosing and treating CVD by discussing the structure and function of HMGB1 and HMGB2.
During sepsis, the alarmin HMGB1 is released from tissues and promotes systemic inflammation that results in multi-organ damage, with the kidney particularly susceptible to injury. The severity of inflammation and pro-damage signaling mediated by HMGB1 appears to be dependent on the alarmin's redox state. Therefore, we examined HMGB1 redox in kidney cells during sepsis. Using intravital microscopy, CellROX labeling of kidneys in live mice indicated increased ROS generation in the kidney perivascular endothelium and tubules during lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced sepsis. Subsequent CellROX and MitoSOX labeling of LPS-stressed endothelial and kidney proximal tubule cells demonstrated increased ROS generation in these cells as sepsis worsens. Consequently, HMGB1 oxidation increased in the cytoplasm of kidney cells during its translocation from the nucleus to the circulation, with the degree of oxidation dependent on the severity of sepsis, as measured in in vivo mouse samples using a thiol assay and mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The greater the oxidation of HMGB1, the greater the ability of the alarmin to stimulate pro-inflammatory cyto-/chemokine release (measured by Luminex Multiplex) and alter mitochondrial ATP generation (Luminescent ATP Detection Assay). Administration of glutathione and thioredoxin inhibitors to cell cultures enhanced HMGB1 oxidation during sepsis in endothelial and proximal tubule cells, respectively. In conclusion, as sepsis worsens, ROS generation and HMGB1 oxidation increases in kidney cells, which enhances HMGB1's pro-inflammatory signaling. Conversely, the glutathione and thioredoxin systems work to maintain the protein in its reduced state.
RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation end-products) is a multiligand receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily involved in inflammation, diabetes, atherosclerosis, nephropathy, neurodegeneration, and cancer. Advanced glycation end-products, high mobility group box-1 (amphoterin), beta-amyloid fibrils, certain S100 proteins, and DNA and RNA are RAGE ligands. Upon RAGE ligation, adaptor proteins (i.e., diaphanous-1, TIRAP, MyD88 and/or other as yet unidentified adaptors) associate with RAGE cytoplasmic domain resulting in signaling. However, RAGE activation may not be restricted to pathological statuses, the receptor being involved in tissue homeostasis and regeneration/repair upon acute injury, and in resolution of inflammation. RAGE effects are strongly dependent on the cell type and the context, which may condition therapeutic strategies aimed at reducing RAGE signaling.
HMGB1, a very mobile chromatin protein, leaks out from necrotic cells and signals to neighbouring cells that tissue damage has occurred. At least one receptor for extracellular HMGB1 exists, and signals to different cells to divide, migrate, activate inflammation or start an immune response. Remarkably, apoptotic chromatin binds HMGB1 irreversibly, thereby ensuring that it will not diffuse away to activate responses from neighbouring cells. Thus, dying cells use their own chromatin to signal how they have died. We argue that the nuclear events in apoptosis serve to control the molecular signals that dying cells send out.
BACKGROUND: Liver cancer is increasing due to the rise in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH). High-mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) is involved in the pathogenesis of chronic liver disease, but its role in MASH-associated liver cancer is unknown. We hypothesized that an increase in hepatocyte-derived HMGB1 in a mouse model of inactivation of PTEN that causes MASH could promote MASH-induced tumorigenesis. METHODS: We analyzed publicly available transcriptomics datasets, and to explore the effect of overexpressing HMGB1 in cancer progression, we injected 1.5-month-old Pten∆Hep mice with adeno-associated virus serotype-8 (AAV8) vectors to overexpress HMGB1-EGFP or EGFP, and sacrificed them at 3, 9 and 11 months of age. RESULTS: We found that HMGB1 mRNA increases in human MASH and MASH-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (MASH-HCC) compared to healthy livers. Male and female Pten∆Hep mice overexpressing HMGB1 showed accelerated liver tumor development at 9 and 11 months, respectively, with increased tumor size and volume, compared to control Pten∆Hep mice. Moreover, Pten∆Hep mice overexpressing HMGB1, had increased incidence of mixed HCC-intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA). All iCCAs were positive for nuclear YAP and SOX9. Male Pten∆Hep mice overexpressing HMGB1 showed increased cell proliferation and F4/80+ cells at 3 and 9 months. CONCLUSION: Overexpression of HMGB1 in hepatocytes accelerates liver tumorigenesis in Pten∆Hep mice, enhancing cell proliferation and F4/80+ cells to drive MASH-induced liver cancer.
Metabolites are important for cell fate determination. Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F1,6P) is the rate-limiting product in glycolysis and the rate-limiting substrate in gluconeogenesis. Here, it is discovered that the nuclear-accumulated F1,6P impairs cancer cell viability by directly binding to high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), the most abundant non-histone chromosome structural protein with paradoxical roles in tumor development. F1,6P disrupts the association between the HMGB1 A-box and C-tail by targeting K43/K44 residues, inhibits HMGB1 oligomerization, and stabilizes P53 protein by increasing P53-HMGB1 interaction. Moreover, F1,6P lowers the affinity of HMGB1 for DNA and DNA adducts, which sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drug(s)-induced DNA replication stress and DNA damage. Concordantly, F1,6P resensitizes cancer cells with chemotherapy resistance, impairs tumor growth and enhances chemosensitivity in mice, and impedes the growth of human tumor organoids. These findings reveal a novel role for nuclear-accumulated F1,6P and underscore the potential utility of F1,6P as a drug for cancer therapy.
High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) has been implicated as a key factor in several neuroinflammatory conditions. Our previous study suggested that the release of central HMGB1 acts as a late-phase mediator in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced depression. Recent findings indicate that the redox state of HMGB1 is a critical determinant of its immunomodulatory properties. Here, we aimed to investigate the potential mechanisms that link the redox states of HMGB1 to depression in mice. Distinct redox forms of recombinant HMGB1 (rHMGB1) were used that included fully reduced HMGB (fr-HMGB1), which acted as a chemokine, and disulfide-HMGB1 (ds-HMGB1), which possessed cytokine activity. Fr-HMGB1 in vivo was partially oxidized into ds-HMGB1; thus, the mutant protein non-oxidizable chemokine-HMGB (nonoxid-HMGB1) was applied. Concurrent with depressive behavior induced by four-week stress exposure, the HMGB1 concentrations in the serum and cerebral cortex substantially increased. Therefore, a single dose of rHMGB1 (200ng/5mul/mice) or vehicle was administered to mice via intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection. The receptor inhibitors of TLR4/RAGE/CXCR4 (TAK-242/FPS-ZM1/AMD3100) (3mg/kg) were intraperitoneally injected 30min prior to rHMGB1 treatment. Depressive-like behavior was measured 20h post i.c.v. injection. Administration of fr-HMGB1 prolonged the immobility duration in the tail suspension test (TST) and decreased sucrose preference. In addition to depressive behavior, the hippocampal TNF-alpha protein slightly increased. These depressive behaviors and upregulation of hippocampal TNF-alpha were alleviated or abrogated by pretreatment with the inhibitors AMD3100, FPS-ZM1, and TAK-242. Alternatively, nonoxid-HMGB1 failed to induce TNF-alpha protein or prolong the immobility duration. As expected, ds-HMGB1 administration substantially upregulated hippocampal TNF-alpha protein, increased the immobility time in the TST and decreased sucrose preference. Moreover, both glycyrrhizin and TAK-242 improved ds-HMGB1-induced depressive behavior. Furthermore, TAK-242 significantly blocked the upregulation of hippocampal TNF-alpha protein and protected hippocampal myelin basic protein from ds-HMGB1-induced reduction. These drugs had no effect on the total or central distance in the open field test. Collectively, this initial experiment demonstrates the role and receptor mechanisms of HMGB1 under different redox states on the induction of depressive-like behavior. Both ds-HMGB1 and fr-HMGB1 may induce depressive-like behavior in vivo mainly via neuroinflammatory response activation.
Murine sickle cell disease (SCD) results in damage to multiple organs, likely mediated first by vasculopathy. While the mechanisms inducing vascular damage remain to be determined, nitric oxide bioavailability and sterile inflammation are both considered to play major roles in vasculopathy. Here, we investigate the effects of high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1), a pro-inflammatory damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) molecule on endothelial-dependent vasodilation and lung morphometrics, a structural index of damage in sickle (SS) mice. SS mice were treated with either phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), hE-HMGB1-BP, an hE dual-domain peptide that binds and removes HMGB1 from the circulation via the liver, 1-[4-(aminocarbonyl)-2-methylphenyl]-5-[4-(1H-imidazol-1-yl)phenyl]-1H-pyrrole-2-propanoic acid (N6022) or N-acetyl-lysyltyrosylcysteine amide (KYC) for three weeks. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were treated with recombinant HMGB1 (r-HMGB1), which increases S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) expression by  approximately 80%, demonstrating a direct effect of HMGB1 to increase GSNOR. Treatment of SS mice with hE-HMGB1-BP reduced plasma HMGB1 in SS mice to control levels and reduced GSNOR expression in facialis arteries isolated from SS mice by  approximately 20%. These changes were associated with improved endothelial-dependent vasodilation. Treatment of SS mice with N6022 also improved vasodilation in SS mice suggesting that targeting GSNOR also improves vasodilation. SCD decreased protein nitrosothiols (SNOs) and radial alveolar counts (RAC) and increased GSNOR expression and mean linear intercepts (MLI) in lungs from SS mice. The marked changes in pulmonary morphometrics and GSNOR expression throughout the lung parenchyma in SS mice were improved by treating with either hE-HMGB1-BP or KYC. These data demonstrate that murine SCD induces vasculopathy and chronic lung disease by an HMGB1- and GSNOR-dependent mechanism and suggest that HMGB1 and GSNOR might be effective therapeutic targets for reducing vasculopathy and chronic lung disease in humans with SCD.
BACKGROUND: Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) encompasses a spectrum of liver disorders resulting from prolonged alcohol consumption and is influenced by factors such as oxidative stress, inflammation, and apoptosis. High Mobility Group Box 1 (HMGB1) plays a pivotal role in ALD due to its involvement in inflammation and immune responses. Another key factor, Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), an NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase, is known for its roles in cellular stress responses and metabolic regulation. Despite individual studies on HMGB1 and SIRT1 in ALD, their specific molecular interactions and combined effects on disease advancement remain incompletely understood. METHODS: Alcohol-induced liver injury (ALI) models were established using HepG2 cells and male C57BL/6 mice. HMGB1 and SIRT1 expressions were assessed at the mRNA and protein levels usingreverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction, western blot, and immunofluorescence staining. The physical interaction between HMGB1 and SIRT1 was investigated using co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence co-expression analyses. Cellular viability was evaluated using the CCK-8 assay. RESULTS: In patients with clinical ALI, HMGB1 mRNA levels were elevated, while SIRT1 expression was reduced, indicating a negative correlation between the two. ALI models were successfully established in cells and mice, as evidenced by increased markers of cellular and liver damage. HMGB1 acetylation and translocation were observed in both ALI cells and mouse models. Treatment with the SIRT1 agonist, SRT1720, reversed the upregulation of HMGB1 acetylation, nuclear translocation, and release in the ethyl alcohol (EtOH) group. Furthermore, SIRT1 significantly attenuated ALI. Importantly, in vivo binding was confirmed between SIRT1 and HMGB1. CONCLUSIONS: SIRT1 alleviates HMGB1 acetylation and translocation, thereby ameliorating ALI.
RATIONALE: Alcoholism is a primary, chronic relapsing disease of brain reward, motivation, memory, and related circuitry. It is characterized by an individual's continued drinking despite negative consequences related to alcohol use, which is exemplified by alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress. Chronic alcohol consumption increases the expression of innate immune signaling molecules (ISMs) in the brain that alter cognitive processes and promote alcohol drinking. OBJECTIVES: Unraveling the mechanisms of alcohol-induced neuroimmune gene induction is complicated by positive loops of multiple cytokines and other signaling molecules that converge on nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells and activator protein-1 leading to induction of additional neuroimmune signaling molecules that amplify and expand the expression of ISMs. RESULTS: Studies from our laboratory employing reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to assess mRNA, immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis to assess protein expression, and others suggest that ethanol increases brain neuroimmune gene and protein expression through two distinct mechanisms involving (1) systemic induction of innate immune molecules that are transported from blood to the brain and (2) the direct release of high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) from neurons in the brain. Released HMGB1 signals through multiple receptors, particularly Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, that potentiate cytokine receptor responses leading to a hyperexcitable state that disrupts neuronal networks and increases excitotoxic neuronal death. Innate immune gene activation in brain is persistent, consistent with the chronic relapsing disease that is alcoholism. Expression of HMGB1, TLRs, and other ISMs is increased several-fold in the human orbital frontal cortex, and expression of these molecules is highly correlated with each other as well as lifetime alcohol consumption and age of drinking onset. CONCLUSIONS: The persistent and cumulative nature of alcohol on HMGB1 and TLR gene induction support their involvement in alcohol-induced long-term changes in brain function and neurodegeneration.
Malignant melanoma is the main cause of death in patients with skin cancer. Overexpression of Proteolipid protein 2 (PLP2) increased tumor metastasis and the knockdown of PLP2 inhibited the growth and metastasis of melanoma cells. In the present work, we studied the antitumor activity of peptide Rb4 derived from protein PLP2. In vitro, Rb4 induced F-actin polymerization, prevented F-actin depolymerization and increased the ER-derived cytosolic calcium. Such effects were associated with necrosis of murine melanoma B16F10-Nex2 cells and with inhibition of the viability of human cancer cell lines. Loss of plasma membrane integrity, dilation of mitochondria, cytoplasm vacuolation and absence of chromatin condensation characterized tumor cell necrosis. Cleavage of PARP-1 and inhibition of RIP1 expression were also observed. In vivo, peptide Rb4 reduced the lung metastasis of tumor cells and delayed the subcutaneous melanoma growth in a syngeneic model. Rb4 induced the expression of two DAMPs molecules, HMGB1 and calreticulin, in B16F10-Nex2. Our results suggest that peptide Rb4 acts directly on tumor cells inducing the expression of DAMPs, which trigger the immunoprotective effect in vivo against melanoma cells. We suggest that peptide Rb4 is a promising compound to be developed as an anticancer drug.
INTRODUCTION: High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is a non-histone nuclear protein and can be extracellularly secreted to induce sterile inflammation. Although uterine deletion of HMGB1 causes implantation and decidualization defects, how secreted HMGB1 is involved in mouse early pregnancy is still unknown. METHODS: Mouse models, mouse primary endometrial cells and human endometrial cell lines were used in this study. Both immunofluorescence and Western blot were performed to show the localization and relative level of HMGB1 and acetylated HMGB1, respectively. Relative mRNA levels were analyzed by real time RT-PCR. RESULTS: The secreted HMGB1 was detected in uterine lumen fluid in mouse periimplantation uterus. There is an obvious difference for secreted HMGB1 levels in uterine fluid between day 4 of pregnancy and day 4 of pseudopregnancy, suggesting the involvement of blastocysts during HMGB1 secretion. Trypsin is clearly detected in mouse blastocyst cavity and in the supernatant of cultured blastocysts. Trypsin significantly stimulates HB-EGF production through activating PAR2 and ADAM17. Uterine injection of PAR2 inhibitor into day 4 pregnant mice significantly reduces the number of implantation sites. HB-EGF released from luminal epithelium can induce mouse in vitro decidualization. The conditioned medium collected from trypsin-treated luminal epithelium is able to induce in vitro decidualization, which is suppressed by EGFR inhibitor. Intrauterine injection of glycyrrhizin (HMGB1 inhibitor) can significantly inhibit mouse embryo implantation. We also showed that exogenous HMGB1 released from human epithelial cells are able to induce human in vitro decidualization. CONCLUSION: Trypsin can induce decidualization of stromal cells via PAR2-HMGB1-ADAM17-HB-EGF from luminal epithelium.
High mobility group B1 (HMGB1) and its counter-receptor, receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), represent suitable targets for investigation, integrating many aspects of modern biology, particularly that associated with chronic diseases involving inflammation, dysregulated cell death and cancer. Also known as amphoterin, HMGB1 was initially identified over 25 years ago as a transcriptional regulatory molecule causing DNA bending, and facilitating binding of several transcriptional complexes, in particular members of the nuclear hormone receptor family. Although loosely bound to chromatin, it is released from necrotic cells but not apoptotic cells and is actively secreted by activated macrophages in a partially tumor necrosis factor-dependent manner. It serves as a late mediator of septic death present within the serum and inflammatory sites of patients with arthritis, correlating with the inflammatory response, to signal tissue injury, causes sickness behavior, and acts as an endogenous pyrogen. Although known to interact with RAGE on endothelial cells causing activation and leukocyte recruitment, RAGE itself has most recently been shown to serve as a counter-receptor for leukocyte integrins, suggesting that signaling through this molecule is potentially important for cell adhesion and clustering as well as recruitment of inflammatory cells. Targeting the HMGB1 ligand or its receptor represents an important potential application in cancer therapeutics, given its widespread overexpression, as well as that of its receptor in virtually every tumor type carefully examined. This, coupled with its ability to accelerate tumor growth in immunodeficient murine models, suggests that it is a possible therapeutic target in patients with cancer.
