3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase; Transmembrane glycoprotein that is the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis as well as in the biosynthesis of nonsterol isoprenoids that are essential for normal cell function including ubiquinone and geranylgeranyl proteins.
Large-scale molecular profiling and genotyping provide a unique opportunity to systematically compare the genetically predicted effects of therapeutic targets on the human metabolome. We firstly constructed genetic risk scores for 8 drug targets on the basis that they primarily modify low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (HMGCR, PCKS9, and NPC1L1), high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (CETP), or triglycerides (APOC3, ANGPTL3, ANGPTL4, and LPL). Conducting mendelian randomisation (MR) provided strong evidence of an effect of drug-based genetic scores on coronary artery disease (CAD) risk with the exception of ANGPTL3. We then systematically estimated the effects of each score on 249 metabolic traits derived using blood samples from an unprecedented sample size of up to 115,082 UK Biobank participants. Genetically predicted effects were generally consistent among drug targets, which were intended to modify the same lipoprotein lipid trait. For example, the linear fit for the MR estimates on all 249 metabolic traits for genetically predicted inhibition of LDL cholesterol lowering targets HMGCR and PCSK9 was r2 = 0.91. In contrast, comparisons between drug classes that were designed to modify discrete lipoprotein traits typically had very different effects on metabolic signatures (for instance, HMGCR versus each of the 4 triglyceride targets all had r2 < 0.02). Furthermore, we highlight this discrepancy for specific metabolic traits, for example, finding that LDL cholesterol lowering therapies typically had a weak effect on glycoprotein acetyls, a marker of inflammation, whereas triglyceride modifying therapies assessed provided evidence of a strong effect on lowering levels of this inflammatory biomarker. Our findings indicate that genetically predicted perturbations of these drug targets on the blood metabolome can drastically differ, despite largely consistent effects on risk of CAD, with potential implications for biomarkers in clinical development and measuring treatment response.
Cholesterol is an essential lipid and its synthesis is nutritionally and energetically costly(1,2). In mammals, cholesterol biosynthesis increases after feeding and is inhibited under fasting conditions(3). However, the regulatory mechanisms of cholesterol biosynthesis at the fasting-feeding transition remain poorly understood. Here we show that the deubiquitylase ubiquitin-specific peptidase 20 (USP20) stabilizes HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR), the rate-limiting enzyme in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway, in the feeding state. The post-prandial increase in insulin and glucose concentration stimulates mTORC1 to phosphorylate USP20 at S132 and S134; USP20 is recruited to the HMGCR complex and antagonizes its degradation. The feeding-induced stabilization of HMGCR is abolished in mice with liver-specific Usp20 deletion and in USP20(S132A/S134A) knock-in mice. Genetic deletion or pharmacological inhibition of USP20 markedly decreases diet-induced body weight gain, reduces lipid levels in the serum and liver, improves insulin sensitivity and increases energy expenditure. These metabolic changes are reversed by expression of the constitutively stable HMGCR(K248R). This study reveals an unexpected regulatory axis from mTORC1 to HMGCR via USP20 phosphorylation and suggests that inhibitors of USP20 could be used to lower cholesterol levels to treat metabolic diseases including hyperlipidaemia, liver steatosis, obesity and diabetes.
BACKGROUND: Lipid metabolism plays an important role in viral infections. We aimed to assess the causal effect of lipid-lowering drugs (HMGCR inhibitiors, PCSK9 inhibitiors, and NPC1L1 inhibitior) on COVID-19 outcomes using two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) study. METHODS: We used two kinds of genetic instruments to proxy the exposure of lipid-lowering drugs, including expression quantitative trait loci of drugs target genes, and genetic variants within or nearby drugs target genes associated with low-density lipoprotein (LDL cholesterol from genome-wide association study). Summary-data-based MR (SMR) and inverse-variance-weighted MR (IVW-MR) were used to calculate the effect estimates. RESULTS: SMR analysis found that a higher expression of HMGCR was associated with a higher risk of COVID-19 hospitalization (odds ratio [OR] = 1.38, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.06-1.81). Similarly, IVW-MR analysis observed a positive association between HMGCR-mediated LDL cholesterol and COVID-19 hospitalization (OR = 1.32, 95% CI = 1.00-1.74). No consistent evidence from both analyses was found for other associations. CONCLUSIONS: This two-sample MR study suggested a potential causal relationship between HMGCR inhibition and the reduced risk of COVID-19 hospitalization. FUNDING: Start-up Fund for high-level talents of Fujian Medical University.
BACKGROUND: ATP citrate lyase is an enzyme in the cholesterol-biosynthesis pathway upstream of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), the target of statins. Whether the genetic inhibition of ATP citrate lyase is associated with deleterious outcomes and whether it has the same effect, per unit decrease in the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol level, as the genetic inhibition of HMGCR is unclear. METHODS: We constructed genetic scores composed of independently inherited variants in the genes encoding ATP citrate lyase (ACLY) and HMGCR to create instruments that mimic the effect of ATP citrate lyase inhibitors and HMGCR inhibitors (statins), respectively. We then compared the associations of these genetic scores with plasma lipid levels, lipoprotein levels, and the risk of cardiovascular events and cancer. RESULTS: A total of 654,783 participants, including 105,429 participants who had major cardiovascular events, were included in the study. The ACLY and HMGCR scores were associated with similar patterns of changes in plasma lipid and lipoprotein levels and with similar effects on the risk of cardiovascular events per decrease of 10 mg per deciliter in the LDL cholesterol level: odds ratio for cardiovascular events, 0.823 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.78 to 0.87; P = 4.0x10(-14)) for the ACLY score and 0.836 (95% CI, 0.81 to 0.87; P = 3.9x10(-19)) for the HMGCR score. Neither lifelong genetic inhibition of ATP citrate lyase nor lifelong genetic inhibition of HMGCR was associated with an increased risk of cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants that mimic the effect of ATP citrate lyase inhibitors and statins appeared to lower plasma LDL cholesterol levels by the same mechanism of action and were associated with similar effects on the risk of cardiovascular disease per unit decrease in the LDL cholesterol level. (Funded by Esperion Therapeutics and others.).
BACKGROUND: Lipid-lowering therapy with statins and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) inhibition are effective strategies in reducing cardiovascular disease risk; however, concerns remain about potential long-term adverse neurocognitive effects. OBJECTIVES: This genetics-based study aimed to evaluate the relationships of long-term PCSK9 inhibition and statin use on neurocognitive outcomes. METHODS: We extracted single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) and PCSK9 from predominantly European ancestry-based genome-wide association studies summary-level statistics of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and performed drug-target Mendelian randomization, proxying the potential neurocognitive impact of drug-based PCSK9 and HMGCR inhibition using a range of outcomes to capture the complex facets of cognition and dementia. RESULTS: Using data from a combined sample of  approximately 740,000 participants, we observed a neutral cognitive profile related to genetic PCSK9 inhibition, with no significant effects on cognitive performance, memory performance, or cortical surface area. Conversely, we observed several adverse associations for HMGCR inhibition with lowered cognitive performance (beta: -0.082; 95% CI: -0.16 to -0.0080; P = 0.03), reaction time (beta = 0.00064; 95% CI: 0.00030-0.00098; P = 0.0002), and cortical surface area (beta = -0.18; 95% CI: -0.35 to -0.014; P = 0.03). Neither PCSK9 nor HMGCR inhibition impacted biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease progression or Lewy body dementia risk. Consistency of findings across Mendelian randomization methods accommodating different assumptions about genetic pleiotropy strengthens causal inference. CONCLUSIONS: Using a wide range of cognitive function and dementia endpoints, we failed to find genetic evidence of an adverse PCSK9-related impact, suggesting a neutral cognitive profile. In contrast, we observed adverse neurocognitive effects related to HMGCR inhibition, which may well be outweighed by the cardiovascular benefits of statin use, but nonetheless may warrant pharmacovigilance.
BACKGROUND: Currently, the treatment and prevention of migraine remain highly challenging. Mendelian randomization (MR) has been widely used to explore novel therapeutic targets. Therefore, we performed a systematic druggable genome-wide MR to explore the potential therapeutic targets for migraine. METHODS: We obtained data on druggable genes and screened for genes within brain expression quantitative trait locis (eQTLs) and blood eQTLs, which were then subjected to two-sample MR analysis and colocalization analysis with migraine genome-wide association studies data to identify genes highly associated with migraine. In addition, phenome-wide research, enrichment analysis, protein network construction, drug prediction, and molecular docking were performed to provide valuable guidance for the development of more effective and targeted therapeutic drugs. RESULTS: We identified 21 druggable genes significantly associated with migraine (BRPF3, CBFB, CDK4, CHD4, DDIT4, EP300, EPHA5, FGFRL1, FXN, HMGCR, HVCN1, KCNK5, MRGPRE, NLGN2, NR1D1, PLXNB1, TGFB1, TGFB3, THRA, TLN1 and TP53), two of which were significant in both blood and brain (HMGCR and TGFB3). The results of phenome-wide research showed that HMGCR was highly correlated with low-density lipoprotein, and TGFB3 was primarily associated with insulin-like growth factor 1 levels. CONCLUSIONS: This study utilized MR and colocalization analysis to identify 21 potential drug targets for migraine, two of which were significant in both blood and brain. These findings provide promising leads for more effective migraine treatments, potentially reducing drug development costs.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the causal role of lipid or apolipoprotein traits in intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and determine the effect of lipid-lowering interventions on the disease. METHODS: Two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses were conducted to evaluate the associations of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglycerides (TG), apolipoprotein (Apo)B and ApoA1 levels with risks for ICH, and those of LDL-C- (HMGCR, PCSK9, and NPC1L1) and TG-lowering targets (LPL and APOC3) with ICH. RESULTS: Increased levels of ApoB was associated with a decreased risk of overall ICH (OR 0.623, 95% CI 0.413-0.940; p = 0.024) and lobar ICH (OR 0.579, 95% CI 0.342-0.979; p = 0.042). The inverse relationship remained stable in multivariable MR. In addition, elevated TGs showed a causal effect on lobar ICH in multivariable MR (OR 1.600, 95% CI 1.009-2.537; p = 0.046). The LDL-C-reducing genetic variation alleles at or near the HMGCR gene (mimicking the effect of statins) were predicted to increase the overall and deep ICH risk. Additionally, genetic variation at or near the APOC3 gene suggested that genetically reducing the activity of APOC3 (mimicking antisense anti-apoC3 agents) was predicted to decrease lobar ICH. INTERPRETATION: Genetically predicted elevated ApoB may have a protective effect on overall ICH and lobar ICH, whereas elevated TG was associated with a higher risk of lobar ICH conditional on LDL-C and ApoB. MR analysis supports the conclusion that statins may increase the risk of overall and deep ICH independent of their lipid-lowering effect. More specific lipid-lowering targets may end up being the future. ANN NEUROL 2022;92:390-399.
Statin-induced necrotizing autoimmune myopathy (SINAM) is associated with a unique clinical 5 phenotype of severe proximal muscle weakness during or after exposure to statins in patients with high creatine kinase (CK) levels. Electromyography (EMG) and muscle biopsy reveal features of a necrotizing myopathy and the anti-HMGCR autoantibody is frequently detected. Treatment requires a combination of statin discontinuation as well as immunomodulatory or immunosuppressive therapy. HLA typing (HLADRB1*1101) is strongly associated with anti-10 HMGCR autoantibody positivity in statin-exposed patients. It is well documented that statin triggers autoimmune disease in those with a genetic susceptibility. With the commercial availability of an accurate ELISA test, the natural history of the disease and its phenotypic features are becoming increasingly understood.
BACKGROUND: The role of cholesterol metabolism in gastric cancer (GC) and its implications for tumor characteristics and immunotherapy response remain poorly understood. In this study, our aim was to investigate this role, identify associated metabolic subtypes, and assess their clinical implications in GC. METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive analysis of cholesterol metabolism genes (CMGs) using transcriptomic data from TCGA and GEO. Based on 23 representative CMGs, we classified GC into metabolic subtypes. We evaluated clinical features and immune cell infiltration between these subtypes. Additionally, we identified a CMG signature and assessed its clinical relevance in GC. We retrospectively enrolled thirty-five GC patients receiving chemotherapy plus a PD-1 inhibitor to assess the CMG signature using multiplex immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed two cholesterol metabolism subtypes in GC: Cholesterol Metabolism Type 1 (CMT1) and Cholesterol Metabolism Type 2 (CMT2). These subtypes exhibited distinct patterns: CMT1 indicated heightened cholesterol biosynthesis, while CMT2 showed abnormal cholesterol transport. CMT2 was associated with unfavorable clinical features, enriched malignant pathways, and a pro-tumor immune microenvironment. Furthermore, we developed a five-CMG prognostic signature (ABCA1, NR1H3, TSPO, NCEH1, and HMGCR) that effectively predicted the prognosis of patients with GC and their response to chemotherapy plus a PD-1 inhibitor. This signature was validated in a clinical cohort using multiplex immunohistochemistry. CONCLUSION: Our results highlight the effectiveness of cholesterol metabolism patterns as biomarkers for predicting the prognosis and immunotherapy response in GC. The expression of cholesterol metabolism genes and the assessment of cholesterol metabolism patterns have the potential to predict the outcome of immunotherapy and guide treatment strategies.
AIMS: The lack of effective pharmacotherapies for aortic aneurysms (AA) is a persistent clinical challenge. Lipid metabolism plays an essential role in AA. However, the impact of lipid-lowering drugs on AA remains controversial. The study aimed to investigate the genetic association between lipid-lowering drugs and AA. METHODS AND RESULTS: Our research used publicly available data on genome-wide association studies (GWASs) and expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studies. Genetic instruments, specifically eQTLs related to drug-target genes and SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) located near or within the drug-target loci associated with low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), have been served as proxies for lipid-lowering medications. Drug-Target Mendelian Randomization (MR) study is used to determine the causal association between lipid-lowering drugs and different types of AA. The MR analysis revealed that higher expression of HMGCR (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase) was associated with increased risk of AA (OR = 1.58, 95% CI = 1.20-2.09, P = 1.20 x 10-03) and larger lumen size (aortic maximum area: OR = 1.28, 95% CI = 1.13-1.46, P = 1.48 x 10-04; aortic minimum area: OR = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.21-1.42, P = 1.78 x 10-04). PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9) and CETP (cholesteryl ester transfer protein) show a suggestive relationship with AA (PCSK9: OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 1.10-1.63, P = 3.07 x 10-03; CETP: OR = 1.38, 95% CI = 1.06-1.80, P = 1.47 x 10-02). No evidence to support genetically mediated NPC1L1 (Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1) and LDLR (low-density lipoprotein cholesterol receptor) are associated with AA. CONCLUSION: This study provides causal evidence for the genetic association between lipid-lowering drugs and AA. Higher gene expression of HMGCR, PCSK9, and CETP increases AA risk. Furthermore, HMGCR inhibitors may link with smaller aortic lumen size.
BACKGROUND: AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a metabolic sensor that maintains energy homeostasis. AMPK functions as a tumor suppressor in different cancers; however, its role in regulating antitumor immunity, particularly the function of regulatory T cells (Tregs), is poorly defined. METHODS: AMPKalpha1(fl/fl)Foxp3(YFP-Cre), Foxp3(YFP-Cre), Rag1(-/-), and C57BL/6 J mice were used for our research. Flow cytometry and cell sorting, western blotting, immuno-precipitation, immuno-fluorescence, glycolysis assay, and qRT-PCR were used to investigate the role of AMPK in suppressing programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) expression and for mechanistic investigation. RESULTS: The deletion of the AMPKalpha1 subunit in Tregs accelerates tumor growth by increasing the expression of PD-1. Metabolically, loss of AMPK in Tregs promotes glycolysis and the expression of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR), a key enzyme of the mevalonate pathway. Mechanistically, AMPK activates the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) that phosphorylates glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta), inhibiting the expression of PD-1 in Tregs. CONCLUSION: Our study identified an AMPK regulatory mechanism of PD-1 expression via the HMGCR/p38 MAPK/GSK3beta signaling pathway. We propose that the AMPK activator can display synergic antitumor effect in murine tumor models, supporting their potential clinical use when combined with anti-PD-1 antibody, anti-CTLA-4 antibody, or a HMGCR inhibitor.
OBJECTIVE: Increased de novo fatty acid (FA) synthesis and cholesterol biosynthesis have been independently described in many tumour types, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). DESIGN: We investigated the functional contribution of fatty acid synthase (Fasn)-mediated de novo FA synthesis in a murine HCC model induced by loss of Pten and overexpression of c-Met (sgPten/c-Met) using liver-specific Fasn knockout mice. Expression arrays and lipidomic analysis were performed to characterise the global gene expression and lipid profiles, respectively, of sgPten/c-Met HCC from wild-type and Fasn knockout mice. Human HCC cell lines were used for in vitro studies. RESULTS: Ablation of Fasn significantly delayed sgPten/c-Met-driven hepatocarcinogenesis in mice. However, eventually, HCC emerged in Fasn knockout mice. Comparative genomic and lipidomic analyses revealed the upregulation of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis, as well as decreased triglyceride levels and increased cholesterol esters, in HCC from these mice. Mechanistically, loss of Fasn promoted nuclear localisation and activation of sterol regulatory element binding protein 2 (Srebp2), which triggered cholesterogenesis. Blocking cholesterol synthesis via the dominant negative form of Srebp2 (dnSrebp2) completely prevented sgPten/c-Met-driven hepatocarcinogenesis in Fasn knockout mice. Similarly, silencing of FASN resulted in increased SREBP2 activation and hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase (HMGCR) expression in human HCC cell lines. Concomitant inhibition of FASN-mediated FA synthesis and HMGCR-driven cholesterol production was highly detrimental for HCC cell growth in culture. CONCLUSION: Our study uncovers a novel functional crosstalk between aberrant lipogenesis and cholesterol biosynthesis pathways in hepatocarcinogenesis, whose concomitant inhibition might represent a therapeutic option for HCC.
BACKGROUND: Melanoma proliferation is partly attributed to dysregulated lipid metabolism. The effectiveness of lipid-lowering drugs in combating cutaneous melanoma (CM) is a subject of ongoing debate in both in vitro and clinical studies. METHOD: This study aims to evaluate the causal relationship between various lipid-lowering drug targets, namely 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR, targeted by statins), Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9, targeted by alirocumab and evolocumab), and Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1, targeted by ezetimibe), and the outcomes of cutaneous melanoma. To mimic the effects of lipid-lowering drugs, we utilized two genetic tools: analysis of polymorphisms affecting the expression levels of drug target genes, and genetic variations linked to low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and drug target genes. These variations were sourced from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). We applied Summary-data-based Mendelian Randomization (SMR) and Inverse Variance Weighted Mendelian Randomization (IVW-MR) to gauge the effectiveness of these drugs. RESULTS: Our findings, with SMR results showing an odds ratio (OR) of 1.44 (95% CI: 1.08-1.92; P = 0.011) and IVW-MR results indicating an OR of 1.56 (95% CI: 1.10-2.23; P = 0.013), demonstrate a positive correlation between PCSK9 expression and increased risk of CM. However, no such correlations were observed in other analyses. CONCLUSION: The study concludes that PCSK9 plays a significant role in the development of CM, and its inhibition is linked to a reduced risk of the disease.
Hypoxia and low glucose abundance often occur simultaneously at sites of inflammation. In monocytes and macrophages, glucose-oxygen deprivation stimulates the assembly of the NLRP3 inflammasome to generate the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1beta. We found that concomitant glucose deprivation and hypoxia activated the NLRP3 inflammasome by constraining the function of HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR), the rate-limiting enzyme of the mevalonate kinase pathway. HMGCR is involved in the synthesis of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), which is required for the prenylation and lipid membrane integration of proteins. Under glucose-oxygen deprivation, GGPP synthesis was decreased, leading to reduced prenylation of the small GTPase Rac1, increased binding of nonprenylated Rac1 to the scaffolding protein IQGAP1, and enhanced activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. In response to restricted oxygen and glucose supply, patient monocytes with a compromised mevalonate pathway due to mevalonate kinase deficiency or Muckle-Wells syndrome released more IL-1beta than did control monocytes. Thus, reduced GGPP synthesis due to inhibition of HMGCR under glucose-oxygen deprivation results in proinflammatory innate responses, which are normally kept in check by the prenylation of Rac1. We suggest that this mechanism is also active in inflammatory autoimmune conditions.
Cholesterol is an essential component of mammalian membranes, and its homeostasis is strictly regulated, with imbalances causing atherosclerosis, Niemann Pick disease, and familial hypercholesterolemia. Cellular cholesterol supply is mediated by LDL-cholesterol import and de novo cholesterol biosynthesis, and both pathways are adjusted to cellular demand by the cholesterol-sensitive SREBP2 transcription factor. Cholesterol homeostasis is modulated by a wide variety of metabolic pathways and the ubiquitination machinery, in particular E3 ubiquitin ligases. In this article, we review recent progress in understanding the role of E3 ubiquitin ligases in the metabolic control of cellular sterol homeostasis.
BACKGROUND: Successive observational studies have highlighted low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) as a standalone risk factor for the progression of chronic kidney disease (CKD) to end-stage renal disease. Lowering LDL-C levels significantly reduces the incidence of atherosclerotic events in patients with progressive CKD. Recent research indicates that proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors not only effectively lower LDL-C levels in CKD patients but also exhibit therapeutic potential for autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and ulcerative colitis. However, the role of PCSK9 inhibitors (PCSK9i) in treating CKD beyond lowering LDL-C levels remains uncertain. Therefore, this study employs drug-targeted Mendelian randomization (MR) to investigate the causal impact of PCSK9i on primary glomerular diseases such as IgA nephropathy (IgAN), membranous nephropathy (MN), and nephrotic syndrome (NS). METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) linked to LDL-C were sourced from the Global Lipids Genetics Consortium genome-wide association study (GWAS). Genes situated in proximity to 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), and PCSK9 served as proxies for therapeutic inhibition of these targets. The causal link between PCSK9i and the risk of primary glomerular disorders was discovered using drug-target MR studies. The HMGCR inhibitor, a drug target of statins, was utilized for comparative analysis with PCSK9i. Primary outcomes included the risk assessment for IgAN, MN, and NS, using the risk of coronary heart disease as a positive control. RESULTS: The inhibition of PCSK9, as proxied genetically, was found to significantly reduce the risk of IgAN [odds ratio, OR (95% confidence interval, CI) = 0.05 (-1.82 to 1.93), p = 2.10 x 10(-3)]. Conversely, this inhibition was associated with an increased risk of NS [OR (95% CI) = 1.78 (1.34-2.22), p = 0.01]. Similarly, HMGCR inhibitors (HMGCRi) demonstrated a potential reduction in the risk of IgAN [OR (95%CI) = 0.0032 (-3.58 to 3.59), p = 1.60 x 10(-3)). CONCLUSIONS: PCSK9i markedly decreased the risk of IgAN, suggesting a potential mechanism beyond their primary effect on LDL-C. However, these inhibitors were also associated with an increased risk of NS. On the other hand, HMGCRi appears to serve as a protective factor against IgAN. Conversely, PCSK9i may pose a risk factor for NS, suggesting the necessity for cautious application and further research into their impacts on various glomerular diseases.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate the association between hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) inhibition and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using drug-target Mendelian randomization (MR) and genetic colocalization analyses. METHODS: Two sets of genetic instruments were employed to proxy HMGCR inhibitors: expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) of target genes from the eQTLGen Consortium and genetic variants associated with low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels with HMGCR locus from open genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Positive control analyses were conducted on type 2 diabetes and coronary heart disease, and multiple sensitivity analyses were performed. RESULTS: Genetically proxied expression of eQTL was associated with a lower risk of RA (OR=0.996, 95% CI =0.992-0.999, p= 0.032). Similarly, hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR)-mediated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol was negatively associated with risk of RA (OR=0.995, 95% CI =0.991-0.998, p= 0.007) in the inverse variance weighted (IVW) method. Colocalization analysis suggested a 74.6% posterior probability of sharing a causal variant within the SNPs locus (PH4 = 74.6%). A causal relationship also existed between HMGCR-mediated LDL and RA risk factors. The results were also confirmed by multiple sensitivity analyses. The results in positive control were consistent with the previous study. CONCLUSION: Our study suggested that HMGCR inhibition was associated with an increased risk of RA while also highlighting an increased risk of current smoking and obesity. These findings contribute to a growing body of evidence regarding the adverse effects of HMGCR inhibition on RA risk, calling for further research on alternative approaches using HMGCR inhibitors in RA management.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacologic inhibitors of proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) are being evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. The effect of lowering low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels by inhibiting PCSK9 on the risk of cardiovascular events or diabetes is unknown. METHODS: We used genetic scores consisting of independently inherited variants in the genes encoding PCSK9 and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR; the target of statins) as instruments to randomly assign 112,772 participants from 14 studies, with 14,120 cardiovascular events and 10,635 cases of diabetes, to groups according to the number of LDL cholesterol-lowering alleles that they had inherited. We compared the effects of lower LDL cholesterol levels that were mediated by variants in PCSK9, HMGCR, or both on the risk of cardiovascular events and the risk of diabetes. RESULTS: Variants in PCSK9 and HMGCR were associated with nearly identical protective effects on the risk of cardiovascular events per decrease of 10 mg per deciliter (0.26 mmol per liter) in the LDL cholesterol level: odds ratio for cardiovascular events, 0.81 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.74 to 0.89) for PCSK9 and 0.81 (95% CI, 0.72 to 0.90) for HMGCR. Variants in these two genes were also associated with very similar effects on the risk of diabetes: odds ratio for each 10 mg per deciliter decrease in LDL cholesterol, 1.11 (95% CI, 1.04 to 1.19) for PCSK9 and 1.13 (95% CI, 1.06 to 1.20) for HMGCR. The increased risk of diabetes was limited to persons with impaired fasting glucose levels for both scores and was lower in magnitude than the protective effect against cardiovascular events. When present together, PCSK9 and HMGCR variants had additive effects on the risk of both cardiovascular events and diabetes. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, variants in PCSK9 had approximately the same effect as variants in HMGCR on the risk of cardiovascular events and diabetes per unit decrease in the LDL cholesterol level. The effects of these variants were independent and additive. (Funded by the Medical Research Council and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.).
Cytostatic and pro-apoptotic effects of selenium steroid derivatives against HeLa cells were determined. The highest cytostatic activity was shown by derivative 4 (GI(50) 25.0 microM, almost complete growth inhibition after three days of culture, and over 97% of apoptotic and dead cells at 200 microM). The results of our study (cell number measurements, apoptosis profile, relative expression of apoptosis-related APAF1, BID, and mevalonate pathway-involved HMGCR, SQLE, CYP51A1, and PDHB genes, and computational chemistry data) support the hypothesis that tested selenosteroids induce the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis by affecting the cell membrane as cholesterol antimetabolites. An additional mechanism of action is possible through a direct action of derivative 4 to inhibit PDHB expression in a way similar to steroid hormones.
Accumulating evidences have indicated that lipid-lowering drugs have effect for the treatment of cancers. However, causal associations between lipid-lowering drugs and the risk of cancers are still unclear. In our study, we utilized single nucleotide polymorphisms of proprotein convertase subtilis kexin 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-assisted enzyme A reductase (HMGCR) inhibitors and performed a drug target Mendelian randomization to explore the causal association between lipid-lowering drugs and the risk of cancers. Five regression methods were carried out, including inverse variance weighted (IVW) method, MR Egger, weighted median, simple mode and weighted mode methods, of which IVW method was considered as the main analysis. Our outcome dataset contained the risk of breast cancer (BC), colorectal cancer, endometrial cancer, gastric cancer (GC), hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), lung cancer, esophageal cancer, prostate cancer (PC), and skin cancer (SC). Our results demonstrated that PCSK9 inhibitors were significant associated with a decreased effect of GC [IVW: OR = 0.482, 95% CI: 0.264-0.879, P = .017]. Besides, genetic inhibitions of HMGCR were significant correlated with an increased effect of BC [IVW: OR = 1.421, 95% CI: 1.056-1.911, P = .020], PC [IVW: OR = 1.617, 95% CI: 1.234-2.120, P = .0005] and SC [IVW: OR = 1.266, 95% CI: 1.022-1.569, P = .031]. For GC [IVW: OR = 0.559, 95% CI: 0.382-0.820, P = .0029] and HCC [IVW: OR = 0.241, 95% CI: 0.085-0.686, P = .0077], HMGCR inhibitors had a protective risk. Our method suggested that PCSK9 inhibitors were significant associated with a protective effect of GC. Genetic inhibitions of HMGCR were significant correlated with an increased effect of BC, PC and SC. Meanwhile, HMGCR inhibitors had a protective risk of GC and HCC. Subsequent studies still needed to assess potential effects between lipid-lowering drugs and the risk of cancers with clinical trials.
