Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
Genetic alterations that activate NOTCH1 signaling and T cell transcription factors, coupled with inactivation of the INK4/ARF tumor suppressors, are hallmarks of T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), but detailed genome-wide sequencing of large T-ALL cohorts has not been carried out. Using integrated genomic analysis of 264 T-ALL cases, we identified 106 putative driver genes, half of which had not previously been described in childhood T-ALL (for example, CCND3, CTCF, MYB, SMARCA4, ZFP36L2 and MYCN). We describe new mechanisms of coding and noncoding alteration and identify ten recurrently altered pathways, with associations between mutated genes and pathways, and stage or subtype of T-ALL. For example, NRAS/FLT3 mutations were associated with immature T-ALL, JAK3/STAT5B mutations in HOXA1 deregulated ALL, PTPN2 mutations in TLX1 deregulated T-ALL, and PIK3R1/PTEN mutations in TAL1 deregulated ALL, which suggests that different signaling pathways have distinct roles according to maturational stage. This genomic landscape provides a logical framework for the development of faithful genetic models and new therapeutic approaches.
Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies and remains the second leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Over 70% of new cases and deaths occur in developing countries. In the early years of the molecular biology revolution, cancer research mainly focuses on genetic alterations, including gastric cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mammals. Disruption of epigenetic processes can lead to altered gene function and malignant cellular transformation. Recent advancements in the rapidly evolving field of cancer epigenetics have shown extensive reprogramming of every component of the epigenetic machinery in cancer, including DNA methylation, histone modifications, nucleosome positioning, noncoding RNAs, and microRNAs. Aberrant DNA methylation in the promoter regions of gene, which leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor and other cancer-related genes in cancer cells, is the most well-defined epigenetic hallmark in gastric cancer. The advantages of gene methylation as a target for detection and diagnosis of cancer in biopsy specimens and non-invasive body fluids such as serum and gastric washes have led to many studies of application in gastric cancer. This review focuses on the most common and important phenomenon of epigenetics, DNA methylation, in gastric cancer and illustrates the impact epigenetics has had on this field.
More than 25 years ago, the first literature records mentioned HOXA1 expression in human breast cancer. A few years later, HOXA1 was confirmed as a proper oncogene in mammary tissue. In the following two decades, molecular data about the mode of action of the HOXA1 protein, the factors contributing to activate and maintain HOXA1 gene expression and the identity of its target genes have accumulated and provide a wider view on the association of this transcription factor to breast oncogenesis. Large-scale transcriptomic data gathered from wide cohorts of patients further allowed refining the relationship between breast cancer type and HOXA1 expression. Several recent reports have reviewed the connection between cancer hallmarks and the biology of HOX genes in general. Here we take HOXA1 as a paradigm and propose an extensive overview of the molecular data centered on this oncoprotein, from what its expression modulators, to the interactors contributing to its oncogenic activities, and to the pathways and genes it controls. The data converge to an intricate picture that answers questions on the multi-modality of its oncogene activities, point towards better understanding of breast cancer aetiology and thereby provides an appraisal for treatment opportunities.
Some forms of ophthalmoplegia are congenital and fall into the category of Congenital Cranial Dysinnervation Disorders (CCDDs). These disorders arise from a primary defect of cranial nucleus/nerve development or guidance. Many have substantial limitations of ocular motility with or without other associated features. The type and degree of ophthalmoplegia can be similar between CCDD subtypes as well as with non-congenital forms of ophthalmoplegia. Therefore diagnostic confirmation often requires neuro-imaging and/or genetic investigations. The clinician should consider this category in cases of ophthalmoplegia that are congenital and nonprogressive in nature.
As a hallmark for cancer, aerobic glycolysis, also known as the Warburg effect contributes to tumor progression. However, the roles of aerobic glycolysis on cervical cancer remain elusive. In this work, we identified transcription factor HOXA1 as a novel regulator of aerobic glycolysis. High expression of HOXA1 is closely associated with poor outcome of patients. And, altered HOXA1 expression enhance or reduce aerobic glycolysis and progression in cervical cancer. Mechanistically, HOXA1 directly regulates the transcriptional activity of ENO1 and PGK1, thus induce glycolysis and promote cancer progression. Moreover, therapeutic knockdown of HOXA1 results in reduce aerobic glycolysis and inhibits cervical cancer progression in vivo and in vitro. In conclusion, these data indicate a therapeutic role of HOXA1 inhibits aerobic glycolysis and cervical cancer progression.
BACKGROUND: Recent studies showed that HOXA1 can promote or suppress the transcription of target genes via binding to their promoter region, therefore regulating the development and progression of various cancers. However, the biological function of HOXA1 in bladder cancer (Bca) remains unknown. METHODS: qRT-PCR and Western blot assay was performed to measure the mRNA protein level of HOXA1 in Bca cells. CCK-8 and cell colony formation assay were carried out to detect cell proliferation ability. Wound healing assay was applied to detect cell migration ability, while transwell assay was applied to detect cell invasion ability. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and dual-luciferase reporter assay were used to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying HOXA1. RESULTS: In this study, we discovered that HOXA1 mRNA and protein was dramatically increased in Bca tissues and cells compared to matched normal tissues and normal bladder epithelial cell. Enhanced HOXA1 expression was positively correlated with bigger tumor size and lymphatic metastasis, causing shorter overall survival to Bca patients. Knockdown of HOXA1 obviously impaired cell proliferation and metastasis ability. Further experiments proved that HOXA1 could strength the transcription of SMAD3 via binding to the promoter region of SMAD3. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our study suggested that HOXA1 contributed to the growth and metastasis of Bca and it might serve as a tumor biomarker for Bca treatment and prognosis monitoring.
BACKGROUND: Macrophage-like transformation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is a risk factor of atherosclerosis (AS) progression. Transcription factor homeobox A1 (HOXA1) plays functional roles in differentiation and development. This study aims to explore the role of HOXA1 in VSMC transformation, thereby providing evidence for the potential mechanism of AS pathogenesis. METHODS: High fat diet (HFD)-fed apolipoprotein E knockout (ApoE(-/-)) mice were applied as an in vivo model to imitate AS, while 1-palmitoyl-2-(5-oxovaleroyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POV-PC)-treated VSMCs were applied as an in vitro model. Recombinant adeno-associated-virus-1 (AAV-1) vectors that express short-hairpin RNAs targeting HOXA1, herein referred as AAV1-shHOXA1, were generated for the loss-of-function experiments throughout the study. RESULTS: In the aortic root of AS mice, lipid deposition was severer and HOXA1 expression was higher than the wide-type mice fed with normal diet or HFD. Silencing of HOXA1 inhibited the AS-induced weight gain, inflammatory response, serum and liver lipid metabolism disorder and atherosclerotic plaque formation. Besides, lesions from AS mice with HOXA1 knockdown showed less trans-differentiation of VSMCs to macrophage-like cells, along with a suppression of kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB RelA (p65) expression. In vitro experiments consistently confirmed that HOXA1 knockdown suppressed lipid accumulation, VSMC-to-macrophage phenotypic switch and inflammation in POV-PC-treated VSMCs. Mechanism investigations further illustrated that HOXA1 transcriptionally activated RelA and KLF4 to participate in the pathological manifestations of VSMCs. CONCLUSIONS: HOXA1 participates in AS progression by regulating VSMCs plasticity via regulation of NF-kappaB p65 and KLF4. HOXA1 has the potential to be a biomarker or therapeutic target for AS.
Members of my research laboratory combine clinical, genetic, and molecular biologic approaches to the study of congenital strabismus. Strabismus, which is misalignment of the eyes, affects 2-4% of the population and causes loss of binocular vision and amblyopia (vision loss in a structurally normal eye). The cause of strabismus when it occurs in the absence of structural brain abnormalities is generally unknown. In the last decade, we have focused our research studies on understanding the genetic etiology of a series of complex strabismus syndromes in which eye movement in at least one direction is limited or paralyzed. We are discovering that these disorders result from mutations in genes necessary for the normal development and connectivity of brainstem ocular motoneurons, including PHOX2A, SALL4, KIF21A, ROBO3, and HOXA1, and we now refer to these syndromes as the "congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders," or CCDD.
To identify genes altered in a highly aggressive metastatic meningioma primary as well as its metastases. Exome sequencing of a primary anaplastic meningioma and metastatic lesions in which DNA could be extracted and compared to germline DNA. Genetic analysis of the metastatic sites found 31 common mutations among the primary tumor and two metastatic sites. Additionally, genetic mutations were identified which were either infrequently (MUC3A, ALDH1A3, HOXA1) or not at all previously described in meningiomas (CASS4, CMKLR1). Exome sequencing of a metastatic meningioma and its distant metastases outside the CNS identified mutations that were not previously well described.
The essential role HOX-associated non-coding RNAs play in chromatin dynamics and gene regulation has been well documented. The potential roles of these microRNAs and long non-coding RNAs in oral cancer development, with their attendant involvement in various cellular processes including proliferation, invasion, migration, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis is gaining credence. An interaction network of HOX-embedded non-coding RNAs was constructed to identify the RNA interaction landscape using the arena-Idb platform and visualized using Cytoscape. The miR-10a was shown to interact with HOXA1, miR-10b with HOXD10, miR-196a1 with HOXA5, HOXA7, HOXB8, HOXC8, HOXD8, and miR-196a2 with HOXA5. The lncRNAs, HOTAIR interacted with HOXC11, HOTAIRM1 with HOXA1 and HOXA4, HOTTIP with HOXA13, HOXA-AS2 with HOXA3, HOXA11-AS with HOXA11 and HOXD-AS1 with HOXB8. Changes in the HOX cluster-embedded non-coding RNAs have implications for prognosis and overall disease survival. Our review aims to analyze the functional significance and clinical relevance of non-coding RNAs within the HOX cluster in the context of oral carcinogenesis. Elucidating these interactions between the non-coding RNAs and HOX genes in oral cancer development and progression could pave the way for the identification of reliable biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: Recent molecular advances suggest that Spitz nevi and other spitzoid neoplasms are biologically distinct from melanoma and conventional nevi. The ubiquitin ligase UBE2C and the homeobox transcription factor HOXA1 are candidate oncogenes in melanoma. METHODS: Using RNA expression analysis and immunohistochemistry, we evaluated these biomarkers in Spitz nevi (n = 20), melanoma (n = 20), and by immunohistochemistry in conventional nevi (n = 20). RESULTS: RNA analysis with branched DNA multiplex assay identified upregulation of UBE2C in melanomas vs Spitz nevi (P = .003), whereas HOXA1 was downregulated in melanoma (P < .0001). Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed increased nuclear expression of UBE2C in melanoma (mean = 18% of cells; range 3%-44%) when compared with Spitz nevi (mean = 9%; range 2%-28%; P = .001) and conventional nevi (mean = 1.5%; range 0-9%; P < .0001). Strong UBE2C staining was identified in cells undergoing mitosis. UBE2C RNA and protein detection correlated with mitotic rate (P < .0001). On the other hand, HOXA1 nuclear staining was low in melanoma (mean = 69%; range 5%-100%) when compared with Spitz nevi (mean = 94%; range 66%-100%; P = .0024) and conventional nevi (mean = 94%; range 83%-99%; P = .009). CONCLUSIONS: UBE2C and HOXA1 RNA and protein are differentially expressed in conventional and Spitz nevi and melanoma.
HOX proteins define a family of key transcription factors regulating animal embryogenesis. HOX genes have also been linked to oncogenesis and HOXA1 has been described to be active in several cancers, including breast cancer. Through a proteome-wide interaction screening, we previously identified the TNFR-associated proteins RBCK1/HOIL-1 and TRAF2 as HOXA1 interactors suggesting that HOXA1 is functionally linked to the TNF/NF-kappaB signaling pathway. Here, we reveal a strong positive correlation between expression of HOXA1 and of members of the TNF/NF-kappaB pathway in breast tumor datasets. Functionally, we demonstrate that HOXA1 can activate NF-kappaB and operates upstream of the NF-kappaB inhibitor IkappaB. Consistently, we next demonstrate that the HOXA1-mediated activation of NF-kappaB is non-transcriptional and that RBCK1 and TRAF2 influences on NF-kappaB are epistatic to HOXA1. We also identify an 11 Histidine repeat and the homeodomain of HOXA1 to be required both for RBCK1 and TRAF2 interaction and NF-kappaB stimulation. Finally, we highlight that activation of NF-kappaB is crucial for HOXA1 oncogenic activity.
Foetal breathing in mice results from prenatal activity of the two coupled hindbrain oscillators considered to be responsible for respiratory rhythm generation after birth: the pre-Botzinger complex (preBotC) is active shortly before the onset of foetal breathing; the parafacial respiratory group (e-pF in embryo) starts activity one day earlier. Transcription factors have been identified that are essential to specify neural progenitors and lineages forming each of these oscillators during early development of the neural tube: Hoxa1, Egr2 (Krox20), Phox2b, Lbx1 and Atoh1 for the e-pF; Dbx1 and Evx1 for the preBotC which eventually grow contralateral axons requiring expression of Robo3. Inactivation of the genes encoding these factors leads to mis-specification of these neurons and distinct breathing abnormalities: apneic patterns and loss of central chemosensitivity for the e-pF (central congenital hypoventilation syndrome, CCHS, in humans), complete loss of breathing for the preBotC, right-left desynchronized breathing in Robo3 mutants. Mutations affecting development in more rostral (pontine) respiratory territories change the shape of the inspiratory drive without affecting the rhythm. Other (primordial) embryonic oscillators start in the mouse three days before the e-pF, to generate low frequency (LF) rhythms that are probably required for activity-dependent development of neurones at embryonic stages; in the foetus, however, they are actively silenced to avoid detrimental interaction with the on-going respiratory rhythm. Altogether, these observations provide a strong support to the previously proposed hypothesis that the functional organization of the respiratory generator is specified at early stages of development and is dual in nature, comprising two serially non-homologous oscillators.
The inner ear is a complex sensory organ responsible for balance and sound detection in vertebrates. It originates from a transient embryonic structure, the otic vesicle, that contains all of the information to develop autonomously into the mature inner ear. We review here the development of the otic vesicle, bringing together classical embryological experiments and recent genetic and molecular data. The specification of the prospective ectoderm and its commitment to the otic fate are very early events and can be related to the expression of genes with restricted expression domains. A combinatorial gene expression model for placode specification and diversification, based on classical embryological evidence and gene expression patterns, is discussed. The formation of the otic vesicle is dependent on inducing signals from endoderm, mesoderm and neuroectoderm. Ear induction consists of a sequence of discrete instructions from those tissues that confer its final identity on the otic field, rather than a single all-or-none process. The important role of the neural tube in otic development is highlighted by the abnormalities observed in mouse mutants for the Hoxa1, kreisler and fgf3 genes and those reported in retinoic acid-deficient quails. Still, the nature of the relation between the neural tube and otic development remains unclear. Gene targeting experiments in the mouse have provided evidence for genes potentially involved in regional and cell-fate specification in the inner ear. The disruption of the mouse Brn3.1 gene identifies the first mutation affecting sensory hair-cell specification, and mutants for Pax2 and Nkx5.1 genes show their requirement for the development of specific regions of the otic vesicle. Several growth-factors contribute to the patterned cell proliferation of the otic vesicle. Among these, IGF-I and FGF-2 are expressed in the otic vesicle and may act in an autocrine manner. Finally, little is known about early mechanisms involved in guiding ear innervation. However, targeted disruption of genes coding for neurotrophins and Trk receptors have shown that once synaptic contacts are established, they depend on specific trophic interactions that involve these two gene families. The accessibility of new cellular and molecular approaches are opening new perspectives in vertebrate development and are also starting to be applied to ear development. This will allow this classical and attractive model system to see a rapid progress in the near future.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide and the second leading cause of cancer-related death. This research focuses on investigating the impact and underlying molecular mechanisms of protocadherin gamma subfamily A, 9 (PCDHGA9) on the invasion and metastasis of CRC, aiming to identify more precise molecular markers for the diagnosis and prognosis of CRC. METHODS: PCDHGA9 expression was detected using quantitative real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) in 63 pairs of colorectal cancer tissues. Differential gene expression from high-throughput sequencing was analyzed using ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) to explore the biological functions of PCDHGA9 and its potential regulated genes. Bioinformatics tools were employed to explore potential upstream regulatory microRNAs of PCDHGA9. Dual-luciferase assays were performed to demonstrate the regulation between PCDHGA9 and miR-1269a. Protein mass spectrometry suggested an interaction between PCDHGA9 and HOXA1. JASPAR predicted that HOXA1 may act as a transcription factor of CXCR4. Coimmunoprecipitation, dual-luciferase assays, and nuclear-cytoplasmic fractionation experiments confirmed the molecular mechanism involving PCDHGA9, CXCR4, HOXA1, and beta-catenin. Transwell, wound healing, and western blot assays were conducted to confirm the impact of PCDHGA9, miR-1269a, and CXCR4 on the invasion, metastasis, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) functions of CRC cells in in vitro experiments. A whole-body fluorescence imaging system was used to evaluate the combined impact of miR-1269a and PCDHGA9 on the invasion and metastasis of CRC in in vivo experiments. RESULTS: The expression of PCDHGA9 was found to be lower in CRC tissues compared with their corresponding adjacent tissues. Low expression of PCDHGA9 potentially correlated with worse prognosis and increased chances of invasion and metastasis in CRC. miR-1269a was highly expressed in CRC tissues and acted as a negative regulator for PCDHGA9, promoting invasion, migration, and EMT of CRC cells. PCDHGA9's interaction with HOXA1 downregulated CXCR4, a transcription factor, leading to accumulation of beta-catenin and further promoting invasion, migration, and EMT of CRC cells. CONCLUSIONS: PCDHGA9, acting as a tumor suppressor, is downregulated by miR-1269a. The low level of PCDHGA9 activates the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway by releasing its interaction with HOXA1, promoting the expression of CXCR4, and causing invasion, migration, and EMT in CRC.
Deregulated tyrosine kinase signaling alters cellular homeostasis to drive cancer progression. The emergence of a non-receptor tyrosine kinase (non-RTK), ACK1 (also known as activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 or TNK2) as an oncogenic kinase, has uncovered novel mechanisms by which tyrosine kinase signaling promotes cancer progression. Although early studies focused on ACK1 as a cytosolic effector of activated transmembrane RTKs, wherein it shuttles between the cytosol and the nucleus to rapidly transduce extracellular signals from the RTKs to the intracellular effectors, recent data unfold a new aspect of its functionality as an epigenetic regulator. ACK1 interacts with the estrogen receptor (ER)/histone demethylase KDM3A (JHDM2a) complex, which modifies KDM3A by tyrosine phosphorylation to regulate the transcriptional outcome at HOXA1 locus to promote the growth of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. It is also well established that ACK1 regulates the activity of androgen receptor (AR) by tyrosine phosphorylation to fuel the growth of hormone-refractory prostate cancers. Further, recent explosion in genomic sequencing has revealed recurrent ACK1 gene amplification and somatic mutations in a variety of human malignancies, providing a molecular basis for its role in neoplastic transformation. In this review, we will discuss the various facets of ACK1 signaling, including its newly uncovered epigenetic regulator function, which enables cells to bypass the blockade to major survival pathways to promote resistance to standard cancer treatments. Not surprisingly, cancer cells appear to acquire an 'addiction' to ACK1-mediated survival, particularly under stress conditions, such as growth factor deprivation or genotoxic insults or hormone deprivation. With the accelerated development of potent and selective ACK1 inhibitors, targeted treatment for cancers harboring aberrant ACK1 activity may soon become a clinical reality.
OBJECTIVE: Recent studies have demonstrated that homeobox A1 (HOXA1) is upregulated in lung cancer due to RNA modifications (N(6)-methyladenosine), but the specific function of HOXA1 in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) remains indistinct. Herein, we investigated the role of HOXA1 in LUAD biology. METHODS: This study presented pancancer analysis of associations of HOXA1 with prognosis, TMB, and immune checkpoints. The expression of HOXA1 was detected in LUAD and normal tissues with immunohistochemistry and western blot. Through least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) analysis, HOXA1-derived gene model was conducted in LUAD. Correlations of HOXA1 with immune cell infiltrations, immune checkpoints, HLAs, and chemotherapeutic sensitivity were evaluated. Colony formation, proliferation, and migration of LUAD cells with si-HOXA1 transfection were investigated, and the effects of HOXA1 on T cell exhaustion were assessed in vitro. RESULTS: HOXA1 expression was a risk factor of overall survival, disease-specific survival, and progression-free interval of LUAD. HOXA1 exhibited prominent associations with immune cell infiltration, immune checkpoints, and HLAs. HOXA1-derived gene signature reliably and independently predicted LUAD outcomes. Also, high-risk cases presented increased sensitivity to cisplatin, paclitaxel, docetaxel, vinorelbine, and etoposide. HOXA1 knockdown exhibited an inhibitory effect on proliferation and migration abilities of LUAD cells. Silencing HOXA1 weakened the expression of antioxidative stress markers Nrf2/HO-1 and T cell exhaustion marker CD155 in LUAD cells. Moreover, LUAD cells with HOXA1 knockdown enhanced the CD8+ T cell response. CONCLUSION: Our data support the oncogenic function and prognostic significance of HOXA1 that facilitates immune escape and alleviates oxidative stress of LUAD.
BACKGROUND: TASP1 encodes an endopeptidase activating histone methyltransferases of the KMT2 family. Homozygous loss-of-function variants in TASP1 have recently been associated with Suleiman-El-Hattab syndrome. We report six individuals with Suleiman-El-Hattab syndrome and provide functional characterization of this novel histone modification disorder in a multi-omics approach. METHODS: Chromosomal microarray/exome sequencing in all individuals. Western blotting from fibroblasts in two individuals. RNA sequencing and proteomics from fibroblasts in one individual. Methylome analysis from blood in two individuals. Knock-out of tasp1 orthologue in zebrafish and phenotyping. RESULTS: All individuals had biallelic TASP1 loss-of-function variants and a phenotype including developmental delay, multiple congenital anomalies (including cardiovascular and posterior fossa malformations), a distinct facial appearance and happy demeanor. Western blot revealed absence of TASP1. RNA sequencing/proteomics showed HOX gene downregulation (HOXA4, HOXA7, HOXA1 and HOXB2) and dysregulation of transcription factor TFIIA. A distinct methylation profile intermediate between control and Kabuki syndrome (KMT2D) profiles could be produced. Zebrafish tasp1 knock-out revealed smaller head size and abnormal cranial cartilage formation in tasp1 crispants. CONCLUSION: This work further delineates Suleiman-El-Hattab syndrome, a recognizable neurodevelopmental syndrome. Possible downstream mechanisms of TASP1 deficiency include perturbed HOX gene expression and dysregulated TFIIA complex. Methylation pattern suggests that Suleiman-El-Hattab syndrome can be categorized into the group of histone modification disorders including Wiedemann-Steiner and Kabuki syndrome.
Cervical cancer (CC) is a multifactorial disease associated to genetic, environmental and epigenetic factors, being the infection by human papillomavirus the main etiologic agent. Additionally, the alteration in the expression of transcription factors has been considered of importance for the development of this tumor. HOX genes encode a group of transcription factors involved in cellular proliferation and differentiation processes during the development of embryonic structures in vertebrates; their aberrant expression is associated with tumorigenesis and metastasis. A range of evidence suggests a role for HOX genes in the development of cervical neoplastic cell. Studies in CC cell lines, primary tumors and premalignant lesions have suggested the involvement of HOXA1, HOXC5, C6, C8 and C10, HOXD9 and HOXD13 in the process of cervical carcinogenesis. Also, the de novo expression of genes HOXB2, B4, B13 and HOXC11-C13 appears to be involved in the process of malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cell. These data would allow to open a field in search of new molecular markers in cervical cancer and the development of new therapeutic strategies for this malignancy.
