Homeobox protein Hox-B4; Sequence-specific transcription factor which is part of a developmental regulatory system that provides cells with specific positional identities on the anterior-posterior axis.
The molecular pathways that regulate megakaryocyte production have historically been identified through multiple candidate gene approaches. Several transcription factors critical for generating megakaryocytes were identified by promoter analysis of megakaryocyte-specific genes, and their biological roles then verified by gene knockout studies; for example, GATA-1, NF-E2, and RUNX1 were identified in this way. In contrast, other transcription factors important for megakaryopoiesis were discovered through a systems approach; for example, c-Myb was found to be critical for the erythroid versus megakaryocyte lineage decision by genome-wide loss-of-function studies. The regulation of the levels of these transcription factors is, for the most part, cell intrinsic, although that assumption has recently been challenged. Epigenetics also impacts megakaryocyte gene expression, mediated by histone acetylation and methylation. Several cytokines have been identified to regulate megakaryocyte survival, proliferation, and differentiation, most prominent of which is thrombopoietin. Upon binding to its receptor, the product of the c-Mpl proto-oncogene, thrombopoietin induces a conformational change that activates a number of secondary messengers that promote cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation, and down-modulate receptor signaling. Among the best studied are the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins; phosphoinositol-3-kinase; mitogen-activated protein kinases; the phosphatases PTEN, SHP1, SHP2, and SHIP1; and the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins. Additional signals activated by these secondary mediators include mammalian target of rapamycin; beta(beta)-catenin; the G proteins Rac1, Rho, and CDC42; several transcription factors, including hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha(alpha), the homeobox-containing proteins HOXB4 and HOXA9, and a number of signaling mediators that are reduced, including glycogen synthase kinase 3alpha(alpha) and the FOXO3 family of forkhead proteins. More recently, systematic interrogation of several aspects of megakaryocyte formation have been conducted, employing genomics, proteomics, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses, among others, and have yielded many previously unappreciated signaling mechanisms that regulate megakaryocyte lineage determination, proliferation, and differentiation. This chapter focuses on these pathways in normal and neoplastic megakaryopoiesis, and suggests areas that are ripe for further study.
Plastics have been part of our ecosystem for about a century and their degradation by different environmental factors produce secondary microplastics (MPs). To date, the impact of MPs on human health has not been well investigated. To understand the possible effects of polystyrene-MPs (PS-MPs) on the human brain, a 3D model of human forebrain cortical spheroids has been derived, which mimics early development of human cerebral cortex. The spheroids were exposed to 100, 50, and 5 microg/mL of 1 microm and 10 microm PS-MPs during day 4-10 and day 4-30. The short-term MP exposure showed the promoted proliferation and high gene expression of Nestin, PAX6, ATF4, HOXB4 and SOD2. For long-term exposure, reduced cell viability was observed. Moreover, changes in size and concentration of PS-MPs altered the gene expression of DNA damage and neural tissue patterning. In particular, beta-tubulin III, Nestin, and TBR1/TBR2 gene expression decreased in PS-MP treated conditions compare to the untreated control. The results of this study suggest that the size- and concentration-dependent exposure to PS-MPs can adversely affect embryonic brain-like tissue development in forebrain cerebral spheroids. This study has significance in assessing environmental factors in neurotoxicity and degeneration in human.
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) possess a distinct ability to perpetuate through self-renewal and to generate progeny that differentiate into mature cells of myeloid and lymphoid lineages. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which HSCs replicate and differentiate from the perspective of developing new approaches for HSC transplantation is necessary for further advances. The interaction of the receptor tyrosine kinase--c-KIT--with its ligand stem cell factor plays a key role in HSC survival, mitogenesis, proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, homing, migration, and functional activation. Evidence that activating site-directed point mutations in the c-KIT gene contributes to its ligand-independent constitutive activation, which induces enhanced proliferation of HSCs, is accumulating. Similarly, and equally important, self-renewal is a process by which HSCs generate daughter cells via division. Self-renewal is necessary for retaining the HSC pool. Therefore, elucidating the molecular machinery that governs self-renewal is of key importance. The transcription factor, HOXB4 is a key molecule that has been reported to induce the in vitro expansion of HSCs via self-renewal. However, critical downstream effector molecules of HOXB4 remain to be determined. This concisely reviewed information on c-KIT and HOXB4 helps us to update our understanding of their function and mechanism of action in self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation of HSCs, particularly modulation by c-KIT mutant interactions, and HOXB4 overexpression showing certain therapeutic implications.
Murine embryonic stem cells (mESC) readily form embryoid bodies (EBs) that exhibit hematopoietic differentiation. Methods based on EB formation or ESC coculture with murine bone marrow stromal cell lines have revealed pathways of both primitive and definitive hematopoietic differentiation progressing from primitive mesoderm via hemangioblasts to endothelium and hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. The addition of specific hematopoietic growth factors and morphogens to these cultures enhances the generation of neutrophils, macrophages, megakaryocyte/platelets, and hemoglobinized mature red cells. In addition, selective culture systems have been developed to support differentiation into mature T lymphocytes, natural killer cells, B cells, and dendritic cells. In most cases, culture systems have been developed that support equivalent differentiation of various human ESC (hESC). The major obstacle to translation of ESC hematopoietic cultures to clinical relevance has been the general inability to produce hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) that can engraft adult, irradiated recipients. In this context, the pattern of ES hematopoietic development mirrors the yolk sac phase of hematopoiesis that precedes the appearance of engraftable HSC in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region. Genetic manipulation of mESC hematopoietic progeny by upregulation of HOXB4 or STAT5 has led to greatly enhanced long- or short-term multilineage hematopoietic engraftment, suggesting that genetic or epigenetic manipulation of these pathways may lead to functional HSC generation from hESC.
BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. The alteration of DNA methylation plays a major role in the development of lung cancer. Methylation biomarkers become a possible method for lung cancer diagnosis. RESULTS: We identified eleven lung cancer-specific methylation markers (CDO1, GSHR, HOXA11, HOXB4-1, HOXB4-2, HOXB4-3, HOXB4-4, LHX9, MIR196A1, PTGER4-1, and PTGER4-2), which could differentiate benign and malignant pulmonary nodules. The methylation levels of these markers are significantly higher in malignant tissues. In bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples, the methylation signals maintain the same differential trend as in tissues. An optimal 5-marker model for pulmonary nodule diagnosis (malignant vs. benign) was developed from all possible combinations of the eleven markers. In the test set (57 tissue and 71 BALF samples), the area under curve (AUC) value achieves 0.93, and the overall sensitivity is 82% at the specificity of 91%. In an independent validation set (111 BALF samples), the AUC is 0.82 with a specificity of 82% and a sensitivity of 70%. CONCLUSIONS: This model can differentiate pulmonary adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma from benign diseases, especially for infection, inflammation, and tuberculosis. The model's performance is not affected by gender, age, smoking history, or the solid components of nodules.
The molecular pathways that regulate thrombopoiesis are becoming increasingly understood. Upon binding to its receptor, the product of the c-Mpl proto-oncogene, thrombopoietin activates a number of secondary messengers that promote cell survival, proliferation and differentiation. Amongst the best studied are the signal transducers and activators of transcription, phosphoinositol-3-kinase, and the mitogen-activated protein kinases. Additional signals activated by these secondary mediators include mammalian target of rapamycin, beta-catenin, hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha and the homeobox proteins HOXB4 and HOXA9, and a number that are reduced, including glycogen synthase kinase 3alpha and the FOXO3 family of forkhead proteins. More recently, a number of signaling pathways have been identified that turn the thrombopoietin signal off, a step necessary to avoid uncontrolled myeloproliferation, and include the phosphatases PTEN, SHP1 and SHIP1, the suppressors of cytokine signaling, and down-modulation of surface expression of c-Mpl. This review will focus on these pathways in normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis.
The HOX genes are a family of homeodomain-containing transcription factors that determine cellular identity during development and which are subsequently re-expressed in many types of cancer. Some recent studies have shown that HOX genes may have key roles both in pancreatic development and in adult diseases of the pancreas, including cancer. In this review we consider recent advances in elucidating the role of HOX genes in these processes, how they may connect early developmental events to subsequent adult disease, and their potential both as diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets.
Geminin exerts two distinct molecular roles. Geminin negatively regulates DNA replication licensing through the direct interaction with Cdt1 to prevent re-replication in proliferating cells. Geminin also regulates chromatin remodeling through the direct interaction with Brahma/Brg1 to maintain undifferentiated states of stem cells. We previously uncovered that Polycomb-group complex 1 and Hoxb4/Hoxa9, well-known intrinsic factors that are essential for maintaining the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) activity, alternatively act as ubiquitin-proteasome systems for Geminin protein to reduce the protein expression level, and sustain the HSC activity. Thus, Geminin is presumed to play an important role in determining cell fate, i.e., turning on and off cellular quiescence and proliferation/differentiation, in HSCs. We recently generated recombinant cell-penetrating Geminin (CP-Geminin), enabling rapid incorporation and withdraw of Geminin protein in cells. CP-Geminin may be useful in regulating the cell cycle and chromatin configuration. In this article, we summarize current information on the molecular functions of Geminin and the regulatory system for Geminin protein expression, and argue for the molecular role of Geminin in cell fate determination of HSCs, and future perspective of a new technology for manipulating the activities of HSCs and cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Endometriosis is a common disease characterized by the presence of ectopic endometrial tissue. Although the pathogenesis of endometriosis remains unclear, several factors have been implicated, including the dysregulation of homeobox ( HOX) genes. Our objective was to investigate the localization and immunoreactivity of HOXB4 in endometrial tissues from women with or without endometriosis. We studied samples of eutopic endometrium (EE), endometriomas (Eoma), superficial endometriosis (SE), and deep infiltrating endometriosis (DIE) from 34 women with endometriosis, as well as eutopic endometrium from 38 women without endometriosis (EC). HOXB4 localization and immunoreactivity was assessed using immunohistochemistry and histoscore analysis. Data were analyzed with and without stratification by menstrual cycle phase. HOXB4 protein was present in the nuclei of endometrial glandular epithelial cells but not in stromal cells. HOXB4 immunoreactivity was reduced in DIE samples compared to all other groups. A smaller reduction in HOXB4 immunoreactivity was observed in SE samples compared to EC samples. HOXB4 immunoreactivity was significantly greater in proliferative compared to secretory phase samples in the EC group but not in EE, Eoma, or DIE groups. Among only proliferative phase samples, HOXB4 immunoreactivity was reduced in EE, Eoma, and DIE groups compared to EC. Based on these data, we suggest that an impaired capacity of eutopic and ectopic endometrial tissue to upregulate levels of HOXB4 during the proliferative phase may play a role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis and that further downregulation of HOXB4 may enhance ectopic implant invasiveness.
Pluripotent stem cells can be differentiated into hematopoietic lineages in vitro and hold promise for the future treatment of hematological disease. Differentiation strategies involving defined factors in serum-free conditions have been successful in producing hematopoietic progenitors and some mature cell types from mouse and human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent cells. However, these precisely defined protocols are relatively inefficient and have not been used successfully to produce hematopoietic stem cells capable of multilineage long-term reconstitution of the hematopoietic system. More complex differentiation induction strategies including coculture with stromal cells derived from sites of hematopoietic activity in vivo and enforced expression of reprogramming transcription factors, such as HOXB4, have been required to increase the efficiency of the differentiation procedure and to produce these most potent hematopoietic stem cells. We review the studies that have used HOXB4 to improve hematopoietic differentiation from pluripotent cells focusing on studies that have provided some insight into its mechanism of action. A better understanding of the molecular pathways involved in the action of HOXB4 might lead to more defined culture systems and safer protocols for clinical translation.
The mammalian Caudal-related homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX2) plays a key role in the homeobox regulatory network and is essential in regulating the expression of several homeobox (HOX) genes during embryonic development, particularly in the gut. Genome-wide CDX2 chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis and expression data from Caco2 cells also suggests a role for CDX2 in the regulation of HOXB4 gene expression in the intestinal epithelium. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate whether HOXB4 gene expression is regulated by CDX2 in the intestinal epithelium. We demonstrated binding of CDX2 to four different CDX2 binding sites in an enhancer region located upstream of the HOXB4 transcription start site. Mutations in the CDX2 binding sites reduced HOXB4 gene activity, and knock down of endogenous CDX2 expression by shRNA reduced HOXB4 gene expression. This is the first report demonstrating the CDX2 regulation of HOXB4 gene expression in the developed intestinal epithelium, indicating a possible role for HOXB4 in intestinal homeostasis.
BACKGROUND: Homeobox B4 (HOXB4) is correlated with poor prognosis of various cancer types. However, how HOXB4 promotes ovarian cancer (OV) progression remains unclear. METHODS: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database indicated that a high level of HOXB4 in OV was correlated with poor prognosis. The biological functions of HOXB4 were confirmed by colony formation, migration, and invasion assays. The effect of HOXB4 on the expression of EMT cell markers was determined. The transcriptional target of HOXB4 was DHDDS, which was detected by a ChIP assay. A xenograft tumor model was generated in nude mice to detect the role of HOXB4 in tumor proliferation and metastasis. RESULTS: The results showed that HOXB4 protein levels were higher in OV tissues than in normal tissues and correlated with poor prognosis of OV. HOXB4 reduction inhibited the proliferation and invasion ability of OV cells in vitro. Conversely, these effects were enhanced by the upregulation of HOXB4 in OV cells. The binding of HOXB4 to two DNA motifs regulated DHDDS expression and contributed to the malignant progression of OV. The role of HOXB4 in contributing to tumor development in vivo was verified in mice. Further results indicated that HOXB4 induced Snail and Zeb1 expression. CONCLUSION: Overall, HOXB4 overexpression was remarkably correlated with poor prognosis of OV. Mechanistically, HOXB4 enhances the proliferation and invasion of tumor cells by activating DHDDS, thereby promoting the malignant progression of OV.
The interplay between polycomb and trithorax complexes has been implicated in embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and differentiation. It has been shown recently that WRD5 and Dpy-30, specific components of the SET1/MLL protein complexes, play important roles during ESC self-renewal and differentiation of neural lineages. However, not much is known about how and where specific trithorax complexes are targeted to genes involved in self-renewal or lineage-specification. Here, we report that the recruitment of the hSET1A histone H3K4 methyltransferase (HMT) complex by transcription factor USF1 is required for mesoderm specification and lineage differentiation. In undifferentiated ESCs, USF1 maintains hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HS/PC) associated bivalent chromatin domains and differentiation potential. Furthermore, USF1 directed recruitment of the hSET1A complex to the HoxB4 promoter governs the transcriptional activation of HoxB4 gene and regulates the formation of early hematopoietic cell populations. Disruption of USF or hSET1A function by overexpression of a dominant-negative AUSF1 mutant or by RNA-interference-mediated knockdown, respectively, led to reduced expression of mesoderm markers and inhibition of lineage differentiation. We show that USF1 and hSET1A together regulate H3K4me3 modifications and transcription preinitiation complex assembly at the hematopoietic-associated HoxB4 gene during differentiation. Finally, ectopic expression of USF1 in ESCs promotes mesoderm differentiation and enforces the endothelial-to-hematopoietic transition by inducing hematopoietic-associated transcription factors, HoxB4 and TAL1. Taken together, our findings reveal that the guided-recruitment of the hSET1A histone methyltransferase complex and its H3K4 methyltransferase activity by transcription regulator USF1 safeguards hematopoietic transcription programs and enhances mesoderm/hematopoietic differentiation.
The human brain formation involves complicated processing, which is regulated by a gene regulatory network influenced by different signaling pathways. The cross-regulatory interactions between elements of different pathways affect the process of cell fate assignment during neural and astroglial tissue patterning. In this study, the interactions between Wnt and Notch pathways, the two major pathways that influence neural and astroglial differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) individually, were investigated. In particular, the synergistic effects of Wnt-Notch pathway on the neural patterning processes along the anterior-posterior or dorsal-ventral axis of hiPSC-derived cortical spheroids were explored. The human cortical spheroids derived from hiPSCs were treated with Wnt activator CHIR99021 (CHIR), Wnt inhibitor IWP4, and Notch inhibitor (N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester [DAPT]) individually, or in combinations (CHIR + DAPT, IWP4 + DAPT). The results suggest that CHIR + DAPT can promote Notch signaling, similar or higher than CHIR alone, whereas IWP4 + DAPT reduces Notch activity compared to IWP4 alone. Also, CHIR + DAPT promoted hindbrain marker HOXB4 expression more consistently than CHIR alone, while IWP4 + DAPT promoted Olig2 expression, indicating the synergistic effects distinctly different from that of the individual small molecule. In addition, IWP4 simultaneously promoted dorsal and ventral identity. The patterned neural spheroids can be switched for astroglial differentiation using bone morphogenetic protein 4. This study should advance the derivations of neurons, astroglial cells, and brain region-specific organoids from hiPSCs for disease modeling, drug screening, as well as for hiPSC-based therapies. Impact Statement Wnt signaling plays a central role in neural patterning of human pluripotent stem cells. It can interact with Notch signaling in defining dorsal-ventral and rostral-caudal (or anterior-posterior) axis of brain organoids. This study investigates novel Wnt and Notch interactions (i.e., Wntch) in neural patterning of dorsal forebrain spheroids or organoids derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells. The synergistic effects of Wnt activator or inhibitor with Notch inhibitor were observed. This study should advance the derivations of neurons, astroglial cells, and brain region-specific organoids from human stem cells for disease modeling and drug screening, as well as for stem cell-based therapies. The results can be used to establish better in vitro culture methods for efficiently mimicking in vivo structure of central nervous system.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma is a fatal malignancy that lacking specific therapies. Homeobox B4 (HOXB4) was negatively correlated with poor prognosis in cancers, but its role in hepatocellular carcinoma has not been elucidated. RESULTS: We confirmed that HOXB4 was downregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues and lower HOXB4 expression associated with poor prognosis. Gain- and loss-of function experiments were performed to understand the functional consequences. We revealed that HOXB4 overexpression inhibited proliferation and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma cells, accompanied with the decrease in epithelial-mesenchymal transition and increase in cell apoptosis. Database analysis showed that HOXB4 was positively correlated with the immune infiltration. PD-L1 expression was decreased in HOXB4 overexpressed hepatocellular carcinoma cells. HOXB4 overexpression was confirmed to inhibit the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma and promote T cell infiltration in vivo. N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification was implicated in the tumorigenesis. RNA-seq analysis showed that HOXB4 overexpression modulated METTL7B expression. With the performance of dual-luciferase reporter, ChIP, and DNA pulldown assays, we revealed that HOXB4 binding to METTL7B promoter and inhibited its mRNA expression. The increased aggressiveness of hepatocellular carcinoma cells and the enhanced immune escape, triggered by HOXB4 knockdown, were inhibited via METTL7B downregulation. Methylated RNA immunoprecipitation assay displayed that METTL7B controlled the mRNA decay of TKT in m6A methylation. METTL7B overexpression increase the expression of TKT, ultimately promoting hepatocellular carcinoma progression and immune evasion. CONCLUSIONS: HOXB4 mediated the malignant phenotypes and modulated the immune evasion via METTL7B/TKT axis. The HOXB4/METTL7B cascade and its downstream changes might be novel targets for blocking hepatocellular carcinoma progression.
Hox genes are clearly implicated in leukemia; however, neither the specificity of the leukemogenic potential among Hox genes of different paralog groups nor the role of the homeodomain is clear. We tested the leukemogenic potential of various NUP98-Hox fusion genes alone and with MEIS1. All genes tested had a significant overlapping effect in bone marrow cells in vitro. However, not all formed strong leukemogenic NUP98 fusion genes; but together with overexpression of MEIS1, all induced myeloid leukemia. This phenomenon was also seen with NUP98 fusions containing only the homeodomain of the corresponding Hox protein. We then exploited the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 and NUP98-HOXA10 to establish preleukemic myeloid lines composed of early myeloid progenitors with extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity, short-term myeloid repopulating activity, and low propensity for spontaneous leukemic conversion. We also showed that MEIS1 can efficiently induce their conversion to leukemic stem cells, thus providing a novel model for the study of leukemic progression. In contrast to the leukemogenic effect of most of the Hox genes tested, HOXB4 has the ability to increase the self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells without disrupting normal differentiation. On the basis of the discovery that the leukemogenic gene HOXA9 can also expand hematopoietic stem cells, we compared the ability of NUP98-Hox fusions to that of HOXB4 to trigger HSC expansion in vitro. Our preliminary results indicate that the expanding potential of HOXB4 is retained and even augmented by fusion to NUP98. Moreover, even greater expansion may be possible using Abd-B-like Hox fusions genes.
During the early thymus colonization, Notch signaling activation on hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) drives proliferation and T cell commitment. Although these processes are driven by transcription factors such as HOXB4 and GATA3, there is no evidence that Notch directly regulates their transcription. To evaluate the role of NOTCH and TNF signaling in this process, human CD34(+) HPCs were cocultured with OP9-DL1 cells, in the presence or absence of TNF. The use of a Notch signaling inhibitor and a protein synthesis inhibitor allowed us to distinguish primary effects, mediated by direct signaling downstream Notch and TNF, from secondary effects, mediated by de novo synthesized proteins. A low and physiologically relevant concentration of TNF promoted T lymphopoiesis in OP9-DL1 cocultures. TNF positively modulated the expression of both transcripts in a Notch-dependent manner; however, GATA3 induction was mediated by a direct mechanism, while HOXB4 induction was indirect. Induction of both transcripts was repressed by a GSK3beta inhibitor, indicating that activation of canonical Wnt signaling inhibits rather than induces their expression. Our study provides novel evidences of the mechanisms integrating Notch and TNF-alpha signaling in the transcriptional induction of GATA3 and HOXB4. This mechanism has direct implications in the control of self-renewal, proliferation, commitment, and T cell differentiation.
BACKGROUND: Uterine leiomyomas (UL) are the most common benign tumor in women of reproductive age. Their pathology remains unclear, which hampers the development of safe and effective treatments. Raising evidence suggests epigenetics as a main mechanism involved in tumor development. Histone modification is a key component in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Specifically, the histone mark H3K4me3, which promotes gene expression, is altered in many tumors. In this study, we aimed to identify if the histone modification H3K4me3 regulates the expression of genes involved in uterine leiomyoma pathogenesis. METHODS: Prospective study integrating RNA-seq (n = 48) and H3K4me3 CHIP-seq (n = 19) data of uterine leiomyomas versus their adjacent myometrium. Differentially expressed genes (FDR < 0.01, log2FC > 1 or < - 1) were selected following DESeq2, edgeR, and limma analysis. Their differential methylation and functional enrichment (FDR < 0.05) were respectively analyzed with limma and ShinyGO. RESULTS: CHIP-seq data showed a global suppression of H3K4me3 in uterine leiomyomas versus their adjacent myometrial tissue (p-value< 2.2e-16). Integrating CHIP-seq and RNA-seq data highlighted that transcription of 696/922 uterine leiomyoma-related differentially expressed genes (DEG) (FDR < 0.01, log2FC > 1 or < - 1) was epigenetically mediated by H3K4me3. Further, 50 genes were differentially trimethylated (FDR < 0.05), including 33 hypertrimethylated/upregulated, and 17 hypotrimethylated/downregulated genes. Functional enrichment analysis of the latter showed dysregulation of neuron-related processes and synapsis-related cellular components in uterine leiomyomas, and a literature review study of these DEG found additional implications with tumorigenesis (i.e. aberrant proliferation, invasion, and dysregulation of Wnt/beta-catenin, and TGF-beta pathways). Finally, SATB2, DCX, SHOX2, ST8SIA2, CAPN6, and NPTX2 proto-oncogenes were identified among the hypertrimethylated/upregulated DEG, while KRT19, ABCA8, and HOXB4 tumor suppressor genes were identified among hypotrimethylated/downregulated DEG. CONCLUSIONS: H3K4me3 instabilities alter the expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, inducing aberrant proliferation, and dysregulated Wnt/beta-catenin, and TGF-beta pathways, that ultimately promote uterine leiomyoma progression. The reversal of these histone modifications may be a promising new therapeutic alternative for uterine leiomyoma patients.
The hemoglobin disorders of beta-thalassemia and sickle cell disease together constitute the most prevalent of human monogenic diseases. Although palliative therapies and curative allogeneic stem cell transplantation therapy have been developed for these disorders, many patients still suffer significant morbidity and early mortality. Therefore, development of alternative treatment based on a gene therapy approach continues to be a worthwhile endeavor. Several laboratories have recently achieved major progress towards this goal. Using lentiviral vectors to obtain high-level expression of relatively complex globin gene cassettes, therapeutic correction of several murine models of both beta-thalassemia and sickle cell disease has been achieved. These breakthroughs, coupled with recent significant developments in the ability to select and expand genetically modified stem cells in vivo, have greatly advanced the possibility of gene therapy for the hemoglobin disorders in the near future. These advances, together with recent information regarding safety issues of retroviral gene transfer, are reviewed here.
Differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells in vitro yields abundant hematopoietic progenitors, but achieving stable hematopoietic engraftment of irradiated mice has proven difficult, begging the question of whether ES cells give rise to hematopoietic stem cells in vitro, and limiting the application of ES cells as experimental and therapeutic models. We have employed a number of hematopoietic regulatory genes to probe the nature and developmental potential of ES-derived blood precursors. The chronic myeloid leukemia-associated BCR/ABL oncoprotein transforms a novel class of ES-derived embryonic hematopoietic stem cell that represents a common progenitor of primitive erythropoiesis and definitive lymphoid-myeloid blood development. Expression of the homeobox gene HoxB4 generated normal, non-leukemic hematopoietic progenitors that enabled long-term, multilineage hematopoietic engraftment in primary and secondary mouse recipients. We have used these repopulating hematopoietic stem cells to model therapeutic transplantation from ES cells. We treated an immunodeficient Rag2(-/-) mouse by therapeutic cloning, that is, isogenic ES cell generation by somatic cell nuclear transfer, gene correction, and cell replacement therapy. Comparable approaches with human ES cells are being developed to lay the foundation for cellular therapies in patients with a variety of bone marrow diseases.
