B2 bradykinin receptor; Receptor for bradykinin. It is associated with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Bradykinin receptor subfamily. BDKRB2 sub-subfamily.
Reinvigoration of antitumor immunity remains an unmet challenge. Our retrospective analyses revealed that cancer patients who took antihistamines during immunotherapy treatment had significantly improved survival. We uncovered that histamine and histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) are frequently increased in the tumor microenvironment and induce T cell dysfunction. Mechanistically, HRH1-activated macrophages polarize toward an M2-like immunosuppressive phenotype with increased expression of the immune checkpoint VISTA, rendering T cells dysfunctional. HRH1 knockout or antihistamine treatment reverted macrophage immunosuppression, revitalized T cell cytotoxic function, and restored immunotherapy response. Allergy, via the histamine-HRH1 axis, facilitated tumor growth and induced immunotherapy resistance in mice and humans. Importantly, cancer patients with low plasma histamine levels had a more than tripled objective response rate to anti-PD-1 treatment compared with patients with high plasma histamine. Altogether, pre-existing allergy or high histamine levels in cancer patients can dampen immunotherapy responses and warrant prospectively exploring antihistamines as adjuvant agents for combinatorial immunotherapy.
OBJECTIVE: The correlation between cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) progression and bile is rarely studied. Here, we aimed to identify differential metabolites in benign and malignant bile ducts and elucidate the generation, function and degradation of bile metabolites. DESIGN: Differential metabolites in the bile from CCA and benign biliary stenosis were identified by metabonomics. Biliary molecules able to induce mast cell (MC) degranulation were revealed by in vitro and in vivo experiments, including liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS and bioluminescence resonance energy transfer assays. Histamine (HA) receptor expression in CCA was mapped using a single-cell mRNA sequence. HA receptor functions were elucidated by patient-derived xenografts (PDX) in humanised mice and orthotopic models in MC-deficient mice. Genes involved in HA-induced proliferation were screened by CRISPR/Cas9. RESULTS: Bile HA was elevated in CCA and indicated poorer prognoses. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)-derived stem cell factor (SCF) recruited MCs, and bile N,N-dimethyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (DMPD) stimulated MCs to release HA through G protein-coupled receptor subtype 2 (MRGPRX2)-Galphaq signalling. Bile-induced MCs released platelet-derived growth factor subunit B (PDGF-B) and angiopoietin 1/2 (ANGPT1/2), which enhanced CCA angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) and HRH2 were predominantly expressed in CCA cells and CAFs, respectively. HA promoted CCA cell proliferation by activating HRH1-Galphaq signalling and hastened CAFs to secrete hepatocyte growth factor by stimulating HRH2-Galphas signalling. Solute carrier family 22 member 3 (SLC22A3) inhibited HA-induced CCA proliferation by importing bile HA into cells for degradation, and SLC22A3 deletion resulted in HA accumulation. CONCLUSION: Bile HA is released from MCs through DMPD stimulation and degraded via SLC22A3 import. Different HA receptors exhibit a distinct expression profile in CCA and produce different oncogenic effects. MCs promote CCA progression in a CCA-bile interplay pattern.
Genetic polymorphisms for histamine-metabolizing enzymes are responsible for interindividual variation in histamine metabolism and are associated with diverse diseases. Initial reports on polymorphisms of histamine-related genes including those coding for the enzymes histidine decarboxylase (HDC), diamine oxidase (ABP1) and histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT), as well as histamine receptor genes, often have pointed to polymorphisms that occur with extremely low frequencies or that could not be verified by later studies. In contrast, common and functionally significant polymorphisms recently described have been omitted in many association studies. In this review we analyze allele frequencies, functional and clinical impact and interethnic variability on histamine-related polymorphisms. The most relevant nonsynonymous polymorphisms for the HDC gene are rs17740607 Met31Thr, rs16963486 Leu553Phe and rs2073440 Asp644Glu. For ABP1 the most relevant polymorphisms are rs10156191 Thr16Met, rs1049742 Ser332Phe, and particularly because of its functional effect, rs1049793 His645Asp. In addition the ABP1 polymorphisms rs45558339 Ile479Met and rs35070995 His659Asn are relevant to Asian and African subjects, respectively. For HNMT the only nonsynonymous polymorphism present with a relevant frequency is rs1801105 Thr105Ile. For HRH1 the polymorphism rs7651620 Glu270Gly is relevant to African subjects only. The HRH2 rs2067474 polymorphism, located in an enhancer element of the gene promoter, is common in all populations. No common nonsynonymous SNPs were observed in the HRH3 gene and two SNPs were observed with a significant frequency in the HRH4 gene: rs11665084 Ala138Val and rs11662595 His206Arg. This review summarizes relevant polymorphisms, discusses controversial findings on association of histamine-related polymorphisms and allergies and other diseases, and identifies topics requiring further investigation.
Numerous host factors, in addition to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE2), have been identified as coreceptors of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), demonstrating broad viral tropism and diversified druggable potential. We and others have found that antihistamine drugs, particularly histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) antagonists, potently inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection. In this study, we provided compelling evidence that HRH1 acts as an alternative receptor for SARS-CoV-2 by directly binding to the viral spike protein. HRH1 also synergistically enhanced hACE2-dependent viral entry by interacting with hACE2. Antihistamine drugs effectively prevent viral infection by competitively binding to HRH1, thereby disrupting the interaction between the spike protein and its receptor. Multiple inhibition assays revealed that antihistamine drugs broadly inhibited the infection of various SARS-CoV-2 mutants with an average IC50 of 2.4 microM. The prophylactic function of these drugs was further confirmed by authentic SARS-CoV-2 infection assays and humanized mouse challenge experiments, demonstrating the therapeutic potential of antihistamine drugs for combating coronavirus disease 19.IMPORTANCEIn addition to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) can utilize alternative cofactors to facilitate viral entry. In this study, we discovered that histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) not only functions as an independent receptor for SARS-CoV-2 but also synergistically enhances ACE2-dependent viral entry by directly interacting with ACE2. Further studies have demonstrated that HRH1 facilitates the entry of SARS-CoV-2 by directly binding to the N-terminal domain of the spike protein. Conversely, antihistamine drugs, primarily HRH1 antagonists, can competitively bind to HRH1 and thereby prevent viral entry. These findings revealed that the administration of repurposable antihistamine drugs could be a therapeutic intervention to combat coronavirus disease 19.
BACKGROUND: Although immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy has proven to be extremely effective at managing certain cancers, its efficacy in treating pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has been limited. Therefore, enhancing the effect of ICB could improve the prognosis of PDAC. In this study, we focused on the histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) and investigated its impact on ICB therapy for PDAC. METHODS: We assessed HRH1 expression in pancreatic cancer cell (PCC) specimens from PDAC patients through public data analysis and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. The impact of HRH1 in PCCs was evaluated using HRH1 antagonists and small hairpin RNA (shRNA). Techniques including Western blot, flow cytometry, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and microarray analyses were performed to identify the relationships between HRH1 and major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) expression in cancer cells. We combined HRH1 antagonism or knockdown with anti-programmed death receptor 1 (alphaPD-1) therapy in orthotopic models, employing IHC, immunofluorescence, and hematoxylin and eosin staining for assessment. RESULTS: HRH1 expression in cancer cells was negatively correlated with HLA-ABC expression, CD8(+) T cells, and cytotoxic CD8(+) T cells. Our findings indicate that HRH1 blockade upregulates MHC-I expression in PCCs via cholesterol biosynthesis signaling. In the orthotopic model, the combined inhibition of HRH1 and alphaPD-1 blockade enhanced cytotoxic CD8(+) T cell penetration and efficacy, overcoming resistance to ICB therapy. CONCLUSIONS: HRH1 plays an immunosuppressive role in cancer cells. Consequently, HRH1 intervention may be a promising method to amplify the responsiveness of PDAC to immunotherapy.
Glioblastoma (GBM), an extremely aggressive and prevalent malignant brain tumor, remains a challenge to treat. Despite a multimodality treatment approach, GBM recurrence remains inevitable, particularly with the emergence of temozolomide (TMZ) resistance and limited treatment options. Surprisingly, previous studies show that a history of allergies, atopy, or asthma is inversely associated with GBM risk. Further, the electronic medical record at the University Hospital of Lausanne showed that the GBM patients taking antihistamine during treatment had better survival. Histamine is an essential neurotransmitter in the brain and plays a significant role in regulating sleep, hormonal balance, and cognitive functions. Elevated levels of histamine and increased histamine receptor expression have been found in different tumors and their microenvironments, including GBM. High histamine 1 receptor (HRH1) expression is inversely related to overall and progression-free survival in GBM patients, further emphasizing the role of histamine in disease progression. This review aims to provide insights into the challenges of GBM treatment, the role of histamine in GBM progression, and the rationale for considering antihistamines as targeted therapy. The review concludes by encouraging further investigation into antihistamine mechanisms and their impact on the tumor microenvironment.
Despite the success of immunotherapy in several haematological neoplasms, the effectiveness in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is still controversial, partially due to the lack of knowledge regarding immune-related processes in this disease and similar neoplasias. In this study, we analysed the role and expression of histamine receptor 1 (HRH1) in haematological malignancies. Although the histamine receptor type 1 was widely expressed in healthy and malignant haematopoiesis, especially along the myeloid lineage, HRH1 lacked a relevant role in survival/proliferation and chemoresistance of AML cells, as analysed by HRH1 knockdown (KD) and pharmacological modulation. However, HRH1-mediated signalling was critical for the activation of the differentiation process induced by several agents including all-trans retinoic acid, establishing a role for HRH1 in myeloid differentiation. Pharmacological activation of Erk was able to partially restore differentiation capacity in HRH1 KD AML cells, suggesting that HRH1 signalling acts upstream MAPK-Erk pathway. As an indirect consequence of our results, treatment-related histamine release is not expected to confer a proliferative advantage in leukaemic cells.
Histamine receptors mediate important physiological processes and take part in the pathophysiology of different brain disorders. Histamine receptor 1 (HRH1) is involved in the development of neurotransmitter systems, and its role in neurogenesis has been proposed. Altered HRH1 binding and expression have been detected in the brains of patients with schizophrenia, depression, and autism. Our goal was to assess the role of hrh1 in zebrafish development and neurotransmitter system regulation through the characterization of hrh1(-/-) fish generated by the CRISPR/Cas9 system. Quantitative PCR, in situ hybridization, and immunocytochemistry were used to study neurotransmitter systems and genes essential for brain development. Additionally, we wanted to reveal the role of this histamine receptor in larval and adult fish behavior using several quantitative behavioral methods including locomotion, thigmotaxis, dark flash and startle response, novel tank diving, and shoaling behavior. Hrh1(-/-) larvae displayed normal behavior in comparison with hrh1(+/+) siblings. Interestingly, a transient abnormal expression of important neurodevelopmental markers was evident in these larvae, as well as a reduction in the number of tyrosine hydroxylase 1 (Th1)-positive cells, th1 mRNA, and hypocretin (hcrt)-positive cells. These abnormalities were not detected in adulthood. In summary, we verified that zebrafish lacking hrh1 present deficits in the dopaminergic and hypocretin systems during early development, but those are compensated by the time fish reach adulthood. However, impaired sociability and anxious-like behavior, along with downregulation of choline O-acetyltransferase a and LIM homeodomain transcription factor Islet1, were displayed by adult fish.
Although the cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) has been evolutionarily conserved, the role of this protein remains elusive. Recent evidence indicates that PrP(C) may be involved in neuroinflammation and the immune response in the brain, and its expression may be modified via various mechanisms. Histamine is a proinflammatory mediator and neurotransmitter that stimulates numerous cells via interactions with histamine receptors 1-4 (HRH1-4). Since microglia are the innate immune cells of the central nervous system, we hypothesized that histamine-induced stimulation regulates the expression of PrP(C) in human-derived microglia. The human microglial clone 3 (HMC3) cell line was treated with histamine, and intracellular calcium levels were measured via a calcium flux assay. Cytokine production was monitored by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Western blotting and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used to determine protein and gene expression of HRH1-4. Flow cytometry and western blotting were used to measure PrP(C) expression levels. Fluorescence microscopy was used to examine Iba-1 and PrP(C) localization. HMC3 cells stimulated by histamine exhibited increased intracellular calcium levels and increased release of IL-6 and IL-8, while also modifying PrP(C) localization. HMC3 stimulated with histamine for 6 and 24 hours exhibited increased surface PrP(C) expression. Specifically, we found that stimulation of the HRH2 receptor was responsible for changes in surface PrP(C). Histamine-induced increases in surface PrP(C) were attenuated following inhibition of the HRH2 receptor via the HRH2 antagonist ranitidine. These changes were unique to HRH2 activation, as stimulation of HRH1, HRH3, or HRH4 did not alter surface PrP(C). Prolonged stimulation of HMC3 decreased PrP(C) expression following 48 and 72 hours of histamine stimulation. HMC3 cells can be stimulated by histamine to undergo intracellular calcium influx. Surface expression levels of PrP(C) on HMC3 cells are altered by histamine exposure, primarily mediated by HRH2. While histamine exposure also increases release of IL-6 and IL-8 in these cells, this cytokine release is not fully dependent on PrP(C) levels, as IL-6 release is only partially reduced and IL-8 release is unchanged under the conditions of HRH2 blockade that prevent PrP(C) changes. Overall, this suggests that PrP(C) may play a role in modulating microglial responses.
Tuberculosis (TB), which is caused by the single pathogenic bacterium, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is among the top 10 lethal diseases worldwide. This situation has been exacerbated by the increasing number of cases of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) and extensively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB). Histamine is an organic nitrogenous compound that mediates a plethora of cell processes via different receptors. The expression of histamine receptor H1 (HRH1), one of the four histamine receptors identified to date was previously reported to be augmented by M. tuberculosis infection, although the underlying mechanism is unclear. In the present study, we applied confocal microscopy, flow cytometry, and Western blotting to show that HRH1 expression was enhanced in macrophages following mycobacterial infection. Furthermore, by combining techniques of gene knockdown, immunoprecipitation, intracellular bacterial burden analysis, fluorescence labeling, and imaging, we found that M. tuberculosis targeted the host HRH1 to suppress NOX2-mediated cROS production and inhibit phagosome maturation and acidification via the GRK2-p38MAPK signaling pathway. Our findings clarified the underlying mechanism of the M. tuberculosis and host HRH1 interaction and may provide useful information for the development of novel antituberculosis treatments. IMPORTANCE Once engulfed in macrophage phagosomes, M. tuberculosis adopts various strategies to take advantage of the host environment for its intracellular survival. Histamine is an organic nitrogen-containing compound that mediates a plethora of cellular processes via different receptors, but the crosstalk mechanism between M. tuberculosis and HRH1 in macrophages is not clear. Our results revealed that M. tuberculosis infection enhanced HRH1 expression, which in turn restrained macrophage bactericidal activity by modulating the GRK2-p38MAPK signaling pathway, inhibiting NOX2-mediated cROS production and phagosome maturation. Clarification of the underlying mechanism by which M. tuberculosis utilizes host HRH1 to favor its intracellular survival may provide useful information for the development of novel antituberculosis treatments.
H1 nonsedating antihistamines, such as desloratadine, are first-line treatment options for chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). However, desloratadine induces various degrees of sedation side effect in CSU patients, and no biomarkers currently exist for predicting the severity of such side effect. Herein, we evaluated the association between HRH1 gene rs901865 polymorphism and the severity of sedation side effect following desloratadine therapy in patients with CSU. We found that 20 of the 114 patients (17.50%) showed sedation side effect after desloratadine treatment, and 3 patients (2.63%) experienced serious sleepiness. The frequency of HRH1 rs901865 G allele was significantly higher in patients who experienced sedation than in patients with rs901865 A allele (p = 0.0009). Moreover, patients with the rs901865 G/G genotype suffered a more serious sedation side effect than patients with the rs901865 G/A genotype (p = 0.005). These results provide evidence that the HRH1 rs901865 G/G polymorphism is associated with severe sedation side effect after desloratadine treatment. Thus, the HRH1 rs901865 allele may potentially be used as a biomarker for predicting the severity of sedation side effect in patients suffering from CSU and treated with desloratadine.
Histamine (HA) is a pleiotropic biogenic amine synthesized exclusively by histidine decarboxylase (HDC) in most mammalian tissues. The literature on the role of HA within the male gonad has expanded over the last years, attracting attention to potential unexpected side-effects of anti-histamines on testicular function. In this regard, HA receptors (HRH1, HRH2 and HRH4) have been described in Leydig cells of different species, including human. Via these receptors, HA has been reported to trigger positive or negative interactions with the LH/hCG signaling pathway depending upon its concentration, thereby contributing to the local control of testicular androgen levels. It should then be considered that anti-histamines may affect testicular homeostasis by increasing or decreasing steroid production. Additionally, HRH1 and HRH2 receptors are present in peritubular and germ cells, and HRH2 antagonists have been found to negatively affect peritubular cells and reduce sperm viability. The potential negative impact of anti-histamines on male reproduction becomes even more dramatic if we consider that HA has also been associated with human sexual behavior and penile erection. What is more, although testicular mast cells are the major source of locally produced HA, recent studies have described HDC expression in macrophages, Leydig cells and germ cells, revealing the existence of multiple sources of HA within the testis. Undoubtedly, the more we learn about the testicular histaminergic system, the more opportunities there will be for rational design of drugs aimed at treating HA-related pathologies, with minimum or nule negative impact on fertility.
OBJECTIVES: A positive correlation between antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG) and the antagonist effect of antipsychotic drugs at the histamine H1 receptor (HRH1) as well as the agonist effect at the histamine H3 receptor (HRH3) in the brain has been consistently demonstrated. We investigated the potential impact of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HRH1 and HRH3 genes on AIWG. METHODS: We analysed 40 tagSNPs in HRH1 (n = 34) and HRH3 (n = 6) in schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder patients (n = 193) primarily treated with clozapine or olanzapine for up to 14 weeks. Linear regression was used to evaluate the association between SNPs and AIWG, with baseline weight and treatment duration as covariates. RESULTS: In HRH1, a nominal association of rs7639145 with AIWG was observed in patients of European ancestry treated with either clozapine or olanzapine (P( )= 0.043; beta = 1.658; n = 77). We observed nominal association for two HRH1 SNPs rs346074 (P = 0.002; beta = -5.024) and rs13064530 (P( )= 0.004; beta = -5.158) in patients of African ancestry treated with either clozapine or olanzapine (n = 37). However, the above associations are not significant after correcting for multiple testing. In HRH3, we did not observe association in either ancestry. CONCLUSIONS: The current study suggests that SNPs in HRH1 and HRH3 may not have a major role in AIWG.
AIM: Histamine plays an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. Genetic variations in histamine receptors (HRH) may influence the expression of allergic diseases. This study analyzes the association between HRH variants and NSAID hypersensitivity reactions. PATIENTS & METHODS: The authors analyzed copy number variations (CNVs) and common functional SNPs in genes HRH1, HRH2 and HRH4 in 442 unrelated patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs and in 414 healthy unrelated controls. RESULTS: The authors identified, both in patients and control subjects, individuals carrying CNVs in HRH genes. The most common genotype corresponded to two copies of each gene, but carriers of one or three copies of HRH1 (5% of individuals), HRH2 (1.1%) and HRH4 genes (0.9%) were also identified. CONCLUSION: For the first time, we describe CNVs in human HRH genes. Neither common functional SNPs in HRH genes nor CNVs influenced the risk of developing hypersensitivity to NSAIDs.
Staphylococcus aureus poses a significant threat to human health due to its virulence and multidrug resistance. In addition, recalcitrant biofilm formation of S. aureus often results in chronic infection and the treatment tolerance toward the traditional antibiotics. Thus, the development of novel antimicrobial agents capable to inhibit or eradicate S. aureus biofilm formation does matter. Here, we demonstrated that clemastine showed slight bacteriostatic activity and enhanced the antibacterial activity of oxacillin against S. aureus. Moreover, the dramatic inhibition of biofilm formation was found in clinical S. aureus strains by clemastine. Clemastine inhibited the release of eDNA during the biofilm formation and decreased the S. aureus hemolytic activity. Moreover, the S. aureus SA113 treated with clemastine displayed the decreased transcriptional level of the biofilm formation relevant genes (fnbB, icaA, and icaB), virulence genes (hlg, hld, lukde, lukpvl, beta-PSM, delta-PSM, and cap5A), and the regulatory genes agrA. The proteomics analysis of SA113 treated with clemastine demonstrated the significant changes in levels of biofilm-related proteins (stress response regulators ClpB and GroS, ATP-binding proteins, and urease metabolism), virulence-related proteins (SspA, superantigen, and VWbp), and methicillin resistance-related proteins (glutamine metabolism). The genetic mutations on gdpP (cyclic di-AMP phosphodiesterase) were found in the clemastine-induced tolerant derivative isolate by whole-genome sequencing. Furthermore, the interaction between clemastine and GdpP protein was demonstrated by the molecular docking, gdpP overexpression experiment, and thermal stability assay. Conclusively, clemastine might exert its inhibitory effects against the biofilm formation and hemolysis in S. aureus through targeting GdpP protein. IMPORTANCE The biofilm formation, which protects bacteria from stresses, including antibiotics and host immune responses, can be commonly found in clinical S. aureus isolates worldwide. Treatment failure of traditional antibiotics in biofilm-associated S. aureus infections remains a serious challenge. The novel anti-biofilm drug is urgently needed to address the looming crisis. In this study, clemastine, which is a histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) antagonist, was found to have a novel role of the significant inhibition against the biofilm formation and hemolytic activity of S. aureus and enhanced antibacterial activity against S. aureus when used in combination with oxacillin by targeting the GdpP protein. The discovery of this study identified novel use and mechanism of action of clemastine as a potential anti-biofilm drug for clinical application for S. aureus infectious.
The human histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) gene is located on chromosome 3p25 and encodes for a 487 amino acid G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) with a long third intracellular loop (IL3). The HRH1 predominantly couples to Galphaq/11 proteins, leading to the activation of phospholipase C (PLC) and subsequent release of the second messengers inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG) followed by the activation of PKC and the release of [Ca2+]i. In the present study, we identified HRH1 genes from 14 vertebrate genomes and found that HRH1 exists in all types of vertebrates including fish, amphibians, birds and mammals. We identified 88 SNPs including 4 available alleles disrupting an existing exonic splicing enhancer and 84 SNPs causing missense mutation, which may impact the effect of histamine on the HRH1 protein. We found that the human HRH1 gene was expressed in many tissues or organs, and predominant expression of HRH1 was shown in the bone marrow, whole blood, lymph node, thymus, brain, cerebellum, retina, spinal cord, heart, smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, small intestine, colon, adipocytes, kidney, liver, lung, pancreas, thyroid salivary gland, skin, ovary, uterus, placenta, prostate and testis. When searched in the PrognoScan database, human HRH1 was also found to be expressed in bladder cancer, blood cancer, brain cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, eye cancer, head and neck cancer, lung cancer, ovarian cancer, skin cancer and soft tissue cancer tissues. The relationship between the expression of HRH1 and prognosis was found to vary in different types of cancers, even in the same cancer from different databases. This implies that the function of HRH1 in these tumors may be multidimensional. GR, STAT5A and c-Myb regulatory transcription factor binding sites were identified in the HRH1 gene upstream (promoter) region, which may be involved in the effect of HRH1 in tumors.
Patients with liver diseases often suffer from chronic itch, yet the pruritogen(s) and receptor(s) remain largely elusive. Here, we identify bile acids as natural ligands for MRGPRX4. MRGPRX4 is expressed in human dorsal root ganglion (hDRG) neurons and co-expresses with itch receptor HRH1. Bile acids elicited Ca(2+) responses in cultured hDRG neurons, and bile acids or a MRGPRX4 specific agonist induced itch in human subjects. However, a specific agonist for another bile acid receptor TGR5 failed to induce itch in human subjects and we find that human TGR5 is not expressed in hDRG neurons. Finally, we show positive correlation between cholestatic itch and plasma bile acids level in itchy patients and the elevated bile acids is sufficient to activate MRGPRX4. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that MRGPRX4 is a novel bile acid receptor that likely underlies cholestatic itch in human, providing a promising new drug target for anti-itch therapies.
C-X-C chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) is widely overexpressed in various types of cancer and is involved in several cancer phenotypes including tumor growth, survival, and metastasis. The roles of histamine and histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) in cancer pathogenesis remain controversial. Here, we show that HRH1 is widely expressed in various cancer cell lines and cancer tissues and that coexpression of CXCR4 and HRH1 is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. Using bimolecular fluorescence complementation and bioluminescence resonance energy transfer donor saturation assays, we demonstrate that CXCR4 and HRH1 can assemble into a heteromeric complex. Simultaneous activation of CXCR4 and HRH1 synergistically increases calcium flux in MDA-MB-231 cells that endogenously express CXCR4 and HRH1 but not in cells deficient in CXCR4 or HRH1. Costimulation of CXCR4 and HRH1 also significantly enhances CXCL12-induced MDA-MB-231 cell migration, while histamine alone does not induce cell migration. Synergistic effects on calcium flux and cell migration are inhibited by the Galpha(i) inhibitor pertussis toxin and the Galpha(q) inhibitor YM254890, suggesting that the Galpha(i) and Galpha(q) pathways are involved in the synergy. Enhanced calcium signaling and cell migration are also observed in NCI-H23 and HeLa cells, which coexpress CXCR4 and HRH1. Taken together, our findings demonstrate an interplay between CXCR4 and HRH1, and suggest the possibility of the CXCR4-HRH1 heteromer as a potential therapeutic target for anticancer therapy.
Inhibition of mTOR is the standard of care for lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM). However, this therapy has variable tolerability and some patients show progressive decline of lung function despite treatment. LAM diagnosis and monitoring can also be challenging due to the heterogeneity of symptoms and insufficiency of non-invasive tests. Here, we propose monoamine-derived biomarkers that provide preclinical evidence for novel therapeutic approaches. The major histamine-derived metabolite methylimidazoleacetic acid (MIAA) is relatively more abundant in LAM plasma, and MIAA values are independent of VEGF-D. Higher levels of histamine are associated with poorer lung function and greater disease burden. Molecular and cellular analyses, and metabolic profiling confirmed active histamine signaling and metabolism. LAM tumorigenesis is reduced using approved drugs targeting monoamine oxidases A/B (clorgyline and rasagiline) or histamine H1 receptor (loratadine), and loratadine synergizes with rapamycin. Depletion of Maoa or Hrh1 expression, and administration of an L-histidine analog, or a low L-histidine diet, also reduce LAM tumorigenesis. These findings extend our knowledge of LAM biology and suggest possible ways of improving disease management.
OBJECTIVE: Histamine is an important mediator in the pathophysiology of asthma. We have previously reported that HRH1 is differentially expressed among those with asthma compared to those without asthma. Single histamine-related genes have also been associated with asthma. We aimed to evaluate known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes along the histamine biotransformation and response pathway, and determine their association with asthma and HRH1 mRNA expression. METHODS: We enrolled children and adults (n = 93) with/without asthma who met inclusion/exclusion criteria. Genotyping was performed for nine known SNPs in the HDC, HRH1, HRH4, HNMT and ABP1 genes. HRH1 mRNA expression was determined on RNA from buccal tissue. General linear model, Fisher's exact test and Chi-square test were used to determine differences in allele, genotype and haplotype frequency between subjects with and without asthma and differential HRH1 mRNA expression relative to genotype. Statistical significance was determined by p < 0.05. RESULTS: No difference was observed in genotype/allele frequency for the nine SNPs between subjects with and without asthma. The HNMT-1639C/-464C/314C/3'UTRA haplotype was more frequently observed in those without asthma than those with asthma (p = 0.03). We also observed genetic differences relative to race and gender. HNMT 314 genotype CT was more frequent in males with asthma compared to those without asthma (p = 0.04). CONCLUSIONS: Histamine pathway haplotype was associated with a diagnosis of asthma in our cohort but allele and genotype were not. Subgroup evaluations may also be important. Further studies are needed to determine the potential biological/clinical significance of our findings.
