Histamine H2 receptor; The H2 subclass of histamine receptors mediates gastric acid secretion. Also appears to regulate gastrointestinal motility and intestinal secretion. Possible role in regulating cell growth and differentiation. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase and, through a separate G protein-dependent mechanism, the phosphoinositide/protein kinase (PKC) signaling pathway (By similarity); Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
BACKGROUND: Having a comprehensive map of the cellular anatomy of the normal human bladder is vital to understanding the cellular origins of benign bladder disease and bladder cancer. METHODS: We used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of 12,423 cells from healthy human bladder tissue samples taken from patients with bladder cancer and 12,884 cells from mouse bladders to classify bladder cell types and their underlying functions. RESULTS: We created a single-cell transcriptomic map of human and mouse bladders, including 16 clusters of human bladder cells and 15 clusters of mouse bladder cells. The homology and heterogeneity of human and mouse bladder cell types were compared and both conservative and heterogeneous aspects of human and mouse bladder evolution were identified. We also discovered two novel types of human bladder cells. One type is ADRA2A(+) and HRH2(+) interstitial cells which may be associated with nerve conduction and allergic reactions. The other type is TNNT1(+) epithelial cells that may be involved with bladder emptying. We verify these TNNT1(+) epithelial cells also occur in rat and mouse bladders. CONCLUSIONS: This transcriptomic map provides a resource for studying bladder cell types, specific cell markers, signaling receptors, and genes that will help us to learn more about the relationship between bladder cell types and diseases.
OBJECTIVE: The correlation between cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) progression and bile is rarely studied. Here, we aimed to identify differential metabolites in benign and malignant bile ducts and elucidate the generation, function and degradation of bile metabolites. DESIGN: Differential metabolites in the bile from CCA and benign biliary stenosis were identified by metabonomics. Biliary molecules able to induce mast cell (MC) degranulation were revealed by in vitro and in vivo experiments, including liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS and bioluminescence resonance energy transfer assays. Histamine (HA) receptor expression in CCA was mapped using a single-cell mRNA sequence. HA receptor functions were elucidated by patient-derived xenografts (PDX) in humanised mice and orthotopic models in MC-deficient mice. Genes involved in HA-induced proliferation were screened by CRISPR/Cas9. RESULTS: Bile HA was elevated in CCA and indicated poorer prognoses. Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs)-derived stem cell factor (SCF) recruited MCs, and bile N,N-dimethyl-1,4-phenylenediamine (DMPD) stimulated MCs to release HA through G protein-coupled receptor subtype 2 (MRGPRX2)-Galphaq signalling. Bile-induced MCs released platelet-derived growth factor subunit B (PDGF-B) and angiopoietin 1/2 (ANGPT1/2), which enhanced CCA angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) and HRH2 were predominantly expressed in CCA cells and CAFs, respectively. HA promoted CCA cell proliferation by activating HRH1-Galphaq signalling and hastened CAFs to secrete hepatocyte growth factor by stimulating HRH2-Galphas signalling. Solute carrier family 22 member 3 (SLC22A3) inhibited HA-induced CCA proliferation by importing bile HA into cells for degradation, and SLC22A3 deletion resulted in HA accumulation. CONCLUSION: Bile HA is released from MCs through DMPD stimulation and degraded via SLC22A3 import. Different HA receptors exhibit a distinct expression profile in CCA and produce different oncogenic effects. MCs promote CCA progression in a CCA-bile interplay pattern.
Genetic polymorphisms for histamine-metabolizing enzymes are responsible for interindividual variation in histamine metabolism and are associated with diverse diseases. Initial reports on polymorphisms of histamine-related genes including those coding for the enzymes histidine decarboxylase (HDC), diamine oxidase (ABP1) and histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT), as well as histamine receptor genes, often have pointed to polymorphisms that occur with extremely low frequencies or that could not be verified by later studies. In contrast, common and functionally significant polymorphisms recently described have been omitted in many association studies. In this review we analyze allele frequencies, functional and clinical impact and interethnic variability on histamine-related polymorphisms. The most relevant nonsynonymous polymorphisms for the HDC gene are rs17740607 Met31Thr, rs16963486 Leu553Phe and rs2073440 Asp644Glu. For ABP1 the most relevant polymorphisms are rs10156191 Thr16Met, rs1049742 Ser332Phe, and particularly because of its functional effect, rs1049793 His645Asp. In addition the ABP1 polymorphisms rs45558339 Ile479Met and rs35070995 His659Asn are relevant to Asian and African subjects, respectively. For HNMT the only nonsynonymous polymorphism present with a relevant frequency is rs1801105 Thr105Ile. For HRH1 the polymorphism rs7651620 Glu270Gly is relevant to African subjects only. The HRH2 rs2067474 polymorphism, located in an enhancer element of the gene promoter, is common in all populations. No common nonsynonymous SNPs were observed in the HRH3 gene and two SNPs were observed with a significant frequency in the HRH4 gene: rs11665084 Ala138Val and rs11662595 His206Arg. This review summarizes relevant polymorphisms, discusses controversial findings on association of histamine-related polymorphisms and allergies and other diseases, and identifies topics requiring further investigation.
Chronic liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are life-threatening diseases with limited treatment options. The lack of clinically relevant/tractable experimental models hampers therapeutic discovery. Here, we develop a simple and robust human liver cell-based system modeling a clinical prognostic liver signature (PLS) predicting long-term liver disease progression toward HCC. Using the PLS as a readout, followed by validation in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis/fibrosis/HCC animal models and patient-derived liver spheroids, we identify nizatidine, a histamine receptor H2 (HRH2) blocker, for treatment of advanced liver disease and HCC chemoprevention. Moreover, perturbation studies combined with single cell RNA-Seq analyses of patient liver tissues uncover hepatocytes and HRH2(+), CLEC5A(high), MARCO(low) liver macrophages as potential nizatidine targets. The PLS model combined with single cell RNA-Seq of patient tissues enables discovery of urgently needed targets and therapeutics for treatment of advanced liver disease and cancer prevention.
Tourette's disorder (TD) is a highly heritable childhood-onset neurodevelopmental disorder and is caused by a complex interplay of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Yet, the molecular mechanisms underlying the disorder remain largely elusive. In this study, we used the available omics data to compile a list of TD candidate genes, and we subsequently conducted tissue/cell type specificity and functional enrichment analyses of this list. Using genomic data, we also investigated genetic sharing between TD and blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) metabolite levels. Lastly, we built a molecular landscape of TD through integrating the results from these analyses with an extensive literature search to identify the interactions between the TD candidate genes/proteins and metabolites. We found evidence for an enriched expression of the TD candidate genes in four brain regions and the pituitary. The functional enrichment analyses implicated two pathways ('cAMP-mediated signaling' and 'Endocannabinoid Neuronal Synapse Pathway') and multiple biological functions related to brain development and synaptic transmission in TD etiology. Furthermore, we found genetic sharing between TD and the blood and CSF levels of 39 metabolites. The landscape of TD not only provides insights into the (altered) molecular processes that underlie the disease but, through the identification of potential drug targets (such as FLT3, NAALAD2, CX3CL1-CX3CR1, OPRM1, and HRH2), it also yields clues for developing novel TD treatments.
Background: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is an aggressive urological cancer that originates from the proximal tubular epithelium. As one of the most common post-translational modification, protein arginine methylation plays a pivotal role in various cancer-associated biological functions, especially in cancer immunity. Therefore, constructing a protein arginine methylation-related prognostic signature would be beneficial in guiding better personalized clinical management for patients with ccRCC. Methods: Based on the multi-omics profiling of the expression levels of eight protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) in 763 ccRCC samples (from TCGA, CPTAC, EMBL, and ICGC databases), we established a scoring system with machine-learning algorithms to quantify the modification patterns on clinical and immunological characterizations of individual ccRCC patient, which was termed as PRMTScore. Moreover, we utilized two external clinical cohorts receiving immunotherapy (n=302) to validate the reliability of the PRMTScore system. Multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC) was performed to characterize the cellular composition of 30 paired ccRCC samples. The proteomic profiling of 232 ccRCC samples obtained from Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center (FUSCC) was analyzed to validate the protein expression of PRMT5 in ccRCC. Finally, CCK-8, transwell, and wound healing assays were conducted to elucidate the role of PRMT5 in ccRCC in vitro. Results: A total of 763 ccRCC patients with available multi-omics profiling were stratified into two clusters (PRMTCluster A and B) with distinctive prognosis, genomic alterations, tumor microenvironment (TME) characteristics, and fundamental biological mechanisms. Subsequently, protein arginine methylation-related prognostic signature (PRMTScore) was constructed and consisted of SLC16A12, HRH2, F2RL3, and SAA1. The PRMTScore showed remarkable differences in outcomes, immune and stromal fractions, expressions of immune checkpoints, the abundance of immune cells, and immunotherapy response in ccRCC patients. Additionally, preliminary insights unveiled the tumor-suppressive role of PRMT5 in ccRCC, and the signal of PRMT5(low) significantly predicted aggressive prognosis and the high abundance of PD1(+) CD8(+) cells in ccRCC. Conclusion: We constructed a PRMTScore system, which showed the potent ability to assess the prognosis, TME characteristics, and immunotherapy response for patients with ccRCC. Moreover, this is the first study to propose that PRMT5 acts as a cancer suppressor in ccRCC.
Histamine (HA) is a pleiotropic biogenic amine synthesized exclusively by histidine decarboxylase (HDC) in most mammalian tissues. The literature on the role of HA within the male gonad has expanded over the last years, attracting attention to potential unexpected side-effects of anti-histamines on testicular function. In this regard, HA receptors (HRH1, HRH2 and HRH4) have been described in Leydig cells of different species, including human. Via these receptors, HA has been reported to trigger positive or negative interactions with the LH/hCG signaling pathway depending upon its concentration, thereby contributing to the local control of testicular androgen levels. It should then be considered that anti-histamines may affect testicular homeostasis by increasing or decreasing steroid production. Additionally, HRH1 and HRH2 receptors are present in peritubular and germ cells, and HRH2 antagonists have been found to negatively affect peritubular cells and reduce sperm viability. The potential negative impact of anti-histamines on male reproduction becomes even more dramatic if we consider that HA has also been associated with human sexual behavior and penile erection. What is more, although testicular mast cells are the major source of locally produced HA, recent studies have described HDC expression in macrophages, Leydig cells and germ cells, revealing the existence of multiple sources of HA within the testis. Undoubtedly, the more we learn about the testicular histaminergic system, the more opportunities there will be for rational design of drugs aimed at treating HA-related pathologies, with minimum or nule negative impact on fertility.
Although the cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) has been evolutionarily conserved, the role of this protein remains elusive. Recent evidence indicates that PrP(C) may be involved in neuroinflammation and the immune response in the brain, and its expression may be modified via various mechanisms. Histamine is a proinflammatory mediator and neurotransmitter that stimulates numerous cells via interactions with histamine receptors 1-4 (HRH1-4). Since microglia are the innate immune cells of the central nervous system, we hypothesized that histamine-induced stimulation regulates the expression of PrP(C) in human-derived microglia. The human microglial clone 3 (HMC3) cell line was treated with histamine, and intracellular calcium levels were measured via a calcium flux assay. Cytokine production was monitored by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Western blotting and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used to determine protein and gene expression of HRH1-4. Flow cytometry and western blotting were used to measure PrP(C) expression levels. Fluorescence microscopy was used to examine Iba-1 and PrP(C) localization. HMC3 cells stimulated by histamine exhibited increased intracellular calcium levels and increased release of IL-6 and IL-8, while also modifying PrP(C) localization. HMC3 stimulated with histamine for 6 and 24 hours exhibited increased surface PrP(C) expression. Specifically, we found that stimulation of the HRH2 receptor was responsible for changes in surface PrP(C). Histamine-induced increases in surface PrP(C) were attenuated following inhibition of the HRH2 receptor via the HRH2 antagonist ranitidine. These changes were unique to HRH2 activation, as stimulation of HRH1, HRH3, or HRH4 did not alter surface PrP(C). Prolonged stimulation of HMC3 decreased PrP(C) expression following 48 and 72 hours of histamine stimulation. HMC3 cells can be stimulated by histamine to undergo intracellular calcium influx. Surface expression levels of PrP(C) on HMC3 cells are altered by histamine exposure, primarily mediated by HRH2. While histamine exposure also increases release of IL-6 and IL-8 in these cells, this cytokine release is not fully dependent on PrP(C) levels, as IL-6 release is only partially reduced and IL-8 release is unchanged under the conditions of HRH2 blockade that prevent PrP(C) changes. Overall, this suggests that PrP(C) may play a role in modulating microglial responses.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema is a major aspirin-related hypersensitivity often associated with aspirin-intolerant asthma. Genetic studies on aspirin-intolerant asthma have shown chronic overproduction of cysteinyl leukotrienes. The genetic analysis of aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema is limited, however. RECENT FINDINGS: A recent study on HLA genotypes has suggested that the HLA alleles DRB11302 and DQB10609 may be genetic markers for aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema. A polymorphism study that examined nine single-nucleotide polymorphisms of five leukotriene-related genes [ALOX5 (encoding 5-lipoxygenase), ALOX5AP (5-lipoxygenase-activating protein), PTGS2 (cyclooxygenase 2), LTC4S (leukotriene C4 synthase), and CYSLTR1 (cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1)] found that promoter polymorphisms of ALOX5 (-1708A>G) and CYSLTR1 (-634C>T) were significantly different between aspirin-intolerant asthma and aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema, suggesting different contributions to the lipoxygenase pathway. A second polymorphism study, conducted on histamine-related genes, did not find any significant associations with aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema for the genes HNMT (encoding histamine N-methyltransferase), HRH1 or HRH2 (encoding histamine receptor types 1 and 2 respectively), or the gene encoding high-affinity IgE receptor Ibeta (FcepsilonRIbeta); however, the FcepsilonRIalpha gene promoter polymorphism was significantly associated with aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema. This finding has been supported by in vitro functional studies. SUMMARY: The HLA alleles DRB11302 and DQB10609, and the ALOX5 and FcepsilonRIalpha promoter polymorphisms, may contribute to the pathogenesis of aspirin-induced urticaria/angioedema. Further investigation to identify candidate genetic markers would help to elucidate the pathogenic mechanism of this condition.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common subtype of kidney cancer characterized by metabolic reprogramming. Glutamine metabolism is pivotal in metabolic reprogramming, contributing to the significant heterogeneity observed in ccRCC. Consequently, developing prognostic markers associated with glutamine metabolism could enhance personalized treatment strategies for ccRCC patients. This study obtained RNA sequencing and clinical data from 763 ccRCC cases sourced from multiple databases. Consensus clustering of 74 glutamine metabolism related genes (GMRGs)- profiles stratified the patients into three clusters, each of which exhibited distinct prognosis, tumor microenvironment, and biological characteristics. Then, six genes (SMTNL2, MIOX, TMEM27, SLC16A12, HRH2, and SAA1) were identified by machine-learning algorithms to develop a predictive signature related to glutamine metabolism, termed as GMRScore. The GMRScore showed significant differences in clinical prognosis, expression profile of immune checkpoints, abundance of immune cells, and immunotherapy response of ccRCC patients. Besides, the nomogram incorporating the GMRScore and clinical features showed strong predictive performance in prognosis of ccRCC patients. ALDH18A1, one of the GRMGs, exhibited elevated expression level in ccRCC and was related to markedly poorer prognosis in the integrated cohort, validated by proteomic profiling of 232 ccRCC samples from Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center (FUSCC). Conducting western blotting, CCK-8, transwell, and flow cytometry assays, we found the knockdown of ALDH18A1 in ccRCC significantly promoted apoptosis and inhibited proliferation, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in two human ccRCC cell lines (786-O and 769-P). In conclusion, we developed a glutamine metabolism-related prognostic signature in ccRCC, which is tightly linked to the tumor immune microenvironment and immunotherapy response, potentially facilitating precision therapy for ccRCC patients. Additionally, this study revealed the key role of ALDH18A1 in promoting ccRCC progression for the first time.
Transcriptional analyses such as microarray data have contributed to the progress in the diagnostics and therapy of colorectal cancer (CRC). The need for such research is still present because of the disease being common in both men and women with a high second position in cancer rankings. Little is known about the relations between the histaminergic system and inflammation in the large intestine and CRC. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of genes related to the histaminergic system and inflammation in the CRC tissues at three cancer development designs: all tested CRC samples, low (LCS) and high (HCS) clinical stage, and four clinical stages (CSI-CSIV), to the control. The research was carried out at the transcriptomic level, analysing hundreds of mRNAs from microarrays, as well as carrying out RT-PCR analysis of histaminergic receptors. The following histaminergic mRNAs: GNA15, MAOA, WASF2A, and inflammation-related: AEBP1, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL8, SPHK1, TNFAIP6, were distinguished. Among all analysed transcripts, AEBP1 can be considered the most promising diagnostic marker in the early stage of CRC. The results showed 59 correlations between differentiating genes of the histaminergic system and inflammation in the control, control and CRC, and CRC. The tests confirmed the presence of all histamine receptor transcripts in both the control and colorectal adenocarcinoma. Significant differences in expression were stated for HRH2 and HRH3 in the advanced stages of CRC adenocarcinoma. The relations between the histaminergic system and inflammation-linked genes in both the control and the CRC have been observed.
AIM: Histamine plays an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. Genetic variations in histamine receptors (HRH) may influence the expression of allergic diseases. This study analyzes the association between HRH variants and NSAID hypersensitivity reactions. PATIENTS & METHODS: The authors analyzed copy number variations (CNVs) and common functional SNPs in genes HRH1, HRH2 and HRH4 in 442 unrelated patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs and in 414 healthy unrelated controls. RESULTS: The authors identified, both in patients and control subjects, individuals carrying CNVs in HRH genes. The most common genotype corresponded to two copies of each gene, but carriers of one or three copies of HRH1 (5% of individuals), HRH2 (1.1%) and HRH4 genes (0.9%) were also identified. CONCLUSION: For the first time, we describe CNVs in human HRH genes. Neither common functional SNPs in HRH genes nor CNVs influenced the risk of developing hypersensitivity to NSAIDs.
The pathophysiological functions of cardiac histamine level and related histamine receptors during the development of chronic heart failure (CHF) were intensively investigated previously. However, the relevance of polymorphisms in histamine-related genes, such as HRH2, HRH3, DAO, and HNMT, with CHF remains largely neglected. This study herein aims to analyze the clinical associations of polymorphisms in those genes with CHF risk. A total of 333 unrelated Chinese Han CHF patients and 354 ethnicity-matched healthy controls were recruited and 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped. We found that the HRH3 rs3787429 polymorphism was associated with CHF risk (p < 0.001). The T allele of rs3787429 exhibited protective effect against CHF under the dominant (ORs = 0.455; 95% CIs = 0.322-0.642) and additive models (ORs = 0.662; 95% CIs = 0.523-0.838), while, for SNPs in HRH2, DAO, and HNMT, no significant associations were observed in the present study. These findings for the first time screen out one SNP (rs3787429) of HRH3 gene that was significantly associated with CHF in Chinese Han population, which may be a novel biomarker for personal prevention and treatment of CHF and provides novel highlights for investigating the contribution of this disease.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Histamine plays important physiological roles in upper gastrointestinal tract and acts via the H2 receptor. A polymorphism -1018 G>A (rs2067474) was identified in an enhancer element of the HRH2 promoter. We attempted to clarify the associations of this polymorphism with the progression of gastric mucosal atrophy. METHODS: Gastric mucosa samples were obtained from 398 subjects with no malignancies. The rs2067474 genotype was determined by PCR-SSCP method. The degree of gastritis was assessed in 366 subjects and serum pepsinogen (PG) I/II levels were measured in 108 subjects. The subjects with atrophy score higher or equal to 2 and metaplasia score higher or equal to1 were classified into the severe atrophic gastritis group (SA group). RESULTS: The -1018G>A minor allele frequencies in SA and non-SA groups were 8.02% and 13.3%, respectively (p=0.057). The -1018 GG homozygote had a significantly high risk for gastric mucosal atrophy (OR: 2.03, 95%CI: 1.03-4.01, p=0.042). In H. pylori positive subjects, GG homozygote was a more significant risk factor for gastric mucosal atrophy (OR: 2.32, 95%CI: 1.12-4.81, p=0.023). In addition, in the subjects older than 60 years, GG homozygote had also a significant risk for gastric mucosal atrophy (OR: 2.63, 95%CI: 1.15-6.00, p=0.022). In -1018 GG homozygote, PG I/II ratio was significantly lower in H. pylori positive than negative subjects and was significantly decreased with age (p=0.0032 by ANOVA), whereas it was not in the A carrier. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HRH2 -1018 GG homozygote is a risk factor for the severity of gastric mucosal atrophy under the influence of H. pylori infection, especially in older subjects.
Myocardial H(2) receptor activation contributes to heart failure (HF) in preclinical models, and H(2) receptor antagonists are associated with decreased HF incidence. This study evaluated whether H(2) histamine receptor (HRH2) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated with HF incidence and whether myocardial transcript abundance is associated with HF recovery. The association of SNPs in HRH2 with incident HF was characterized using Cox proportional hazards regression among participants in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Differences in myocardial HRH2 transcripts were characterized in participants with dilated cardiomyopathy comparing 6 "super-responders" with 6 nonresponders to beta blockade in the Beta-Blocker Effect on Remodeling and Gene Expression Trial. In MESA, no candidate SNP was associated with HF in black, Hispanic, or white participants. The rs2241562 minor allele was present only in Chinese participants and the adjusted HF hazard among those with 1 or more copies of this allele was 3.7, 95% confidence interval 1.0 to 13.4. In BORG, super-responders to beta blockade had higher levels of myocardial HRH2 transcript at baseline compared with nonresponders (fragments per kilobase per transcript per million mapped reads: Variant 2, 5.5 +/- 1.1 compared with 3.2 +/- 0.8 in nonresponders, p = 0.002; Variant 1 + 2, 32.1 +/- 7.4 compared with 23.3 +/- 4.2 in nonresponders, p = 0.04). In conclusion, the presence of a minor allele at rs2241562 was associated with increased HF incidence in Chinese participants. Differences in myocardial HRH2 transcript abundance were seen in participants with dilated cardiomyopathy who responded to beta blockade. These observations support the hypothesis that HRH2 is involved in the pathogenesis of HF.
Histamine receptor 2 (HR(H2)) activation in the stomach results in gastric acid secretion, and HR(H2) blockers are used for the treatment of peptidic ulcers and acid reflux. Over-the-counter HR(H2) blockers carry a five-membered aromatic heterocycle, with two of them additionally carrying a tertiary amine that decomposes to N-nitrosodimethylamine, a human carcinogen. To discover a novel HR(H2) blocker scaffold to serve in the development of next-generation HR(H2) blockers, we developed an HR(H2)-based sensor in yeast by linking human HR(H2) activation to cell luminescence. We used the HR(H2)-based sensor to screen a 403-member anti-infection chemical library and identified three HR(H2) blockers, chlorquinaldol, chloroxine, and broxyquinoline, all sharing an 8-hydroxyquinoline scaffold, which is not found among known HR(H2) antagonists. Critically, we validate their HR(H2)-blocking ability in mammalian cells. Molecular docking suggests that the HR(H2) blockers bind the histamine binding pocket and structure-activity data point toward these blockers acting as competitive antagonists. Chloroxine and broxyquinoline are antimicrobials that can be found in the gastrointestinal tract at concentrations that would block HR(H2), thus likely modulating gastric acid secretion. Taken together, this work demonstrates the utility of GPCR-based sensors for rapid drug discovery applications, identifies a novel HR(H2) blocker scaffold, and provides further evidence that antimicrobials not only target the human microbiota but also the human host.
Besides acting in the immune system, histamine is also a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. The H1R causes central side effects, e.g. of first generation antihistamines, antidepressants or antipsychotics and represents the component of the central histaminergic system most extensively studied in behavior experiments with knock-out mice. Central effects of H2R are similar, but only few behavioral results from knockout models are available. We summarize the behavior phenotype of H1R- and H2R-deficient mice, revealing histaminergic modulation of behaviors like locomotor activity, cognition, emotional states, arousal, sleep and wakefulness, circadian rhythm, pain perception, food intake and energy consumption, respiration and susceptibility to seizures. Knock-out models demonstrate several central effects of H1R and H2R that are not clinically and therapeutically exploited to date. We critically discuss problems and pitfalls of both the knock-out mouse technique and the pharmacological approach with receptor-selective ligands. The behavioral characterization of Hrh1(-/-)- and Hrh2(-/-)-mice is crucial, because many pharmacological agents lack the required selectivity to unequivocally address the functions of a single histamine receptor subtype.
Histamine plays important physiological roles in the upper gastrointestinal tract and acts via the H2 receptor. The -1018 G>A (rs2067474) in an enhancer element of the promoter and non-synonymous rs79385261 (Asn46Thr) were identified in HRH2. We attempted to clarify the associations of these polymorphisms with gastric carcinogenesis. The study was performed in 321 patients with gastric cancer and 599 subjects with no evidence of gastric malignancies on upper gastroduodenal endoscopy. The genotypes were determined using a one-tube multiplex PCR-SSCP method. The degree of gastritis was assessed in 496 subjects and serum pepsinogen (PG) I/II levels were measured in 124 subjects without gastric cancer. The minor allele of Asn46Thr could not be detected. The frequencies of the -1018 A allele in the non-GC and GC groups were 13.5% and 8.26%, respectively (p=0.00077). Overall, -1018 GG homozygotes had an increased risk for developing gastric cancer (OR 1.68; 95% CI 1.17-2.42; p=0.0052), especially intestinal type cancer (OR 1.94; 95% CI 1.23-3.08; p=0.0047). In subjects aged >60 years, the adjusted risk for gastric cancer among individuals who were -1018 GG homozygotes was 1.87 (range 1.19-2.93; p=0.0065) compared with A carriers. In the gastric cancer cases located in the antrum and at comparative advanced stage, -1018 GG homozygosity was a significantly increased risk factor. In subjects >60 years, the metaplasia score was significantly higher in -1018 GG homozygotes than A carriers. Both atrophy and metaplasia scores were significantly increased with age only in -1018 GG homozygotes. The PG I/II ratio was significantly decreased in H. pylori positive GG homozygotes than negative GG homozygotes and positive A carriers. Our results suggest that -1018 GG homozygosity of HRH2 may be associated with the severity of gastric mucosal atrophy. This genotype has an increased risk for the subsequent development of gastric cancer, especially intestinal type, at advanced age.
Histamine H2 receptor (HRH2) was previously suggested to affect the proliferation of breast cancer cells and disease-free survival of breast cancer patients. Furthermore, a common polymorphism, rs2067474, was identified in an enhancer element of the HRH2 gene promoter and was reported to be associated with various diseases including cancer. However, the relationship between this polymorphism and breast cancer risk and malignant degree remains unclear. The aim of this study was to clarify the clinical association of rs2067474 polymorphism with breast cancer. A total of 201 unrelated Chinese Han breast cancer patients and 238 ethnicity-matched health controls were recruited and rs2067474 polymorphism was genotyped. Logistic regression analyses were performed to calculate the odds ratios (ORs) as a measure of association of genotype with breast cancer according to 3 genetic models (dominant, recessive, and additive). Although the percentage of hormone receptor negative cases tended to be higher in AA genotypes, we did not find any significant associations of rs2067474 polymorphism with breast cancer risk or with related clinicopathological parameters in the present study, which indicates that rs2067474 polymorphism of HRH2 gene might not be a risk factor in the development of breast cancer in Chinese Han population.
To identify genes involving in the pathogenesis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). In this study, the comprehensive analysis of GSE8157 was downloaded. Overlapping genes of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, and enrichment analysis for these genes was performed. A modular network of differentially expressed genes was constructed by weighted gene co-expression network analyses (WGCNA), and a total of 322 differentially expressed genes in 5 stable modules were screened. The correlations of genes of the stable modules in BioGRID 3.4, STRING 10.5, HPRD9 databases were screened, and the interaction network of 104 DEGs was constructed. In addition, some genes and the key words were searched in CTD. A total of 596 differentially expressed genes were screened, including 379 genes that were up-regulated in case group and down-regulated in control group and treat group, and 217 genes that were down-regulated in case group and up-regulated in control group and treat group. The differentially expressed genes were enriched in PPAR signaling pathway, Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cAMP signaling pathway, of which pathways were involved in the cancer development. Finally, 7 important target genes were identified, such as APOC3 was interacted with pioglitazone, ADCY2 involved in cAMP signaling pathway, and the genes (C3AR1, HRH2, GRIA1, MLNR and TAAR2) involved in neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. In addition, the important target genes were significantly differential expression. These results implied that the 7 important target genes were played an important role in the development and progression of PCOS. Our study implied that genes had played a key role in the development and progression of PCOS, the results showed that microarray can be use as a method for the discovery of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for PCOS.
