Histamine H3 receptor; The H3 subclass of histamine receptors could mediate the histamine signals in CNS and peripheral nervous system. Signals through the inhibition of adenylate cyclase and displays high constitutive activity (spontaneous activity in the absence of agonist). Agonist stimulation of isoform 3 neither modified adenylate cyclase activity nor induced intracellular calcium mobilization.
Genetic polymorphisms for histamine-metabolizing enzymes are responsible for interindividual variation in histamine metabolism and are associated with diverse diseases. Initial reports on polymorphisms of histamine-related genes including those coding for the enzymes histidine decarboxylase (HDC), diamine oxidase (ABP1) and histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT), as well as histamine receptor genes, often have pointed to polymorphisms that occur with extremely low frequencies or that could not be verified by later studies. In contrast, common and functionally significant polymorphisms recently described have been omitted in many association studies. In this review we analyze allele frequencies, functional and clinical impact and interethnic variability on histamine-related polymorphisms. The most relevant nonsynonymous polymorphisms for the HDC gene are rs17740607 Met31Thr, rs16963486 Leu553Phe and rs2073440 Asp644Glu. For ABP1 the most relevant polymorphisms are rs10156191 Thr16Met, rs1049742 Ser332Phe, and particularly because of its functional effect, rs1049793 His645Asp. In addition the ABP1 polymorphisms rs45558339 Ile479Met and rs35070995 His659Asn are relevant to Asian and African subjects, respectively. For HNMT the only nonsynonymous polymorphism present with a relevant frequency is rs1801105 Thr105Ile. For HRH1 the polymorphism rs7651620 Glu270Gly is relevant to African subjects only. The HRH2 rs2067474 polymorphism, located in an enhancer element of the gene promoter, is common in all populations. No common nonsynonymous SNPs were observed in the HRH3 gene and two SNPs were observed with a significant frequency in the HRH4 gene: rs11665084 Ala138Val and rs11662595 His206Arg. This review summarizes relevant polymorphisms, discusses controversial findings on association of histamine-related polymorphisms and allergies and other diseases, and identifies topics requiring further investigation.
Histamine receptor H3 (HRH3) is mainly expressed in the central nervous system, where it is involved in the regulation of the release of various neurotransmitters in the brain. Recent studies have demonstrated that the expression of HRH3 is upregulated in several types of cancer. However, the functional effect of HRH3 on tumor progression remains largely unknown, particularly in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In the present study, the expression of HRH3 in 96 HCC patients was first evaluated, and its clinical significance was analyzed. Subsequently, the functional roles of HRH3 in HCC growth and metastasis were systematically explored in vitro and in vivo using its agonist (imetit) or antagonist (clobenpropit). It was observed that HRH3 was significantly upregulated in HCC tissues, while its expression was significantly associated with recurrence‑free survival and overall survival in HCC patients. Functional experiments also demonstrated that HRH3 upregulation facilitated the growth and metastasis of HCC cells by inducing the formation of lamellipodia. These findings revealed that HRH3 serves an important role in the growth and metastasis of HCC cells, which provides experimental evidence supporting the application of HRH3 as a potential therapeutic target in HCC treatment.
Although the cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) has been evolutionarily conserved, the role of this protein remains elusive. Recent evidence indicates that PrP(C) may be involved in neuroinflammation and the immune response in the brain, and its expression may be modified via various mechanisms. Histamine is a proinflammatory mediator and neurotransmitter that stimulates numerous cells via interactions with histamine receptors 1-4 (HRH1-4). Since microglia are the innate immune cells of the central nervous system, we hypothesized that histamine-induced stimulation regulates the expression of PrP(C) in human-derived microglia. The human microglial clone 3 (HMC3) cell line was treated with histamine, and intracellular calcium levels were measured via a calcium flux assay. Cytokine production was monitored by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Western blotting and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used to determine protein and gene expression of HRH1-4. Flow cytometry and western blotting were used to measure PrP(C) expression levels. Fluorescence microscopy was used to examine Iba-1 and PrP(C) localization. HMC3 cells stimulated by histamine exhibited increased intracellular calcium levels and increased release of IL-6 and IL-8, while also modifying PrP(C) localization. HMC3 stimulated with histamine for 6 and 24 hours exhibited increased surface PrP(C) expression. Specifically, we found that stimulation of the HRH2 receptor was responsible for changes in surface PrP(C). Histamine-induced increases in surface PrP(C) were attenuated following inhibition of the HRH2 receptor via the HRH2 antagonist ranitidine. These changes were unique to HRH2 activation, as stimulation of HRH1, HRH3, or HRH4 did not alter surface PrP(C). Prolonged stimulation of HMC3 decreased PrP(C) expression following 48 and 72 hours of histamine stimulation. HMC3 cells can be stimulated by histamine to undergo intracellular calcium influx. Surface expression levels of PrP(C) on HMC3 cells are altered by histamine exposure, primarily mediated by HRH2. While histamine exposure also increases release of IL-6 and IL-8 in these cells, this cytokine release is not fully dependent on PrP(C) levels, as IL-6 release is only partially reduced and IL-8 release is unchanged under the conditions of HRH2 blockade that prevent PrP(C) changes. Overall, this suggests that PrP(C) may play a role in modulating microglial responses.
The histaminergic system (HS) has a critical role in cognition, sleep and other behaviors. Although not well studied in autism spectrum disorder (ASD), the HS is implicated in many neurological disorders, some of which share comorbidity with ASD, including Tourette syndrome (TS). Preliminary studies suggest that antagonism of histamine receptors 1-3 reduces symptoms and specific behaviors in ASD patients and relevant animal models. In addition, the HS mediates neuroinflammation, which may be heightened in ASD. Together, this suggests that the HS may also be altered in ASD. Using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), we investigated genome-wide expression, as well as a focused gene set analysis of key HS genes (HDC, HNMT, HRH1, HRH2, HRH3 and HRH4) in postmortem dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) initially in 13 subjects with ASD and 39 matched controls. At the genome level, eight transcripts were differentially expressed (false discovery rate <0.05), six of which were small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs). There was no significant diagnosis effect on any of the individual HS genes but expression of the gene set of HNMT, HRH1, HRH2 and HRH3 was significantly altered. Curated HS gene sets were also significantly differentially expressed. Differential expression analysis of these gene sets in an independent RNA-seq ASD data set from DLPFC of 47 additional subjects confirmed these findings. Understanding the physiological relevance of an altered HS may suggest new therapeutic options for the treatment of ASD.
AIM: Aggression is a behavioural trait characterized by the intention to harm others for offensive or defensive purposes. Neurotransmitters such as serotonin and dopamine are important mediators of aggression. However, the physiological role of the histaminergic system during this behaviour is currently unclear. Here, we aimed to better understand histaminergic signalling during aggression by characterizing the involvement of the histamine H3 receptor (Hrh3). METHODS: We have generated a novel zebrafish Hrh3 null mutant line using CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering and investigated behavioural changes and alterations to neural activity using whole brain Ca(2+) imaging in zebrafish larvae and ribosomal protein S6 (rpS6) immunohistochemistry in adults. RESULTS: We show that genetic inactivation of the histamine H3 receptor (Hrh3) reduces aggression in zebrafish, an effect that can be reproduced by pharmacological inhibition. In addition, hrh3(-/-) zebrafish show behavioural impairments consistent with heightened anxiety. Larval in vivo whole brain Ca(2+) imaging reveals higher neuronal activity in the forebrain of mutants, but lower activity in specific hindbrain areas and changes in measures of functional connectivity between subregions. Adult hrh3(-/-) zebrafish display brain region-specific neural activity changes in response to aggression of both key regions of the social decision-making network, and the areas containing histaminergic neurons in the zebrafish brain. CONCLUSION: These results highlight the importance of zebrafish Hrh3 signalling for aggression and anxiety and uncover the brain areas involved. Targeting this receptor might be a potential novel therapeutic route for human conditions characterized by heightened aggression.
Transcriptional analyses such as microarray data have contributed to the progress in the diagnostics and therapy of colorectal cancer (CRC). The need for such research is still present because of the disease being common in both men and women with a high second position in cancer rankings. Little is known about the relations between the histaminergic system and inflammation in the large intestine and CRC. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of genes related to the histaminergic system and inflammation in the CRC tissues at three cancer development designs: all tested CRC samples, low (LCS) and high (HCS) clinical stage, and four clinical stages (CSI-CSIV), to the control. The research was carried out at the transcriptomic level, analysing hundreds of mRNAs from microarrays, as well as carrying out RT-PCR analysis of histaminergic receptors. The following histaminergic mRNAs: GNA15, MAOA, WASF2A, and inflammation-related: AEBP1, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL8, SPHK1, TNFAIP6, were distinguished. Among all analysed transcripts, AEBP1 can be considered the most promising diagnostic marker in the early stage of CRC. The results showed 59 correlations between differentiating genes of the histaminergic system and inflammation in the control, control and CRC, and CRC. The tests confirmed the presence of all histamine receptor transcripts in both the control and colorectal adenocarcinoma. Significant differences in expression were stated for HRH2 and HRH3 in the advanced stages of CRC adenocarcinoma. The relations between the histaminergic system and inflammation-linked genes in both the control and the CRC have been observed.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to predict key genes and their relationships for anxiety and nociceptive sensitivity related to Comt1 genetype. METHODS: : The raw data of E-GEOD-20160 related to anxiety and nociceptive sensitivity were obtained. Pearson correlation coefficient of interaction in protein-protein interaction was calculated. Topological analysis was processed for protein- protein interaction network, and genes in this network were ranked based on their degrees. Ego genes were identified, and models were searched and refined. A total of 1000 randomized tests were processed for ego networks. The classification accuracy of each ego network was obtained in this process. RESULTS: The interactions with genes in gene expression profiles were extracted, and protein-protein interaction was constructed. The protein-protein interaction included 4639 genes and 43,837 relationships. Differential co-expression network was constructed, and 74 ego genes were obtained. Thereinto, top five ego genes were ADCY2, GRM8, S1PR3, ADCY6, and ANXA1. After module searching and refinement, a total of 11 candidate modules were obtained, including module 14, module 51, and module 9. In addition, these 11 modules were confirmed to be with significance. Module 14 contained 10 genes, such as HRH3, DRD2, and CXCR3. Similarly, module 51 included six genes, such as HELZ2, NCOA3, and MED30. CONCLUSIONS: Ego network analysis was a useful and comprehensive method for biomarkers screening. Several modules such as module 3 and module 36 were important subnetworks. Potential genes in these modules including ADCYs, GNAI1, DRD2, PNOC, CCR2, DRD2, and LPAR1 might be important genes in the research of anxiety and nociceptive sensitivity.
Recent evidence shows that the expression levels of histamine receptor H3 (Hrh3) are upregulated in several types of cancer. However, the role of Hrh3 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not been elucidated. In the present study, we showed that the expression levels of Hrh3 were significantly increased in NSCLC samples, and high levels of Hrh3 were associated with poor overall survival (OS) in NSCLC patients. In five human NSCLC cell lines tested, Hrh3 was significantly upregulated. In NSCLC cell lines H1975, H460, and A549, Hrh3 antagonist ciproxifan (CPX, 10-80 muM) exerted moderate and concentration-dependent inhibition on the cell growth and induced apoptosis, whereas its agonist RAMH (80 muM) reversed these effects. Furthermore, inhibition of Hrh3 by CPX or siRNA retarded the migration and invasion of NSCLC cells through inhibiting epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) progression via reducing the phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and MEK/ERK signaling pathways. In nude mice bearing H1975 cell xenograft or A549 cell xenograft, administration of CPX (3 mg/kg every other day, intraperitoneal) significantly inhibited the tumor growth with increased E-cadherin and ZO-1 expression and decreased Fibronectin expression in tumor tissue. In conclusion, this study reveals that Hrh3 plays an important role in the growth and metastasis of NSCLC; it might be a potential therapeutic target against the lung cancer.
The pathophysiological functions of cardiac histamine level and related histamine receptors during the development of chronic heart failure (CHF) were intensively investigated previously. However, the relevance of polymorphisms in histamine-related genes, such as HRH2, HRH3, DAO, and HNMT, with CHF remains largely neglected. This study herein aims to analyze the clinical associations of polymorphisms in those genes with CHF risk. A total of 333 unrelated Chinese Han CHF patients and 354 ethnicity-matched healthy controls were recruited and 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped. We found that the HRH3 rs3787429 polymorphism was associated with CHF risk (p < 0.001). The T allele of rs3787429 exhibited protective effect against CHF under the dominant (ORs = 0.455; 95% CIs = 0.322-0.642) and additive models (ORs = 0.662; 95% CIs = 0.523-0.838), while, for SNPs in HRH2, DAO, and HNMT, no significant associations were observed in the present study. These findings for the first time screen out one SNP (rs3787429) of HRH3 gene that was significantly associated with CHF in Chinese Han population, which may be a novel biomarker for personal prevention and treatment of CHF and provides novel highlights for investigating the contribution of this disease.
OBJECTIVES: A positive correlation between antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG) and the antagonist effect of antipsychotic drugs at the histamine H1 receptor (HRH1) as well as the agonist effect at the histamine H3 receptor (HRH3) in the brain has been consistently demonstrated. We investigated the potential impact of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HRH1 and HRH3 genes on AIWG. METHODS: We analysed 40 tagSNPs in HRH1 (n = 34) and HRH3 (n = 6) in schizophrenia/schizoaffective disorder patients (n = 193) primarily treated with clozapine or olanzapine for up to 14 weeks. Linear regression was used to evaluate the association between SNPs and AIWG, with baseline weight and treatment duration as covariates. RESULTS: In HRH1, a nominal association of rs7639145 with AIWG was observed in patients of European ancestry treated with either clozapine or olanzapine (P( )= 0.043; beta = 1.658; n = 77). We observed nominal association for two HRH1 SNPs rs346074 (P = 0.002; beta = -5.024) and rs13064530 (P( )= 0.004; beta = -5.158) in patients of African ancestry treated with either clozapine or olanzapine (n = 37). However, the above associations are not significant after correcting for multiple testing. In HRH3, we did not observe association in either ancestry. CONCLUSIONS: The current study suggests that SNPs in HRH1 and HRH3 may not have a major role in AIWG.
Previous studies have not completely elucidated the role of the histaminergic system in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of adalimumab and cyclosporine A on the expression of histaminergic system-related genes and miRNAs regulating these genes in bacterial lipopolysaccharide A (LPS)-stimulated human keratinocyte (HaCaT) cells. HaCaT cells were treated with 1 microg/mL LPS for 8 h, followed by treatment with 8 microg/mL adalimumab or 100 ng/mL cyclosporine A for 2, 8, or 24 h. Untreated cells served as controls. The cells were subjected to ribonucleic acid (RNA) extraction and microarray, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay analyses. Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistica 13.0 PL (StatSoft, Cracow, Poland) and the Transcriptome Analysis Console programs (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) (p < 0.05). The differential expression of the following two miRNAs was not affected in LPS-stimulated cells upon treatment with cyclosporine A or adalimumab: hsa-miR-583 (downregulated expression), involved in the regulation of histamine receptor 1 - HRH1 (overexpression); has-miR-1275 (downregulated expression), involved in the regulation of histamine receptor 1 - HRH3 (overexpression) and Solute carrier family 22 member 3 - SLC23A2 (downregulated expression)). Adalimumab and cyclosporine A modulated the histaminergic system in HaCaT cells in vitro. However, further studies are needed to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.Abbreviations: (-) - downregulated in comparison to the control, (+) - overexpression in comparison to the control, ACTB - beta-actine, ADA - Adenosine deaminase, ADCYAP1 - Adenylate Cyclase Activating Polypeptide 1, BMP - bone morphogenetic protein, bp - base pair, cAMP - adenosine 3' 5'-cyclic monophosphate, CBX7 - Chromobox protein homolog 7, cDNA - double-stranded complementary DNA, CSA - cyclosporine A DAG - diacylglycerol, DIAPH - Diaphanous related formin 1, DNMT - DNA methyltransferases, DRD2 - Dopamine receptor D2, EDN1 - Endothelin 1, EDNRA - Endothelin receptor type A, ELISA - Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, EZH2 - Enhancer of zeste homolog 2, FC - fold change, GABRB1 - Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor, alpha 1, GABRB2 - Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor, alpha 2, GABRB3 - Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) A receptor, alpha 3, HaCaT - Human adult, low-calcium, high-temperature keratinocytes, HIS - Human Histamine, HLAs - human leukocyte antigens, HNMT - Histamine N-methyltransferase, HNMT - Histamine N-Methyltransferase, HRH1 - histamine receptor 1, HRH2 - histamine receptor 2, HRH3 - histamine receptor 3, HRH4 - histamine receptor 4, HTR6 - 5-Hydroxytryptamine Receptor 6, IGF1 - Insulin-like growth factor 1, IL10 -interleukin 10, IL12 -interleukin 12, IL6 - interleukin 6, IP3 - inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate, LPS - bacterial lipopolysaccharide A, LYN - LYN Proto-Oncogene, Src Family Tyrosine Kinase, MAPKs -mitogen-activated protein kinases, miRNA - micro RNA, MMP2 - matrix metalloproteinase-2, NHDF - Normal Human Dermal Fibroblasts, NHEK - Normal Human Epidermal Keratinocytes, OCT3 - organic cation transporter 3, PANTHER - Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships Classification, PBS - phosphate-buffered saline, PI3K-AKT - phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-protein kinase B, PIP2 - phosphatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate, PMSF - phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, PSORS1- psoriasis susceptibility gene 1, qRT-PCR - quantitative Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction, RNA - ribonucleic acid, RNAi - RNA interference, RTqPCR - Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription Reaction, SLC223A2 - Solute carrier family 22 member 3, SNX -Sorting nexin, SOX9 - SRY-Box Transcription Factor 9, TGF-alpha - transforming growth factor alpha, TGF-beta - transforming growth factor beta, TNF-alpha - tumor necrosis factor alpha, TP53 - tumor protein 5 z, VAMP2 - Vesicle associated membrane protein 2.
BACKGROUND: Linkage studies have implicated the 2q33, 9p21, 11q13 and 20q13 regions in the regulation of allergic disease. The aim of this study was to test genetic variants in candidate genes from these regions for association with specific asthma traits. METHODS: Ninety-five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) located in eight genes (CD28, CTLA4, ICOS, ADAM23, ADAMTSL1, MS4A2, CDH26 and HRH3) were genotyped in >5000 individuals from Australian (n = 1162), Dutch (n = 99) and Danish (n = 303) families. Traits tested included doctor-diagnosed asthma, atopy, airway obstruction, total serum immunoglobulin (Ig) E levels and eosinophilia. Association was tested using both multivariate and univariate methods, with gene-wide thresholds for significance determined through simulation. Gene-by-gene and gene-by-environment analyses were also performed. RESULTS: There was no overall evidence for association with seven of the eight genes tested when considering all genetic variation assayed in each gene. The exception was MS4A2 on chromosome 11q13, which showed weak evidence for association with IgE (gene-wide P < 0.05, rs502581). There were no significant gene-by-gene or gene-by-environment interaction effects after accounting for the number of tests performed. CONCLUSIONS: The individual variants genotyped in the 2q33, 9p21 and 20q13 regions do not explain a large fraction of the variation in the quantitative traits tested or have a major impact on asthma or atopy risk. Our results are consistent with a weak effect of MS4A2 polymorphisms on the variation of total IgE levels.
Evidence suggests that the human histamine H3 receptor (HRH3) may be involved in the pharmacodynamics of risperidone and influence clinical efficacy. More information on the pharmacogenetics of this receptor may therefore be useful in developing individualized therapy. However, to our knowledge, no study has been reported in this area. The aim of this investigation was to clarify whether H3 receptor polymorphism could affect risperidone efficacy. We genotyped tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the HRH3 gene (rs3787429 and rs3787430) and analyzed their association with the reduction of Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) score in Chinese Han schizophrenia patients (N = 129), following an eight-week period of risperidone monotherapy. The confounding effects of non-genetic factors were estimated, and then the significant one was included as the covariate for adjustment in statistical analysis. Baseline symptom score was the only significant confounding effect and thus the covariate. After adjustment, significant association of HRH3 with antipsychotic efficacy was detected (for rs3787429, p = 0.013, 0.087 after 4 weeks and 8 weeks of treatment, respectively; for rs3787430, p = 0.024, 0.010 after 4 weeks and 8 weeks of treatment, respectively) and stood up to conservative Bonferroni correction. Our results demonstrate that polymorphism of the HRH3 gene may be a potential genetic marker for predicting the therapeutic effect of risperidone, and suggest novel pharmacological links between HRH3 and risperidone. Further studies with larger samples and different ethnic populations are warranted to confirm our results.
Cannabis, the most widely used illicit drug, can induce hallucinations. Our understanding of the biology of cannabis-induced hallucinations (Ca-HL) is limited. We used the Semi-Structured Assessment for Drug Dependence and Alcoholism (SSADDA) to identify cannabis-induced hallucinations (Ca-HL) among long-term cannabis users (used cannabis >/=1 year and >/=100 times). A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was conducted by analyzing European Americans (EAs) and African Americans (AAs) in Yale-Penn 1 and 2 cohorts individually, then meta-analyzing the two cohorts within population. In the meta-analysis of Yale-Penn EAs (n = 1917), one genome-wide significant (GWS) signal emerged at the CHRM3 locus, represented by rs115455482 (P = 1.66 x 10(-10)), rs74722579 (P = 2.81 x 10(-9)), and rs1938228 (P = 1.57 x 10(-8)); signals were GWS in Yale-Penn 1 EAs (n = 1092) and nominally significant in Yale-Penn 2 EAs (n = 825). Two SNPs, rs115455482 and rs74722579, were available from the Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism data (COGA; 3630 long-term cannabis users). The signals did not replicate, but when meta-analyzing Yale-Penn and COGA EAs, the two SNPs' association signals were increased (meta-P-values 1.32 x 10(-10) and 2.60 x 10(-9), respectively; n = 4291). There were no significant findings in AAs, but in the AA meta-analysis (n = 3624), nominal significance was seen for rs74722579. The rs115455482*T risk allele was associated with lower CHRM3 expression in the thalamus. CHRM3 was co-expressed with three psychosis risk genes (GABAG2, CHRNA4, and HRH3) in the thalamus and other human brain tissues and mouse GABAergic neurons. This work provides strong evidence for the association of CHRM3 with Ca-HL and provides insight into the potential involvement of thalamus for this trait.
The alertness-promoting effect of MK-0249 (10 or 50 mg), a histamine subtype-3 receptor (HRH3) inverse agonist (IA), was evaluated in the stimulant reference sleep deprivation model (SRSDM) using a double-blind, double-dummy, placebo- and modafinil- (200 mg) controlled, four-period crossover design in 24 healthy young men. The two primary hypotheses were related to sleep latency (first appearance of one epoch of stage 2, 3, or 4 or REM sleep, as detected using polysomnography (PSG)) at 8:00 AM on day 2. Statistically significant increases in sleep latency were observed in association with the use of modafinil 200 mg (9.07 min; P < 0.0001), MK-0249 50 mg (5.17 min; P = 0.008), and MK-0249 10 mg (5.45 min; P = 0.005) at the maintenance of wakefulness test (MWT) at 8:00 AM. Sleep latency was higher when averaged over all MWT time points (P < 0.0001 for modafinil and for both doses of MK-0249). The alertness-promoting effect with the use of MK-0249 in the SRSDM suggests that HRH3 IAs may be effective in disorders involving excessive somnolence.
Tissue repair is a highly regulated process involving immune, stromal, vascular, and parenchymal cell responses. Mediators of cellular responses at different phases of the healing process stimulate transitions through the continuum of repair. Histamine is an early mediator of healing, which, in skin, is released by resident cells (e.g., mast cells) after cutaneous injury, and acts to stimulate diverse responses in multiple cell populations. Histamine signaling is regulated by four distinct cell surface G-protein coupled receptors (HRH1-4 in humans, Hrh1-4 in mice) which initiate different downstream signaling cascades upon activation, but the specific effect of each receptor on tissue repair is poorly understood. Here, we systematically investigated the effect of selective histamine receptor agonism in laser-activated sealing and tissue repair of incisional skin wounds in immunocompetent mice. Although all four histamine receptors exhibited wound responsiveness in the epidermis, we find that activation of Hrh1, Hrh2, and Hrh4 stimulate a pro-healing immune response characterized by increased pro-resolution macrophages, reduced pro-inflammatory macrophages, and suppressed neutrophil responses. Further, activation of Hrh1 and Hrh4 stimulate angiogenesis after injury. Lastly, although Hrh1 activation resulted in enhanced epidermal epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in vivo and epithelialization in vitro, activation of Hrh2 suppressed both epidermal EMT and epithelialization. Activation of Hrh3, primarily found on neuronal cells, had no effect on any measure in our study. Selective histamine receptor agonism, specifically of histamine receptors Hrh-1 and 4, is a potential reparative approach to promote the efficacy of biomaterial-mediated repair of tissues, including skin.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener's ) is a rare autoimmune disease associated with the presence of antibodies directed against neutrophil antigen, proteinase-3 (PR3). The mechanisms by which anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) may activate neutrophils are still not well understood. In the present study we analyzed neutrophil gene expression profile after anti-PR3 antibodies stimulation. Briefly neutrophils isolated from 12 healthy volunteers, who tested negative for anti-PR3 autoantibodies, were stimulated with anti-PR3 IgG and activation of 147 genes was analyzed with the use of TaqMan low-density arrays. In stimulated neutrophils we observed up-regulation of 13 genes (CCL2, CXCL2, VCAM1, MMP9, PLCB4, PDE4C, PLA2G4C, RAC1, RHOA, IRAK1, CACNA1D, CACNB2, PTGDR), further 11 genes were up-regulated only in some donors (IL13, PF4, IL2RG, ITGB1, CD83, PLA2G7, ALOX12, AXNA1, AXNA5, LTA4H, MCR2) yet two others (HRH3 and PLA2G2D) were up-regulated in a few samples and undetectable in others. The obtained results demonstrate that c-ANCA mediated activation of neutrophils involve several pathways mediated via FcgammaRs like calcium signaling, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase AKT pathway or MAPK signaling systems, but also inducts others, like G-protein signaling. Neutrophil is a very sensitive cell, responding to many environment changes. As our results showed, some anti-PR3 responses are highly variable across donors. Perhaps, this variablity also contribute to the susceptibility for granulocyte vasculitis and requires future studies.
We previously found that genetic polymorphisms in gene coding for histamine H4 receptors were related to the risk and malignant degree of breast cancer. The roles of polymorphisms in other histamine-related genes, such as histidine decarboxylase (HDC), histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT) and histamine H3 receptor (HRH3), remain unexplored. The aim of this study is to analyze the clinical associations of polymorphisms in HDC, HNMT and HRH3 with breast cancer. Two hundred and one unrelated Chinese Han breast cancer patients and 205 ethnicity-matched health controls were recruited for case-control investigation. Genomic DNA from the participants was extracted and 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HDC, HNMT and HRH3 were genotyped. We found that polymorphisms of HNMT and HRH3 were irrelevant with breast cancer in the present study. However, the T allele of rs7164386 in HDC significantly decreased the risk of breast cancer (adjusted odds ratios [ORs], 0.387; 95% confidence intervals [CIs], 0.208-0.720; P = 0.003). Furthermore, for HDC haplotypes, the CG haplotype of rs7164386-rs7182203 was more frequent among breast cancer patients (adjusted OR, 1.828; 95% CI, 1.218-2.744; P = 0.004) while the TG haplotype was more frequent among health controls (adjusted OR, 0.351; 95% CI, 0.182-0.678; P = 0.002). These findings indicated that polymorphisms of HDC gene were significantly associated with breast cancer in Chinese Han population and may be novel diagnostic or therapeutic targets for breast cancer. Further studies with larger participants worldwide are still needed for conclusion validation.
BACKGROUND: This study investigates the expression and clinical significance of the histamine receptor family (HRs) in the bone marrow of children with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML). METHODS: RNA sequencing was performed to assess the expression levels of HR family members (HRH1, HRH2, HRH3, and HRH4) in the bone marrow of 140 pediatric AML patients prior to chemotherapy. We compared the expression levels across various risk categories and assessed their relationship with prognosis using ROC curve analysis to evaluate predictive capabilities for outcomes. RESULTS: Among the 140 AML patients in our center, those with different FAB subtypes showed varying overall survival (OS), event-free survival (EFS), and relapse-free survival (RFS). Specifically, the M2 and M4 subtypes showed better OS, EFS, and RFS, whereas the M5 subtype had poorer outcomes. Among patients with different fusion genes, those with AML1/ETO had superior OS, EFS, and RFS compared to other subtypes. Additionally, patients with CEBPA mutations demonstrated relatively favorable outcomes, whereas those with FLT3 mutations had poorer survival metrics. HRH1 expression was significantly higher in AML patients than in normal controls (P < 0.05). Patients in the high HRH1 expression group had significantly better EFS and RFS than those in the low expression group (P < 0.05). Furthermore, HRH1 expression was significantly higher in the low-risk (LR) group than in the intermediate and high-risk (IR & HR) groups (P < 0.05). This finding suggests that HRH1 may serve as an early predictor of risk, EFS, and RFS. CONCLUSION: The clinical significance of HR family members varies in pediatric AML, with HRH1 identified as a valuable predictor of relapse in children with AML.
Accumulating evidence has indicated that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play critical roles in the development and progression of cancers, including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, the mechanisms of lncRNAs in ESCC are still incompletely understood and therapeutic attempts for in vivo targeting cancer-associated lncRNA remain a challenge. By RNA-sequencing analysis, we identified that LLNLR-299G3.1 was a novel ESCC-associated lncRNA. LLNLR-299G3.1 was up-regulated in ESCC tissues and cells and promoted ESCC cell proliferation and invasion. Silencing of LLNLR-299G3.1 with ASO (antisense oligonucleotide) resulted in opposite effects. Mechanistically, LLNLR-299G3.1 bound to cancer-associated RNA binding proteins and regulated the expression of cancer-related genes, including OSM, TNFRSF4, HRH3, and SSTR3. ChIRP-seq (chromatin isolation by RNA purification and sequencing) revealed that these genes contained enriched chromatin binding sites for LLNLR-299G3.1. Rescue experiments confirmed that the effects of LLNLR-299G3.1 on ESCC cell proliferation were dependent on interaction with HRH3 and TNFRSF4. Therapeutically, intravenous delivery of placental chondroitin sulfate A binding peptide-coated nanoparticles containing antisense oligonucleotide (pICSA-BP-ANPs) strongly inhibited ESCC tumor growth and significantly improved animal survival in vivo. Overall, our results suggest that LLNLR-299G3.1 promotes ESCC malignancy through regulating gene-chromatin interactions and targeting ESCC by pICSA-BP-ANPs may be an effective strategy for the treatment of lncRNA-associated ESCC.
