Histamine H4 receptor; The H4 subclass of histamine receptors could mediate the histamine signals in peripheral tissues. Displays a significant level of constitutive activity (spontaneous activity in the absence of agonist); Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Genetic polymorphisms for histamine-metabolizing enzymes are responsible for interindividual variation in histamine metabolism and are associated with diverse diseases. Initial reports on polymorphisms of histamine-related genes including those coding for the enzymes histidine decarboxylase (HDC), diamine oxidase (ABP1) and histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT), as well as histamine receptor genes, often have pointed to polymorphisms that occur with extremely low frequencies or that could not be verified by later studies. In contrast, common and functionally significant polymorphisms recently described have been omitted in many association studies. In this review we analyze allele frequencies, functional and clinical impact and interethnic variability on histamine-related polymorphisms. The most relevant nonsynonymous polymorphisms for the HDC gene are rs17740607 Met31Thr, rs16963486 Leu553Phe and rs2073440 Asp644Glu. For ABP1 the most relevant polymorphisms are rs10156191 Thr16Met, rs1049742 Ser332Phe, and particularly because of its functional effect, rs1049793 His645Asp. In addition the ABP1 polymorphisms rs45558339 Ile479Met and rs35070995 His659Asn are relevant to Asian and African subjects, respectively. For HNMT the only nonsynonymous polymorphism present with a relevant frequency is rs1801105 Thr105Ile. For HRH1 the polymorphism rs7651620 Glu270Gly is relevant to African subjects only. The HRH2 rs2067474 polymorphism, located in an enhancer element of the gene promoter, is common in all populations. No common nonsynonymous SNPs were observed in the HRH3 gene and two SNPs were observed with a significant frequency in the HRH4 gene: rs11665084 Ala138Val and rs11662595 His206Arg. This review summarizes relevant polymorphisms, discusses controversial findings on association of histamine-related polymorphisms and allergies and other diseases, and identifies topics requiring further investigation.
BACKGROUND: Eosinophils are elusive cells involved in allergic inflammation. Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) is an emerging approach to deeply characterize cellular properties, heterogeneity, and functionality. OBJECTIVES: We sought to comprehensively characterize the transcriptome and biological functions of human eosinophils at a site of severe allergic inflammation in the esophagus (ie, eosinophilic esophagitis [EoE]). METHODS: We employed a gravity-based scRNA-seq methodology to sequence blood eosinophils from patients with EoE and control individuals compared to a reanalyzed public scRNA-seq dataset of human esophageal eosinophils of EoE patients. We used flow cytometry, immunostaining, and a stimulation assay to verify mRNA findings. RESULTS: In total, scRNA-seq was obtained from 586 eosinophils (188 from blood [n = 6 individuals] and 398 from esophagus [n = 6 individuals]). The esophageal eosinophils were composed of a population of activated eosinophils (enriched in 659 genes compared with peripheral blood-associated eosinophils) and a small population of eosinophils resembling peripheral blood eosinophils (enriched in 62 genes compared with esophageal eosinophils). Esophageal eosinophils expressed genes involved in sensing and responding to diverse stimuli, most notably IFN-gamma, IL-10, histamine and leukotrienes, and succinate. Esophageal eosinophils were most distinguished from other esophageal populations by gene expression of the receptors CCR3, HRH4, SUCNR1, and VSTM1; transcription factors CEBPE, OLIG1, and OLIG2; protease PRSS33; and the hallmark eosinophil gene CLC. A web of bidirectional eosinophil interactions with other esophageal populations was derived. Comparing esophageal eosinophils and mast cells revealed that esophageal eosinophils expressed genes involved in DNAX-activation protein-12 (also known as TYROBP) interactions, IgG receptor-triggered events, immunoregulation, and IL-10 signaling. CONCLUSIONS: In EoE, esophageal eosinophils exist as 2 populations, a minority population resembling blood eosinophils and the other population characterized by high de novo transcription of diverse sensing receptors and inflammatory mediators readying them to potentially intersect with diverse cell types.
Chronic pruritus, defined as an unpleasant sensation resulting in a need to scratch that lasts more than 6 weeks, is a prevalent and bothersome symptom associated with both cutaneous and systemic conditions. Due to complex pathogenesis and profuse contributing factors, chronic pruritus therapy remains challenging. Regardless of the well-established antipruritic properties of classic pharmacotherapy (topical therapy, phototherapy and systemic therapy), these methods often provide insufficient relief for affected individuals. Owing to the growing interest in the field of pruritic research, further experimental and clinical data have emerged, continuously supporting the possibility of instigating novel therapeutic measures. This review covers the most relevant current modalities remaining under investigation that possess promising perspectives of approval in the near future, especially opioidergic drugs (mu-opioid antagonists and kappa-opioid agonists), neurokinin-1 receptor antagonists, biologic drugs, Janus kinase inhibitors, ileal bile acid transporter inhibitors, aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists and histamine H(4) receptor antagonists.
Pathogenic microorganisms that are ubiquitous in the environment threaten human health and food safety. Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Poly (I:C)) is a macromolecule with a double-stranded RNA structure, which is often used to simulate viruses. Our previous study found that Poly (I:C) maternal stimulation could affect the reproduction of laying hens and their offspring, but the underlying mechanism needed to be explored. In the present study, splenic transcriptomes were sequenced and analyzed from two groups (Poly (I:C) treatment as the challenged group and saline treatment as the control) and in three generations (maternal stimulated F0 hens, unchallenged F1 and F2 generations). The results showed that Poly (I:C) maternal stimulation affected gene expression patterns in laying hens and their offspring. A total of 27 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with the same regulating trend were discovered in the F0 and F1 generations, indicating an influence of the intergenerational transmission effect. Functional enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology (GO) showed that lymphocyte differentiation, positive regulation of leukocyte differentiation, positive regulation of MAPK cascade, and T cell differentiation were the common biological processes between F0 and F1 generations, revealing Poly (I:C) could affect the immunity of the treated F0 hens and the unchallenged subsequent generations. Further study showed that pathways associated with growth, development, biosynthesis, and metabolism of F2 chicks were also affected by Poly (I:C) maternal stimulation. Correlation analysis between DEGs and reproductive traits revealed that PHLDA2 (pleckstrin homology-like domain family A member 2) and PODN (podocan) with inheritable effect were highly correlated with egg-laying rate and egg weight in F1 hens, suggesting their potential long-term role in regulating reproductive traits. ARHGAP40, FGB, HRH4, PHLDA2, PODN, NTSR1, and NMU were supposed to play important roles in regulating chickens' immunity and reproductive traits. This study reveals the far-reaching effect on transcriptome induced by Poly (I:C), reflecting the influence of the mother's living environment on the offspring. It is an important reference for future research into the multi-generational transmission of maternal stimulation and harmful environmental factors.
The pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (AD) is multifactorial and complex. Consequently, clinical signs and symptoms vary strongly depending on individually relevant trigger factors and the stage of the disease. So far, treatment of AD was commonly limited to topical treatment or, in more severe cases, to systemic drugs mostly approved for other indications than AD. However, emerging data on new anti-inflammatory agents have been published in the recent years. As these new substances specifically focus on immune responses in AD, these are partially considered as possible 'breakthrough' in the treatment of AD. Therapeutic strategies of the future appear to be 'customized' for inflammation in AD as they target pro-inflammatory, highly relevant cytokines and cytokine receptors, such as IL-4Ralpha, IL-13, IL-31, and IL-17. Further innovative therapeutic approaches aim to block the function of relevant molecules such as thymic stromal lymphopoietin, chemoattractant-receptor homologous molecule expressed on Th2 lymphocytes (CRTh2), and phosphodiesterase (PDE)-4 inhibitors. Recently, anti-inflammatory effects in AD by antagonizing the histamine (H)-4 receptor have also been detected. Finally, specific immunotherapy is under further investigation as treatment option for AD patients with clinically relevant sensitization.
In this study, a genetically diverse panel of 43 mouse strains was exposed to ammonia, and genome-wide association mapping was performed employing a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) assembly. Transcriptomic analysis was used to help resolve the genetic determinants of ammonia-induced acute lung injury. The encoded proteins were prioritized based on molecular function, nonsynonymous SNP within a functional domain or SNP within the promoter region that altered expression. This integrative functional approach revealed 14 candidate genes that included Aatf, Avil, Cep162, Hrh4, Lama3, Plcb4, and Ube2cbp, which had significant SNP associations, and Aff1, Bcar3, Cntn4, Kcnq5, Prdm10, Ptcd3, and Snx19, which had suggestive SNP associations. Of these genes, Bcar3, Cep162, Hrh4, Kcnq5, and Lama3 are particularly noteworthy and had pathophysiological roles that could be associated with acute lung injury in several ways.
The epigenetic process of genomic imprinting results in the monoallelic expression of genes based on their parental origin. Comparative analysis of imprinted genes between species is useful for investigating the biological significance and regulatory mechanisms of genomic imprinting. Mouse Impact is an imprinted gene, but its human ortholog IMPACT escapes genomic imprinting. Hrh4 and Osbpl1a are the two nearest neighbors of the Impact located in distal and proximal regions, respectively. This study aims to assess the allelic expression of bovine IMPACT, OSBPL1A and HRH4 genes and examine the differentially methylated regions (DMRs) associated with these three genes. Based on an expressed single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) approach, we found that both the IMPACT and OSBPL1A genes exhibit isoform-specific monoallelic expression in bovine adult tissues. In the seven detected bovine IMPACT transcripts, only one transcript variant (X6) is monoallelically expressed in bovine adult tissues and paternally expressed in the placenta. However, no DMR was found in the promoter region of the IMPACT gene. We obtained five transcript variants (V1-V5) of the bovine OSBPL1A gene of different lengths that start transcription from distinct alternative promoters by RT-PCR. Only the longest variant V1 was found to be expressed monoallelically in bovine adult tissues and a DMR was identified in its promoter region using the bisulfite sequencing method. Thus, the DMR in OSBPL1A V1 promoter region may contribute to its isoform-specific monoallelic expression. The bovine HRH4 gene is expressed biallelically. Hypermethylation was observed in brains without HRH4 expression, while hypomethylation was found in the spleens with HRH4 expression, so and the level of DNA methylation in the promoter seemed to be related to its expression in tissues.
Patients with liver diseases often suffer from chronic itch, yet the pruritogen(s) and receptor(s) remain largely elusive. Here, we identify bile acids as natural ligands for MRGPRX4. MRGPRX4 is expressed in human dorsal root ganglion (hDRG) neurons and co-expresses with itch receptor HRH1. Bile acids elicited Ca(2+) responses in cultured hDRG neurons, and bile acids or a MRGPRX4 specific agonist induced itch in human subjects. However, a specific agonist for another bile acid receptor TGR5 failed to induce itch in human subjects and we find that human TGR5 is not expressed in hDRG neurons. Finally, we show positive correlation between cholestatic itch and plasma bile acids level in itchy patients and the elevated bile acids is sufficient to activate MRGPRX4. Taken together, our data strongly suggest that MRGPRX4 is a novel bile acid receptor that likely underlies cholestatic itch in human, providing a promising new drug target for anti-itch therapies.
The discovery of the histamine H(4) receptor has added a new chapter to the century of extensive biogenic amine research. The human histamine H(4) receptor is mainly expressed in cells of the human immune system (e.g. mast cells, eosinophils, monocytes, dendritic cells, T cells) and mediates several effects on chemotaxis with numerous cell types. The distinct expression pattern and the immunomodulatory role highlight its physiological relevance in inflammatory and immunological processes. Inflammatory conditions, e.g. allergy, asthma and autoimmune diseases, were for a long time thought to be mainly mediated by activation of the histamine H(1) receptor subtype. However, in the treatment of diseases as chronic pruritus, asthma and allergic rhinitis the use of histamine H(1) receptor antagonists is unsatisfying. Selective H(4) receptor ligands and/or synergism of histamine H(1) and H(4) receptor modulation may be more effective in such pathophysiological conditions. Promising preclinical studies underline its role as an attractive target in the treatment of inflammatory and autoimmune disorders. Meanwhile, first histamine H(4) receptor antagonist has reached clinical phases for the treatment of respiratory diseases.
This Themed Issue consists of three reviews and 11 original articles authored by internationally respected industrial and academic pharmacologists from across three continents. It derives from the highly successful symposium on 'The H3 and H4 histamine receptors: the antihistamines for the 21(st) century', which took place at EPHAR 2008 in Manchester University, and encompasses new roles, new compounds and exciting new therapeutic areas for histamine.
The histamine H4 receptor has stood out since its discovery and identification in 2000 as an important target in the search for potential new drugs for the treatment of inflammatory and allergic diseases such as rhinitis, pruritus and asthma. Thus, in the last decade, both industry and academia have performed an intensive and productive search for new ligands of this newest subtype of histamine receptor. The most promising compounds found include monocyclic and fused azines, and azoles such as bispyrimidines, di- and triaminopyrimidines, quinazolines, imidazoles, indoles, benzimidazoles and benzazoles. The aim of this review is to give an insight into the current state of the art in the field of histamine H<sub>4</sub> receptor research, focusing mainly on the last five years.
OBJECTIVES: Oral lichen planus (OLP) is an autoimmune disease characterized by a band-like T-cell infiltrate below the apoptotic epithelial cells and degenerated basement membrane. We tested the hypothesis that the high-affinity histamine H4 receptors (H4 Rs) are downregulated in OLP by high histamine concentrations and proinflammatory T-cell cytokines. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining, image analysis and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction of tissue samples and cytokine-stimulated cultured SCC-25 and primary human oral keratinocytes. RESULTS: H4 R immunoreactivity was weak in OLP and characterized by mast cell (MC) hyperplasia and degranulation. In contrast to controls, H4 R immunostaining and MC counts were negatively correlated in OLP (P = 0.003). H4 R agonist at nanomolar levels led to a rapid internalization of H4 Rs, whereas high histamine concentration and interferon-gamma decreased HRH4 -gene transcripts. CONCLUSION: Healthy oral epithelial cells are equipped with H4 R, which displays a uniform staining pattern in a MC-independent fashion. In contrast, in OLP, increased numbers of activated MCs associate with increasing loss of epithelial H4 R. Cell culture experiments suggest a rapid H4 R stimulation-dependent receptor internalization and a slow cytokine-driven decrease in H4 R synthesis. H4 R may be involved in the maintenance of healthy oral mucosa. In OLP, this maintenance might be impaired by MC degranulation and inflammatory cytokines.
TARGET: The purpose of the study was to investigate the association between the histamine H4 receptor (HRH4) polymorphisms and the susceptibility to ankylosing spondylitis (AS). METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method was used to analyze the HRH4 rs8088140 and rs657132 polymorphisms. Linkage disequilibrium and haplotype analyses were conducted with Haploview software. The genotypes distributions of HRH4 polymorphisms in the control group were tested by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE), allele, genotype and haplotype frequencies between the cases and control groups were compared by chi(2) test. The controls were matched with cases by age and gender. The relative risk of AS with HRH4 polymorphisms was represented by odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) calculated by chi(2) test. RESULTS: The genotypes distributions of HRH4 rs8088140, rs657132 polymorphisms in controls conformed to HWE. The frequency of rs657132 AA genotype in the case group was obviously higher than that in the control group (P=0.040), and so was the A allele (OR=2.572, 95% CI=1.475-4.486, P=0.022). The frequency differences of A-A haplotype between two groups had statistical significance (P=0.011, OR=2.071, 95% CI=1.172-3.660) through haplotype analysis, indicating A-A might be the susceptible haplotype to AS. CONCLUSION: The AA genotypes of HRH4 rs657132 polymorphism may be the susceptible factors for AS, and rs657132 plays a role in generation of AS. In addition, A-A haplotype in rs8088140-rs657132 is also increased the risk of AS.
Considerable evidence has been collected indicating that histamine can modulate proliferation of different normal and malignant cells. High histamine biosynthesis and content together with histamine receptors have been reported in different human neoplasias including melanoma, colon and breast cancer, as well as in experimental tumours in which histamine has been postulated to behave as an important paracrine and autocrine regulator of proliferation. The discovery of the human histamine H(4) receptor in different tissues has contributed to our understanding of histamine role in numerous physiological and pathological conditions revealing novel functions for histamine and opening new perspectives in histamine pharmacology research. In the present review we aimed to briefly summarize current knowledge on histamine and histamine receptor involvement in cancer before focusing on some recent evidence supporting the novel role of histamine H(4) receptor in cancer progression representing a promising molecular target and avenue for cancer drug development.
Environmental triggers and genetic factors are supposed to lead to complex gene expression changes in psoriasis and interact in the manifestation of the disease. The histamine H4 receptor (HRH4) is functionally expressed on Th17 cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) which play a prominent role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. On pDCs a higher basal expression level of the HRH4 in psoriasis patients compared to healthy controls has been detected. The functional relationship between predisposing genetic variations in the HRH4 gene and psoriasis is yet not known. The aim of the study was to evaluate a possible association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the HRH4 gene primarily in the promotor region and incidence, severity as well as special clinical features (nail involvement, arthritis, palmoplantar location) of psoriasis. For this approach genomic DNA from 206 patients with psoriasis and 213 healthy controls of Caucasian origin was extracted and three SNPs in the promotor region and one SNP located in an intron of the HRH4 gene were analysed by PCR and pyrophosphate DNA-sequencing. The genotype distributions and allele frequencies between the different groups were compared by chi-square test. The analysis of association between HRH4 polymorphisms and psoriasis was assessed by odds ratio with 95% confidence interval. The genotype distributions and allele frequencies of the four SNPs in the HRH4 gene did not show obvious differences between the whole group of psoriasis patients and healthy controls. However, there were differences by trend in subgroup analysis: The mutant genotypes (A/G) of rs17203314 and (G/A) of rs615283 were more frequent in patients with severe psoriasis PASI>/=30 (34.8% and 34.8%) when compared to the control groups (23.5% and 27.2%), respectively. The mutant G/A genotype of rs615283 was significantly more frequent in patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis PASI>/=10 when compared to mild psoriasis PASI<10 (33.3% vs 21.7%, p=0.022). For rs524149 and rs17797945 the wildtype CC genotype was more frequent by trend in moderately-to-severely affected patients with PASI>/=10 (85.2% and 63.0%) when compared to the group with mild psoriasis PASI<10 (77.0% and 49.4%), respectively. Furthermore, a significant association of rs615283 with psoriasis palmoplantaris was detected. In conclusion our study suggests that genetic variations within the HRH4 gene might be associated with special clinical features of psoriasis. Further studies are needed in larger study populations to confirm the reported associations and investigate the functional relevance of the identified SNPs.
BACKGROUND: This study investigates the expression and clinical significance of the histamine receptor family (HRs) in the bone marrow of children with newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia (AML). METHODS: RNA sequencing was performed to assess the expression levels of HR family members (HRH1, HRH2, HRH3, and HRH4) in the bone marrow of 140 pediatric AML patients prior to chemotherapy. We compared the expression levels across various risk categories and assessed their relationship with prognosis using ROC curve analysis to evaluate predictive capabilities for outcomes. RESULTS: Among the 140 AML patients in our center, those with different FAB subtypes showed varying overall survival (OS), event-free survival (EFS), and relapse-free survival (RFS). Specifically, the M2 and M4 subtypes showed better OS, EFS, and RFS, whereas the M5 subtype had poorer outcomes. Among patients with different fusion genes, those with AML1/ETO had superior OS, EFS, and RFS compared to other subtypes. Additionally, patients with CEBPA mutations demonstrated relatively favorable outcomes, whereas those with FLT3 mutations had poorer survival metrics. HRH1 expression was significantly higher in AML patients than in normal controls (P < 0.05). Patients in the high HRH1 expression group had significantly better EFS and RFS than those in the low expression group (P < 0.05). Furthermore, HRH1 expression was significantly higher in the low-risk (LR) group than in the intermediate and high-risk (IR & HR) groups (P < 0.05). This finding suggests that HRH1 may serve as an early predictor of risk, EFS, and RFS. CONCLUSION: The clinical significance of HR family members varies in pediatric AML, with HRH1 identified as a valuable predictor of relapse in children with AML.
Although the cellular prion protein (PrP(C)) has been evolutionarily conserved, the role of this protein remains elusive. Recent evidence indicates that PrP(C) may be involved in neuroinflammation and the immune response in the brain, and its expression may be modified via various mechanisms. Histamine is a proinflammatory mediator and neurotransmitter that stimulates numerous cells via interactions with histamine receptors 1-4 (HRH1-4). Since microglia are the innate immune cells of the central nervous system, we hypothesized that histamine-induced stimulation regulates the expression of PrP(C) in human-derived microglia. The human microglial clone 3 (HMC3) cell line was treated with histamine, and intracellular calcium levels were measured via a calcium flux assay. Cytokine production was monitored by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Western blotting and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used to determine protein and gene expression of HRH1-4. Flow cytometry and western blotting were used to measure PrP(C) expression levels. Fluorescence microscopy was used to examine Iba-1 and PrP(C) localization. HMC3 cells stimulated by histamine exhibited increased intracellular calcium levels and increased release of IL-6 and IL-8, while also modifying PrP(C) localization. HMC3 stimulated with histamine for 6 and 24 hours exhibited increased surface PrP(C) expression. Specifically, we found that stimulation of the HRH2 receptor was responsible for changes in surface PrP(C). Histamine-induced increases in surface PrP(C) were attenuated following inhibition of the HRH2 receptor via the HRH2 antagonist ranitidine. These changes were unique to HRH2 activation, as stimulation of HRH1, HRH3, or HRH4 did not alter surface PrP(C). Prolonged stimulation of HMC3 decreased PrP(C) expression following 48 and 72 hours of histamine stimulation. HMC3 cells can be stimulated by histamine to undergo intracellular calcium influx. Surface expression levels of PrP(C) on HMC3 cells are altered by histamine exposure, primarily mediated by HRH2. While histamine exposure also increases release of IL-6 and IL-8 in these cells, this cytokine release is not fully dependent on PrP(C) levels, as IL-6 release is only partially reduced and IL-8 release is unchanged under the conditions of HRH2 blockade that prevent PrP(C) changes. Overall, this suggests that PrP(C) may play a role in modulating microglial responses.
Histamine is a chemical transmitter found practically in whole organism and exerts its effects through the interaction with H1 to H4 histaminergic receptors. Specifically, H4 receptors are found mainly in immune cells and blood-forming tissues, thus are involved in inflammatory and immune processes, as well as some actions in central nervous system. Therefore, H4 receptor ligands can have applications in the treatment of chronic inflammatory and immune diseases and may be novel therapeutic option in these conditions. Several H4 receptor ligands have been described from early 2000's until nowadays, being imidazole, indolecarboxamide, 2-aminopyrimidine, quinazoline, and quinoxaline scaffolds the most explored and discussed in this review. Moreover, several studies of molecular modeling using homology models of H4 receptor and QSAR data of the ligands are summarized. The increasing and promising therapeutic applications are leading these compounds to clinical trials, which probably will be part of the next generation of blockbuster drugs.
Histamine receptor H4 (HRH4) is one of four known histamine receptors, among which H1 receptor is primarily involved in typeI allergic reactions and H2 receptor is generally recognized for its role in gastric acid secretion. Compared with H1 and H2, HRH4 has unique characteristics; it is expressed in neurons and vascular endothelial cells, and is reported to be deeply involved in inflammation. Therefore, we investigated whether HRH4 is expressed in choroidal neovascularization(CNV), the main cause of age-related macular degeneration, and further examined whether HRH4-targeted treatment is effective in suppressing CNV. It was determined that HRH4 was expressed in human and mouse CNV, but not in the normal state of mouse retina, retinal pigment epithelium, or choroid. Laser-induced CNV in Hrh4-deficient mice was significantly smaller compared with that in wild-type mice. Immunohistochemistry showed co-positivity of the macrophage marker F4/80 with HRH4-positive cells in laser-induced CNV. Intravitreal administration of an HRH4 antagonist reduced laser-induced CNV in wild-type mice. In addition, oral administration of an HRH4 antagonist also reduced laser-induced CNV. HRH4 antagonists had no effect on tube formation in human retinal vascular endothelial cells. We also examined retinal toxicity after HRH4 antagonist administration; no retinal degeneration was observed even when a large amount of HRH4 antagonist was injected into the mouse eyes, which was confirmed using fundus imaging, retinal histology, and electroretinography. In conclusion, HRH4 antagonist is believed to be a possible therapeutic agent that reduces CNV without causing retinal toxicity.
The histamine H4 receptor (HRH4), discovered only 13 years ago, is considered a promising drug target for allergy, inflammation, autoimmune disorders and cancer, as reflected by a steadily growing number of scientific publications and patent applications. Although the presence of HRH4 has been evidenced in the testis, its specific localization or its role has not been established. Herein, we sought to identify the possible involvement of HRH4 in the regulation of Leydig cell function. We first evaluated its expression in MA-10 Leydig tumor cells and then assessed the effects of two HRH4 agonists on steroidogenesis and proliferation. We found that HRH4 is functionally expressed in MA-10 cells, and that its activation leads to the inhibition of LH/human chorionic gonadotropin-induced cAMP production and StAR protein expression. Furthermore, we observed decreased cell proliferation after a 24-h HRH4 agonist treatment. We then detected for the sites of HRH4 expression in the normal rat testis, and detected HRH4 immunostaining in the Leydig cells of rats aged 7-240 days, while 21-day-old rats also presented HRH4 expression in male gametes. Finally, we evaluated the effect of HRH4 activation on the proliferation of normal progenitor and immature rat Leydig cell culture, and both proved to be susceptible to the anti-proliferative effect of HRH4 agonists. Given the importance of histamine (2-(1H-imidazol-4-yl)ethanamine) in human (patho)physiology, continued efforts are directed at elucidating the emerging properties of HRH4 and its ligands. This study reveals new sites of HRH4 expression, and should be considered in the design of selective HRH4 agonists for therapeutic purposes.
