Cytochrome P450 2B6; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of endocannabinoids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH-- hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide) to 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15- epoxyeicosatrienoic acid ethanolamides (EpETrE-EAs), potentially modulating endocannabinoid system signaling. Hydroxylates steroid hormon [...] 
Huggins and Hodges demonstrated the therapeutic effect of gonadal testosterone deprivation in the 1940s and therefore firmly established the concept that prostate cancer is a highly androgen-dependent disease. Since that time, hormonal therapy has undergone iterative advancement, from the types of gonadal testosterone deprivation to modalities that block the generation of adrenal and other extragonadal androgens, to those that directly bind and inhibit the androgen receptor (AR). The clinical states of prostate cancer are the product of a superimposition of these therapies with nonmetastatic advanced prostate cancer, as well as frankly metastatic disease. Today's standard of care for advanced prostate cancer includes gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists (e.g., leuprolide), second-generation nonsteroidal AR antagonists (enzalutamide, apalutamide, and darolutamide) and the androgen biosynthesis inhibitor abiraterone. The purpose of this review is to provide an assessment of hormonal therapies for the various clinical states of prostate cancer. The advancement of today's standard of care will require an accounting of an individual's androgen physiology that also has recently recognized germline determinants of peripheral androgen metabolism, which include HSD3B1 inheritance.
Dihydrotestosterone synthesis in prostate cancer from adrenal DHEA/DHEA-sulfate requires enzymatic conversion in tumor tissues. 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 is an absolutely necessary enzyme for such dihydrotestosterone synthesis and is encoded by the gene HSD3B1 which comes in 2 functional inherited forms described in 2013. The adrenal-permissive HSD3B1(1245C) allele allows for rapid dihydrotestosterone synthesis. The adrenal-restrictive HSD3B1(1245A) allele limits androgen synthesis. Studies from multiple cohorts show that adrenal-permissive allele inheritance confers worse outcomes and shorter survival after castration in low-volume prostate cancer and poor outcomes after abiraterone or enzalutamide treatment for castration-resistant prostate cancer. Here, we review the clinical data and implications.
After androgen deprivation, prostate cancer frequently becomes castration resistant (CRPC), with intratumoral androgen production from extragonadal precursors that activate the androgen receptor pathway. 3beta-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 (3betaHSD1) is the rate-limiting enzyme for extragonadal androgen synthesis, which together lead to CRPC. Here, we show that cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) increased epithelial 3betaHSD1 expression, induced androgen synthesis, activated the androgen receptor, and induced CRPC. Unbiased metabolomics revealed that CAF-secreted glucosamine specifically induced 3betaHSD1. CAFs induced higher GlcNAcylation in cancer cells and elevated expression of the transcription factor Elk1, which induced higher 3betaHSD1 expression and activity. Elk1 genetic ablation in cancer epithelial cells suppressed CAF-induced androgen biosynthesis in vivo. In patient samples, multiplex fluorescent imaging showed that tumor cells expressed more 3betaHSD1 and Elk1 in CAF-enriched areas compared with CAF-deficient areas. Our findings suggest that CAF-secreted glucosamine increases GlcNAcylation in prostate cancer cells, promoting Elk1-induced HSD3B1 transcription, which upregulates de novo intratumoral androgen synthesis to overcome castration.
In this article we aim to provide an overview of the zebrafish interrenal development and function, as well as a review of its contribution to basic and translational research. A search of the PubMed database identified 41 relevant papers published over the last 20 years. Based on the common themes identified, we discuss the organogenesis of the interrenal gland and its functional development and we review what is known about the genes involved in zebrafish steroidogenesis. We also outline the consequences of specific defects in steroid biosynthesis, as revealed by evidence from genetically engineered zebrafish models, including cyp11a2, cyp21a2, hsd3b1, cyp11c1 and fdx1b deficiency. Finally, we summarise the impact of different chemicals and environmental factors on steroidogenesis. Our review highlights the utility of zebrafish as a research model for exploring important areas of basic science and human disease, especially in the current context of rapid technological progress in the field of Molecular Biology.
Patients with advanced prostate cancer who receive androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) almost invariably develop castration-resistant disease. The mechanism of resistance is largely based on synthesis of intratumoral androgens from adrenal precursors, requiring enzymatic action of 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Delta(5-->4) isomerase 1 (3beta-HSD1), encoded by HSD3B1. A nucleotide polymorphism (1245A>C) in HSD3B1 results in a protein variant with increased steady-state levels and subsequently increased androgen synthesis from extragonadal precursors. Multiple clinical studies have shown that patients with the variant allele have significantly worse outcomes after ADT than those without, indicating that HSD3B1 variant status is a predictive biomarker of shortened ADT response. In addition, inheritance of the HSD3B1 variant is associated with extended responses to 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1) inhibition with a nonsteroidal agent, adding to evidence of increased tumour dependence on extragonadal androgens in patients who inherited the HSD3B1 variant. However, steroidal drugs with a 3beta-hydroxyl, Delta(5)-structure, such as abiraterone, are also metabolized by 3beta-HSD1, and 5alpha-abiraterone, a downstream metabolite, has been shown to activate the androgen receptor, potentially driving cancer progression. These data indicate a potential requirement to modify the treatment framework of patients harbouring variant HSD3B1.
OBJECTIVE: Rate-limiting enzyme 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (3betaHSD1) encoded by HSD3B1 catalyzes the transition of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) to dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The HSD3B1 (1245C) variant renders 3bHSD1 of resistant to ubiquitination and degradation, leading to a large amount of protein accumulation in the cell. Multiple clinical studies have shown that this mutation was correlated with resistance to androgen-deprivation therapy in prostate cancer. However, the results were not consistent depending on different treatment strategy and in some researches, the number of observed cases was relatively small. METHODS: To determine the effects of HSD3B1 (1245C) variant on resistance to androgen-deprivation therapy in prostate cancer, we performed a meta-analysis of the available literature. Electronic database searches identified appropriately designed studies that detected HSD3B1 in prostate cancer. We conducted a systematic search of studies in the following databases: PubMed, and EMBASE published until August 10, 2020 using the following search terms: (HSD3B1 AND ((((prostate cancer) OR prostatic neoplasm) OR prostatic carcinoma) OR prostatic cancer). RESULTS: Eight researches were included in this research. The result validated that the HSD3B1 (1245C) variant allele was associated with a shorter PFS (HR, 1.97; 95% CI, 1.39-2.79; P = 0.0001) (homozygous wild-type group) in men with prostate cancer when treated with ADT, however, a higher PFS (HR, 0.68; 95% CI, 0.48-0.96; P = 0.03) when treated with ADT and CYP17A1 inhibitor. CONCLUSION: The HSD3B1 (1245C) variant is a predictor of ADT plus CYP17A1 inhibitor response in prostate cancer.
Progression of prostate cancer depends on androgen receptor, which is usually activated by androgens. Therefore, a mainstay treatment is androgen deprivation therapy. Unfortunately, despite initial treatment response, resistance nearly always develops, and disease progresses to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), which remains driven by non-gonadal androgens synthesized in prostate cancer tissues. 3beta-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Delta(5)(-->4) isomerase 1 (3betaHSD1) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in androgen synthesis. However, how 3betaHSD1, especially the "adrenal-permissive" 3betaHSD1(367T) that permits tumor synthesis of androgen from dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), is regulated at the protein level is not well understood. Here, we investigate how hypoxia regulates 3betaHSD1(367T) protein levels. Our results show that, in vitro, hypoxia stabilizes 3betaHSD1 protein by suppressing autophagy. Autophagy inhibition promotes 3betaHSD1-dependent tumor progression. Hypoxia represses transcription of autophagy-related (ATG) genes by decreasing histone acetylation. Inhibiting deacetylase (HDAC) restores ATG gene transcription under hypoxia. Therefore, HDAC inhibition may be a therapeutic target for hypoxic tumor cells.
Testicular 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B) is a steroidogenic enzyme, catalyzing the conversion of 3beta-hydroxysteroids into 3-keto-steroids. Two distinct isoforms in the human are cloned, HSD3B1 and HSD3B2, and HSD3B2 is located in the testis. HSD3B2 is a two-substrate enzyme, which binds to cofactor NAD(+) and a 3beta-steroid. Many endocrine disruptors, including industrial compounds (phthalates, bisphenols, and perfluoroalkyl substances), insecticides and biocides (organochlorine insecticides and organotins), food additives (butylated hydroxyanisole, resveratrol, gossypol, flavones, and isoflavones), and drugs (etomidate, troglitazone, medroxyprogesterone acetate, and ketoconazole) inhibit testicular HSD3B, possibly interfering with androgen synthesis. In this review, we discuss the distinct testicular isoform of HSD3B, its gene, chemistry, subcellular location, and the endocrine disruptors that directly inhibit testicular HSD3B and their inhibitory modes.
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and DHEA sulfate together are abundant adrenal steroids whose physiological effects are mediated through their conversion to potent downstream androgens. 3beta-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isotype 1 (3betaHSD1) facilitates the rate-limiting step of DHEA metabolism and gates the flux of substrate into the distal portion of the androgen synthesis pathway. Notably, a germline, missense-encoding change, HSD3B1(1245C), results in expression of 3betaHSD1 protein that is resistant to degradation, yielding greater potent androgen production in the periphery. In contrast, HSD3B1(1245A) encodes 3betaHSD1 protein that is easily degraded, limiting peripheral androgen synthesis. These adrenal-permissive (AP) and adrenal-restrictive (AR) alleles have recently been associated with divergent outcomes in androgen-sensitive disease states, underscoring the need to reevaluate DHEA metabolism using HSD3B1 genetics.
The enzyme 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 (3betaHSD1), encoded by the gene HSD3B1, plays an essential role in the peripheral conversion of 3beta-OH, Delta(5)-steroids to 3-keto, Delta(4)-steroids. In human physiology, the adrenal produces dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and DHEA-sulfate, which are major precursors for the biosynthesis of potent androgens and estrogens. DHEA is converted by 3betaHSD1 and subsequently is converted by steroid-5alpha-reductase to potent androgens or by aromatase to estrogens. Assessment of 3betaHSD1 is therefore critical under various conditions. In this chapter, we detail several approaches to assessing 3betaHSD1. First, we describe a genotyping protocol for the identification of a common missense-encoding variation that regulates 3betaHSD1 cellular metabolic activity. This protocol distinguishes between the HSD3B1(1245A) and the HSD3B1(1245C) allele which have lower and higher metabolic activity, respectively. Second, we detail mass spectrometry approaches to determining 3betaHSD1 activity using stable isotope dilution. Third, we describe methods for using tritiated DHEA and high performance liquid chromatography coupled with a beta-RAM to also determine 3betaHSD1 activity. Together, we provide multiple methods of directly assessing 3betaHSD1 activity or anticipated 3betaHSD1 activity.
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is addicted to androgens. The steroidogenic enzyme 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 (3betaHSD1) recognizes pregnenolone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and steroidal medicine abiraterone as substrates to accelerate disease progression. METHODS: References for this review were identified through searches of PubMed with the search terms "prostate cancer", "HSD3B1", and "3bHSD1" from 1990 until June, 2022. RESULTS: Genotype of 3betaHSD1 has been reported to correlate with tumor aggressiveness of advanced prostate cancer in multiple clinical scenarios. The ethnic differences and limitations of using 3betaHSD1 genotype as a prognostic biomarker have been discussed here. The activity of 3betaHSD1 increases in patients treated with abiraterone and enzalutamide, giving rise to treatment resistance. Further elucidation of 3betaHSD1 regulatory mechanisms will shed light on more approaches for disease intervention. We also review the recent advance on 3betaHSD1 inhibitors and targeting 3betaHSD1 for prostate cancer management. Novel 3betaHSD1 inhibitors will be needed to provide additional options for prostate cancer management. CONCLUSION: 3betaHSD1 is both a predictive biomarker and a promising therapeutic target for prostate cancer.
HSD3B1 encodes 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1, which converts adrenal dehydroepiandrosterone to 5alpha-dihydrotestosterone and is inherited in adrenal-permissive (AP) or adrenal-restrictive forms. The AP allele is linked to castration resistance, mainly in low-volume tumors. Here, we investigate the association of HSD3B1 alleles with outcomes in ARCHES, a multinational, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial that demonstrated clinical benefit with enzalutamide plus androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) in men with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC) compared to those treated with placebo plus ADT. There are no significant differences between genotypes for clinical efficacy endpoints. Enzalutamide significantly improves radiographic progression-free survival and overall survival vs. placebo irrespective of HSD3B1 status. Men with the AP genotype have higher post-progression mortality and treatment-emergent adverse events, including hypertension, cardiovascular events, and gynecomastia, but a lower fracture rate. Overall, enzalutamide is beneficial in men with mHSPC independent of the HSD3B1 genotype. Inherited polymorphisms of HSD3B1 may account for differential toxicities.
Half of all men with advanced prostate cancer (PCa) inherit at least 1 copy of an adrenal-permissive HSD3B1 (1245C) allele, which increases levels of 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 (3betaHSD1) and promotes intracellular androgen biosynthesis. Germline inheritance of the adrenally permissive allele confers worse outcomes in men with advanced PCa. We investigated whether HSD3B1 (1245C) drives resistance to combined androgen deprivation and radiotherapy. Adrenally permissive 3betaHSD1 enhanced resistance to radiotherapy in PCa cell lines and xenograft models engineered to mimic the human adrenal/gonadal axis during androgen deprivation. The allele-specific effects on radiosensitivity were dependent on availability of DHEA, the substrate for 3betaHSD1. In lines expressing the HSD3B1 (1245C) allele, enhanced expression of DNA damage response (DDR) genes and more rapid DNA double-strand break (DSB) resolution were observed. A correlation between androgen receptor (AR) expression and increased DDR gene expression was confirmed in 680 radical prostatectomy specimens. Treatment with the nonsteroidal antiandrogen enzalutamide reversed the resistant phenotype of HSD3B1 (1245C) PCa in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion, 3betaHSD1 promotes prostate cancer resistance to combined androgen deprivation and radiotherapy by upregulating DNA DSB repair. This work supports prospective validation of early combined androgen blockade for high-risk men harboring the HSD3B1 (1245C) allele.
Castration-resistant prostate cancer (PCa) almost invariably occurs after androgen deprivation therapy for metastatic disease and is driven in part by androgen synthesis within the tumor. 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isoenzyme-1 catalyzes the conversion of adrenal precursor steroids into potent androgens essential for PCa progression. A common 1245 A-->C missense-encoding single nucleotide polymorphism in HSD3B1 (rs1047303), the gene that encodes this enzyme, leads to a more stable protein that is resistant to degradation and thus increased production of potent androgens from adrenal precursors, facilitating castration-resistant PCa development. Consistent with this mechanism, this adrenal-permissive HSD3B1(1245C) genotype is associated with inferior outcomes after androgen deprivation therapy for advanced PCa, and increased sensitivity to pharmacologic blockade of adrenal precursors in metastatic disease. Herein, we review current knowledge of the mechanisms conferred by HSD3B1 genotype to alter androgen physiology and accelerate development of castration-resistant disease and its associations with clinical PCa outcomes. In light of its effect on steroid physiology, we also discuss its potential associations with non-PCa phenotypes.
IMPORTANCE: The adrenal androgen-metabolizing 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 enzyme, encoded by the HSD3B1 gene, catalyzes the rate-limiting step necessary for synthesizing nontesticular testosterone and dihydrotestosterone production. The common adrenal-permissive HSD3B1(1245C) allele is responsible for encoding the 3beta-HSD1 protein with decreased susceptibility to degradation resulting in higher extragonadal androgen synthesis. Retrospective studies have suggested an association of the HSD3B1 adrenal-permissive homozygous genotype with androgen deprivation therapy resistance in prostate cancer. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate differences in mortality outcomes by HSD3B1 genetic status among men with prostate cancer. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cohort study of patients with prostate cancer who were enrolled in the Million Veteran Program within the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) system between 2011 and 2023 collected genotyping and phenotyping information. EXPOSURE: HSD3B1 genotype status was categorized as AA (homozygous adrenal-restrictive), AC (heterozygous adrenal-restrictive), or CC (homozygous adrenal-permissive). MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome of this study was prostate cancer-specific mortality (PCSM), defined as the time from diagnosis to death from prostate cancer, censored at the date of last VHA follow-up. Secondary outcomes included incidence of metastases and PCSM in predefined subgroups. RESULTS: Of the 5287 participants (median [IQR] age, 69 [64-74] years), 402 (7.6%) had the CC genotype, 1970 (37.3%) had the AC genotype, and 2915 (55.1%) had the AA genotype. Overall, the primary cause of death for 91 patients (1.7%) was prostate cancer. Cumulative incidence of PCSM at 5 years after prostate cancer diagnosis was higher among men with the CC genotype (4.0%; 95% CI, 1.7%-6.2%) compared with the AC genotype (2.1%; 95% CI, 1.3%-2.8%) and AA genotype (1.9%; 95% CI, 1.3%-2.4%) (P = .02). In the 619 patients who developed metastatic disease at any time, the cumulative incidence of PCSM at 5 years was higher among patients with the CC genotype (36.0%; 95% CI, 16.7%-50.8%) compared with the AC genotype (17.9%; 95% CI, 10.5%-24.7%) and AA genotype (18.5%; 95% CI, 12.0%-24.6%) (P = .01). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cohort study of US veterans undergoing treatment for prostate cancer at the VHA, the HSD3B1 CC genotype was associated with inferior outcomes. The HSD3B1 biomarker may help identify patients who may benefit from therapeutic targeting of 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 and the androgen-signaling axis.
Sebaceous glands drive acne, however, their role in other inflammatory skin diseases remains unclear. To shed light on their potential contribution to disease development, we investigated the spatial transcriptome of sebaceous glands in psoriasis and atopic dermatitis patients across lesional and non-lesional human skin samples. Both atopic dermatitis and psoriasis sebaceous glands expressed genes encoding key proteins for lipid metabolism and transport such as ALOX15B, APOC1, FABP7, FADS1/2, FASN, PPARG, and RARRES1. Also, inflammation-related SAA1 was identified as a common spatially variable gene. In atopic dermatitis, genes mainly related to lipid metabolism (e.g. ACAD8, FADS6, or EBP) as well as disease-specific genes, i.e., Th2 inflammation-related lipid-regulating HSD3B1 were differentially expressed. On the contrary, in psoriasis, more inflammation-related spatially variable genes (e.g. SERPINF1, FKBP5, IFIT1/3, DDX58) were identified. Other psoriasis-specific enriched pathways included lipid metabolism (e.g. ACOT4, S1PR3), keratinization (e.g. LCE5A, KRT5/7/16), neutrophil degranulation, and antimicrobial peptides (e.g. LTF, DEFB4A, S100A7-9). In conclusion, our results show that sebaceous glands contribute to skin homeostasis with a cell type-specific lipid metabolism, which is influenced by the inflammatory microenvironment. These findings further support that sebaceous glands are not bystanders in inflammatory skin diseases, but can actively and differentially modulate inflammation in a disease-specific manner.
This study investigated cellular mechanisms in steroidogenesis responsible for treatment resistance to the novel antiandrogen agent darolutamide in prostate cancer. HSD3B1 was overexpressed in darolutamide-resistant cells and induced by darolutamide treatment and AR knockdown. Inversely, HSD3B1 knockdown increased cellular sensitivity to darolutamide. Similarly, its upstream regulator NR5A2 was up-regulated in darolutamide-resistant cells and induced by darolutamide treatment and AR knockdown. Inversely, NR5A2 knockdown and NR5A2 inhibitor ML180 decreased expression of various steroidogenic enzymes including HSD3B1, leading to increased cellular sensitivity to darolutamide. The NR5A2/HSD3B1 pathway promoted cellular resistance to darolutamide and targeting NR5A2/HSD3B1 pathway is a promising therapeutic strategy to overcome darolutamide resistance.
WNT ligand transporter Wls is essential for the WNT dependent developmental and pathogenic processes. The spatiotemporal expression pattern of Wls was investigated in this study. Immature female mice (21-22 days old) were treated with 5 IU, pregnant mare's serum gonadotrophin (PMSG) to stimulate follicular development, followed 48 h later by injection with 5 IU, human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) to induce ovulation. The expression of Wls was stimulated in granulosa cells and the forming corpus luteum after hCG administration. To study the function of Wls, the Amhr2(tm3(cre)Bhr) strain was used to target deletion of Wls in granulosa cells. The deletion of Wls caused a significant decrease in the fertility of Wls(Amhr2-Cre) female mice. In female Wls(Amhr2-Cre) mice, decreased ovarian size and number of antral follicles were found. The number of corpus luteum in immature PMSG/hCG primed Wls(Amhr2-Cre) mice was much less than that in the control group. Compared with control animals, Wls(Amhr2-Cre) mice have lower serum progesterone levels. RNA sequencing was used to identify genes regulated by Wls after hCG treatment. Several genes known to be critical for follicle development and steroidogenesis were significantly down-regulated, such as Fshr, Lhcgr, Sfrp4, Inhba, Cyp17a1, Hsd3b1, and Hsd17b7. The expression of WNT signaling downstream target genes, Bmp2 and Cyp19a1, also decreased significantly in Wls(Amhr2-Cre) ovary. In summary, the findings of this study suggest that Wls is critical for female fertility and luteinization.
BACKGROUND: The germline variant rs1047303 (HSD3B1[1245A/C]), restricting or enabling production of potent androgens and estrogens from adrenal precursors, affects outcomes of castration-resistant prostate cancer and is associated with estrogen receptor positivity in postmenopausal breast cancer. Like breast cancer, endometrial cancer is another malignancy with hormone-dependent and hormone-independent subtypes. We hypothesized that adrenal-restrictive HSD3B1 genotype would associate with hormone-independent cancer subtypes. METHODS: We employed a previously described classification of tumors in The Cancer Genome Atlas into genomic clusters. We determined HSD3B1 genotype frequencies by endometrial cancer genomic cluster and calculated the odds per adrenal-restrictive A allele for the largely hormone-independent copy-number (CN) high subtype vs other subtypes. An equivalent analysis was performed for the genomically similar, hormone-independent basal breast cancer subtype. Last, we performed survival analyses for UK Biobank participants with endometrial cancer by HSD3B1 genotype. All statistical tests were 2-sided. RESULTS: The adrenal-restrictive HSD3B1(1245A) allele was associated with the CN-high endometrial cancer subtype (odds ratio [OR] = 1.63, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.14 to 2.32; P = .007). Similarly, HSD3B1(1245A) was associated with the basal breast cancer subtype (OR = 1.54, 95% CI = 1.13 to 2.08; P = .006). In the UK Biobank, endometrial cancer patients homozygous for HSD3B1(1245A) had worse overall (hazard ratio [HR] = 1.39, 95% CI = 1.16 to 1.68; P < .001) and cancer-specific (HR = 1.39, 95% CI = 1.14 to 1.70; P = .001) survival, consistent with the A allele being enriched in the more aggressive CN-high subtype. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest roles for adrenal-restrictive vs adrenal-permissive steroidogenesis, by way of rs1047303 genotype, in the development of and/or outcomes from at least 3 commonly hormone-associated types of cancer: prostate, breast, and endometrial.
BACKGROUND: HSD3B1 and HSD3B2 are crucial enzymes for the synthesis of hormonal steroids, including aldosterone. Therefore, HSD3B gene variations could possibly influence blood pressure (BP) by affecting the aldosterone level. METHODS: We performed a haplotype- and diplotype-based case-control study to investigate the association between the HSD3B gene variations and essential hypertension (EH), aldosterone level, and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). A total of 275 EH patients and 286 controls were genotyped for four SNPs of the HSD3B1 gene (rs3765945, rs3088283, rs6203, and rs1047303) and for two SNPs of the HSD3B2 gene (rs2854964 and rs1819698). Aldosterone and LVH were investigated in 240 and 110 subjects respectively. RESULTS: Significant differences were noted for the total and the male subject groups for the recessive model (CC versus TC+TT) of rs6203 between the controls and EH patients (P=0.030 and P=0.008 respectively). The frequency of the T-C haplotype established by rs3088283-rs1047303 was significantly higher for EH patients compared with the controls (P=0.014). Even though the polymorphism of HSB3B1 was not associated with LVH, the diplotype established by rs3088283-rs1047303 in the total subject group, along with the systolic BP, diastolic BP, and aldosterone level were significantly higher for those subjects who had the T-C haplotype versus those who did not (P=0.025, P=0.014, and P=0.006 respectively). CONCLUSION: rs6203 and rs1047303 in the HSD3B1 gene are useful genetic markers for EH, while polymorphisms of HSD3B1 are associated with the BP and aldosterone level.
