5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1B; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for ergot alkaloid derivatives, various anxiolytic and antidepressant drugs and other psychoactive substances, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity. Arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and medi [...] 
Results of behavioral genetic and molecular genetic studies have converged to suggest that both genetic and nongenetic factors contribute to the development of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We review this literature, with a particular emphasis on molecular genetic studies. Family, twin, and adoption studies provide compelling evidence that genes play a strong role in mediating susceptibility to ADHD. This fact is most clearly seen in the 20 extant twin studies, which estimate the heritability of ADHD to be .76. Molecular genetic studies suggest that the genetic architecture of ADHD is complex. The few genome-wide scans conducted thus far are not conclusive. In contrast, the many candidate gene studies of ADHD have produced substantial evidence implicating several genes in the etiology of the disorder. For the eight genes for which the same variant has been studied in three or more case-control or family-based studies, seven show statistically significant evidence of association with ADHD on the basis of the pooled odds ratio across studies: DRD4, DRD5, DAT, DBH, 5-HTT, HTR1B, and SNAP-25.
Psychopathy is a condition characterized by atypical emotions and socially maladaptive behavioral patterns. Among incarcerated people, psychopathy has been associated with higher rates of crimes, recidivism, and resistance to treatment. Many studies have indicated significant heritability of psychopathic traits, but little is known about the specific contribution of genes and their interaction with adverse experiences in life. Considering the primary role that serotonin plays in cognition and emotion, we investigated TPH2-rs4570625, 5-HTTLPR, MAOA-uVNTR, HTR1B-rs13212041 and HTR2A-rs6314 as risk factors for psychopathy in the largest sample of institutionalized individuals studied so far, consisting of 793 US White male incarcerated adults, and in a replication sample of 168 US White male incarcerated adolescents. In a subgroup of the adult sample, the interaction between genetics and parenting style, assessed by the Measure of Parental Style (MOPS) questionnaire, was also evaluated. The HTR1B-rs13212041-T/T genotype, as compared to HTR1B-rs13212041-C allele, predicted higher psychopathy scores in both the adult and the adolescent samples. The interaction between HTR1B-rs13212041-T/T genotype and paternal MOPS scores, investigated in a subgroup of the adult sample, was an even stronger predictor of higher levels of psychopathy than either the genetics or the environment taken individually. Overall, these data, obtained in two independent samples, shed new light on neurobiological correlates of psychopathy with promising implications both at a clinical and forensic level.
INTRODUCTION: Serotonin is highly implicated in the regulation of emotional state and the execution of cognitive tasks, so much so that the serotonin transporter genes (5-HTT, SLC6A4) and the serotonin receptor genes (HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A) have become the perfect candidates when studying the effects that these genes and their polymorphic variations have on depression characteristics. OBJECTIVE: A review of research reports that have studied the effects of variations in the serotonin transporter and receptor genes on different clinical features of depression. METHODS: A search of the Scopus, Web of Science and PubMed databases was conducted using the keywords ("depression" AND "polymorphism"). CONCLUSIONS: According to the review of 54 articles, the short allele of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism was found to be the most reported risk factor related to the development of depression and its severity. Variations in the genes studied (SLC6A4, HTR1A, HTR2A) can generate morphological alterations of brain structures.
OBJECTIVE: Antidepressants are frequently prescribed and are the first-line pharmacological treatments for psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents. Although antidepressants are generally effective and well-tolerated by children, between 31% to 48% will not respond and up to 25% will experience an adverse drug reaction. Evidence from adult populations suggests pharmacogenetic information can assist with identifying individuals at greatest risk for poor response or adverse drug reactions but the evidence base in pediatric populations is less clear. METHOD: We systematically identified, reviewed, and critically evaluated the antidepressant pharmacogenetics literature among children and adolescents using standardized tools and consensus criteria. RESULTS: We identified 24 studies, most of which were of fair to moderate quality. Collectively, the studies identified 25 significant gene-antidepressant associations involving 10 genes (ABCB1, BDNF, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, FKBP5, GNB3, HTR1B, HTR2A, SLC6A4, TPH2) and nine antidepressants (amitriptyline, citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, nortriptyline, paroxetine, sertraline, and venlafaxine). None of the identified associations have been independently replicated in children. LIMITATIONS: Included studies were heterogenous in terms of study design, genes and drugs assessed, and outcomes measured. CONCLUSION: The antidepressant pharmacogenetics knowledge base in pediatric populations is still emerging, but results to date echo many of the gene-antidepressant associations identified in adult populations. Given ubiquitous prescribing of antidepressants in the care of children and adolescents with psychiatric disorders, further research on identifying new and confirming current gene-antidepressant associations are warranted.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that almost certainly represents the common outcome of multiple causal pathways and it is now generally accepted that genetic factors make a significant contribution to these pathways. Behavioral studies suggest a heritability of approximately 0.76. While molecular genetic approaches have identified a range of potential candidate genes, it is now clear that the genetics of ADHD are characterized by a number of genes each of which makes a small but significant contribution to the overall risk. Several genome-wide linkage studies have been conducted and, although there are considerable differences in findings between studies, several regions have been supported across several studies (bin 16.4, 5p13, 11q22-25, 17p11). The contribution of several candidate genes has been supported by meta-analyses (DRD4, DRD5, DAT1, HTR1B and SNAP25). Genome-wide association scans are starting to appear but have not yet had sufficient power to produce conclusive results. Gene-environment interactions, which are as yet relatively understudied, are likely to be of importance in fully understanding the role of genes in ADHD and will be discussed.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common childhood behavioral condition which affects 2-10% of school age children worldwide. Although the underlying molecular mechanism for the disorder is poorly understood, familial, twin and adoption studies suggest a strong genetic component. Here we provide a state-of-the-art review of the molecular genetics of ADHD incorporating evidence from candidate gene and linkage designs, as well as genome-wide association (GWA) studies of common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and rare copy number variations (CNVs). Bioinformatic methods such as functional enrichment analysis and protein-protein network analysis are used to highlight biological processes of likely relevance to the aetiology of ADHD. Candidate gene associations of minor effect size have been replicated across a number of genes including SLC6A3, DRD5, DRD4, SLC6A4, LPHN3, SNAP-25, HTR1B, NOS1 and GIT1. Although case-control SNP-GWAS have had limited success in identifying common genetic variants for ADHD that surpass critical significance thresholds, quantitative trait designs suggest promising associations with Cadherin13 and glucose-fructose oxidoreductase domain 1 genes. Further, CNVs mapped to glutamate receptor genes (GRM1, GRM5, GRM7 and GRM8) have been implicated in the aetiology of the disorder and overlap with bioinformatic predictions based on ADHD GWAS SNP data regarding enriched pathways. Although increases in sample size across multi-center cohorts will likely yield important new results, we advocate that this must occur in parallel with a shift away from categorical case-control approaches that view ADHD as a unitary construct, towards dimensional approaches that incorporate endophenotypes and statistical classification methods.
PURPOSE: Serotonin receptor 1B (HTR1B) is involved in the regulation of the serotonin system, playing different roles in specific areas of the brain. We review the characteristics of the gene coding for HTR1B, its product and the functional role of HTR1B in the neural networks involved in motivation and memory; the central role played by HTR1B in these functions is thoroughly depicted and show HTR1B to be a candidate modulator of the mnemonic and motivationally related symptoms in psychiatric illnesses. METHODS: In order to challenge this assessment, we analyze how and how much the genetic variations located in the gene that codes for HTR1B impacts on the psychiatric phenotypes by reviewing the literature on this topic. RESULTS: We gathered partial evidence arising from genetic association studies, which suggests that HTR1B plays a relevant role in substance-related and obsessive compulsive disorders. On the other hand, no solid evidence for other psychiatric disorders was found. This finding is quite striking because of the heavy impairment of motivation and of mnemonic-related functions (for example, recall bias) that characterize major psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSIONS: The possible reasons for the contrast between the prime relevance of HTR1B in regulating memory and motivation and the limited evidence brought by genetic association studies in humans are discussed, and some suggestions for possible future directions are provided.
AIMS: Antidepressants are effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), while many patients fail to respond to antidepressants. Both 5-HT1A (HTR1A) and 5-HT1B (HTR1B) receptors play an important role in antidepressant activity. Meanwhile, DNA methylation is associated with MDD and antidepressant efficacy. In this study we investigate the influence of HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype on antidepressant efficacy. METHODS: A total of 291 MDD patients and 100 healthy controls received the Life Events Scale (LES) and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) as stress assessment. Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of HTR1A and HTR1B involved in antidepressant mechanisms were tested. Methylation status in 181 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites of HTR1A and HTR1B were assessed. All MDD patients were divided into response (RES) and non-response (NRES) after 2 weeks of antidepressant treatment. Logistic regression was conducted for interactions between methylation, NLES/CTQ score and genotype. RESULTS: Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation is connected with better antidepressant efficacy in subgroup. Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation combined with low CTQ score is related to better antidepressant efficacy. The interaction between high HTR1B methylation with the rs6298 AA/AG genotype affects better antidepressant efficacy. CONCLUSIONS: HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype is associated with antidepressant efficacy.
To investigate the association between three selected pain polymorphisms and clinical, functional, sensory-related, psychophysical, psychological or cognitive variables in a sample of women with fibromyalgia (FMS). One hundred twenty-three (n = 123) women with FMS completed demographic (age, height, weight), clinical (years with pain, intensity of pain at rest and during daily living activities), functional (quality of life, physical function), sensory-related (sensitization-associated and neuropathic-associated symptoms), psychophysical (pressure pain thresholds), psychological (sleep quality, depressive and anxiety level) and cognitive (pain catastrophizing, kinesiophobia) variables. Those three genotypes of the OPRM1 rs1799971, HTR1B rs6296 and COMT rs4680 single nucleotide polymorphisms were obtained by polymerase chain reactions from no-stimulated whole saliva collection. No significant differences in demographic, clinical, functional, sensory-related, psychophysical, psychological and cognitive variables according to OPRM1 rs1799971, HTR1B rs6296 or COMT rs4680 genotype were identified in our sample of women with FMS. A multilevel analysis did not either reveal any significant gene-to-gene interaction between OPRM1 rs1799971 x HTR1B rs6296, OPRM1 rs1799971 x COMT rs4680 and HTR1B rs6296 x COMT rs4680 for any of the investigated outcomes. This study revealed that three single nucleotide polymorphisms, OPRM1 rs1799971, HTR1B rs6296 or COMT rs4680, mostly associated with chronic pain were not involved in phenotyping features of FMS. Potential gene-to-gene interaction and their association with clinical phenotype in women with FMS should be further investigated in future studies including large sample sizes.
Antipsychotic-induced akathisia (AIA) is a movement disorder characterized by a subjective feeling of inner restlessness or nervousness with an irresistible urge to move, resulting in repetitive movements of the limbs and torso, while taking antipsychotics (APs). In recent years, there have been some associative genetic studies of the predisposition to the development of AIA. Objective: The goal of our study was to review the results of associative genetic and genome-wide studies and to systematize and update the knowledge on the genetic predictors of AIA in patients with schizophrenia (Sch). Methods: We searched full-text publications in PubMed, Web of Science, Springer, Google Scholar, and e-Library databases from 1977 to 2022. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) quality scale was used for the critical selection of the studies. Results: We identified 37 articles, of which 3 were included in the review. Thus, the C allele of rs1800498 (59414 C>T) and the A allele of rs1800497 (17316 G>A) (TaqIA) from the DRD2 gene as well as the TT genotype rs13212041 (77461407 C>T) from the HTR1B gene were found to be associated with AIA. Conclusions: Uncovering the genetic biomarkers of AIA may provide a key to developing a strategy for the personalized prevention and treatment of this adverse neurological drug reaction of APs in patients with Sch in real clinical practice.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debilitating neuropsychiatric disorder that causes the patient to experience intrusive thoughts and/or to carry out repetitive, ritualized behaviors that are time consuming and impairing. OCD is familial and heritable. The genetic factors responsible for pathogenesis, however, remain largely unknown despite the numerous candidate gene studies conducted. Based on efficacy of serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) in treating OCD, serotonin system genes have been a dominant focus in OCD candidate gene studies. We review the most commonly studied candidate serotonin system gene variants (specifically in SLC6A4, HTR2A, HTR1B, and HTR2C) and their association with OCD. Although findings to date are mixed, serotonin transporter polymorphism 5-HTTLPR and HTR2A polymorphism rs6311 (or rs6313) are most consistently associated with OCD. Mixed findings may be the result of genetic complexity and phenotypic heterogeneity that future studies should account for. Homogenous patient subgroups reflecting OCD symptom dimensions, OCD subtypes, and sex should be used for gene discovery.
Suicide is one of the leading causes of death in the world. Its aetiology is complex and diverse, however, epidemiological studies show that suicidal behavior is partly heritable. Neurobiological evidence implicates serotonergic dysfunction in suicidality, stimulating genetic research to focus on genes related to the serotonergic system. In this paper, we review evidence from studies examining the association between various serotonergic genes (Tryptophan Hydroxylase genes: TPH1; TPH2, Serotonin Transporter gene: 5-HTTLPR in SLC6A4, Serotonin Receptor genes: HTR1A, HTR2A, HTR1B, HTR2C and Monoamine Oxidase A gene: MAOA) and suicidal behavior. The data show associations between variation on the TPH1 gene and 5-HTTLPR gene and violent suicidal behavior in Caucasian populations, with the least inconsistencies. Results are mixed for the TPH2 gene and serotonin receptor genes, but for some genes, studies that include haplotypic analyses or that examine a larger coding region of the genes tend to provide more reliable results. Findings on endophenotypes of suicidality, such as aggression and impulsivity traits, show positive associations for the TPH1, HTR2A, and MAOA genes, but need further replication, since negative associations are also occasionally reported. Since genes can only partially explain suicidal risk, several studies during the past decade have tried to incorporate environmental factors in the susceptibility model. Studies to date show that variation on the 5-HTTLPR, MAOA and HTR2A gene can interact with stressful life events to increase risk for suicidal behavior. Limitations of case-control studies are discussed and future considerations are put forward with regard to endophenotypic measurements and gene-environment interactions.
Lrp5, the mutated gene in osteoporosis pseudoglioma (OPPG) and the high bone-mass syndrome (HBM), regulates bone formation, while beta-catenin, the molecular node of Wnt signaling, regulates bone resorption, suggesting that Lrp5 could act in a Wnt-independent manner. Using microarray and conditional gene deletion in mice, we showed that Lrp5 actually enhances bone formation by inhibiting the expression, in duodenum, of tryptophan hydroxylase 1, the rate-limiting enzyme in the serotonin biosynthetic pathway. Accordingly, serotonin circulating levels are high in Lrp5(-/-) mice and OPPG patients but low in HBM patients, and normalizing serum serotonin levels rescues the bone phenotype of the Lrp5(-/-) mice. We also showed that serotonin acts on osteoblasts through the Htr1b receptor and the transcription factor cAMP responsive element binding to inhibit their proliferation. This study shows that Lrp5 acts in gut cells, not in osteoblasts, to control bone formation via a Wnt-independent pathway and identifies a new hormone, serotonin, and a novel endocrine axis regulating bone mass. These findings may have important therapeutic implications for the treatment of low bone-mass disorders.
The smoothened sonic hedgehog (Smo-Shh) pathway is one mechanism that influences neurogenesis, including brain cell differentiation and development during childhood. Shh signaling dysregulation leads to decreased target gene transcription, which contributes to increased neuronal excitation, apoptosis, and neurodegeneration, eventually leading to neurological deficits. Neuropsychiatric disorders such as OCD and related neurological dysfunctions are characterized by neurotransmitter imbalance, neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and impaired neurogenesis, disturbing the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) link neuronal network. Despite the availability of several treatments, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, some individuals may not benefit much from them. Several trials on the use of antipsychotics in the treatment of OCD have also produced inadequate findings. This evidence-based review focuses on a potential pharmacological approach to alleviating OCD and associated neuronal deficits by preventing neurochemical alterations, in which sonic hedgehog activators are neuroprotective, lowering neuronal damage while increasing neuronal maintenance and survival. As a result, stimulating SMO-Shh via its potential activators may have neuroprotective effects on neurological impairment associated with OCD. This review investigates the link between SMO-Shh signaling and the neurochemical abnormalities associated with the progression of OCD and associated neurological dysfunctions. Role of Smo-Shh signaling in serotonergic neurogenesis and in maintaining their neuronal identity. The Shh ligand activates two main transcriptional factors known as Foxa2 and Nkx2.2, which again activates another transcriptional factor, GATA (GATA2 and GATA3), in post mitotic precursor cells of serotonergic neurons-following increased expression of Pet-1 and Lmx1b after GATA regulates the expression of many serotonergic enzymes such as TPH2, SERT, VMAT, slc6a4, Htr1a, Htr1b (Serotonin receptor enzymes), and MAO that regulate and control the release of serotonin and maintain their neuronal identity after their maturation. Abbreviation: Foxa2: Forkhead box; GATA: Globin transcription factor; Lmx1b: LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 beta; TPH2: Tryptophan hydroxylase 2; Htr1a: Serotonin receptor 1a; Htr1b: Serotonin receptor 1b; SERT: Serotonin transporter; VMAT: Vesicular monoamine transporter; MAO: Monoamine oxidase.
Although twin studies demonstrate that ADHD is a highly heritable condition, molecular genetic studies suggest that the genetic architecture of ADHD is complex. The handful of genome-wide linkage and association scans that have been conducted thus far show divergent findings and are, therefore, not conclusive. Similarly, many of the candidate genes reviewed here (ie, DBH, MAOA, SLC6A2, TPH-2, SLC6A4, CHRNA4, GRIN2A) are theoretically compelling from neurobiological systems perspective but available data are sparse and inconsistent. However, candidate gene studies of ADHD have produced substantial evidence implicating several genes in the etiology of the disorder, with meta-analyses supportive of a role of the genes coding for DRD4, DRD5, SLC6A3, SNAP-25, and HTR1B in the etiology of ADHD.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a neuropsychiatric disorder whose aetiology still remains elusive. Nevertheless, evidence supports a high genetic contribution that interacts with environmental factors, also known to modulate epigenetic processes. These epigenetic modulators are a class of non-coding RNAs, microRNAs (miRNAs), known as post-transcriptional regulators, which have emerged as prospective players in neuropsychiatric disorders since they play a role in brain development, synapse formation, and the fine-tuning of genes underlying synaptic and memory formation. Here, we review the current literature following a systematic search up until August 2016. The keywords used were "ADHD", "attention deficit hyperactivity disorder", "attention hyperactivity" in combination with "miRNA" or "microRNA". A total of 9 studies out of 34 met inclusion criteria. The results provide preliminary information, shedding light on two important aspects. First, it depicts that miRNAs modulate expression of genes (BDNF, DAT1, HTR2C, HTR1B, SNAP-25) linked to ADHD aetiology. Dysregulation of miRNAs affects regulatory mechanisms of aforementioned genes, which may affect neurodevelopmental processes leading to alterations. Secondly, altered peripheral miRNA levels are observed in both ADHD animal model and humans, suggesting a notion of utilizing circulatory miRNA in disease diagnosis. Therefore, deciphering the role of miRNAs in ADHD seems a promising step in understanding its aetiology.
Over the last decade, finding a reliable biomarker for the early detection of schizophrenia (Scz) has been a topic of interest. The main goal of the current review is to provide a comprehensive view of the brain, blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and serum biomarkers of Scz disease. Imaging studies have demonstrated that the volumes of the corpus callosum, thalamus, hippocampal formation, subiculum, parahippocampal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortices, and amygdala-hippocampal complex were reduced in patients diagnosed with Scz. It has been revealed that the levels of interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha were increased in patients with Scz. Decreased mRNA levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), nerve growth factor (NGF), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) genes have also been reported in Scz patients. Genes with known strong relationships with this disease include BDNF, catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), regulator of G-protein signaling 4 (RGS4), dystrobrevin-binding protein 1 (DTNBP1), neuregulin 1 (NRG1), Reelin (RELN), Selenium-binding protein 1 (SELENBP1), glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 (GAD 67), and disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1). The levels of dopamine, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), serotonin or 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptor 1A and B (5-HTR1A and 5-HTR1B), and 5-HT1B were significantly increased in Scz patients, while the levels of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 5-HT transporter (5-HTT), and 5-HT receptor 2A (5-HTR2A) were decreased. The increased levels of SELENBP1 and Glycogen synthase kinase 3 subunit alpha (GSK3alpha) genes in contrast with reduced levels of B-cell translocation gene 1 (BTG1), human leukocyte antigen DRB1 (HLA-DRB1), heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A3 (HNRPA3), and serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SFRS1) genes have also been reported. This review covers various dysregulation of neurotransmitters and also highlights the strengths and weaknesses of studies attempting to identify candidate biomarkers.
A growing body of behavioral and molecular genetics literature has indicated that the development of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may be attributed to both genetic and environmental factors. Family, twin, and adoption studies provide compelling evidence that genes play a strong role in mediating susceptibility to ADHD. Molecular genetic studies suggest that the genetic architecture of ADHD is complex, while the handful of genome-wide scans conducted thus far is not conclusive. In contrast, the many candidate gene studies of ADHD have produced substantial evidence implicating several genes in the etiology of the disorder. For the 8 genes for which the same variant has been studied in 3 or more case-control or family-based studies, 7 show statistically significant evidence of association with ADHD based on pooled odds ratios across studies: the dopamine D4 receptor gene (DRD4), the dopamine D5 receptor gene (DRD5), the dopamine transporter gene (DAT), the dopamine beta-hydroxylase gene (DBH), the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTT), the serotonin receptor 1B gene (HTR1B), and the synaptosomal-associated protein 25 gene (SNAP25). Recent pharmacogenetic studies have correlated treatment nonresponse with particular gene markers, while preclinical studies have increased our understanding of gene expression paradigms and potential analogs for human trials. This literature review discusses the relevance and implications of genetic associations with ADHD for clinical practice and future research.
Until recently, it has largely been assumed that G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) function as monomeric entities. However, over the past few years, we and others have documented that GPCRs can form dimers and oligomers, leading to a re-evaluation of the mechanisms thought to mediate GPCR function. Despite the growing number of investigations into dimerization, little is known about the structural basis of receptor-receptor interactions and the functional consequences of dimer formation. Here, we present a brief review of some insights we have gained into the dimerization of dopamine and serotonin receptors. We have demonstrated that agonist-regulated trafficking is identical for receptor monomers and dimers, however, agonist treatment appears to stabilise the receptor oligomers. An investigation of the structural assembly between receptors involved in dimerization showed that there are several sites of interaction including hydrophobic transmembrane domain interactions and intermolecular disulphide bonds. We have also examined receptor hetero-oligomerization and demonstrated the potential for novel functions as a result of these associations. Finally, as a result of these observations, we have been able to present evidence that GPCRs function as oligomers in the cell.
Remodeling of the microenvironment by tumor cells can activate pathways that favor cancer growth. Molecular delineation and targeting of such malignant-cell nonautonomous pathways may help overcome resistance to targeted therapies. Herein we leverage genetic mouse models, patient-derived xenografts, and patient samples to show that acute myeloid leukemia (AML) exploits peripheral serotonin signaling to remodel the endosteal niche to its advantage. AML progression requires the presence of serotonin receptor 1B (HTR1B) in osteoblasts and is driven by AML-secreted kynurenine, which acts as an oncometabolite and HTR1B ligand. AML cells utilize kynurenine to induce a proinflammatory state in osteoblasts that, through the acute-phase protein serum amyloid A (SAA), acts in a positive feedback loop on leukemia cells by increasing expression of IDO1-the rate-limiting enzyme for kynurenine synthesis-thereby enabling AML progression. This leukemia-osteoblast cross-talk, conferred by the kynurenine-HTR1B-SAA-IDO1 axis, could be exploited as a niche-focused therapeutic approach against AML, opening new avenues for cancer treatment. SIGNIFICANCE: AML remains recalcitrant to treatments due to the emergence of resistant clones. We show a leukemia-cell nonautonomous progression mechanism that involves activation of a kynurenine-HTR1B-SAA-IDO1 axis between AML cells and osteoblasts. Targeting the niche by interrupting this axis can be pharmacologically harnessed to hamper AML progression and overcome therapy resistance. This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 873.
