5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1F; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various alkaloids and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity.
Migraine affects over a billion individuals worldwide but its genetic underpinning remains largely unknown. Here, we performed a genome-wide association study of 102,084 migraine cases and 771,257 controls and identified 123 loci, of which 86 are previously unknown. These loci provide an opportunity to evaluate shared and distinct genetic components in the two main migraine subtypes: migraine with aura and migraine without aura. Stratification of the risk loci using 29,679 cases with subtype information indicated three risk variants that seem specific for migraine with aura (in HMOX2, CACNA1A and MPPED2), two that seem specific for migraine without aura (near SPINK2 and near FECH) and nine that increase susceptibility for migraine regardless of subtype. The new risk loci include genes encoding recent migraine-specific drug targets, namely calcitonin gene-related peptide (CALCA/CALCB) and serotonin 1F receptor (HTR1F). Overall, genomic annotations among migraine-associated variants were enriched in both vascular and central nervous system tissue/cell types, supporting unequivocally that neurovascular mechanisms underlie migraine pathophysiology.
Disordered eating contributes to weight gain, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the precise mechanisms underlying the development of different eating patterns and connecting them to specific metabolic phenotypes remain unclear. We aimed to identify genetic variants linked to eating behaviour and investigate its causal relationships with metabolic traits using Mendelian randomization (MR). We tested associations between 30 genetic variants and eating patterns in individuals with T2D from the Volga-Ural region and investigated causal relationships between variants associated with eating patterns and various metabolic and anthropometric traits using data from the Volga-Ural population and large international consortia. We detected associations between HTR1D and CDKAL1 and external eating; between HTR2A and emotional eating; between HTR2A, NPY2R, HTR1F, HTR3A, HTR2C, CXCR2, and T2D. Further analyses in a separate group revealed significant associations between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and the loci in CRP, ADCY3, GHRL, CDKAL1, BDNF, CHRM4, CHRM1, HTR3A, and AKT1 genes. MR results demonstrated an inverse causal relationship between external eating and glycated haemoglobin levels in the Volga-Ural sample. External eating influenced anthropometric traits such as body mass index, height, hip circumference, waist circumference, and weight in GWAS cohorts. Our findings suggest that eating patterns impact both anthropometric and metabolic traits.
The serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) signaling system is involved in a variety of physiological functions, including the control of cognition, reward, learning, memory, and vasoconstriction in vertebrates. Contrary to the extensive studies in the mammalian system, little is known about the molecular characteristics of the avian serotonin signaling network. In this study, we cloned and characterized the full-length cDNA of three serotonin receptor genes (HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F) in chicken pituitaries. Synteny analyses indicated that HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F were highly conserved across vertebrates. Cell-based luciferase reporter assays showed that the three chicken HTRs were functional, capable of binding their natural ligands (5-HT) or selective agonists (CP94253, BRL54443, and LY344864) and inhibiting intracellular cAMP production in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, activation of these receptors could stimulate the MAPK/ERK signaling cascade. Quantitative real-time PCR analyses revealed that HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F were primarily expressed in various brain regions and the pituitary. In cultured chicken pituitary cells, we found that LY344864 could significantly inhibit the secretion of PRL stimulated by vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) or forskolin, revealing that HTR1F might be involved in the release of prolactin in chicken. Our findings provide insights into the molecular mechanism and facilitate a better understanding of the serotonergic modulation via HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F in avian species.
Peripheral inflammation is always accompanied by a noxious sensation, either pain or itch, providing a protective warning for the occurrence of pathological changes; however, the mechanisms determining whether pain, itch, or both will be elicited under certain inflammatory statuses are still far from clear. Complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) contains heat killed and dried Mycobacterium tuberculosis widely used to induce inflammatory pain models, but how CFA treatment affects itch sensation and the possible mechanisms are still unclear. In this study, using itch behavior testing and calcium imaging, we showed that both the behaviors and calcium responses associated with Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid 1 (TRPV1)-mediated histamine-dependent itch and Transient Receptor Potential Ankyrin 1 (TRPA1)-mediated histamine-independent itch were significantly suppressed by CFA treatment. Furthermore, to explore the possible cellular mechanisms, high-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing and real-time PCR were used to detect CFA-induced changes of itch-related genes in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Our results revealed that although both nociceptive Trpv1+ and Trpa1+ DRG neurons were increased after CFA treatment, most known pruriceptors, including Hrh1+, Mrgpra3+, Mrgprd+, Htr3a+, Htr1f+, IL31ra+, Osmr+, and Lpar3+ DRG neurons, were significantly decreased, which may explain that CFA treatment caused itch suppression. This study indicated that itch sensation was affected after CFA treatment, although negatively, and comprehensive but not specific suppression of different pruriceptors was observed after CFA treatment, suggesting that a unified adaptive change of increased pain and decreased itch will occur simultaneously under CFA-induced inflammatory conditions.
In the present study, we report the chromosomal localization of the human 5-HT1F receptor gene (HTR1F) by the analysis of somatic cell hybrids. Based upon the HTR1F cDNA sequence, a primer set that reacted with human genomic DNA but not mouse or hamster genomic DNA was derived from the relatively nonconserved 5'-untranslated and coding region. Using monochromosomal hybrid cell lines of the NIGMS Mapping Panel 2 we localized the HTR1F to human chromosome 3. To confirm the localization on chromosome 3 and to further sublocalize the HTR1F gene, a set of human cell hybrids regionally separating chromosome 3 into 7 regions was similarly analysed. Analysis of this regional panel showed that the HTR1F gene was located proximal to the 3p14.1 breakpoint in hybrid APH14 and distal to the breakpoint in 3p13 in hybrid APH13. This localizes the HTR1F gene to human chromosome 3p13-p14.1.
There is accumulating evidence that points to a role of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) in the pathophysiology of asthma. Therefore, we analyzed the expression of serotoninergic receptors (5-HTR), its linkage to intracellular calcium homeostasis, and its influence on the production and secretion of IL-6, prostaglandin E(2), the CCL-Chemokine CCL5/Rantes, and the CXC-chemokines CXCL8/IL-8, CXCL9/MIG, CXCL10/IP-10, and CXCL11/I-TAC in primary alveolar epithelial cells type II and the human lung cell lines A549 and BEAS-2B. Employing a PCR approach we were able to demonstrate mRNA expression of several 5-HTR, such as the heptahelical receptors 5-HTR1A, 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR1E, 5-HTR1F, 5-HTR2A, 5-HTR4, 5-HTR6, and 5-HTR7, as well as the ligand-gated ion channel 5-HTR3 in alveolar epithelial cells type II (AEC-II), A549, and BEAS-2B cells. To verify functional expression of 5-HTR subtypes, Ca(2+)-transients were analyzed. This enabled us to show that 5-HT induced an increase in intracellular calcium. Further experiments with isotype-selective receptor agonists allowed us to demonstrate that 5-HT induced calcium transients via activation of 5-HTR1, 5-HTR2, and 5-HTR3 in A549 and BEAS-2B cells. Moreover, we revealed that stimulation of 5-HTR1 and 5-HTR2 induced Ca(2+) mobilization from intracellular stores, whereas activation of 5-HTR3 induced Ca(2+) influx from the extracellular space. Functional studies indicated that activation of 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR1E/F, 5-HTR2, 5-HTR3, 5-HTR4, and 5-HTR7 regulated the release of the cytokine IL-6 and the CXC-chemokine CXCL8/IL-8. Our study shows that 5-HT stimulates different signaling pathways and regulates cytokine release in airway epithelial cells. In summary, our data implicate a pathophysiologic role of 5-HT in the asthmatic inflammatory responses in human airway epithelial cells.
BACKGROUND: The Generation Scotland: Scottish Family Health Study (GS:SFHS) is a family-based population cohort with DNA, biological samples, socio-demographic, psychological and clinical data from approximately 24,000 adult volunteers across Scotland. Although data collection was cross-sectional, GS:SFHS became a prospective cohort due to of the ability to link to routine Electronic Health Record (EHR) data. Over 20,000 participants were selected for genotyping using a large genome-wide array. METHODS: GS:SFHS was analysed using genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to test the effects of a large spectrum of variants, imputed using the Haplotype Research Consortium (HRC) dataset, on medically relevant traits measured directly or obtained from EHRs. The HRC dataset is the largest available haplotype reference panel for imputation of variants in populations of European ancestry and allows investigation of variants with low minor allele frequencies within the entire GS:SFHS genotyped cohort. RESULTS: Genome-wide associations were run on 20,032 individuals using both genotyped and HRC imputed data. We present results for a range of well-studied quantitative traits obtained from clinic visits and for serum urate measures obtained from data linkage to EHRs collected by the Scottish National Health Service. Results replicated known associations and additionally reveal novel findings, mainly with rare variants, validating the use of the HRC imputation panel. For example, we identified two new associations with fasting glucose at variants near to Y_RNA and WDR4 and four new associations with heart rate at SNPs within CSMD1 and ASPH, upstream of HTR1F and between PROKR2 and GPCPD1. All were driven by rare variants (minor allele frequencies in the range of 0.08-1%). Proof of principle for use of EHRs was verification of the highly significant association of urate levels with the well-established urate transporter SLC2A9. CONCLUSIONS: GS:SFHS provides genetic data on over 20,000 participants alongside a range of phenotypes as well as linkage to National Health Service laboratory and clinical records. We have shown that the combination of deeper genotype imputation and extended phenotype availability make GS:SFHS an attractive resource to carry out association studies to gain insight into the genetic architecture of complex traits.
BACKGROUND: Runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) is one of the most frequently mutated genes in most of hematological malignancies, especially in acute myeloid leukemia. In the present study, we aimed to identify the key genes and microRNAs based on acute myeloid leukemia with RUNX1 mutation. The newly finding targeted genes and microRNA associated with RUNX1 may benefit to the clinical treatment in acute myeloid leukemia. MATERIAL/METHODS: The gene and miRNA expression data sets relating to RUNX1 mutation and wild-type adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas database. Differentially expressed miRNAs and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by edgeR of R platform. Gene ontology and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analyses were performed by Metascape and Gene set enrichment analysis. The protein-protein interaction network and miRNA-mRNA regulatory network were performed by Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes database and Cytoscape software. RESULTS: A total of 27 differentially expressed miRNAs (25 upregulated and 2 downregulated) and 561 DEGs (429 upregulated and 132 downregulated) were identified. Five miRNAs (miR-151b, miR-151a-5p, let-7a-2-3p, miR-363-3p, miR-20b-5p) had prognostic significance in AML. The gene ontology analysis showed that upregulated DEGs suggested significant enrichment in MHC class II protein complex, extracellular structure organization, blood vessel development, cell morphogenesis involved in differentiation, embryonic morphogenesis, regulation of cell adhesion, and so on. Similarly, the downregulated DEGs were mainly enriched in secretory granule lumen, extracellular structure organization. In the gene set enrichment analysis of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways, the RUNX1 mutation was associated with adherent junction, WNT signaling pathway, JAK-STAT signaling pathway, pathways in cancer, cell adhesion molecules CAMs, MAPK signaling pathway. Eleven genes (PPBP, APP, CCR5, HLA-DRB1, GNAI1, APLNR, P2RY14, C3AR1, HTR1F, CXCL12, GNG11) were simultaneously identified by hub gene analysis and module analysis. MicroRNA-363-3p may promote the development of RUNX1 mutation AML, targeting SPRYD4 and FNDC3B. In addition, the RUNX1 mutation rates in patient were obviously correlated with age, white blood cell, FAB type, risk(cyto), and risk(molecular) (P < .05). CONCLUSION: Our findings have indicated that multiple genes and microRNAs may play a crucial role in RUNX1 mutation AML. MicroRNA-363-3p may promote the development of RUNX1 mutation AML by targeting SPRYD4 and FNDC3B.
As part of the Genetic Epidemiology Network of Arteriopathy, hypertensive sibships were collected and smoking behavior recorded. Using an affected sibpair design and genome-wide microsatellite data markers ( approximately 10 cM coverage), we identified 214 non-Hispanic White sibships (502 sibpairs) from Rochester, Minnesota (M (age) [SD] = 55.68 years [10.56]) and 206 Black sibships (376 sibpairs) from Jackson, Mississippi (M (age) = 57.97 [8.94]), who had smoked for at least 3 years, and performed nonparametric linkage analysis using GENEHUNTER. We found evidence of linkage on chromosome 3 in both Whites (LOD = 1.76@109 cM) and Blacks (LOD = 2.03@122 cM). Each of these peaks had a secondary smaller peak at 140-147 cM that was statistically suggestive only in the Black sample (LOD = 1.4). The peak for the combined samples was suggestive of strong linkage (LOD = 3.24@124 cM). Additional suggestive peaks (LOD>1.3) were found in the White (chromosomes 8 [26 cM] and 19 [36 cM]) and Black sibships (chromosome 10 [153 cM]) but did not overlap with corresponding regions in the other ethnic group. This is the first study to identify a chromosomal region that has replicate evidence of linkage to smoking in two independent samples of similar size differing both geographically and ethnically. The gene for serotonin receptor 1F (HTR1F) is located in the region of the chromosome 3 linkage signal, representing at least one potential candidate gene. Fine mapping may well provide useful new information about genetic factors underlying nicotine dependence.
BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the correlation of BRCA2 gene mutation and prognosis as well as variant genes in patients with invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. It predicted and explored the possible mechanism and clinical value of BRCA2 in the occurrence and development of tumors. METHODS: Data sets of patients with bladder cancer were collected from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Also the gene expression profile data and clinical information of the BRCA2 mutation group and non-BRCA2 mutation group were downloaded. RESULTS: The prognosis of the BRCA2 mutation group was better than that of the non-mutant group. Among the down-regulated genes, the following genes showed significant differences between the two groups: CCL22, CYP2B6, CYP2E1, CYP4F2, HTR1E, HTR1F, KLRC1, NAPSA, SELL, SFTPA1, SFTPA2, SFTPB, SFTPC and STRA8, while the following genes among the up-regulated genes showed significant differences between the two groups: ELAVL3, NOTUM, TRH and VIP. Meanwhile, the following gene sets were highly enriched in BRCA2: cell cycle, DNA replication, homologous recombination, oocyte meiosis, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, base excision repair, progestin mediated oocyte maturation, basal transcription factor, biosynthesis of N polysaccharide, mismatch repair, sliceosome, purine metabolism as well as P53 and neurotrophic factor signaling pathway, etc.CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that the BRCA2 gene mutation is a good prognostic factor and can be used as a gene to predict the prognosis in the bladder cancer patients.
We have used RFLP analysis on DNA from a panel of interspecific (C57BL/6J x Mus spretus) F1 x M. spretus backcross offspring to assign the genes encoding 10 neuron-specific mRNAs and 2 loci corresponding to cyclophilin 2-related sequences to the mouse chromosomal map. The Pss1 locus encoding the forebrain-enriched protein kinase C substrate RC3, a component of dendritic spines, mapped to proximal Chr 9. The Camkl locus encoding the calmodulin-binding protein kinase-like vesicle protein 1G5 mapped to distal Chr 9. The Gng7 locus encoding the gamma 7 G-protein subunit, highly enriched in the striatum and presumptively coupled to dopamine receptors, mapped to mid-Chr 10. The Htr1f, Htr5a, Htr5b, and Htr7loci, encoding four serotonin receptors, mapped to Chr 16, 5, 1, and 19, respectively. The Peplb locus, encoding a CD26 ectopeptidase-like neuronal membrane protein activated by kainate and long-term potentiation, mapped to Chr 5. The D2Sut1e and Cpu3 loci, encoding neural proteins of unknown functions, mapped to Chrs 2 and 9, respectively. Two cyclophilin 2-related loci, Cphn2-r1 and Cphn2-r2, mapped to different regions of Chr 9. Comparison of these 12 newly mapped loci with the existing mouse map and known regions of syntenic homology with the human map, along with the known features and expression profiles of the products of these genes, suggests a few candidates for mouse mutations and human neurological and immunological deficits, including the Tourette syndrome and Bloom syndrome genes.
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)) signaling systems play a pivotal role in the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, but the molecular nature of interactions between these two systems remain largely unidentified. We used computational and experimental approaches to evaluate if DNA-protein interactions would provide a molecular link for the interaction between 5-HT and GR systems. Bioinformatic analysis identified nine binding sites in various serotonin receptors (HTR1D, HTR1F, HTR2A, HTR3A, and HTR6) for transcription factors in the GR family. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using HeLa nuclear extract and purified full-length GR verified most of the predicted DNA-protein interactions. Six binding sites verified by EMSA results were evolutionarily conserved in multiple species. Multiple lines of evidence from computational and experimental analyses in this study support the potential of a molecular link between 5-HT and GR signaling systems. This finding provides new approaches to studies directed at mechanisms for glucocorticoid negative feedback regulation of the HPA axis involving 5-HT and interventional studies directed to neuropsychiatric diseases.
We report here the localisation of BAIAP1 (13q24), HTR1F (13q45), PTPRG (13q23) and UBE1C (13q24) by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), and BAIAP1 (Swr2114; 21 cR; LOD = 11.03), GATA2 (Sw2448; 37 cR; LOD = 8.26), IL5RA (Swr2114; 64 cR; LOD = 3.85), LMCD1 (Sw2450; 61 cR; LOD = 4.73), MME (CP; 50 cR; LOD = 7.75), RYK (Swc22; 12 cR; LOD = 18.62) and SGU003 (Sw1876; 6 cR; LOD = 16.99) by radiation hybrid (RH) mapping to porcine chromosome 13 (SSC13). The mapping of these 10 different loci (all mapped to human chromosome 3; HSA3) not only confirms the extended conservation of synteny between HSA3 and SSC13, but also defines more precisely the regions with conserved linkage. The syntenic region of the centromeric part of SSC13 was determined by isolating porcine bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones (842D4 and 1031H1) using primers amplifying porcine microsatellite markers S0219 and S0076 (mapped to this region). Sequence comparison of the BAC end sequences with the human genome sequence showed that the centromeric part of SSC13 is homologous with HSA3p24.
BACKGROUND: Serotonin (5-HT) is an important neurotransmitter with wide-ranging functions. Its disfunction in the central nervous system seems to play an important role in many psychiatric disorders and suicidal behavior. The objective of this study was to examine the association between polymorphisms in different serotonin receptor genes (HTR): HTR1A (polymorphism -1019C>G), HTR1B (polymorphisms 861G>C and -161A>T), HTR1F (polymorphism -78C>T) and HTR2A (polymorphism -1420C>T), and serotonin transporter gene (5-HTT) (polymorphism LPR in promoter and VNTR in the second intron), and completed alcohol-related suicide, as well as between alcohol-dependent suicide victims. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The study subjects were 373 Slovenian suicide victims (mean age +/- SD: 48.8 +/- 17.7 years) autopsied in the years 2002 through 2005. During autopsy venous blood was drawn, and afterwards DNA extraction and alcoholimetric analysis were performed. Relatives of 79 suicide victims were interviewed using a semi-structured questionnaire designed according to Slovenian cultural and economic conditions. They provided information about the alcohol abuse of the suicide victims. Amongst the suicide victims were 25 alcohol misusers and 54 non-misusers. RESULTS: Association between polymorphisms in the selected serotonin receptor genes, transporter gene and completed alcohol-related suicide, as well as between alcohol-dependent suicide victims was not established. CONCLUSIONS: Present results suggest that selected polymorphisms of the 5-HT receptor genes and transporter gene are not involved in genetic susceptibility to completed suicide under acute influence of alcohol or among alcohol-dependent individuals, but further studies in a larger sample are needed.
Comparative biochemical and histopathological data suggest that a deficiency in the glycogen branching enzyme (GBE) is responsible for a fatal neonatal disease in Quarter Horse foals that closely resembles human glycogen storage disease type IV (GSD IV). Identification of DNA markers closely linked to the equine GBE1 gene would assist us in determining whether a mutation in this gene leads to the GSD IV-like condition. FISH using BAC clones as probes assigned the equine GBE1 gene to a marker deficient region of ECA26q12-->q13. Four other genes, ROBO2, ROBO1, POU1F1, and HTR1F, that flank GBE1 within a 10-Mb segment of HSA3p12-->p11, were tightly linked to equine GBE1 when analyzed on the Texas A&M University 5000 rad equine radiation hybrid panel, while the GLB1, MITF, RYBP, and PROS1 genes that flank this 10-Mb interval were not linked with markers in the GBE1 group. A polymorphic microsatellite (GBEms1) in a GBE1 BAC clone was then identified and genetically mapped to ECA26 on the Animal Health Trust full-sibling equine reference family. All Quarter Horse foals affected with GSD IV were homozygous for an allele of GBEms1, as well as an allele of the most closely linked microsatellite marker, while a control horse population showed significant allelic variation with these markers. This data provides strong molecular genetic support for the candidacy of the GBE1 locus in equine GSD IV.
Serotoninergic pathways are involved in economically important bovine gastrointestinal (GI) motility disorders such as displaced abomasum and cecal dilatation/dislocation. The existing research tools to investigate the role of serotoninergic pathways in such disorders in ruminants comprise functional pharmacological methods, e.g., in vitro contractility studies in tissue baths, and electromyographical recordings in vivo. However, no tools for quantification of bovine serotonin receptor [5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HTR)] expression were available so far. This study aimed to develop real-time RT-PCR assays for quantitative mRNA analysis of bovine 5-HTR subtypes. Because the bovine 5-HTR coding sequences (CDSs) were completely unknown, multiple species (human, mouse, and rat) alignment of complete CDS was used for primer design in highly homologous regions. LightCycler real-time RT-PCR assays (partial CDS) for the following bovine 5-HTR subtypes were developed and validated: 5-HTR1A, 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR1D, 5-HTR1F, 5-HTR2A, 5-HTR2B, 5-HTR2C, and 5-HTR4. Intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation (CV) for the eight established assays were small, ranging from 0.49% to 2.46%. As a first physiological application, 5-HTR mRNA expression levels were measured in brain, abomasum, and intestine of 10 healthy, lactating dairy cows. The 5-HTR expression was quantified by normalization to the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-phosphate-dehydrogenase (GAPDH). The 5-HTR subtype expression levels ranged from 0.001% (5-HTR2C in intestine) to 1% 5-HTR/GAPDH (5-HTR1B and 5-HTR4 in intestine). There were high variations of 5-HTR subtype mRNA expression within tissues across receptor subtypes and within receptor subtypes across tissues. In conclusion, accurate real-time RT-PCR assays for quantitative analysis of bovine 5-HTR subtype gene expression were developed and validated.
Suicide is an important public health problem, accounting for a significant proportion of total mortality among young people, particularly males. There is growing and consistent evidence suggesting that genetic factors play an important role in the predisposition to suicide. Based on several lines of evidence supporting a reduced serotonergic neurotransmission in subjects who committed suicide, we investigated variation at genes that code for serotonin receptor 1B (5-HTR1B), 1Dalpha (5-HTR1Dalpha), 1E (5-HTR1E), 1F (5-HTR1F), 2C (5-HTR2C), 5A (5-HTR5A), and 6 (5-HTR6) in a total sample of 106 suicide completers and 120 normal controls. No differences were observed in allelic or genotypic distributions between groups for any of the loci investigated. Moreover, further analysis according to suicide method or psychopathology also failed to reveal differences between groups. Our results do not support a substantial role of these serotonergic receptors in suicide completion.
The genetic analysis of nontumorigenic radiation hybrids generated by transfer of chromosome 3 fragments into the tumorigenic OV-90 ovarian cancer cell line identified the 3p12.3-pcen region as a candidate tumor suppressor gene (TSG) locus. In the present study, polymorphic microsatellite repeat analysis of the hybrids further defined the 3p12.3-pcen interval to a 16.1 Mb common region containing 12 known or hypothetical genes: 3ptel-ROBO2-ROBO1-GBE1-CADM2-VGLL3-CHMP2B-POU1F1-HTR1F-CGGBP1-ZNF654-C3orf38-EPHA3-3pcen. Seven of these genes, ROBO1, GBE1, VGLL3, CHMP2B, CGGBP1, ZNF654, and C3orf38, exhibited gene expression in the hybrids, placing them as top TSG candidates for further analysis. The expression of all but one (VGLL3) of these genes was also detected in the parental OV-90 cell line. Mutations were not identified in a comparative sequence analysis of the predicted protein coding regions of these candidates in OV-90 and donor normal chromosome 3 contig. However, the nondeleterious sequence variants identified in the transcribed regions distinguished parent of origin alleles for ROBO1, VGLL3, CHMP2B, and CGGBP1 and cDNA sequencing of the hybrids revealed biallelic expression of these genes. Interestingly, underexpression of VGLL3 and ZNF654 were observed in malignant ovarian tumor samples as compared with primary cultures of normal ovarian surface epithelial cells or benign ovarian tumors, and this occurred regardless of allelic content of 3p12.3-pcen. The results taken together suggest that dysregulation of VGLL3 and/or ZNF654 expression may have affected pathways important in ovarian tumorigenesis which was offset by the transfer of chromosome 3 fragments in OV-90, a cell line hemizygous for 3p.
