5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1E; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various alkaloids and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity.
Rationale: Psychological stress has been linked to cancer development and resistance to therapy by many epidemiological and clinical studies. Stress-induced immunosuppressive microenvironment by stress hormones, in particular glucocorticoids, has been extensively studied. However, the impacts of other stress-related neurotransmitters, such as serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT), on cancer development just start to be revealed. Here, we aimed to identify novel neurotransmitters involved in stress-induced growth and dissemination of ovarian cancer (OC) and reveal the major underlying signaling pathway and the therapeutic significance. Methods: Through a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screen in the murine orthotopic model of ovarian carcinoma (OC), we identified candidate genes regulating the peritoneal dissemination of OC. Among them, we picked out HTR1E, one member of 5-HT receptor family specifically expressed in the ovary and endometrium in addition to brain. The correlation of HTR1E expression with OC progression was analyzed in OC patient specimen by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), western blot, and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Gain-of-function and loss-of-function analyses were performed to explore the functions of 5-HT/HTR1E signaling in OC growth and dissemination in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we investigated the therapeutic values of HTR1E specific agonist and small molecular inhibitors against HTR1E downstream factor SRC in a stressed murine OC xenograft model. Results: In OC patients, the HTR1E expression is dramatically decreased in peritoneal disseminated OC cells, which correlates with poor clinical outcome. Silence of HTR1E in OC cells greatly promotes cell proliferation and epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) by the activation of SRC-mediated downstream signaling pathways. Furthermore, chronic stress results in significantly decreased serotonin in the ovary and the enhanced OC growth and peritoneal dissemination in mice, which can be strongly inhibited by specific HTR1E agonist or the SRC inhibitor. Conclusions: We discovered the essential role of serotonin/HTR1E signaling in preventing the chronic psychological stress-promoted progression of OC, suggesting the potential therapeutic value of the HTR1E specific agonist and the SRC inhibitor for OC patients who are suffering from psychological stress.
5-Hydroxytryptamine receptor 1E (5-HTR1E) is reported to activate cyclic AMP (cAMP) and extracellular-signal related kinases (ERK) pathways via its ligands and binding partners, but the detailed mechanism underlying the serotonin-induced 5-HTR1E signaling is still not known. In the present study, we determined the cellular regulators of ERK and cAMP signaling pathways in response to serotonin-induced 5-HTR1E activation in 5-HTR1E overexpressing HEK293 cells. We found that Pertussis Toxin (PTX) treatment completely reversed the effect of serotonin-5-HTR1E mediated signaling on cAMP and ERK pathways, confirming the involvement of a Galphai-linked cascade. We also observed that Gbetagamma and Gq were not associated with 5-HTR1E activation, while blocking protein kinase A (PKA) inhibited ERK signaling only, and had no effect on cAMP. Additionally, serotonin-stimulated ERK1/2 phosphorylation was similar in 5-HTR1E overexpressing, beta-arrestin-deficient HEK293 cells and is solely dependent on G protein signaling. siRNA mediated gene knockdown studies in SH-SY5Y cells revealed that the inhibition of 5-HTR1E reduced the expression of cMyc, Cyclin D1, Cyclin E and BCL2 genes which are related to cell cycle regulation and survival. MTT assays showed that 5-HTR1E knockdown in SHSY-5Y and U118 cells inhibited cell survival significantly. In addition to the signaling mechanism, we also performed RNA-seq analysis in 5-HTR1E overexpressing HEK293 cells and found that 5-HTR1E can regulate the expression of Receptor activity modifying protein 1 (RAMP1), Nuclear receptor 1 (NR4A1) and other Cyclin genes. These findings indicate that serotonin interaction with 5-HTR1E receptor simultaneously activates cAMP and ERK pathway in HEK293 cells and its expression is important for cell survival.
The serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) signaling system is involved in a variety of physiological functions, including the control of cognition, reward, learning, memory, and vasoconstriction in vertebrates. Contrary to the extensive studies in the mammalian system, little is known about the molecular characteristics of the avian serotonin signaling network. In this study, we cloned and characterized the full-length cDNA of three serotonin receptor genes (HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F) in chicken pituitaries. Synteny analyses indicated that HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F were highly conserved across vertebrates. Cell-based luciferase reporter assays showed that the three chicken HTRs were functional, capable of binding their natural ligands (5-HT) or selective agonists (CP94253, BRL54443, and LY344864) and inhibiting intracellular cAMP production in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, activation of these receptors could stimulate the MAPK/ERK signaling cascade. Quantitative real-time PCR analyses revealed that HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F were primarily expressed in various brain regions and the pituitary. In cultured chicken pituitary cells, we found that LY344864 could significantly inhibit the secretion of PRL stimulated by vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) or forskolin, revealing that HTR1F might be involved in the release of prolactin in chicken. Our findings provide insights into the molecular mechanism and facilitate a better understanding of the serotonergic modulation via HTR1B, HTR1E and HTR1F in avian species.
Multiple musculoskeletal traits assessed by various methods at different skeletal sites serve as surrogates for osteoporosis risk. However, it is a challenge to select the most relevant phenotypes for genetic study of fractures. Principal component analyses (PCA) were conducted in participants of the Framingham Osteoporosis Study on 17 measures including bond mineral density (BMD) (hip and spine), heel ultrasound, leg lean mass (LLM), and hip geometric indices, adjusting for covariates (age, height, body mass index [BMI]), in a combined sample of 1180 men and 1758 women, as well as in each sex. Four principal components (PCs) jointly explained ~69% of the total variability of musculoskeletal traits. PC1, explaining ~33% of the total variance, was referred to as the component of "Bone strength," because it included the hip and spine BMD as well as several hip cross-sectional properties. PC2 (20.5% variance) was labeled as "Femoral cross-sectional geometry;" PC3 (~8% variance) captured only ultrasound measures; PC4, explaining ~7% variance, was correlated with LLM and hip geometry. We then evaluated ~2.5 mil SNPs for association with PCs 1, 2, and 4. There were genome-wide significant associations (p < 5 x 10(-)(8)) between PC2 and HTR1E (that codes for one of the serotonin receptors) and PC4 with COL4A2 in women. In the sexes-combined sample, AKAP6 was associated with PC2 (p = 1.40 x 10(-)(7)). A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in HTR1E was also associated with the risk of nonvertebral fractures in women (p = 0.005). Functions of top associated genes were enriched for the skeletal and muscular system development (p < 0.05). In conclusion, multivariate combination provides genetic associations not identified in the analysis of primary phenotypes. Genome-wide screening for the linear combinations of multiple osteoporosis-related phenotypes suggests that there are variants with potentially pleiotropic effects in established and novel pathways to be followed up to provide further evidence of their functions.
Despite marked morbidity and mortality associated with suicidal behavior, accurate identification of individuals at risk remains elusive. The goal of this study is to identify a model based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that discriminates between suicide attempters and non-attempters using data mining strategies. We examined functional SNPs (n = 840) of 312 brain function and development genes using data mining techniques. Two hundred seventy-seven male psychiatric patients aged 18 years or older were recruited at a University hospital psychiatric emergency room or psychiatric short stay unit. The main outcome measure was history of suicide attempts. Three SNPs of three genes (rs10944288, HTR1E; hCV8953491, GABRP; and rs707216, ACTN2) correctly classified 67% of male suicide attempters and non-attempters (0.50 sensitivity, 0.82 specificity, positive likelihood ratio = 2.80, negative likelihood ratio = 1.64). The OR for the combined three SNPs was 4.60 (95% CI: 1.31-16.10). The model's accuracy suggests that in the future similar methodologies may generate simple genetic tests with diagnostic utility in identification of suicide attempters. This strategy may uncover new pathophysiological pathways regarding the neurobiology of suicidal acts.
Protecting neurons from death during oxidative and neuroexcitotoxic stress is key for preventing cognitive dysfunction. We uncovered a novel neuroprotective mechanism involving interaction between neurotrophic factor-alpha1 (NF-alpha1/carboxypeptidase E, CPE) and human 5-HTR1E, a G protein-coupled serotonin receptor with no previously known neurological function. Co-immunoprecipitation and pull-down assays confirmed interaction between NFalpha1/CPE and 5-HTR1E and (125)I NF-alpha1/CPE-binding studies demonstrated saturable, high-affinity binding to 5-HTR1E in stably transfected HEK293 cells (Kd = 13.82 nM). Treatment of 5-HTR1E stable cells with NF-alpha1/CPE increased pERK 1/2 and pCREB levels which prevented a decrease in pro-survival protein, BCL2, during H(2)O(2)-induced oxidative stress. Cell survival assay in beta-arrestin Knockout HEK293 cells showed that the NF-alpha1/CPE-5-HTR1E-mediated protection against oxidative stress was beta-arrestin-dependent. Molecular dynamics studies revealed that NF-alpha1/CPE interacts with 5-HTR1E via 3 salt bridges, stabilized by several hydrogen bonds, independent of the serotonin pocket. Furthermore, after phosphorylating the C-terminal tail and intracellular loop 3 (ICL3) of NF-alpha1/CPE-5-HTR1E, it recruited beta-arrestin1 by forming numerous salt bridges and hydrogen bonds to ICL2 and ICL3, leading to activation of beta-arrestin1. Immunofluorescence studies showed 5-HTR1E and NF-alpha1/CPE are highly expressed and co-localized on cell surface of human hippocampal neurons. Importantly, knock-down of 5-HTR1E in human primary neurons diminished the NF-alpha1/CPE-mediated protection of these neurons against oxidative stress and glutamate neurotoxicity-induced cell death. Thus, NF-alpha1/CPE uniquely interacts with serotonin receptor 5-HTR1E to activate the beta-arrestin/ERK/CREB/BCL2 pathway to mediate stress-induced neuroprotection.
Adolescence is a period of profound neurophysiological, behavioral, cognitive and psychological changes, but not much is known about the underlying molecular neural mechanisms. The aim of this study was to systematically analyze expression levels of the genes forming serotonergic and dopaminergic synapses during adolescence. We analyzed the mRNA expression profiles of genes that code for all components of serotonergic and dopaminergic synapses, in 16 brain areas from human and non-human primates from public domain databases, to detect genes whose expression changes during adolescence. Two serotonin receptors, HTR1E and HTR1B had expression levels that exhibit a sharp transition in the prefrontal cortex in adolescence, but we found no similar transition in the dopaminergic system. A similar but smoother rise in expression levels is observed in HTR4 and HTR5A, and in HTR1E and HTR1B in three other expression datasets published. An earlier rise is observed in HTR1A, and a smooth and significant rise with age is observed in the expression of HTR1E in microarray measurements in macaque monkeys. The expression of HTR1E and HTR1B is correlated across subjects within each age group, suggesting that they are controlled by common mechanisms. These results point to HTR1E and HTR1B as major candidate genes involved in adolescence maturation processes, and to their operation through common control mechanisms. The maturation profiles may also involve several other 5-HT receptors, including the genes HTR5A, HTR4 and HTR1A.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common mental disorders in childhood, with a high heritability about 60% to 90%. Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter. Numerous studies have reported the association between the serotonin receptor family (5-HTR) gene polymorphisms and ADHD, but the results are still controversial. In this study, we conducted a meta-analysis of the association between 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR2A, and 5-HTR2C genetic variants and ADHD. The results showed that the 861G allele of 5-HTR1B SNP rs6296 could significantly increase the risk of ADHD (C)R=1.09, 95% CI: 1.01-1.18); the 5-HTR2C gene rs518147 (OR=1.69, 95% CI: 1.38-2.07) and rs3813929 (OR = 1.57, 95% CI: 1.25-1.97) were all associated with the risk of ADHD. In addition, we also carried on a casecontrol study to explore the relevance between potential candidate genes 5-HTR1A, 5-HTR1E, 5-HTR3A and ADHD. The results indicated that 5-HTR1A rs6295 genotype (CC+CG vs. GG OR=2.00, 95% CI: 1.23-3.27) and allele (OR=1.77, 95% CI: 1.16-2.72) models were statistically significantly different between case group and control group. This study is the first comprehensive exploration and summary of the association between serotonin receptor family genetic variations and ADHD, and it also provides more evidence for the etiology of ADHD.
Epilepsy is most common in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). However, in addition to the challenging treatment, the pathogenesis of epilepsy is still controversial. To determine the transcriptome characteristics of perituberal tissue (PT) and clarify its role in the pathogenesis of epilepsy, GSE16969 was downloaded from the GEO database for further study by comprehensive bioinformatics analysis. Identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), functional enrichment analysis, construction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, and selection of Hub genes were performed using R language, Metascape, STRING, and Cytoscape, respectively. Comparing with cortical tuber (CT), 220 DEGs, including 95 upregulated and 125 downregulated genes, were identified in PT and mainly enriched in collagen-containing extracellular matrix and positive regulation of receptor-mediated endocytosis, as well as the pathways of ECM-receptor interaction and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. As for normal cortex (NC), 1549 DEGs, including 30 upregulated and 1519 downregulated genes, were identified and mainly enriched in presynapse, dendrite and axon, and also the pathways of dopaminergic synapse and oxytocin signaling pathway. In the PPI network, 4 hub modules were found between PT and CT, and top 5 hub modules were selected between PT and NC. C3, APLNR, ANXA2, CD44, CLU, CP, MCHR2, HTR1E, CTSG, APP, and GNG2 were identified as Hub genes, of which, C3, CD44, ANXA2, HTR1E, and APP were identified as Hub-BottleNeck genes. In conclusion, PT has the unique characteristics different from CT and NC in transcriptome and makes us further understand its importance in the TSC-associated epilepsy.
BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate the correlation of BRCA2 gene mutation and prognosis as well as variant genes in patients with invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. It predicted and explored the possible mechanism and clinical value of BRCA2 in the occurrence and development of tumors. METHODS: Data sets of patients with bladder cancer were collected from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Also the gene expression profile data and clinical information of the BRCA2 mutation group and non-BRCA2 mutation group were downloaded. RESULTS: The prognosis of the BRCA2 mutation group was better than that of the non-mutant group. Among the down-regulated genes, the following genes showed significant differences between the two groups: CCL22, CYP2B6, CYP2E1, CYP4F2, HTR1E, HTR1F, KLRC1, NAPSA, SELL, SFTPA1, SFTPA2, SFTPB, SFTPC and STRA8, while the following genes among the up-regulated genes showed significant differences between the two groups: ELAVL3, NOTUM, TRH and VIP. Meanwhile, the following gene sets were highly enriched in BRCA2: cell cycle, DNA replication, homologous recombination, oocyte meiosis, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, base excision repair, progestin mediated oocyte maturation, basal transcription factor, biosynthesis of N polysaccharide, mismatch repair, sliceosome, purine metabolism as well as P53 and neurotrophic factor signaling pathway, etc.CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that the BRCA2 gene mutation is a good prognostic factor and can be used as a gene to predict the prognosis in the bladder cancer patients.
There is accumulating evidence that points to a role of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) in the pathophysiology of asthma. Therefore, we analyzed the expression of serotoninergic receptors (5-HTR), its linkage to intracellular calcium homeostasis, and its influence on the production and secretion of IL-6, prostaglandin E(2), the CCL-Chemokine CCL5/Rantes, and the CXC-chemokines CXCL8/IL-8, CXCL9/MIG, CXCL10/IP-10, and CXCL11/I-TAC in primary alveolar epithelial cells type II and the human lung cell lines A549 and BEAS-2B. Employing a PCR approach we were able to demonstrate mRNA expression of several 5-HTR, such as the heptahelical receptors 5-HTR1A, 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR1E, 5-HTR1F, 5-HTR2A, 5-HTR4, 5-HTR6, and 5-HTR7, as well as the ligand-gated ion channel 5-HTR3 in alveolar epithelial cells type II (AEC-II), A549, and BEAS-2B cells. To verify functional expression of 5-HTR subtypes, Ca(2+)-transients were analyzed. This enabled us to show that 5-HT induced an increase in intracellular calcium. Further experiments with isotype-selective receptor agonists allowed us to demonstrate that 5-HT induced calcium transients via activation of 5-HTR1, 5-HTR2, and 5-HTR3 in A549 and BEAS-2B cells. Moreover, we revealed that stimulation of 5-HTR1 and 5-HTR2 induced Ca(2+) mobilization from intracellular stores, whereas activation of 5-HTR3 induced Ca(2+) influx from the extracellular space. Functional studies indicated that activation of 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR1E/F, 5-HTR2, 5-HTR3, 5-HTR4, and 5-HTR7 regulated the release of the cytokine IL-6 and the CXC-chemokine CXCL8/IL-8. Our study shows that 5-HT stimulates different signaling pathways and regulates cytokine release in airway epithelial cells. In summary, our data implicate a pathophysiologic role of 5-HT in the asthmatic inflammatory responses in human airway epithelial cells.
Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic skin condition that primarily affects areas with dense hair follicles and apocrine sweat glands, such as the underarms, groin, buttocks, and lower breasts. Intense pain and discomfort in HS have been commonly noted, primarily due to the lesions' effects on nearby tissues. Pain is a factor that can influence DNA methylation patterns, though its exact role in HS is not fully understood. We aim to identify molecular markers of chronic pain in HS patients. We performed DNA methylome of peripheral blood DNA derived from a group of 24 patients with HS and 24 healthy controls, using Illumina methylation array chips. We identified 253 significantly differentially methylated CpG sites across 253 distinct genes regulating pain sensitization in HS, including 224 hypomethylated and 29 hypermethylated sites. Several genes with pleiotropic roles include transporters (ABCC2, SLC39A8, SLC39A9), wound healing (MIR132, FGF2, PDGFC), ion channel regulators (CACNA1C, SCN1A), oxidative stress mediators (SCN8A, DRD2, DNMT1), cytochromes (CYP19A, CYP1A2), cytokines (TGFB1, IL4), telomere regulators (CSNK1D, SMAD3, MTA1), circadian rhythm (IL1R2, ABCG1, RORA), ultradian rhythms (PHACTR1, TSC2, ULK1), hormonal regulation (PPARA, NR3C1, ESR2), and the serotonin system (HTR1D, HTR1E, HTR3C, HTR4, TPH2). They also play roles in glucose metabolism (POMC, IRS1, GNAS) and obesity (DRD2, FAAH, MMP2). Gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis identified 43 pathways, including calcium signaling, cocaine addiction, and nicotine addiction. This study identified multiple differentially methylated genes involved in chronic pain in HS, which may serve as biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Understanding their epigenetic regulation is crucial for personalized pain management and could enhance the identification of high-risk patients, leading to better preventative therapies and improved maternal and neonatal outcomes.
Proximal 6q (6q11-q15) deletions are extremely rare and little is known about their phenotypic consequences. Since parents and caregivers now use social media to seek information on rare disorders, the Chromosome 6 Project has successfully collaborated with a Facebook group to collect data on individuals worldwide. Here we describe a cohort of 20 newly identified individuals and 25 literature cases with a proximal 6q deletion. Microarray results and phenotype data were reported directly by parents via a multilingual online questionnaire. This led to phenotype descriptions for five subregions of proximal 6q deletions; comparing the subgroups revealed that 6q11q14.1 deletions presented less severe clinical characteristics than 6q14.2q15 deletions. Gastroesophageal reflux, tracheo/laryngo/bronchomalacia, congenital heart defects, cerebral defects, seizures, and vision and respiratory problems were predominant in those with 6q14.2q15 deletions. Problems related to connective tissue (hypermobility, hernias and foot deformities) were predominantly seen in deletions including the COL12A1 gene (6q13). Congenital heart defects could be linked to deletions of MAP3K7 (6q15) or TBX18 (6q14.3). We further discuss the role of ten genes known or assumed to be related to developmental delay and/or autism (BAI3, RIMS1, KCNQ5, HTR1B, PHIP, SYNCRIP, HTR1E, ZNF292, AKIRIN2 and EPHA7). The most influential gene on the neurodevelopmental phenotype seems to be SYNCRIP (6q14.3), while deletions that include more than two of these genes led to more severe developmental delay. We demonstrate that approaching individuals via social media and collecting data directly from parents is a successful strategy, resulting in better information to counsel families.
A chemosensitive single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discovery schema is presented that utilizes (i) genome-wide SNP screening, with a human SNP array and an in vitro chemosensitivity assay, in 93 patients with gastric cancer (GC), and (ii) biological utility assessment using cell viability assays of transfected GC cells. Cytotoxicity analysis showed that most of the MKN1 and SNU638 clones transfected with the G allele of Deoxyribonuclease II beta (DNASE2B) rs3738573 were more sensitive to docetaxel than those with the C allele (p</=0.001-0.029) and most of the AGS and SNU638 clones transfected with the T allele of 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor IE (HTRIE) rs3828741 were more sensitive to paclitaxel than those with the C allele (p</=0.001-0.019). Our findings show that the two novel markers, DNASE2B rs3738573 and HTR1E rs3828741, have potential for improving the prediction of chemosensitivity of GC patients.
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a debilitating disorder of unknown etiology with no known lesions, diagnostic markers or therapeutic intervention. The pathophysiology of CFS remains elusive, although abnormalities in the central nervous system (CNS) have been implicated, particularly hyperactivity of the serotonergic (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) system and hypoactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Since alterations in 5-HT signaling can lead to physiologic and behavioral changes, a genetic evaluation of the 5-HT system was undertaken to identify serotonergic markers associated with CFS and potential mechanisms for CNS abnormality. A total of 77 polymorphisms in genes related to serotonin synthesis (TPH2), signaling (HTR1A, HTR1E, HTR2A, HTR2B, HTR2C, HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR4, HTR5A, HTR6, and HTR7), transport (SLC6A4), and catabolism (MAOA) were examined in 137 clinically evaluated subjects (40 CFS, 55 with insufficient fatigue, and 42 non-fatigued, NF, controls) derived from a population-based CFS surveillance study in Wichita, Kansas. Of the polymorphisms examined, three markers (-1438G/A, C102T, and rs1923884) all located in the 5-HT receptor subtype HTR2A were associated with CFS when compared to NF controls. Additionally, consistent associations were observed between HTR2A variants and quantitative measures of disability and fatigue in all subjects. The most compelling of these associations was with the A allele of -1438G/A (rs6311) which is suggested to have increased promoter activity in functional studies. Further, in silico analysis revealed that the -1438 A allele creates a consensus binding site for Th1/E47, a transcription factor implicated in the development of the nervous system. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay supports allele-specific binding of E47 to the A allele but not the G allele at this locus. These data indicate that sequence variation in HTR2A, potentially resulting in its enhanced activity, may be involved in the pathophysiology of CFS.
The human gene for the 5-HT1E serotonin receptor was recently cloned, but no chromosomal assignment has yet been given to this gene (locus HTR1E). In this work, we demonstrate by two independent polymerase chain reactions on a panel of human-hamster somatic cell hybrid genomic DNA that the 5-HT1E serotonin receptor gene is localized on human chromosome 6. Furthermore, by means of in situ hybridization to human metaphase chromosomes, using the cloned 5-HT1E receptor gene (phage clone lambda-S31; Levy et al., FEBS Lett. 296:201-206,1992) as was a probe, we demonstrate that this gene is localized to the q14-q15 region on chromosome 6. Screening of genomic DNA from 15 unrelated Caucasian individuals, using as a probe the open reading frame of the cloned 5-HT1E receptor gene, did not reveal any restriction fragment length polymorphisms with the enzymes BamHI, BanII, BglII, EcoRI, HincII, HindIII, HinfI, MspI, PstI, and PvuII. Since the 5-HT1E receptor is found mainly in the cerebral cortex and abnormal function of the serotonergic system has been implicated in a variety of neurologic and psychiatric diseases, the precise chromosomal assignment of the 5-HT1E receptor gene is the crucial first step toward the evaluation of this locus as a candidate for mutations in such syndromes.
We have mapped and sequenced both chromosome breakpoints of a balanced t(6;11)(q14.2;q25) chromosome translocation that segregates with a schizophrenia-like psychosis. Bioinformatics analysis of the regions revealed a number of confirmed and predicted transcripts. No confirmed transcripts are disrupted by either breakpoint. The chromosome 6 breakpoint region is gene poor, the closest transcript being the serotonin receptor 1E (HTR1E) at 625 kb telomeric to the breakpoint. The chromosome 11 breakpoint is situated close to the telomere. The closest gene, beta-1,3-glucuronyltransferase (B3GAT1 or GlcAT-P), is 299 kb centromeric to the breakpoint. B3GAT1 is the key enzyme during the biosynthesis of the carbohydrate epitope HNK-1, which is present on a number of cell adhesion molecules important in neurodevelopment. Mice deleted for the B3GAT1 gene show defects in hippocampal long-term potentiation and in spatial memory formation. We propose that the translocation causes a positional effect on B3GAT1, affecting expression levels and making it a plausible candidate for the psychosis found in this family. More generally, regions close to telomeres are highly polymorphic in both sequence and length in the general population and several studies have implicated subtelomeric deletions as a common cause of idiopathic mental retardation. This leads us to the hypothesis that polymorphic or other variation of the 11q telomere may affect the activity of B3GAT1 and be a risk factor for schizophrenia and related psychoses in the general population.
BACKGROUND: Female sexual dysfunction (FSD) is an important but controversial problem with serious negative impact on women's quality of life. Data from twin studies have shown a genetic contribution to the development and maintenance of FSD. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on 2.5 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1,104 female twins (25-81 years of age) in a population-based register and phenotypic data on lifelong sexual functioning. Although none reached conventional genome-wide level of significance (10 x -8), we found strongly suggestive associations with the phenotypic dimension of arousal (rs13202860, P = 1.2 x 10(-7); rs1876525, P = 1.2 x 10(-7); and rs13209281 P = 8.3 x 10(-7)) on chromosome 6, around 500 kb upstream of the locus HTR1E (5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1E) locus, related to the serotonin brain pathways. We could not replicate previously reported candidate SNPs associated with FSD in the DRD4, 5HT2A and IL-1B loci. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We report the first GWAS of FSD symptoms in humans. This has pointed to several "risk alleles" and the implication of the serotonin and GABA pathways. Ultimately, understanding key mechanisms via this research may lead to new FSD treatments and inform clinical practice and developments in psychiatric nosology.
Serotonin receptors (5-HTR) are present in the mammary tissue of mouse, humans, cows, and rats. In these species, serotonin is important for the mammary gland function and lactation performance. The mammary gland expression of 5-HTR in small dairy ruminants has yet to be described. In the present study, primer sequences were developed to amplify 5-HTR (1A, 1D, 1E,1B, 1F, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3a, 4, 5a, 6, and 7) using real-time quantitative PCR for the detection of mRNA expression in mammary tissue of dairy sheep, goats, and cows. The distribution of commonly expressed 5-HTR between the 3 species (1B, 1E, 2A, 2B, 4, and 7) was analyzed in the mammary tissue of late-lactation and dried-off sheep, goats, and cows using immunohistochemical staining. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed that the 3 studied species expressed receptors 5-HTR1B, 1E, 2A, 2B, 4, and 7. Goats and sheep expressed 5-HTR1D and 5a; 5-HTR1A and 1F were expressed only in sheep. The mammary epithelial cells were positively stained for all the studied receptors by immunohistochemistry (5-HTR1B, 1E, 2A, 2B, 4, and 7). The endothelial cells of blood vessels were positively stained for 5-HTR1B, 2A, 2B, and 7 in all the species. Additionally, 5-HTR1E was present in cow endothelium. The myoepithelial cells stained positively for 5-HTR1E in all the species, and 5-HTR4 myoepithelial staining was present only in cows and sheep. Between the lactating and dried-off mammary glands, the location of 5-HTR in the epithelial cells changed from a cytoplasmic reaction in lactating udders to a reaction in the apical region in dry udders. These results showed that the distribution of 5-HTR subtypes in the mammary gland of dairy ruminants vary among species, tissue type, and stage of gland development. These findings warrant future studies aimed at understanding whether the differences in 5-HTR subtype expression and location accounts for the differences in milk secretion and lactocyte activity among cows, goats, and sheep.
