5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1D; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for ergot alkaloid derivatives, various anxiolytic and antidepressant drugs and other psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity. Regulates the release of 5-hydroxytryptamine in the brain, and thereby affects neural activity. May also pl [...] 
Patients with chronic pain often develop comorbid depressive symptoms, which makes the pain symptoms more complicated and refractory. However, the underlying mechanisms are poorly known. Here, in a repeated complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) male mouse model, we reported a specific regulatory role of the paraventricular thalamic nucleus (PVT) glutamatergic neurons, particularly the anterior PVT (PVA) neurons, in mediating chronic pain and depression comorbidity (CDC). Our c-Fos protein staining observed increased PVA neuronal activity in CFA-CDC mice. In wild-type mice, chemogenetic activation of PVA glutamatergic neurons was sufficient to decrease the 50% paw withdrawal thresholds (50% PWTs), while depressive-like behaviors evaluated with immobile time in tail suspension test (TST) and forced swim test (FST) could only be achieved by repeated chemogenetic activation. Chemogenetic inhibition of PVA glutamatergic neurons reversed the decreased 50% PWTs in CFA mice without depressive-like symptoms and the increased TST and FST immobility in CFA-CDC mice. Surprisingly, in CFA-CDC mice, chemogenetically inhibiting PVA glutamatergic neurons failed to reverse the decrease of 50% PWTs, which could be restored by rapid-onset antidepressant S-ketamine. Further behavioral tests in chronic restraint stress mice and CFA pain mice indicated that PVA glutamatergic neuron inhibition and S-ketamine independently alleviate sensory and affective pain. Molecular profiling and pharmacological studies revealed the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1D (Htr1d) in CFA pain-related PVT engram neurons as a potential target for treating CDC. These findings identified novel CDC neuronal and molecular mechanisms in the PVT and provided insight into the complicated pain neuropathology under a comorbid state with depression and related drug development.
Disordered eating contributes to weight gain, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the precise mechanisms underlying the development of different eating patterns and connecting them to specific metabolic phenotypes remain unclear. We aimed to identify genetic variants linked to eating behaviour and investigate its causal relationships with metabolic traits using Mendelian randomization (MR). We tested associations between 30 genetic variants and eating patterns in individuals with T2D from the Volga-Ural region and investigated causal relationships between variants associated with eating patterns and various metabolic and anthropometric traits using data from the Volga-Ural population and large international consortia. We detected associations between HTR1D and CDKAL1 and external eating; between HTR2A and emotional eating; between HTR2A, NPY2R, HTR1F, HTR3A, HTR2C, CXCR2, and T2D. Further analyses in a separate group revealed significant associations between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and the loci in CRP, ADCY3, GHRL, CDKAL1, BDNF, CHRM4, CHRM1, HTR3A, and AKT1 genes. MR results demonstrated an inverse causal relationship between external eating and glycated haemoglobin levels in the Volga-Ural sample. External eating influenced anthropometric traits such as body mass index, height, hip circumference, waist circumference, and weight in GWAS cohorts. Our findings suggest that eating patterns impact both anthropometric and metabolic traits.
OBJECTIVE: Hashimoto's thyroiditis, also known as chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, is a common autoimmune thyroiditis, which mostly occurs in young and middle-aged women. It can be manifested as hyperthyroidism in the early stage; hypothyroidism may appear with the progression of the disease. Studies have shown that multiple factors such as heredity, environment, and autoimmunity are involved in the pathogenesis, but the specific mechanism is not clear. In our study, we tried to find key genes and potential molecular mechanisms of Hashimoto's thyroiditis to provide new ideas for the therapeutic targets of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. METHOD: GSE138198 and GSE54958 were downloaded from the GEO database, and two datasets were combined for analysis. The combined data were normalized to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), and GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks and hub genes between DEGs were identified. We also used the miRWalk database to identify regulatory miRNAs associated with expressions of DEGs. RESULT: We identified 182 DEGs (160 upregulated and 22 downregulated) between Hashimoto's disease patients and the healthy control group. GO analysis showed that DEGs were mostly concentrated in detection of chemical stimulus involved in sensory perception, intermediate filament cytoskeleton, and olfactory receptor activity. KEGG pathway analysis showed that DEGs were mainly related to olfactory transduction. Some members of the KRTAP family and HTR5A, KNG1, DRD3, HTR1D, TAS2R16, INSL5, TAS2R42, and GRM7 are the most important hub genes in the PPI network. In addition, we recognized that OTUD4, LLPH, and ECHDC1 were the most important hub genes in the miRNA-target gene network. CONCLUSION: In this study, a series of bioinformatics analyses of DEGs were performed to identify the key genes and pathways associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. These genes and pathways provide a more detailed understanding of the pathogenesis of Hashimoto's disease and provide new ideas for the therapeutic targets of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
Pregnancy in placental mammals places unique demands on the insulin-producing beta-cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The pancreas anticipates the increase in insulin resistance that occurs late in pregnancy by increasing beta-cell numbers and function earlier in pregnancy. In rodents, this beta-cell expansion depends on secreted placental lactogens that signal through the prolactin receptor. Then at the end of pregnancy, the beta-cell population contracts back to its pre-pregnancy size. In the current review, we focus on how glucose metabolism changes during pregnancy, how beta-cells anticipate these changes through their response to lactogens and what molecular mechanisms guide the adaptive compensation. In addition, we summarize current knowledge of beta-cell adaptation during human pregnancy and what happens when adaptation fails and gestational diabetes ensues. A better understanding of human beta-cell adaptation to pregnancy would benefit efforts to predict, prevent and treat gestational diabetes.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) and its receptors play important roles in the development and progression of malignant tumors. The effect of the 5-HT receptor 1D (HTR1D), a member of the serotonin receptor family, on gastric cancer (GC) is not clear. Analysis of clinical data has shown that high expression of HTR1D was associated with poor prognosis in patients with GC and was an independent risk factor for reduced overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS). The present study assessed the effects of HTR1D knockdown and the HTR1D inhibitor GR127935 on the biological behavior of GC cells, which both impaired the proliferation and migration of GC cells. RNA sequencing showed that GR127935 inhibited tumor progression by limiting DNA replication and the cell cycle, inducing ferroptosis, and affecting tumor metabolism. Taken together, these findings showed that HTR1D has a potent oncogenic effect on GC and may provide a novel therapeutic target.
Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is a common and severe epilepsy displaying rhythmicity in humans and animals. However, how the circadian clock contributes to TLE remains elusive. A recent circadian analysis of the ventral hippocampal transcriptome of pilocarpine-induced TLE mice revealed as many as 1650 rhythmically expressed transcripts. Here, a comparison of the mouse ventral hippocampal transcriptome with the human epilepsy-related gene set identified 315 possible mouse epilepsy-related genes. Rhythmicity analysis classified them into arrhythmicity, loss-of-rhythmicity, gain-of-rhythmicity, and rhythmicity-maintaining groups. KEGG and GO analyses of these mouse epilepsy genes suggest their involvement in circadian entrainment. In TLE mice, Htr1d, Drd2, and Chrna3 lose rhythmicity, but P2rx7 gains rhythmicity; the up-regulation of Htr1d and Drd2 and down-regulation of Chrna3 inhibit adenylate cyclase (AC), and up-regulation of Htr1d, Drd2, and P2rx7 activates protein kinase C (PKC). Together, these results suggest that epilepsy can disrupt the circadian dynamics of the epileptic genes, shed light on possible TLE pathogenesis, and provide potential targets for TLE diagnosis and chronotherapy.
Purpose: The study aimed to predict and explore the possible clinical value and mechanism of genetic markers in adrenal cortical carcinoma using a bioinformatics analysis method. Methods: The RNA-seqs and miRNAs data were downloaded from TCGA database to identify the differentially expressed genes and differentially expressed miRNAs. The hub-genes were screened by building protein-protein interaction sub-networks with 12 topological analysis methods. We conducted the receiver operating characteristic curve to elevate the diagnostic value of hub-genes in distinguishing the death and alive groups. The survival analysis of hub-genes and key miRNAs were conducted using Kaplan-Meier curves. Furthermore, most significant small molecules were identified as therapeutic candidates for adrenal cortical carcinoma by the CMap analysis. Results: Compared to survival group, we found 475 up-regulated genes and 354 genes and the key pathways leading to the death of different ACC individual patients. Then we used 12 topological analysis methods to found the most possible 22 hub-genes. Among these hub-genes, nine hub-genes (C3, CXCL5, CX3CR1, GRM8, HCAR2, HTR1B, SUCNR1, PTGER3 and SSTR1) could be used to distinguish the death and survival groups for patients. We also revealed that mRNA expressions of 12 genes (C3, CXCL8, CX3CR1, GNAT3, GNGT1, GRM8, HCAR2, HTR1B, HTR1D, PTGER3, SSTR1 and SUCNR1) and four key miRNAs (hsa-mir-330, hsa-mir-489, hsa-mir-508 and hsa-mir-513b) were related to survival. Three most small molecules were identified (H-9, AZ-628 and phensuximide) as potential therapeutic drugs for adrenal cortical carcinoma. Conclusion: The hub-genes expression was significant useful in adrenal cortical carcinoma, provide new diagnostic, prognosis and therapeutic approaches for adrenal cortical carcinoma. Furthermore, we also explore the possible miRNAs involved in regulation of hub-genes.
Competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) are a newly discovered class of molecular regulators involved in many diseases, especially tumors. Therefore, exploration of the potential ceRNA regulatory network regarding the occurrence and development of pancreatic cancer will provide a new theoretical basis for its diagnosis and treatment. Based on the above background, we applied a bioinformatics approach to mine the public database The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and performed a series of subsequent molecular biology assays to confirm the hypothesis that HOXA10-AS/ miR-340-3p/HTR1D axis could modulate the malignant progression of pancreatic cancer. Here, our present study demonstrated that the expression level of HTR1D, positively correlated with the level of lncRNA HOXA10-AS and negatively associated with the level of miR-340-3p, was significantly increased in pancreatic cancer cell lines (PCs) compared with that in normal HPDE6-C7 cells. Knocking down HTR1D obviously inhibited the proliferation and migration of PCs and promoted apoptosis by upregulating p-AKT. Elevated miR-340-3p blocked the progression of pancreatic cancer by downregulating HTR1D. Lessened level of lncRNA HOXA10-AS reduced the sponging of miR-340-3p, resulting in an increase of miR-340-3p and a subsequent decrease of HTR1D to ultimately suppress the malignant biological behaviors of cancer. These data illustrated that the HOXA10-AS/miR-340-3p/HTR1D ceRNA axis acted a crucial part in the malignant biological behavior of pancreatic cancer in an AKT-dependent manner.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has a poor prognosis, partly due to resistance to treatments like sorafenib. The 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1D (HTR1D) is involved in cancer progression through the PI3K/Akt pathway, but its role in HCC is not well understood. This study investigates HTR1D's expression, function, and potential as a prognostic marker in HCC. METHODS: First, the correlation between HTR1D and hepatocellular carcinoma was analyzed using the TCGA database, and the expression level of HTR1D in clinical samples was detected by qPCR. Then the siRNA was transfected into Huh-7 and Hep3B cells, and the cell proliferation ability, colony formation ability, migration and invasion ability were detected with or without sorafenib. And the expression of the PI3K/Akt pathway was detected by Western Blot. Finally, the potential of HTR1D as a predictive marker for patient prognosis was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Analysis of TCGA data showed that methylation of the HTR1D gene was associated with cancer status. Clinical samples confirmed significant differences in HTR1D expression between HCC and adjacent tissues, with higher expression correlating with poorer patient prognosis. Interference with HTR1D gene expression demonstrated its role in promoting HCC proliferation, migration, and drug resistance through the PI3K/Akt pathway. These findings were validated in a mouse model. Immunohistochemical analysis of clinicopathological samples suggested that HTR1D could be a valuable prognostic marker for HCC. CONCLUSION: HTR1D is highly expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, and it can influence hepatocellular carcinoma development and resistance to sorafenib by regulating the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. In addition, HTR1D has potential as a prognostic indicator.
The most studied roles of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) have been related to its action in the Central Nervous System (CNS). However, most of 5HT is produced outside the CNS, mainly in the enterochromaffin cells of the gut. Additionally, other tissues such as the endocrine pancreas, particularly beta-cells, have its own serotonin system able to synthesize, secrete and respond to extracellular 5HT through cell surface receptors subtypes that have been grouped in 7 families (HTR1-7). Interestingly, 5HT is stored in granules and released together with insulin from beta-cells and its biological significance is likely a combination of intra and extracellular actions. The expression of enzymes involved in 5HT synthesis and their receptors varied markedly in beta-pancreatic cells during pregnancy, in parallel with an increase in their insulin secretion potential (probably through the action of Htr3a) and an increase in beta-cell mass (through the action of Htr2b and Htr1d). In addition, it has been suggested that gut-derived 5HT may promote hepatic gluconeogenesis during prolonged fasting through Htr2b receptor. Taken together, these findings suggest that peripheral 5HT plays an important role in the regulation of glucose homeostasis through the differential expression and activation of 5-HT membrane receptors on the surface of hepatocytes, adipocytes and pancreatic beta-cells.
BACKGROUND: A recent study reported strong evidence for the involvement of a region on human chromosome 1 and genetic susceptibility to anorexia nervosa (AN). A more detailed analysis of this region has suggested 2 genes that may account for this susceptibility. These data suggest that polymorphisms in both the serotonin 1D (HTR1D) and opioid delta 1 (OPRD1) receptor genes show a significant association with restricting AN (RAN). METHODS: In the current study, we have conducted an independent association study on 226 females meeting DSM-IV criteria for AN and 678 matched volunteers. RESULTS: We genotyped 4 SNPs in HTR1D and 6 SNPs in OPRD1. 3 SNPs were found to be associated with both RAN and binge-purge AN (BPAN) within the gene for OPRD1. We also found evidence of association between 2 polymorphisms within HTR1D and RAN. CONCLUSIONS: These data support the hypothesis that polymorphisms within this region form a component of the genetic basis to susceptibility to RAN. However, further work is required to understand the processes that may be mediated by these genes.
We previously reported that serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) suppresses beta-casein expression, a differentiation marker in mammary epithelial cells, via inhibition of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) phosphorylation in the human mammary epithelial cell line, MCF-12A. In this study, we investigated the expression pattern of the different 5-HT receptor subtypes in MCF-12A cells, and identified the receptors involved in 5-HT-mediated suppression of beta-casein protein expression. beta-Casein mRNA expression was inhibited by 30 microM 5-HT in a time-dependent manner. Treatment with 30 microM 5-HT for 72 h decreased beta-casein protein levels and STAT5 phosphorylation (pSTAT5). The cells expressed four 5-HT receptors subtypes (5-HTR1D, 2B, 3A, and 7) at the mRNA and protein level, and their expression was elevated by prolactin (PRL) treatment. Additionally, the mRNA levels of 5-HTR1D and 5-HTR7 were significantly higher than the other 5-HT receptors in the cells. Tryptophan hydroxylase 1 mRNA was detectable in the cells in the absence of PRL, and PRL treatment significantly increased its expression. beta-Casein and pSTAT5/STAT5 levels in the cells co-treated with 5-HT and a selective 5-HTR1D inhibitor, BRL15572, were equal to those observed in cells treated with 5-HT alone. However, in the cells co-treated with 5-HT and a selective 5-HTR7 inhibitor, SB269970, beta-casein and pSTAT5/STAT5 levels increased in a SB269970 concentration-dependent manner. In conclusion, we showed that 5-HT regulates beta-casein expression via 5-HTR7 in MCF-12A human mammary epithelial cells.
Human-directed canine aggression was studied using 50 aggressive and 81 non-aggressive dogs. We examined 62 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) occurring in or in the close vicinity of 16 neurotransmitter-related genes. Allelic associations with aggression were identified for DRD1, HTR1D, HTR2C and SLC6A1. Risk or protective haplotypes for aggressive behaviour based on 2-5 SNPs were identified. The frequency of aggressive dogs varied significantly between the haplotypes within loci and the odds ratios of aggression in dogs with risk haplotypes compared with protective haplotypes varied from 4.4 (HTR2C) to 9.0 (SLC6A1). A risk haplotype across the neurotransmitter receptor gene HTR1D harboured a non-synonymous SNP with a potential effect on protein function. We identified no haplotypes in complete association with the recorded phenotypes, supporting a complex inheritance of aggression.
Serotonin or 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) is a biogenic amine involved in regulating several functions, including development. However, its impact on human embryo development has been poorly studied. The present work investigated the expression and distribution of the main components of the serotoninergic system in human amniotic tissue and human amniotic epithelial cells (hAEC) in vitro, as an alternative model of early human embryo development. Amniotic membranes from full-term healthy pregnancies were used. Human amnion tissue or hAEC isolated from the amnion was processed for reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunofluorescence analyses of the main components of the serotoninergic system. We found the expression of tryptophan hydroxylase type 1 (TPH1), type 2 (TPH2), serotonin transporter (SERT), monoamine oxidase-A (MAOA), as well as HTR1D and HTR7 receptors at mRNA level in amnion tissue as well in hAEC. Interestingly, we found the presence of 5-HT in the nucleus of the cells in amnion tissue, whereas it was located in the cytoplasm of isolated hAEC. We detected TPH1, TPH2, and HTR1D receptor in both the nucleus and cytoplasm. SERT, MAOA, and HTR7 receptor were only observed in the cytoplasm. The results presented herein show, for the first time, the presence of the serotoninergic system in human amnion in vivo and in vitro.
BACKGROUND: In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that Zuo Jin Wan (ZJW), a herbal formula of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), possessed anticancer properties. However, the underlying mechanism for the action of ZJW remains unclear. Various subtypes of 5-Hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HTR) have been shown to play a role in carcinogenesis and cancer metastasis. 5-HTR1D, among the subtypes, is highly expressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines and tissues. The present study aimed at investigating effect of ZJW extracts on the biological function of CRC cells, the expression of 5-HTR1D, and molecules of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway. METHODS: In this study, the effect of ZJW extracts on 5-HTR1D expression and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway were investigated and contrasted with GR127935 (GR), a known 5-HTR1D antagonist, using the CRC cell line SW403. The cells were respectively treated with GR127935 and different doses of ZJW extracts. Proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion of SW403 cells were compared between ZJW and GR127935 treatments. The expression of 5-HTR1D and signaling molecules involved in the canonic Wnt/beta-catenin pathway were determined by Western blot analysis. RESULTS: After ZJW extracts treatment and GR127935 treatment, G1 arrest in cell cycle of SW403 was increased. Cell apoptosis was pronounced, and cell migration and invasion were suppressed. SW403 cells showed a dose-dependently decreased expression of 5-HTR1D, meanwhile, beta-catenin level was significantly decreased in nucleus of cells cultured with GR127935. Treatment of ZJW extracts dose-dependently resulted in decreased 5-HTR1D and a concomitant reduction in the Wnt/beta-catenin signal transduction, an effect indistinguishable from GR127935 treatment. CONCLUSION: The anticancer activity of ZJW extracts may be partially achieved through attenuation of the 5-HTR1D-Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Despite the substantial impact of sleep disturbances on human health and the many years of study dedicated to understanding sleep pathologies, the underlying genetic mechanisms that govern sleep and wake largely remain unknown. Recently, the authors completed large-scale genetic and gene expression analyses in a segregating inbred mouse cross and identified candidate causal genes that regulate the mammalian sleep-wake cycle, across multiple traits including total sleep time, amounts of rapid eye movement (REM), non-REM, sleep bout duration, and sleep fragmentation. Here the authors describe a novel approach toward validating candidate causal genes, while also identifying potential targets for sleep-related indications. Select small-molecule antagonists and agonists were used to interrogate candidate causal gene function in rodent sleep polysomnography assays to determine impact on overall sleep architecture and to evaluate alignment with associated sleep-wake traits. Significant effects on sleep architecture were observed in validation studies using compounds targeting the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M3 subunit (Chrm3) (wake promotion), nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha4 subunit (Chrna4) (wake promotion), dopamine receptor D5 subunit (Drd5) (sleep induction), serotonin 1D receptor (Htr1d) (altered REM fragmentation), glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (Glp1r) (light sleep promotion and reduction of deep sleep), and calcium channel, voltage-dependent, T type, alpha 1I subunit (Cacna1i) (increased bout duration of slow wave sleep). Taken together, these results show the complexity of genetic components that regulate sleep-wake traits and highlight the importance of evaluating this complex behavior at a systems level. Pharmacological validation of genetically identified putative targets provides a rapid alternative to generating knock out or transgenic animal models, and may ultimately lead towards new therapeutic opportunities.
Migraine is the most common neurovascular disorder that imparts a considerable burden to health care system around the world. However, currently there are still no effective and widely applicable pharmacotherapies for migraine patients. Herbal formulae, characterized as multiple herbs, constituents and targets, have been acknowledged with clinical effects in treating migraine, which attract more and more researchers' attention although their exact molecular mechanisms are still unclear. In this work, a novel systems pharmacology-based method which integrates pharmacokinetic filtering, target fishing and network analysis was developed and exemplified by a probe, i.e. Tianshu formula, a widely clinically used anti-migraine herbal formula in China which comprises of Rhizoma chuanxiong and Gastrodia elata. The results exhibit that 20 active ingredients of Tianshu formula possess favorable pharmacokinetic profiles, which have interactions with 48 migraine-related targets to provide potential synergistic therapeutic effects. Additionally, from systematic analysis, we speculate that R. chuanxiong as the monarch herb mediates the major targets like PTGS2, ESR1, NOS2, HTR1B and NOS3 to regulate the vascular and nervous systems, as well as the inflammation and pain-related pathways to benefit migraine patients. Meanwhile, as an adjuvant herb, G. elata may not only assist the monarch herb to improve the outcome of migraine patients, but also regulate multiple targets like ABAT, HTR1D, ALOX15 and KCND3 to modify migraine accompanying symptoms like vomiting, vertigo and gastrointestinal disorders.
PURPOSE: We examined the effect of race-effort cycling exercise with and without heat stress on post-exercise perceptions of fatigue and pain, as well as mRNA expression in genes related to exercise responses. METHODS: Trained cyclists (n = 20) completed 40 km time trials during temperate (TC, 21  degrees C) and hot (HC, 35  degrees C) conditions. Blood lactates were measured 1 and 5 min post-exercise. Venous blood samples and ratings of fatigue and pain perceptions were obtained at baseline and at 0.5, 8, 24, and 48 h post-exercise. Leukocyte mRNA expression was performed for metabolite detecting, adrenergic, monoamine, and immune receptors using qPCR. RESULTS: Significantly lower mean power (157 +/- 32.3 vs 187 +/- 40 W) and lactates (6.4 +/- 1.7 vs 8.8 +/- 3.2 and 4.2 +/- 1.5 vs 6.6 +/- 2.7 mmol L(-1) at 1- and 5-min post-exercise) were observed for HC versus TC, respectively (p < 0.05). Increases (p < 0.05) in physical fatigue and pain perception during TTs did not differ between TC and HC (p > 0.30). Both trials resulted in significant post-exercise decreases in metabolite detecting receptors ASIC3, P2X4, TRPV1, and TRPV4; increases in adrenergic receptors alpha2a, alpha2c, and beta1; decreases in adrenergic beta2, the immune receptor TLR4, and dopamine (DRD4); and increases in serotonin (HTR1D) and IL-10 (p < 0.05). Post-exercise IL-6 differed between TC and HC, with significantly greater increases observed following HC (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Both TT performances appeared to be regulated around a specific sensory perception of fatigue and pain. Heat stress may have compensated for lower lactate during HC, thereby matching changes in metabolite detecting and other mRNAs across conditions.
OBJECTIVES: Placental insufficiency contributes to altered maternal-fetal amino acid transfer, and thereby to poor fetal growth. An important placental function is the uptake of tryptophan and its metabolism to serotonin (5-HT) and kynurenine metabolites, which are essential for fetal development. We hypothesised that placental 5-HT content will be increased in pregnancies affected with fetal growth restriction (FGR). METHODS: The components of the 5-HT synthetic pathway were determined in chorionic villus samples (CVS) from small-for gestation (SGA) and matched control collected at 10-12 weeks of human pregnancy; and in placentae from third trimester FGR and gestation-matched control pregnancies using the Fluidigm Biomarker array for mRNA expression, the activity of the enzyme TPH and 5-HT concentrations using an ELISA. RESULTS: Gene expression for the rate limiting enzymes, TPH1 and TPH2; 5-HT transporter, SLC6A4; and 5-HT receptors HTR5A, HTR5B, HTR1D and HTR1E were detected in all CVS and third trimester placentae. No significant difference in mRNA was observed in SGA compared with control. Although there was no significant change in TPH1 mRNA, the mRNA of TPH2 and SLC6A4 was significantly decreased in FGR placentae (p < 0.05), while 5-HT receptor mRNA was significantly increased in FGR compared with control (p < 0.01). Placental TPH enzyme activity was significantly increased with a concomitant increase in the total placental 5-HT concentrations in FGR compared with control. CONCLUSION: This study reports differential expression and activity of the key components of the 5-HT synthetic pathway associated with the pathogenesis of FGR. Further studies are required to elucidate the functional consequences of increased placental 5-HT in FGR pregnancies.
BACKGROUND: Serotonin (5-HT) is involved in regulating tumor growth, as well as psychiatric disorders. It is synthesized by tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) and acts through 5-HT receptors (HTRs). Single-nucleotide variations (SNVs) in TPH1 rs623580 (T>A), TPH2 rs4570625 (G>T), and HTR1D rs674386 (G>A) may affect 5-HT levels. However, the effect of these SNVs on oropharynx carcinoma (OPC) is unknown. METHODS: DNA from 251 patients with OPC and 254 controls was analyzed by RT-PCR. Transcriptional activity of TPH1 rs623580 and HTR1D rs674386 was studied by luciferase assays. Multivariate statistical tests were utilized to evaluate group differences and survival outcomes. RESULTS: TPH1 TT was more frequent in patients than in controls (OR: 1.56, p = 0.03). Patients with HTR1D GG/GA showed invasive tumors (p = 0.01) and shorter survival (HR: 1.66, p = 0.04). TPH1 TT (0.79-fold, p = 0.03) and HTR1D GG (0.64-fold, p = 0.008) presented lower transcriptional activity. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that SNVs in 5-HT modulating genes can influence OPC.
