5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1A; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathways. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity and activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second  [...] 
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Portal hypertension (PH) is one of the most frequent complications of chronic liver disease. The peripheral 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) level was increased in cirrhotic patients. We aimed to elucidate the function and mechanism of 5-HT receptor 1A (HTR1A) in the portal vein (PV) on PH. METHODS: PH models were induced by thioacetamide injection, bile duct ligation, or partial PV ligation. HTR1A expression was detected using real-time polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization, and immunofluorescence staining. In situ intraportal infusion was used to assess the effects of 5-HT, the HTR1A agonist 8-OH-DPAT, and the HTR1A antagonist WAY-100635 on portal pressure (PP). Htr1a-knockout (Htr1a(-/-)) rats and vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC)-specific Htr1a-knockout (Htr1a(DeltaVSMC)) mice were used to confirm the regulatory role of HTR1A on PP. RESULTS: HTR1A expression was significantly increased in the hypertensive PV of PH model rats and cirrhotic patients. Additionally, 8-OH-DPAT increased, but WAY-100635 decreased, the PP in rats without affecting liver fibrosis and systemic hemodynamics. Furthermore, 5-HT or 8-OH-DPAT directly induced the contraction of isolated PVs. Genetic deletion of Htr1a in rats and VSMC-specific Htr1a knockout in mice prevented the development of PH. Moreover, 5-HT triggered adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate pathway-mediated PV smooth muscle cell contraction via HTR1A in the PV. We also confirmed alverine as an HTR1A antagonist and demonstrated its capacity to decrease PP in rats with thioacetamide-, bile duct ligation-, and partial PV ligation-induced PH. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal that 5-HT promotes PH by inducing the contraction of the PV and identify HTR1A as a promising therapeutic target for attenuating PH. As an HTR1A antagonist, alverine is expected to become a candidate for clinical PH treatment.
BACKGROUND: This meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate whether HTR1A gene polymorphisms impact the efficacy of antipsychotic drugs in patients with schizophrenia. METHODS: Candidate gene studies that were published in English up to August 6, 2015 were identified by a literature search of PubMed, Web of Science, and Google scholar. Data were pooled from individual clinical trials considering overall symptoms, positive symptoms and negative symptoms, and standard mean differences were calculated by applying a random-effects model. RESULTS: The present meta-analysis included a total of 1281 patients from 10 studies. Three polymorphisms of HTR1A (rs6295, rs878567, and rs1423691) were selected for the analysis. In the pooled data from all studies, none of these HTR1A polymorphisms correlated significantly with either overall symptoms or positive symptoms. However, C allele carriers of the rs6295 polymorphism showed a significantly greater negative symptoms improvement than G allele carriers (P=.04, standardized mean difference =-0.14, 95％CI = 0.01 to 0.28). CONCLUSIONS: The results of our present analysis indicate that the HTR1A rs6295 polymorphism may impact negative symptoms improvement but not on either overall symptoms or positive symptoms improvement. However, this meta-analysis was based on a small number of studies and patients, and the effect size on negative symptoms was small. Given this limitation, the results should be confirmed by further investigations.
Several association studies have indicated that the HTR1A gene is associated with suicidal behavior (SB). Thus, a systematic assessment of the association of HTR1A was performed based on a literature review and pooled analysis. Four electronic databases were comprehensively searched to find and pinpoint all case-control articles related to this study. When analyzing the genetic association with SB, data were divided into: (A) SB cases vs. healthy controls and (B) SB cases vs. psychiatric controls. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were assessed as measures of association. Heterogeneity among included studies was analyzed using sensitivity test and Q statistics. Publication bias was also explored by Egger and rank correlation test. Thirteen case-control studies were selected in this meta-analysis, involving 2817 SB patients, 2563 healthy controls and 545 psychiatric controls. In the overall comparison between SB cases and healthy controls, result showed that the rs6295 polymorphisms of HTR1A gene was associated with SB, but only when using the recessive model (OR = 2.21, 95% CI = 1.80-2.71, P < 0.001). In the smaller sample size comparison between SB and psychiatric controls, no significant association was detected with rs6295 in any of the five genetics models tested. The present meta-analysis suggests that rs6295 polymorphism of HTR1A gene could increase the risk for SB. Well-designed studies with more patients will be required to validate these results.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The present review aims to deliver a systematic overview of current developments and trends in (epi)genetics of anxiety and to identify upcoming challenges and opportunities. RECENT FINDINGS: Genes related to peptide and hormone signaling have been suggested for anxiety-related phenotypes, e.g., the NPSR1 gene, which has been associated predominantly with panic disorder in women, and shown to interact with environmental factors and to influence psychometric, neurophysiological, and neuroimaging correlates of anxiety. Similar multi-level results have been reported for genetic and epigenetic variation in the OXTR gene, especially in social anxiety disorder (SAD), and for CRHR1 gene variation in women with panic disorder. Variants in RGS2 and ASIC1 genes were linked to panic disorder, with the latter also being implicated in SAD treatment response. Finally, monoaminergic 'risk' genes (SLC6A4, MAOA, HTR1A) were related to SAD, generalized anxiety disorder and women with panic disorder, anxiety traits and response to psychopharmacological and psychotherapeutic interventions. SUMMARY: Converging evidence for potential genetic and epigenetic risk markers has been gathered and future studies call for independent replications and multi-level integration of dimensional approaches, environmental factors, and biological readouts, while considering sex-specific substratification. Particularly, epigenetic variation appears promising for disease course and treatment response predictions.
BACKGROUND: Genetic factors may encourage or even cause the occurrence of mood disorders such as anxiety and/or depression. However, despite the significant amount of work and sophisticated technology is not fully elucidated which genes or regions of nuclear or mitochondrial DNA, or which types of genetic changes, alone or in combination, can represent reliable genetic markers of anxiety and/or depression. OBJECTIVE: To identify whether there are genetic changes that can cause depression or anxiety and if there are genetic markers that can be used to detect these changes. METHODS: A systematic review of 01.01.2004 to 03.28.2014 was held by VHL (Virtual Health Library). The search was performed with the descriptors ׳׳anxiety׳׳, ׳׳depression׳׳, "mutation" and "genetic markers׳׳. The selected articles were indexed in MEDLINE. The information pertinent to the study was selected, categorized and analyzed. Of the 374 articles found, 29 met the eligibility criteria. RESULTS: FMR1 gene polymorphisms, dopaminergic (DAT, DRD, COMT), serotonin (5-HTTLPR, HTR1A, HTR2A), interleukins, MCR1, HCN (potassium channel), neurorregulinas, GABAergic (GABA, GAD, DBI) DBI, GABA (Gabra) receptors and GAD genes (GAD1, GAD2) appear to contribute to generate condition of depression or anxiety like. Mutations in mitochondrial DNA in 124pb allele of D2S2944 in ofil 1 and 2 loci of chromosomes 4 and 7, respectively, and the chromosomes 8p, 17p and 15q appear to be associated with the origin of depression or anxiety. CONCLUSION: Some studies show only associations with one of the disorders, mainly anxiety. Few have shown association with both simultaneously. Other studies showed specific association of gender, or even specific ethnic groups. It was noticed, controversies over certain markers. Interesting results were observed in combination of changes, especially in cases of SNPs, indicating that perhaps this is the most appropriate way to find reliable markers.
Progress in PTSD pharmacotherapy has lagged far behind that of other major mental illnesses. Unfortunately, due to the enormous costs and lengthy process involved in bringing drugs to market, delivering new treatments to patients with PTSD in the near future will remain a challenge. However, by capitalizing on recent advances in the pharmacogenetics of antidepressants, precision psychiatry approaches can be leveraged to optimize the delivery of currently-available medications in a fraction of the time and cost required to develop novel therapeutics. This paper provides a review of the pharmacogenetics of the four serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) that are currently endorsed for the treatment of PTSD (paroxetine, sertraline, fluoxetine and venlafaxine). It focuses on genes involved in SRI pharmacokinetics (including the liver enzyme genes CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 and blood-brain barrier-relevant gene ABCB1) as well as those implicated in both SRI pharmacodynamics and the pathophysiology of PTSD and related conditions (e.g., BDNF, FKBP5, HTR1A, HTR2A, TPH2). The review concludes with an overview of emerging commercial platforms for pharmacogenetic-guided prescription and a discussion of challenges and directions for future pharmacogenetic research on PTSD.
The serotonin-1A (5-HT(1A)) receptor is an abundant post-synaptic 5-HT receptor (heteroreceptor) implicated in regulation of mood, emotion and stress responses and is the major somatodendritic autoreceptor that negatively regulates 5-HT neuronal activity. Based on animal models, an integrated model for opposing roles of pre- and post-synaptic 5-HT(1A) receptors in anxiety and depression phenotypes and response to antidepressants is proposed. Understanding differential transcriptional regulation of pre- versus post-synaptic 5-HT(1A) receptors could provide better tools for their selective regulation. This review examines the transcription factors that regulate brain region-specific basal and stress-induced expression of the 5-HT(1A) receptor gene (Htr1a). A functional polymorphism, rs6295 in the Htr1a promoter region, blocks the function of specific repressors Hes1, Hes5 and Deaf1, resulting in increased 5-HT(1A) autoreceptor expression in animal models and humans. Its association with altered 5-HT(1A) expression, depression, anxiety and antidepressant response are related to genotype frequency in different populations, sample homogeneity, disease outcome measures and severity. Preliminary evidence from gene x environment studies suggests the potential for synergistic interaction of stress-mediated repression of 5-HT(1A) heteroreceptors, and rs6295-induced upregulation of 5-HT(1A) autoreceptors. Targeted therapeutics to inhibit 5-HT(1A) autoreceptor expression and induce 5-HT(1A) heteroreceptor expression may ameliorate treatment of anxiety and major depression.
Although fluoxetine is useful in the treatment of major depression, 30-40 % of the patients do not respond to therapy. The response seems to be influenced by certain genes which are involved in the drug's pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. The present study reviews the literature on genetic contributions to fluoxetine response in children and adults, and concludes that the different polymorphisms of CYP2D6 and CYP2C9 may influence the blood concentrations of fluoxetine. If the childhood dose is adjusted for weight, differences between children and adults are unlikely. As regards the genes that influence the drug's pharmacodynamics, polymorphisms of SLC6A4, HTR1A and MAO-A seem to be involved in the response to fluoxetine, while the genes COMT, CRHR1, PDEA1, PDEA11 GSK3B and serpin-1 also seem to play a role. Comparison of different studies reveals that the results are not always consistent, probably due to methodological differences. Other factors such as gender or ethnicity may also influence treatment response.
OBJECTIVE: Dysfunction of serotonin 1A receptors (HTR1A) may play a role in the genesis of suicidal behavior. We studied the association between a functional polymorphism in the HTR1A gene and suicidal behavior. METHOD: We performed a meta-analysis of published genetic association studies by searching through Medline, PubMed, and Web of Science databases to analyze a possible correlation between the rs6295 polymorphism and suicidal behavior in different populations. RESULTS: Four studies comprising a total of nine hundred and fifty seven patients with suicidal behavior and nine hundred and fifty seven controls were the eligible. The G allele of the rs6295 polymorphism may not be associated with suicidal behavior (Random-effects model: OR = 1.08; 95% CI: 0.80-1.45; p(Z) = 0.80) in presence of heterogeneity (Q = 17.84, df = 4, p = 0.0013). In a second analysis that presented no heterogeneity, a negative association was also observed (OR = 0.94; 95%CI: 0.79-1.13; p(Z) = 0.99). CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, the present study is the first meta-analysis searching for a correlation between rs6295 of HTR1A and suicidal behavior. Our results showed no association between HTR1A and suicidal behavior. However, more studies assessing different populations, as well as larger samples, are needed.
AIMS: Antidepressants are effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), while many patients fail to respond to antidepressants. Both 5-HT1A (HTR1A) and 5-HT1B (HTR1B) receptors play an important role in antidepressant activity. Meanwhile, DNA methylation is associated with MDD and antidepressant efficacy. In this study we investigate the influence of HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype on antidepressant efficacy. METHODS: A total of 291 MDD patients and 100 healthy controls received the Life Events Scale (LES) and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) as stress assessment. Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of HTR1A and HTR1B involved in antidepressant mechanisms were tested. Methylation status in 181 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites of HTR1A and HTR1B were assessed. All MDD patients were divided into response (RES) and non-response (NRES) after 2 weeks of antidepressant treatment. Logistic regression was conducted for interactions between methylation, NLES/CTQ score and genotype. RESULTS: Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation is connected with better antidepressant efficacy in subgroup. Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation combined with low CTQ score is related to better antidepressant efficacy. The interaction between high HTR1B methylation with the rs6298 AA/AG genotype affects better antidepressant efficacy. CONCLUSIONS: HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype is associated with antidepressant efficacy.
This study aimed to investigate if SNP rs6313, SNP rs2770304, SNP rs4941573, and SNP rs1923884 of the 5-HT2A receptor gene and SNP rs6295 of the 5-HT1A receptor gene are associated with bruxism etiology. METHODOLOGY: This systematic review was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42018094561). A search was conducted for articles published in or before May 2021. To qualify for eligibility in this review, the studies had to be case-controls, cohort or cross-sectional. The inclusion criteria were the articles with a group of patients with bruxism and a control group in which the presence of these SNPs was evaluated. The exclusion criteria were the investigations of other polymorphisms, the studies that did not consider a control group for comparison, case reports, and reviews. The NOS and JBI were used to evaluate the methodological quality of studies. RESULTS: We conducted this study with databases, such as Web of Science, Scopus, Embase, PubMed/MEDLINE, and ProQuest. We considered four studies eligible. A total of 672 participants were included,187 with sleep bruxism, 105 with awake bruxism, 89 with sleep and awake bruxism, and 291 controls. One study found a strong association between the SNPs rs6313, rs2770304 and rs4941573 of the 5-HT2A receptor gene and sleep bruxism. In one study, we considered the C allele of the SNP rs2770304 a risk factor for sleep bruxism. We found no significant results of other SNPs in sleep bruxers compared to controls. We found no positive association concerning the SNPs and groups of awake bruxism and sleep and awake bruxism. CONCLUSION: The different results regarding the SNPs in sleep bruxers could be explained by the genetic distinction between Chilean, Mexican, Japanese, and Polish population. More clinical trials and prospective studies must be conducted with larger sample size and in different ethnicities to confirm the results of this review.
Thrombocytopenia caused by long-term radiotherapy and chemotherapy exists in cancer treatment. Previous research demonstrates that 5-Hydroxtrayptamine (5-HT) and its receptors induce the formation of megakaryocytes (MKs) and platelets. However, the relationships between 5-HT1A receptor (5-HTR1A) and MKs is unclear so far. We screened and investigated the mechanism of vilazodone as a 5-HTR1A partial agonist in promoting MK differentiation and evaluated its therapeutic effect in thrombocytopenia. We employed a drug screening model based on machine learning (ML) to screen the megakaryocytopoiesis activity of Vilazodone (VLZ). The effects of VLZ on megakaryocytopoiesis were verified in HEL and Meg-01 cells. Tg (itga2b: eGFP) zebrafish was performed to analyze the alterations in thrombopoiesis. Moreover, we established a thrombocytopenia mice model to investigate how VLZ administration accelerates platelet recovery and function. We carried out network pharmacology, Western blot, and immunofluorescence to demonstrate the potential targets and pathway of VLZ. VLZ has been predicted to have a potential biological action. Meanwhile, VLZ administration promotes MK differentiation and thrombopoiesis in cells and zebrafish models. Progressive experiments showed that VLZ has a potential therapeutic effect on radiation-induced thrombocytopenia in vivo. The network pharmacology and associated mechanism study indicated that SRC and MAPK signaling are both involved in the processes of megakaryopoiesis facilitated by VLZ. Furthermore, the expression of 5-HTR1A during megakaryocyte differentiation is closely related to the activation of SRC and MAPK. Our findings demonstrated that the expression of 5-HTR1A on MK, VLZ could bind to the 5-HTR1A receptor and further regulate the SRC/MAPK signaling pathway to facilitate megakaryocyte differentiation and platelet production, which provides new insights into the alternative therapeutic options for thrombocytopenia.
INTRODUCTION: 5-HT(1A)R was one of the first discovered serotonin receptors and is one of the most thoroughly studied. Dysfunctions associated with 5-HT(1A)R neurotransmission are linked to several psychiatric disorders, including anxiety, depression, and movement disorders. AREAS COVERED: The current review covers patent literature published between January 2012 and May 2018. Queries were performed on Espacenet, SciFinder, clinicaltrials.gov, pharmacodia.com, and the websites of pharmaceutical companies. EXPERT OPINION: Several novel therapeutic applications have been proposed for 5-HT(1A)R ligands, i.e. prostate cancer treatment, gastrointestinal and cardiopulmonary disorders, facilitation of urination and defecation, and L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia. Interestingly, no patent application has been filed by big pharma companies, while numerous researches are being conducted in smaller companies and academia.
AIM: Perioperative neurocognitive disorders (PND) occur frequently after surgery and anesthesia, especially in aged patients. Previous studies have shown multiple PND related mechanisms in the hippocampus; however, their relationships remain unclear. Meanwhile, the perioperative neuropathological processes are sophisticated and changeable, single period study could not reveal the accurate mechanisms. Thus, multiperiod whole-transcriptome study is necessary to elucidate the gene expression patterns during perioperative period. METHODS: Aged C57BL/6 mice were subjected to exploratory laparotomy under sevoflurane anesthesia. Whole-transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq analysis) was performed on the hippocampi from control condition (Con), 30 min (Day0), 2 days (Day2), and 7 days (Day7) after surgery. Gene Ontology/Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses, quantitative real-time PCR, immunofluorescence, and fear conditioning test were also performed to elucidate the pathological processes and modulation networks during the period. RESULTS: Through RNA-seq analysis, 328, 3597, and 4179 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened out in intraoperative period (Day0 vs. Con), early postoperative period (Day2 vs. Day0), and late postoperative period (Day7 vs. Day2). The involved GO biological processes were divided into 9 categories, and positive-regulated processes were more than negative-regulated ones. Seventy-four transcription factors were highlighted. The potential synaptic and neuroinflammatory pathways were constructed for Neurotransmitter, Synapse and Neuronal alteration categories with 9 genes (Htr1a, Rims1, and Ezh2, etc.). The metabolic and mitochondrial pathways were constructed for metabolism, oxidative stress, and biological rhythm categories with 9 genes (Gpld1, Sirt1, and Cry2, etc.). The blood-brain barrier and neurotoxicity related pathways were constructed for blood-brain barrier, neurotoxicity, and cognitive function categories with 10 genes (Mmp2, Itpr1, and Nrf1, etc.). CONCLUSION: The results revealed gene expression patterns and modulation networks in the aged hippocampus during perioperative period, which provide insights into overall mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets for prevention and treatment of perioperative central nervous system diseases, such as PND, from the genetic level.
Patient phenotypes in pharmacological pain treatment varies between individuals, which could be partly assigned to their genotypes regarding the targets of classical analgesics (OPRM1, PTGS2) or associated signalling pathways (KCNJ6). Translational and genetic research have identified new targets, for which new analgesics are being developed. This addresses voltage-gated sodium, calcium and potassium channels, for which SCN9A, CACNA1B, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, respectively, are primary gene candidates because they code for the subunits of the respective channels targeted by analgesics currently in clinical development. Mutations in voltage gated transient receptor potential (TRPV) channels are known from genetic pain research and may modulate the effects of analgesics under development targeting TRPV1 or TRPV3. To this add ligand-gated ion channels including nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, ionotropic glutamate-gated receptors and ATP-gated purinergic P2X receptors with most important subunits coded by CHRNA4, GRIN2B and P2RX7. Among G protein coupled receptors, delta-opioid receptors (coded by OPRD1), cannabinoid receptors (CNR1 and CNR2), metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR5 coded by GRM5), bradykinin B(1) (BDKRB1) and 5-HT(1A) (HTR1A) receptors are targeted by new analgesic substances. Finally, nerve growth factor (NGFB), its tyrosine kinase receptor (NTRK1) and the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) have become targets of interest. For most of these genes, functional variants have been associated with neuro-psychiatric disorders and not yet with analgesia. However, research on the genetic modulation of pain has already identified variants in these genes, relative to pain, which may facilitate the pharmacogenetic assessments of new analgesics. The increased number of candidate pharmacogenetic modulators of analgesic actions may open opportunities for the broader clinical implementation of genotyping information.
Rodent defense behavior assays have been widely used as preclinical models of anxiety to study possibly therapeutic anxiety-reducing interventions. However, some proposed anxiety-modulating factors - genes, drugs and stressors - have had discordant effects across different studies. To reconcile the effect sizes of purported anxiety factors, we conducted systematic review and meta-analyses of the literature on ten anxiety-linked interventions, as examined in the elevated plus maze, open field and light-dark box assays. Diazepam, 5-HT1A receptor gene knockout and overexpression, SERT gene knockout and overexpression, pain, restraint, social isolation, corticotropin-releasing hormone and Crhr1 were selected for review. Eight interventions had statistically significant effects on rodent anxiety, while Htr1a overexpression and Crh knockout did not. Evidence for publication bias was found in the diazepam, Htt knockout, and social isolation literatures. The Htr1a and Crhr1 results indicate a disconnect between preclinical science and clinical research. Furthermore, the meta-analytic data confirmed that genetic SERT anxiety effects were paradoxical in the context of the clinical use of SERT inhibitors to reduce anxiety.
The serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) receptor serves as a hub to regulate the activity and actions of the serotonin system, and is expressed both as a presynaptic autoreceptor on raphe neurons, and as a major postsynaptic receptor in hippocampal, cortical, and hypothalamic regions involved in mood, emotion and stress response. As such, the level of expression of 5-HT1A receptors is implicated in the development of anxiety and depression phenotypes. This review focuses on the C(-1019)G (rs6295) promoter polymorphism of the 5-HT1A receptor gene (HTR1A) and its effect on the activity of transcription factors that recognize the C-allele, including Deaf-1, Hes1 and Hes5; its effects on 5-HT1A receptor expression in pre- and postsynaptic areas; as well as its implication in early postnatal development and adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus and cortex. Although several studies have now replicated the association of the G-allele with depression, panic disorder, neuroticism, and reduced response to antidepressant or antipsychotic treatment, ethnic, disease and genetic heterogeneity among subjects in different studies may obscure such associations. Gene-gene interaction studies suggest that the 5-HT1A receptor G(-1019) allele is a risk allele which could be used as a marker for depression and related mood disorders. Finally, association of the G(-1019) allele with increased raphe 5-HT1A binding potential, increased amygdala reactivity to emotional stimuli, and reduced amygdala volume, particularly in disease states, suggests a functional role for the C(-1019)G site in 5-HT1A receptor dys-regulation and predisposition to mental illness.
Since its theoretical inception, psychopathy has been considered by philosophers, clinicians, theorists, and empirical researchers to be substantially and critically explained by genetic factors. In this systematic review and structural analysis, new hypotheses will be introduced regarding gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in the etiology of psychopathy and sociopathy. Theory and research from neurobiological and behavioral sciences will be integrated in order to place this work in a broader conceptual framework and promote synergy across fields. First, a between groups comparison between psychopathy and sociopathy is made based on their specific dysfunctions in emotional processing, behavioral profiles, etiological pathways, HPA-axis functioning, and serotonergic profiles. Next, it is examined how various polymorphisms in serotonergic genes (e.g., TPH, 5HTT, HTR1A, HTR2A, HTR2C, and HTR3) might contribute either individually or interactively to the development of these disorders and through which specific biological and behavioral endophenotypes this effect could be mediated. A short introduction is made into mediating variables such as GABAergic functioning and testosterone which could potentially alter the decisive effect of serotonergic genotypes on behavior and physiology. Finally, critical commentary is presented on how to interpret the hypotheses put forward in this review.
The smoothened sonic hedgehog (Smo-Shh) pathway is one mechanism that influences neurogenesis, including brain cell differentiation and development during childhood. Shh signaling dysregulation leads to decreased target gene transcription, which contributes to increased neuronal excitation, apoptosis, and neurodegeneration, eventually leading to neurological deficits. Neuropsychiatric disorders such as OCD and related neurological dysfunctions are characterized by neurotransmitter imbalance, neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, and impaired neurogenesis, disturbing the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) link neuronal network. Despite the availability of several treatments, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, some individuals may not benefit much from them. Several trials on the use of antipsychotics in the treatment of OCD have also produced inadequate findings. This evidence-based review focuses on a potential pharmacological approach to alleviating OCD and associated neuronal deficits by preventing neurochemical alterations, in which sonic hedgehog activators are neuroprotective, lowering neuronal damage while increasing neuronal maintenance and survival. As a result, stimulating SMO-Shh via its potential activators may have neuroprotective effects on neurological impairment associated with OCD. This review investigates the link between SMO-Shh signaling and the neurochemical abnormalities associated with the progression of OCD and associated neurological dysfunctions. Role of Smo-Shh signaling in serotonergic neurogenesis and in maintaining their neuronal identity. The Shh ligand activates two main transcriptional factors known as Foxa2 and Nkx2.2, which again activates another transcriptional factor, GATA (GATA2 and GATA3), in post mitotic precursor cells of serotonergic neurons-following increased expression of Pet-1 and Lmx1b after GATA regulates the expression of many serotonergic enzymes such as TPH2, SERT, VMAT, slc6a4, Htr1a, Htr1b (Serotonin receptor enzymes), and MAO that regulate and control the release of serotonin and maintain their neuronal identity after their maturation. Abbreviation: Foxa2: Forkhead box; GATA: Globin transcription factor; Lmx1b: LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 beta; TPH2: Tryptophan hydroxylase 2; Htr1a: Serotonin receptor 1a; Htr1b: Serotonin receptor 1b; SERT: Serotonin transporter; VMAT: Vesicular monoamine transporter; MAO: Monoamine oxidase.
The serotonin-1A (5-HT1A) receptor is among the most abundant and widely distributed 5-HT receptors in the brain, but is also expressed on serotonin neurons as an autoreceptor where it plays a critical role in regulating the activity of the entire serotonin system. Over-expression of the 5-HT1A autoreceptor has been implicated in reducing serotonergic neurotransmission, and is associated with major depression and suicide. Extensive characterization of the transcriptional regulation of the 5-HT1A gene (HTR1A) using cell culture systems has revealed a GC-rich "housekeeping" promoter that non-selectively drives its expression; this is flanked by a series of upstream repressor elements for REST, Freud-1/CC2D1A and Freud-2/CC2D1B factors that not only restrict its expression to neurons, but may also regulate the level of expression of 5-HT1A receptors in various subsets of neurons, including serotonergic neurons. A separate set of allele-specific factors, including Deaf1, Hes1 and Hes5 repress at the HTR1A C(-1019)G (rs6295) polymorphism in serotonergic neurons in culture, as well as in vivo. Pet1, an obligatory enhancer for serotonergic differentiation, has been identified as a potent activator of 5-HT1A autoreceptor expression. Taken together, these results highlight an integrated regulation of 5-HT1A autoreceptors that differs in several aspects from regulation of post-synaptic 5-HT1A receptors, and could be selectively targeted to enhance serotonergic neurotransmission.
