5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2C; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances, including ergot alkaloid derivatives, 1-2,5,- dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane (DOI) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathway [...] 
Major depressive disorder with suicide behavior (sMDD) is a server mood disorder, bringing tremendous burden to family and society. Although reduced gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) level has been observed in postmortem tissues of sMDD patients, the molecular mechanism by which GABA levels are altered remains elusive. In this study, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from five sMDD patients and differentiated the iPSCs to GABAergic interneurons (GINs) and ventral forebrain organoids. sMDD GINs exhibited altered neuronal morphology and increased neural firing, as well as weakened calcium signaling propagation, compared with controls. Transcriptomic sequencing revealed that a decreased expression of serotoninergic receptor 2C (5-HT2C) may cause the defected neuronal activity in sMDD. Furthermore, targeting 5-HT2C receptor, using a small molecule agonist or genetic approach, restored neuronal activity deficits in sMDD GINs. Our findings provide a human cellular model for studying the molecular mechanisms and drug discoveries for sMDD.
The 5-hydroxytryptamine 2C receptor (5-HTR2C) is a class G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) enriched in the hypothalamus and the brain stem, where it has been shown to regulate energy homeostasis, including feeding and glucose metabolism. Accordingly, 5-HTR2C has been the target of several anti-obesity drugs, though the associated side effects greatly curbed their clinical applications. Dissecting the specific neural circuits of 5-HTR2C-expressing neurons and the detailed molecular pathways of 5-HTR2C signaling in metabolic regulation will help to develop better therapeutic strategies towards metabolic disorders. In this review, we introduced the regulatory role of 5-HTR2C in feeding behavior and glucose metabolism, with particular focus on the molecular pathways, neural network, and its interaction with other metabolic hormones, such as leptin, ghrelin, insulin, and estrogens. Moreover, the latest progress in the clinical research on 5-HTR2C agonists was also discussed.
This review considers pharmacogenetics of the so called 'second-generation' antipsychotics. Findings for polymorphisms replicating in more than one study are emphasized and compared and contrasted with larger-scale candidate gene studies and genome-wide association study analyses. Variants in three types of genes are discussed: pharmacokinetic genes associated with drug metabolism and disposition, pharmacodynamic genes encoding drug targets, and pharmacotypic genes impacting disease presentation and subtype. Among pharmacokinetic markers, CYP2D6 metabolizer phenotype has clear clinical significance, as it impacts dosing considerations for aripiprazole, iloperidone and risperidone, and variants of the ABCB1 gene hold promise as biomarkers for dosing for olanzapine and clozapine. Among pharmacodynamic variants, the TaqIA1 allele of the DRD2 gene, the DRD3 (Ser9Gly) polymorphism, and the HTR2C -759C/T polymorphism have emerged as potential biomarkers for response and/or side effects. However, large-scale candidate gene studies and genome-wide association studies indicate that pharmacotypic genes may ultimately prove to be the richest source of biomarkers for response and side effect profiles for second-generation antipsychotics.
Declined memory is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Experiments in rodents and human postmortem studies suggest that serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) plays a role in memory, but the underlying mechanisms are unknown. Here, we investigate the role of 5-HT 2C receptor (5-HT(2C)R) in regulating memory. Transgenic mice expressing a humanized HTR2C mutation exhibit impaired plasticity of hippocampal ventral CA1 (vCA1) neurons and reduced memory. Further, 5-HT neurons project to and synapse onto vCA1 neurons. Disruption of 5-HT synthesis in vCA1-projecting neurons or deletion of 5-HT(2C)Rs in the vCA1 impairs neural plasticity and memory. We show that a selective 5-HT(2C)R agonist, lorcaserin, improves synaptic plasticity and memory in an AD mouse model. Cumulatively, we demonstrate that hippocampal 5-HT(2C)R signaling regulates memory, which may inform the use of 5-HT(2C)R agonists in the treatment of dementia.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review highlights recent advances in the investigation of genetic factors for antipsychotic response and side effects. RECENT FINDINGS: Antipsychotics prescribed to treat psychotic symptoms are variable in efficacy and propensity for causing side effects. The major side effects include tardive dyskinesia, antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG), and clozapine-induced agranulocytosis (CIA). Several promising associations of polymorphisms in genes including HSPG2, CNR1, and DPP6 with tardive dyskinesia have been reported. In particular, a functional genetic polymorphism in SLC18A2, which is a target of recently approved tardive dyskinesia medication valbenazine, was associated with tardive dyskinesia. Similarly, several consistent findings primarily from genes modulating energy homeostasis have also been reported (e.g. MC4R, HTR2C). CIA has been consistently associated with polymorphisms in the HLA genes (HLA-DQB1 and HLA-B). The association findings between glutamate system genes and antipsychotic response require additional replications. SUMMARY: The findings to date are promising and provide us a better understanding of the development of side effects and response to antipsychotics. However, more comprehensive investigations in large, well characterized samples will bring us closer to clinically actionable findings.
Disordered eating contributes to weight gain, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the precise mechanisms underlying the development of different eating patterns and connecting them to specific metabolic phenotypes remain unclear. We aimed to identify genetic variants linked to eating behaviour and investigate its causal relationships with metabolic traits using Mendelian randomization (MR). We tested associations between 30 genetic variants and eating patterns in individuals with T2D from the Volga-Ural region and investigated causal relationships between variants associated with eating patterns and various metabolic and anthropometric traits using data from the Volga-Ural population and large international consortia. We detected associations between HTR1D and CDKAL1 and external eating; between HTR2A and emotional eating; between HTR2A, NPY2R, HTR1F, HTR3A, HTR2C, CXCR2, and T2D. Further analyses in a separate group revealed significant associations between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and the loci in CRP, ADCY3, GHRL, CDKAL1, BDNF, CHRM4, CHRM1, HTR3A, and AKT1 genes. MR results demonstrated an inverse causal relationship between external eating and glycated haemoglobin levels in the Volga-Ural sample. External eating influenced anthropometric traits such as body mass index, height, hip circumference, waist circumference, and weight in GWAS cohorts. Our findings suggest that eating patterns impact both anthropometric and metabolic traits.
Anxiety and depression coexist with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease along with other concomitant disorders (>60%), which require multipurpose treatments. Polypharmaceutical regimens cause drug-drug interactions and adverse drug reactions, potentially avoidable in number and severity with the implementation of pharmacogenetic procedures. The accumulation of defective variants (>30 genes per patient in more than 50% of cases) in pharmagenes (pathogenic, mechanistic, metabolic, transporter, pleiotropic) influences the therapeutic response to antidementia, antidepressant and anxiolytic drugs in polyvalent regimens. APOE, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP4F2, COMT, MAOB, CHAT, GSTP1, NAT2, SLC30A8, SLCO1B1, ADRA2A, ADRB2, BCHE, GABRA1, HMGCR, HTR2C, IFNL3, NBEA, UGT1A1, ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCG2, SLC6A2, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, MTHFR and OPRM1 variants affect anxiety and depression in Alzheimer's disease.
HTR2C is one of the most relevant and investigated serotonin receptors. Its role in important brain structures such as the midbrain, the lateral septal complex, the hypothalamus, the olfactory bulb, the pons, the choroid plexus, the nucleus pallidus, the striatum and the amygdala, the nucleus accumbens and the anterior cingulated gyrus candidate it as a promising target for genetic association studies. The biological relevance of these brain structures is reviewed by way of the focus on HTR2C activity, with a special attention paid to psychiatric disorders. Evidence from the genetic association studies that dealt with HTR2C is reviewed and discussed alongside the findings derived from the neuronatmic investigations. The reasons for the discrepancies between these two sets of reports are discussed. As a result, HTR2C is shown to play a pivotal role in many different psychiatric behaviors or psychiatric related disrupted molecular balances, nevertheless, genetic association studies brought inconsistent results so far. The most replicated association involve the feeding behavior and antipsychotic induced side effects, both weight gain and motor related: Cys23Ser (rs6318) and -759C/T (rs3813929) report the most consistent results. The lack of association found in other independent studies dampens the clinical impact of these reports. Here, we report a possible explanation for discrepant findings that is poorly or not at all usually considered, that is that HTR2C may exert different or even opposite activities in the brain depending on the structure analyzed and that mRNA editing activity may compensate possible genetically controlled functional effects. The incomplete coverage of the HTR2C variants is proposed as the best cost-benefit ratio bias to fix. The evidence of brain area specific HTR2C mRNA editing opens a debate about how the brain can differently modulate stress events, and process antidepressant treatments, in different brain areas. The mRNA editing activity on HTR2C may play a major role for the negative association results.
Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a potentially irreversible and often debilitating movement disorder secondary to chronic use of dopamine receptor blocking medications. Genetic factors have been implicated in the etiology of TD. We therefore have reviewed the most promising genes associated with TD, including DRD2, DRD3, VMAT2, HSPG2, HTR2A, HTR2C, and SOD2. In addition, we present evidence supporting a role for these genes from preclinical models of TD. The current understanding of the etiogenesis of TD is discussed in the light of the recent approvals of valbenazine and deutetrabenazine, VMAT2 inhibitors, for treating TD.
Weight gain and metabolic disturbances are common side effects during psychopharmacological treatment with specific antipsychotics and antidepressants. The antipsychotics clozapine and olanzapine, and antidepressants tricyclics and mirtazapine have a high risk of inducing weight gain. Recently discovered pathophysiological mechanisms include antihistaminergic effects, activation of hypothalamic adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), modulation of hormonal signaling of ghrelin and leptin, changes in the production of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF)-alpha and adipokines such as adiponektin, and the impact of genes, in particular the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), serotonin 2C receptor (HTR2C), leptin, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) genes. Metabolic changes associated with weight gain include disturbances of glucose and lipid metabolism. Clozapine and olanzapine may, in addition to mechanisms resulting from weight gain, impair glucose metabolism by blockade of the muscarinic M3 receptor (M3R). Antidepressants associated with weight gain appear to have fewer unfavourable effects on glucose and lipid metabolism than the second-generation antipsychotics clozapine and olanzapine. To assess the risk of weight gain and its consequences for the patient's health, assessing body weight changes and metabolic monitoring in the first week of treatment as well as in long-term treatment is recommended.
Serotonin 2C receptor (5HT(2C)R) exists as different isoforms as a result of alternate splicing. A truncated variant (5HT(2C)R-trunc) has no canonical receptor function and yet shows robust expression levels throughout the brain. Recent work has demonstrated the biochemical role of this isoform and how altering levels of 5HT(2C)R-trunc leads to changes in behaviour.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Antipsychotic drugs are effective in alleviating a variety of symptoms and are medication of first choice in schizophrenia. However, a substantial interindividual variability in side effects often requires a lengthy 'trial-and-error' approach until the right medication is found for the right patient. Genetic factors have long been hypothesized to be involved and identification of related gene variants could be used to predict and tailor drug treatment. RECENT FINDINGS: This review highlighting the most recent genetic findings was conducted on the two most common and most well-studied side effects: antipsychotic-induced weight gain and tardive dyskinesia. SUMMARY: Regarding weight gain, most promising and most consistent findings were obtained in the serotonergic system (HTR2C) and with hypothalamic leptin-melanocortin genes, in particular with one variant close to the melanocortin-4-receptor (MC4R) gene. With respect to tardive dyskinesia, most interesting findings were generally obtained in genes related to the dopaminergic system (dopamine receptors D2 and D3), and more recently with glutamatergic system genes. Overall, genetic studies have been successful in identifying strong findings, in particular for antipsychotic-induced weight gain and to some extent for tardive dyskinesia. Apart from the need for replication studies in larger and well-characterized samples, the next challenge will be to create predictive algorithms that can be used for clinical practice.
Antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG) is a common adverse effect of this treatment, particularly with second-generation antipsychotics, and it is a major health problem around the world. We aimed to review the progress of pharmacogenetic studies on AIWG in the Chinese population to compare the results for Chinese with other ethnic populations, identify the limitations and problems of current studies, and provide future research directions in China. Both English and Chinese electronic databases were searched to identify eligible studies. We determined that > 25 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 19 genes have been investigated in association with AIWG in Chinese patients over the past few decades. HTR2C rs3813929 is the most frequently studied single-nucleotide polymorphism, and it seems to be the most strongly associated with AIWG in the Chinese population. However, many genes that have been reported to be associated with AIWG in other ethnic populations have not been included in Chinese studies. To explain the pharmacogenetic reasons for AIWG in the Chinese population, genome-wide association studies and multiple-center, standard, unified, and large samples are needed.
BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of people with clozapine-treated schizophrenia develop 'checking' compulsions, a phenomenon yet to be understood. AIMS: To use habit formation models developed in cognitive neuroscience to investigate the dynamic interplay between psychosis, clozapine dose and obsessive-compulsive symptoms (OCS). METHOD: Using the anonymised electronic records of a cohort of clozapine-treated patients, including longitudinal assessments of OCS and psychosis, we performed longitudinal multi-level mediation and multi-level moderation analyses to explore associations of psychosis with obsessiveness and excessive checking. Classic bivariate correlation tests were used to assess clozapine load and checking compulsions. The influence of specific genetic variants was tested in a subsample. RESULTS: A total of 196 clozapine-treated individuals and 459 face-to-face assessments were included. We found significant OCS to be common (37.9%), with checking being the most prevalent symptom. In mediation models, psychosis severity mediated checking behaviour indirectly by inducing obsessions (r = 0.07, 95% CI 0.04-0.09; P < 0.001). No direct effect of psychosis on checking was identified (r = -0.28, 95% CI -0.09 to 0.03; P = 0.340). After psychosis remission (n = 65), checking compulsions correlated with both clozapine plasma levels (r = 0.35; P = 0.004) and dose (r = 0.38; P = 0.002). None of the glutamatergic and serotonergic genetic variants were found to moderate the effect of psychosis on obsession and compulsion (SLC6A4, SLC1A1 and HTR2C) survived the multiple comparisons correction. CONCLUSIONS: We elucidated different phases of the complex interplay of psychosis and compulsions, which may inform clinicians' therapeutic decisions.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debilitating neuropsychiatric disorder that causes the patient to experience intrusive thoughts and/or to carry out repetitive, ritualized behaviors that are time consuming and impairing. OCD is familial and heritable. The genetic factors responsible for pathogenesis, however, remain largely unknown despite the numerous candidate gene studies conducted. Based on efficacy of serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) in treating OCD, serotonin system genes have been a dominant focus in OCD candidate gene studies. We review the most commonly studied candidate serotonin system gene variants (specifically in SLC6A4, HTR2A, HTR1B, and HTR2C) and their association with OCD. Although findings to date are mixed, serotonin transporter polymorphism 5-HTTLPR and HTR2A polymorphism rs6311 (or rs6313) are most consistently associated with OCD. Mixed findings may be the result of genetic complexity and phenotypic heterogeneity that future studies should account for. Homogenous patient subgroups reflecting OCD symptom dimensions, OCD subtypes, and sex should be used for gene discovery.
BACKGROUND: An adverse maternal environment (AME) predisposes progeny towards cognitive impairment in humans and mice. Cognitive impairment associates with hippocampal dysfunction. An important regulator of hippocampal function is the hippocampal serotonergic system. Dysregulation of hippocampal serotonin receptor 2c (HTR2c) expression is linked with cognitive impairment. HTR2c contains multiple mRNA variants and isoforms that are epigenetically regulated including DNA methylation, histone modifications, and small nucleolar RNA MBII-52. We tested the hypotheses that AME increases HTR2c variant expression and alters epigenetic modifications along the HTR2c gene locus. METHODS: We create an AME through maternal Western diet and prenatal environmental stress in the mouse. We analyzed hippocampal HTR2c and variants' expression, DNA methylation and histone modifications along the gene locus, and MBII-52 levels in postnatal day 21 offspring. RESULTS: AME significantly increased the expressions of total HTR2c and full-length variants (V201 and V202) concurrently with an altered epigenetic profile along the HTR2c gene locus in male offspring hippocampi. Moreover, increased full-length variants' expression in AME males was in line with increased MBII-52 levels. CONCLUSIONS: AME affects male offspring hippocampal expression of HTR2c and full-length variants via epigenetic mechanisms. Altered hippocampal HTR2c expression may contribute to cognitive impairment seen in adult males in this model. IMPACT: The key message of our article is that an adverse maternal environment increases expression of total HTR2c mRNA and protein, alters proportions of HTR2c mRNA variants, and impacts HTR2c epigenetic modifications in male offspring hippocampi relative to controls. Our findings add to the literature by providing the first report of altered HTR2c mRNA variant expression in association with altered epigenetic modifications in the hippocampus of offspring mice exposed to an adverse maternal environment. Our findings suggest that an adverse maternal environment affects the expression of genes previously determined to regulate cognitive function through an epigenetic mechanism in a sex-specific manner.
Suicide is one of the leading causes of death in the world. Its aetiology is complex and diverse, however, epidemiological studies show that suicidal behavior is partly heritable. Neurobiological evidence implicates serotonergic dysfunction in suicidality, stimulating genetic research to focus on genes related to the serotonergic system. In this paper, we review evidence from studies examining the association between various serotonergic genes (Tryptophan Hydroxylase genes: TPH1; TPH2, Serotonin Transporter gene: 5-HTTLPR in SLC6A4, Serotonin Receptor genes: HTR1A, HTR2A, HTR1B, HTR2C and Monoamine Oxidase A gene: MAOA) and suicidal behavior. The data show associations between variation on the TPH1 gene and 5-HTTLPR gene and violent suicidal behavior in Caucasian populations, with the least inconsistencies. Results are mixed for the TPH2 gene and serotonin receptor genes, but for some genes, studies that include haplotypic analyses or that examine a larger coding region of the genes tend to provide more reliable results. Findings on endophenotypes of suicidality, such as aggression and impulsivity traits, show positive associations for the TPH1, HTR2A, and MAOA genes, but need further replication, since negative associations are also occasionally reported. Since genes can only partially explain suicidal risk, several studies during the past decade have tried to incorporate environmental factors in the susceptibility model. Studies to date show that variation on the 5-HTTLPR, MAOA and HTR2A gene can interact with stressful life events to increase risk for suicidal behavior. Limitations of case-control studies are discussed and future considerations are put forward with regard to endophenotypic measurements and gene-environment interactions.
Second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs), such as risperidone, clozapine and olanzapine, are the most common drug treatments for schizophrenia. SGAs presented an advantage over first-generation antipsychotics (FGAs), particularly regarding avoidance of extrapyramidal symptoms. However, most SGAs, and to a lesser degree FGAs, are linked to substantial weight gain. This substantial weight gain is a leading factor in patient non-compliance and poses significant risk of diabetes, lipid abnormalities (that is, metabolic syndrome) and cardiovascular events including sudden death. The purpose of this article is to review the advances made in the field of pharmacogenetics of antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG). We included all published association studies in AIWG from December 2006 to date using the Medline and ISI web of knowledge databases. There has been considerable progress reaffirming previous findings and discovery of novel genetic factors. The HTR2C and leptin genes are among the most promising, and new evidence suggests that the DRD2, TNF, SNAP-25 and MC4R genes are also prominent risk factors. Further promising findings have been reported in novel susceptibility genes, such as CNR1, MDR1, ADRA1A and INSIG2. More research is required before genetically informed, personalized medicine can be applied to antipsychotic treatment; nevertheless, inroads have been made towards assessing genetic liability and plausible clinical application.
Antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG) is a prevalent side effect of antipsychotic treatment, particularly with second generation antipsychotics, such as clozapine and olanzapine. At this point, there is virtually nothing that can be done to predict who will be affected by AIWG. However, hope for the future of prediction lies with genetic risk factors. Many genes have been studied for their association with AIWG with a variety of promising findings. This review will focus on genetic findings in the last year and will discuss the first epigenetic and biomarker findings as well. Although there are significant findings in many other genes, the most consistently replicated findings are in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), the serotonin 2C receptor (HTR2C), the leptin, the neuropeptide Y (NPY) and the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1) genes. The study of genetic risk variants poses great promise in creating predictive tools for side effects such as AIWG.
Serotonin receptor 2C (HTR2C) is one of the attractive candidate genes for studying pathophysiology of mental disorders. Here we overviewed the genetic, expression and RNA editing studies suggesting the close relationship between HTR2C and major mental disorders including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depression. We especially focused on the human studies as well as with reference to relevant cellular and animal models. Possible significance of genetic variations affecting expression and RNA editing and appropriate animal models that mimic human mental disorders were discussed.
