5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2B; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various ergot alkaloid derivatives and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathways. Signaling activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system that modulates the activity o [...] 
Nerves can support tumor development by secreting neurotransmitters that promote cancer cell proliferation and invasion. 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) is a critical neurotransmitter in the gastrointestinal nervous system, and 5-HT signaling has been shown to play a role in tumorigenesis. Here, we found that expression of the 5-HT receptor HTR2B was significantly elevated in human gastric adenocarcinoma tissues compared with nontumor tissues, and high HTR2B expression corresponded to shorter patient survival. Both 5-HT and a specific HTR2B agonist enhanced gastric adenocarcinoma cell viability under metabolic stress, reduced cellular and lipid reactive oxygen species, and suppressed ferroptosis; conversely, HTR2B loss or inhibition with a selective HTR2B antagonist yielded the inverse tumor suppressive effects. In a patient-derived xenograft tumor model, HTR2B-positive tumors displayed accelerated growth, which was inhibited by HTR2B antagonists. Single-cell analysis of human gastric adenocarcinoma tissues revealed enrichment of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and fatty acid metabolism-related gene clusters in cells expressing HTR2B compared with HTR2B-negative cells. Mechanistically, HTR2B cooperated with Fyn to directly regulate p85 activity and trigger the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, which led to increased expression of HIF1alpha and ABCD1 along with decreased levels of lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis. Together, these findings demonstrate that HTR2B activity modulates PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling to stimulate gastric cancer cell survival and indicate that HTR2B expression could be a potential prognostic biomarker in patients with gastric cancer. SIGNIFICANCE: Nerve cancer cross-talk mediated by HTR2B inhibits lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis in gastric cancer cells and promotes viability under metabolic stress, resulting in increased tumor growth and decreased patient survival.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Desmoplasia and poor vascularity cause severe metabolic stress in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs). Serotonin (5-HT) is a neuromodulator with neurotransmitter and neuroendocrine functions that contributes to tumorigenesis. We investigated the role of 5-HT signaling in the growth of pancreatic tumors. METHODS: We measured the levels of proteins that regulate 5-HT synthesis, packaging, and degradation in pancreata from Kras(G12D/+)/Trp53(R172H/+)/Pdx1-Cre (KPC) mice, which develop pancreatic tumors, as well as in PDAC cell lines and a tissue microarray containing 81 human PDAC samples. We also analyzed expression levels of proteins involved in 5-HT synthesis and degradation by immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue microarray containing 311 PDAC specimens, and associated expression levels with patient survival times. 5-HT level in 14 matched PDAC tumor and non-tumor tissues were analyzed by ELISA. PDAC cell lines were incubated with 5-HT and cell survival and apoptosis were measured. We analyzed expression of the 5-HT receptor HTR2B in PDAC cells and effects of receptor agonists and antagonists, as well as HTR2B knockdown with small hairpin RNAs. We determined the effects of 5-HT stimulation on gene expression profiles of BxPC-3 cells. Regulation of glycolysis by 5-HT signaling via HTR2B was assessed by immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation analyses, as well as by determination of the extracellular acid ratio, glucose consumption, and lactate production. Primary PDACs, with or without exposure to SB204741 (a selective antagonist of HTR2B), were grown as xenograft tumors in mice, and SB204741 was administered to tumor-bearing KPC mice; tumor growth and metabolism were measured by imaging analyses. RESULTS: In immunohistochemical analysis of a tissue microarray of PDAC specimens, increased levels of TPH1 and decreased level of MAOA, which regulate 5-HT synthesis and degradation, correlated with stage and size of PDACs and shorter patient survival time. We found levels of 5-HT to be increased in human PDAC tissues compared with non-tumor pancreatic tissues, and PDAC cell lines compared with non-transformed pancreatic cells. Incubation of PDAC cell lines with 5-HT increased proliferation and prevented apoptosis. Agonists of HTR2B, but not other 5-HT receptors, promoted proliferation and prevented apoptosis of PDAC cells. Knockdown of HTR2B in PDAC cells, or incubation of cells with HTR2B inhibitors, reduced their growth as xenograft tumors in mice. We observed a correlation between 5-HT and glycolytic flux in PDAC cells; levels of metabolic enzymes involved in glycolysis, the phosphate pentose pathway, and hexosamine biosynthesis pathway increased significantly in PDAC cells following 5-HT stimulation. 5-HT stimulation led to formation of the HTR2B-LYN-p85 complex, which increased PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling and the Warburg effect by increasing protein levels of MYC and HIF1A. Administration of SB204741 to KPC mice slowed growth and metabolism of established pancreatic tumors and prolonged survival of the mice. CONCLUSIONS: Human PDACs have increased levels of 5-HT, and PDAC cells increase expression of its receptor, HTR2B. These increases allow for tumor glycolysis under metabolic stress and promote growth of pancreatic tumors and PDAC xenograft tumors in mice.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter widely conserved from ancient organisms lacking nervous systems through man, and its presence precedes the appearance of nervous systems on both developmental and evolutionary time scales. Serotonin receptor subtypes diversified approximately at the time period during which vertebrates diverged from invertebrates. The biological and clinical importance of serotonin receptors, may benefit from studies on their evolution. Although potentially informative about their pathophysiological functions, reviews on this topic are sparse. Several observations support basic functions mediated by serotonin, both in periphery and central nervous system. In particular, 5-HT(2B) receptors have been implicated in embryonic development, including cell proliferation, survival, and/or differentiation, in either neural crest cell derivatives, myeloid cell lineage, or heart embryogenesis. In this review, we collected existing data about the genomic association between the RPN2 proteasome subunit gene Psmd1 and the 5-HT(2B) receptor gene Htr2b. We discuss about the possibility that, during genome duplications, a single copy of this pair of genes has been conserved, suggesting a strong selective pressure. Many basic physiological functions in which serotonin system is involved could be linked to the early association of these two genes in pre-vertebrates. Their evolutionary association highlights the possibility that the 5-HT(2B) receptor gene, Htr2b, is the common ancestor of 5-HT(2A/2B/2C)-receptor subfamily. Disentangling these possibilities could bring new understanding of the respective importance of these receptors in pathophysiology of serotonin.
Pregnancy in placental mammals places unique demands on the insulin-producing beta-cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The pancreas anticipates the increase in insulin resistance that occurs late in pregnancy by increasing beta-cell numbers and function earlier in pregnancy. In rodents, this beta-cell expansion depends on secreted placental lactogens that signal through the prolactin receptor. Then at the end of pregnancy, the beta-cell population contracts back to its pre-pregnancy size. In the current review, we focus on how glucose metabolism changes during pregnancy, how beta-cells anticipate these changes through their response to lactogens and what molecular mechanisms guide the adaptive compensation. In addition, we summarize current knowledge of beta-cell adaptation during human pregnancy and what happens when adaptation fails and gestational diabetes ensues. A better understanding of human beta-cell adaptation to pregnancy would benefit efforts to predict, prevent and treat gestational diabetes.
A number of neurotransmitters have been detected in tumor microenvironment and proved to modulate cancer oncogenesis and progression. We previously found that biosynthesis and secretion of neurotransmitter 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) was elevated in colorectal cancer cells. In this study, we discovered that the HTR2B receptor of 5-HT was highly expressed in colorectal cancer tumor tissues, which was further identified as a strong risk factor for colorectal cancer prognostic outcomes. Both pharmacological blocking and genetic knocking down HTR2B impaired migration of colorectal cancer cell, as well as the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. Mechanistically, HTR2B signaling induced ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1 (S6K1) activation via the Akt/mTOR pathway, which triggered cAMP-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB1) phosphorylation (Ser 133) and translocation into the nucleus, then the phosphorylated CREB1 acts as an activator for ZEB1 transcription after binding to CREB1 half-site (GTCA) at ZEB1 promoter. As a key regulator of EMT, ZEB1, therefore, enhances migration and EMT process in colorectal cancer cells. We also found that HTR2B-specific antagonist (RS127445) treatment significantly ameliorated metastasis and reversed EMT process in both HCT116 cell tail-vein-injected pulmonary metastasis and CT26 cell intrasplenic-injected hepatic metastasis mouse models. IMPLICATIONS: These findings uncover a novel regulatory role of HTR2B signaling on colorectal cancer metastasis, which provide experimental evidences for potential HTR2B-targeted anti-colorectal cancer metastasis therapy.
BACKGROUND: Managing nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas (NFPAs) is difficult due to limited drug treatments. Cabergoline's (CAB) effectiveness for NFPAs is debated. This study explores the role of HTR2B in NFPAs and its therapeutic potential. METHODS: We conducted screening of bulk RNA-sequencing data to analyze HTR2B expression levels in NFPA samples. In vitro and in vivo experiments were performed to evaluate the effects of HTR2B modulation on tumor growth and cell cycle regulation. Mechanistic insights into the HTR2B-mediated signaling pathway were elucidated using pharmacological inhibitors and molecular interaction assays. RESULTS: Elevated HTR2B expression was detected in NFPA samples, which was associated with increased tumor survival. Inhibition of HTR2B activity resulted in the suppression of tumor growth through modulation of the G2M cell cycle. The inhibition of HTR2B with PRX-08066 was found to block STAT3 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation by interfering with the Galphaq/PLC/PKC pathway. A direct interaction between PKC-gamma and STAT3 was critical for STAT3 activation. CAB was shown to activate pSTAT3 via HTR2B, reducing its therapeutic potential. However, the combination of an HTR2B antagonist with CAB significantly inhibited tumor cell proliferation in HTR2B-expressing pituitary tumor cell lines, a xenografted pituitary tumor model, and patient-derived samples. Analysis of patient-derived data indicated that a distinct molecular pattern characterized by upregulated HTR2B/PKC-gamma and downregulated BTG2/GADD45A may benefit from combination treatment with CAB and PRX-08066. CONCLUSIONS: HTR2B is a potential therapeutic target for NFPAs, and its inhibition could improve CAB efficacy. A dual therapy approach may be beneficial for NFPA patients with high HTR2B expression.
Insulin resistance is a cornerstone of obesity-related complications such as type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. A high rate of lipolysis is known to be associated with insulin resistance, and inhibiting adipose tissue lipolysis improves obesity-related insulin resistance. Here, we demonstrate that inhibition of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) signaling through serotonin receptor 2B (HTR2B) in adipose tissues ameliorates insulin resistance by reducing lipolysis in visceral adipocytes. Chronic high-fat diet (HFD) feeding increased Htr2b expression in epididymal white adipose tissue, resulting in increased HTR2B signaling in visceral white adipose tissue. Moreover, HTR2B expression in white adipose tissue was increased in obese humans and positively correlated with metabolic parameters. We further found that adipocyte-specific Htr2b-knockout mice are resistant to HFD-induced insulin resistance, visceral adipose tissue inflammation, and hepatic steatosis. Enhanced 5-HT signaling through HTR2B directly activated lipolysis through phosphorylation of hormone-sensitive lipase in visceral adipocytes. Moreover, treatment with a selective HTR2B antagonist attenuated HFD-induced insulin resistance, visceral adipose tissue inflammation, and hepatic steatosis. Thus, adipose HTR2B signaling could be a potential therapeutic target for treatment of obesity-related insulin resistance.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Serotonin (5-HT) is a biogenic monoamine that acts as a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and as a paracrine, exocrine, or endocrine messenger in peripheral tissues. In this study, we hypothesized that inhibition of serotonin signaling using 5-HT receptor 2B (HTR2B) inhibitors could potentially impede the progression of CRC. We treated CT26 and COLO-205 cells with SB204741, an inhibitor of HTR2B, and evaluated CRC cell proliferation and migration. We then evaluated the effects of HTR2B inhibition in a xenograft mouse model of human colorectal cancer. We also evaluated the role of a novel inhibitor, GM-60186, using both in vitro and in vivo models. RNA sequencing analysis was performed to elucidate the underlying mechanism of the anti-tumor effects of pharmacological inhibition of HTR2B on CRC. In both CRC cell lines and xenograft mouse models, we show that pharmacological inhibition of HTR2B with SB204741 and GM-60186 significantly inhibits CRC cell proliferation and migration. HTR2B inhibition leads to the suppression of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling, a critical pathway in CRC pathogenesis. Notably, transcriptomic analysis reveals distinct gene expression changes associated with HTR2B inhibition, providing insight into its therapeutic potential. In this study, we found that pharmacological inhibition of HTR2B suppressed CRC proliferation via ERK signaling. In addition, we proposed a novel HTR2B inhibitor for the treatment of CRC. This study highlights the potential role of HTR2B signaling in CRC. These inhibitors may contribute to new therapeutics for CRC treatment.
BACKGROUND: Colon cancer (CC) is a heterogeneous disease that is categorized into four Consensus Molecular Subtypes (CMS) according to gene expression. Patients with loco-regional CC (stages II/III) lack prognostic factors, making it essential to analyze new molecular markers that can delineate more aggressive tumors. Aberrant methylation of genes that are essential in crucial mechanisms such as epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) contributes to tumor progression in CC. We evaluate the presence of hyper- and hypomethylation in subrogate IHC markers used for CMS classification (CDX2, FRMD6, HTR2B, ZEB1) of 144 stage II/III patients and CC cell lines by pyrosequencing. ZEB1 expression was also studied in control and shRNA-silenced CC cell lines and in paired normal tissue/tumors by quantitative PCR. The pattern of ZEB1 staining was also analyzed in methylated/unmethylated tumors by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: We describe for the first time the hypermethylation of ZEB1 gene and the hypomethylation of the FRMD6 gene in 32.6% and 50.9% of tumors, respectively. Additionally, we confirm the ZEB1 re-expression by epigenetic drugs in methylated cell lines. ZEB1 hypermethylation was more frequent in CMS1 patients and, more importantly, was a good prognostic factor related to disease-free survival (p = 0.015) and overall survival (p = 0.006) in our patient series, independently of other significant clinical parameters such as patient age, stage, lymph node involvement, and blood vessel and perineural invasion. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant methylation is present in the subrogate genes used for CMS classification. Our results are the first evidence that ZEB1 is hypermethylated in CC and that this alteration is an independent factor of good prognosis.
Macrophages display a ample plethora of effector functions whose acquisition is promoted by the surrounding cytokine and cellular environment. Depending on the stimulus, macrophages become specialized ("polarized") for either pathogen elimination, tissue repair and wound healing or immunosuppression. This "polarization" versatility allows macrophages to critically contribute to tissue homeostasis, as they promote initiation and resolution of inflammatory responses. As a consequence, deregulation of the tissue macrophage polarization balance is an etiological agent of chronic inflammation, autoimmune diseases, cancer and even obesity and insulin resistance. In the present review we describe current concepts on the molecular basis and the patho-physiological implications of macrophage polarization, and describe its modulation by serotonin (5-HT), a neurotransmitter that regulates inflammation and tissue repair via a large set of receptors (5-HTR1-7). 5-HT modulates the phenotypic and functional polarization of macrophages, and contributes to the maintenance of an anti-inflammatory state mainly via 5-HTR2B and 5-HTR7, whose activation has a great impact on macrophage gene expression profile. The identification of 5-HTR2B and 5-HTR7 as functionally-relevant polarization markers suggests their therapeutic value in inflammatory pathologies as well as their potential involvement in linking the immune and nervous systems.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is often associated with lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), which has the same etiology (smoking, inflammation, oxidative stress, microenvironmental changes, and genetics). Smoking, inflammation, and airway remodeling are the most important and classical mechanisms of COPD comorbidity in LUSC patients. Cancer can occur during repeated airway damage and repair (airway remodeling). Changes in the inflammatory and immune microenvironments, which can cause malignant transformation of some cells, are currently being revealed in both LUSC and COPD patients. We obtained the GSE76925 dataset from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Screening for possible COPD biomarkers was performed using the LASSO regression model and a random forest classifier. The compositional patterns of the immune cell fraction in COPD patients were determined using CIBERSORT. HTR2B expression was analyzed using validation datasets (GSE47460, GSE106986, and GSE1650). HTR2B expression in COPD cell models was determined via real-time quantitative PCR. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker expression levels were determined after knocking down or overexpressing HTR2B. HTR2B function and mechanism in LUSC were analyzed with the Kaplan‒Meier plotter database. HTR2B expression was inhibited to detect changes in LUSC cell proliferation. A total of 1082 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the GSE76925 dataset (371 genes were significantly upregulated, and 711 genes were significantly downregulated). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs were mainly enriched in the p53 signaling and beta-alanine metabolism pathways. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs were largely related to transcription initiation from the RNA polymerase I promoter and to the regulation of mononuclear cell proliferation. The LASSO regression model and random forest classifier results revealed that HTR2B, DPYS, FRY, and CD19 were key COPD genes. Immune cell infiltration analysis indicated that these genes were closely associated with immune cells. Analysis of the validation sets suggested that HTR2B was upregulated in COPD patients. HTR2B was significantly upregulated in COPD cell models, and its upregulation was associated with increased EMT marker expression. Compared with that in bronchial epithelial cells, HTR2B expression was upregulated in LUSC cells, and inhibiting HTR2B expression led to the inhibition of LUSC cell proliferation. In conclusions, HTR2B might be a new biomarker and therapeutic target in COPD patients with LUSC.
Growing evidence indicates that transient receptor potential (TRP) channels contribute to different forms of pruritus. However, the endogenous mediators that cause itch through transient receptor potential channels signaling are poorly understood. In this study, we show that genetic deletion or pharmacological antagonism of TRPV4 attenuated itch in a mouse model of psoriasis induced by topical application of imiquimod. Human psoriatic lesions showed increased expression of several microRNAs, including the miR-203b-3p, which induced a calcium ion response in rodent dorsal root ganglion neurons and scratching behavior in mice through 5-HTR2B activation and the protein kinase C‒dependent phosphorylation of TRPV4. Computer simulation revealed that the miR-203b-3p core sequence (GUUAAGAA) that causes 5-HTR2B/TRPV4-dependent itch targets the extracellular side of 5-HTR2B by interacting with a portion of the receptor pocket consistent with its activation. Overall, we reveal the unconventional pathophysiological role of an extracellular microRNA that can behave as an itch promoter through 5-HTR2B and TRPV4.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) can be classified into four consensus molecular subtypes (CMS) according to genomic aberrations and gene expression profiles. CMS is expected to be useful in predicting prognosis and selecting chemotherapy regimens. However, there are still no reports on the relationship between the morphology and CMS. METHODS: This retrospective study included 55 subjects with T2 CRC undergoing surgical resection, of whom 30 had the depressed type and 25 the protruded type. In the classification of the CMS, we first defined cases with deficient mismatch repair as CMS1. And then, CMS2/3 and CMS4 were classified using an online classifier developed by Trinh et al. The staining intensity of CDX2, HTR2B, FRMD6, ZEB1, and KER and the percentage contents of CDX2, FRMD6, and KER are input into the classifier to obtain automatic output classifying the specimen as CMS2/3 or CMS4. RESULTS: According to the results yielded by the online classifier, of the 30 depressed-type cases, 15 (50%) were classified as CMS2/3 and 15 (50%) as CMS4. Of the 25 protruded-type cases, 3 (12%) were classified as CMS1 and 22 (88%) as CMS2/3. All of the T2 CRCs classified as CMS4 were depressed CRCs. More malignant pathological findings such as lymphatic invasion were associated with the depressed rather than protruded T2 CRC cases. CONCLUSIONS: Depressed-type T2 CRC had a significant association with CMS4, showing more malignant pathological findings such as lymphatic invasion than the protruded-type, which could explain the reported association between CMS4 CRC and poor prognosis.
Serotonin is involved in appetite regulation and energy homeostasis. Recently, it has been reported that 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2B (Htr2b) and tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (Tph1) play major role in beta-cell proliferation in mouse during pregnancy. We investigated the genetic association of HTR2B and TPH1 with risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and measures of obesity, in 869 Korean GDM women and carefully selected 632 nondiabetic control subjects. Six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HTR2B and ten SNPs in TPH1 were selected for genotyping according to their tagging status. Genetic variants in HTR2B and TPH1 were not associated with the risk of GDM. In GDM women, SNPs of TPH1 were significantly associated with weight gain during pregnancy. In nondiabetic controls, SNPs of TPH1 were associated with waist circumference and BMI. We also found that a variant of TPH1 (rs623580) was associated with BMI in a genome-wide association study comprised of 8,842 subjects. Although genetic variants in HTR2B and TPH1 were not associated with risk of GDM, we found significant association of these variants with measures of obesity. However, further replication studies in a different population are required to confirm our findings.
The neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) has been linked to multiple aspects of cognition. For example, in rodents, discrimination and reversal learning are altered by experimentally induced changes in brain serotonin levels, and reduced expression of the 5-HT(2B) receptor subtype in mice and humans is associated with decreased serotonergic tone and increased behavioral impulsivity. Serotonin modulates cognitive flexibility as well as fear and anxiety, but the specific contributions of 5-HT(2B) receptors to these behaviors is unknown. The current study assessed mice with partial Htr2b deletion for performance on a touchscreen-based pairwise visual discrimination and reversal learning task followed by a test of cued fear learning. Male Htr2b heterozygous mice (+/-) and littermate controls (+/+) were trained to discriminate between two visual stimuli presented on a touch-sensitive screen, one which predicted delivery of a 14-mg food pellet and the other which was not rewarded. Once discrimination performance criterion was attained, the stimulus-reward contingencies were reversed. Htr2b +/- mice were faster to reach discrimination criterion than +/+ controls, and made fewer errors. Htr2b +/- mice were also slower to make responses and collect rewards. Conversely, measures of reversal learning were not different between genotypes. Pavlovian cued fear conditioning was also normal in Htr2b +/-mice. These data demonstrate a selective improvement in touchscreen-based discrimination learning in mice with partial deletion of the 5-HT(2B) receptor, and provide further insight into the role of the 5-HT(2B) receptor in cognition.
In preclinical studies serotonin stimulates and dopamine inhibits tumour growth and angiogenesis. Information regarding serotonin and dopamine receptor (5-HTR and DRD) expression in human cancers is limited. Therefore, we screened a large tumour set for receptor mRNA overexpression using functional genomic mRNA (FGmRNA) profiling, and we analysed protein expression and location of 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR2B, DRD1, and DRD2 with immunohistochemistry in different tumour types. With FGmRNA profiling 11,756 samples representing 43 tumour types were compared to 3,520 normal tissue samples to analyse receptor overexpression. 5-HTR2B overexpression was present in many tumour types, most frequently in uveal melanomas (56%). Receptor overexpression in rare cancers included 5-HTR1B in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (17%), DRD1 in ependymoma (30%) and synovial sarcoma (21%), and DRD2 in astrocytoma (13%). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated high 5-HTR2B protein expression on melanoma and gastro-intestinal stromal tumour cells and endothelial cells of colon, ovarian, breast, renal and pancreatic tumours. 5-HTR1B expression was predominantly low. High DRD2 protein expression on tumour cells was observed in 48% of pheochromocytomas, and DRD1 expression ranged from 14% in melanoma to 57% in renal cell carcinoma. In conclusion, 5-HTR1B, 5-HTR2B, DRD1, and DRD2 show mRNA overexpression in a broad spectrum of common and rare cancers. 5-HTR2B protein is frequently highly expressed in human cancers, especially on endothelial cells. These findings support further investigation of especially 5HTR2B as a potential treatment target.
Herein, we examined insulin resistance (IR), insulin sensitivity (IS), beta cell activity, and glucose metabolism in subjects with antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), and whether the serotonin 2B (5-HT2B) receptor and testosterone have a role in energy metabolism. A cohort of subjects belonging to a founder population that included 98 ASPD males, aged 25-30, was divided into groups based on the presence of a heterozygous 5-HT2B receptor loss-of-function gene mutation (HTR2B Q20*; n = 9) or not (n = 89). Serum glucose and insulin levels were measured in a 5 h oral glucose tolerance test (75 g) and indices describing IR, IS, and beta cell activity were calculated. Body mass index (BMI) was also determined. Concentrations of the serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid were measured in cerebrospinal fluid, and testosterone levels from serum. An IR-like state comprising high IR, low IS, and high beta cell activity indices was observed among ASPD subjects without the HTR2B Q20* allele. By contrast, being an ASPD HTR2B Q20* carrier appeared to be preventive of these pathophysiologies. The HTR2B Q20* allele and testosterone predicted lower BMI independently, but an interaction between HTR2B Q20* and testosterone lead to increased insulin sensitivity among HTR2B Q20* carriers with low testosterone levels. The HTR2B Q20* allele also predicted reduced beta cell activity and enhanced glucose metabolism. Reduced 5-HT2B receptor function at low or normal testosterone levels may be protective of obesity. Results were observed among Finnish males having an antisocial personality disorder, which limits the generality.
BACKGROUND: G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) play crucial roles in regulating islet function, with Galphas- and Galphaq-coupled receptors being linked to the stimulation of insulin secretion. We have quantified the mRNA expression of 384 non-olfactory GPCRs in islets isolated from lean and obese organ donors to determine alterations in islet GPCR mRNA expression in obesity. METHODS: RT-qPCR was used to quantify GPCR mRNAs relative to five reference genes (ACTB, GAPDH, PPIA, TBP, and TFRC) in human islets isolated from lean (BMI = 22.6 +/- 0.5) and obese (BMI = 32.0 +/- 0.8) donors. RESULTS: Overall, 197 and 256 GPCR mRNAs were detected above trace level in islets from lean and obese donors, respectively, with 191 GPCR mRNAs being common to the lean and obese groups. 40.9% (n = 157) and 27.1% (n = 104) of the mRNAs were expressed at trace level whilst 7.8% and 6.3% were absent in islets from lean and obese donors, respectively. Hundred and seventeen GPCR mRNAs were upregulated at least twofold in islets from obese donors, and there was >twofold downregulation of 21 GPCR mRNAs. Of particular interest, several receptors signalling via Galphas or Galphaq showed significant mRNA upregulation in islets from obese donors (fold increase: PTH2R: 54.0 +/- 14.6; MC2R: 34.3 +/- 11.5; RXFP1: 8.5 +/- 2.1; HTR2B: 6.0 +/- 2.0; GPR110: 3.9 +/- 1.2; PROKR2: 3.9 +/- 0.7). CONCLUSIONS: Under conditions of obesity, human islets showed significant alterations in mRNAs encoding numerous GPCRs. The increased expression of Galphas- and Galphaq-coupled receptors that have not previously been investigated in beta-cells opens up possibilities of novel therapeutic candidates that may lead to the potentiation of insulin secretion and/or beta-cell mass to regulate glucose homeostasis.
The proper maturation of emotional and sensory circuits requires fine-tuning of serotonin (5-HT) level during early postnatal development. Consistently, dysfunctions of the serotonergic system have been associated with neurodevelopmental psychiatric diseases, including autism spectrum disorders (ASD). However, the mechanisms underlying the developmental effects of 5-HT remain partially unknown, one obstacle being the action of 5-HT on different cell types. Here, we focused on microglia, which play a role in brain wiring refinement, and we investigated whether the control of these cells by 5-HT is relevant for neurodevelopment and spontaneous behaviors in mice. Since the main 5-HT sensor in microglia is the 5-HT(2B) receptor subtype, we prevented 5-HT signaling specifically in microglia by conditional invalidation of the Htr2b gene in these cells. We observed that abrogating the serotonergic control of microglia during early postnatal development affects the phagolysosomal compartment of these cells and their proximity to dendritic spines and perturbs neuronal circuits maturation. Furthermore, this early ablation of microglial 5-HT(2B) receptors leads to adult hyperactivity in a novel environment and behavioral defects in sociability and flexibility. Importantly, we show that these behavioral alterations result from a developmental effect, since they are not observed when microglial Htr2b invalidation is induced later, at P30 onward. Thus, a primary alteration of 5-HT sensing in microglia, during a critical time window between birth and P30, is sufficient to impair social and flexibility skills. This link between 5-HT and microglia may explain the association between serotonergic dysfunctions and behavioral traits like impaired sociability and inadaptability to novelty, which are prominent in psychiatric disorders such as ASD.
Degenerative mitral valve (MV) regurgitation (MR) is a highly prevalent heart disease that requires surgery in severe cases. Here, we show that a decrease in the activity of the serotonin transporter (SERT) accelerates MV remodeling and progression to MR. Through studies of a population of patients with MR, we show that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) use and SERT promoter polymorphism 5-HTTLPR LL genotype were associated with MV surgery at younger age. Functional characterization of 122 human MV samples, in conjunction with in vivo studies in SERT(-/-) mice and wild-type mice treated with the SSRI fluoxetine, showed that diminished SERT activity in MV interstitial cells (MVICs) contributed to the pathophysiology of MR through enhanced serotonin receptor (HTR) signaling. SERT activity was decreased in LL MVICs partially because of diminished membrane localization of SERT. In mice, fluoxetine treatment or SERT knockdown resulted in thickened MV leaflets. Similarly, silencing of SERT in normal human MVICs led to up-regulation of transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) and collagen (COL1A1) in the presence of serotonin. In addition, treatment of MVICs with fluoxetine not only directly inhibited SERT activity but also decreased SERT expression and increased HTR2B expression. Fluoxetine treatment and LL genotype were also associated with increased COL1A1 expression in the presence of serotonin in MVICs, and these effects were attenuated by HTR2B inhibition. These results suggest that assessment of both 5-HTTLPR genotype and SERT-inhibiting treatments may be useful tools to risk-stratify patients with MV disease to estimate the likelihood of rapid disease progression.
