5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 3A; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. This receptor is a ligand- gated ion channel, which when activated causes fast, depolarizing responses in neurons. It is a cation-specific, but otherwise relatively nonselective, ion channel.
Chronic inflammation is a key driver for colitis-associated colorectal cancer. 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), a neurotransmitter, has been reported to promote inflammation in the gastrointestinal tract. However, the mechanism behind this remains unclear. In this study, we found that 5-HT levels, as well as the expression of tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1), the 5-HT biosynthesis rate-limiting enzyme, were significantly upregulated in colorectal tumor tissues from patients with colorectal cancer, colorectal cancer mouse models, and colorectal cancer cell lines when compared with normal colorectal tissues or epithelial cell lines. Colorectal cancer cell-originated 5-HT enhanced NLRP3 inflammasome activation in THP-1 cells and immortalized bone marrow-derived macrophages (iBMDM) via its ion channel receptor, HTR3A. Mechanistically, HTR3A activation led to Ca(2+) influx, followed by CaMKIIalpha phosphorylation (Thr286) and activation, which then induced NLRP3 phosphorylation at Ser198 (mouse: Ser194) and inflammasome assembling. The NLRP3 inflammasome mediated IL1beta maturation, and release upregulated 5-HT biosynthesis in colorectal cancer cells by inducing TPH1 transcription, revealing a positive feedback loop between 5-HT and NLRP3 signaling. Silencing TPH1 or HTR3A by short hairpin RNA slowed down tumor growth in an established CT26 and iBMDM coimplanted subcutaneous allograft colorectal cancer mouse model, whereas treatment with TPH1 inhibitor 4-chloro-DL-phenylalanine or HTR3A antagonist tropisetron alleviated tumor progression in an azoxymethane/dextran sodium sulfate-induced colorectal cancer mouse model. Addressing the positive feedback loop between 5-HT and NLRP3 signaling could provide potential therapeutic targets for colorectal cancer.
Pregnancy in placental mammals places unique demands on the insulin-producing beta-cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The pancreas anticipates the increase in insulin resistance that occurs late in pregnancy by increasing beta-cell numbers and function earlier in pregnancy. In rodents, this beta-cell expansion depends on secreted placental lactogens that signal through the prolactin receptor. Then at the end of pregnancy, the beta-cell population contracts back to its pre-pregnancy size. In the current review, we focus on how glucose metabolism changes during pregnancy, how beta-cells anticipate these changes through their response to lactogens and what molecular mechanisms guide the adaptive compensation. In addition, we summarize current knowledge of beta-cell adaptation during human pregnancy and what happens when adaptation fails and gestational diabetes ensues. A better understanding of human beta-cell adaptation to pregnancy would benefit efforts to predict, prevent and treat gestational diabetes.
Adrenal glands are the major organs releasing catecholamines and regulating our stress response. The mechanisms balancing generation of adrenergic chromaffin cells and protecting against neuroblastoma tumors are still enigmatic. Here we revealed that serotonin (5HT) controls the numbers of chromaffin cells by acting upon their immediate progenitor "bridge" cells via 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 3A (HTR3A), and the aggressive HTR3A(high) human neuroblastoma cell lines reduce proliferation in response to HTR3A-specific agonists. In embryos (in vivo), the physiological increase of 5HT caused a prolongation of the cell cycle in "bridge" progenitors leading to a smaller chromaffin population and changing the balance of hormones and behavioral patterns in adulthood. These behavioral effects and smaller adrenals were mirrored in the progeny of pregnant female mice subjected to experimental stress, suggesting a maternal-fetal link that controls developmental adaptations. Finally, these results corresponded to a size-distribution of adrenals found in wild rodents with different coping strategies.
OBJECTIVE: This study explored the potentially modifiable factors for depression and major depressive disorder (MDD) from the MR-Base database and further evaluated the associations between drug targets with MDD. METHODS: We analyzed two-sample of Mendelian randomization (2SMR) using genetic variant depression ( n = 113,154) and MDD ( n = 208,811) from Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS). Separate calculations were performed with modifiable risk factors from MR-Base for 1,001 genomes. The MR analysis was performed by screening drug targets with MDD in the DrugBank database to explore the therapeutic targets for MDD. Inverse variance weighted (IVW), fixed-effect inverse variance weighted (FE-IVW), MR-Egger, weighted median, and weighted mode were used for complementary calculation. RESULTS: The potential causal relationship between modifiable risk factors and depression contained 459 results for depression and 424 for MDD. Also, the associations between drug targets and MDD showed that SLC6A4, GRIN2A, GRIN2C, SCN10A, and IL1B expression are associated with an increased risk of depression. In contrast, ADRB1, CHRNA3, HTR3A, GSTP1, and GABRG2 genes are candidate protective factors against depression. CONCLUSION: This study identified the risk factors causally associated with depression and MDD, and estimated 10 drug targets with significant impact on MDD, providing essential information for formulating strategies to prevent and treat depression.
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a chronic pain syndrome that affects the central nervous system and generates disability, which is characterized by generalized pain, fatigue, and functional decline. In this review, we aimed to identify the polymorphisms related to the pathophysiology of FM and the clinical characteristics generated by genetic influence. Only original studies with genes related to FM were considered, totaling 27 articles. The genes found were: MTHFR, RGS4, MYT1L, TACR1, SCN9A, DRD3, ADRB2, IL-4, HLA-DRB1, EDN1, CNR1, TAAR1, OPRM1, ADRA1A, ADRB3, BDNF, GRIA4, HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR2A, SERPINA 1 or A1AT, NRXN3, GCH1, MEFV, TRPV3, SLC6A4, ACE I/D, TSPO, COMT, and MAOA. Several genes related to different pain syndromes and altered pain thresholds have been identified and some polymorphisms were related to susceptibility to FM. It was observed that 73.33% of the genes related to FM were also associated with some psychological disorders, such as anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, and obsessive and compulsive disorder, and 40.00% with pain sensitivity and/or migraine, besides other disorders associated (drug addiction, autoimmune disorders, circulatory problems, and metabolic alterations). This review demonstrated an association of FM and genetic polymorphisms that can expand our knowledge about the pathophysiology of this disease.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Risk for alcohol use disorders (AUDs) is influenced by gene-environment interactions. Environmental factors can affect gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation. This review outlines the findings regarding the association of DNA methylation and AUDs. METHODS: We searched PubMed (by April 2016) and identified 29 studies that examined the association of DNA methylation and AUDs. We also evaluated the methods used in these studies. RESULTS: Two studies demonstrated elevated global (repetitive element) DNA methylation levels in AUD subjects. Fifteen candidate gene studies showed hypermethylation of promoter regions of six genes (AVP, DNMT3B, HERP, HTR3A, OPRM1, and SNCA) or hypomethylation of the GDAP1 promoter region in AUD subjects. Five genome-wide DNA methylation studies demonstrated widespread DNA methylation changes across the genome in AUD subjects. Six studies showed significant correlations of DNA methylation with gene expression in AUD subjects. Three studies revealed interactive effects of genetic variation and DNA methylation on susceptibility to AUDs. Most studies analyzed AUD-associated DNA methylation changes in the peripheral blood; a few studies examined DNA methylation changes in postmortem brains of AUD subjects. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: Chronic alcohol consumption may result in DNA methylation changes, leading to neuroadaptations that may underlie some of the mechanisms of AUD risk and persistence. Future studies are needed to confirm the few existing results, and then to elucidate whether DNA methylation changes are the cause or consequence of AUDs. SCIENTIFIC SIGNIFICANCE: DNA methylation profiles may be used to assess AUD status or monitor AUD treatment response. (Am J Addict 2017;26:502-515).
OBJECTIVE: Clozapine response varies widely from person to person, which may be due to inter-individual genetic variability. This umbrella review aims to summarize the current evidence on associations between pharmacodynamic genes and response to clozapine treatment. METHODS: Following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis methodology, a systematic literature search was conducted in the PubMed and EMBASE databases from inception to November 2021 to identify systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that examined genetic determinants of clozapine response. The quality of the reviews was assessed with the AMSTAR-2 tool. RESULTS: From a total of 128 records, 10 studies representing nine systematic reviews and one meta-analysis met our inclusion criteria. The overall quality of the included studies was poor. All systematic reviews concluded that the results of primary studies were largely negative or conflicting. Most evidence was found for an association with clozapine response and rs6313 and rs6314 within HTR2A and rs1062613 within HTR3A in the serotonergic system. CONCLUSIONS: Conclusive evidence for associations between genetic variants and clozapine response is still lacking. Hypothesis-generating genetic studies in large, well-characterized study populations are urgently needed to obtain more consistent and clinically informative results. Future studies may also include multi-omics approaches to identify novel genetic determinants associated with clozapine response.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HTR3A and HTR3B have been reported to be associated with bipolar disorder in European and Japanese populations. We explored the roles of 21 tag SNPs in HTR3A and HTR3B in susceptibility to bipolar disorder in a Chinese cohort. Twenty-one Tag SNPs were genotyped in a study consisting of 130 patients with bipolar disorder, who visited Shandong Mental Health Center between June 2013 and May 2014, and 109 healthy individuals as controls. All of the tag SNPs were genotyped using Sequenom MassArray matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight spectrometry. Plink 1.07, Haploview 4.2, and SPSS 20.0 were used for the analysis of the genotypes and the associations of the haplotypes with bipolar disorder. Association analyses of tag SNPs detected significant associations with the A allele in HTR3A rs1176719 (P = 0.030) and the C allele in HTR3A rs1176713 (P = 0.048). Haplotype-based association analyses indicated a statistically significant (P = 0.035) five-SNP haplotype (rs1062613:C, rs11604247:C, rs1176722:G, rs2276302:A, rs1176719:G) of linkage disequilibrium in block 3. Analysis of our small Chinese sample revealed a significant association of HTR3A with bipolar disorder, but yielded no evidence of an association between HTR3B and bipolar disorder. Furthermore, evidence for an association was found for a haplotype of HTR3A. Studies with larger Chinese samples are needed to verify our findings.
Despite current advances in antiemetic treatments, between 30% to and 60% of oncology patients experience chemotherapy-induced nausea (CIN) and 13% to 33% report chemotherapy-induced vomiting (CIV). Inter-individual differences are observed in the occurrence and severity of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV). This review summarizes and critiques studies on associations between occurrence and severity of CINV and polymorphisms in serotonin receptor, drug metabolism, and drug transport pathway genes. Sixteen studies evaluated the associations between the occurrence and/or severity of CINV and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Across these studies, three SNPs in 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor (5-HT3R) genes, two alleles of the cytochrome P450 family 2 subfamily D member 6 (CYP2D6) gene, and three SNPs in ATP binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) gene were associated with the occurrence and severity of CINV. Given the limited number of polymorphisms evaluated, additional research is warranted to identify new mechanisms to develop more targeted therapies.
Serotonin type 3 (5-HT(3)) receptors are ligand-gated ion channels built by five subunits of diverse composition. In humans, five subunits exist (5-HT3A-E) which are encoded by the genes HTR3A-E and are expressed in various isoforms. Recently, the importance of factors influencing receptor expression became clear, such as chaperones and microRNAs. Owing to their expression profile and physiological functions, 5-HT(3) receptors have been implicated in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and psychiatric disorders. Interestingly, HTR3 variants have now been shown to be associated with these conditions. This underlines the potential of 5-HT(3) receptors as therapeutic targets and may enable personalised therapies in the future.
The 5-HT3B subunit was first cloned in 1999, and co-expression with the 5-HT3A subunit results in heteromeric 5-HT(3)AB receptors that are functionally distinct from homomeric 5-HT(3)A receptors. The affinities of competitive ligands at the two receptor subtypes are usually similar, but those of non-competitive antagonists that bind in the pore often differ. A competitive ligand and allosteric modulator that distinguishes 5-HT(3)A from 5-HT(3)AB receptors has recently been described, and the number of non-competitive antagonists identified with this ability has increased in recent years. In this review, we discuss the differences between 5-HT(3)A and 5-HT(3)AB receptors and describe the possible sites of action of compounds that can distinguish between them.
Disordered eating contributes to weight gain, obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D), but the precise mechanisms underlying the development of different eating patterns and connecting them to specific metabolic phenotypes remain unclear. We aimed to identify genetic variants linked to eating behaviour and investigate its causal relationships with metabolic traits using Mendelian randomization (MR). We tested associations between 30 genetic variants and eating patterns in individuals with T2D from the Volga-Ural region and investigated causal relationships between variants associated with eating patterns and various metabolic and anthropometric traits using data from the Volga-Ural population and large international consortia. We detected associations between HTR1D and CDKAL1 and external eating; between HTR2A and emotional eating; between HTR2A, NPY2R, HTR1F, HTR3A, HTR2C, CXCR2, and T2D. Further analyses in a separate group revealed significant associations between metabolic syndrome (MetS) and the loci in CRP, ADCY3, GHRL, CDKAL1, BDNF, CHRM4, CHRM1, HTR3A, and AKT1 genes. MR results demonstrated an inverse causal relationship between external eating and glycated haemoglobin levels in the Volga-Ural sample. External eating influenced anthropometric traits such as body mass index, height, hip circumference, waist circumference, and weight in GWAS cohorts. Our findings suggest that eating patterns impact both anthropometric and metabolic traits.
The 5-HT(3) receptor is a ligand-gated ion channel composed of five subunits. To date, five different human subunits are known, 5-HT(3AE), which are encoded by the serotonin receptor genes HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR3C, HTR3D and HTR3E, respectively. Functional receptors are pentameric complexes of diverse composition. Different receptor subtypes seem to be involved in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV), irritable bowel syndrome and psychiatric disorders. 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists are established in the therapy of CINV and irritable bowel syndrome. HTR3A and HTR3B polymorphisms may also contribute to the etiology of psychiatric disorders and serve as predictors in CINV and in the medical treatment of psychiatric patients.
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death around the world. Adenocarcinoma is the most common histological type and has various histologic subtypes: lepidic, acinar, papillary, solid, and invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma. Histologic subtypes are related to invasiveness of tumors; eg, lepidic subtype is less invasive than acinar/papillary subtype. HTR3A is the main subunit of 5-hydroxytryptamine 3 (5-HT3) receptors, which are the only ligand-gated ion channels in seven families of 5-HT receptors. Although 5-HT3 receptor is expressed mainly throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems, some papers report the effect of 5-HT3 receptors on tumor cells, including lung cancer. However, whether HTR3A correlates with histopathological findings such as the histologic subtypes or the distribution in an individual sample remains unclear. Immunohistochemically, we revealed that the higher expression level of HTR3A was detected in acinar, papillary, and solid adenocarcinoma than in adenocarcinoma in situ and lepidic adenocarcinoma; the former was a more aggressive subtype than the latter. We also showed the relationship between HTR3A expression and Ki-67 positivity, widely used as a proliferation marker. Moreover, we generated HTR3A-knockdown lung adenocarcinoma cells and showed that the HTR3A knockdown attenuated proliferation by ERK phosphorylation. Our results indicated that HTR3A expression was related to proliferation in lung adenocarcinoma, by means of both in vitro and immunohistochemical assays on clinical samples. We showed the therapeutic potential of a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, tropisetron, for the treatment of lung adenocarcinoma.
The aim of this study was to investigate experimentally if 5-HT3 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) contribute to pain perception and efficacy of the 5-HT3-antagonist granisetron and sex differences. Sixty healthy participants were genotyped regarding HTR3A (rs1062613) and HTR3B (rs1176744). First, pain was induced by bilateral hypertonic saline injections (HS, 5.5%, 0.2 mL) into the masseter muscles. Thirty min later the masseter muscle on one side was pretreated with 0.5 mL granisetron (1 mg/mL) and on the other side with 0.5 mL placebo (isotonic saline) followed by another HS injection (0.2 mL). Pain intensity, pain duration, pain area and pressure pain thresholds (PPTs) were assessed after each injection. HS evoked moderate pain, with higher intensity in the women (P = 0.023), but had no effect on PPTs. None of the SNPs influenced any pain variable in general, but compared to men, the pain area was larger in women carrying the C/C (HTR3A) (P = 0.015) and pain intensity higher in women with the A/C alleles (HTR3B) (P = 0.019). Pre-treatment with granisetron reduced pain intensity, duration and area to a lesser degree in women (P < 0.05), but the SNPs did not in general influence the efficacy of granisetron. Women carrying the C/T & T/T (HTR3A) genotype had less reduction of pain intensity (P = 0.041) and area (P = 0.005), and women with the C/C genotype (HTR3B) had less reduction of pain intensity (P = 0.030), duration (P = 0.030) and area compared to men (P = 0.017). In conclusion, SNPs did not influence experimental muscle pain or the effect of granisetron on pain variables in general, but there were some sex differences in pain variables that seem to be influenced by genotypes. However, due to the small sample size further research is needed before any firm conclusions can be drawn.
Increasing evidence supports the involvement of both heritable and environmental risk factors in major depression (MD) and suicidal behavior (SB). Studies investigating gene-environment interaction (G x E) may be useful for elucidating the role of biological mechanisms in the risk for mental disorders. In the present paper, we review the literature regarding the interaction between genes modulating brain functions and stressful life events in the etiology of MD and SB and discuss their potential added benefit compared to genetic studies only. Within the context of G x E investigation, thus far, only a few reliable results have been obtained, although some genes have consistently shown interactive effects with environmental risk in MD and, to a lesser extent, in SB. Further investigation is required to disentangle the direct and mediated effects that are common or specific to MD and SB. Since traditional G x E studies overall suffer from important methodological limitations, further effort is required to develop novel methodological strategies with an interdisciplinary approach.
In this paper, a total of 20 sites of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the serotonin 3 receptor A gene (HTR3A) and B gene (HTR3B) are used for feature fusion with age, education and marital status information, and the grid search-support vector machine (GS-SVM), the convolutional neural network (CNN) and the convolutional neural network combined with long and short-term memory (CNN-LSTM) are used to classify and discriminate between alcohol-dependent patients (AD) and the non-alcohol-dependent control group. The results show that 19 SNPs combined with academic qualifications have the best discrimination effect. In the GS-SVM, the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) is 0.87, the AUC of CNN-LSTM is 0.88, and the performance of the CNN model is the best, with an AUC of 0.92. This study shows that the CNN model can more accurately discriminate AD than the SVM to treat patients in time.
BRAF mutation is a representative oncogenic mutation, with a frequency of 60% in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), but the reasons for the poor prognosis and more aggressive course of BRAF-mutated PTC are controversial. Tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) is an essential factor permitting the development and progression of malignancy, but whether TIME participates in the prognosis of BRAF-mutated PTC has not yet been reported. The primary goal of the present study was to provide a comprehensive TIME-related prognostic model to increase the predictive accuracy of progression-free survival (PFS) in patients with BRAF-mutated PTC. In this study, we analyzed the mRNA-seq data and corresponding clinical data of PTC patients obtained from the TCGA database. By calculating the TIME scores (immune score, stromal score and ESTIMATE score), the BRAF mutation group (n=237) was dichotomized into the high- and low-score groups. By functional analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in different high/low score groups, we identified 2 key TIME-related genes, HTR3A and NIPAL4, which affected PFS in BRAF-mutated PTC. A risk scoring system was developed by multivariate Cox analysis based on the abovementioned 2 TIME-related genes. Then, the BRAF-mutated cohort was divided into the high- and low-risk groups using the median risk score as a cutoff. A high risk score correlated positively with a higher HTR3A/NIPAL4 expression level but negatively with PFS in BRAF-mutated PTC. Ultimately, a nomogram was constructed by combining risk score with clinical parameter (Tumor stage), and the areas under the ROC curve (AUCs) of the nomogram for predicting 1-, 3- and 5-year PFS were then calculated and found to be 0.694, 0.707 and 0.738, respectively, indicating the improved accuracy and clinical utility of the nomogram versus the risk score model in the BRAF-mutated PTC cohort. Moreover, we determined the associations between prognostic genes or risk score and immune cell infiltration by two-way ANOVA. In the high-risk score, high HTR3A expression, and high NIPAL4 expression groups, higher infiltration of immune cells was found. Collectively, these findings confirm that the nomogram is effective in predicting the outcome of BRAF-mutated PTC and will add a spatial dimension to the developing risk stratification system.
Rosacea is a common, chronic inflammatory skin disease of poorly understood origin. Based on its clinical features (flushing, chronic inflammation, fibrosis) and trigger factors, a complex pathobiology involving different regulatory systems can be anticipated. Although a wealth of research has shed new light over recent years on its pathophysiology, the precise interplay of the various dysregulated systems (immune, vascular, nervous) is still poorly understood. Most authors agree on 4 major clinical subtypes of rosacea: erythematotelangiectatic rosacea, papulopustular rosacea, phymatous rosacea, and ocular rosacea. Still, it needs to be elucidated whether these subtypes develop in a consecutive serial fashion or if any subtypes may occur individually as part of a syndrome. Because rosacea often affects multiple family members, a genetic component is also suspected, but the genetic basis of rosacea remains unclear. During disease manifestation and early stage, the innate immune system and neurovascular dysregulation seem to be driving forces in rosacea pathophysiology. Dissection of major players for disease progression and in advanced stages is severely hampered by the complex activation of the innate and adaptive immune systems, enhanced neuroimmune communication, profound blood vessel and possibly lymphatic vessel changes, and activation of almost every resident cell in the skin. This review discusses some of the recent findings and aims to build unifying hypotheses for a modern understanding of rosacea pathophysiology.
Interaction of genetic predispositions and environmental factors via epigenetic mechanisms have been hypothesized to play a central role in Panic Disorder (PD) aetiology and therapy. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), including exposure interventions, belong to the most efficient treatments of PD although its biological mechanism of action remains unknown. For the first time, we explored the dynamics and magnitude of DNA-methylation and immune cell-type composition during CBT (n = 38) and the therapeutic exposure intervention (n = 21) to unravel their biological correlates and identify possible biomarkers of therapy success. We report transient regulation of the CD4 + T-Cells, Natural Killers cells, Granulocytes during exposure and a significant change in the proportions of CD4 + T cells, CD8 + T cells and B-Cells and Granulocytes during therapy. In an epigenome-wide association study we identified cg01586609 located in a CpG island and annotated to the serotonin receptor 3 A (HTR3A) to be differentially methylated during fear exposure and regulated at gene expression level with significant differences between remitters and non-remitters (p = 0.028). We moreover report cg01699630 annotated to ARG1 to undergo long lasting methylation changes during therapy (paired t test, genome-wide adj.p value = 0.02). This study reports the first data-driven biological candidates for epigenetically mediated effects of acute fear exposure and CBT in PD patients. Our results provide evidence of changes in the serotonin receptor 3 A methylation and expression during fear exposure associated with different long-term CBT trajectories and outcome, making it a possible candidate in the search of markers for therapy success. Finally, our results add to a growing body of evidence showing immune system changes associated with PD.
