5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 5A; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
OBJECTIVE: Hashimoto's thyroiditis, also known as chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis, is a common autoimmune thyroiditis, which mostly occurs in young and middle-aged women. It can be manifested as hyperthyroidism in the early stage; hypothyroidism may appear with the progression of the disease. Studies have shown that multiple factors such as heredity, environment, and autoimmunity are involved in the pathogenesis, but the specific mechanism is not clear. In our study, we tried to find key genes and potential molecular mechanisms of Hashimoto's thyroiditis to provide new ideas for the therapeutic targets of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. METHOD: GSE138198 and GSE54958 were downloaded from the GEO database, and two datasets were combined for analysis. The combined data were normalized to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), and GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks and hub genes between DEGs were identified. We also used the miRWalk database to identify regulatory miRNAs associated with expressions of DEGs. RESULT: We identified 182 DEGs (160 upregulated and 22 downregulated) between Hashimoto's disease patients and the healthy control group. GO analysis showed that DEGs were mostly concentrated in detection of chemical stimulus involved in sensory perception, intermediate filament cytoskeleton, and olfactory receptor activity. KEGG pathway analysis showed that DEGs were mainly related to olfactory transduction. Some members of the KRTAP family and HTR5A, KNG1, DRD3, HTR1D, TAS2R16, INSL5, TAS2R42, and GRM7 are the most important hub genes in the PPI network. In addition, we recognized that OTUD4, LLPH, and ECHDC1 were the most important hub genes in the miRNA-target gene network. CONCLUSION: In this study, a series of bioinformatics analyses of DEGs were performed to identify the key genes and pathways associated with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. These genes and pathways provide a more detailed understanding of the pathogenesis of Hashimoto's disease and provide new ideas for the therapeutic targets of Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
The 5-HT1A receptor (HTR1A) and the 5-HT5A receptor (HTR5A) are key 5-HT receptors with distinct inhibitory functions. Studies have been conducted to investigate the association of a few HTR1A polymorphisms with schizophrenia, producing conflicting results, and the relationship between HTR5A and schizophrenia has not yet been well investigated. We aimed to examine the association of HTR1A and HTR5A with schizophrenia and executive function. The study included a discovery stage with 1,115 patients and 2,289 controls and a replication stage with 2,128 patients and 3,865 controls. A total of 30 common SNPs in HTR1A and HTR5A were genotyped in the discovery stage, and significantly associated SNPs were genotyped in the replication stage. We identified that two SNPs (rs878567 in HTR1A and rs1800883 in HTR5A) were significantly associated with schizophrenia in both datasets, and similar results were observed in imputation and haplotype association analyses. Moreover, we found that SNP rs1800883 significantly interacted with executive function when processing the perseverative error of Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in patients. Our results provide further supportive evidence of the effect of HTR1A and HTR5A on the etiology of schizophrenia and suggest that the selected genetic variations in HTR5A may be involved in impaired executive function.
Epidemiological studies implicate stress as an important factor contributing to the increasing prevalence of metabolic disorders. Studies have correlated visceral obesity and atherosclerosis with hyper-cortisolemia, a sequela of chronic psychological stress in humans and animals. Although several hormonal markers of stress have been associated with various metabolic disorders, the mechanism by which these hormones alter metabolic functions have not been established. We used an in vitro model system, culturing 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes and RAW 264.7 macrophages in the presence or absence of cortisol, to analyze cell signaling pathways mediating changes in metabolic functions. Our analysis revealed that cortisol up-regulated the expression and function of two serotonin (S) receptors, HTR2c and HTR5a. HTR2c and HTR5a were also directly involved in mediating cortisol enhanced adipogenesis when pre-adipocytes were cultured alone or in the presence of macrophages. Finally, cortisol treatment of pre-adipocytes co-cultured with macrophages enhanced adipogenesis in both macrophages and pre-adipocytes.
BACKGROUND: Breast tumor initiating cells (BTIC) are stem-like cells that initiate and sustain tumor growth, and drive disease recurrence. Identifying therapies targeting BTIC has been hindered due primarily to their scarcity in tumors. We previously reported that BTIC frequency ranges between 15% and 50% in multiple mammary tumors of 3 different transgenic mouse models of breast cancer and that this frequency is maintained in tumor cell populations cultured in serum-free, chemically defined media as non-adherent tumorspheres. The latter enabled high-throughput screening of small molecules for their capacity to affect BTIC survival. Antagonists of several serotonin receptors (5-HTRs) were among the hit compounds. The most potent compound we identified, SB-699551, selectively binds to 5-HT5A, a Galpha(i/o) protein coupled receptor (GPCR). METHODS: We evaluated the activity of structurally unrelated selective 5-HT5A antagonists using multiple orthogonal assays of BTIC frequency. Thereafter we used a phosphoproteomic approach to uncover the mechanism of action of SB-699551. To validate the molecular target of the antagonists, we used the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technology to conditionally knockout HTR5A in a breast tumor cell line. RESULTS: We found that selective antagonists of 5-HT5A reduced the frequency of tumorsphere initiating cells residing in breast tumor cell lines and those of patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) that we established. The most potent compound among those tested, SB-699551, reduced the frequency of BTIC in ex vivo assays and acted in concert with chemotherapy to shrink human breast tumor xenografts in vivo. Our phosphoproteomic experiments established that exposure of breast tumor cells to SB-699551 elicited signaling changes in the canonical Galpha(i/o)-coupled pathway and the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) axis. Moreover, conditional mutation of the HTR5A gene resulted in the loss of tumorsphere initiating cells and BTIC thus mimicking the effect of SB-699551. CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide genetic, pharmacological and phosphoproteomic evidence consistent with the on-target activity of SB-699551. The use of such agents in combination with cytotoxic chemotherapy provides a novel therapeutic approach to treat breast cancer.
Neurotransmitters such as serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) work closely with leptin and insulin to fine-tune the metabolic and neuroendocrine responses to dietary intake. Losing the sensitivity to excess food intake can lead to obesity, diabetes, and a multitude of behavioral disorders. It is largely unclear how different serotonin receptor subtypes respond to and integrate metabolic signals and which genetic variations in these receptor genes lead to individual differences in susceptibility to metabolic disorders. In an obese cohort of families of Northern European descent (n = 2,209), the serotonin type 5A receptor gene, HTR5A, was identified as a prominent factor affecting plasma levels of triglycerides (TG), supported by our data from both genome-wide linkage and targeted association analyses using 28 publicly available and 12 newly discovered single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), of which 3 were strongly associated with plasma TG levels (P < 0.00125). Bayesian quantitative trait nucleotide (BQTN) analysis identified a putative causal promoter SNP (rs3734967) with substantial posterior probability (P = 0.59). Functional analysis of rs3734967 by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed distinct binding patterns of the two alleles of this SNP with nuclear proteins from glioma cell lines. In conclusion, sequence variants in HTR5A are strongly associated with high plasma levels of TG in a Northern European population, suggesting a novel role of the serotonin receptor system in humans. This suggests a potential brain-specific regulation of plasma TG levels, possibly by alteration of the expression of HTR5A.
This study aimed to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with milk cholesterol (CHL) content via a genome wide association study (GWAS). Milk CHL content was determined by gas chromatography and expressed as mg of CHL in 100 g of fat (CHL_fat) or in 100 mg of milk (CHL_milk). GWAS was performed with 1,183 cows and 40,196 SNPs using a univariate linear mixed model. Two and 20 SNPs were significantly associated with CHL_fat and CHL_milk, respectively. The important regions for CHL_fat and CHL_milk were at 41.9 Mb on chromosome (BTA) 17 and 1.6-3.2 Mb on BTA 14, respectively. DGAT1, PTPN1, INSIG1, HEXIM1, SDS, and HTR5A genes, also known to be associated with human plasma CHL phenotypes, were identified as potential candidate genes for bovine milk CHL. Additional new potential candidate genes for milk CHL were RXFP1, FAM198B, TMEM144, CXXC4, MAML2 and CDH13. Enrichment analyses suggested that identified candidate genes participated in cell-cell signaling processes and are key members in tight junction, focal adhesion, Notch signaling and glycerolipid metabolism pathways. Furthermore, identified transcription factors such as PPARD, LXR, and NOTCH1 might be important in the regulation of bovine milk CHL content. The expression of several positional candidate genes (such as DGAT1, INSIG1 and FAM198B) and their correlation with milk CHL content were further confirmed with RNA sequence data from mammary gland tissues. This is the first GWAS on bovine milk CHL. The identified markers and candidate genes need further validation in a larger cohort for use in the selection of cows with desired milk CHL content.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) appears to play a role in the pathophysiology of a range of neuropsychiatric disorders, and serotonergic agents are of central importance in neuropharmacology. Genes encoding various components of the 5-HT system are being studied as risk factors in depression, schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, aggression, alcoholism, and autism. Recently, pharmacogenetic research has begun to examine possible genetic influences on therapeutic response to drugs affecting the serotonin system. Genes regulating the synthesis (TPH), storage (VMAT2), membrane uptake (HTT), and metabolism (MAOA) of 5-HT, as well as a number of 5-HT receptors (HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A, HTR2C, and HTR5A), have been studied and this initial research is reviewed here. After a brief introduction to serotonin neurobiology and a general discussion of appropriate genetic methodology, each of the major 5-HT-related genes and their encoded proteins are reviewed in turn. For each gene, relevant polymorphisms and research on functional variants are discussed; following brief reviews of the disorder or trait association and linkage studies, pharmacogenetic studies performed to date are covered. The critical and manifold roles of the serotonin system, the great abundance of targets within the system, the wide range of serotonergic agents-available and in development-and the promising preliminary results suggest that the serotonin system offers a particularly rich area for pharmacogenetic research.
BACKGROUND: Neuroblastoma (NB) is a complex disease, and the current understanding of NB biology is limited. Deregulation in genomic imprinting is a common event in malignancy. Since imprinted genes play crucial roles in early fetal growth and development, their role in NB pathogenesis could be suggested. METHODS: We examined alterations in DNA methylation patterns of 369 NB tumours at 49 imprinted differentially methylated regions (DMRs) and assessed its association with overall survival probabilities and selected clinical and genomic features of the tumours. In addition, an integrated analysis of DNA methylation and allele-specific copy number alterations (CNAs) was performed, to understand the correlation between the two molecular events. RESULTS: Several imprinted regions with aberrant methylation patterns in NB were identified. Regions that underwent loss of methylation in > 30% of NB samples were DMRs annotated to the genes NDN, SNRPN, IGF2, MAGEL2 and HTR5A and regions with gain of methylation were NNAT, RB1 and GPR1. Methylation alterations at six of the 49 imprinted DMRs were statistically significantly associated with reduced overall survival: MIR886, RB1, NNAT/BLCAP, MAGEL2, MKRN3 and INPP5F. RB1, NNAT/BLCAP and MKRN3 were further able to stratify low-risk NB tumours i.e. tumours that lacked MYCN amplification and 11q deletion into risk groups. Methylation alterations at NNAT/BLCAP, MAGEL2 and MIR886 predicted risk independently of MYCN amplification or 11q deletion and age at diagnosis. Investigation of the allele-specific CNAs demonstrated that the imprinted regions that displayed most alterations in NB tumours harbor true epigenetic changes and are not result of the underlying CNAs. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant methylation in imprinted regions is frequently occurring in NB tumours and several of these regions have independent prognostic value. Thus, these could serve as potentially important clinical epigenetic markers to identify individuals with adverse prognosis. Incorporation of methylation status of these regions together with the established risk predictors may further refine the prognostication of NB patients.
OBJECTIVE: In adult female rodents, ovarian estradiol (E(2)) regulates body weight, adiposity, energy balance, physical activity, glucose-insulin homeodynamics, and lipid metabolism, while protecting against diet-induced obesity. The same E(2) actions are presumed to occur in primates, but confirmatory studies have been lacking. METHODS: We investigated the consequences of ovariectomy (OVX) and E(2) replacement in female marmoset monkeys on major metabolic and morphometric endpoints. Sexual behavior and uterine diameters were assessed as positive controls for E(2) treatment efficacy. Metabolic parameters were measured 1 mo prior to OVX, and 3 and 6 mo thereafter. During OVX, animals received empty or E(2)-containing silastic s.c. implants. To test the interaction between E(2) and diet, both treatment groups were assigned to either a higher fat diet (HFD) or a low-fat diet (LFD). RESULTS: As anticipated, OVX animals exhibited diminished frequency (p = 0.04) of sexually receptive behavior and increased rejection behavior (p = 0.04) toward their male partners compared with E(2)-treated OVX females. OVX also decreased (p = 0.01) uterine diameter. There were no treatment effects on total caloric intake. There were no significant effects of OVX, E(2) treatment, or diet on body weight, body composition, energy expenditure, physical activity, fasting glucose, or glucose tolerance. Regardless of E(2) treatment, serum triglycerides were higher (p = 0.05) in HFD than LFD females. Postmortem qPCR analysis of hypothalamic tissues revealed higher mRNA expression (p < 0.001) for PGR in E(2)-treated monkeys versus OVX controls regardless of diet, but no differences between groups in other selected metabolic genes. In contrast, regardless of E(2) treatment, there was a decreased mRNA expression of PGC1alpha (PPARGC1A), HTR1A, and HTR5A in HFD compared with LFD females. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings, overall, document a greatly diminished role for ovarian E(2) in the metabolic physiology of a female primate, and encourage consideration that primates, including humans, evolved metabolic control systems regulated by extra-ovarian E(2) or are generally less subject to E(2) regulation.
Adolescence is a period of profound neurophysiological, behavioral, cognitive and psychological changes, but not much is known about the underlying molecular neural mechanisms. The aim of this study was to systematically analyze expression levels of the genes forming serotonergic and dopaminergic synapses during adolescence. We analyzed the mRNA expression profiles of genes that code for all components of serotonergic and dopaminergic synapses, in 16 brain areas from human and non-human primates from public domain databases, to detect genes whose expression changes during adolescence. Two serotonin receptors, HTR1E and HTR1B had expression levels that exhibit a sharp transition in the prefrontal cortex in adolescence, but we found no similar transition in the dopaminergic system. A similar but smoother rise in expression levels is observed in HTR4 and HTR5A, and in HTR1E and HTR1B in three other expression datasets published. An earlier rise is observed in HTR1A, and a smooth and significant rise with age is observed in the expression of HTR1E in microarray measurements in macaque monkeys. The expression of HTR1E and HTR1B is correlated across subjects within each age group, suggesting that they are controlled by common mechanisms. These results point to HTR1E and HTR1B as major candidate genes involved in adolescence maturation processes, and to their operation through common control mechanisms. The maturation profiles may also involve several other 5-HT receptors, including the genes HTR5A, HTR4 and HTR1A.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: The genetic variations in serotonin-related genes may be associated with antidepressant treatment response in major depressive disorder (MDD). The tryptophan hydroxylase-1 (TPH1) gene and serotonin 5A receptor (HTR5A) gene are known to be involved in serotonin biosynthesis and signal transduction, respectively. The purpose of this study was to investigate a possible interaction between the TPH1 gene and the HTR5A gene in the treatment outcome of escitalopram in MDD. METHODS: In total, 245 patients diagnosed with MDD were recruited, and their symptoms were evaluated using the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating scale (HAMD-17). The association between the TPH1 218A/C and HTR5A 12A/T polymorphisms and the clinical outcomes (remission, response and changes in HAMD-17 score) was investigated after 2, 4 and 8 weeks of escitalopram treatment using multiple logistic regression or multiple linear regression analysis. RESULTS: No significant associations of TPH1 or HTR5A gene polymorphisms were observed with either response rate or remission rate at 2, 4 and 8 weeks after escitalopram treatment. In addition, the gene-gene interaction between TPH1 and HTR5A genes was not associated with the treatment outcome. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that TPH1 218A/C and HTR5A 12A/T polymorphisms cannot predict treatment response in major depression.
Personality is a determinant of behavior and lifestyle associated with health and human diseases. Although personality is known to be a heritable trait, its polygenic nature has made the identification of genetic variants elusive. We performed a genome-wide association study on 1089 Korean women aged 18-40 years whose personality traits were measured with the Revised NEO Personality Inventory for the five-factor model of personality. To reduce environmental factors that may influence personality traits, this study was restricted to young adult women. In the discovery phase, we identified variants of PTPRD (protein tyrosine phosphatase, receptor type D) that associated this gene with the Openness domain. Other genes that were previously reported to be associated with neurological phenotypes were also associated with personality traits. In particular, DRD1 and OR1A2 were linked to Neuroticism, NKAIN2 with Extraversion, HTR5A with Openness and DRD3 with Agreeableness. Data from our replication study of 2090 subjects confirmed the association between OR1A2 and Neuroticism. We first identified and confirmed a novel region on OR1A2 associated with Neuroticism [corrected]. Candidate genes for psychiatric disorders were also enriched. These findings contribute to our understanding of the genetic architecture of personality traits and provide critical clues to the neurobiological mechanisms that influence them.
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a debilitating disorder of unknown etiology with no known lesions, diagnostic markers or therapeutic intervention. The pathophysiology of CFS remains elusive, although abnormalities in the central nervous system (CNS) have been implicated, particularly hyperactivity of the serotonergic (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) system and hypoactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Since alterations in 5-HT signaling can lead to physiologic and behavioral changes, a genetic evaluation of the 5-HT system was undertaken to identify serotonergic markers associated with CFS and potential mechanisms for CNS abnormality. A total of 77 polymorphisms in genes related to serotonin synthesis (TPH2), signaling (HTR1A, HTR1E, HTR2A, HTR2B, HTR2C, HTR3A, HTR3B, HTR4, HTR5A, HTR6, and HTR7), transport (SLC6A4), and catabolism (MAOA) were examined in 137 clinically evaluated subjects (40 CFS, 55 with insufficient fatigue, and 42 non-fatigued, NF, controls) derived from a population-based CFS surveillance study in Wichita, Kansas. Of the polymorphisms examined, three markers (-1438G/A, C102T, and rs1923884) all located in the 5-HT receptor subtype HTR2A were associated with CFS when compared to NF controls. Additionally, consistent associations were observed between HTR2A variants and quantitative measures of disability and fatigue in all subjects. The most compelling of these associations was with the A allele of -1438G/A (rs6311) which is suggested to have increased promoter activity in functional studies. Further, in silico analysis revealed that the -1438 A allele creates a consensus binding site for Th1/E47, a transcription factor implicated in the development of the nervous system. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay supports allele-specific binding of E47 to the A allele but not the G allele at this locus. These data indicate that sequence variation in HTR2A, potentially resulting in its enhanced activity, may be involved in the pathophysiology of CFS.
OBJECTIVES: Placental insufficiency contributes to altered maternal-fetal amino acid transfer, and thereby to poor fetal growth. An important placental function is the uptake of tryptophan and its metabolism to serotonin (5-HT) and kynurenine metabolites, which are essential for fetal development. We hypothesised that placental 5-HT content will be increased in pregnancies affected with fetal growth restriction (FGR). METHODS: The components of the 5-HT synthetic pathway were determined in chorionic villus samples (CVS) from small-for gestation (SGA) and matched control collected at 10-12 weeks of human pregnancy; and in placentae from third trimester FGR and gestation-matched control pregnancies using the Fluidigm Biomarker array for mRNA expression, the activity of the enzyme TPH and 5-HT concentrations using an ELISA. RESULTS: Gene expression for the rate limiting enzymes, TPH1 and TPH2; 5-HT transporter, SLC6A4; and 5-HT receptors HTR5A, HTR5B, HTR1D and HTR1E were detected in all CVS and third trimester placentae. No significant difference in mRNA was observed in SGA compared with control. Although there was no significant change in TPH1 mRNA, the mRNA of TPH2 and SLC6A4 was significantly decreased in FGR placentae (p < 0.05), while 5-HT receptor mRNA was significantly increased in FGR compared with control (p < 0.01). Placental TPH enzyme activity was significantly increased with a concomitant increase in the total placental 5-HT concentrations in FGR compared with control. CONCLUSION: This study reports differential expression and activity of the key components of the 5-HT synthetic pathway associated with the pathogenesis of FGR. Further studies are required to elucidate the functional consequences of increased placental 5-HT in FGR pregnancies.
Synaptic receptors in the human brain consist of multiple protein subunits, many of which have multiple variants, coded by different genes, and are differentially expressed across brain regions and developmental stages. The brain can tune the electrophysiological properties of synapses to regulate plasticity and information processing by switching from one protein variant to another. Such condition-dependent variant switch during development has been demonstrated in several neurotransmitter systems including NMDA and GABA. Here we systematically detect pairs of receptor-subunit variants that switch during the lifetime of the human brain by analyzing postmortem expression data collected in a population of donors at various ages and brain regions measured using microarray and RNA-seq. To further detect variant pairs that co-vary across subjects, we present a method to quantify age-corrected expression correlation in face of strong temporal trends. This is achieved by computing the correlations in the residual expression beyond a cubic-spline model of the population temporal trend, and can be seen as a nonlinear version of partial correlations. Using these methods, we detect multiple new pairs of context dependent variants. For instance, we find a switch from GLRA2 to GLRA3 that differs from the known switch in the rat. We also detect an early switch from HTR1A to HTR5A whose trends are negatively correlated and find that their age-corrected expression is strongly positively correlated. Finally, we observe that GRIN2B switch to GRIN2A occurs mostly during embryonic development, presumably earlier than observed in rodents. These results provide a systematic map of developmental switching in the neurotransmitter systems of the human brain.
Variation in genes implicated in serotonin neurotransmission may interact with environmental factors to influence antidepressant response. We aimed to determine how a range of polymorphisms in serotonergic genes determine this response to treatment and how they interact with childhood trauma and recent life stress in a Chinese sample. In total, 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in coding regions of 10 serotonergic genes (HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR1D, HTR2A, HTR3A, HTR3C, HTR3D, HTR3E, HTR5A and TPH2) were genotyped in 308 Chinese Han patients with major depressive disorder. Response to 6 weeks' antidepressant treatment was determined by change in the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS-17) score, and previous stressful events were evaluated by the Life Events Scale (LES) and Childhood Trauma Questionnaire-Short Form (CTQ-SF). Two 5-HT1B receptor SNPs (rs6296 and rs6298) and one tryptophan hydroxylase2 (rs7305115) SNP were significantly associated with antidepressant response in this Chinese sample, as was a haplotype in TPH2 (rs7305115 and rs4290270). A gene-gene interaction on antidepressant response was found between SNPs in HTR1B, HTR3A and HTR5A in female subjects. The HTR1B SNPs demonstrated interaction with recent stress, while that for TPH2 interacted with childhood trauma to influence antidepressant response.
We have used RFLP analysis on DNA from a panel of interspecific (C57BL/6J x Mus spretus) F1 x M. spretus backcross offspring to assign the genes encoding 10 neuron-specific mRNAs and 2 loci corresponding to cyclophilin 2-related sequences to the mouse chromosomal map. The Pss1 locus encoding the forebrain-enriched protein kinase C substrate RC3, a component of dendritic spines, mapped to proximal Chr 9. The Camkl locus encoding the calmodulin-binding protein kinase-like vesicle protein 1G5 mapped to distal Chr 9. The Gng7 locus encoding the gamma 7 G-protein subunit, highly enriched in the striatum and presumptively coupled to dopamine receptors, mapped to mid-Chr 10. The Htr1f, Htr5a, Htr5b, and Htr7loci, encoding four serotonin receptors, mapped to Chr 16, 5, 1, and 19, respectively. The Peplb locus, encoding a CD26 ectopeptidase-like neuronal membrane protein activated by kainate and long-term potentiation, mapped to Chr 5. The D2Sut1e and Cpu3 loci, encoding neural proteins of unknown functions, mapped to Chrs 2 and 9, respectively. Two cyclophilin 2-related loci, Cphn2-r1 and Cphn2-r2, mapped to different regions of Chr 9. Comparison of these 12 newly mapped loci with the existing mouse map and known regions of syntenic homology with the human map, along with the known features and expression profiles of the products of these genes, suggests a few candidates for mouse mutations and human neurological and immunological deficits, including the Tourette syndrome and Bloom syndrome genes.
BACKGROUND: Previous genetic studies demonstrated association between the transcription factor engrailed2 (EN2) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Subsequent molecular analysis determined that the EN2 ASD-associated haplotype (rs1861972-rs1861973 A-C) functions as a transcriptional activator to increase gene expression. EN2 is flanked by 5 genes, serotonin receptor5a (HTR5A), insulin induced gene1 (INSIG1), canopy1 homolog (CNPY1), RNA binding motif protein33 (RBM33), and sonic hedgehog (SHH). These flanking genes are co-expressed with EN2 during development and coordinate similar developmental processes. To investigate if mRNA levels for these genes are altered in individuals with autism, post-mortem analysis was performed. METHODS: qRT-PCR quantified mRNA levels for EN2 and the 5 flanking genes in 78 post-mortem cerebellar samples. mRNA levels were correlated with both affection status and rs1861972-rs1861973 genotype. Molecular analysis investigated whether EN2 regulates flanking gene expression. RESULTS: EN2 levels are increased in affected A-C/G-T individuals (p = .0077). Affected individuals also display a significant increase in SHH and a decrease in INSIG1 levels. Rs1861972-rs1861973 genotype is correlated with significant increases for SHH (A-C/G-T) and CNPY1 (G-T/G-T) levels. Human cell line over-expression and knock-down as well as mouse knock-out analysis are consistent with EN2 and SHH being co-regulated, which provides a possible mechanism for increased SHH post-mortem levels. CONCLUSIONS: EN2 levels are increased in affected individuals with an A-C/G-T genotype, supporting EN2 as an ASD susceptibility gene. SHH, CNPY1, and INSIG1 levels are also significantly altered depending upon affection status or rs1861972-rs1861973 genotype. Increased EN2 levels likely contribute to elevated SHH expression observed in the post-mortem samples.
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of unclear etiology. The consistent finding of platelet hyperserotonemia in a proportion of patients and its heritability within affected families suggest that genes involved in the serotonin system play a role in this disorder. The role in autism etiology of seven candidate genes in the serotonin metabolic and neurotransmission pathways and mapping to autism linkage regions (SLC6A4, HTR1A, HTR1D, HTR2A, HTR5A, TPH1 and ITGB3) was analyzed in a sample of 186 nuclear families. The impact of interactions among these genes in autism was assessed using the multifactor-dimensionality reduction (MDR) method in 186 patients and 181 controls. We further evaluated whether the effect of specific gene variants or gene interactions associated with autism etiology might be mediated by their influence on serotonin levels, using the quantitative transmission disequilibrium test (QTDT) and the restricted partition method (RPM), in a sample of 109 autistic children. We report a significant main effect of the HTR5A gene in autism (P = 0.0088), and a significant three-locus model comprising a synergistic interaction between the ITGB3 and SLC6A4 genes with an additive effect of HTR5A (P < 0.0010). In addition to the previously reported contribution of SLC6A4, we found significant associations of ITGB3 haplotypes with serotonin level distribution (P = 0.0163). The most significant models contributing to serotonin distribution were found for interactions between TPH1 rs4537731 and SLC6A4 haplotypes (P = 0.002) and between HTR1D rs6300 and SLC6A4 haplotypes (P = 0.013). In addition to the significant independent effects, evidence for interaction between SLC6A4 and ITGB3 markers was also found. The overall results implicate SLC6A4 and ITGB3 gene interactions in autism etiology and in serotonin level determination, providing evidence for a common underlying genetic mechanism and a molecular explanation for the association of platelet hyperserotonemia with autism.
To investigate similarities and differences in the serotonergic diathesis for mood disorders and suicide attempts, we conducted a study in a cohort followed longitudinally for 22 years. A total of 1255 members of this cohort, which is representative of the French-speaking population of Quebec, were investigated. Main outcome measures included (1) mood disorders (bipolar disorder and major depression) and suicide attempts by early adulthood; (2) odds ratios and probabilities associated with 143 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 11 serotonergic genes, acting directly or as moderators in gene-environment interactions with childhood sexual or childhood physical abuse (CPA), and in gene-gene interactions; (3) regression coefficients for putative endophenotypes for mood disorders (childhood anxiousness) and suicide attempts (childhood disruptiveness). Five genes showed significant adjusted effects (HTR2A, TPH1, HTR5A, SLC6A4 and HTR1A). Of these, HTR2A variation influenced both suicide attempts and mood disorders, although through different mechanisms. In suicide attempts, HTR2A variants (rs6561333, rs7997012 and rs1885884) were involved through interactions with histories of sexual and physical abuse whereas in mood disorders through one main effect (rs9316235). In terms of phenotype-specific contributions, TPH1 variation (rs10488683) was relevant only in the diathesis for suicide attempts. Three genes contributed exclusively to mood disorders, one through a main effect (HTR5A (rs1657268)) and two through gene-environment interactions with CPA (HTR1A (rs878567) and SLC6A4 (rs3794808)). Childhood anxiousness did not mediate the effects of HTR2A and HTR5A on mood disorders, nor did childhood disruptiveness mediate the effects of TPH1 on suicide attempts. Of the serotonergic genes implicated in mood disorders and suicidal behaviors, four exhibited phenotype-specific effects, suggesting that despite their high concordance and common genetic determinants, suicide attempts and mood disorders may also have partially independent etiological pathways. To identify where these pathways diverge, we need to understand the differential, phenotype-specific gene-environment interactions such as the ones observed in the present study, using suitably powered samples.
