5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 6; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase. It has a high affinity for tricyclic psychotropic drugs (By similarity). Controls pyramidal neurons migration during corticogenesis, through the regulation of CDK5 activity (By similarity). Is an activator of TOR signaling.
Bipolar disorder is a heritable mental illness with complex etiology. We performed a genome-wide association study of 41,917 bipolar disorder cases and 371,549 controls of European ancestry, which identified 64 associated genomic loci. Bipolar disorder risk alleles were enriched in genes in synaptic signaling pathways and brain-expressed genes, particularly those with high specificity of expression in neurons of the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. Significant signal enrichment was found in genes encoding targets of antipsychotics, calcium channel blockers, antiepileptics and anesthetics. Integrating expression quantitative trait locus data implicated 15 genes robustly linked to bipolar disorder via gene expression, encoding druggable targets such as HTR6, MCHR1, DCLK3 and FURIN. Analyses of bipolar disorder subtypes indicated high but imperfect genetic correlation between bipolar disorder type I and II and identified additional associated loci. Together, these results advance our understanding of the biological etiology of bipolar disorder, identify novel therapeutic leads and prioritize genes for functional follow-up studies.
Primary cilia are hair-like projections of the cell membrane supported by an inner microtubule scaffold, the axoneme, which polymerizes out of a membrane-docked centriole at the ciliary base. By working as specialized signaling compartments, primary cilia provide an optimal environment for many G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and their effectors to efficiently transmit their signals to the rest of the cell. For this to occur, however, all necessary receptors and signal transducers must first accumulate at the ciliary membrane. Serotonin receptor 6 (HTR6) and Somatostatin receptor 3 (SSTR3) are two GPCRs whose signaling in brain neuronal cilia affects cognition and is implicated in psychiatric, neurodegenerative, and oncologic diseases. Over a decade ago, the third intracellular loops (IC3s) of HTR6 and SSTR3 were shown to contain ciliary localization sequences (CLSs) that, when grafted onto non-ciliary GPCRs, could drive their ciliary accumulation. Nevertheless, these CLSs were dispensable for ciliary targeting of HTR6 and SSTR3, suggesting the presence of additional CLSs, which we have recently identified in their C-terminal tails. Herein, we review the discovery and mapping of these CLSs, as well as the state of the art regarding how these CLSs may orchestrate ciliary accumulation of these GPCRs by controlling when and where they interact with the ciliary entry and exit machinery via adaptors such as TULP3, RABL2 and the BBSome.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the most common pharmacological target in human clinical practice. To perform their functions, many GPCRs must accumulate inside primary cilia, microtubule-based plasma membrane protrusions working as cellular antennae. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying GPCR ciliary targeting remain poorly understood. Serotonin receptor 6 (HTR6) and somatostatin receptor 3 (SSTR3) are two brain-enriched ciliary GPCRs involved in cognition and pathologies such as Alzheimer's disease and cancer. Although the third intracellular loops (IC3) of HTR6 and SSTR3 suffice to target non-ciliary GPCRs to cilia, these IC3s are dispensable for ciliary targeting of HTR6 and SSTR3 themselves, suggesting these GPCRs contain additional ciliary targeting sequences (CTSs). Herein, we discover and characterize novel CTSs in HTR6 and SSTR3 C-terminal tails (CT). These CT-CTSs (CTS2) act redundantly with IC3-CTSs (CTS1), each being sufficient for ciliary targeting. In HTR6, RKQ and LPG motifs are critical for CTS1 and CTS2 function, respectively, whereas in SSTR3 these roles are mostly fulfilled by AP[AS]CQ motifs in IC3 and juxtamembrane residues in CT. Furthermore, we shed light on how these CTSs promote ciliary targeting by modulating binding to ciliary trafficking adapters TULP3 and RABL2.
BACKGROUND: Several studies indicated that antipsychotic treatment response and side effect manifestation can be different due to inter-individual variability in genetic variations. AIM OF THE STUDY: Here we perform a case-control study to explore a potential association between schizophrenia and variants within the antipsychotic drug molecular targets (DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, HTR2A, HTR6) and metabolizing enzymes (CYP2D6, COMT) genes in Armenian population including also analysis of their possible relationship with disease clinical symptoms. METHODS: A total of 18 SNPs was studied in patients with schizophrenia (n = 78) and healthy control subjects (n = 77) using MassARRAY genotyping. RESULTS: We found that two studied genetic variants, namely DRD2 rs4436578*C and HTR2A rs6314*A are underrepresented in the group of patients compared to healthy subjects. After the correction for multiple testing, the rs4436578*C variant remained significant while the rs6314*A reported borderline significance. No significant differences in minor allele frequencies for other studied variants were identified. Also, a relationship between the genotypes and age of onset as well as disease duration has been detected. CONCLUSIONS: The DRD2 rs4436578*C genetic variant might have protective role against schizophrenia, at least in Armenians.
Approximately 30% of epilepsy cases are refractory to current pharmacological treatments. Thus, novel therapeutic approaches that prevent or reverse the molecular and cellular mechanisms of epilepsy are required. 5-HT6 receptor (HTR6) blockade can modulate multiple neurotransmitter systems, and HTR6 may be a potential therapeutic treatment for neurological diseases, including epilepsy. Here, we investigated the role of HTR6 in epilepsy. We detected HTR6 expression both in human epileptic tissues and the pilocarpine rat model by western blotting. We observed behavioral changes after administration of pilocarpine in rats pretreated with a selective HTR6 antagonist, SB-399885, and recorded the electrophysiological index in the pilocarpine rat model pre- or posttreated with SB-399885 by electroencephalogram (EEG) and whole-cell clamp. We measured the activity of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) in the pilocarpine rat model pretreated with the mTOR-specific inhibitor, rapamycin, and SB-399885 using western blotting. We found that HTR6 expression was upregulated in both human tissues and the pilocarpine rat model, and that SB-399885 could suppress epileptic seizures and mTOR activity in epileptic seizures. These results suggest that HTR6 plays an important role in modulating seizure activity and that the blockade of the HTR6/mTOR pathway could be a potential therapeutic target for epilepsy treatment.
Dietary restriction (DR; sometimes called calorie restriction) has profound beneficial effects on physiological, psychological, and behavioral outcomes in animals and in humans. We have explored the molecular mechanism of DR-induced memory enhancement and demonstrate that dietary tryptophan-a precursor amino acid for serotonin biosynthesis in the brain-and serotonin receptor 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 6 (HTR6) are crucial in mediating this process. We show that HTR6 inactivation diminishes DR-induced neurological alterations, including reduced dendritic complexity, increased spine density, and enhanced long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampal neurons. Moreover, we find that HTR6-mediated mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signaling is involved in DR-induced memory improvement. Our results suggest that the HTR6-mediated mTORC1 pathway may function as a nutrient sensor in hippocampal neurons to couple memory performance to dietary intake.
IMPORTANCE: African American men experience greater prostate cancer incidence and mortality than White men. Growing literature supports associations of neighborhood disadvantage, which disproportionately affects African American men, with aggressive prostate cancer; chronic stress and downstream biological impacts (eg, increased inflammation) may contribute to these associations. OBJECTIVE: To examine whether several neighborhood disadvantage metrics are associated with prostate tumor RNA expression of stress-related genes. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cross-sectional study leveraged prostate tumor transcriptomic data for African American and White men with prostate cancer who received radical prostatectomy at the University of Maryland Medical Center between August 1992 and January 2021. Data were analyzed from May 2023 to April 2024. EXPOSURES: Using addresses at diagnosis, 2 neighborhood deprivation metrics (Area Deprivation Index [ADI] and validated bayesian Neighborhood Deprivation Index) as well as the Racial Isolation Index (RI) and historical redlining were applied to participants' addresses. Self-reported race was determined using electronic medical records. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: A total of 105 stress-related genes were evaluated with each neighborhood metric using linear regression, adjusting for race, age, and year of surgery. Genes in the Conserved Transcriptional Response to Adversity (CTRA) and stress-related signaling genes were included. RESULTS: A total of 218 men (168 [77%] African American, 50 [23%] White) with a median (IQR) age of 58 (53-63) years were included. African American participants experienced greater neighborhood disadvantage than White participants (median [IQR] ADI, 115 [100-130] vs 92 [83-104]; median [IQR] RI, 0.68 [0.34-0.87] vs 0.11 [0.06-0.14]). ADI was positively associated with expression for 11 genes; HTR6 (serotonin pathway) remained significant after multiple-comparison adjustment (beta = 0.003; SE, 0.001; P < .001; Benjamini-Hochberg q value = .01). Several genes, including HTR6, were associated with multiple metrics. We observed higher expression of 5 proinflammatory genes in the CTRA with greater neighborhood disadvantage (eg, CXCL8 and ADI, beta = 0.008; SE, 0.003; P = .01; q value = .21). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cross-sectional study, the expression of several stress-related genes in prostate tumors was higher among men residing in disadvantaged neighborhoods. This study is one of the first to suggest associations of neighborhood disadvantage with prostate tumor RNA expression. Additional research is needed in larger studies to replicate findings and further investigate interrelationships of neighborhood factors, tumor biology, and aggressive prostate cancer to inform interventions to reduce disparities.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of 5-hydroxy tryptamine receptor 6 (5-HTR6) gene polymorphism with vestibular migraine (VM). METHODS: A total of 92 VM patients were enrolled as the observation group, and 100 healthy people receiving physical examinations as the control group. Their general clinical information was collected, and the level of 5-HT in plasma and the vestibular function test indexes were detected. Moreover, the polymorphism of 5-HTR6 rs770963777 was detected with the TaqMan-MGB probe. RESULTS: The observation group had a lower level of 5-HT than the control group (P < .05), and the abnormality rates of the vestibular function tests, including the caloric test, head-shaking test, and vestibular autorotation test, were obviously higher than those in the control group (P < .01). The comparisons showed that the distribution frequencies of the genotypes and alleles were different between the two groups (P < .05). According to the analysis of the genetic mode, there were differences in recessive and additive modes between the two groups (P < .05), but the dominant mode was not different between the two groups (P > .05). CONCLUSION: The level of 5-HT and the vestibular function test indexes can serve as the effective indicators for observing VM, and the polymorphism of 5-HTR6 rs770963777 site is correlated with VM onset.
Several evidence suggests that alterations in serotonin 6 (5-HT6) receptors might be associated with the pathophysiology of mood disorders. Therefore, to evaluate the association between HTR6 and BP and MDD, we conducted a case-control study of Japanese population samples (1007 BP patients, 447 MDD patients and 1753 controls) with five tagging SNPs, including rs1805054 (C267T), in HTR6. In addition, we conducted a meta-analysis of rs1805054, which has been examined in other studies. We selected five tagging SNPs (rs6693503, rs1805054, rs4912138, rs3790757 and rs9659997). Moreover, three association studies for BP and four association studies for MDD, including this study, met our criteria for the meta-analysis of rs1805054. We did not detect an association between tagging SNPs in HTR6 and BP and MDD in the allele/genotype, haplotype analysis or meta-analysis. In conclusion, we found no association involving polymorphism and mood disorder in the Japanese population. However, because changes in expression level or signal transduction of this receptor may be involved in the pathology of these diseases, it will be necessary to conduct the further study about the relationship between this receptor and mood disorders in the future.
Serotonergic neurotransmitter system has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)(6) receptor is mainly expressed in the brain areas involved in cognitive processes. And 5-HT(6) receptor gene (HTR6) variants may be a genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD). To assess whether HTR6 increases the risk for LOAD, we carried out an association study between the HTR6 polymorphism C267T and sporadic LOAD in Mainland Chinese. An association of C/T genotype with LOAD (OR = 2.10, P = 0.014) was observed. And no statistical difference was found between cases and controls after stratification for APOE epsilon4 status. These data suggest that the HTR6 polymorphism C267T possibly involved in the susceptibility to LOAD as an APOE epsilon4-allele independent risk factor of LOAD.
Many epidemiological reports have indicated an increase in the incidence of breast cancer among psychotic patients, suggesting that the targets of antipsychotics, neurotransmitter receptors, may have a role in tumorigenesis. However, the functions of neurotransmitter receptors in cancer are barely known. Here, we analyzed 44 neurotransmitter receptors in breast cancer and revealed that the expression of 34 receptors was positively correlated with relapse-free survival rates (RFS) of patients using the public database (n = 3951). Among all these receptors, we revealed decreased expression of HTR6 in human advanced breast cancer versus tumors in situ using our original data (n = 44). After a pan-cancer analysis including 22 cancers (n = 11262), we disclosed that HTR6 was expressed in 12 tumors and uncovered its influence on survival in seven tumors. Using multi-omics datasets from Linkedomics, we revealed a potential regulatory role of HTR6 in MAPK, JUN, and leukocyte-differentiation pathways through enriching 294 co-expressed phosphorylated proteins of HTR6. Furthermore, we proclaimed a close association of HTR6 expression with the immune microenvironment. Finally, we uncovered two possible reasons for HTR6 down-regulation in breast cancer, including deep deletion in the genome and the up-regulation of FOXA1 in breast cancer, which was a potential negatively regulatory transcription factor of HTR6. Taken together, we revealed a new function of neurotransmitter receptors in breast cancer and identified HTR6 as a survival-related gene potentially regulating the immune microenvironment. The findings in our study would improve our understanding of the pathogenesis of breast cancer and provided a theoretical basis for personalized medication in psychotic patients.
Genes that regulate the serotonin signalling system are potential targets for research in the aetiology of mood disorders and also in the treatment response of serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In this study, we evaluated the association of seven serotonin signal transduction-linked single nucleotide polymorphisms [HTR1A (rs6295), HTR2A (rs6313, rs6311 and rs7997012), HTR6 (rs1805054), TPH1 (rs1800532) and TPH2 (rs1386494)] with major depressive disorder and/or treatment outcome with serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Patients who met the criteria for major depressive disorder were treated for 6 weeks with fluoxetine, paroxetine or citalopram. The treatment response was evaluated with the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, and according to predefined response criteria, the patients were divided into responders, nonresponders, remitters and nonremitters. Altogether, 86 patients completed the entire study according to the study protocol. We had also a control population (N = 395) of healthy blood donors. None of the seven single nucleotide polymorphisms was associated with major depressive disorder or with treatment response in our study population of Finnish individuals.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a major and devastating neurodegenerative disease, and the amyloid-beta (Abeta) hypothesis is still the central theory for AD pathogenesis. Meanwhile, another major mental illness, depression, is one of the risk factors for AD. From a high-throughput screening (HTS), amoxapine, a typical secondary amine tricyclic antidepressant (TCA), was identified to reduce Abeta production. A follow-up investigation on antidepressants showed that most of the TCAs harbour similar activity. Previous studies have indicated that TCAs improve cognitive function in AD mouse models as well as in preliminary clinical data; however, the underlying mechanism is controversial, and the effect on Abeta is elusive. Thus, we developed a secondary screening to determine the molecular target of amoxapine, and serotonin receptor 6 (HTR6) was identified. Knockdown of HTR6 reduced the amoxapine's effect, while the HTR6 antagonist SB258585 mimicked the activity of amoxapine. Further mechanistic study showed that amoxapine and SB258585 reduced Abeta generation through multiple HTR6-mediated targets, including beta-arrestin2 and CDK5. Taken together, our study suggests that amoxapine, though no longer a first-line drug for the treatment of depression, may be beneficial for AD and further structural modification of TCAs may lead to desirable therapeutic agents to treat both AD and depression.
Schizophrenia is a serious, chronic psychiatric disorder requiring lifelong treatment. Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) are common adverse reactions to antipsychotic medications. In addition to the dopaminergic system, serotonergic mechanisms, including serotonin (5-HT) receptors, might be involved in EPS development. This study aimed to examine molecular associations of HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A, HTR2C and HTR6 gene polymorphisms with acute EPS in 229 male schizophrenia patients, following two weeks of haloperidol monotherapy. The Simpson-Angus Rating Scale for Extrapyramidal Side Effects (SAS), Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) and Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS) were used to evaluate EPS severity. Genotyping was performed using real-time PCR, following extraction of blood DNA. Significant acute EPS appeared in 48.03% of schizophrenia patients. For the rs13212041 HTR1B gene polymorphism, affecting microRNA regulation of HTR1B gene expression, a higher frequency of TT carriers was found among haloperidol-treated patients with akathisia when compared to the group without akathisia symptoms. In comparison to C-allele carriers, patients carrying the TT genotype had higher akathisia severity, as determined by the SAS, BARS and ESRS scales. These molecular findings suggest potential involvement of 5-HT(1B) receptors in akathisia development following haloperidol treatment, as well as possible epigenetic mechanisms of serotonergic modulation associated with antipsychotic-induced EPS.
The primary cilium, a solitary protrusion from most mammalian cells, functions as a cell sensor by receiving extracellular signals through receptors and channels accumulated in the organelle. Certain G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) specifically localize to the membrane compartment of primary cilia. To gain insight into the mechanisms that regulate ciliary GPCR sorting, we investigated the atypical small GTPase RAB-like 2 (RABL2; herein referring to the near-identical human paralogs RABL2A and RABL2B). RABL2 recruitment to the mother centriole is dependent on the distal appendage proteins CEP164 and CEP83. We found that silencing of RABL2 causes mis-targeting of ciliary GPCRs, GPR161 and HTR6, whereas overexpression of RABL2 resulted in accumulation of these receptors in the organelle. Ablation of CEP19 and the intraflagellar transport B (IFT-B) complex, which interact with RABL2, also leads to mis-localization of GPR161. RABL2 controls localization of GPR161 independently of TULP3, which promotes entry of ciliary GPCRs. We further demonstrate that RABL2 physically associates with ciliary GPCRs. Taken together, these studies suggest that RABL2 plays an important role in trafficking of ciliary GPCRs at the ciliary base in mammalian cells.
The 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, also known as serotonin) subtype 6 receptor (5-HT6R, also known as HTR6) plays roles in cognition, anxiety and learning and memory disorders, yet new details concerning its regulation remain poorly understood. In this study, we found that 5-HT6R directly interacted with SNX14 and that this interaction dramatically increased internalization and degradation of 5-HT6R. Knockdown of endogenous SNX14 had the opposite effect. SNX14 is highly expressed in the brain and contains a putative regulator of G-protein signaling (RGS) domain. Although its RGS domain was found to be non-functional as a GTPase activator for Galphas, we found that it specifically bound to and sequestered Galphas, thus inhibiting downstream cAMP production. We further found that protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of SNX14 inhibited its binding to Galphas and diverted SNX14 from Galphas binding to 5-HT6R binding, thus facilitating the endocytic degradation of the receptor. Therefore, our results suggest that SNX14 is a dual endogenous negative regulator in 5-HT6R-mediated signaling pathway, modulating both signaling and trafficking of 5-HT6R.
OBJECTIVE: We characterized associations between central nervous system (CNS) adverse events and brain neurotransmitter transporter/receptor genomics among participants randomized to efavirenz-containing regimens in AIDS Clinical Trials Group studies in the USA. PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: Four clinical trials randomly assigned treatment-naive participants to efavirenz-containing regimens. Genome-wide genotype and PrediXcan were used to infer gene expression levels in tissues including 10 brain regions. Multivariable regression models stratified by race/ethnicity were adjusted for CYP2B6/CYP2A6 genotypes that predict plasma efavirenz exposure, age, and sex. Combined analyses also adjusted for genetic ancestry. RESULTS: Analyses included 167 cases with grade 2 or greater efavirenz-consistent CNS adverse events within 48 weeks of study entry, and 653 efavirenz-tolerant controls. CYP2B6/CYP2A6 genotype level was independently associated with CNS adverse events (odds ratio: 1.07; P=0.044). Predicted expression of six genes postulated to mediate efavirenz CNS side effects (SLC6A2, SLC6A3, PGR, HTR2A, HTR2B, HTR6) were not associated with CNS adverse events after correcting for multiple testing, the lowest P value being for PGR in hippocampus (P=0.012), nor were polymorphisms in these genes or AR and HTR2C, the lowest P value being for rs12393326 in HTR2C (P=6.7x10(-4)). As a positive control, baseline plasma bilirubin concentration was associated with predicted liver UGT1A1 expression level (P=1.9x10(-27)). CONCLUSION: Efavirenz-related CNS adverse events were not associated with predicted neurotransmitter transporter/receptor gene expression levels in brain or with polymorphisms in these genes. Variable susceptibility to efavirenz-related CNS adverse events may not be explained by brain neurotransmitter transporter/receptor genomics.
Primary cilia are sensory organelles present on most mammalian cells. The functions of cilia are defined by the signaling proteins localized to the ciliary membrane. Certain G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), including somatostatin receptor 3 (Sstr3) and serotonin receptor 6 (Htr6), localize to cilia. As Sstr3 and Htr6 are the only somatostatin and serotonin receptor subtypes that localize to cilia, we hypothesized they contain ciliary localization sequences. To test this hypothesis we expressed chimeric receptors containing fragments of Sstr3 and Htr6 in the nonciliary receptors Sstr5 and Htr7, respectively, in ciliated cells. We found the third intracellular loop of Sstr3 or Htr6 is sufficient for ciliary localization. Comparison of these loops revealed a loose consensus sequence. To determine whether this consensus sequence predicts ciliary localization of other GPCRs, we compared it with the third intracellular loop of all human GPCRs. We identified the consensus sequence in melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (Mchr1) and confirmed Mchr1 localizes to primary cilia in vitro and in vivo. Thus, we have identified a putative GPCR ciliary localization sequence and used this sequence to identify a novel ciliary GPCR. As Mchr1 mediates feeding behavior and metabolism, our results implicate ciliary signaling in the regulation of body weight.
A number of candidate gene studies focused on major depression (MD) and antidepressant (AD) efficacy have been carried out, but results mainly remain inconclusive. We performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of published candidate gene studies focused on AD efficacy in MD to evaluate the cumulative evidence. A random-effect model was applied to study the polymorphisms with genotypic counts available from at least three independent studies. On the base of previous evidence, the analysis was stratified by ethnicity (Caucasian, Asian, and other/mixed), and AD class (SSRIs and mixed/other ADs). Genotypic data were available for 16 polymorphisms in 11 genes. After the exclusion of 5-HTTLPR in SLC6A4 included in another recent meta-analysis, 15 polymorphisms in 11 genes were included in the present meta-analysis (BDNF rs6265, SLC6A4 STin2, HTR1A rs6295, HTR2A rs6311, rs6313 and rs7997012, HTR6 rs1805054, TPH1 rs1800532, SLC6A2 rs5569, COMT rs4680, GNB3 rs5443, FKBP5 rs1360780 and rs3800373, and ABCB1 rs1045642 and rs2032582). Our results suggested that BDNF rs6265 (Val66Met) heterozygous genotype was associated with better SSRIs response compared to the homozygous genotypes, particularly in Asians (OR=1.53, 95%CI 1.12-2.07, p=0.007). SLC6A4 STin2, HTR2A rs6311 and rs7997012, GNB3 rs5443, FKBP5 rs1360780 and rs3800373, and ABCB1 rs2032582 showed associations with AD efficacy, but these results were highly dependent on one or two single studies. In conclusion, our findings suggested the BDNF Val66Met as the best single candidate involved in AD response, with a selective effect on SSRI treatment. Our overall results supported no major effect of any single gene variant on AD efficacy.
Serotonergic system is involved in the regulation of physiological functions and behavioral traits including cognition, memory, aggression, stress coping, appetite and immunomodulation. Serotonin exerts its functions via binding distinct serotonin receptors which are classified into 7 groups. Salmonid exhibits expanded functional gene copies due to salmonid-specific whole genome duplication. However, serotonin receptor (htr) repertoire is not fully identified in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). In this study, we identified 39 htr genes, including 14 htr1, 4 htr2, 4 htr2 like, 3 htr3, 4 htr4, 2 htr5, 2 htr6, and 6 htr7 subtypes. We investigated physiological functions of serotonin receptors in response to bacterial pathogens exposure and salinity changes. We showed htr1, htr2, htr4 and htr7 subtypes were associated with immunomodulation in response to Vibrio anguillarum or Aeromonas salmonicida infection. Saltwater (salinity of 15) transfer significantly altered htr1, htr2, htr4, and htr7 subtypes, suggesting trout Htr was associated with osmoregulation. We further showed residues interacted with inverse agonist (methiothepin) and serotonin analogue (5-Carboxamidotryptamine) were conserved between trout and human, suggesting exogenous ligands targeting human HTRs might have a role in aquaculture. This study showed duplicated trout Htrs might be physiologically neofunctionalized and potentially exhibit pleiotropic effects in regulating immunomodulation and osmoregulation.
