5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 7; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase.
Increasing evidence suggests that induction of lethal macroautophagy/autophagy carries potential significance for the treatment of glioblastoma (GBM). In continuation of previous work, we demonstrate that pimozide and loperamide trigger an ATG5- and ATG7 (autophagy related 5 and 7)-dependent type of cell death that is significantly reduced with cathepsin inhibitors and the lipid reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger alpha-tocopherol in MZ-54 GBM cells. Global proteomic analysis after treatment with both drugs also revealed an increase of proteins related to lipid and cholesterol metabolic processes. These changes were accompanied by a massive accumulation of cholesterol and other lipids in the lysosomal compartment, indicative of impaired lipid transport/degradation. In line with these observations, pimozide and loperamide treatment were associated with a pronounced increase of bioactive sphingolipids including ceramides, glucosylceramides and sphingoid bases measured by targeted lipidomic analysis. Furthermore, pimozide and loperamide inhibited the activity of SMPD1/ASM (sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1) and promoted induction of lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP), as well as release of CTSB (cathepsin B) into the cytosol in MZ-54 wild-type (WT) cells. Whereas LMP and cell death were significantly attenuated in ATG5 and ATG7 knockout (KO) cells, both events were enhanced by depletion of the lysophagy receptor VCP (valosin containing protein), supporting a pro-survival function of lysophagy under these conditions. Collectively, our data suggest that pimozide and loperamide-driven autophagy and lipotoxicity synergize to induce LMP and cell death. The results also support the notion that simultaneous overactivation of autophagy and induction of LMP represents a promising approach for the treatment of GBM.Abbreviations: ACD: autophagic cell death; AKT1: AKT serine/threonine kinase 1; ATG5: autophagy related 5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; ATG14: autophagy related 14; CERS1: ceramide synthase 1; CTSB: cathepsin B; CYBB/NOX2: cytochrome b-245 beta chain; ER: endoplasmatic reticulum; FBS: fetal bovine serum; GBM: glioblastoma; GO: gene ontology; HTR7/5-HT7: 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 7; KD: knockdown; KO: knockout; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; LAP: LC3-associated phagocytosis; LMP: lysosomal membrane permeabilization; MAP1LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; RB1CC1: RB1 inducible coiled-coil 1; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RPS6: ribosomal protein S6; SMPD1/ASM: sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1; VCP/p97: valosin containing protein; WT: wild-type.
Serotonergic neurons in the central nervous system control behavior and mood, but knowledge of the roles of serotonergic circuits in the regulation of immune homeostasis is limited. Here, we employ mouse genetics to investigate the functions of enteric serotonergic neurons in the control of immune responses and find that these circuits regulate IgA induction and boost host defense against oral, but not systemic Salmonella Typhimurium infection. Enteric serotonergic neurons promote gut-homing, retention and activation of intestinal plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC). Mechanistically, this neuro-immune crosstalk is achieved through a serotonin-5-HT receptor 7 (HTR7) signaling axis that ultimately facilitates the pDC-mediated differentiation of IgA(+) B cells from IgD(+) precursors in the gut. Single-cell RNA-seq data further reveal novel patterns of bidirectional communication between specific subsets of enteric neurons and lamina propria DC. Our findings thus reveal a close interplay between enteric serotonergic neurons and gut immune homeostasis that enhances mucosal defense.
Even though the involvement of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) and its receptors in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is widely accepted, data on the expression and the role of 5-HT(7) receptors in AD is relatively limited. Therefore, the objective of the present work was to study the expression of serotonergic 5-HT(7) receptors in postmortem samples of AD brains and correlate it with neurotransmitter levels, cognition and behavior. The study population consisted of clinically well-characterized and neuropathologically confirmed AD patients (n = 42) and age-matched control subjects (n = 18). Reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and high-performance liquid chromatography were performed on Brodmann area (BA) 7, BA10, BA22, BA24, hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus and cerebellum to measure mRNA levels of 5-HT(7) receptors (HTR7), as well as the concentrations of various monoamine neurotransmitters and their metabolites. Decreased levels of HTR7 mRNA were observed in BA10. A significant association was observed between HTR7 levels in BA10 and BEHAVE-AD cluster B (hallucinations) (rs(28) = 0.444, P < 0.05). In addition, a negative correlation was observed between HTR7 levels in BA10 and both MHPG concentrations in this brain region (rs(45) = -0.311; P < 0.05), and DOPAC levels in the amygdala (rs(42) = -0.311; P < 0.05). Quite surprisingly, no association was found between HTR7 levels and cognitive status. Altogether, this study supports the notion of the involvement of 5-HT(7) receptors in psychotic symptoms in AD, suggesting the interest of testing antagonist acting at this receptor to specifically treat psychotic symptoms in this illness.
Inflammation and immune responses after tissue injury play pivotal roles in the pathology, resolution of inflammation, tissue recovery, fibrosis and remodeling. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are the cells responsible for suppressing immune responses and can be activated in secondary lymphatic tissues, where they subsequently regulate effector T cell and dendritic cell activation. Recently, Tregs that reside in non-lymphoid tissues, called tissue Tregs, have been shown to exhibit tissue-specific functions that contribute to the maintenance of tissue homeostasis and repair. Unlike other tissue Tregs, the role of Tregs in the brain has not been well elucidated because the number of brain Tregs is very small under normal conditions. However, we found that Tregs accumulate in the brain at the chronic phase of ischemic brain injury and control astrogliosis through secretion of a cytokine, amphiregulin (Areg). Brain Tregs resemble other tissue Tregs in many ways but, unlike the other tissue Tregs, brain Tregs express neural-cell-specific genes such as the serotonin receptor (Htr7) and respond to serotonin. Administering serotonin or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in an experimental mouse model of stroke increases the number of brain Tregs and ameliorates neurological symptoms. Knowledge of brain Tregs will contribute to the understanding of various types of neuroinflammation.
OBJECTIVE: To report the genome-wide significant and/or replicable risk variants for alcohol dependence and explore their potential biological functions. METHODS: We searched in PubMed for all genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of alcohol dependence. The following three types of the results were extracted: genome-wide significant associations in an individual sample, the combined samples, or the meta-analysis (p < 5 x 10(-8) ); top-ranked associations in an individual sample (p < 10(-5) ) that were nominally replicated in other samples (p < .05); and nominally replicable associations across at least three independent GWAS samples (p < .05). These results were meta-analyzed. cis-eQTLs in human, RNA expression in rat and mouse brains and bioinformatics properties of all of these risk variants were analyzed. RESULTS: The variants located within the alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) cluster were significantly associated with alcohol dependence at the genome-wide level (p < 5 x 10(-8) ) in at least one sample. Some associations with the ADH cluster were replicable across six independent GWAS samples. The variants located within or near SERINC2, KIAA0040, MREG-PECR or PKNOX2 were significantly associated with alcohol dependence at the genome-wide level (p < 5 x 10(-8) ) in meta-analysis or combined samples, and these associations were replicable across at least one sample. The associations with the variants within NRD1, GPD1L-CMTM8 or MAP3K9-PCNX were suggestive (5 x 10(-8)  < p < 10(-5) ) in some samples, and nominally replicable in other samples. The associations with the variants at HTR7 and OPA3 were nominally replicable across at least three independent GWAS samples (10(-5)  < p < .05). Some risk variants at the ADH cluster, SERINC2, KIAA0040, NRD1, and HTR7 had potential biological functions. CONCLUSION: The most robust risk locus was the ADH cluster. SERINC2, KIAA0040, NRD1, and HTR7 were also likely to play important roles in alcohol dependence. PKNOX2, MREG, PECR, GPD1L, CMTM8, MAP3K9, PCNX, and OPA3 might play less important roles in risk for alcohol dependence based on the function analysis. This conclusion will significantly contribute to the post-GWAS follow-up studies on alcohol dependence.
Inflammation and immune responses after tissue injury play pivotal roles in the resolution of inflammation, tissue recovery, fibrosis, and remodeling. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are responsible for immune tolerance and are usually activated in secondary lymphatic tissues. Activated Tregs subsequently regulate effector T cell and dendritic cell activation. For clinical applications such as the suppression of both autoimmune diseases and the rejection of transplanted organs, methods to generate stabilized antigen-specific Tregs are required. For this purpose, transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of Foxp3 expression has been investigated. In addition to conventional Tregs, there are some Tregs that reside in tissues and are called tissue Tregs. Tissue Tregs exhibit tissue-specific functions that contribute to the maintenance of tissue homeostasis and repair. Such tissue Tregs could also be useful for Treg-based cell therapy. We recently discovered brain Tregs that accumulate in the brain during the chronic phase of ischemic brain injury. Brain Tregs resemble other tissue Tregs, but are unique in expressing neural cell-specific genes such as the serotonin receptor (Htr7); consequently, brain Tregs respond to serotonin. Here, we describe our experiences in the use of Tregs to suppress graft-versus-host disease and to promote neural recovery after stroke.
Macrophages display a ample plethora of effector functions whose acquisition is promoted by the surrounding cytokine and cellular environment. Depending on the stimulus, macrophages become specialized ("polarized") for either pathogen elimination, tissue repair and wound healing or immunosuppression. This "polarization" versatility allows macrophages to critically contribute to tissue homeostasis, as they promote initiation and resolution of inflammatory responses. As a consequence, deregulation of the tissue macrophage polarization balance is an etiological agent of chronic inflammation, autoimmune diseases, cancer and even obesity and insulin resistance. In the present review we describe current concepts on the molecular basis and the patho-physiological implications of macrophage polarization, and describe its modulation by serotonin (5-HT), a neurotransmitter that regulates inflammation and tissue repair via a large set of receptors (5-HTR1-7). 5-HT modulates the phenotypic and functional polarization of macrophages, and contributes to the maintenance of an anti-inflammatory state mainly via 5-HTR2B and 5-HTR7, whose activation has a great impact on macrophage gene expression profile. The identification of 5-HTR2B and 5-HTR7 as functionally-relevant polarization markers suggests their therapeutic value in inflammatory pathologies as well as their potential involvement in linking the immune and nervous systems.
The mechanisms of treatment-resistant depression (TRD) are not clear and are difficult to study. An animal model resembling human TRD is the Wistar Kyoto rat strain. In the present study, we focused on selecting miRNAs that differentiate rats of the WKY strain from Wistar Han (WIS) rats in two divisions of the habenula, the lateral and medial (LHb and MHb, respectively). Based on our preliminary study and literature survey, we identified 32 miRNAs that could be potentially regulated in the habenula. Six miRNAs significantly differentiated WKY rats from WIS rats within the MHb, and three significantly differentiated WKY from WIS rats within the LHb. Then, we selected relevant transcripts regulated by those miRNAs, and their expression in the habenular nuclei was investigated. For mRNAs that differentiated WKY rats from WIS rats in the MHb (Cdkn1c, Htr7, Kcnj9, and Slc12a5), their lower expression correlated with a higher level of relevant miRNAs. In the LHb, eight mRNAs significantly differentiated WKY from WIS rats (upregulated Htr4, Drd2, Kcnj5, and Sstr4 and downregulated Htr2a, Htr7, Elk4, and Slc12a5). These data indicate that several important miRNAs are expressed in the habenula, which differentiates WKY rats from WIS rats and in turn correlates with alterations in the expression of target transcripts. Of particular note are two genes whose expression is altered in WKY rats in both LHb and MHb: Slc12a5 and Htr7. Regulation of KCC2 via the 5-HT7 receptor may be a potential target for the treatment of TRD.
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) is an amine produced in both the mammary gland and the central nervous system. Tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1) catalyzes the conversion of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) into l-tryptophan, which is then converted into 5-HT by monoamine-oxidase (MAO-A). In the mammary gland, 5-HT has been shown to have a variety of paracrine-autocrine actions, including suppressing lactation, controlling the destiny of mammary epithelial cells, and maintaining calcium homeostasis throughout the transition from pregnancy to lactation. To examine the effects of 5-HT on the composition of colostrum and milk, a total of 30 transition Guan Zhong dairy goats were intramuscularly injected with 5-HTP (1.0 mg/kg) every morning before feeding from 10 d before the projected parturition date to the day of parturition. The average number of days animals received injections was 8.2 +/- 3.2 d. 5-HTP treatment increased serum 5-HT concentration from days 5 to 2 relative to parturition (P < 0.05), and decreased the casein concentration of colostrum (P < 0.05). In the in vitro experiment, mammary epithelial cells isolated from three individual goats' mammary glands were separately treated with 200 muM 5-HTP, 30 muM PCPA (the specific inhibitor of TPH1), or 200 muM 5-HTP + 50 muM SB269970 (the selective antagonist of 5-HTR7). The results showed that 200 muM 5-HTP inhibited the expression of beta-casein, downregulated the activity of the JAK2/ STAT5a signaling pathway, and promoted the apoptosis of goat mammary epithelial cells (GMECs) (P < 0.05). When GMECs were treated with 30 muM Four-chloro-dl-phenylalanine (PCPA), a specific inhibitor of 5-HT synthesis, the mRNA expression of STAT5a and the phosphorylated STAT5a protein level were upregulated. The 50 muM SB269970 treatment rescued the effects of 5-HTP on GMECs (P < 0.05). Taken together, the results indicated that 5-HTP exerted an inhibitory effect on beta-casein synthesis and a proapoptotic effect in GMECs via HTR7 and the JAK2/STAT5a axis.
Chronic itch is a prevalent and debilitating condition for which few effective therapies are available. We harnessed the natural variation across genetically distinct mouse strains to identify transcripts co-regulated with itch behavior. This survey led to the discovery of the serotonin receptor HTR7 as a key mediator of serotonergic itch. Activation of HTR7 promoted opening of the ion channel TRPA1, which in turn triggered itch behaviors. In addition, acute itch triggered by serotonin or a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor required both HTR7 and TRPA1. Aberrant serotonin signaling has long been linked to a variety of human chronic itch conditions, including atopic dermatitis. In a mouse model of atopic dermatitis, mice lacking HTR7 or TRPA1 displayed reduced scratching and skin lesion severity. These data highlight a role for HTR7 in acute and chronic itch and suggest that HTR7 antagonists may be useful for treating a variety of pathological itch conditions.
Some patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) have visceral hypersensitivity, which contributes to their abdominal pain. miRNA-29 was detected to be significantly upregulated in colonic tissues of patients with IBS. However, it is unknown whether miRNA-29a is involved in the visceral hypersensitivity pathogenesis of IBS. This study aimed to investigate whether miRNA-29a participates in visceral hypersensitivity in IBS. We investigated miRNA-29a in intestinal biopsies collected during endoscopy of patients with IBS (n = 10) and healthy volunteers (control) (n = 10). In addition, a water avoidance stress (WAS)-induced visceral hypersensitivity IBS mouse model was established. The abdominal withdrawal reflex (AWR) scores of mice in response to colorectal distention were used to assess visceral sensitivity. Reverse transcription quantitative-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was used to measure miRNA-29a levels. Immunofluorescence, RT-qPCR and western blot were used to measure 5-HT(7) receptor (HTR7) levels. Bioinformatic analysis and luciferase reporter assays were used to detect the direct relationship between miRNA-29a and HTR7. Finally, alterations in the levels of HTR7 and miRNA-29a were measured in the human intestinal epithelial cell line NCM460 after transfection with miRNA-29a inhibitor or mimic. Intestinal tissues from patients with IBS and WAS-induced IBS mice had increased levels of miRNA-29a, but reduced levels of HTR7. MiRNA-29a knockout resulted in overexpression of HTR7 and attenuated visceral hyperalgesia in WAS-induced IBS mice. HTR7 was a direct target of miRNA-29a. Based on analyses of intestinal tissue samples from patients with IBS and WAS-induced miRNA-29a(-/-) mice, miRNA-29a plays a role in the visceral hyperalgesia pathogenesis of IBS, probably through regulating HTR7 expression.
Besides its role as a neurotransmitter, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT) regulates inflammation and tissue repair via a set of receptors (5HT(1-7)) whose pattern of expression varies among cell lineages. Considering the importance of macrophage polarization plasticity for inflammatory responses and tissue repair, we evaluated whether 5HT modulates human macrophage polarization. 5HT inhibited the LPS-induced release of proinflammatory cytokines without affecting IL-10 production, upregulated the expression of M2 polarization-associated genes (SERPINB2, THBS1, STAB1, COL23A1), and reduced the expression of M1-associated genes (INHBA, CCR2, MMP12, SERPINE1, CD1B, ALDH1A2). Whereas only 5HT(7) mediated the inhibitory action of 5HT on the release of proinflammatory cytokines, both 5HT(2B) and 5HT(7) receptors mediated the pro-M2 skewing effect of 5HT. In fact, blockade of both receptors during in vitro monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation preferentially modulated the acquisition of M2 polarization markers. 5HT(2B) was found to be preferentially expressed by anti-inflammatory M2(M-CSF) macrophages and was detected in vivo in liver Kupffer cells and in tumor-associated macrophages. Therefore, 5HT modulates macrophage polarization and contributes to the maintenance of an anti-inflammatory state via 5HT(2B) and 5HT(7), whose identification as functionally relevant markers for anti-inflammatory/homeostatic human M2 macrophages suggests their potential therapeutic value in inflammatory pathologies.
Approximately 15 million babies are born prematurely every year and many will face lifetime motor and/or cognitive deficits. Children born prematurely are at higher risk of developing perinatal brain lesions, especially white matter injuries (WMI). Evidence in humans and rodents demonstrates that systemic inflammation-induced neuroinflammation, including microglial and astrocyte reactivity, is the prominent processes of WMI associated with preterm birth. Thus, a new challenge in the field of perinatal brain injuries is to develop new neuroprotective strategies to target neuroinflammation to prevent WMI. Serotonin (5-HT) and its receptors play an important role in inflammation, and emerging evidence indicates that 5-HT may regulate brain inflammation by the modulation of microglial reactivity and astrocyte functions. The present study is based on a mouse model of WMI induced by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of IL-1beta during the first 5 days of life. In this model, certain key lesions of preterm brain injuries can be summarized by (i) systemic inflammation, (ii) pro-inflammatory microglial and astrocyte activation, and (iii) inhibition of oligodendrocyte maturation, leading to hypomyelination. We demonstrate that Htr7 mRNA (coding for the HTR7/5-HT7 receptor) is significantly overexpressed in the anterior cortex of IL-1beta-exposed animals, suggesting it as a potential therapeutic target. LP-211 is a specific high-affinity HTR7 agonist that crosses the blood-brain barrier (BBB). When co-injected with IL-1beta, LP-211 treatment prevented glial reactivity, the down-regulation of myelin-associated proteins, and the apparition of anxiety-like phenotypes. Thus, HTR7 may represent an innovative therapeutic target to protect the developing brain from preterm brain injuries.
Exposure to psychostimulants, including both abused and therapeutic drugs, can occur first during human adolescence. Animal modeling is useful not only to reproduce adolescent peculiarities but also to study neurobehavioral adaptations to psychostimulant consumption. Human adolescence (generally considered as the period between 9/12 and 18 years old) has been compared with the age window between postnatal days (pnd) 28/35 and 50 in rats and mice. These adolescent rodents display basal hyperlocomotion and higher rates of exploration together with a marked propensity for sensation-seeking and risk-taking behaviors. Moreover, peculiar responses to psychostimulants, including enhanced locomotor sensitization, no drug-induced stereotypy and reduced place conditioning have been described in adolescent rodents. During this age window, forebrain dopamine systems undergo profuse remodeling, thus providing a neuro-biological substrate to explain behavioral peculiarities observed during adolescence, as well as the reported vulnerabilities to several drugs. Further, methylphenidate (MPH, better known as Ritalin(R)), a psychostimulant extensively prescribed to children and adolescents diagnosed with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), raises concerns for its long-term safety. Using magnetic resonance techniques, MPH-induced acute effects appear to be different in adolescent rats compared to adult animals. Moreover, adolescent exposure to MPH seems to provoke persistent neurobehavioral consequences: long-term modulation of self-control abilities, decreased sensitivity to natural and drug reward, enhanced stress-induced emotionality, together with an enhanced cortical control over sub-cortical dopamine systems and an enduring up-regulation of Htr7 gene expression within the nucleus accumbens (NAcc). In summary, additional studies in animal models are necessary to better understand the long-term consequences of adolescent MPH, and to further investigate the safety of the prescription and administration of such pharmacological treatment at early life stages.
PURPOSE: Exosomes are gradually detected as an indicator for diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer in clinic and a systematic review was conducted. METHODS: A search for clinical studies published before July 1, 2017 was performed. Methods of exosome purification and identification from all studies were extracted. For diagnosis evaluation, the comparison of exosome biomarkers expression between breast cancer patients and healthy women was obtained; for prognosis prediction, the correlation between exosome biomarkers expression and chemotherapy resistance, overall survival (OS), disease-free survival (DFS), recurrence and metastasis of breast cancer was also extracted. RESULTS: A total of 11 studies with 921 breast cancer patients were included. Ultracentrifugation is the most frequent method to purify exosomes and transmission electron microscopy is commonly used to identify exosomes. Exosome biomarkers (such as HER2, CD47, Del-1, miR-1246 and miR-21) in breast cancer patients are significantly higher than those in healthy controls, exosomal GSTP1 and TRPC5 are related to chemotherapy resistance, exosome-carrying TRPC5, NANOG, NEUROD1, HTR7, KISS1R and HOXC are correlated to PFS, DFS or OS, and some exosomal proteins (HER2, KDR, CD49d, CXCR4 and CD44) as well as miRNAs (miR-340-5p, miR-17-5p, miR-130a-3p, miR-93-5p) are associated with tumor recurrence or distant organ metastasis. CONCLUSIONS: Exosome biomarkers can be used for early diagnosis and prognosis of breast cancer patients in clinic.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is characterized by visceral hypersensitivity (VH) associated with abnormal serotonin/5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) metabolism and neurotrophin-dependent mucosal neurite outgrowth. The underlying mechanisms of VH remain poorly understood. We investigated the role of 5-HT(7) receptor in mucosal innervation and intestinal hyperalgesia. A high density of mucosal nerve fibres stained for 5-HT(7) was observed in colonoscopic biopsy specimens from IBS patients compared with those from healthy controls. Staining of 5-HT(3) and 5-HT(4) receptors was observed mainly in colonic epithelia with comparable levels between IBS and controls. Visceromotor responses to colorectal distension were evaluated in two mouse models, one postinfectious with Giardia and subjected to water avoidance stress (GW) and the other postinflammatory with trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis (PT). Increased VH was associated with higher mucosal density of 5-HT(7)-expressing nerve fibres and elevated neurotrophin and neurotrophin receptor levels in the GW and PT mice. The increased VH was inhibited by intraperitoneal injection of SB-269970 (a selective 5-HT(7) antagonist). Peroral multiple doses of CYY1005 (a novel 5-HT(7) ligand) decreased VH and reduced mucosal density of 5-HT(7)-expressing nerve fibres in mouse colon. Human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells incubated with bacteria-free mouse colonic supernatant, 5-HT, nerve growth factor, or brain-derived neurotrophic factor exhibited nerve fibre elongation, which was inhibited by 5-HT(7) antagonists. Gene silencing of HTR7 also reduced the nerve fibre length. Activation of 5-HT(7) upregulated NGF and BDNF gene expression, while stimulation with neurotrophins increased the levels of tryptophan hydroxylase 2 and 5-HT(7) in neurons. A positive-feedback loop was observed between serotonin and neurotrophin pathways via 5-HT(7) activation to aggravate fibre elongation, whereby 5-HT(3) and 5-HT(4) had no roles. In conclusion, 5-HT(7)-dependent mucosal neurite outgrowth contributed to VH. A novel 5-HT(7) antagonist could be used as peroral analgesics for IBS-related pain.
The gene encoding the serotonin 5-HT(7) receptor (HTR7) has been considered as a candidate locus in several neuropsychiatric disorders, based on pharmacological evidence and ligand-binding studies. After determining over 3 kb of previously unpublished sequence from introns 1 and 2 of HTR7, a single base (C/T) polymorphism in the second intron of HTR7 was found. Allele-specific PCR was used to genotype the HTR7 marker in 53 trios consisting of subjects with autistic disorder and both parents. Using the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), no evidence of preferential transmission of either allele was found (TDT chi(2) = 0.252, p = 0.602). Sequence data obtained from both intron 1 and intron 2 of HTR7, and from the 5-HT(7) pseudogene (HTR7P), was used to confirm localization of HTR7 to 10q23 and HTR7P to 12p13 using radiation hybrid analyses.
Objective: By comparing and analyzing the differential sites of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) between pregnant women with hypothyroidism and normal controls, the possible pathogenesis of hypothyroidism during pregnancy was explored. Methods: A total of 53 pregnant women with hypothyroidism during pregnancy from January 2018 to October 2018 were enrolled. A total of 50 pregnant women who underwent concurrent delivery and matched age with the case group were selected. Whole blood scans were performed on blood samples from two groups of subjects using the Illumina ASA chip to analyze the SNP with significant differences between the two groups. The human genome database hg19_dbsnp_version150 was employed to locate related genes. The association of related genes with thyroid dysfunction and pregnancy complications were analyzed. Results: A total of 13 SNPs were found in the study: rs4668077 (P=2.87E-05) in CERS6, rs6717546 (P=5.92E-05) in UGT1A1, rs1965358(P=7.78E-05) in CASR, rs916801 (P=9.22E-05) near CXCL14, rs6886845 (P=8.67E-05)near MAT2B, rs76245053 in GRIK2 (P=2.07E-05), rs6977642 (P=2.10E-05)in HDAC9, rs6949597 (P=3.68E-05) near ATXN7L1, rs11186331 (P=2.08E-05) in HTR7, rs2415551 (P=4.53E-05) near FBXO33, rs75850124 (P=9.24E-05) and rs76519339 (P=9.24E-05)in MIR4527, rs1014971 (P=3.24E-05) near CBX6 were statistically significant in the hypothyroidism group compared with the control group. Conclusions: The related gene UGT1A1 is related to the metabolism of thyroxine in the liver. CASR, CXCL14 and CBX6 are related to reproductive ability. CXCL14, CASR, HBAC9 and CERS6 are related to metabolic syndrome, and GRIK2, HTR7 and FBOX33 are related to neuropsychiatric diseases. Abnormal serum thyroxine levels during pregnancy may be associated with abnormal metabolism of thyroxine caused by UGT1A1 mutation. Genes associated with reproduction, metabolism, and neuropsychiatric disorders suggest a pathogenic link between hypothyroidism and infertility, metabolic syndrome, and neuropsychiatric disorders.
We previously reported that serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) suppresses beta-casein expression, a differentiation marker in mammary epithelial cells, via inhibition of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) phosphorylation in the human mammary epithelial cell line, MCF-12A. In this study, we investigated the expression pattern of the different 5-HT receptor subtypes in MCF-12A cells, and identified the receptors involved in 5-HT-mediated suppression of beta-casein protein expression. beta-Casein mRNA expression was inhibited by 30 microM 5-HT in a time-dependent manner. Treatment with 30 microM 5-HT for 72 h decreased beta-casein protein levels and STAT5 phosphorylation (pSTAT5). The cells expressed four 5-HT receptors subtypes (5-HTR1D, 2B, 3A, and 7) at the mRNA and protein level, and their expression was elevated by prolactin (PRL) treatment. Additionally, the mRNA levels of 5-HTR1D and 5-HTR7 were significantly higher than the other 5-HT receptors in the cells. Tryptophan hydroxylase 1 mRNA was detectable in the cells in the absence of PRL, and PRL treatment significantly increased its expression. beta-Casein and pSTAT5/STAT5 levels in the cells co-treated with 5-HT and a selective 5-HTR1D inhibitor, BRL15572, were equal to those observed in cells treated with 5-HT alone. However, in the cells co-treated with 5-HT and a selective 5-HTR7 inhibitor, SB269970, beta-casein and pSTAT5/STAT5 levels increased in a SB269970 concentration-dependent manner. In conclusion, we showed that 5-HT regulates beta-casein expression via 5-HTR7 in MCF-12A human mammary epithelial cells.
BACKGROUND: A recent genome-wide association study has identified 5-hydroxytrytamine (serotonin) receptor 7, adenylate cyclase-coupled (HTR7) as a risk gene for alcohol dependence. In addition, the serotonergic system has been considered as a modulator that plays an important role in alcohol use disorders. Functional, pharmacological, and genetic studies of serotonin neurotransmission have revealed that serotonin receptors are potential targets for the treatment of alcohol use disorders. The aim of this study is to investigate whether associations between HTR7 genetic polymorphisms and alcohol dependence could be replicated. METHODS: This study genotyped a total of 22 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 459 alcoholic patients and 444 nonalcoholic controls. RESULTS: Logistic regression analysis of the case-control study, controlling for age and sex as covariates, showed nominal associations of 7 SNPs (p = 0.02 to 0.04; odds ratio = 0.60 to 1.35). In further linear regression analysis based on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test score for alcohol dependence, 8 SNPs and 3 haplotypes showed relatively significant associations with alcohol dependence (minimum p = 0.001; p(corr) = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Although further replications and functional evaluations are needed, our findings suggest that genetic variations of HTR7 may contribute to the predisposition for alcohol dependence.
