Macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for CSF1 and IL34 and plays an essential role in the regulation of survival, proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic precursor cells, especially mononuclear phagocytes, such as macrophages and monocytes. Promotes the release of proinflammatory chemokines in response to IL34 and CSF1, and thereby plays an important role in innate immunity and in inflammatory processes. Plays an important role in the regulation of osteoclast proliferation and differentiation, the regulat [...] 
Interleukin-4 is a multifunctional cytokine that plays a critical role in the regulation of immune responses. Its effects depend upon binding to and signaling through a receptor complex consisting of the IL-4R alpha chain and the common gamma chain (gamma c), resulting in a series of phosphorylation events mediated by receptor-associated kinases. In turn, these cause the recruitment of mediators of cell growth, of resistance to apoptosis, and of gene activation and differentiation. Here we describe our current understanding of the organization of the IL-4 receptor, of the signaling pathways that are induced as a result of receptor occupancy, and of the various mechanisms through which receptor function is modulated. We particularly emphasize the modular nature of the receptor and the specialization of different receptor regions for distinct functions, most notably the independent regulation of cell growth and gene activation.
Acyl-coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) species are cofactors for numerous enzymes that acylate thousands of proteins. Here, we describe an enzyme that uses S-nitroso-CoA (SNO-CoA) as its cofactor to S-nitrosylate multiple proteins (SNO-CoA-assisted nitrosylase, SCAN). Separate domains in SCAN mediate SNO-CoA and substrate binding, allowing SCAN to selectively catalyze SNO transfer from SNO-CoA to SCAN to multiple protein targets, including the insulin receptor (INSR) and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1). Insulin-stimulated S-nitrosylation of INSR/IRS1 by SCAN reduces insulin signaling physiologically, whereas increased SCAN activity in obesity causes INSR/IRS1 hypernitrosylation and insulin resistance. SCAN-deficient mice are thus protected from diabetes. In human skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, SCAN expression increases with body mass index and correlates with INSR S-nitrosylation. S-nitrosylation by SCAN/SNO-CoA thus defines a new enzyme class, a unique mode of receptor tyrosine kinase regulation, and a revised paradigm for NO function in physiology and disease.
The family of insulin receptor substrates (IRS) consists of four proteins (IRS-1-IRS-4), which were initially characterized as typical cytosolic adaptor proteins involved in insulin receptor (IR) and insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF-IR) signaling. The first cloned and characterized member of the IRS family, IRS-1, has a predicted molecular weight of 132 kDa, however, as a result of its extensive serine phosphorylation it separates on a SDS gel as a band of approximately 160-185 kDa. In addition to its metabolic and growth-promoting functions, IRS-1 is also suspected to play a role in malignant transformation. The mechanism by which IRS-1 supports tumor growth is not fully understood, and the argument that IRS-1 merely amplifies the signal from the IGF-1R and/or IR requires further investigation. Almost a decade ago, we reported the presence of nuclear IRS-1 in medulloblastoma clinical samples, which express viral oncoprotein, large T-antigen of human polyomavirus JC (JCV T-antigen). This first demonstration of nuclear IRS-1 was confirmed by several other laboratories. Nuclear IRS-1 was also detected by cells expressing the SV40 T-antigen, v-Src, in immortalized fibroblasts stimulated with IGF-I, in hepatocytes, 32D cells, and in an osteosarcoma cell line. More recently, nuclear IRS-1 was detected in breast cancer cells in association with estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha), and in JC virus negative medulloblastoma cells expressing estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta), further implicating nuclear IRS-1 in cellular transformation. Here, we discuss how nuclear IRS-1 acting on DNA repair fidelity, transcriptional activity, and cell growth can support tumor development and progression.
While a potential causal factor in Alzheimer's disease (AD), brain insulin resistance has not been demonstrated directly in that disorder. We provide such a demonstration here by showing that the hippocampal formation (HF) and, to a lesser degree, the cerebellar cortex in AD cases without diabetes exhibit markedly reduced responses to insulin signaling in the IR-->IRS-1-->PI3K signaling pathway with greatly reduced responses to IGF-1 in the IGF-1R-->IRS-2-->PI3K signaling pathway. Reduced insulin responses were maximal at the level of IRS-1 and were consistently associated with basal elevations in IRS-1 phosphorylated at serine 616 (IRS-1 pS(6)(1)(6)) and IRS-1 pS(6)(3)(6)/(6)(3)(9). In the HF, these candidate biomarkers of brain insulin resistance increased commonly and progressively from normal cases to mild cognitively impaired cases to AD cases regardless of diabetes or APOE epsilon4 status. Levels of IRS-1 pS(6)(1)(6) and IRS-1 pS(6)(3)(6)/(6)(3)(9) and their activated kinases correlated positively with those of oligomeric Abeta plaques and were negatively associated with episodic and working memory, even after adjusting for Abeta plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and APOE epsilon4. Brain insulin resistance thus appears to be an early and common feature of AD, a phenomenon accompanied by IGF-1 resistance and closely associated with IRS-1 dysfunction potentially triggered by Abeta oligomers and yet promoting cognitive decline independent of classic AD pathology.
IRS-1 is a principal substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase. It undergoes multi-site tyrosine phosphorylation and mediates the insulin signal by associating with various signaling molecules containing Src homology 2 domains. Interleukin-4 also stimulates IRS-1 phosphorylation, and it is suspected that a few more growth factors or cytokines will be added to form a select group of receptors that utilize the IRS-1 signaling pathway. More IRS-1-like adapter molecules, such as 4PS (IRS-2), may remain to be found.
Insulin Receptor Substrate (IRS) proteins are the main cytoplasmic adaptor molecules involved in transducing extracellular signals from receptors to downstream proteins. This protein family have pivotal roles on maintenance, distribution and regulation of signaling networks. Since IRS1/2 interact with and transmits signals from the receptors of insulin, Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF1), prolactin, growth hormone (GH), leptin, Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF), TrkB, ALK and integrins this promoted scientist to think that IRS1 may have functions in cell proliferation, tumorigenesis and metastasis. Therefore, over the past decade, studies on IRS proteins and their functions in cancer has been increased and these studies provided valuable results claiming the involvement of IRS1/2 in cancer development. In this review, we discuss the function and contributions of IRS1 and IRS2 in development of  breast cancer.
Cellular responses to the environment are mediated by intracellular signalling pathways monitoring several essential cellular processes, such as proliferation, migration, differentiation and survival. Cellular dysfunction is caused by dysregulation of intracelleular signalling pathways and may ultimately result in pathophysiological conditions. The non- transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 has been shown to be important for the control of cellular behaviour. It influences the activity of several growth factor and cytokine dependent signalling pathways by association with growth factor receptors, cell surface adhesion molecules and adaptor molecules such as Gab-1, Grb2 and IRS-1. Upon FGF-2, EGF and insulin stimulation SHP-2 regulates MAPK pathway activation. In addition, SHP-2 is involved in the regulation of cell survival by influencing the PI3-K/Akt pathway upon EGF, IGF and PDGF stimulation. Due to these properties, SHP-2 function has recently gained more interest in vascular processes, such as in the differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells and angiogenic events. Indeed, SHP-2 was shown to positively regulate endothelial cell motility and angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo as well as controlling intracellular pH of endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells. On the other hand, SHP-2 was also demonstrated to be responsible for down regulation of VEGF receptor 2 activation upon dopamin and collagen stimulation. Finally, mutations in the Ptpn11 gene (encoding SHP-2) underlie the developmental disorders Noonan syndrome and Leopard syndrome characterized by congenital heart disease and hematologic abnormalities. Different mutations in this gene also result in myeloid and lymphoid malignancies. This article summarizes the role of SHP-2 in signalling pathways relevant for vascular biology and associated disorders.
Insulin-receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) is a principal substrate of the receptor tyrosine kinase for insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1, and a substrate for a tyrosine kinase activated by interleukin 4. IRS-1 undergoes multisite tyrosine phosphorylation and mediates downstream signals by 'docking' various proteins that contain Src homology 2 domains. IRS-1 appears to be a unique molecule; however, 4PS, a protein found mainly in hemopoietic cells, may represent another member of this family.
Cell size plays an indirect role in cell proliferation, as cells must double in size before dividing. Cell size is largely determined by the activity of RNA polymerase I that controls ribosomal RNA synthesis and ribosome biogenesis. The type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) and its docking protein, insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) control, in a non-redundant way, about 50% of cell and body size. This is certainly true in mice, flies and cells in culture, but also probably in higher mammals. Interestingly, the insulin receptor (InR) cannot substitute for the IGF-IR in controlling cell size. This is probably due to the fact that the IGF-IR is more effective than the InR in translocationg to the nuclei IRS-1, which then binds UBF1, one of the proteins that regulate RNA pol I activity.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a complex disorder that has a heterogeneous genetic and environmental background. In this Review, we discuss the role of relatively infrequent polymorphisms of genes that regulate insulin signaling (including the K121Q polymorphism of ENPP1, the G972R polymorphism of IRS1 and the Q84R polymorphism of TRIB3) in T2DM and other conditions related to insulin resistance. The biological relevance of these three polymorphisms has been very thoroughly characterized both in vitro and in vivo and the available data indicate that they all affect insulin signaling and action as well as insulin secretion. They also affect insulin-mediated regulation of endothelial cell function. In addition, several reports indicate that the effects of all three polymorphisms on the risk of T2DM and cardiovascular diseases related to insulin resistance depend on the clinical features of the individual, including their body weight and age at disease onset. Thus, these polymorphisms might be used to demonstrate how difficult it is to ascertain the contribution of relatively infrequent genetic variants with heterogeneous effects on disease susceptibility. Unraveling the role of such variants might be facilitated by improving disease definition and focusing on specific subsets of patients.
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Insulin resistance is more prominent in men than women. If this involves adipose tissue is unknown and was presently examined. SUBJECTS/METHODS: AdipoIR (in vivo adipose insulin resistance index) was measured in 2344 women and 787 men. In 259 of the women and 54 of the men, insulin induced inhibition of lipolysis (acylglycerol breakdown) and stimulation of lipogenesis (glucose conversion to acylglycerols) were determined in subcutaneous adipocytes; in addition, basal (spontaneous) lipolysis was also determined in the fat cells. In 234 women and 115 men, RNAseq expression of canonical insulin signal genes were measured in subcutaneous adipose tissue. Messenger RNA transcripts of the most discriminant genes were quantified in 175 women and 109 men. RESULTS: Men had higher AdipoIR values than women but only when obesity (body mass index 30 kg/m(2) or more) was present (p < 0.0001). The latter sex dimorphism was found among physically active and sedentary people, in those with and without cardiometabolic disease and in people using nicotine or not (p = 0.0003 or less). In obesity, adipocyte insulin sensitivity (half maximum effective hormone concentration) and maximal antilipolytic effect were tenfold and 10% lower, respectively, in men than women (p = 0.005 or less). Basal rate of lipolysis was two times higher in men than women (p > 0.0001). Sensitivity and maximum effect of insulin on lipogenesis were similar in both sexes (p = 0.26 and p = 0.18, respectively). When corrected for multiple comparison only RNAseq expression of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) was lower in men than women (p < 0.0001). The mRNA transcript for IRS1 was 60% higher in women than men (p < 0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: In obesity, adipose tissue insulin resistance is more pronounced in men than in women. The mechanism involves less efficient insulin-mediated inhibition of adipocyte lipolysis, increased basal rate of lipolysis and decreased adipose expression of a key element of insulin signaling, IRS1.
Phosphoinositide-3-kinase, catalytic, alpha polypeptide, which encodes the catalytic p110alpha subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase alpha, is the most frequently mutated oncogene in human cancers. Targeting mutant p110alpha holds great promise for cancer therapy. However, it is challenging to develop p110alpha isoform-specific inhibitors. Most p110alpha mutations occur at two hot spot regions: an acidic cluster (E542, E545, and Q546) in the helical domain and a histidine residue (H1047) in the kinase domain. We recently discovered that p110alpha helical domain mutant proteins, but not the kinase domain mutant proteins, directly associate with insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1). Moreover, we demonstrated that disruption of protein-protein interaction between p110alpha helical domain mutant and IRS1 inhibits the growth of tumors with such mutations. The direct protein interaction between IRS1 and p110alpha helical domain mutants may provide a more accessible target for developing novel precision cancer therapy.
The insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) signalling pathways are present in most mammalian cells and play important roles in the growth and metabolism of tissues. Most proteins in these pathways have also been identified in the beta-cells of the pancreatic islets. Tissue-specific knockout of the insulin receptor (betaIRKO) or IGF-1 receptor (betaIGFRKO) in pancreatic beta-cells leads to altered glucose-sensing and glucose intolerance in adult mice, and betaIRKO mice show an age-dependent decrease in islet size and beta-cell mass. These data indicate that these receptors are important for differentiated function and are unlikely to play a major role in the early growth and/or development of the pancreatic islets. Conventional insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) knockouts manifest growth retardation and mild insulin resistance. The IRS-1 knockouts also display islet hyperplasia, defects in insulin secretory responses to multiple stimuli both in vivo and in vitro, reduced islet insulin content and an increased number of autophagic vacuoles in the beta-cells. Re-expression of IRS-1 in cultured beta-cells is able to partially restore the insulin content indicating that IRS-1 is involved in the regulation of insulin synthesis. Taken together, these data provide evidence that insulin and IGF-1 receptors and IRS-1, and potentially other proteins in the insulin/IGF-1 signalling pathway, contribute to the regulation of islet hormone secretion and synthesis and therefore in the maintenance of glucose homeostasis.
Recent mining of the human and mouse genomes, use of yeast genetics, and detailed analyses of several biochemical pathways, have resulted in the identification of many new roles for ubiquitin-proteasome mediated degradation of proteins. In the context of last year's award of Noble Prize (Chemistry) work, the ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like modifications are increasingly recognized as key regulatory events in health and disease. Although the ATP-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome system has evolved as premier cellular proteolytic machinery, dysregulation of this system by several different mechanisms leads to inappropriate degradation of specific proteins and pathological consequences. While aberrations in the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway have been implicated in certain malignancies and neurodegenerative disorders, recent studies indicate a role for this system in the pathogenesis of diabetes and its complications. Inappropriate degradation of insulin signaling molecules such as insulin receptor substrates (IRS-1 and IRS-2) has been demonstrated in experimental diabetes, mediated in part through the up-regulation of suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS). It appears that altered ubiquitin-proteasome system might be one of the molecular mechanisms of insulin resistance in many pathological situations. Drugs that modulate the SOCS action and/or proteasomal degradation of proteins could become novel agents for the treatment of insulin resistance and Type 2 diabetes.
The insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins are cytoplasmic docking proteins that function as essential signaling intermediates downstream of activated cell surface receptors, many of which have been implicated in breast cancer. The IRS proteins do not contain intrinsic kinase activity but rather function by organizing signaling complexes to initiate intracellular signaling cascades. IRS-1 and IRS-2 are expressed in normal mammary epithelial cells and in breast carcinoma cells, where they have been implicated in mediating signals to promote tumor cell survival, growth and motility. Although IRS-1 and IRS-2 are homologous, recent studies have revealed distinct functions for these adaptor proteins in regulating breast cancer progression. Specifically, IRS-2 is a positive regulator of metastasis, whereas IRS-1 may be a suppressor of metastasis. The observation that IRS-1 is inactivated in metastatic mammary tumors raises the possibility that IRS activity, rather than expression, may be a novel predictive indicator of metastasis. Understanding how the IRS proteins function in tumor progression is essential for future efforts aimed at developing approaches to target IRS-1 and IRS-2 in a diagnostic or therapeutic manner for the benefit of breast cancer patients.
OBJECTIVE: Insulin receptor substract 1 (IRS1) protein is an important signal transduction adapter for extracellular signal transduction from insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor and its family members to IRS1 downstream proteins. IRS1 has been reported to be involved in tumourigenesis and metastasis in some of solid tumors. Investigating the role of IRS1 in thyroid cancer can help to screen high risk patients at the initial diagnosis. DESIGN, PATIENTS AND MEASUREMENTS: Immunohistochemical assay was used to detect the expression levels of IRS1 in 131 metastatic thyroid cancer tissues. Wound healing, cell invasion and colony formation assays were used to study the functions of IRS1 in vitro. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and Western blot analysis analyses were performed to examine the underlying regulation mechanisms of IRS1 in thyroid cancer cells. RESULTS: IRS1 was highly expressed in thyroid cancers and its expression was positively associated with distant metastasis and advanced clinical stages. In vitro studies demonstrated that IRS1 is an important mediator of migration, invasion and colony formation of thyroid cancer cells. RNA-seq showed that IRS1 promoted the metastasis of thyroid cancer by regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathway. CONCLUSIONS: IRS1 overexpression contributes to the aggressiveness of thyroid cancer and is expected to be a stratified marker and a potential therapeutic target for thyroid cancer.
The insulin receptor substrate proteins IRS1 and IRS2 are key targets of the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase and are required for hormonal control of metabolism. Tissues from insulin-resistant and diabetic humans exhibit defects in IRS-dependent signalling, implicating their dysregulation in the initiation and progression of metabolic disease. However, IRS1 and IRS2 are regulated through a complex mechanism involving phosphorylation of >50 serine/threonine residues (S/T) within their long, unstructured tail regions. In cultured cells, insulin-stimulated kinases (including atypical PKC, AKT, SIK2, mTOR, S6K1, ERK1/2 and ROCK1) mediate feedback (autologous) S/T phosphorylation of IRS, with both positive and negative effects on insulin sensitivity. Additionally, insulin-independent (heterologous) kinases can phosphorylate IRS1/2 under basal conditions (AMPK, GSK3) or in response to sympathetic activation and lipid/inflammatory mediators, which are present at elevated levels in metabolic disease (GRK2, novel and conventional PKCs, JNK, IKKbeta, mPLK). An emerging view is that the positive/negative regulation of IRS by autologous pathways is subverted/co-opted in disease by increased basal and other temporally inappropriate S/T phosphorylation. Compensatory hyperinsulinaemia may contribute strongly to this dysregulation. Here, we examine the links between altered patterns of IRS S/T phosphorylation and the emergence of insulin resistance and diabetes.
BACKGROUND: The importance of N6-methyladenosine (m6A) modification in tumorigenesis and progression have been highlighted. This study aimed to investigate the modification of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) by m6A and its role in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). METHODS: Bioinformatics was employed to predict differential genes related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in OSCC. Seventeen pairs of OSCC and paracancerous tissue samples were collected. The impact of IRS1 on OSCC cell growth and EMT was evaluated. The fluctuations in IRS1 enrichment and the involvement of p53/Line-1 were investigated. RESULTS: IRS1 was highly expressed in OSCC. IRS1 silencing decreased OSCC cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. IRS1 silencing hindered EMT by regulating related markers. IRS1 silencing upregulated p53 and downregulated Line-1 ORF1p. The p53 inhibition reversed the effects of IRS1 silencing and induced EMT in OSCC cells. Furthermore, the m6A modification of IRS1 was increased in OSCC cells. IRS1 were positively regulated by the m6A regulators methyltransferase-like 14 (METTL14) and YTH domain-containing protein 1 (YTHDC1). IRS1 bound to YTHDC1, and YTHDC1 knockdown inhibited the IRS1 nuclear export. The obesity-associated protein (FTO) negatively regulated IRS1, and FTO overexpression reversed the IRS1-induced OSCC tumor growth. CONCLUSIONS: m6A methylation-mediated IRS1 regulated EMT in OSCC through p53/Line-1. These findings provide potential therapeutic strategies for managing OSCC.
Insulin receptor substrate (IRS) molecules are key mediators in insulin signaling and play a central role in maintaining basic cellular functions such as growth, survival, and metabolism. They act as docking proteins between the insulin receptor and a complex network of intracellular signaling molecules containing Src homology 2 (SH2) domains. Four members (IRS-1, IRS-2, IRS-3, IRS-4) of this family have been identified that differ as to tissue distribution, subcellular localization, developmental expression, binding to the insulin receptor, and interaction with SH2 domain-containing proteins. Results from targeted disruption of the IRS genes in mice have provided important clues to the functional differences among these related molecules, suggesting they play different and specific roles in vivo. The available data are consistent with the notion that IRS-1 and IRS-2 are not functionally interchangeable in tissues that are responsible for glucose production (liver), glucose uptake (skeletal muscle and adipose tissue), and insulin production (pancreatic beta cells). In fact, IRS-1 appears to have its major role in skeletal muscle whereas IRS-2 appears to regulate hepatic insulin action as well as pancreatic beta cell development and survival. By contrast, IRS-3 and IRS-4 genes appear to play a redundant role in the IRS signaling system. Defects in muscle IRS-1 expression and function have been reported in insulin-resistant states such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. Several polymorphisms in the IRS genes have been identified, but only the Gly-->Arg972 substitution of IRS-1, interacting with environmental factors, seems to have a pathogenic role in the development of type 2 diabetes. In contrast, polymorphisms of the other IRS genes do not appear to contribute to type 2 diabetes.
BACKGROUND: TNS2 is a focal adhesions protein and a binding partner for many proteins, including the receptor tyrosine kinase Axl. Although TNS2 can bind with Axl, the details of their interactions have not been elucidated. TNS2 is involved in IRS-1 signaling pathway. In this study, we confirmed the relationship between TNS2 expression and the expression of Axl, IRS-1, PDK1 and Glut4 in pancreatic cancer patients. METHODS: The expression levels of TNS2, Axl, IRS-1, PDK1 and Glut4 in human cancer cells were measured by Western blot and/or IP-Western blot assays. Paired samples of pancreatic cancer and non-cancer tissues were obtained from 33 patients and were used to construct tissue microarrays. The expression levels of these markers in the tissue microarrays were measured by enzyme-linked Immunohistochemistry assay, and the relationships were analyzed by Pearson's chi-square test and two-tailed t-test analysis. RESULTS: We demonstrated for the first time that TNS2 is a phosphorylation substrate of Axl. Moreover, we found a positive relationship between TNS2 expression and the expression of Axl, IRS-1, PDK1 and Glut4 in pancreatic cancer patients. Based on these results, we suggest that Axl modulates glucose metabolism potentially through TNS2 and IRS-1. We hypothesize that there exists a novel mechanism whereby Axl binds to and phosphorylates TNS2, releasing TNS2 from interaction with IRS-1 and resulting in increased stability of IRS-1. The two key enzymes of aerobic glycolysis (Glut4 and PDK1) were found to be up-regulated by Axl/TNS2/IRS-1 cross-talk and may play a critical role in glucose metabolism of cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed for the first time that Axl binds to and phosphorylates TNS2 and that Axl/TNS2/IRS-1 cross-talk may potentially play a critical role in glucose metabolism of cancer cells.
