Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
Cellular senescence is induced by stresses and results in a stable proliferation arrest accompanied by a pro-inflammatory secretome. Senescent cells accumulate during aging, promoting various age-related pathologies and limiting lifespan. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, type 2 (ITPR2) calcium-release channel and calcium fluxes from the ER to the mitochondria are drivers of senescence in human cells. Here we show that Itpr2 knockout (KO) mice display improved aging such as increased lifespan, a better response to metabolic stress, less immunosenescence, as well as less liver steatosis and fibrosis. Cellular senescence, which is known to promote these alterations, is decreased in Itpr2 KO mice and Itpr2 KO embryo-derived cells. Interestingly, ablation of ITPR2 in vivo and in vitro decreases the number of contacts between the mitochondria and the ER and their forced contacts induce premature senescence. These findings shed light on the role of contacts and facilitated exchanges between the ER and the mitochondria through ITPR2 in regulating senescence and aging.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a cause of disability that affects approximately 16% of the world's population; however, little is known regarding the underlying biology of this disorder. Animal studies, postmortem brain analyses and imaging studies of patients with depression have implicated glial dysfunction in MDD pathophysiology. However, the molecular mechanisms through which astrocytes modulate depressive behaviors are largely uncharacterized. Here, we identified ATP as a key factor involved in astrocytic modulation of depressive-like behavior in adult mice. We observed low ATP abundance in the brains of mice that were susceptible to chronic social defeat. Furthermore, we found that the administration of ATP induced a rapid antidepressant-like effect in these mice. Both a lack of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 2 and transgenic blockage of vesicular gliotransmission induced deficiencies in astrocytic ATP release, causing depressive-like behaviors that could be rescued via the administration of ATP. Using transgenic mice that express a Gq G protein-coupled receptor only in astrocytes to enable selective activation of astrocytic Ca(2+) signaling, we found that stimulating endogenous ATP release from astrocytes induced antidepressant-like effects in mouse models of depression. Moreover, we found that P2X2 receptors in the medial prefrontal cortex mediated the antidepressant-like effects of ATP. These results highlight astrocytic ATP release as a biological mechanism of MDD.
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) receptor type 1 (ITPR1), 2 (ITPR2), and 3 (ITPR3) encode the IP3 receptor (IP3R), a key player in intracellular calcium release. In four unrelated patients, we report that an identical ITPR3 de novo variant-NM_002224.3:c.7570C>T, p.Arg2524Cys-causes, through a dominant-negative effect, a complex multisystemic disorder with immunodeficiency. This leads to defective calcium homeostasis, mitochondrial malfunction, CD4(+) lymphopenia, a quasi-absence of naive CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells, an increase in memory cells, and a distinct TCR repertoire. The calcium defect was recapitulated in Jurkat knock-in. Site-directed mutagenesis displayed the exquisite sensitivity of Arg(2524) to any amino acid change. Despite the fact that all patients had severe immunodeficiency, they also displayed variable multisystemic involvements, including ectodermal dysplasia, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, short stature, and bone marrow failure. In conclusion, unlike previously reported ITPR1-3 deficiencies leading to narrow, mainly neurological phenotypes, a recurrent dominant ITPR3 variant leads to a multisystemic disease, defining a unique role for IP3R3 in the tetrameric IP3R complex.
Congenital vertebral malformation, affecting 0.13-0.50 per 1000 live births, has an immense locus heterogeneity and complex genetic architecture. In this study, we analyze exome/genome sequencing data from 873 probands with congenital vertebral malformation and 3794 control individuals. Clinical interpretation identifies Mendelian etiologies in 12.0% of the probands and reveals a muscle-related disease mechanism. Gene-based burden test of ultra-rare variants identifies risk genes with large effect sizes (ITPR2, TBX6, TPO, H6PD, and SEC24B). To further investigate the biological relevance of the genetic association signals, we perform single-nucleus RNAseq on human embryonic spines. The burden test signals are enriched in the notochord at early developmental stages and myoblast/myocytes at late stages, highlighting their critical roles in the developing spine. Our work provides insights into the developmental biology of the human spine and the pathogenesis of spine malformation.
Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) is extremely carcinogenic and can cause liver cancer in humans and animals with continued ingestion. As a natural compound, curcumin (Cur) exhibits excellent anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancer properties with few side effects. In this study, a total of 60 male mice (6-week-olds, 15 per group). After one week of acclimatization feeding, the mice were divided into control group (Con), AFB1 group, curcumin group (Cur), and AF+Cur group. The mice were gavaged with curcumin (Cur, 100 mg/kg) and/or AFB1 (0.75 mg/kg). To identify a new therapeutic target for AFB1-induced pyroptosis, we performed proteomic profiling for curcumin alleviating liver injury caused by AFB1 to further validate the targets through volcano plot analysis, Venn analysis, heatmap analysis, correlation, cluster analysis, GO and KEGG enrichment. AFB1 exposure resulted in the loss of hepatocyte membrane, swelling of the endoplasmic reticulum, and a significant increase in transaminase (ALT and AST) contents, while curcumin greatly improved these changes. We found that differentially expressed proteins are enriched in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and identified ITPR2 as a target of curcumin that alleviates AFB1-induced liver injury by proteomics. Furthermore, ITPR2 expression was detected by immunofluorescence, and qRT-PCR for mRNA expression of genes downstream of ITPR2 (calpain1, calpain2, caspase-12, caspase-3). ITPR2-activated endoplasmic reticulum stress-related proteins (calpain1, calpaini2, bcl-2, BAX, cl-caspase-12, cl-caspase-3), apoptosis (PARP) and pyroptosis (DFNA5) related proteins were examined by western blotting. The analysis showed that it effectively prevents AFB1-induced pyroptosis by lowering endoplasmic reticulum stress via interfering with ITPR2 and its downstream proteins (calpain1, calpain2, bcl-2, Bax) and inhibiting caspase-12/caspase-3 pathway. Conclusively, this study applied proteomic profiling to elucidate ITPR2 as a new target, which might give a new perspective on the mechanism of curcumin alleviating AFB1-induced pyroptosis.
Many sex-specific biomarkers have been recently revealed in Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, cerebral glial cells were rarely reported. This study analyzed 220,095 single-nuclei transcriptomes from the frontal cortex of thirty-three AD individuals in the GEO database. Sex-specific Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) were identified in glial cells, including 243 in astrocytes, 1,154 in microglia, and 572 in oligodendrocytes. Gene Ontology (GO) functional annotation analyses and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses revealed functional concentration in synaptic, neural, and hormone-related pathways. Protein-protein interaction network (PPI) identified MT3, CALM2, DLG2, KCND2, PAKACB, CAMK2D, and NLGN4Y in astrocytes, TREM2, FOS, APOE, APP, and NLGN4Y in microglia, and GRIN2A, ITPR2, GNAS, and NLGN4Y in oligodendrocytes as key genes. NLGN4Y was the only gene shared by the three glia and was identified as the biomarker for the gender specificity of AD. Gene-transcription factor (TF)-miRNA coregulatory network identified key regulators for NLGN4Y and its target TCMs. Ecklonia kurome Okam (Kunbu) and Herba Ephedrae (Mahuang) were identified, and the effects of the active ingredients on AD were displayed. Finally, enrichment analysis of Kunbu and Mahuang suggested that they might act as therapeutic candidates for gender specificity of AD.
Inositol 1,4,5 trisphosphate receptors (ITPRs) are a family of endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) channels essential for the control of intracellular Ca(2+) levels in virtually every mammalian cell type. The three isoforms (ITPR1, ITPR2 and ITPR3) are highly homologous in amino acid sequence, but they differ considerably in terms of biophysical properties, subcellular localization, and tissue distribution. Such differences underscore the variety of cellular responses triggered by each isoform and suggest that the expression/activity of specific isoforms might be linked to particular pathophysiological states. Indeed, recent findings demonstrate that changes in expression of ITPR isoforms are associated with a number of human diseases ranging from fatty liver disease to cancer. ITPR3 is emerging as the isoform that is particularly important in the pathogenesis of various human diseases. Here we review the physiological and pathophysiological roles of ITPR3 in various tissues and the mechanisms by which the expression of this isoform is modulated in health and disease.
Neutrophil infiltration occurs in a variety of liver diseases, but it is unclear how neutrophils and hepatocytes interact. Neutrophils generally use granule proteases to digest phagocytosed bacteria and foreign substances or neutralize them in neutrophil extracellular traps. In certain pathological states, granule proteases play a destructive role against the host as well. More recently, nondestructive actions of neutrophil granule proteins have been reported, such as modulation of tissue remodeling and metabolism. Here, we report a completely different mechanism by which neutrophils act nondestructively, by inserting granules directly into hepatocytes. Specifically, elastase-containing granules were transferred to hepatocytes where elastase selectively degraded intracellular calcium channels to reduce cell proliferation without cytotoxicity. In response, hepatocytes increased expression of Serpin E2 and A3, which inhibited elastase activity. Elastase insertion was seen in patient specimens of alcohol-associated hepatitis, and the relationship between elastase-mediated ITPR2 degradation and reduced cell proliferation was confirmed in mouse models. Moreover, neutrophils from patients with alcohol-associated hepatitis were more prone to degranulation and more potent in reducing calcium channel expression than neutrophils from healthy individuals. This nondestructive and reversible action on hepatocytes defines a previously unrecognized role for neutrophils in the transient regulation of epithelial calcium signaling mechanisms.
BACKGROUND: Kashin-Beck Disease (KBD) is a chronic, endemic osteoarthropathy. Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor type 2 (ITPR2) gene is involved in chondrocytes. We speculated that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ITPR2 gene may have an association with KBD in Tibetan. METHODS: To prove this hypothesis, a total of eight SNPs (rs1049376, rs11048526, rs11048556, rs11048585, rs16931011, rs10842759, rs2230372, and rs7134213) were selected, and genotyped in 316 KBD patients and 320 controls. The association between ITPR2 variants and KBD risk was assessed by logistic regression analysis. RESULTS: The study identified significant association (p = 0.019) between KBD and a novel locus, ITPR2 SNP rs11048526 (OR = 1.49, 95% CI = 1.07-2.08). The variant A/G genotype frequency in rs11048526 had a significantly increased risk of KBD in co-dominant model (OR = 3.70, 95% CI = 1.26-10.89, p = 0.018), dominant model (OR = 3.56, 95% CI = 1.22-10.40, p = 0.020), log-additive model (OR = 3.00, 95% CI = 1.12-8.00, p = 0.029) after adjusted for age and gender. CONCLUSION: The results indicate a potential association between ITPR2 and KBD risk in Tibetan. Further work is required to confirm these results and explore the mechanisms of these effects.
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most prevalent liver disease worldwide. It may result in several types of liver problems, including impaired liver regeneration (LR), but the mechanism for this is unknown. Because LR depends on calcium signaling, we examined the effects of NAFLD on expression of the type II inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (ITPR2), the principle calcium release channel in hepatocytes. ITPR2 promoter activity was measured in Huh7 and HepG2 cells. ITPR2 and c-Jun protein levels were evaluated in Huh7 cells, in liver tissue from a rat model of NAFLD, and in liver biopsy specimens of patients with simple steatosis and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). LR was assessed in wild-type and Itpr2 knockout (Itpr2(-/-) ) mice following 67% hepatectomy. Cell proliferation was examined in ITPR2-knockout HepG2 cells generated by the CRISPR/Cas9 system. c-Jun dose dependently decreased activity of the human ITPR2 promoter. c-Jun expression was increased and ITPR2 was decreased in fat-loaded Huh7 cells and in livers of rats fed a high-fat, high-fructose diet. Overexpression of c-Jun reduced protein and mRNA expression of ITPR2 in Huh7 cells, whereas knockdown of c-Jun prevented the decrease of ITPR2 in fat-loaded Huh7 cells. ITPR2 expression was decreased and c-Jun was increased in liver biopsies of patients with steatosis and NASH compared to controls. ITPR2-knockout cells exhibited less nuclear calcium signaling and cell proliferation than control cells. LR assessed by Ki-67 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen was markedly decreased in Itpr2(-/-) mice. Conclusion: Fatty liver induces a c-Jun-mediated decrease in ITPR2 in hepatocytes. This may account for the impaired LR that occurs in NAFLD. (Hepatology 2018;67:560-574).
Intracellular Ca(2+) signaling regulates a plethora of cellular functions. A central role in these processes is reserved for the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP(3)R), a ubiquitously expressed Ca(2+)-release channel, mainly located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Three IP(3)R isoforms (IP(3)R1, IP(3)R2 and IP(3)R3) exist, encoded respectively by ITPR1, ITPR2 and ITPR3. The proteins encoded by these genes are each about 2700 amino acids long and assemble into large tetrameric channels, which form the target of many regulatory proteins, including several tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Due to the important role of the IP(3)Rs in cell function, their dysregulation is linked to multiple pathologies. In this review, we highlight the complex role of the IP(3)R in cancer, as it participates in most of the so-called "hallmarks of cancer". In particular, the IP(3)R directly controls cell death and cell survival decisions via regulation of autophagy and apoptosis. Moreover, the IP(3)R impacts cellular proliferation, migration and invasion. Typical examples of the role of the IP(3)Rs in these various processes are discussed. The relative levels of the IP(3)R isoforms expressed and their subcellular localization, e.g. at the ER-mitochondrial interface, is hereby important. Finally, evidence is provided about how the knowledge of the regulation of the IP(3)R by tumor suppressors and oncogenes can be exploited to develop novel therapeutic approaches to fight cancer.
Tumor-induced changes in the peritumoral neocortex play a crucial role in generation of seizures. This study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanisms potentially involved in peritumoral epilepsy in low-grade gliomas (LGGs). Intraoperative peritumoral brain tissues resected from LGG patients with seizures (pGRS) or without seizures (pGNS) were used for RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Comparative transcriptomics was performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in pGRS compared to pGNS using deseq2 and edgeR packages (R). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using Gene Ontology terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes & Genomes (KEGG) pathways was performed using the clusterProfiler package (R). The expression of key genes was validated at the transcript and protein levels in the peritumoral region using real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry, respectively. A total of 1073 DEGs were identified in pGRS compared to pGNS, of which 559 genes were upregulated and 514 genes were downregulated (log2 fold-change >/= 2, padj < 0.001). The DEGs in pGRS were highly enriched in the "Glutamatergic Synapse" and "Spliceosome" pathways, with increased expression of GRIN2A (NR2A), GRIN2B (NR2B), GRIA1 (GLUR1), GRIA3 (GLUR3), GRM5, CACNA1C, CACNA1A, and ITPR2. Moreover, increased immunoreactivity was observed for NR2A, NR2B, and GLUR1 proteins in the peritumoral tissues of GRS. These findings suggest that altered glutamatergic signaling and perturbed Ca(2+) homeostasis may be potential causes of peritumoral epilepsy in gliomas. This explorative study identifies important genes/pathways that merit further characterization for their potential involvement in glioma-related seizures.
A recent genome-wide association study (GWAS) found significant association of six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene FLJ10986 with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS). Another independent GWAS reported significant association of one SNP in the gene inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor 2 (ITPR2) with SALS. These studies provided conflicting results. We examined the six most significant SNPs in FLJ10986 and one SNP in ITPR2 in a large cohort consisting of 595 SALS cases and 681 controls ascertained from Germany. Our results did not provide evidence for the association of these SNPs with SALS, suggesting a possible population-specific effect for FLJ10986 and ITPR2 that do not modulate the risk for SALS in the German population.
In heart, the type 2 inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (InsP3R2) is the predominant isoform expressed and is localized in the nuclear membrane of ventricular myocytes. InsP3R2-mediated Ca(2+) release regulates hypertrophy specific gene expression by modulating CaMKIIdelta, histone deacetylase, and calcineurin-NFATc signaling pathways. InsP3R2 protein is a hypertrophy specific marker and is overexpressed in heart failure animal models and in humans. However, the regulation of InsP3R2 mRNA and protein expression during cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure is not known. Here we show the transcriptional regulation of the Itpr2 gene in adult cardiomyocytes. Our data demonstrates that, InsP3R2 mRNA and protein expression is activated by hypertrophic agonists and attenuated by InsP3R inhibitors 2-aminoethoxyldiphenyl borate and xestospongin-C. The Itpr2 promoter is regulated by the calcineurin-NFATc signaling pathway. NFATc1 regulates Itpr2 gene expression by directly binding to the Itpr2 promoter. The calcineurin-NFATc mediated up-regulation of the Itpr2 promoter was attenuated by cyclosporine-A. InsP3R2 mRNA and protein expression was up-regulated in calcineurin-A transgenic mice and in human heart failure. Collectively, our data suggests that ITPR2 and hypertrophy specific gene expression is regulated, in part, by a positive feedback regulation between InsP3R2 and calcineurin-NFATc signaling pathways.
Calcium signaling is emerging as a key pathway controlling cellular senescence, a stable cell proliferation arrest playing a fundamental role in pathophysiological conditions, such as embryonic development, wound healing, cancer, and aging. However, how calcium signaling is regulated is still only partially understood. The inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor type 2 (ITPR2), an endoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel, was recently shown to critically contribute to the implementation of senescence, but how ITPR2 expression is controlled is unclear. To gain insights into the regulation of ITPR2 expression, we performed an siRNA screen targeting 160 transcription factors and epigenetic regulators. Interestingly, we discovered that the retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRA), which belongs to the nuclear receptor family, represses ITPR2 expression and regulates calcium signaling though ITPR2 and the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU). Knockdown of RXRA induces the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA damage via the ITPR2-MCU calcium signaling axis and consequently triggers cellular senescence by activating p53, whereas RXRA overexpression decreases DNA damage accumulation and then delays replicative senescence. Altogether, our work sheds light on a novel mechanism controlling calcium signaling and cellular senescence and provides new insights into the role of nuclear receptors.
Inositol 1,4,5-Triphosphate Receptor Family (ITPRs) are necessary intracellular Ca2+-release channel encoders and participate in mammalian cell physiological and pathological processes. Previous studies have suggested that ITPRs participate in tumorigenesis of multiple cancers. Nevertheless, the diverse expression profiles and prognostic significance of three ITPRs in pancreatic cancer have yet to be uncovered. In this work, we examined the expression levels and survival dates of ITPRs in patients with pancreatic cancer. As a result, we identified that ITPR1 and ITPR3 expression levels are significantly elevated in cancerous specimens. Survival data revealed that over-expression of ITPR2 and ITPR3 resulted in unfavourable overall survival and pathological stage. The multivariate Cox logistic regression analysis showed that ITPR3 could be an independent risk factor for PAAD patient survival. Moreover, to investigate how ITPRs work, co-expressed genes, alterations, protein-protein interaction, immune infiltration, methylation, and functional enrichment of ITPRs were also analyzed. Then, we evaluated these findings in clinical samples. Moreover, the gain and loss of function of ITPR3 were also conducted. The electron microscope assay was employed to explore the role of ITPR3 in pancreatic cancer cell lines' endoplasmic reticulum stress. In summary, our findings demonstrated that ITPR3 has the potential to be drug targets and biomarkers for human pancreatic cancer.
Tear secretion is important as it supplies water to the ocular surface and keeps eyes moist. Both the parasympathetic and sympathetic pathways contribute to tear secretion. Although intracellular Ca2+ elevation in the acinar cells of lacrimal glands is a crucial event for tear secretion in both the pathways, the Ca2+ channel, which is responsible for the Ca2+ elevation in the sympathetic pathway, has not been sufficiently analyzed. In this study, we examined tear secretion in mice lacking the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) types 2 and 3 (Itpr2-/-;Itpr3-/-double-knockout mice). We found that tear secretion in both the parasympathetic and sympathetic pathways was abolished in Itpr2-/-;Itpr3-/- mice. Intracellular Ca2+ elevation in lacrimal acinar cells after acetylcholine and epinephrine stimulation was abolished in Itpr2-/-;Itpr3-/- mice. Consequently, Itpr2-/-;Itpr3-/- mice exhibited keratoconjunctival alteration and corneal epithelial barrier disruption. Inflammatory cell infiltration into the lacrimal glands and elevation of serum autoantibodies, a representative marker for Sjogren's syndrome (SS) in humans, were also detected in older Itpr2-/-;Itpr3-/- mice. These results suggested that IP3Rs are essential for tear secretion in both parasympathetic and sympathetic pathways and that Itpr2-/-;Itpr3-/- mice could be a new dry eye mouse model with symptoms that mimic those of SS.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with RCC in European and African American population. In this study, we evaluated whether these SNPs are associated with clear cell RCC (ccRCC) in Chinese population. All reported RCC risk-associated SNPs from GWAS were evaluated in 346 ccRCC cases and 1,130 controls. Rs10054504 (at PDZD2, Odds ratio, OR = 0.71, 95%CI:0.59-0.86, P = 0.0006), rs718314 (at ITPR2, OR = 0.56, 95%CI:0.45-0.69, P = 5.26x10-8) and rs1049380 (at ITPR2, by dominant model, OR = 1.58, 95%CI:1.18-2.13, P = 0.0025) were significantly associated with ccRCC risk in Chinese population. To conclude, genetic variations in PDZD2 and ITPR2 are ccRCC-risk associated in Chinese population.
BACKGROUND: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating disease characterised by progressive degeneration of motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord. ALS is thought to be multifactorial, with both environmental and genetic causes. Our aim was to identify genetic variants that predispose for sporadic ALS. METHODS: We did a three-stage genome-wide association study in 461 patients with ALS and 450 controls from The Netherlands, using Illumina 300K single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips. The SNPs that were most strongly associated with ALS were analysed in a further 876 patients and 906 controls in independent sample series from The Netherlands, Belgium, and Sweden. We also investigated the possible pathological functions of associated genes using expression data from whole blood of patients with sporadic ALS and of control individuals who were included in the genome-wide association study. FINDINGS: A genetic variant in the inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor 2 gene (ITPR2) was associated with ALS (p=0.012 after Bonferroni correction). Combined analysis of all samples (1337 patients and 1356 controls) confirmed this association (p=3.28x10(-6), odds ratio 1.58, 95% CI 1.30-1.91). ITPR2 expression was greater in the peripheral blood of 126 ALS patients than in that of 126 healthy controls (p=0.00016). INTERPRETATION: Genetic variation in ITPR2 is a susceptibility factor for ALS. ITPR2 is a strong candidate susceptibility gene for ALS because it is involved in glutamate-mediated neurotransmission, is one of the main regulators of intracellular calcium concentrations, and has an important role in apoptosis.
