Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
OVERVIEW: IL-7 is a member of the family of cytokines with four anti-parallel alpha helixes that bind Type I cytokine receptors. It is produced by stromal cells and is required for development and homeostatic survival of lymphoid cells. GENOMIC ARCHITECTURE: Interleukin 7 (IL7) human IL7: gene ID: 3574 on ch 8; murine Il7 gene ID: 16,196 on ch 3. PROTEIN: Precursor contains a signal sequence, mature human IL-7 peptide 152aa, predicted 17.4kd peptide, glycosylated resulting in 25kd. Crystal structure: http://www.rcsb.org/structure/3DI2. REGULATION OF IL-7 PRODUCTION: Major producers are stromal cells in thymus, bone marrow and lymphoid organs but also reported in other tissues. Production is primarily constitutive but reported to be affected by IFNgamma and other factors. IL-7 RECEPTORS: Two chains IL-7Ralpha (IL-7R) and gammac (IL-2RG). Human IL-7R: gene ID 3575 on ch 5; human IL2RG: gene ID 3561 on ch X; mouse IL-7R: gene ID 16,197 on ch 15; murine Il2rg gene ID 16,186 on ch X. Member of gammac family of receptors for cytokines IL-2, -4, -9, -15, and -21. Primarily expressed on lymphocytes but reports of other cell types. Expression in T-cells downregulated by IL-7. Low expression on Tregs, no expression on mature B-cells. Crystal structure: http://www.rcsb.org/structure/3DI2. IL-7 RECEPTOR SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS: Major signals through JAK1, JAK3 to STAT5 and through non-canonical STAT3, STAT1, PI3K/AKT and MEK/ERK pathways. BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY OF IL-7: Required for survival of immature thymocytes, naive T-cells, memory T-cells, pro-B-cells and innate lymphocytes. Pharmacological treatment with IL-7 induces expansion of naive and memory T-cells and pro-B-cells. ABNORMALITIES OF THE IL-7 PATHWAY IN DISEASE: Deficiencies in the IL-7 pathway in humans and mice result in severe combined immunodeficiency due to lymphopenia. Excessive signaling of the pathway in mice drives autoimmune diseases and in humans is associated with autoimmune syndromes including multiple sclerosis, type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, atopic dermatitis and asthma. Mutations in the IL-7 receptor pathway drive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. CLINICAL APPLICATIONS: IL-7 has been evaluated in patients with cancer and shown to expand lymphocytes. It accelerated lymphocyte recovery after hematopoietic stem cell transfer, and increased lymphocyte counts in AIDS patients and sepsis patients. Monoclonal antibodies blocking the IL-7 receptor are being evaluated in autoimmune diseases. Cytotoxic monoclonals are being evaluated in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Drugs blocking the signal transduction pathway are being tested in autoimmunity and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Objectives: Macrophages are conventionally classified as pro-inflammatory (M1) and anti-inflammatory (M2) functional types. There is evidence for a predominance of macrophages with an inflammatory phenotype (M1) in the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovium. MicroRNAs (miRs) play a pivotal role in regulating the inflammatory response in innate immune cells and are found at dysregulated levels in RA patients. Here we explored miRs that tune the inflammatory function of M2-macrophages. Methods: Expression profiles of miR-221-3p and miR-155-5p were analyzed in clinical samples from RA, other inflammatory arthritis (OIA), osteoarthritis (OA), and healthy donors (HD) by qPCR. In vitro generated macrophages were transfected with miR-mimics and inhibitors. Transcriptome profiling through RNA-sequencing was performed on M2-macrophages overexpressing miR-221-3p mimic with or without LPS treatment. Secretion of IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-8, and CXCL13 was measured in M1- and M2-macrophages upon TLR2/TLR3/TLR4-stimulation using ELISA. Inflammatory pathways including NF-kappaB, IRF3, MAPKs, and JAK3/STAT3 were evaluated by immunoblotting. Direct target interaction of miR-221-3p and predicted target sites in 3'UTR of JAK3 were examined by luciferase reporter gene assay. Results: miR-221-3p in synovial tissue and fluid was increased in RA vs. OA or OIA. Endogenous expression levels of miR-221-3p and miR-155-5p were higher in M1- than M2-macrophages derived from RA patients or HD. TLR4-stimulation of M1- and M2-macrophages resulted in downregulation of miR-221-3p, but upregulation of miR-155-5p. M2-macrophages transfected with miR-221-3p mimics secreted less IL-10 and CXCL13 but more IL-6 and IL-8, exhibited downregulation of JAK3 protein and decreased pSTAT3 activation. JAK3 was identified as new direct target of miR-221-3p in macrophages. Co-transfection of miR-221-3p/miR-155-5p mimics in M2-macrophages increased M1-specific IL-12 secretion. Conclusions: miR-221-3p acts as a regulator of TLR4-induced inflammatory M2-macrophage function by directly targeting JAK3. Dysregulated miR-221-3p expression, as seen in synovium of RA patients, leads to a diminished anti-inflammatory response and drives M2-macrophages to exhibit a M1-cytokine profile.
Glucose uptake into lymphocytes is accomplished by non-concentrative glucose carriers of the GLUT family (GLUT1, GLUT3, GLUT4, GLUT6) and/or by the Na(+)-coupled glucose carrier SGLT1. The latter accumulates glucose against glucose gradients and is still effective at very low extracellular glucose concentrations. Signaling involved in SGLT1 expression and activity includes protein kinase A (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC), serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase (SGK1), AMP-activated kinase (AMPK), and Janus kinases (JAK2 and JAK3). Glucose taken up is partially stored as glycogen. In hypoxic environments, such as in tumors as well as infected and inflamed tissues, lymphocytes depend on energy production from glycogen-dependent glycolysis. The lack of SGLT1 may compromise glycogen storage and thus lymphocyte survival and function in hypoxic tissues. Accordingly, in mice, genetic knockout of sglt1 compromised bacterial clearance following Listeria monocytogenes infection leading to an invariably lethal course of the disease. Whether the effect was due to the lack of sglt1 in lymphocytes or in other cell types still remains to be determined. Clearly, additional experimental effort is required to define the role of glucose transport by GLUTs and particularly by SGLT1 for lymphocyte survival and function, as well as orchestration of the host defense against tumors and bacterial infections.
Janus kinases (Jaks) are a family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that include four different members, viz., Jak1, Jak2, Jak3, and Tyk2. Jaks play critical roles in immune cells functions; however, recent studies suggest they also play essential roles in nonimmune cell physiology. This review highlights the significance of epithelial Jaks in understanding the molecular basis of some of the diseases through regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cell survival, cell growth, development, and differentiation. Growth factors and cytokines produced by the cells of hematopoietic origin use Jak kinases for signal transduction in both immune and nonimmune cells. Among Jaks, Jak3 is widely expressed in both immune cells and in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) of both humans and mice. Mutations that abrogate Jak3 functions cause an autosomal severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) while activating Jak3 mutations lead to the development of hematologic and epithelial cancers. A selective Jak3 inhibitor CP-690550 (Xeljanz) approved by the FDA for certain chronic inflammatory conditions demonstrates immunosuppressive activity in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and organ transplant rejection. Here, we also focus on the consequences of Jak3-directed drugs on adverse effects in light of recent discoveries in mucosal epithelial functions of Jak3 with some information on other Jaks. Lastly, we brief on structural implications of Jak3 domains beyond the immune cells. As information about the roles of Jak3 in gastrointestinal functions and associated diseases are only just emerging, in the review, we summarize its implications in gastrointestinal wound repair, inflammatory bowel disease, obesity-associated metabolic syndrome, and epithelial cancers. Lastly, we shed lights on identifying potential novel targets in developing therapeutic interventions of diseases associated with dysfunctional IEC.
In humans, the Janus protein tyrosine kinase family (JAKs) contains four members: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and TYK2. JAKs phosphorylate signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) simultaneously with other phosphorylations required for activation, and there are several cellular mechanisms in place to inhibit JAK/STAT signaling. That one might be able to modulate selected JAK/STAT-mediated cellular signals by inhibiting JAK kinase activity to effect a positive therapeutic outcome is a tantalizing prospect, as yet incompletely realized. While current data suggest no therapeutic use for JAK1 and TYK2 inhibition, JAK2 inhibition seems a promising but not definitively tested mechanism for treatment of leukemia. More promising, however, are data indicating a possible therapeutic use of JAK3 inhibition. The restriction of the JAK3-deficient phenotype to the hematopoietic system and the resulting profound immune suppression suggest that JAK3 could be a target for immunosuppressive therapies used to prevent organ transplant rejection.
The Janus kinase (Jak) family is one of ten recognized families of non-receptor tyrosine kinases. Mammals have four members of this family, Jak1, Jak2, Jak3 and Tyrosine kinase 2 (Tyk2). Birds, fish and insects also have Jaks. Each protein has a kinase domain and a catalytically inactive pseudo-kinase domain, and they each bind cytokine receptors through amino-terminal FERM (Band-4.1, ezrin, radixin, moesin) domains. Upon binding of cytokines to their receptors, Jaks are activated and phosphorylate the receptors, creating docking sites for signaling molecules, especially members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) family. Mutations of the Drosophila Jak (Hopscotch) have revealed developmental defects, and constitutive activation of Jaks in flies and humans is associated with leukemia-like syndromes. Through the generation of Jak-deficient cell lines and gene-targeted mice, the essential, nonredundant functions of Jaks in cytokine signaling have been established. Importantly, deficiency of Jak3 is the basis of human autosomal recessive severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID); accordingly, a selective Jak3 inhibitor has been developed, forming a new class of immunosuppressive drugs.
Severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) refers to a spectrum of inherited immunodeficiencies that together represent the most severe forms of primary immunodeficiency in humans. Recent work has shown that many of these diseases, as well as other forms of immunodeficiency, result from defects in cytokine signalling pathways. Such defects can prevent normal development of lymphoid lineages and/or compromise cytokine signalling by these cells. These natural 'experiments' in human genetics have shown the non-redundant role for several cytokines or cytokine signalling molecules. Moreover, a comparison of the phenotypes of humans with SCID to analogous mouse-knockout models has shown not only expected similarities, but also unexpected differences in cytokine signalling between humans and mice.
Members of the Janus kinase (JAK) family, JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and Tyk2 are intimately involved in the signalling events initiated by cytokines activating cell surface receptors. They are responsible for phosphorylating these receptors, which create docking sites for downstream molecules such as the signal transducer and activator of transcription family members. In addition, cytokine receptors associate with members of the Src family kinase (SFK). JAKs and SFK work in concert to activate many of the signalling molecules, with both kinase families required for optimal transmission of intracellular signals. JAKs and SFK are also required for the activation and recruitment of negative regulators of cytokine signalling, e.g., protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) and suppressors of cytokine signalling. Aberrant activity of the JAK-Src kinase duet can result in hemopoietic abnormalities including leukaemia. Additionally, the recent identification of a somatic JAK2 mutation as the cause of polycythema vera, further highlights the clinical importance of these molecules.
Interleukin-2 has pleiotropic actions on the immune system and plays a vital role in the modulation of immune responses. Our current understanding of IL-2 signaling has resulted from in vitro studies that have identified the signaling pathways activated by IL-2, including the Jak-STAT pathways, and from in vivo studies that have analyzed mice in which IL-2, each chain of the receptor, as well a number of signaling molecules have been individually targeted by homologous recombination. Moreover, mutations in IL-2Ralpha, gamma(c) and Jak3 have been found in patients with severe combined immunodeficiency. In addition, with the discovery that two components of the receptor, IL-2Rbeta and gamma(c), are shared by other cytokine receptors, we have an enhanced appreciation of the contributions of these molecules towards cytokine specificity, pleiotropy and redundancy.
Janus kinase-3 (JAK3), a tyrosine kinase, is expressed in a variety of tissues, including the brain and is involved in the signaling of cytokine receptors. JAK3 participates in numerous functions, such as cell survival and proliferation, neuroprotection, apoptosis and the cellular response to hypoxia and ischemia-reperfusion. This kinase further contributes to the signaling of hematopoietic cell cytokine receptors, activation of dendritic cells, maturation, and immune suppression as well as to cell volume regulation. Recently, JAK3 has been demonstrated to be an important regulator of transport processes across the plasma membrane. Either directly or indirectly JAK3 affects the expression of transport proteins, including various ion channels, a number of cellular carriers and the Na+/K+ pump. More specifically, JAK3 is involved in the regulation of various potassium, sodium, and chloride ion channels, a wide variety of Na+-coupled cellular carriers including the high-affinity Na+ coupled glucose transporter SGLT1, the excitatory amino acid transporters EAAT1, EAAT2, EAAT3 and EAAT4, the peptide transporters PepT1 and PepT2, CreaT1 and theNa+/K+-ATPase. Via these transporters this kinase plays a role in various physiological and pathophysiological processes. Additional research is needed to investigate the effects of JAK3 on other cellular transporters and the underlying mechanisms.
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is a malignant hematologic disease caused by gene mutations in T-cell progenitors. As an important epigenetic regulator, PHF6 mutations frequently coexist with JAK3 mutations in T-ALL patients. However, the role(s) of PHF6 mutations in JAK3-driven leukemia remain unclear. Here, the cooperation between JAK3 activation and PHF6 inactivation is examined in leukemia patients and in mice models. We found that the average survival time is shorter in patients with JAK/STAT and PHF6 comutation than that in other patients, suggesting a potential role of PHF6 in leukemia progression. We subsequently found that Phf6 deficiency promotes JAK3(M511I)-induced T-ALL progression in mice by inhibiting the Bai1-Mdm2-P53 signaling pathway, which is independent of the JAK3/STAT5 signaling pathway. Furthermore, combination therapy with a JAK3 inhibitor (tofacitinib) and a MDM2 inhibitor (idasanutlin) reduces the Phf6 KO and JAK3(M511I) leukemia burden in vivo. Taken together, our study suggests that combined treatment with JAK3 and MDM2 inhibitors may potentially increase the drug benefit for T-ALL patients with PHF6 and JAK3 comutation.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim of the review is to report on recent advances in cytokine-mediated signalling, as illustrated by the study of natural human mutants. In particular, the role of cytokines and cytokine-mediated signalling in human T-cell development is analysed in detail, and currently available forms of treatment including experimental trials are described. RECENT FINDINGS: Defects of the cytokine/JAK/STAT axis have been recently described as responsible for human Severe Combined Immune Deficiency. In particular, defects in gammac, JAK3 and IL7RA have been analysed in terms of development of novel diagnostic tools as well as of new therapeutic agents for the treatment of autoimmune diseases and graft-versus-host disease. SUMMARY: Dissection of the genetic defects underlying the various forms of Severe Combined Immune Deficiency has helped develop new and more accurate diagnostic assays and novel forms of treatment.
The front pocket (FP) N-terminal cap (Ncap) cysteine is the most popular site of covalent modification in kinases. A long-standing hypothesis associates the Ncap position with cysteine hyper-reactivity; however, traditional computational predictions suggest that the FP Ncap cysteines are predominantly unreactive. Here we applied the state-of-the-art continuous constant pH molecular dynamics (CpHMD) to test the Ncap hypothesis. Simulations found that the Ncap cysteines of BTK/BMX/TEC/ITK/TXK, JAK3, and MKK7 are reactive to varying degrees; however, those of BLK and EGFR/ERBB2/ERBB4 possessing a Ncap+3 aspartate are unreactive. Analysis suggested that hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions drive the reactivity, and their absence renders the Ncap cysteine unreactive. To further test the Ncap hypothesis, we examined the FP Ncap+2 cysteines in JNK1/JNK2/JNK3 and CASK. Our work offers a systematic understanding of the cysteine structure-reactivity relationship and illustrates the use of CpHMD to differentiate cysteines toward the design of targeted covalent inhibitors with reduced chemical reactivities.
Several immunodeficiency-related genes have been identified and a large number of mutations in these genes. Currently, a genetic defect has been determined in more than 2000 patients. Only recently has it become possible to address structure-function effects of these mutations in the corresponding proteins. The consequences of mutations in structure are discussed for Btk in X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA), Jak3 in T-B+ severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), p47phox and p67phox in autosomal chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) and SH2D1 A in X-linked lymphoproliferatine disease (XLP). The experimental and homology modelling derived structures were used to analyze mechanisms related to these diseases.
BACKGROUND: In-depth and clear mechanistic study is a prerequisite for new drugs to enter clinical research. METHODS: New chemical entity BY4008 was identified by our lab as a novel and highly potent EGFR and JAK3 dualtarget inhibitor. A cell-based test exhibited strong antiproliferative activities against SW620 and HCT116 colon cancer cells harboring KRAS mutation with IC(50) of nanomolar potency. Furthermore, acridine orange/ethidium bromide (AO/EB), Hematoxylin-Eosin (H&E) and DAPI staining assays and flow cytometry analyses indicated that BY4008 has the function of pro-apoptosis and arresting the cell cycle. In addition, BY4008 inhibited the autophosphorylation of EGFR and blocked the activation of downstream signaling and the JAK-STAT3 pathway. RESULTS: Meanwhile, a decreased level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and an increased level of malondialdehyde (MDA) in SW620 and HCT116 cells were observed after exposure to BY4008. CONCLUSION: In summary, this study provides an important structural basis and mechanistic study for future effective treatment of colorectal cancer.
Similar to nucleated cells, erythrocytes may undergo suicidal death or eryptosis, which is characterized by cell shrinkage, cell membrane blebbing and cell membrane phospholipid scrambling. Eryptotic cells are removed and thus prevented from undergoing hemolysis. Eryptosis is stimulated by Ca(2+) following Ca(2+) entry through unspecific cation channels. Ca(2+) sensitivity is enhanced by ceramide, a product of acid sphingomyelinase. Eryptosis is triggered by hyperosmolarity, oxidative stress, energy depletion, hyperthermia and a wide variety of xenobiotics and endogenous substances. Eryptosis is inhibited by nitric oxide, catecholamines and a variety of further small molecules. Erythropoietin counteracts eryptosis in part by inhibiting the Ca(2+)-permeable cation channels but by the same token may foster formation of erythrocytes, which are particularly sensitive to eryptotic stimuli. Eryptosis is triggered in several clinical conditions such as iron deficiency, diabetes, renal insufficiency, myelodysplastic syndrome, phosphate depletion, sepsis, haemolytic uremic syndrome, mycoplasma infection, malaria, sickle-cell anemia, beta-thalassemia, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-(G6PD)-deficiency, hereditary spherocytosis, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, and Wilson's disease. Enhanced eryptosis is observed in mice with deficient annexin 7, cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I (cGKI), AMP-activated protein kinase AMPK, anion exchanger AE1, adenomatous polyposis coli APC and Klotho as well as in mouse models of sickle cell anemia and thalassemia. Eryptosis is decreased in mice with deficient phosphoinositide dependent kinase PDK1, platelet activating factor receptor, transient receptor potential channel TRPC6, janus kinase JAK3 or taurine transporter TAUT. If accelerated eryptosis is not compensated by enhanced erythropoiesis, clinically relevant anemia develops. Eryptotic erythrocytes may further bind to endothelial cells and thus impede microcirculation.
Inborn errors of the genes encoding two of the four human JAKs (JAK3 and TYK2) and three of the six human STATs (STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5B) have been described. We review the disorders arising from mutations in these five genes, highlighting the way in which the molecular and cellular pathogenesis of these conditions has been clarified by the discovery of inborn errors of cytokines, hormones, and their receptors, including those interacting with JAKs and STATs. The phenotypic similarities between mice and humans lacking individual JAK-STAT components suggest that the functions of JAKs and STATs are largely conserved in mammals. However, a wide array of phenotypic differences has emerged between mice and humans carrying biallelic null alleles of JAK3, TYK2, STAT1, or STAT5B. Moreover, the high degree of allelic heterogeneity at the human JAK3, TYK2, STAT1, and STAT3 loci has revealed highly diverse immunological and clinical phenotypes, which had not been anticipated.
In this article, we report that primary leukemic B-cell precursors from B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients overexpress multiple JAK3-activating cytokines as well as their receptors. We also show that amplified expression of JAK3 pathway genes in B-lineage ALL is associated with steroid resistance and relapse. Our findings further demonstrate that several different diagnostic classes of B-lineage lymphoid malignancies exhibit upregulated expression of JAK3 pathway genes, which are associated with an overexpression of genes for JAK3-stimulatory cytokines with concomitant deficiency of JAK3-inhibitory signaling molecules. Thus, despite the rare occurrence of activating JAK3 mutations, JAK3 appears to be constitutively active and represents a viable molecular target in the treatment of a broad range of B-lineage lymphoid malignancies, including B-lineage ALL.
Constitutively activated tyrosine kinase JAK3 is implicated in the pathogenesis of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCL). The mechanisms of constitutive JAK3 activation are unknown although a JAK3 mutation was reported in a small portion of CTCL patients. In this study, we assessed the oncogenic roles of a newly identified JAK3-INSL3 fusion transcript in CTCL. Total RNA from malignant T-cells in 33 patients with Sezary syndrome (SS), a leukemic form of CTCL, was examined for the new JAK3-INSL3 fusion transcript by RT-PCR followed by Sanger sequencing. The expression levels were assessed by qPCR and correlated with patient survivals. Knockdown and/or knockout assays were conducted in two CTCL cell lines (MJ cells and HH cells) by RNA interference and/or CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. SS patients expressed heterogeneous levels of a new JAK3-INSL3 fusion transcript. Patients with high-level expression of JAK3-INSL3 showed poorer 5-year survival (n = 19, 42.1%) than patients with low-level expression (n = 14, 78.6%). CTCL cells transduced with specific shRNAs or sgRNAs had decreased new JAK3-INSL3 fusion transcript expression, reduced cell proliferation, and decreased colony formation. In NSG xenograft mice, smaller tumor sizes were observed in MJ cells transduced with specific shRNAs than cells transduced with controls. Our results suggest that the newly identified JAK3-INSL3 fusion transcript confers an oncogenic event in CTCL.
Overactive Janus kinases (JAKs) are known to drive leukemia, making them well-suited targets for treatment. We sought to identify new JAK-activating mutations and instead found a JAK1-inactivating pseudokinase mutation, V666G. In contrast to other pseudokinase mutations that canonically lead to an active kinase, the JAK1 V666G mutation led to under-activation seen by reduced phosphorylation. To understand the functional role of JAK1 V666G in modifying kinase activity we investigated its influence on other JAK kinases and within the Interleukin-2 pathway. JAK1 V666G not only inhibited its own activity, but its presence could inhibit other JAK kinases. These findings provide new insights into the potential of JAK1 pseudokinase to modulate its own activity, as well as of other JAK kinases. Thus, the features of the JAK1 V666 region in modifying JAK kinases can be exploited to allosterically inhibit overactive JAKs.
