Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily A member 3; Mediates the voltage-dependent potassium ion permeability of excitable membranes. Assuming opened or closed conformations in response to the voltage difference across the membrane, the protein forms a potassium-selective channel through which potassium ions may pass in accordance with their electrochemical gradient.
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) is a unique form of chronic pancreatitis characterized by high serum IgG4 concentration and a variety of complicating extra-pancreatic lesions. AIP has the features of a complex disease that is caused by multifactorial genes. However, the genetic factors underlying AIP have not been elucidated conclusively. Association studies by the candidate-gene approach and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed several susceptibility genes for AIP, including HLA DRB1*04:05-DQB1*04:01, FCRL3, CTLA4, and KCNA3, albeit in small-scale analyses. Thus, GWAS of large sample sizes and multinational collaborative meta-analyses are needed to identify the precise genetic variants that are associated with AIP onset. Systems genetics approaches that integrate DNA sequencing, expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) mapping, proteomics, and metabolomics will also be useful in clarifying the pathogenesis of AIP.
OBJECTIVE: Variants in several potassium channel genes, including KCNA1 and KCNA2, cause Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathies (DEEs). We investigated whether variants in KCNA3, another mammalian homologue of the Drosophila shaker family and encoding for Kv1.3 subunits, can cause DEE. METHODS: Genetic analysis of study individuals was performed by routine exome or genome sequencing, usually of parent-offspring trios. Phenotyping was performed via a standard clinical questionnaire. Currents from wild-type and/or mutant Kv1.3 subunits were investigated by whole-cell patch-clamp upon their heterologous expression. RESULTS: Fourteen individuals, each carrying a de novo heterozygous missense variant in KCNA3, were identified. Most (12/14; 86%) had DEE with marked speech delay with or without motor delay, intellectual disability, epilepsy, and autism spectrum disorder. Functional analysis of Kv1.3 channels carrying each variant revealed heterogeneous functional changes, ranging from "pure" loss-of-function (LoF) effects due to faster inactivation kinetics, depolarized voltage-dependence of activation, slower activation kinetics, increased current inactivation, reduced or absent currents with or without dominant-negative effects, to "mixed" loss- and gain-of-function (GoF) effects. Compared to controls, Kv1.3 currents in lymphoblasts from 1 of the proband displayed functional changes similar to those observed upon heterologous expression of channels carrying the same variant. The antidepressant drug fluoxetine inhibited with similar potency the currents from wild-type and 1 of the Kv1.3 GoF variant. INTERPRETATION: We describe a novel association of de novo missense variants in KCNA3 with a human DEE, and provide evidence that fluoxetine might represent a potential targeted treatment for individuals carrying variants with significant GoF effects. ANN NEUROL 2024;95:365-376.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Mutations in TERT (telomerase reverse transcriptase) promoter are established gatekeepers in early hepatocarcinogenesis, but little is known about other molecular alterations driving this process. Epigenetic deregulation is a critical event in early malignancies. Thus, we aimed to (1) analyze DNA methylation changes during the transition from preneoplastic lesions to early HCC (eHCC) and identify candidate epigenetic gatekeepers, and to (2) assess the prognostic potential of methylation changes in cirrhotic tissue. APPROACH AND RESULTS: Methylome profiling was performed using Illumina HumanMethylation450 (485,000 cytosine-phosphateguanine, 96% of known cytosine-phosphateguanine islands), with data available for a total of 390 samples: 16 healthy liver, 139 cirrhotic tissue, 8 dysplastic nodules, and 227 HCC samples, including 40 eHCC below 2cm. A phylo-epigenetic tree derived from the Euclidean distances between differentially DNA-methylated sites (n = 421,997) revealed a gradient of methylation changes spanning healthy liver, cirrhotic tissue, dysplastic nodules, and HCC with closest proximity of dysplasia to HCC. Focusing on promoter regions, we identified epigenetic gatekeeper candidates with an increasing proportion of hypermethylated samples (beta value > 0.5) from cirrhotic tissue (<1%), to dysplastic nodules (>/=25%), to eHCC (>/=50%), and confirmed inverse correlation between DNA methylation and gene expression for TSPYL5 (testis-specific Y-encoded-like protein 5), KCNA3 (potassium voltage-gated channel, shaker-related subfamily, member 3), LDHB (lactate dehydrogenase B), and SPINT2 (serine peptidase inhibitor, Kunitz type 2) (all P < 0.001). Unsupervised clustering of genome-wide methylation profiles of cirrhotic tissue identified two clusters, M1 and M2, with 42% and 58% of patients, respectively, which correlates with survival (P < 0.05), independent of etiology. CONCLUSIONS: Genome-wide DNA-methylation profiles accurately discriminate the different histological stages of human hepatocarcinogenesis. We report on epigenetic gatekeepers in the transition between dysplastic nodules and eHCC. DNA-methylation changes in cirrhotic tissue correlate with clinical outcomes.
Voltage-dependent potassium channel Kv1.3 plays a key role on T-cell activation; however, lack of reliable antibodies has prevented its accurate detection under endogenous circumstances. To overcome this limitation, we created a Jurkat T-cell line with endogenous Kv1.3 channel tagged, to determine the expression, location, and changes upon activation of the native Kv1.3 channels. CRISPR-Cas9 technique was used to insert a Flag-Myc peptide at the C terminus of the KCNA3 gene. Basal or activated channel expression was studied using western blot analysis and imaging techniques. We identified two isoforms of Kv1.3 other than the canonical channel (54 KDa) differing on their N terminus: a longer isoform (70 KDa) and a truncated isoform (43 KDa). All three isoforms were upregulated after T-cell activation. We focused on the functional characterization of the truncated isoform (short form, SF), because it has not been previously described and could be present in the available Kv1.3-/- mice models. Overexpression of SF in HEK cells elicited small amplitude Kv1.3-like currents, which, contrary to canonical Kv1.3, did not induce HEK proliferation. To explore the role of endogenous SF isoform in a native system, we generated both a knockout Jurkat clone and a clone expressing only the SF isoform. Although the canonical isoform (long form) localizes mainly at the plasma membrane, SF remains intracellular, accumulating perinuclearly. Accordingly, SF Jurkat cells did not show Kv1.3 currents and exhibited depolarized resting membrane potential (V(M) ), decreased Ca(2+) influx, and a reduction in the [Ca(2+) ](i) increase upon stimulation. Functional characterization of these Kv1.3 channel isoforms showed their differential contribution to signaling pathways involved in formation of the immunological synapse. We conclude that alternative translation initiation generates at least three endogenous Kv1.3 channel isoforms in T cells that exhibit different functional roles. For some of these functions, Kv1.3 proteins do not need to form functional plasma membrane channels.
The janus-activated kinase 2 JAK2 participates in the signalling of several hormones including interferon, a powerful regulator of lymphocyte function. Lymphocyte activity and survival depend on the activity of the voltage-gated K(+) channel KCNA3 (Kv1.3). The present study thus explored whether JAK2 modifies the activity of voltage-gated K(+) channel KCNA3. To this end, cRNA encoding KCNA3 was injected in Xenopus oocytes with or without additional injection of cRNA encoding wild-type human JAK2, human inactive (K882E)JAK2 mutant, or human gain-of-function (V617F)JAK2 mutant. KCNA3-dependent depolarization-induced current was determined utilizing dual-electrode voltage clamp, and protein KCNA3 abundance in the cell membrane was quantified by chemiluminescence. Moreover, the effect of interferon-gamma on voltage-gated K(+) current was determined by patch clamp in mainly KCNA3-expressing Jurkat T cells with or without prior treatment with JAK2 inhibitor AG490 (40 microM). As a result, KCNA3 channel activity and protein abundance were up-regulated by coexpression of JAK2 or (V617F)JAK2 but not (K882E)JAK2. The effect of JAK2 coexpression was reversed by AG490 treatment. In human Jurkat T lymphoma cells, voltage-gated K(+) current was up-regulated by interferon-gamma and down-regulated by AG490 (40 microM). In conclusion, JAK2 participates in the signalling, regulating the voltage-gated K(+) channel KCNA3.
BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer (EC) is a highly lethal disease lacking early detection approaches. We previously identified that OTOP2 and KCNA3 were specifically hypermethylated in circulating cell-free DNA from patients with EC. We then developed a blood-based methylation assay targeting OTOP2 and KCNA3 (named "IEsohunter") for esophageal cancer noninvasive detection. This double-blinded, multicenter, prospective study aimed to comprehensively evaluate its clinical diagnostic performance. METHODS: Participants with EC, high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia (HGIN), other malignancies, benign gastrointestinal lesions, or no abnormalities were prospectively enrolled from 5 tertiary referral centers across China. Peripheral blood samples were collected, followed by plasma cell-free DNA methylation analysis using the IEsohunter test based on multiplex quantitative polymerase chain reaction adopting an algorithm-free interpretation strategy. The primary outcome was the diagnostic accuracy of IEsohunter test for EC. RESULTS: We prospectively enrolled 1116 participants, including 334 patients with EC, 71 with HGIN, and 711 controls. The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves of the IEsohunter test for detecting EC and HGIN were 0.903 (95% CI 0.880-0.927) and 0.727 (95% CI 0.653-0.801), respectively. IEsohunter test showed sensitivities of 78.5% (95% CI 69.1-85.6), 87.3% (95% CI 79.4-92.4), 92.5% (95% CI 85.9-96.2), and 96.9% (95% CI 84.3-99.8) for stage I-IV EC, respectively, with an overall sensitivity of 87.4% (95% CI 83.4-90.6) and specificity of 93.3% (95% CI 91.2-94.9) for EC detection. The IEsohunter test status turned negative (100.0%, 47/47) after surgical resection of EC. CONCLUSIONS: The IEsohunter test showed high diagnostic accuracy for EC detection, indicating that it could potentially serve as a tool for noninvasive early detection and surveillance of EC.
Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) types 13 and 25 are two genetic entities among the autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias, initially mapped in two French families to chromosomes 19q and 2p, respectively. The SCA13 locus was confirmed by the identification of a second kindred of Filipino ancestry. SCA13 patients have cerebellar ataxia of adult onset, or of early onset when associated with mental impairment. SCA25 patients present with cerebellar ataxia with sensory neuropathy and frequent gastrointestinal features. While the gene responsible for SCA25 is still unknown, missense mutations affecting the potassium channel KCNC3 function have been identified.
Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP), characterized by irregular narrowing of the main pancreatic duct, swelling of the pancreas, and histological evidence of lymphoplasmacytic inflammation by high serum immunoglobulin G4, is distinct from ordinary pancreatitis. However, genetic factors involved in the etiology and pathophysiology of AIP remain unclear. Sixty-four patients with autoimmune pancreatitis (53 men, 11 women; mean age, 62.4 years) and 104 healthy Japanese controls were enrolled in this study. We performed an association analysis using 400 microsatellite markers with an average spacing of 10.8 cM in the genome. We also evaluated the association of AIP with seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the 20-kb region around the potassium voltage-gated channel, shaker-related subfamily, member 3 gene (KCNA3). We identified six statistically significant markers (D1S2726, D5S410, D6S460, D10S548, D15S128, and D20S186; P< 0.05) related to susceptibility. The surrounding region showing the strong association (P=7.4 x 10<formula>;-7</formula>, Pc=0.0015) contained the KCNA3 gene. Further analysis by SNP genotyping in KCNA3 gene revealed that four SNPs (rs2840381, rs1058184, rs2640480, rs1319782) were significantly associated with the AIP susceptibility (P< 0.007). KCNA3 is known to be involved in immunomodulation of autoreactive effector and memory T cell--mediated autoimmune diseases. Our findings provide the first evidence that KCNA3 is associated with AIP and suggest that KCNA3 may influence the risk for AIP.
The Kv1.3 potassium channel is expressed abundantly on activated T cells and mediates the cellular immune response. This role has made the channel a target for therapeutic immunomodulation to block its activity and suppress T cell activation. Here, we report structures of human Kv1.3 alone, with a nanobody inhibitor, and with an antibody-toxin fusion blocker. Rather than block the channel directly, four copies of the nanobody bind the tetramer's voltage sensing domains and the pore domain to induce an inactive pore conformation. In contrast, the antibody-toxin fusion docks its toxin domain at the extracellular mouth of the channel to insert a critical lysine into the pore. The lysine stabilizes an active conformation of the pore yet blocks ion permeation. This study visualizes Kv1.3 pore dynamics, defines two distinct mechanisms to suppress Kv1.3 channel activity with exogenous inhibitors, and provides a framework to aid development of emerging T cell immunotherapies.
INTRODUCTION: Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the leading cause of death worldwide according to World Health Organization (WHO) data. Atherosclerosis is considered as a chronic inflammatory disease that develops in response to damage to the vascular intima-media layer in most cases. In recent years, epigenetic events have emerged as important players in the development and progression of CVDs. Since noncoding RNA (ncRNAs) are important regulators in the organization of the pathophysiological processes of the cardiovascular system, they have the potential to be used as therapeutic targets, diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. In this study long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) and mRNA gene expression were compared between coronary atherosclerotic plaques (CAP) and the internal mammary artery (IMA)  which has the same genetic makeup and is exposed to the same environmental stress conditions with CAP in the same individual. METHODS: lncRNA and mRNA gene expressions were determined using the microarray in the samples. Microarray results were validated by RT-qPCR. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs; lncRNAs and mRNAs) were determined by GeneSpring (Ver 3.0) [p values < 0.05 and fold change (FC) > 2]. DAVID bioinformatics program was used for Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analyses of statistically significant genes between CAP and IMA tissue. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: In our study, 345 DEGs were found to be statistically significant (p < 0.05; FC > 2) between CAP and IMA. Of these, 65 were lncRNA and 280 were mRNA. Thirty-three lncRNAs were upregulated, while 32 lncRNAs were downregulated. Some of the important mRNAs are SPP1, CYP4B1, CHRDL1, MYOC, and ALKAL2, while some of the lncRNAs are LOC105377123, LINC01857, DIO3OS, LOC101928134, and KCNA3 between CAP and IMA tissue. We also identified genes that correlated with statistically significant lncRNAs. The results of this study are expected to be an important source of data in the development of new genetically based drugs to prevent atherosclerotic plaque. In addition, the data obtained may contribute to the explanation of the epigenetic mechanisms that play a role in the pathological basis of the process that protects the IMA from atherosclerosis.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) regulate diverse cellular processes, and their anomalous expression exert an essential role in the progression of many kinds of cancers, including colorectal carcinoma (CRC). The objective of this study was to investigate the role of lncRNA kcna3 and its underlying mechanism in CRC progression. The expression of lncRNA kcna3 in human CRC tissues and the adjacent non-tumor tissues was evaluated by RT-PCR. The correlations between lncRNA kcna3 expression levels and the overall survival (OS), as well as the clinicopathological features of CRC patients were analyzed. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments were used to evaluate the effects of lncRNA kcna3 on the proliferation, apoptosis, migration, invasion and tumorigenesis of colon cancer SW620 cells. We found that lncRNA kcna3 was lowly expressed in CRC tissues, and its low expression was closely associated with patients' higher TNM grade and the higher occurrence rate of lymphatic metastasis and distant metastasis, as well as shorter OS. Enhanced expression of lncRNA kcna3 inhibited SW620 cells' proliferation, migration and invasion, and induced cell apoptosis in vitro, and repressed CRC tumor growth in vivo. Whereas knockdown of lncRNA kcna3 showed the opposite results. Mechanistically, up-regulation of lncRNA kcna3 decreased YAP1 protein expression and accelerated its degradation. The effects of lncRNA kcna3 overexpression on cell growth and tumorigenesis inhibition and apoptosis promotion were weakened when the expression of YAP1 was up-regulated. In conclusion, this study revealed that lncRNA kcna3 exerts a tumor-inhibit role in CRC progression through down-regulating YAP1 expression, indicating that lncRNA kcna3/YAP1 might be served as a new prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for CRC.
BACKGROUND: Multiple myeloma (MM) is a highly heterogeneous disease. Cuproptosis is a novel mode of death that is closely associated with several diseases, such as hepatocellular carcinoma. However, its role in MM is unknown. METHODS: MM transcriptomic and clinical data were obtained from UCSC Xena and gene expression omnibus (GEO) databases. Following MM samples were divided into different subtypes based on the cuproptosis genes, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) among different subtypes, namely, candidate cuproptosis related genes were analyzed by univariate Cox and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression to construct a cuproptosis-related risk model. After the independent prognostic analysis was performed, a nomogram was constructed. Finally, Functional enrichment analysis and immune infiltration analysis were performed in the high- and low-risk groups, potential therapeutic agents were then predicted. RESULTS: The 784 MM samples in UCSC Xena cohorts were divided into three different subtypes, and 4 out of 346 candidate cuproptosis related genes, namely CDKN2A, BCL3, KCNA3 and TTC14 were used to construct a risk model. Risk score was considered a reliable independent prognostic factor for MM patients. It was investigated that the pathway of cell cycle was significantly enriched in the high-risk group. In addition, immune score, ESTIMATE score and cytolytic activity were significantly different between different risk groups, as well as 13 immune cells such as memory B cells. Nine drugs were predicted in our study. CONCLUSION: A cuproptosis-related prognostic model was constructed, which may have a potential guiding role in the treatment of MM.
Ion channels have been demonstrated to be a central element in the induction and the execution of apoptosis. In particular, mitochondrial ion channels, including not only the permeability transition pore but also a mitochondrial, ATP-sensitive (mKATP) channel as well as a mitochondrial calcium-activated potassium channel are involved critically in apoptotic changes in mitochondria. Ion channels in the cell membrane that are altered by induction of apoptosis include potassium, chloride and calcium channels. The Kv1.3 potassium channel belongs to the best-characterized ion channels involved in apoptosis and a genetic model of cells deficient for Kv1.3 has indicated a critical role for Kv1.3, at least in some forms of apoptosis. The mechanisms regulating ion channels during apoptosis are, however, still poorly defined. Recent studies have suggested a function for distinct membrane domains, termed rafts, in the cell membrane for the regulation of ion channels during apoptosis. Small sphingolipid- and cholesterol-enriched membrane domains are modified by many apoptotic stimuli to form large ceramide-enriched membrane platforms. These platforms serve to cluster receptor molecules, to re-organize intracellular signalling molecules including ion channels, to bring ion channels into close contact with their regulators and/or to separate proteins from a specific ion channel. Finally, the lipid composition of the cell membrane might be involved directly in ion channel regulation.
The rate of symptom accumulation distinguishes between slowly and rapidly progressing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Given that a patient's genetics can affect the rate of disease progression, identification of genetic variants associated with rapid disease progression should provide valuable information for timely prognosis and development of optimal treatment plans. We hypothesized that the polymorphism rs2821557 in the human KCNA3 gene encoding a voltage-gated potassium channel Kv1.3 might be one of these genetic variants, given the role of Kv1.3 in neuroinflammation, as well as the location and gain-of-function effect of this polymorphism. To test this hypothesis we performed an analytic study exploring the relationships between rs2821557 polymorphism and disease progression in a cohort of MS patients. The rs2821557 genotype and the rate of disease progression based on Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score (MSSS) were determined for 101 patients (68 females and 33 males). Peripheral blood CD4+ lymphocyte subpopulations (T(naive) , T(CM) , T(EM) ) and the expression of chemokine receptors (CXCR5, CXCR3, CCR6, CCR4) were estimated by flow cytometry. The comparisons between groups by genotype (TT, TC, CC) and allelic approach analysis (T vs. C) revealed a significantly higher incidence of the rapid disease course (MSSS >/= 7.5) among minor C allele carriers (CC and TC) compared to patients with the TT genotype. Furthermore, C allele carriers had higher counts of CXCR3+ T(EM) cells than homozygous T allele carriers. In conclusion, accelerated MS progression in C allele carriers is likely linked to enhanced Kv1.3-mediated accumulation of pathogenic CXCR3+ T(EM) cells and exacerbated neuroinflammation.
AIM: We investigated differential DNA methylation in gingival tissues in periodontal health, gingivitis, and periodontitis, and its association with differential mRNA expression. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Gingival tissues were harvested from individuals and sites with clinically healthy and intact periodontium, gingivitis, and periodontitis. Samples were processed for differential DNA methylation and mRNA expression using the IlluminaEPIC (850 K) and the IlluminaHiSeq2000 platforms, respectively. Across the three phenotypes, we identified differentially methylated CpG sites and regions, differentially expressed genes (DEGs), and genes with concomitant differential methylation at their promoters and expression were identified. The findings were validated using our earlier databases using HG-U133Plus2.0Affymetrix microarrays and Illumina (450 K) methylation arrays. RESULTS: We observed 43,631 differentially methylated positions (DMPs) between periodontitis and health, and 536 DMPs between gingivitis and health (FDR < 0.05). On the mRNA level, statistically significant DEGs were observed only between periodontitis and health (n = 126). Twelve DEGs between periodontitis and health (DCC, KCNA3, KCNA2, RIMS2, HOXB7, PNOC, IRX1, JSRP1, TBX1, OPCML, CECR1, SCN4B) were also differentially methylated between the two phenotypes. Spearman correlations between methylation and expression in the EPIC/mRNAseq dataset were largely replicated in the 450 K/Affymetrix datasets. CONCLUSIONS: Concomitant study of DNA methylation and gene expression patterns may identify genes whose expression is epigenetically regulated in periodontitis.
The voltage-dependent potassium channel Kv1.3 has been implicated in proliferation in many cell types, based on the observation that Kv1.3 blockers inhibited proliferation. By modulating membrane potential, cell volume, and/or Ca(2+) influx, K(+)  channels can influence cell cycle progression. Also, noncanonical channel functions could contribute to modulate cell proliferation independent of K(+) efflux. The specificity of the requirement of Kv1.3 channels for proliferation suggests the involvement of molecule-specific interactions, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly identified. Heterologous expression of Kv1.3 channels in HEK cells has been shown to increase proliferation independently of K(+) fluxes. Likewise, some of the molecular determinants of Kv1.3-induced proliferation have been located in the C-terminus region, where individual point mutations of putative phosphorylation sites (Y447A and S459A) abolished Kv1.3-induced proliferation. Here, we investigated the mechanisms linking Kv1.3 channels to proliferation exploring the correlation between Kv1.3 voltage-dependent molecular dynamics and cell cycle progression. Using transfected HEK cells, we analyzed both the effect of changes in resting membrane potential on Kv1.3-induced proliferation and the effect of mutated Kv1.3 channels with altered voltage dependence of gating. We conclude that voltage-dependent transitions of Kv1.3 channels enable the activation of proliferative pathways. We also found that Kv1.3 associated with IQGAP3, a scaffold protein involved in proliferation, and that membrane depolarization facilitates their interaction. The functional contribution of Kv1.3-IQGAP3 interplay to cell proliferation was demonstrated both in HEK cells and in vascular smooth muscle cells. Our data indicate that voltage-dependent conformational changes of Kv1.3 are an essential element in Kv1.3-induced proliferation.
BACKGROUND: Early detection of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) can considerably improve the prognosis of patients. Aberrant cell-free DNA (cfDNA) methylation signatures are a promising tool for detecting ESCC. However, available markers based on cell-free DNA methylation are still inadequate. This study aimed to identify ESCC-specific cfDNA methylation markers and evaluate the diagnostic performance in the early detection of ESCC. METHODS: We performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) for 24 ESCC tissues and their normal adjacent tissues. Based on the WGBS data, we identified 21,469,837 eligible CpG sites (CpGs). By integrating several methylation datasets, we identified several promising ESCC-specific cell-free DNA methylation markers. Finally, we developed a dual-marker panel based on methylated KCNA3 and OTOP2 , and then, we evaluated its performance in our training and validation cohorts. RESULTS: The ESCC diagnostic model constructed based on KCNA3 and OTOP2 had an AUC of 0.91 [95% CI: 0.85-0.95], and an optimal sensitivity and specificity of 84.91% and 94.32%, respectively, in the training cohort. In the independent validation cohort, the AUC was 0.88 [95% CI: 0.83-0.92], along with an optimal sensitivity of 81.5% and specificity of 92.9%. The model sensitivity for stage I-II ESCC was 78.4%, which was slightly lower than the sensitivity of the model (85.7%) for stage III-IV ESCC. CONCLUSION: The dual-target panel based on cfDNA showed excellent performance for detecting ESCC and might be an alternative strategy for screening ESCC.
OBJECTIVE: The present investigation is aimed at identifying key immune-related genes linked with SLE and their roles using integrative analysis of publically available gene expression datasets. METHODS: Four gene expression datasets pertaining to SLE, 2 from whole blood and 2 experimental PMBC, were sourced from GEO. Shared differentially expressed genes (DEG) were determined as SLE-related genes. Immune cell infiltration analysis was performed using CIBERSORT, and case samples were subjected to k-means cluster analysis using high-abundance immune cells. Key immune-related SLE genes were identified using correlation analysis with high-abundance immune cells and subjected to functional enrichment analysis for enriched Gene Ontology Biological Processes and KEGG pathways. A PPI network of genes interacting with the key immune-related SLE genes was constructed. LASSO regression analysis was performed to identify the most significant key immune-related SLE genes, and correlation with clinicopathological features was examined. RESULTS: 309 SLE-related genes were identified and found functionally enriched in several pathways related to regulation of viral defenses and T cell functions. k-means cluster analysis identified 2 sample clusters which significantly differed in monocytes, dendritic cell resting, and neutrophil abundance. 65 immune-related SLE genes were identified, functionally enriched in immune response-related signaling, antigen receptor-mediated signaling, and T cell receptor signaling, along with Th17, Th1, and Th2 cell differentiation, IL-17, NF-kappa B, and VEGF signaling pathways. LASSO regression identified 9 key immune-related genes: DUSP7, DYSF, KCNA3, P2RY10, S100A12, SLC38A1, TLR2, TSR2, and TXN. Imputed neutrophil percentage was consistent with their expression pattern, whereas anti-Ro showed the inverse pattern as gene expression. CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive bioinformatics analyses revealed 9 key immune-related genes and their associated functions highly pertinent to SLE pathogenesis, subtypes, and identified valuable candidates for experimental research.
K(+) channels play critical roles in a wide variety of physiological processes, including the regulation of heart rate, muscle contraction, neurotransmitter release, neuronal excitability, insulin secretion, epithelial electrolyte transport, cell volume regulation, and cell proliferation. As such, K(+) channels have been recognized as potential therapeutic drug targets for many years. Unfortunately, progress toward identifying selective K(+) channel modulators has been severely hampered by the need to use native currents and primary cells in the drug-screening process. Today, however, more than 80 K(+) channel and K(+) channel-related genes have been identified, and an understanding of the molecular composition of many important native K(+) currents has begun to emerge. The identification of these molecular K(+) channel drug targets should lead to the discovery of novel drug candidates. A summary of progress is presented.
Inflammatory lesions of periodontal disease contain all the cellular components, including abundant activated/memory T- and B-cells, necessary to control immunological interactive networks and to accelerate bone resorption by RANKL-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Blockade of RANKL function has been shown to ameliorate periodontal bone resorption and other osteopenic disorders without affecting inflammation. Development of therapies aimed at decreasing the expression of RANKL and pro-inflammatory cytokines by T-cells constitutes a promising strategy to ameliorate not only bone resorption, but also inflammation. Several reports have demonstrated that the potassium channels Kv1.3 and IKCa1, through the use of selective blockers, play important roles in T-cell-mediated events, including T-cell proliferation and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. More recently, a potassium channel-blocker for Kv1.3 has been shown to down-regulate bone resorption by decreasing the ratio of RANKL-to-OPG expression by memory-activated T-cells. In this article, we first summarize the mechanisms by which chronically activated/memory T-cells, in concert with B-cells and macrophages, trigger inflammatory bone resorption. Then, we describe the main structural and functional characteristics of potassium channels Kv1.3 and IKCa1 in some of the cells implicated in periodontal disease progression. Finally, this review elucidates some recent advances in the use of potassium channel-blockers of Kv1.3 and IKCa1 to ameliorate the clinical signs or side-effects of several immunological disorders and to decrease inflammatory bone resorption in periodontal disease. ABBREVIATIONS: AICD, activation-induced cell death; APC, antigen-presenting cells; B(K), large conductance; CRAC, calcium release-activated calcium channels; DC, dendritic cell; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; IFN-gamma, interferon-gamma; IP(3), inositol (1,4,5)-triphosphate; (K)ir, inward rectifier; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; I(K), intermediate conductance; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; L, ligand; MCSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T-cells; RANK, receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB; T(CM), central memory T-cells; T(EM), effector memory T-cells; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TRAIL, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand; OPG, osteoprotegerin; Omp29, 29-kDa outer membrane protein; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C; RT-PCR, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain-reaction; S(K), small conductance; TCR, T-cell receptor; and (K)v, voltage-gated.
