Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily H member 2; Pore-forming (alpha) subunit of voltage-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channel. Channel properties are modulated by cAMP and subunit assembly. Mediates the rapidly activating component of the delayed rectifying potassium current in heart (IKr). [Isoform B-USO]: Has no channel activity by itself, but modulates channel characteristics by forming heterotetramers with other isoforms which are retained intracellularly and undergo ubiquitin- dependent degradation.
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disease caused by antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor (AChR), muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) or other AChR-related proteins in the postsynaptic muscle membrane. Localized or general muscle weakness is the predominant symptom and is induced by the antibodies. Patients are grouped according to the presence of antibodies, symptoms, age at onset and thymus pathology. Diagnosis is straightforward in most patients with typical symptoms and a positive antibody test, although a detailed clinical and neurophysiological examination is important in antibody-negative patients. MG therapy should be ambitious and aim for clinical remission or only mild symptoms with near-normal function and quality of life. Treatment should be based on MG subgroup and includes symptomatic treatment using acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, thymectomy and immunotherapy. Intravenous immunoglobulin and plasma exchange are fast-acting treatments used for disease exacerbations, and intensive care is necessary during exacerbations with respiratory failure. Comorbidity is frequent, particularly in elderly patients. Active physical training should be encouraged.
STUDY QUESTION: Is there any methylome alteration in women with PCOS who were diagnosed using the new international evidence-based guidelines? SUMMARY ANSWER: A total of 264 differentially methylated probes (DMPs) and 53 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were identified in patients with PCOS and healthy controls. WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: PCOS is a common endocrine disorder among women of reproductive age and polycystic ovarian morphology (PCOM) is one of the main features of the disease. Owing to the availability of more sensitive ultrasound machines, the traditional diagnosis of PCOM according to the Rotterdam criteria (>/=12 antral follicles per ovary) is currently debated as there is a risk of overdiagnosis. The new international evidence-based guidelines set the threshold for PCOM as >/=20 antral follicles per ovary when using endovaginal ultrasound transducers with a frequency bandwidth that includes 8 MHz. However, current DNA methylation studies in PCOS are still based on the Rotterdam criteria. This study aimed to explore aberrant DNA methylation in patients diagnosed with PCOS according to the new evidence-based guidelines. STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: This cross-sectional case-control study included 34 PCOS cases diagnosed using new international evidence-based guidelines and 36 controls. PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: A total of 70 women, including 34 PCOS cases and 36 controls, were recruited. DNA extracted from whole blood samples of participants were profiled using array technology. Data quality control, preprocessing, annotation, and statistical analyses were performed. Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression were used to build a PCOS diagnosis model with DNA methylation sites. MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: We identified 264 DMPs between PCOS cases and controls, which were mainly located in intergenic regions or gene bodies of the genome, CpG open sea sites, and heterochromatin of functional elements. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that DMPs were significantly enriched in biological processes involved in triglyceride regulation. Three of these DMPs overlapped with the PCOS susceptibility genes thyroid adenoma-associated protein (THADA), aminopeptidase O (AOPEP), and tripartite motif family-like protein 2 (TRIML2). Fifty-three DMRs were identified and their annotated genes were largely enriched in allograft rejection, thyroid hormone production, and peripheral downstream signaling effects. Two DMRs were closely related to the PCOS susceptibility genes, potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily A member 4 (KCNA4) and farnesyl-diphosphate farnesyltransferase 1 (FDFT1). Finally, based on LASSO regression, we built a methylation marker model with high accuracy for PCOS diagnosis (AUC=0.952). LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The study cohort was single-center and the sample size was relatively limited. Further analyses with a larger number of participants are required. WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This is the first study to identify DNA methylation alterations in women with PCOS diagnosed using the new international evidence-based guideline, and it provided new molecular insight into the application of the new guidelines. STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This study was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2021YFC2700400), Basic Science Center Program of NSFC (31988101), CAMS Innovation Fund for Medical Sciences (2021-I2M-5-001), National Natural Science Foundation of China (32370916, 82071606, 82101707, 82192874, and 31871509), Shandong Provincial Key Research and Development Program (2020ZLYS02), Taishan Scholars Program of Shandong Province (ts20190988), and Fundamental Research Funds of Shandong University. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: N/A.
Stimulant dependence is heritable, but specific genetic factors underlying the trait have not been identified. A genome-wide association study for stimulant dependence was performed in a discovery cohort of African- (AA) and European-ancestry (EA) subjects ascertained for genetic studies of alcohol, opioid, and cocaine use disorders. The sample comprised individuals with DSM-IV stimulant dependence (393 EA cases, 5288 EA controls; 155 AA cases, 5603 AA controls). An independent cohort from the family-based Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism (532 EA cases, 7635 EA controls; 53 AA cases, AA 3352 controls) was used for replication. One variant in SLC25A16 (rs2394476, p = 3.42 x 10(-10), odds ratio [OR] = 3.70) was GWS in AAs. Four other loci showed suggestive evidence, including KCNA4 in AAs (rs11500237, p = 2.99 x 10(-7), OR = 2.31) which encodes one of the potassium voltage-gated channel protein that has been linked to several other substance use disorders, and CPVL in the combined population groups (rs1176440, p = 3.05 x 10(-7), OR = 1.35), whose expression was previously shown to be upregulated in the prefrontal cortex from users of cocaine, cannabis, and phencyclidine. Analysis of the top GWAS signals revealed a significant enrichment with nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes (adjusted p = 0.04) and significant pleiotropy between stimulant dependence and alcohol dependence in EAs (p(adj) = 3.6 x 10(-3)), an anxiety disorder in EAs (p(adj) = 2.1 x 10(-4)), and ADHD in both AAs (p(adj) = 3.0 x 10(-33)) and EAs (p(adj) = 6.7 x 10(-35)). Our results implicate novel genes and pathways as having roles in the etiology of stimulant dependence.
Neuropathic pain is a characteristic feature of small fiber neuropathy (SFN), which in 18% of the cases is caused by genetic variants in voltage-gated sodium ion channels. In this study, we assessed the role of fifteen other ion channels in neuropathic pain. Patients with SFN (n = 414) were analyzed for ANO1, ANO3, HCN1, KCNA2, KCNA4, KCNK18, KCNN1, KCNQ3, KCNQ5, KCNS1, TRPA1, TRPM8, TRPV1, TRPV3 and TRPV4 variants by single-molecule molecular inversion probes-next-generation sequencing. These patients did not have genetic variants in SCN3A, SCN7A-SCN11A and SCN1B-SCN4B. In twenty patients (20/414, 4.8%), a potentially pathogenic heterozygous variant was identified in an ion-channel gene (ICG). Variants were present in seven genes, for two patients (0.5%) in ANO3, one (0.2%) in KCNK18, two (0.5%) in KCNQ3, seven (1.7%) in TRPA1, three (0.7%) in TRPM8, three (0.7%) in TRPV1 and two (0.5%) in TRPV3. Variants in the TRP genes were the most frequent (n = 15, 3.6%), partly in patients with high mean maximal pain scores VAS = 9.65 +/- 0.7 (n = 4). Patients with ICG variants reported more severe pain compared to patients without such variants (VAS = 9.36 +/- 0.72 vs. VAS = 7.47 +/- 2.37). This cohort study identified ICG variants in neuropathic pain in SFN, complementing previous findings of ICG variants in diabetic neuropathy. These data show that ICG variants are central in neuropathic pain of different etiologies and provides promising gene candidates for future research.
BACKGROUND: MicroRNA miR-448 mediates some of the effects of ischemia on arrhythmic risk. Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily A member 4 (KCNA4) encodes a K(v)1.4 current that opens in response to membrane depolarization and is essential for regulating the action potential duration in heart. KCNA4 has a miR-448 binding site. OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether miR-448 was involved in the regulation of KCNA4 messenger RNA expression in ischemia. METHODS: Quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was used to investigate the expression of KCNA4 and miR-448. Pull-down assays were used to examine the interaction between miR-448 and KCNA4. miR-448 decoy and binding site mutation were used to examine the specificity of the effect for KCNA4. RESULTS: The expression of KCNA4 is diminished in ischemia and human heart failure tissues with ventricular tachycardia. Previously, we have shown that miR-448 is upregulated in ischemia and inhibition can prevent arrhythmic risk after myocardial infarction. The 3'-untranslated region of KCNA4 has a conserved miR-448 binding site. miR-448 bound to this site directly and reduced KCNA4 expression and the transient outward potassium current. Inhibition of miR-448 restored KCNA4. CONCLUSION: These findings showed a link between K(v)1.4 downregulation and miR-448-mediated upregulation in ischemia, suggesting a new mechanism for the antiarrhythmic effect of miR-448 inhibition.
Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is a common malignancy throughout the world with high levels of mortality and morbidity. In the present study, potential biomarkers and treatment targets for LUAD were investigated using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Overall, 4,485 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified (1,857 upregulated and 2,628 downregulated) between tumor and adjacent control tissues. Functional analysis with Gene Ontology, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, Gene Set Variation Analysis and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis revealed significant enrichment of the DEGs in pathways related to system development, cell cycle and cell adhesion. Weighted gene co‑expression network analysis distinguished ten co‑expression modules on inclusion of the clinical profiles of patients with LUAD. Of these, the blue/turquoise modules showed peak association with tumor onset. Analysis of hub modules identified five hub genes, namely ANGPTL7, SLC6A4, PTPRQ, KCNA4 and TEDC2 (also known as C16orf59). Survival analysis revealed associations between hub‑gene expression profiles and patient prognosis. Downregulation of SLC6A4 in LUAD tumor tissues was confirmed using immunohistochemistry. Additional assays (Cell Counting Kit‑8, colony formation, scratch assay, cell cycle, Transwell invasion assay and cell adhesion assay) revealed that SLC6A4 overexpression inhibited A549 cell growth, invasion and migration. The findings demonstrated that the hub genes could act as treatment targets or new biomarkers for LUAD.
The present is an observational study following a genetic epidemiology model using a case-control design. We tested the hypothesis of an association between the prevalence of the genotypic and allelic frequencies distribution of the potassium voltage-gated channel of the shaker related subfamily member 4 gene (KCNA4) rs1323860 (C/T transition) and endurance performance level in Hispanic male marathon runners (MR). The subjects (n=1876) were adult Hispanic male MR. Fast-MR (cases; n=938) were finishers in the top 3(rd) percentile. Slow MR (controls; n=938) were finishers in the lowest 3(rd) percentile of their respective age. Genomic DNA was purified from a whole blood sample. Polymerase chain reaction was used to amplify a KCNA4 SNP which consists of a C/T (rs1323860) transition. The observed genotype frequencies, in both Cases and Controls, met Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (X(2), P>/=0.05). Genotype and allele frequencies were statistically different (P<0.01) between cases and controls. Odds ratio revealed that the C allele was 1.33 times more likely prevalent in the cases than in the controls (95% CI; 1.17, 1.51; P<0.001). The magnitude of the statistical power for the present study was 0.86. In conclusion, the findings strongly suggest that KCNA4 gene rs1323860 (C/T transition) is auxiliary in the complex phenotype of endurance running performance level in Hispanic male marathon runners.
PURPOSE: Patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) treated with ibrutinib are at risk of developing cardiovascular side effects (CVSE). The molecular determinants of CVSEs have not been fully elucidated. We interrogated genetic polymorphisms in the Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) signaling pathway for their association with ibrutinib-related CVSEs. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We conducted a retrospective/prospective observational pharmacogenetic study of 50 patients with newly diagnosed or relapsed CLL who received ibrutinib at a starting daily dose of 420 mg for at least 6 months. CVSEs, primarily atrial fibrillation and hypertension, occurred in 10 patients (20%), of whom 4 discontinued therapy. DNA was isolated from buccal swabs of all 50 patients and genotyped for 40 SNPs in GATA4, SGK1, KCNQ1, KCNA4, NPPA, and SCN5A using a customized next-generation sequencing panel. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis were performed to determine genetic and clinical factors associated with the incidence of ibrutinib-related CVSEs. RESULTS: GATA4 rs804280 AA (P = 0.043), KCNQ1 rs163182 GG (P = 0.036), and KCNQ1 rs2237895 AA (P = 0.023) genotypes were univariately associated with ibrutinib-related CVSEs. On the basis of multivariate analysis, a high genetic risk score, defined as the presence of at least two of these genotypes, was associated with 11.5-fold increased odds of CVSEs (P = 0.019; 95% confidence interval, 1.79-119.73). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest possible genetic determinants of ibrutinib-related CVSEs in CLL. If replicated in a larger study, pretreatment pharmacogenetic testing for GATA4 and KCNQ1 polymorphisms may be a useful clinical tool for personalizing treatment selection for CLL and/or instituting early risk mitigation strategies.
Antibodies to the acetylcholine receptor (AChR) have been recognized for over 40 years and have been important in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis (MG), and its recognition in patients of different ages and thymic pathologies. The 10-20% of patients who do not have AChR antibodies are now known to comprise different subgroups, the most commonly reported of which is patients with antibodies to muscle-specific kinase (MuSK). The use of cell-based assays has extended the repertoire of antibody tests to clustered AChRs, low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4, and agrin. Autoantibodies against intracellular targets, namely cortactin, titin, and ryanodine receptor (the latter two being associated with the presence of thymoma), may also be helpful as biomarkers in some patients. IgG4 MuSK antibodies are clearly pathogenic, but the coexisting IgG1, IgG2, and IgG3 antibodies, collectively, have effects that question the dominance of IgG4 as the sole pathologic factor in MuSK MG. After a brief historical review, we define the different subgroups and summarize the antibody characteristics. Experiments to demonstrate the in vitro and in vivo pathogenic roles of MuSK antibodies are discussed.
A genomic clone encoding the Shaker-related potassium channel gene, Kcna4/mKv1.4, was isolated from mice. Its coding region is contained in a single exon, encodes a protein of 654 amino acids, and shares approximately 91% nucleotide sequence identity with human KCNA4/hKv1.4. We show that 0.8 kb of the 5' noncoding region (NCR), the entire protein coding region (approximately 2.0 kb), and all of the known 3' NCR (approximately 1.1 kb) are contained within a single exon; the remaining 0.5 kb of the 5' NCR is separated from this exon by a 3.4-kb intron. The sequenced genomic region thus accounts for essentially all of the longest known transcript (4.5 kb), although the precise ends of this transcript have not been defined. The 3' NCR contains several ATTTA and ATTTG motifs that are thought to destabilize mRNAs, and these are also present in rat, bovine, and human Kcna4/Kv1.4 cDNAs. It also contains three conserved polyadenylation signals, alternate utilization of which could generate mRNAs of differing stabilities. The 5' NCR of Kcna4/mKv1.4 may also serve to regulate channel expression. This region is approximately 85% identical to KCNA4/hKv1.4 and contains eight consensus translation start sites [(G, A)NNATG] that, based on the 5'-3' scanning model, would lead to a lowering of translational efficiency. The shortest Kcna4/Kv1.4 transcript (2.4 kb) can contain at most 400 bp of NCR and should lack the 3' ATTTAs and most of the 5' ATGs; this transcript might therefore exhibit increased stability and translational efficiency. The Kcna4/mKv1.4 channel exhibited biophysical and pharmacological properties indistinguishable from its rat and human homologues. Kcna4/mKv1.4 lies on mouse chromosome 2, near the Fshb locus, and in humans on the proximal half of chromosome 11p14 near human FSHB. Another K+ channel gene, Kcnc1/mKv3.1, lies approximately 1.8 cM from the Myod-1 gene on mouse chromosome 7, and in situ hybridization localizes KCNC1/hKv3.1 to the homologous region on human chromosome 11p14.3-p15.2. A third gene, KCNA1/hKv1.1, was mapped to human 12p13.
DNA methylation is an epigenetic change to the genome that impacts gene activities without modification to the DNA sequence. Alteration in the methylation pattern is a naturally occurring event throughout the human life cycle which may result in the development of diseases such as cancer. In this study, we analyzed methylation data from The Cancer Genome Atlas, under the Lower-Grade Glioma (LGG) and Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) projects, to identify methylation markers that exhibit unique changes in DNA methylation pattern along with tumor grade progression, to predict patient survival. We found ten glioma grade-associated Cytosine-phosphate-Guanine (CpG) sites that targeted four genes (SMOC1, KCNA4, SLC25A21, and UPP1) and the methylation pattern is strongly associated with glioma specific molecular alterations, primarily isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation and chromosome 1p/19q codeletion. The ten CpG sites collectively distinguished a cohort of diffuse glioma patients with remarkably poor survival probability. Our study highlights genes (KCNA4 and SLC25A21) that were not previously associated with gliomas to have contributed to the poorer patient outcome. These CpG sites can aid glioma tumor progression monitoring and serve as prognostic markers to identify patients diagnosed with less aggressive and malignant gliomas that exhibit similar survival probability to GBM patients.
Voltage-gated potassium channels (VGPCs) are among the most complex families of ion channels. VGPCs are distributed widely among species but their biological roles remain unclear. In this study, the evolution of VGPCs and the functions of ancestral families are determined according to phylogenetic studies. We downloaded 127 genomic data of alpha subunits and 38 genomic data of beta subunits including those from human, rat, mice, Drosophila and Puccinellia tenuiflora. The genetic neighborhood of subfamily genes was determined by neighbor-joining, minimum evolution, maximum parsimony, and Bayes methods. Data was presented as phylogenetic trees. We also detected positive selection sites by site model. New insights into the evolutionary history of the VGPC family are provided. Our assumptions are as follows: (a) KCNH subfamily is likely the most original subfamily in alpha subunit; (b) VGPCs are related to neural and cardiac systems at the earliest time; (c) KCNA4 and KCNF1 may be as ancestors; (d) abnormality in one gene may cause both cardiac and neural diseases; and (e) abnormalities in KCNH6 and KCNQ7 are more likely to cause cardiac diseases.
PDZ (Post-synaptic density, 95 kDa, Discs large, Zona Occludens-1) domains are protein interaction domains that bind to the carboxy-terminal amino acids of binding partners, heterodimerize with other PDZ domains, and also bind phosphoinositides. PDZ domain containing proteins are frequently involved in the assembly of multi-protein complexes and clustering of transmembrane proteins. LNX1 (Ligand of Numb, protein X 1) is a RING (Really Interesting New Gene) domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase that also includes four PDZ domains suggesting it functions as a scaffold for a multi-protein complex. Here we use a human protein array to identify direct LNX1 PDZ domain binding partners. Screening of 8,000 human proteins with isolated PDZ domains identified 53 potential LNX1 binding partners. We combined this set with LNX1 interacting proteins identified by other methods to assemble a list of 220 LNX1 interacting proteins. Bioinformatic analysis of this protein list was used to select interactions of interest for future studies. Using this approach we identify and confirm six novel LNX1 binding partners: KCNA4, PAK6, PLEKHG5, PKC-alpha1, TYK2 and PBK, and suggest that LNX1 functions as a signalling scaffold.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy of Library of Integrated Network-based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) perturbagen prediction software to identify small molecules that revert pathologic gene signature and alter disease phenotype in orbital adipose stem cells (OASCs) derived from patients with thyroid-associated orbitopathy (TAO). METHODS: Differentially expressed genes identified via RNA sequencing were inputted into LINCS L1000 Characteristic Direction Signature Search Engine (L1000CDS(2)) to predict candidate small molecules to reverse pathologic gene expression. TAO OASC cell lines were treated in vitro with six identified small molecules (Torin-2, PX12, withaferin A, isoliquiritigenin, mitoxantrone, and MLN8054), and expression of key adipogenic and differentially expressed genes was measured with quantitative polymerase chain reaction after 7 days of treatment. OASCs were differentiated into adipocytes, treated for 15 days, and stained with Oil Red O (OD 490 nm) to evaluate adipogenic changes. RESULTS: The expression of key differentially expressed genes (IRX1, HOXB2, S100B, and KCNA4) and adipogenic genes (peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma, FABP4) was significantly decreased in TAO OASCs after treatment (P < .05). In treated TAO adipocytes (n = 3), all six tested small molecules yielded significant decrease (P < .05) in Oil Red O staining. In treated non-TAO adipocytes (n = 3), only three of the drugs yielded a significant decrease in Oil Red O staining. CONCLUSIONS: Combining disease expression signatures with LINCS small molecule prediction software can identify promising preclinical drug candidates for TAO. TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: These findings may offer insight into future potential therapeutic options for TAO and demonstrate a streamlined model to predict drug candidates for other diseases.
OBJECTIVE: Prolonged postictal generalized electroencephalographic suppression (PGES) is a potential biomarker for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP), which may be associated with dysfunctional autonomic responses and serotonin signaling. To better understand molecular mechanisms, PGES duration was correlated to 5HT1A and 5HT2A receptor protein expression and RNAseq from resected hippocampus and temporal cortex of temporal lobe epilepsy patients with seizures recorded in preoperative evaluation. METHODS: Analyses included 36 cases (age = 14-64 years, age at epilepsy onset = 0-51 years, epilepsy duration = 2-53 years, PGES duration = 0-93 s), with 13 cases in all hippocampal analyses. 5HT1A and 5HT2A protein was evaluated by Western blot and histologically in hippocampus (n = 16) and temporal cortex (n = 9). We correlated PGES duration to our previous RNAseq dataset for serotonin receptor expression and signaling pathways, as well as weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) to identify correlated gene clusters. RESULTS: In hippocampus, 5HT2A protein by Western blot positively correlated with PGES duration (p = .0024, R(2)  = .52), but 5HT1A did not (p = .87, R(2)  = .0020). In temporal cortex, 5HT1A and 5HT2A had lower expression and did not correlate with PGES duration. Histologically, PGES duration did not correlate with 5HT1A or 5HT2A expression in hippocampal CA4, dentate gyrus, or temporal cortex. RNAseq identified two serotonin receptors with expression that correlated with PGES duration in an exploratory analysis: HTR3B negatively correlated (p = .043, R(2)  = .26) and HTR4 positively correlated (p = .049, R(2)  = .25). WGCNA identified four modules correlated with PGES duration, including positive correlation with synaptic transcripts (p = .040, Pearson correlation r = .52), particularly potassium channels (KCNA4, KCNC4, KCNH1, KCNIP4, KCNJ3, KCNJ6, KCNK1). No modules were associated with serotonin receptor signaling. SIGNIFICANCE: Higher hippocampal 5HT2A receptor protein and potassium channel transcripts may reflect underlying mechanisms contributing to or resulting from prolonged PGES. Future studies with larger cohorts should assess functional analyses and additional brain regions to elucidate mechanisms underlying PGES and SUDEP risk.
Kidney renal cell carcinoma (KIRC) is the most common type of renal cancer. Kidney malignancies have been ranked in the top 10 most frequently occurring cancers. KIRC is a prevalent malignancy with a poor prognosis. The disease has risen for the last 40 years, and robust biomarkers for KIRC are needed for precision/personalized medicine. In this bioinformatics study, we utilized genomic data of KIRC patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas for biomarker discovery. A total of 314 samples were used in this study. We identified many differentially expressed genes (DEGs) categorized as upregulated or downregulated. A protein-protein interaction network for the DEGs was then generated and analyzed using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes plugin of Cytoscape. A set of 10 hub genes was selected based on the Maximum Clique Centrality score defined by the CytoHubba plugin. The elucidated set of genes, that is, CALCA, CRH, TH, CHAT, SLC18A3, FSHB, MYH6, CAV3, KCNA4, and GBX2, were then categorized as potential candidates to be explored as KIRC biomarkers. The survival analysis plots for each gene suggested that alterations in CHAT, CAV3, CRH, MYH6, SLC18A3, and FSHB resulted in decreased survival of KIRC patients. In all, the results suggest that genomic alterations in selected genes can be explored to inform biomarker discovery and for therapeutic predictions in KIRC.
In whole cell patch clamp recordings, we found that normal human adrenal zona fasciculata (AZF) cells express voltage-gated, rapidly inactivating Ca(2+) and K(+) currents and a noninactivating, leak-type K(+) current. Characterization of these currents with respect to voltage-dependent gating and kinetic properties, pharmacology, and modulation by the peptide hormones adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and AngII, in conjunction with Northern blot analysis, identified these channels as Cav3.2 (encoded by CACNA1H), Kv1.4 (KCNA4), and TREK-1 (KCNK2). In particular, the low voltage-activated, rapidly inactivating and slowly deactivating Ca(2+) current (Cav3.2) was potently blocked by Ni(2+) with an IC50 of 3 microM. The voltage-gated, rapidly inactivating K(+) current (Kv1.4) was robustly expressed in nearly every cell, with a current density of 95.0 +/- 7.2 pA/pF (n = 64). The noninactivating, outwardly rectifying K(+) current (TREK-1) grew to a stable maximum over a period of minutes when recording at a holding potential of -80 mV. This noninactivating K(+) current was markedly activated by cinnamyl 1-3,4-dihydroxy-alpha-cyanocinnamate (CDC) and arachidonic acid (AA) and inhibited almost completely by forskolin, properties which are specific to TREK-1 among the K2P family of K(+) channels. The activation of TREK-1 by AA and inhibition by forskolin were closely linked to membrane hyperpolarization and depolarization, respectively. ACTH and AngII selectively inhibited the noninactivating K(+) current in human AZF cells at concentrations that stimulated cortisol secretion. Accordingly, mibefradil and CDC at concentrations that, respectively, blocked Cav3.2 and activated TREK-1, each inhibited both ACTH- and AngII-stimulated cortisol secretion. These results characterize the major Ca(2+) and K(+) channels expressed by normal human AZF cells and identify TREK-1 as the primary leak-type channel involved in establishing the membrane potential. These findings also suggest a model for cortisol secretion in human AZF cells wherein ACTH and AngII receptor activation is coupled to membrane depolarization and the activation of Cav3.2 channels through inhibition of hTREK-1.
OBJECTIVES: To demonstrate the diagnostic significance of methylation, an important molecular event in gastric carcinogenesis. DESIGN AND METHODS: We used methylation microarray to determine candidate genes, and performed MSP to evaluate the methylation status of them in tissues and sera. The effect of demethylation on mRNA expression was investigated by rt-PCR after gastric cancer cell lines were treated with 5-Aza-dC for 96 h. RESULTS: In tissues and sera of gastric cancer patients, a higher prevalence of methylation was observed for BX141696, WT1, CYP26B1, and KCNA4, compared to healthy people (p<0.05, respectively). Detection of the methylation prevalence of KCNA4 and CYP26B1 together in serum demonstrated the good sensitivity (91.3%) and specificity (92.1%). After 5-Aza-dC treatment in gastric cancer cell lines, the mRNA expression level of these genes was restored. CONCLUSIONS: This study underscores the potential application of measurement of serum DNA methylation of these genes, as promising tool for gastric cancer detection.
New evidence has suggested that non-coding microRNAs play a significant role in mediating and modulating chemotherapy resistance, particularly among oral cancers. One recent study found that the upregulation of miR-145 and the downregulation of miR-155 strongly correlated with a limited chemotherapy resistance to Cisplatin, 5-Fluorouracil, and Paclitaxel, although the mechanism(s) responsible for these observations remain unidentified. Using commercially available cell lines of oral squamous cell carcinoma, RNA was isolated, converted into cDNA, and subsequently screened for the expression of downstream targets of miR-145 and miR-155 using qPCR. These results demonstrated the upregulation of miR-21, miR-125, miR-133, miR-365, miR-720, and miR-1246, as well as the downregulation of miR-140, miR-152, miR-218, miR-221, and miR-224. This screening also confirmed the differential expression and regulation of mir-145 and miR-155 among the cell lines with limited chemotherapy resistance (SCC15). In addition, several downstream targets of these specific microRNAs were upregulated by all oral cancer cell lines, such as MBTD1 and FSCN1, or downregulated in all cell lines, such as CLCN3, FLI-1, MRTFB, DAB, SRGAP1, and ABHD17C. However, three miR-145 downstream targets were identified in the least chemotherapy-resistant cells, exhibiting the differential upregulation of KCNA4 and SRGAP2, as well as the downregulation of FAM135A, with this expression pattern not detected in any of the other oral cancer cell lines. These data strongly support that the differential regulation of these three downstream targets may be related to the chemosensitivity of this oral cancer cell line. The potential involvement of these targets must be further investigated to determine how and whether mechanisms of these cellular pathways may be involved in the observed lack of chemotherapy resistance. These data may be important to design targets or treatments to reduce chemotherapy resistance and improve patient treatment outcomes.
