Voltage-gated potassium channel subunit beta-2; Cytoplasmic potassium channel subunit that modulates the characteristics of the channel-forming alpha-subunits. Contributes to the regulation of nerve signaling, and prevents neuronal hyperexcitability (By similarity). Promotes expression of the pore-forming alpha subunits at the cell membrane, and thereby increases channel activity (By similarity). Promotes potassium channel closure via a mechanism that does not involve physical obstruction of the channel pore. Promotes KCNA4 channel closure. Modulates the functional properties of KCNA5  [...] 
The human aldo-keto reductase (AKRs) superfamily is involved in the development of various tumors. However, the different expression patterns of AKRs and their prognostic value in gastric cancer (GC) have not been clarified. In this study, we analyzed the gene expression and gene methylation level of AKRs in GC patients and the survival data and immune infiltration based on AKRs expression, using data from different databases. We found that the expression levels of AKR1B10, AKR1C1, AKR1C2, and AKR7A3 in GC tissues were lower and the expression level of AKR6A5 was higher in GC tissues than in normal tissue. These differentially expressed genes (AKR1B10, AKR1C1, AKR1C2, AKR7A3, and AKR6A5) were significantly correlated with the infiltration level. The expression of SPI1 and AKR6A5 in GC was positively correlated. Survival analysis showed that GC levels of AKR6A5 reduced or increased mRNA levels of AKR7A3, and AKR1B10 was expected to have higher overall survival (OS), first progression (FP) survival, and postprogression survival (PPS) rates and a better prognosis. Moreover, the expression of AKR1B1 was found to be correlated with the staging of GC. The methylation of AKR6A5 (KCNAB2) at cg05307871 and cg01907457 was significantly associated with the classification of GC. Meta-analysis and ROC curve analysis show that the expression level of AKR1B1 and the methylation of cg16156182 (KCNAB1), cg11194299 (KCNAB2), cg16132520 (AKR1B1), and cg13801416 (AKR1B1) had a high hazard ratio and a good prognostic value. These data suggest that the expression and methylation of AKR1B1 and AKR6A5 are significantly related to the prognosis.
The malignancy with the greatest global mortality rate is lung cancer. Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is the most common subtype. The evidence demonstrated that voltage-gated potassium channel subunit beta-2 (KCNAB2) significantly participated in the initiation of colorectal cancer and its progression. However, the biological function of KCNAB2 in LUAD and its effect on the tumor immune microenvironment are still unknown. In this study, we found that the expression of KCNAB2 in tissues of patients with LUAD was markedly downregulated, and its downregulation was linked to accelerated cancer growth and poor clinical outcomes. In addition, low KCNAB2 expression was correlated with a deficiency in immune infiltration. The mechanism behind this issue might be that KCNAB2 influenced the immunological process such that the directed migration of immune cells was affected. Furthermore, overexpression of KCNAB2 in cell lines promoted the expression of CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL18, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL12, which are necessary for the recruitment of immune cells. In conclusion, KCNAB2 may play a key function in immune infiltration and can be exploited as a predictive biomarker for evaluating prognosis and a possible immunotherapeutic target.
Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a poor prognostic subtype of pediatric leukemia. However, the detailed characteristics of many genetic abnormalities are yet to be established in this disease. Although TP53 and RB1 are established as representative tumor suppressor genes in various cancers, alterations of these two genes, especially RB1, have not been characterized in pediatric AML. We performed next-generation sequencing in 328 pediatric AML patients from the Japanese AML-05 trial to ascertain TP53 and RB1 alterations, and their prognostic implications. We identified seven patients with TP53 alterations (2.1%) and six patients with RB1 alterations (1.8%). These alterations were found in only patients without RUNX1::RUNX1T1, CBFB::MYH11, or KMT2A rearrangements. TP53 and RB1 were frequently co-deleted with their neighboring genes PRPF8 and ELF1, respectively. Patients with TP53 alterations had significantly lower 5-year overall survival (OS; 14.3% vs. 71.4%, p < 0.001) and lower 5-year event-free survival (EFS; 0% vs. 56.3%, p < 0.001); similarly, patients with RB1 had significantly lower 5-year OS (0% vs. 71.8%, p < 0.001) and lower 5-year EFS (0% vs. 56.0%, p < 0.001) when compared to patients without these alterations. In gene expression analyses, oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, and protein secretion were upregulated in patients with TP53 and/or RB1 alterations. Additionally, Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that high expressions of SLC2A5, KCNAB2, and CD300LF were related to poor OS of non-core-binding factor AML patients (p < 0.001, p = 0.001, and p = 0.021, respectively). This study will contribute to the development of risk-stratified therapy and precision medicine in pediatric AML.
OBJECTIVE: Prior profiling of the human pituitary adenoma (PA) DNA methylome showed the potassium channel subunit-encoding gene KCNAB2 to be highly differentially methylated between nonfunctional PAs (NFPAs) and growth hormone (GH)-secreting PAs, with greater KCNAB2 methylation detected in secretory PAs. KCNAB2 encodes an aldo-keto reductase that, among other things, negatively regulates members of the voltage-gated potassium channel (Kv) family. In this study, the authors aimed to determine whether modulation of Kcnab2 expression would alter GH secretion in the GH3 mammosomatotroph rat cell line. In addition, they examined whether dosing GH3 cells with the antiarrhythmic drug quinidine, a known inhibitor of Kv and voltage-gated sodium channels, would affect hormonal secretion. METHODS: Previously generated RNA-seq data were reanalyzed to compare KCNAB2 expression levels in human NFPAs and GH-secreting PAs. Kcnab2 was overexpressed in GH3 cells using plasmid transfection and knocked down using shRNA, with confirmation by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). GH concentrations in cell culture supernatants collected 24 hours after cell seeding were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Separately, quinidine was administered to GH3 cells at graduated doses. GH and prolactin concentrations in supernatants collected 48 hours after quinidine treatment were measured by fluorometric immunoassay. RESULTS: Modulation of expression at the transcript level in GH3 cells resulted in proportionate changes in the expression of GH mRNA and secretion of GH peptide, as confirmed by qPCR and ELISA. Specifically, partial knockdown of Kcnab2 was associated with fewer GH RNA transcripts and less GH secretion compared with controls, while augmentation of Kcnab2 expression was associated with more GH transcripts and secretion than the controls. Administration of quinidine (>/= 50 microM) reduced both GH and prolactin secretion in a dose-dependent fashion (p </= 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: GH secretion in a somatotroph cell line is partially dependent on KCNAB2 gene expression and may be mitigated in vitro by quinidine. These results collectively suggest a potential new target and pharmacological candidate to be considered in the development of clinical therapeutics for acromegaly.
Current international prognostic index is widely questioned on the risk stratification of peripheral T-cell lymphoma and does not accurately predict the outcome for patients. We postulated that multiple mRNAs could combine into a model to improve risk stratification and helping clinicians make treatment decisions. In this study, the gene expression profiles were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was used to screening genes in selected module which most closely related to PTCLs, and then built a mRNA signature using a LASSO Cox regression model and validated the prognostic accuracy of it. Finally, a nomogram was constructed and the performance was assessed. A total of 799 WGCNA-selected mRNAs in black module were identified, and a mRNA signature which based on DOCK2, GSTM1, H2AFY, KCNAB2, LAPTM5 and SYK for PTCLs was developed. Significantly statistical difference can be seen in overall survival of PTCLs between low-risk group and high-risk group (training set:hazard ratio [HR] 4.3, 95% CI 2.4-7.4, P < .0001; internal testing set:hazard ratio [HR] 2.4, 95% CI 1.2-4.8, P < .01; external testing set:hazard ratio [HR] 2.3, 95% CI 1.10-4.7, P = .02). Furthermore, multivariate regression demonstrated that the signature was an independently prognostic factor. Moreover, the nomogram which combined the mRNA signature and multiple clinical factors suggesting that predicted survival probability agreed well with the actual survival probability. The signature is a reliable prognostic tool for patients with PTCLs, and it has the potential for clinicians to implement personalized therapeutic regimen for patients with PTCLs.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) "program" an elevated risk of metabolic syndrome in the offspring. Epigenetic alterations are a suspected mechanism. GDM has been associated with placental DNA methylation changes in some epigenome-wide association studies. It remains unclear which genes or pathways are affected, and whether any placental differential gene methylations are correlated to fetal growth or circulating metabolic health biomarkers. In an epigenome-wide association study using the Infinium MethylationEPIC Beadchip, we sought to identify genome-wide placental differentially methylated genes and enriched pathways in GDM, and to assess the correlations with fetal growth and metabolic health biomarkers in cord blood. The study samples were 30 pairs of term placentas in GDM vs. euglycemic pregnancies (controls) matched by infant sex and gestational age at delivery in the Shanghai Birth Cohort. Cord blood metabolic health biomarkers included insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin, IGF-I, IGF-II, leptin and adiponectin. Adjusting for maternal age, pre-pregnancy BMI, parity, mode of delivery and placental cell type heterogeneity, 256 differentially methylated positions (DMPs,130 hypermethylated and 126 hypomethylated) were detected between GDM and control groups accounting for multiple tests with false discovery rate <0.05 and beta-value difference >0.05. WSCD2 was identified as a differentially methylated gene in both site- and region-level analyses. We validated 7 hypermethylated (CYP1A2, GFRA1, HDAC4, LIMS2, NAV3, PAX6, UPK1B) and 10 hypomethylated (DPP10, CPLX1, CSMD2, GPR133, NRXN1, PCSK9, PENK, PRDM16, PTPRN2, TNXB) genes reported in previous epigenome-wide association studies. We did not find any enriched pathway accounting for multiple tests. DMPs in 11 genes (CYP2D7P1, PCDHB15, ERG, SIRPB1, DKK2, RAPGEF5, CACNA2D4, PCSK9, TSNARE1, CADM2, KCNAB2) were correlated with birth weight (z score) accounting for multiple tests. There were no significant correlations between placental gene methylations and cord blood biomarkers. In conclusions, GDM was associated with DNA methylation changes in a number of placental genes, but these placental gene methylations were uncorrelated to the observed metabolic health biomarkers (fetal growth factors, leptin and adiponectin) in cord blood. We validated 17 differentially methylated placental genes in GDM, and identified 11 differentially methylated genes relevant to fetal growth.
BACKGROUND: It is known that the immune system is dysregulated in schizophrenia, having a state similar to chronic neuroinflammation. The origin of this process is unknown, but it is known that T and B lymphocytes, which are components of the adaptive immune system, play an important role in the pathogenic mechanisms of schizophrenia. METHODS: We analysed the membrane of PBMCs from patients diagnosed with schizophrenia through proteomic analysis (n = 5 schizophrenia and n = 5 control). We found the presence of the Kv1.3 voltage-gated potassium channel and its auxiliary subunit beta1 (KCNAB1) and beta2 (KCNAB2). From a sample of 90 participants, we carried out a study on lymphocytes with whole-cell patch-clamp experiments (n = 7 schizophrenia and n = 5 control), western blot (n = 40 schizophrenia and n = 40 control) and confocal microscopy to evaluate the presence and function of different channels. Kv in both cells. RESULTS: We demonstrated the overexpression of Kv1.1, Kv1.2, Kv1.3, Kv1.6, Kv4.2, Kv4.3 and Kv7.2 channels in PBMCs from patients with schizophrenia. This study represents a groundbreaking exploration, as it involves an electrophysiological analysis performed on T and B lymphocytes from patients diagnosed of schizophrenia compared to healthy participants. We observed that B lymphocytes exhibited an increase in output current along with greater peak current amplitude and voltage conductance curves among patients with schizophrenia compared with healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed the importance of the B lymphocyte in schizophrenia. We know that the immune system is altered in schizophrenia, but the physiological mechanisms of this system are not very well known. We suggest that the B lymphocyte may be relevant in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia and that it should be investigated in more depth, opening a new field of knowledge and possibilities for new treatments combining antipsychotics and immunomodulators. The limitation is that all participants received antipsychotic medication, which may have influenced the differences observed between patients and controls. This implies that more studies need to be done where the groups can be separated according to the antipsychotic drug.
OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To generate novel insights and hypotheses in keloid development from potential master regulators. STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort. METHODS: Six fresh keloid and six normal skin samples from 12 anonymous donors were used in a prospective cohort study. Genome-wide profiling was done previously on the cohort using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, CA). The 190 statistically significant CpG islands between keloid and normal tissue mapped to 152 genes (P < .05). The top 10 statistically significant genes (VAMP5, ACTR3C, GALNT3, KCNAB2, LRRC61, SCML4, SYNGR1, TNS1, PLEKHG5, PPP1R13-alpha, false discovery rate <.015) were uploaded into the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software's Causal Network Analysis (QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA). To reflect expected gene expression direction in the context of methylation changes, the inverse of the methylation ratio from keloid versus normal tissue was used for the analysis. Causal Network Analysis identified disease-specific master regulator molecules based on downstream differentially expressed keloid-specific genes and expected directionality of expression (hypermethylated vs. hypomethylated). RESULTS: Causal Network Analysis software identified four hierarchical networks that included four master regulators (pyroxamide, tributyrin, PRKG2, and PENK) and 19 intermediate regulators. CONCLUSIONS: Causal Network Analysis of differentiated methylated gene data of keloid versus normal skin demonstrated four causal networks with four master regulators. These hierarchical networks suggest potential driver roles for their downstream keloid gene targets in the pathogenesis of the keloid phenotype, likely triggered due to perturbation/injury to normal tissue. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: NA Laryngoscope, 126:E319-E324, 2016.
BACKGROUND: The Brugada syndrome is an inherited cardiac arrhythmia associated with high risk of sudden death. Although 20% of patients with Brugada syndrome carry mutations in SCN5A, the molecular mechanisms underlying this condition are still largely unknown. METHODS AND RESULTS: We combined whole-exome sequencing and linkage analysis to identify the genetic variant likely causing Brugada syndrome in a pedigree for which SCN5A mutations had been excluded. This approach identified 6 genetic variants cosegregating with the Brugada electrocardiographic pattern within the pedigree. In silico gene prioritization pointed to 1 variant residing in KCNAB2, which encodes the voltage-gated K(+) channel beta2-subunit (Kvbeta2-R12Q). Kvbeta2 is widely expressed in the human heart and has been shown to interact with the fast transient outward K(+) channel subunit Kv4.3, increasing its current density. By targeted sequencing of the KCNAB2 gene in 167 unrelated patients with Brugada syndrome, we found 2 additional rare missense variants (L13F and V114I). We then investigated the physiological effects of the 3 KCNAB2 variants by using cellular electrophysiology and biochemistry. Patch-clamp experiments performed in COS-7 cells expressing both Kv4.3 and Kvbeta2 revealed a significant increase in the current density in presence of the R12Q and L13F Kvbeta2 mutants. Although biotinylation assays showed no differences in the expression of Kv4.3, the total and submembrane expression of Kvbeta2-R12Q were significantly increased in comparison with wild-type Kvbeta2. CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results indicate that Kvbeta2 dysfunction can contribute to the Brugada electrocardiographic pattern.
OBJECTIVE: Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a hereditary form of autism spectrum disorder. It is caused by a trinucleotide repeat expansion in the Fmr1 gene, leading to a loss of Fragile X Protein (FMRP) expression. The loss of FMRP causes auditory hypersensitivity: FXS patients display hyperacusis and the Fmr1- knock-out (KO) mouse model for FXS exhibits auditory seizures. FMRP is strongly expressed in the cochlear nucleus and other auditory brainstem nuclei. We hypothesize that the Fmr1-KO mouse has altered gene expression in the cochlear nucleus that may contribute to auditory hypersensitivity. METHODS: RNA was isolated from cochlear nuclei of Fmr1-KO and WT mice. Using next-generation sequencing (RNA-seq), the transcriptomes of Fmr1-KO mice and WT mice (n = 3 each) were compared and analyzed using gene ontology programs. RESULTS: We identified 270 unique, differentially expressed genes between Fmr1-KO and WT cochlear nuclei. Upregulated genes (67%) are enriched in those encoding secreted molecules. Downregulated genes (33%) are enriched in neuronal function, including synaptic pathways, some of which are ideal candidate genes that may contribute to hyperacusis. CONCLUSION: The loss of FMRP can affect the expression of genes in the cochlear nucleus that are important for neuronal signaling. One of these, Kcnab2, which encodes a subunit of the Shaker voltage-gated potassium channel, is expressed at an abnormally low level in the Fmr1-KO cochlear nucleus. Kcnab2 and other differentially expressed genes may represent pathways for the development of hyperacusis. Future studies will be aimed at investigating the effects of these altered genes on hyperacusis. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A Laryngoscope, 134:1363-1371, 2024.
The human neural retina is a light sensitive tissue with remarkable spatial and cellular organization. Compared with the periphery, the central retina contains more densely packed cone photoreceptor cells with unique morphologies and synaptic wiring. Some regions of the central retina exhibit selective degeneration or preservation in response to retinal disease and the basis for this variation is unknown. In this study, we used both bulk and single-cell RNA sequencing to compare gene expression within concentric regions of the central retina. We identified unique gene expression patterns of foveal cone photoreceptor cells, including many foveal-enriched transcription factors. In addition, we found that the genes RORB1, PPFIA1 and KCNAB2 are differentially spliced in the foveal, parafoveal and macular regions. These results provide a highly detailed spatial characterization of the retinal transcriptome and highlight unique molecular features of different retinal regions.
The autoantibody in patients' serum can act as a biomarker for diagnosing cancer, and the differences in autoantibodies are significantly correlated with the changes in their target proteins. In this study, 16 renal cancer (RC) patients were assigned to the disease group, and 16 healthy people were assigned to the healthy control (HC) group. The human proteome microarray consisting of>19,500 proteins was used to examine the differences in IgG and IgM autoantibodies in sera between RC and HC. The comparative analysis of the microarray results shows that 101 types of IgG and 25 types of IgM autoantibodies are significantly higher in RC than in HC. Highly responsive autoantibodies can be candidate biomarkers (e.g., anti-KCNAB2 IgG and anti-RCN1 IgM). Extensive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was performed to screen sera in 72 RC patients and 66 healthy volunteers to verify the effectiveness of the new autoantibodies. The AUCs of anti-KCNAB2 IgG and anti-GAPDH IgG were 0.833 and 0.753, respectively. KCNAB2 achieves high protein expression, and its high mRNA level is confirmed to be an unfavorable prognostic marker in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) tissues. This study suggests that the high-throughput human proteome microarray can effectively screen autoantibodies in serum as candidate biomarkers, and their corresponding target proteins can lay a basis for the in-depth investigation into renal cancer.
Prion diseases are fatal and transmissible neurodegenerative disorders caused by the misfolding and aggregation of prion protein. Although recent studies have implicated epigenetic variation in common neurodegenerative disorders, no study has yet explored their role in human prion diseases. Here we profiled genome-wide blood DNA methylation in the most common human prion disease, sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD). Our case-control study (n = 219), when accounting for differences in cell type composition between individuals, identified 38 probes at genome-wide significance (p < 1.24 x 10(-7)). Nine of these sites were taken forward in a replication study, performed in an independent case-control (n = 186) cohort using pyrosequencing. Sites in or close to FKBP5, AIM2 (2 probes), UHRF1, KCNAB2 successfully replicated. The blood-based DNA methylation signal was tissue- and disease-specific, in that the replicated probe signals were unchanged in case-control studies using sCJD frontal-cortex (n = 84), blood samples from patients with Alzheimer's disease, and from inherited and acquired prion diseases. Machine learning algorithms using blood DNA methylation array profiles accurately distinguished sCJD patients and controls. Finally, we identified sites whose methylation levels associated with prolonged survival in sCJD patients. Altogether, this study has identified a peripheral DNA methylation signature of sCJD with a variety of potential biomarker applications.
Despite their abundance, the molecular functions of long non-coding RNAs in mammalian nervous systems remain poorly understood. Here we show that the long non-coding RNA, NEAT1, directly modulates neuronal excitability and is associated with pathological seizure states. Specifically, NEAT1 is dynamically regulated by neuronal activity in vitro and in vivo, binds epilepsy-associated potassium channel-interacting proteins including KCNAB2 and KCNIP1, and induces a neuronal hyper-potentiation phenotype in iPSC-derived human cortical neurons following antisense oligonucleotide knockdown. Next generation sequencing reveals a strong association of NEAT1 with increased ion channel gene expression upon activation of iPSC-derived neurons following NEAT1 knockdown. Furthermore, we show that while NEAT1 is acutely down-regulated in response to neuronal activity, repeated stimulation results in NEAT1 becoming chronically unresponsive in independent in vivo rat model systems relevant to temporal lobe epilepsy. We extended previous studies showing increased NEAT1 expression in resected cortical tissue from high spiking regions of patients suffering from intractable seizures. Our results indicate a role for NEAT1 in modulating human neuronal activity and suggest a novel mechanistic link between an activity-dependent long non-coding RNA and epilepsy.
The 1p36 deletion syndrome is a newly delineated multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome characterized by mental retardation, growth delay, epilepsy, congenital heart defects, characteristic facial appearance, and precocious puberty. We analyzed 11 patients by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using commercially available bacterial artificial chromosome and P1-derived artificial chromosome genomic clones to define the chromosomal deletion responsible for the 1p36 deletion syndrome. Cytogenetic investigation revealed two cases with a terminal deletion of 1p36. Nine patients had an apparently normal karyotype with standard G-bands by trypsin using Giemsa (GTG), but FISH screening with the highly polymorphic genetic marker D1Z2, which is mapped to 1p36.3 and contains an unusual reiterated 40-bp variable number tandem repeat, revealed a submicroscopic deletion. All patients had severe to profound mental retardation. Based on the University of California Santa Cruz Genome Browser, we constructed a deletion map and analyzed the relationship between neurological findings and chromosomal deletions for the 11 cases. Six cases had intractable epilepsy and three had no seizures. The common deletion interval was about 1 million base pairs (Mbp) located between RP11-82D16 and RP4-785P20 (Rho guanine exchange factor (GEF) 16). The severity of clinical symptoms correlates with the size of the deletion. This is demonstrated by the 3 patients with at least 8Mbp deletions that display profound mental retardation and congenital heart defects. Although haploinsufficiency of the potassium channel beta-subunit (KCNAB2) is thought to be responsible for intractable seizures in the 1p36 deletion syndrome, this was not the case for 3 of the 11 patients in this study. Further investigation of the 1p36 region is necessary to allow identification of genes responsible for the 1p36 deletion syndrome.
Ablation of the distal end of the short arm of chromosome 1 [1p36 deletion syndrome (1p36DS)] is one of the most commonly occurring terminal deletion syndromes in humans, occurring in  approximately 1 in 5000 newborns. Subjects with 1p36DS manifest a wide range of clinical features including growth delay, congenital heart defects, and craniofacial dysmorphism. In addition, individuals with 1p36DS often exhibit some form of neurological abnormality and are typically cognitively impaired. Although there is significant variability with regard to the extent of the deletion, several genes have been mapped to region 1p36 that are known to regulate neuronal function. One such gene--KCNAB2--encodes the potassium channel auxiliary subunit Kvbeta2, which has been previously shown to modulate voltage-gated potassium currents in heterologous expression systems. Here, we present experiments characterizing mice in which the ortholog of KCNAB2 was deleted. We find that deletion of Kcnab2 in mice leads to deficits in associative learning and memory. In addition, using whole-cell current-clamp, we find that deletion of Kcnab2 leads to a reduction in the slow afterhyperpolarization following a burst of action potentials and a concomitant increase in neuronal excitability in projection neurons in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala. Our results suggest that loss of Kvbeta2 likely contributes to the cognitive and neurological impairments observed in 1p36DS patients.
Substantial genomic and functional evidence from primary tumors and cell lines indicates that a consistent region of distal chromosome 1p is deleted in a sizable proportion of human neuroblastomas, suggesting that this region contains one or more tumor suppressor genes. To determine systematically and precisely the location and extent of 1p deletion in neuroblastomas, we performed allelic loss studies of 737 primary neuroblastomas and genotype analysis of 46 neuroblastoma cell lines. Together, the results defined a single region within 1p36.3 that was consistently deleted in 25% of tumors and 87% of cell lines. Two neuroblastoma patients had constitutional deletions of distal 1p36 that overlapped the tumor-defined region. The tumor- and constitutionally-derived deletions together defined a smallest region of consistent deletion (SRD) between D1S2795 and D1S253. The 1p36.3 SRD was deleted in all but one of the 184 tumors with 1p deletion. Physical mapping and DNA sequencing determined that the SRD minimally spans an estimated 729 kb. Genomic content and sequence analysis of the SRD identified 15 characterized, nine uncharacterized, and six predicted genes in the region. The RNA expression profiles of 21 of the genes were investigated in a variety of normal tissues. The SHREW1 and KCNAB2 genes both had tissue-restricted expression patterns, including expression in the nervous system. In addition, a novel gene (CHD5) with strong homology to proteins involved in chromatin remodeling was expressed mainly in neural tissues. Together, these results suggest that one or more genes involved in neuroblastoma tumorigenesis or tumor progression are likely contained within this region.
AIMS: Genetic factors may be important in the development of atrial fibrillation (AF) in the young. KCNA5 encodes the potassium channel alpha-subunit KV1.5, which underlies the voltage-gated atrial-specific potassium current IKur. KCNAB2 encodes KVbeta2, a beta-subunit of KV1.5, which increases IKur. Three studies have identified loss-of-function mutations in KCNA5 in patients with idiopathic AF. We hypothesized that early-onset lone AF is associated with high prevalence of genetic variants in KCNA5 and KCNAB2. METHODS AND RESULTS: The coding sequences of KCNA5 and KCNAB2 were sequenced in 307 patients with mean age of 33 years at the onset of lone AF, and in 216 healthy controls. We identified six novel non-synonymous mutations [E48G, Y155C, A305T (twice), D322H, D469E, and P488S] in KCNA5 in seven patients. None were present in controls. We identified a significantly higher frequency of rare deleterious variants in KCNA5 in the patients than in controls. The mutations were analysed with confocal microscopy and whole-cell patch-clamp techniques. The mutant proteins Y155C, D469E, and P488S displayed decreased surface expression and loss-of-function in patch-clamp studies, whereas E48G, A305T, and D322H showed preserved surface expression and gain-of-function for KV1.5. CONCLUSION: This study is the first to present gain-of-function mutations in KCNA5 in patients with early-onset lone AF. We identified three gain-of-function and three loss-of-function mutations. We report a high prevalence of variants in KCNA5 in these patients. This supports the hypothesis that both increased and decreased potassium currents enhance AF susceptibility.
Our comparative studies seek to understand the structure and function of ion channels in cartilaginous fish that can detect very low voltage gradients in seawater. The principal channels of the electroreceptor include a calcium activated K channel whose alpha subunit is Kcnma1, and a voltage-dependent calcium channel, Cacna1d. It has also been suggested based on physiological and pharmacological evidence that a voltage-gated K channel is present in the basal membranes of the receptor cells which modulates synaptic transmitter release. Large conductance calcium-activated K channels (BK) are comprised of four alpha subunits, encoded by Kcnma1 and modulatory beta subunits of the Kcnmb class. We recently cloned and published the skate Kcnma1 gene and most of Kcnmb4 using purified mRNA of homogenized electroreceptors. Bellono et al. have recently performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on purified mRNA from skate electroreceptors and found several ion channels including Kcnma1. We searched the Bellono et al. RNA-seq repository for additional channels and subunits. Our most significant findings are the presence of two Shaker type voltage dependent K channel sequences which are grouped together as isoforms in the data repository. The larger of these is a skate ortholog of the voltage dependent fast potassium channel Kv1.1, which is expressed at appreciable levels. The second ortholog is similar to Kv1.5 but has fewer N-terminal amino acids than other species. The sequence for Kv1.5 in the skate is very strongly aligned with the recently reported sequence for potassium channels in the electroreceptors of the cat shark, S. retifer, which also modulate synaptic transmission. The latter channel was designated as Kv1.3 in the initial report, but we suggest that these channels are actually orthologs of each other, and that Kv1.5 is the prevailing designation. We also found a beta subunit sequence (Kcnab2) which may co-assemble with one or both of the voltage gated channels. The new channels and subunits were verified by RT-PCR and the Kv1.1 sequence was confirmed by cloning. We also searched the RNA-seq repository for accessory subunits of Kcnma1, and found a computer-generated assembly that contained a complete sequence of its beta subunit, Kcnmb2. Skate Kcnmb2 has a total of 279 amino acids, with 51 novel amino acids at the N-terminus which may play a specific physiological role. This sequence was confirmed by PCR and cloning. However, skate Kcnmb2 is expressed at low levels in the electroreceptor compared to Kcnma1 and skate Kcnmb1 is absent. The evolutionary origin of the newly described K channels and their subunits was studied by alignments with mammalian sequences, including human, and also those in related fish: the whale shark (R. typus), the ghost shark (C.milii), and (S. retifer). There are also orthologous K channels of the lamprey, which has electroreceptors. Tree building and bootstrap programs were used to confirm phylogenetic inferences. Further research should focus on the subcellular locations of these channels, their gating behavior, and the effects of accessory subunits on gating.
