Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C; Pore-forming, alpha-1C subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Mediates influx of calcium ions into the cytoplasm, and thereby triggers calcium release from the sarcoplasm (By similarity). Plays an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Required for normal heart development and normal regulation of heart rhythm. Required for normal contraction of smooth muscle cells in blood vessels and in the intestine. Essential for normal blood pressure regulation via  [...] 
The purpose of this review is to provide a comprehensive update and highlight the distinct electroclinical features and discuss recent advances in the etiology, pathophysiology, and management strategies of epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia. Recent studies indicate that variations of certain genes including CHD2 (chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 2), KCNB1, KIAA2022, and NAA10 may occur in these patients. It has been postulated that the occipital cortex may play a role in the pathophysiology. Recent studies of functional imaging and connectivity of neuronal electrical activity have provided additional evidence to support this hypothesis. The frontal cortex has additionally been implicated, and it has been suggested that the epileptic cortex may extend beyond the occipital cortex to involve the posterior temporal cortex. We update the management strategies and describe tools that may predict seizure persistence. Epilepsy with eyelid myoclonias, or Jeavons syndrome, is an idiopathic generalized epilepsy characterized by the triad of eyelid myoclonia with or without absence seizures, eyelid closure-elicited electroencephalographic (EEG) paroxysms (epileptiform discharges and/or seizures), and photosensitivity. This condition may account for up to 13% of generalized epilepsies. However, it is frequently under-reported and under-recognized. Many of the patients develop medically refractory epilepsy, and seizures tend to persist throughout life.
With the development and application of next-generation sequencing technology, the aetiological diagnosis of genetic epilepsy is rapidly becoming easier and less expensive. Additionally, there is a growing body of research into precision therapy based on genetic diagnosis. The numerous genes in the potassium ion channel family constitute the largest family of ion channels: this family is divided into different subtypes. Potassium ion channels play a crucial role in the electrical activity of neurons and are directly involved in the mechanism of epileptic seizures. In China, scientific research on genetic diagnosis and studies of precision therapy for genetic epilepsy are progressing rapidly. Many cases of epilepsy caused by mutation of potassium channel genes have been identified, and several potassium channel gene targets and drug candidates have been discovered. The purpose of this review is to briefly summarize the progress of research on the precise diagnosis and treatment of potassium ion channel-related genetic epilepsy, especially the research conducted in China. Here in, we review several large cohort studies on the genetic diagnosis of epilepsy in China in recent years, summarized the proportion of potassium channel genes. We focus on the progress of precison therapy on some hot epilepsy related potassium channel genes: KCNA1, KCNA2, KCNB1, KCNC1, KCND2, KCNQ2, KCNQ3, KCNMA1, and KCNT1.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEE) refer to a heterogeneous group of devastating neurodevelopmental disorders. Variants in KCNB1 have been recently reported in patients with early-onset DEE. KCNB1 encodes the alpha subunit of the delayed rectifier voltage-dependent potassium channel K(v) 2.1. We review the 37 previously reported patients carrying 29 distinct KCNB1 variants and significantly expand the mutational spectrum describing 18 novel variants from 27 unreported patients. Most variants occur de novo and mainly consist of missense variants located on the voltage sensor and the pore domain of K(v) 2.1. We also report the first inherited variant (p.Arg583*). KCNB1-related encephalopathies encompass a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental disorders with predominant language difficulties and behavioral impairment. Eighty-five percent of patients developed epilepsies with variable syndromes and prognosis. Truncating variants in the C-terminal domain are associated with a less-severe epileptic phenotype. Overall, this report provides an up-to-date review of the mutational and clinical spectrum of KCNB1, strengthening its place as a causal gene in DEEs and emphasizing the need for further functional studies to unravel the underlying mechanisms.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to delineate the phenotypic spectrum and long-term outcome of individuals with KCNB1 encephalopathy. METHODS: We collected genetic, clinical, electroencephalographic, and imaging data of individuals with KCNB1 pathogenic variants recruited through an international collaboration, with the support of the family association "KCNB1 France." Patients were classified as having developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) or developmental encephalopathy (DE). In addition, we reviewed published cases and provided the long-term outcome in patients older than 12 years from our series and from literature. RESULTS: Our series included 36 patients (21 males, median age = 10 years, range = 1.6 months-34 years). Twenty patients (56%) had DEE with infantile onset seizures (seizure onset = 10 months, range = 10 days-3.5 years), whereas 16 (33%) had DE with late onset epilepsy in 10 (seizure onset = 5 years, range = 18 months-25 years) and without epilepsy in six. Cognitive impairment was more severe in individuals with DEE compared to those with DE. Analysis of 73 individuals with KCNB1 pathogenic variants (36 from our series and 37 published individuals in nine reports) showed developmental delay in all with severe to profound intellectual disability in 67% (n = 41/61) and autistic features in 56% (n = 32/57). Long-term outcome in 22 individuals older than 12 years (14 in our series and eight published individuals) showed poor cognitive, psychiatric, and behavioral outcome. Epilepsy course was variable. Missense variants were associated with more frequent and more severe epilepsy compared to truncating variants. SIGNIFICANCE: Our study describes the phenotypic spectrum of KCNB1 encephalopathy, which varies from severe DEE to DE with or without epilepsy. Although cognitive impairment is worse in patients with DEE, long-term outcome is poor for most and missense variants are associated with more severe epilepsy outcome. Further understanding of disease mechanisms should facilitate the development of targeted therapies, much needed to improve the neurodevelopmental prognosis.
The Kv2.1 voltage-activated potassium (Kv) channel is a prominent delayed-rectifier Kv channel in the mammalian central nervous system, where its mechanisms of activation and inactivation are critical for regulating intrinsic neuronal excitability(1,2). Here we present structures of the Kv2.1 channel in a lipid environment using cryo-electron microscopy to provide a framework for exploring its functional mechanisms and how mutations causing epileptic encephalopathies(3-7) alter channel activity. By studying a series of disease-causing mutations, we identified one that illuminates a hydrophobic coupling nexus near the internal end of the pore that is critical for inactivation. Both functional and structural studies reveal that inactivation in Kv2.1 results from dynamic alterations in electromechanical coupling to reposition pore-lining S6 helices and close the internal pore. Consideration of these findings along with available structures for other Kv channels, as well as voltage-activated sodium and calcium channels, suggests that related mechanisms of inactivation are conserved in voltage-activated cation channels and likely to be engaged by widely used therapeutics to achieve state-dependent regulation of channel activity.
Ion channels mediate voltage fluxes or action potentials that are central to the functioning of excitable cells such as neurons. The KCNB family of voltage-gated potassium channels (Kv) consists of two members (KCNB1 and KCNB2) encoded by KCNB1 and KCNB2, respectively. These channels are major contributors to delayed rectifier potassium currents arising from the neuronal soma which modulate overall excitability of neurons. In this study, we identified several mono-allelic pathogenic missense variants in KCNB2, in individuals with a neurodevelopmental syndrome with epilepsy and autism in some individuals. Recurrent dysmorphisms included a broad forehead, synophrys, and digital anomalies. Additionally, we selected three variants where genetic transmission has not been assessed, from two epilepsy studies, for inclusion in our experiments. We characterized channel properties of these variants by expressing them in oocytes of Xenopus laevis and conducting cut-open oocyte voltage clamp electrophysiology. Our datasets indicate no significant change in absolute conductance and conductance-voltage relationships of most disease variants as compared to wild type (WT), when expressed either alone or co-expressed with WT-KCNB2. However, variants c.1141A>G (p.Thr381Ala) and c.641C>T (p.Thr214Met) show complete abrogation of currents when expressed alone with the former exhibiting a left shift in activation midpoint when expressed alone or with WT-KCNB2. The variants we studied, nevertheless, show collective features of increased inactivation shifted to hyperpolarized potentials. We suggest that the effects of the variants on channel inactivation result in hyper-excitability of neurons, which contributes to disease manifestations.
We conducted a cross-trait meta-analysis of genome-wide association study on schizophrenia (SCZ) (n = 65,967), bipolar disorder (BD) (n = 41,653), autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (n = 46,350), attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (n = 55,374), and depression (DEP) (n = 688,809). After the meta-analysis, the number of genomic loci increased from 14 to 19 in ADHD, from 3 to 10 in ASD, from 45 to 57 in DEP, from 8 to 54 in BD, and from 64 to 87 in SCZ. We observed significant enrichment of overlapping genes among different disorders and identified a panel of cross-disorder genes. A total of seven genes were found being commonly associated with four out of five psychiatric conditions, namely GABBR1, GLT8D1, HIST1H1B, HIST1H2BN, HIST1H4L, KCNB1, and DCC. The SORCS3 gene was highlighted due to the fact that it was involved in all the five conditions of study. Analysis of correlations unveiled the existence of two clusters of related psychiatric conditions, SCZ and BD that were separate from the other three traits, and formed another group. Our results may provide a new insight for genetic basis of the five psychiatric disorders.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of and identify factors associated with gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms among children with channelopathy-associated developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). STUDY DESIGN: Parents of 168 children with DEEs linked to SCN1A (n = 59), KCNB1 (n = 31), or KCNQ2 (n = 78) completed online CLIRINX surveys about their children's GI symptoms. Our analysis examined the prevalence, frequency, and severity of GI symptoms, as well as DEE type, functional mobility, feeding difficulties, ketogenic diet, antiseizure medication, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and seizures. Statistical analyses included the chi(2) test, Wilcoxon rank-sum analysis, and multiple logistic regression. RESULTS: GI symptoms were reported in 92 of 168 patients (55%), among whom 63 of 86 (73%) reported daily or weekly symptoms, 29 of 92 (32%) had frequent or serious discomfort, and 13 of 91 (14%) had frequent or serious appetite disturbances as a result. The prevalence of GI symptoms varied across DEE cohorts with 44% of SCN1A-DEE patients, 35% of KCNB1-DEE patients, and 71% of KCNQ2-DEE patients reporting GI symptoms in the previous month. After adjustment for DEE type, current use of ketogenic diet (6% reported), and gastrostomy tube (13% reported) were both associated with GI symptoms in a statistically, but not clinically, significant manner (P < .05). Patient age, functional mobility, feeding difficulties, ASD, and seizures were not clearly associated with GI symptoms. Overall, no individual antiseizure medication was significantly associated with GI symptoms across all DEE cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: GI symptoms are common and frequently severe in patients with DEE.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have reported substantial genomic loci significantly associated with clinical risk of bipolar disorder (BD), and studies combining techniques of genetics, neuroscience, neuroimaging, and pharmacology are believed to help tackle clinical problems (e.g., identifying novel therapeutic targets). However, translating findings of psychiatric genetics into biological mechanisms underlying BD pathogenesis remains less successful. Biological impacts of majority of BD GWAS risk loci are obscure, and the involvement of many GWAS risk genes in this illness is yet to be investigated. It is thus necessary to review the progress of applying BD GWAS risk genes in the research and intervention of the disorder. A comprehensive literature search found that a number of such risk genes had been investigated in cellular or animal models, even before they were highlighted in BD GWAS. Intriguingly, manipulation of many BD risk genes (e.g., ANK3, CACNA1C, CACNA1B, HOMER1, KCNB1, MCHR1, NCAN, SHANK2 etc.) resulted in altered murine behaviors largely restoring BD clinical manifestations, including mania-like symptoms such as hyperactivity, anxiolytic-like behavior, as well as antidepressant-like behavior, and these abnormalities could be attenuated by mood stabilizers. In addition to recapitulating phenotypic characteristics of BD, some GWAS risk genes further provided clues for the neurobiology of this illness, such as aberrant activation and functional connectivity of brain areas in the limbic system, and modulated dendritic spine morphogenesis as well as synaptic plasticity and transmission. Therefore, BD GWAS risk genes are undoubtedly pivotal resources for modeling this illness, and might be translational therapeutic targets in the future clinical management of BD. We discuss both promising prospects and cautions in utilizing the bulk of useful resources generated by GWAS studies. Systematic integrations of findings from genetic and neuroscience studies are called for to promote our understanding and intervention of BD.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEE) are a group of severe epilepsies that usually present with intractable seizures, developmental delay, and often have elevated risk for premature mortality. Numerous genes have been identified as a monogenic cause of DEE, including KCNB1. The voltage-gated potassium channel K(V)2.1, encoded by KCNB1, is primarily responsible for delayed rectifier potassium currents that are important regulators of excitability in electrically excitable cells, including neurons. In addition to its canonical role as a voltage-gated potassium conductance, K(V)2.1 also serves a highly conserved structural function organizing endoplasmic reticulum-plasma membrane junctions clustered in the soma and proximal dendrites of neurons. The de novo pathogenic variant KCNB1-p.G379R was identified in an infant with epileptic spasms, and atonic, focal and tonic-clonic seizures that were refractory to treatment with standard antiepileptic drugs. Previous work demonstrated deficits in potassium conductance, but did not assess non-conducting functions. To determine if the G379R variant affected K(V)2.1 clustering at endoplasmic reticulum-plasma membrane junctions, K(V)2.1-G379R was expressed in HEK293T cells. K(V)2.1-G379R expression did not induce formation of endoplasmic reticulum-plasma membrane junctions, and co-expression of K(V)2.1-G379R with K(V)2.1-wild-type lowered induction of these structures relative to K(V)2.1-WT alone, consistent with a dominant negative effect. To model this variant in vivo, we introduced Kcnb1(G379R) into mice using CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing. We characterized neuronal expression, neurological and neurobehavioral phenotypes of Kcnb1(G379R/+) (Kcnb1(R/+)) and Kcnb1(G379R/G379R) (Kcnb1(R/R)) mice. Immunohistochemistry studies on brains from Kcnb1(+/+), Kcnb1(R/+) and Kcnb1(R/R) mice revealed genotype-dependent differences in the expression levels of K(V)2.1 protein, as well as associated K(V)2.2 and AMIGO-1 proteins. Kcnb1(R/+) and Kcnb1(R/R) mice displayed profound hyperactivity, repetitive behaviors, impulsivity and reduced anxiety. Spontaneous seizures were observed in Kcnb1(R/R) mice, as well as seizures induced by exposure to novel environments and/or handling. Both Kcnb1(R/+) and Kcnb1(R/R) mutants were more susceptible to proconvulsant-induced seizures. In addition, both Kcnb1(R/+) and Kcnb1(R/R) mice exhibited abnormal interictal EEG activity, including isolated spike and slow waves. Overall, the Kcnb1(G379R) mice recapitulate many features observed in individuals with DEE due to pathogenic variants in KCNB1. This new mouse model of KCNB1-associated DEE will be valuable for improving the understanding of the underlying pathophysiology and will provide a valuable tool for the development of therapies to treat this pharmacoresistant DEE.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to describe the extent of neurodevelopmental impairments and identify the genetic etiologies in a large cohort of patients with epilepsy with myoclonic atonic seizures (MAE). METHODS: We deeply phenotyped MAE patients for epilepsy features, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using standardized neuropsychological instruments. We performed exome analysis (whole exome sequencing) filtered on epilepsy and neuropsychiatric gene sets to identify genetic etiologies. RESULTS: We analyzed 101 patients with MAE (70% male). The median age of seizure onset was 34 months (range = 6-72 months). The main seizure types were myoclonic atonic or atonic in 100%, generalized tonic-clonic in 72%, myoclonic in 69%, absence in 60%, and tonic seizures in 19% of patients. We observed intellectual disability in 62% of patients, with extremely low adaptive behavioral scores in 69%. In addition, 24% exhibited symptoms of autism and 37% exhibited attention-deficit/hyperactivity symptoms. We discovered pathogenic variants in 12 (14%) of 85 patients, including five previously published patients. These were pathogenic genetic variants in SYNGAP1 (n = 3), KIAA2022 (n = 2), and SLC6A1 (n = 2), as well as KCNA2, SCN2A, STX1B, KCNB1, and MECP2 (n = 1 each). We also identified three new candidate genes, ASH1L, CHD4, and SMARCA2 in one patient each. SIGNIFICANCE: MAE is associated with significant neurodevelopmental impairment. MAE is genetically heterogeneous, and we identified a pathogenic genetic etiology in 14% of this cohort by exome analysis. These findings suggest that MAE is a manifestation of several etiologies rather than a discrete syndromic entity.
BACKGROUND: Gastric and colorectal cancers are the most common malignant tumours, leading to a significant number of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Recently, increasing evidence has demonstrated that cancer cells exhibit a differential expression of potassium channels and this can contribute to cancer progression. However, their expression and localisation at the somatic level remains uncertain. In this study, we have investigated the expression levels of KCNB1 and KCNA5 genes encoding ubiquitous Kv2.1 and Kv1.5 potassium channels in gastric and colorectal tumours. METHODS: Gastric and colorectal tumoral and peritumoral tissues were collected to evaluate the expression of KCNB1 and KCNA5 mRNA by quantitative PCR. Moreover, the immunohistochemical staining profile of Kv2.1 and Kv1.5 was assessed on 40 Formalin-Fixed and Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) gastric carcinoma tissues. Differences in gene expression between tumoral and peritumoral tissues were compared statistically with the Mann-Whitney U test. The association between the clinicopathological features of the GC patients and the expression of both Kv proteins was investigated with chi2 and Fisher's exact tests. RESULTS: The mRNA fold expression of KCNB1 and KCNA5 genes showed a lower mean in the tumoral tissues (0.06 +/- 0.17, 0.006 +/- 0.009) compared to peritumoral tissues (0.08 +/- 0.16, 0.16 +/- 0.48, respectively) without reaching the significance rate (p = 0.861, p = 0.152, respectively). Interestingly, Kv2.1 and Kv1.5 immunostaining was detectable and characterised by a large distribution in peritumoral and tumoral epithelial cells. More interestingly, inflammatory cells were also stained. Surprisingly, Kv2.1 and Kv1.5 staining was undoubtedly and predominantly detected in the cytoplasm compartment of tumour cells. Indeed, the expression of Kv2.1 in tumour cells revealed a significant association with the early gastric cancer clinical stage (p = 0.026). CONCLUSION: The data highlight, for the first time, the potential role of Kv1.5 and Kv2.1 in gastrointestinal-related cancers and suggests they may be promising prognostic markers for these tumours.
Infantile spasms (IS) is a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy with heterogeneous etiologies including many genetic causes. Genetic studies have identified pathogenic variants in over 30 genes as causes of IS. Many of these genetic causes are extremely rare, with only one reported incidence in an individual with IS. To better understand the genetic landscape of IS, we used targeted sequencing to screen 42 candidate IS genes and 53 established developmental and epileptic encephalopathy genes in 92 individual with IS. We identified a genetic diagnosis for 7.6% of our cohort, including pathogenic variants in KCNB1 (n = 2), GNAO1 (n = 1), STXBP1 (n = 1), SLC35A2 (n = 1), TBL1XR1 (n = 1), and KIF1A (n = 1). Our data emphasize the genetic heterogeneity of IS and will inform the diagnosis and management of individuals with this devastating disorder.
Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily B member 1 (KCNB1) encodes Kv2.1 potassium channel of crucial role in hippocampal neuron excitation homeostasis. KCNB1 mutations are known to cause early-onset infantile epilepsy. To date, 10 KCNB1 mutations have been described in 11 patients. Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified a novel de novo missense (c.1132G>C, p.V378L) KCNB1 mutation in a patient with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, severe speech impairment, but no episode of epilepsy until the lastly examined age of 6 years old. Furthermore, she showed neuropsychiatric symptoms including hyperactivity with irritability, heteroaggressiveness, psychomotor instability and agitation. Our observation might expand the phenotypic spectrum of KCNB1-related phenotypes and raises the issue of the occurrence of the epileptic phenotype.
AIM: KCNB1 encephalopathy encompasses a broad phenotypic spectrum associating intellectual disability, behavioral disturbances, and epilepsies of various severity. Using standardized parental questionnaires, we aimed to capture the heterogeneity of the adaptive and behavioral features in a series of patients with KCNB1 pathogenic variants. METHODS: We included 25 patients with a KCNB1 encephalopathy, aged from 3.2 to 34.1 years (median = 10 years). Adaptive functioning was assessed in all patients using the French version of the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, Second Edition (VABS-II) questionnaire. We screened global behavior with the Childhood Behavioral Check-List (CBCL, Achenbach) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) with the Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ). We used a cluster analysis to identify subgroups of adaptive profiles. RESULTS: VABS-II questionnaire showed pathological adaptive behavior in all participants with a severity of adaptive deficiency ranging from mild in 8/20 to severe in 7/20. Eight out of 16 were at risk of Attention Problems at the CBCL and 13/18 were at risk of autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The adaptive behavior composite score significantly decreased with age (Spearman's Rho=-0.72, p<0.001) but not the equivalent ages, suggesting stagnation and slowing but no regression over time. The clustering analysis identified two subgroups of patients, one showing more severe adaptive behavior. The severity of the epilepsy phenotype predicted the severity of the behavioral profile with a sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 90.9%. CONCLUSION: This study confirms the deleterious consequences of early-onset epilepsy in addition to the impact of the gene dysfunction in patients with KCNB1 encephalopathy. ASD and attention disorders are frequent. Parental questionnaires should be considered as useful tools for early screening and care adaptation.
Kv2.1 voltage-gated potassium channels consist of two types of alpha-subunits: (a) electrically-active Kcnb1 alpha-subunits and (b) silent or modulatory alpha-subunits plus beta-subunits that, similar to silent alpha-subunits, also regulate electrically-active subunits. Voltage-gated potassium channels were traditionally viewed, mainly by electrophysiologists, as regulators of the electrical activity of the plasma membrane in excitable cells, a role that is performed by transmembrane protein domains of alpha-subunits that form the electric pore. Genetic studies revealed a role for this region of alpha-subunits of voltage-gated potassium channels in human neurodevelopmental disorders, such as epileptic encephalopathy. The N- and C-terminal domains of alpha-subunits interact to form the cytoplasmic subunit of heterotetrameric potassium channels that regulate electric pores. Subsequent animal studies revealed the developmental functions of Kcnb1-containing voltage-gated potassium channels and illustrated their role during brain development and reproduction. These functions of potassium channels are discussed in this review in the context of regulatory interactions between electrically-active and regulatory subunits.
The differential diagnostics in Rett syndrome has evolved with the development of next generation sequencing-based techniques and many patients have been diagnosed with other syndromes or variants in newly described genes where the associated phenotype(s) is yet to be fully explored. The term Rett-like refers to phenotypes with distinct overlapping features of Rett syndrome where the clinical criteria are not completely fulfilled. In this study we have combined a review of Rett-like disorders with data from a Danish cohort of 35 patients with Rett-like phenotypes emphasizing the diagnostic overlap with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome with SMC1A variants, and epileptic encephalopathies, for example, due to STXBP1 variants. We also found a patient with a pathogenic variant in KCNB1, which has not been previously linked to a Rett-like phenotype. This study underlines the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of a Rett syndrome spectrum, and provides an overview of the Rett syndrome-related genes described to date, and hence serves as a guide for diagnosing patients with Rett-like phenotypes.
Gastrin signaling mediated through cholecystokinin-2 receptor (CCK2R) and its downstream molecules is altered in pancreatic cancer. CCK2R antagonists, YF476 (netazepide) and JNJ-26070109, were tested systematically for their effect on pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) progression to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in Kras(G12D) mice. After dose selection using wild-type mice, six-week-old p48(Cre/+) -LSL-Kras(G12D) (22-24 per group) genetically engineered mice (GEM) were fed AIN-76A diets containing 0, 250, or 500 ppm JNJ-26070109 or YF-476 for 38 weeks. At termination, pancreata were collected, weighed, and evaluated for PanINs and PDAC. Results demonstrated that control-diet-fed mice showed 69% (males) and 33% (females) incidence of PDAC. Administration of low and high dose JNJ-26070109 inhibited the incidence of PDAC by 88% and 71% (P < .004) in male mice and by 100% and 24% (P > .05) in female mice, respectively. Low and high dose YF476 inhibited the incidence of PDAC by 74% (P < .02) and 69% (P < .02) in male mice and by 45% and 33% (P > .05) in female mice, respectively. Further, transcriptome analysis showed downregulation of Cldn1, Sstr1, Apod, Gkn1, Siglech, Cyp2c44, Bnc1, Fmo2, 623169, Kcne4, Slc27a6, Cma1, Rho GTPase activating protein 18, and Gpr85 genes in JNJ-26070109-treated mice compared with untreated mice. YF476-treated mouse pancreas showed downregulation of Riks, Zpbp, Ntf3, Lrrn4, Aass, Skint3, Kcnb1, Dgkb, Ddx60, and Aspn gene expressions compared with untreated mouse pancreas. Overall, JNJ-26070109 showed better chemopreventive efficacy than YF476. However, caution is recommended when selecting doses, as the agents appeared to exhibit gender-specific effects.
Rett syndrome (RTT) is caused by mutations in methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), but defects in a handful of other genes (e.g., CDKL5, FOXG1, MEF2C) can lead to presentations that resemble, but do not completely mirror, classical RTT. In this study, we attempted to identify other monogenic disorders that share features with RTT. We performed a retrospective chart review on n = 319 patients who had undergone clinical whole exome sequencing (WES) for further etiological evaluation of neurodevelopmental diagnoses that remained unexplained despite extensive prior workup. From this group, we characterized those who (1) possessed features that were compatible with RTT based on clinical judgment, (2) subsequently underwent MECP2 sequencing and/or MECP2 deletion/duplication analysis with negative results, and (3) ultimately arrived at a diagnosis other than RTT with WES. n = 7 patients had clinical features overlapping RTT with negative MECP2 analysis but positive WES providing a diagnosis. These seven patients collectively possessed pathogenic variants in six different genes: two in KCNB1 and one each in FOXG1, IQSEC2, MEIS2, TCF4, and WDR45. n = 2 (both with KCNB1 variants) fulfilled criteria for atypical RTT. RTT-associated features included the following: loss of hand or language skills (n = 3; IQSEC2, KCNB1 x 2); disrupted sleep (n = 4; KNCB1, MEIS2, TCF4, WDR45); stereotyped hand movements (n = 5; FOXG1, KNCB1 x 2, MEIS2, TCF4); bruxism (n = 3; KCNB1 x 2; TCF4); and hypotonia (n = 7). Clinically based diagnoses can be misleading, evident by the increasing number of genetic conditions associated with features of RTT with negative MECP2 mutations.
Increasing evidence suggests that ion channel genes play an important role in the progression of gliomas. However, the mechanisms by which ion channel genes influence the progression of glioma are not fully understood. We identified KCNB1 as a novel ion gene, associated with malignant progression and favorable overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) in glioma patients from three datasets (CGGA, GSE16011 and REMBRANDT). Moreover, we characterized a novel function of autophagy induction accompanied by increased apoptosis and reduced proliferation and invasion of glioma cells for KCNB1. KEGG pathway analysis and in vitro studies suggested that the ERK pathway is involved in KCNB1-mediated regulation of autophagy, which was confirmed by inhibition of KCNB1-induced autophagy by using a selective ERK1/2 inhibitor (U0126) or siERK1/2. In vivo studies showed that KCNB1 induced autophagy while inhibiting tumor growth and increasing survival. Overall, our studies define KCNB1 as a novel prognostic factor for gliomas that exerts its tumor suppressive function through autophagy induction.
