Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily A member 4; Voltage-gated potassium channel that mediates transmembrane potassium transport in excitable membranes. Forms tetrameric potassium- selective channels through which potassium ions pass in accordance with their electrochemical gradient. The channel alternates between opened and closed conformations in response to the voltage difference across the membrane. Can form functional homotetrameric channels and heterotetrameric channels that contain variable proportions of KCNA1, KCNA2, KCNA4, KCNA5, and possibly other family members as well [...] 
Human ether a go-go-related gene type 1 (hERG1) K+ channels conduct the rapid delayed rectifier K+ current and mediate action potential repolarization in the heart. Mutations in KCNH2 (the gene that encodes hERG1) causes LQT2, one of the most common forms of long QT syndrome, a disorder of cardiac repolarization that predisposes affected subjects to ventricular arrhythmia and increases the risk of sudden cardiac death. Hundreds of LQT2-associated mutations have been described, and most cause a loss of function by disrupting subunit folding, assembly, or trafficking of the channel to the cell surface. Loss-of-function mutations in hERG1 channels have also recently been implicated in epilepsy. A single gain-of-function mutation has been described that causes short QT syndrome and cardiac arrhythmia. In addition, up-regulation of hERG1 channel expression has been demonstrated in specific tumors and has been associated with skeletal muscle atrophy in mice.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) empowered clinician scientists to measure the electrical activity of the heart noninvasively to identify arrhythmias and heart disease. Shortly after the standardization of the 12-lead ECG for the diagnosis of heart disease, several families with autosomal recessive (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndrome) and dominant (Romano-Ward Syndrome) forms of long QT syndrome (LQTS) were identified. An abnormally long heart rate-corrected QT-interval was established as a biomarker for the risk of sudden cardiac death. Since then, the International LQTS Registry was established; a phenotypic scoring system to identify LQTS patients was developed; the major genes that associate with typical forms of LQTS were identified; and guidelines for the successful management of patients advanced. In this review, we discuss the molecular and cellular mechanisms for LQTS associated with missense variants in KCNQ1 (LQT1) and KCNH2 (LQT2). We move beyond the "benign" to a "pathogenic" binary classification scheme for different KCNQ1 and KCNH2 missense variants and discuss gene- and mutation-specific differences in K(+) channel dysfunction, which can predispose people to distinct clinical phenotypes (e.g., concealed, pleiotropic, severe, etc.). We conclude by discussing the emerging computational structural modeling strategies that will distinguish between dysfunctional subtypes of KCNQ1 and KCNH2 variants, with the goal of realizing a layered precision medicine approach focused on individuals.
Testing new compounds for pro-arrhythmic potential has focused in recent years on avoiding activity at the hERG K+ channel, as hERG block is a common feature of many pro-arrhythmic compounds associated with Torsades de Pointes in humans. Blockers of hERG are well known to prolong cardiac action potentials and lead to long QT syndrome, and activators, although rarer, can lead to short QT syndrome. The most reliable assays of hERG utilize stable cell lines, and include ligand binding, Rb+ flux and electrophysiology (both automated and manual). These assays can be followed by measurement of activity at other ion channels contributing to cardiac contractility and detailed action potential/repolarization measurements in cardiac tissue. An integrated risk assessment for pro-arrhythmic potential is ultimately required, as the constellation of ion channel activities and potencies, along with the mechanism/kinetics of ion channel block, may ultimately be the best predictor of cardiac risk in vivo.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize and discuss data from recent studies implicating mutations in potassium channel genes in the pathogenesis of primary aldosteronism. RECENT FINDINGS: Potassium channel gene variants are associated with the primary aldosteronism phenotype in animals (Kcnma1, TASK-1, and TASK-3) and humans (HERG and KCNJ5). Germline KCNJ5 mutations cause bilateral, familial primary aldosteronism with variable severity and genotype:phenotype correlations. Somatic KCNJ5 mutations occur in approximately 40% of aldosterone-producing adenomas, and are associated with younger age, female sex, more severe primary aldosteronism, lack of responsiveness of plasma aldosterone to upright posture, and zona fasciculata histology. Of five so far described, G151R and L168R are by far the most common. KCNJ5 mutations lead to reduced K(+)/Na(+) channel selectivity and Na(+) influx, predisposing to cell membrane depolarization, increased calcium influx, increased expression of genes promoting aldosterone synthesis, and increased aldosterone production by adrenocortical cells. How they lead to adrenal cell proliferation and tumor development is less well understood. SUMMARY: These findings shed considerable light on the pathophysiology of primary aldosteronism with the potential to lead to new diagnostic approaches and treatments.
KCNH2 encodes hERG1, the voltage-gated potassium channel that conducts the rapid delayed rectifier potassium current (I(Kr)) in human cardiac tissue. hERG1 is one of the first channels expressed during early cardiac development, and its dysfunction is associated with intrauterine fetal death, sudden infant death syndrome, cardiac arrhythmia, and sudden cardiac death. Here, we identified a hERG1 polypeptide (hERG1(NP)) that is targeted to the nuclei of immature cardiac cells, including human stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) and neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. The nuclear hERG1(NP) immunofluorescent signal is diminished in matured hiPSC-CMs and absent from adult rat cardiomyocytes. Antibodies targeting distinct hERG1 channel epitopes demonstrated that the hERG1(NP) signal maps to the hERG1 distal C-terminal domain. KCNH2 deletion using CRISPR simultaneously abolished I(Kr) and the hERG1(NP) signal in hiPSC-CMs. We then identified a putative nuclear localization sequence (NLS) within the distal hERG1 C-terminus, 883-RQRKRKLSFR-892. Interestingly, the distal C-terminal domain was targeted almost exclusively to the nuclei when overexpressed HEK293 cells. Conversely, deleting the NLS from the distal peptide abolished nuclear targeting. Similarly, blocking alpha or beta1 karyopherin activity diminished nuclear targeting. Finally, overexpressing the putative hERG1(NP) peptide in the nuclei of HEK cells significantly reduced hERG1a current density, compared to cells expressing the NLS-deficient hERG1(NP) or GFP. These data identify a developmentally regulated polypeptide encoded by KCNH2, hERG1(NP), whose presence in the nucleus indirectly modulates hERG1 current magnitude and kinetics.
BACKGROUND: KCNH2-mediated arrhythmia syndromes are caused by loss-of-function (type 2 long QT syndrome [LQT2]) or gain-of-function (type 1 short QT syndrome [SQT1]) pathogenic variants in the KCNH2-encoded K(v)11.1 potassium channel, which is essential for the cardiac action potential. METHODS: A dual-component "suppression-and-replacement" (SupRep) KCNH2 gene therapy was created by cloning into a single construct a custom-designed KCNH2 short hairpin RNA with ~80% knockdown (suppression) and a "short hairpin RNA-immune" KCNH2 cDNA (replacement). Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes and their CRISPR-Cas9 variant-corrected isogenic control (IC) induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes were made for 2 LQT2- (G604S, N633S) and 1 SQT1- (N588K) causative variants. All variant lines were treated with KCNH2-SupRep or non-targeting control short hairpin RNA (shCT). The action potential duration (APD) at 90% repolarization (APD(90)) was measured using FluoVolt voltage dye. RESULTS: KCNH2-SupRep achieved variant-independent rescue of both pathologic phenotypes. For LQT2-causative variants, treatment with KCNH2-SupRep resulted in shortening of the pathologically prolonged APD(90) to near curative (IC-like) APD(90) levels (G604S IC, 471+/-25 ms; N633S IC, 405+/-55 ms) compared with treatment with shCT (G604S: SupRep-treated, 452+/-76 ms versus shCT-treated, 550+/-41 ms; P<0.0001; N633S: SupRep-treated, 399+/-105 ms versus shCT-treated, 577+/-39 ms, P<0.0001). Conversely, for the SQT1-causative variant, N588K, treatment with KCNH2-SupRep resulted in therapeutic prolongation of the pathologically shortened APD(90) (IC: 429+/-16 ms; SupRep-treated: 396+/-61 ms; shCT-treated: 274+/-12 ms). CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first proof-of-principle gene therapy for correction of both LQT2 and SQT1. KCNH2-SupRep gene therapy successfully normalized the pathologic APD(90), thereby eliminating the pathognomonic feature of both LQT2 and SQT1.
Human-ether-a-go-go-related channel (hERG) is a voltage gated potassium channel (K(v)11.1) abundantly expressed in heart and brain tissues. In addition to playing an important role in mediation of repolarizing K(+) currents (I(Kr)) in Action Potential (AP), hERG is notorious for its propensity to interact with various medications. The drug-induced block of K(+) currents across hERG channel are strongly associated with dysrhythmic conditions collectively known as drug-induced long-QT-syndrome. The recent availability of the high-resolution Cryo-EM structures for the hERG channel has provided unique opportunity to resolve structural mechanisms involved into the process of voltage-gating of hERG channels, map various roles played by components of ventricular and neuronal membranes and then to connect it to cellular pathways through which diverse chemical compounds might be affecting function of the channel. Specifically, lipids and lipid derivatives such as polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), ceramides and steroids have been shown to directly interact with the lipid facing amino acids in various K(v) channels including hERG. In this review, possible lipophilic pathways of hERG activators and blockers, together with the existence of fenestration windows and effects of PUFAs, ceramides and steroids are explored throughout different sections. Finally, the interplay between long QT inducing drugs and phospholipidosis is briefly discussed.
BACKGROUND: Escitalopram can cause prolongation of the QT interval on the electrocardiogram (ECG). However, only some patients get pathological QTc prolongation in clinic. We investigated the influence of KCNQ1, KCNE1, and KCNH2 gene polymorphisms along with clinical factors on escitalopram-induced QTc prolongation. METHODS: A total of 713 patients prescribed escitalopram were identified and had at least one ECG recording in this retrospective study. 472 patients with two or more ECG data were divided into QTc prolongation (n = 119) and non-prolongation (n = 353) groups depending on the threshold change in QTc of 30 ms above baseline value (∆QTc >/= 30 ms). 45 patients in the QTc prolongation group and 90 patients in the QTc non-prolongation group were genotyped for 43 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of KCNQ1, KCNE1, and KCNH2 genes. RESULTS: Patients with QTc prolongation (∆QTc >/= 30 ms) got higher escitalopram dose (10.3 mg) than patients without QTc prolongation (9.4 mg), although no significant relationship was found between QTc interval and escitalopram dose in the linear mixed model. Patients who were older/coronary disease/hypertension or carried with KCNE1 rs1805127 C allele, KCNE1 rs4817668 C allele, KCNH2 rs3807372 AG/GG genotype were significantly at risk for QTc prolongation (∆QTc >/= 30 ms). Concomitant antipsychotic treatment was associated with a longer QTc interval. LIMITATIONS: A relatively small sample size and lack of the blood concentration of escitalopram restricted the accurate relationship between escitalopram dose and QTc interval. CONCLUSION: Our study revealed that KCNQ1, KCNE1, and KCNH2 gene polymorphisms along with clinical factors provide a complementary effect in escitalopram-induced QTc prolongation.
G.-N. Tseng. I(Kr): The hERG Channel. Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology (2001) 33, 835-849. The rapid delayed rectifier (I(Kr)) channel is important for cardiac action potential repolarization. Suppressing I(Kr)function, due to either genetic defects in its pore-forming subunit (hERG) or adverse drug effects, can lead to long-QT (LQT) syndrome that carries increased risk of life-threatening arrhythmias. The implication of I(Kr)in cardiac arrhythmias and in anti-arrhythmic/pro-arrhythmic actions of drugs has driven intensive research interests in its structure-function relationship, the linkage between LQT-associated mutations and changes in channel function, and the mechanism of drug actions. This review will cover the following topics: (1) heterogeneous contribution of I(Kr)to action potential repolarization in the heart, (2) structure-function relationship of I(Kr)/hERG channels, (3) role of regulatory & bgr; subunits in I(Kr)/hERG channel function, (4) structural basis for the unique pharmacological properties of I(Kr)/hERG channels, and (5) I(Kr)/hERG channel modulation by changes in cellular milieu under physiological and pathological conditions of the heart. It is anticipated that further advances in our understanding of I(Kr)/hERG, particularly in the areas of roles of different (& agr; and & bgr;) subunits in native I(Kr)function, alterations in I(Kr)function in diseased hearts, and the 3-dimensional structure of the I(Kr)/hERG pore based on homology modeling using the KcsA model, will help us better define the role of I(Kr)in arrhythmias and design therapeutic agents that can increase I(Kr)and are useful for LQT syndrome.
The human ether-a-go-go related gene (HERG) encodes the alpha subunit of Kv11.1, which is a voltage-gated K(+) channel protein mainly expressed in heart and brain tissue. HERG plays critical role in cardiac repolarization, and mutations in HERG can cause long QT syndrome. More recently, evidence has emerged that HERG channels are aberrantly expressed in many kinds of cancer cells and play important roles in cancer progression. HERG could therefore be a potential biomarker for cancer and a possible molecular target for anticancer drug design. HERG affects a number of cellular processes, including cell proliferation, apoptosis, angiogenesis and migration, any of which could be affected by dysregulation of HERG. This review provides an overview of available information on HERG channel as it relates to cancer, with focus on the mechanism by which HERG influences cancer progression. Molecular docking attempts suggest two possible protein-protein interactions of HERG with the ss1-integrin receptor and the transcription factor STAT-1 as novel HERG-directed therapeutic targeting which avoids possible cardiotoxicity. The role of epigenetics in regulating HERG channel expression and activity in cancer will also be discussed. Finally, given its inherent extracellular accessibility as an ion channel, we discuss regulatory roles of this molecule in cancer physiology and therapeutic potential. Future research should be directed to explore the possibilities of therapeutic interventions targeting HERG channels while minding possible complications.
To date, research on the human ether-a-go-go related gene (hERG) has focused on this potassium channel's role in cardiac repolarization and Long QT Syndrome (LQTS). However, growing evidence implicates hERG in a diversity of physiologic and pathological processes. Here we discuss these other functions of hERG, particularly their impact on diseases beyond cardiac arrhythmia.
Derived from enteroendocrine cells (EECs), glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) are pivotal incretin hormones crucial for blood glucose regulation. Medications of GLP-1 analogs and GLP-1 receptor activators are extensively used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and obesity. However, there are currently no agents to stimulate endogenous incretin secretion. Here, we find the pivotal role of KCNH2 potassium channels in the regulation of incretin secretion. Co-localization of KCNH2 with incretin-secreting EECs in the intestinal epithelium of rodents highlights its significance. Gut epithelial cell-specific KCNH2 knockout in mice improves glucose tolerance and increases oral glucose-triggered GLP-1 and GIP secretion, particularly GIP. Furthermore, KCNH2-deficient primary intestinal epithelial cells exhibit heightened incretin, especially GIP secretion upon nutrient stimulation. Mechanistically, KCNH2 knockdown in EECs leads to reduced K(+) currents, prolonged action potential duration, and elevated intracellular calcium levels. Finally, we found that dofetilide, a KCNH2-specific inhibitor, could promote incretin secretion in enteroendocrine STC-1 cells in vitro and in hyperglycemic mice in vivo. These findings elucidate, for the first time, the mechanism and application of KCNH2 in regulating incretin secretion by EECs. Given the therapeutic promise of GLP-1 and GIP in diabetes and obesity management, this study advances our understanding of incretin regulation, paving the way for potential incretin secretagogue therapies in the treatment of diabetes and obesity.
Since 1995, when a potassium channel gene, hERG (human ether-a-go-go-related gene), now referred to as KCNH2, encoding the rapid component of cardiac delayed rectifier potassium channels was identified as being responsible for type 2 congenital long-QT syndrome, a number of potassium channel genes have been shown to cause different types of inherited cardiac arrhythmia syndromes. These include congenital long-QT syndrome, short-QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, early repolarization syndrome, and familial atrial fibrillation. Genotype-phenotype correlations have been investigated in some inherited arrhythmia syndromes, and as a result, gene-specific risk stratification and gene-specific therapy and management have become available, particularly for patients with congenital long-QT syndrome. In this review article, the molecular structure and function of potassium channels, the clinical phenotype due to potassium channel gene mutations, including genotype-phenotype correlations, and the diverse mechanisms underlying the potassium channel gene-related diseases will be discussed.
The human ether-a-go-go related gene (hERG; officially designated as KCNH2) encodes the structure of protein forming alpha-subunit of voltage-gated ion channel which conducts the rapid component of delayed rectifier K+ current (IKr). This current plays an important role namely in the cardiac repolarization. Mutations in hERG result in inherited arrhythmogenic syndromes characterized by a lenghtening or shortening of QT interval on the electrocardiogram and by an increased occurrence of life-threatening arrhythmias. This review also introduces hERG channels as a part of regulatory mechanisms of the smooth muscle contractility, neuronal activity, release of several hormones, and of proliferation and apoptosis of cancer cells. There are also mentioned some of the diseases arising from hERG channel dysfunction, and some possibilities of use of hERG gene/channel as a diagnostic marker and potential therapeutic target in various diseases, namely in cancer.Key words: cancer - epilepsy - hERG - KCNH2 - K+ channel - LQTS - membrane potential - muscle contraction - proliferation - schizophrenia.
BACKGROUND: Cardiac autonomic dysfunction (CADF) is a major contributor to increased cardiac mortality in schizophrenia patients. The aberrant function of voltage-gated ion channels, which are widely distributed in the brain and heart, may link schizophrenia and CADF. In search of channel-encoding genes that are associated with both CADF and schizophrenia, CACNA1C and KCNH2 are promising candidates. In this study, we tested for associations between genetic findings in both genes and CADF parameters in schizophrenia patients whose heart functions were not influenced by psychopharmaceuticals. METHODS: First, we searched the literature for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CACNA1C and KCNH2 that showed genome-wide significant association with schizophrenia. Subsequently, we looked for such robust associations with CADF traits at these loci. A total of 5 CACNA1C SNPs and 9 KCNH2 SNPs were found and genotyped in 77 unmedicated schizophrenia patients and 144 healthy controls. Genotype-related impacts on heart rate (HR) dynamics and QT variability indices (QTvi) were analyzed separately in patients and healthy controls. RESULTS: We observed significantly increased QTvi in unmedicated patients with CADF-associated risk in CACNA1C rs2283274 C and schizophrenia-associated risk in rs2239061 G compared to the non-risk allele in these patients. Moreover, unmedicated patients with previously identified schizophrenia risk alleles in KCNH2 rs11763131 A, rs3807373 A, rs3800779 C, rs748693 G, and 1036145 T showed increased mean HR and QTvi as compared to non-risk alleles. CONCLUSIONS: We propose a potential pleiotropic role for common variation in CACNA1C and KCNH2 associated with CADF in schizophrenia patients, independent of antipsychotic medication, that predisposes them to cardiac arrhythmias and premature death.
Voltage-gated potassium (K(v) ) channels play an important role in the repolarization of a variety of excitable tissues, including in the cardiomyocyte and the pancreatic beta cell. Recently, individuals carrying loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in KCNQ1, encoding K(v) 7.1, and KCNH2 (hERG), encoding K(v) 11.1, were found to exhibit post-prandial hyperinsulinaemia and episodes of hypoglycaemia. These LoF mutations also cause the cardiac disorder long QT syndrome (LQTS), which can be aggravated by hypoglycaemia. Interestingly, patients with LQTS also have a higher burden of diabetes compared to the background population, an apparent paradox in relation to the hyperinsulinaemic phenotype, and KCNQ1 has been identified as a type 2 diabetes risk gene. This review article summarizes the involvement of delayed rectifier K(+) channels in pancreatic beta cell function, with emphasis on K(v) 7.1 and K(v) 11.1, using the cardiomyocyte for context. The functional and clinical consequences of LoF mutations and polymorphisms in these channels on blood glucose homeostasis are explored using evidence from pre-clinical, clinical and genome-wide association studies, thereby evaluating the link between LQTS, hyperinsulinaemia and type 2 diabetes.
A major physiological role of hERG1 (human Ether-a-go-go-Related Gene 1) potassium channels is to repolarize cardiac action potentials. Two isoforms, hERG1a and hERG1b, associate to form the potassium current I(K)(r) in cardiomyocytes. Inherited mutations in hERG1a or hERG1b cause prolonged cardiac repolarization, long QT syndrome, and sudden death arrhythmia. hERG1a subunits assemble with and enhance the number of hERG1b subunits at the plasma membrane, but the mechanism for the increase in hERG1b by hERG1a is not well understood. Here, we report that the hERG1a N-terminal region expressed in trans with hERG1b markedly increased hERG1b currents and increased biotin-labeled hERG1b protein at the membrane surface. hERG1b channels with a deletion of the N-terminal 1b domain did not have a measurable increase in current or biotinylated protein when coexpressed with hERG1a N-terminal regions, indicating that the 1b domain was required for the increase in hERG1b. Using a biochemical pull-down interaction assay and a FRET hybridization experiment, we detected a direct interaction between the hERG1a N-terminal region and the hERG1b N-terminal region. Using engineered deletions and alanine mutagenesis, we identified a short span of amino acids at positions 216 to 220 within the hERG1a "N-linker" region that were necessary for the upregulation of hERG1b. We propose that direct structural interactions between the hERG1a N-linker region and the hERG1b 1b domain increase hERG1b at the plasma membrane. Mechanisms regulating hERG1a and hERG1b are likely critical for cardiac function, may be disrupted by long QT syndrome mutants, and serve as potential targets for therapeutics.
INTRODUCTION: Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a life-threatening inherited channelopathy, and prolonged QT intervals easily trigger malignant arrhythmias, especially torsades de pointes and ventricular fibrillation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The proband with overlapped phenotypes of LQTS and sinoatrial node dysfunction underwent some necessary examinations, including echocardiography, electrocardiogram (ECG), and Holter monitoring. Next, whole-exome sequencing was performed, and candidate genes were validated by Sanger sequencing. RNA secondary structure and protein physical-chemical parameter analyses were used to predict the possible structural change of the proteins induced by the mutations. RESULTS: We identified the digenic heterozygous mutations of KCNH2 p.307_308del (NM_001204798, c.921_923del) and SCN5A p.R1865H (NM_001160160, c.G5594A) in the female and young proband (II: 1) of LQTS and ventricular fibrillation with repeat syncope at rest. Subsequently, she occurred with obvious sinus arrest with persistent ventricular pacing of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator. The heterozygous SCN5Ap.R1865H was carried by her father and sister but not carried by I:2. II:1 carried with KCNH2 p.307_308del as a de novo mutation, but not existed in other family members. RNA secondary structure of KCNH2 p.307_308del showed a false regional double helix, and its amino acids' hydrophobicity was significantly weakened. For the Na(v) 1.5 protein property, SCN5A p.R1865H slightly increased the molecular weight and aliphatic index but reduced the instability index. CONCLUSIONS: The digenic heterozygous KCNH2 and SCN5A mutations were associated with young early-onset long QT syndrome and sinoatrial node dysfunction.
Significant advances in our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that cause congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) have been made. A wide variety of experimental approaches, including heterologous expression of mutant ion channel proteins and the use of inducible pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs) from LQTS patients offer insights into etiology and new therapeutic strategies. This review briefly discusses the major molecular mechanisms underlying LQTS type 2 (LQT2), which is caused by loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in the KCNH2 gene (also known as the human ether-a-go-go-related gene or hERG). Almost half of suspected LQT2-causing mutations are missense mutations, and functional studies suggest that about 90% of these mutations disrupt the intracellular transport, or trafficking, of the KCNH2-encoded Kv11.1 channel protein to the cell surface membrane. In this review, we discuss emerging strategies that improve the trafficking and functional expression of trafficking-deficient LQT2 Kv11.1 channel proteins to the cell surface membrane and how new insights into the structure of the Kv11.1 channel protein will lead to computational approaches that identify which KCNH2 missense variants confer a high-risk for LQT2.
AIMS: Patients with particular mutations of type-2 long QT syndrome (LQT2) are at an increased risk for malignant arrhythmia during fever. This study aimed to determine the mechanism by which KCNH2 mutations cause fever-induced QT prolongation and torsades de pointes (TdP). METHODS AND RESULTS: We evaluated three KCNH2 mutations, G584S, D609G, and T613M, in the Kv11.1 S5-pore region, identified in patients with marked QT prolongation and TdP during fever. We also evaluated KCNH2 M124T and R269W, which are not associated with fever-induced QT prolongation. We characterized the temperature-dependent changes in the electrophysiological properties of the mutant Kv11.1 channels by patch-clamp recording and computer simulation. The average tail current densities (TCDs) at 35 degrees C for G584S, WT+D609G, and WT+T613M were significantly smaller and less increased with rising temperature from 35 degrees C to 40 degrees C than those for WT, M124T, and R269W. The ratios of the TCDs at 40 degrees C to 35 degrees C for G584S, WT+D609G, and WT+T613M were significantly smaller than for WT, M124T, and R269W. The voltage dependence of the steady-state inactivation curve for WT, M124T, and R269W showed a significant positive shift with increasing temperature; however, that for G584S, WT+D609G, and WT+T613M showed no significant change. Computer simulation demonstrated that G584S, WT+D609G, and WT+T613M caused prolonged action potential durations and early afterdepolarization formation at 40 degrees C. CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that KCNH2 G584S, D609G, and T613M in the S5-pore region reduce the temperature-dependent increase in TCDs through an enhanced inactivation, resulting in QT prolongation and TdP at a febrile state in patients with LQT2.
