Lysine-specific demethylase 6A; Histone demethylase that specifically demethylates 'Lys-27' of histone H3, thereby playing a central role in histone code. Demethylates trimethylated and dimethylated but not monomethylated H3 'Lys-27'. Plays a central role in regulation of posterior development, by regulating HOX gene expression. Demethylation of 'Lys-27' of histone H3 is concomitant with methylation of 'Lys-4' of histone H3, and regulates the recruitment of the PRC1 complex and monoubiquitination of histone H2A. Plays a demethylase-independent role in chromatin remodeling to regulate T [...] 
Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare developmental disorder principally comprised of developmental delay, hypotonia and a clearly defined dysmorphism: elongation of the structures surrounding the eyes, a shortened and depressed nose, thinning of the upper lip and thickening of the lower lip, large and prominent ears, hypertrichosis and scoliosis. Other characteristics include poor physical growth, cardiac, gastrointestinal and renal anomalies as well as variable behavioral issues, including autistic features. De novo or inherited pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in the KMT2D gene are the most common cause of KS and account for up to 75% of patients. Variants in KDM6A cause up to 5% of cases (X-linked dominant inheritance), while the etiology of about 20% of cases remains unknown. Current KS diagnostic criteria include hypotonia during infancy, developmental delay and/or intellectual disability, typical dysmorphism and confirmed pathogenic/likely pathogenic variant in KMT2D or KDM6A. Care for KS patients includes the control of physical and psychomotor development during childhood, rehabilitation and multi-specialist care. This paper reviews the current clinical knowledge, provides molecular and scientific links and sheds light on the treatment of Kabuki syndrome individuals.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a malignancy characterized by a poor prognosis and high mortality rate. Genetic mutations and altered molecular pathways serve as targets in precise therapy. Using next-generation sequencing (NGS), these aberrant alterations can be identified and used to develop strategies that will selectively kill cancerous cells in patients with PDAC. The realization of targeted therapies in patients with PDAC may be summarized by three approaches. First, because oncogenes play a pivotal role in tumorigenesis, inhibition of dysregulated oncogenes is a promising method (Table 3). Numerous researchers are developing strategies to target oncogenes, such as KRAS, NRG1, and NTRK and related molecules, although most of the results are unsatisfactory. Accordingly, emerging strategies are being developed to target these oncogenes, including simultaneously inhibiting multiple molecules or pathways, modification of mutant residues by small molecules, and RNA interference. Second, researchers have attempted to reactivate inactivated tumour suppressors or modulate related molecules. TP53, CDKN2A and SMAD4 are three major tumour suppressors involved in PDAC. Advances have been achieved in clinical and preclinical trials of therapies targeting these three genes, and further investigations are warranted. The TGF-beta-SMAD4 signalling pathway plays a dual role in PDAC tumorigenesis and participates in mediating tumour-stroma crosstalk and modulating the tumour microenvironment (TME); thus, molecular subtyping of pancreatic cancer according to the SMAD4 mutation status may be a promising precision oncology technique. Finally, genes such as KDM6A and BRCA have vital roles in maintaining the structural stability and physiological functions of normal chromosomes and are deficient in some patients with PDAC, thus serving as potential targets for correcting these deficiencies and precisely killing these aberrant tumour cells. Recent clinical trials, such as the POLO (Pancreas Cancer Olaparib Ongoing) trial, have reported encouraging outcomes. In addition to genetic event-guided treatment, immunotherapies such as chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T), antibody-drug conjugates, and immune checkpoint inhibitors also exhibit the potential to target tumours precisely, although the clinical value of immunotherapies as treatments for PDAC is still limited. In this review, we focus on recent preclinical and clinical advances in therapies targeting aberrant genes and pathways and predict the future trend of precision oncology for PDAC.
Lysine demethylase 6A (KDM6A), also known as UTX, belongs to the KDM6 family of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) demethylases, which also includes UTY and KDM6B (JMJD3). The KDM6A protein contains six tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domains and an enzymatic Jumonji C (JmjC) domain that catalyzes the removal of di- and trimethylation on H3K27. KDM6A physically associates with histone H3 lysine 4 monomethyltransferases MLL3 (KMT2C) and MLL4 (KMT2D). Since its identification as an H3K27 demethylase in 2007, studies have reported KDM6A's critical roles in cell differentiation, development, and cancer. KDM6A is important for differentiation of embryonic stem cells and development of various tissues. Mutations of KDM6A cause Kabuki syndrome. KDM6A is frequently mutated in cancers and functions as a tumor suppressor. KDM6A is redundant with UTY and functions largely independently of its demethylase activity. It regulates gene expression, likely through the associated transcription factors and MLL3/4 on enhancers. However, KDM6A enzymatic activity is required in certain cellular contexts. Functional redundancy between H3K27 demethylase activities of KDM6A and KDM6B in vivo has yet to be determined. Further understanding of KDM6A functions and working mechanisms will provide more insights into enhancer regulation and may help generate novel therapeutic approaches to treat KDM6A-related diseases.
BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a clinically recognisable syndrome in which 70% of patients have a pathogenic variant in KMT2D or KDM6A. Understanding the function of these genes opens the door to targeted therapies. The purpose of this report is to propose diagnostic criteria for KS, particularly when molecular genetic testing is equivocal. METHODS: An international group of experts created consensus diagnostic criteria for KS. Systematic PubMed searches returned 70 peer-reviewed publications in which at least one individual with molecularly confirmed KS was reported. The clinical features of individuals with known mutations were reviewed. RESULTS: The authors propose that a definitive diagnosis can be made in an individual of any age with a history of infantile hypotonia, developmental delay and/or intellectual disability, and one or both of the following major criteria: (1) a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant in KMT2D or KDM6A; and (2) typical dysmorphic features (defined below) at some point of life. Typical dysmorphic features include long palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of the lower eyelid and two or more of the following: (1) arched and broad eyebrows with the lateral third displaying notching or sparseness; (2) short columella with depressed nasal tip; (3) large, prominent or cupped ears; and (4) persistent fingertip pads. Further criteria for a probable and possible diagnosis, including a table of suggestive clinical features, are presented. CONCLUSION: As targeted therapies for KS are being developed, it is important to be able to make the correct diagnosis, either with or without molecular genetic confirmation.
Characterization of the prostate cancer transcriptome and genome has identified chromosomal rearrangements and copy number gains and losses, including ETS gene family fusions, PTEN loss and androgen receptor (AR) amplification, which drive prostate cancer development and progression to lethal, metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, less is known about the role of mutations. Here we sequenced the exomes of 50 lethal, heavily pre-treated metastatic CRPCs obtained at rapid autopsy (including three different foci from the same patient) and 11 treatment-naive, high-grade localized prostate cancers. We identified low overall mutation rates even in heavily treated CRPCs (2.00 per megabase) and confirmed the monoclonal origin of lethal CRPC. Integrating exome copy number analysis identified disruptions of CHD1 that define a subtype of ETS gene family fusion-negative prostate cancer. Similarly, we demonstrate that ETS2, which is deleted in approximately one-third of CRPCs (commonly through TMPRSS2:ERG fusions), is also deregulated through mutation. Furthermore, we identified recurrent mutations in multiple chromatin- and histone-modifying genes, including MLL2 (mutated in 8.6% of prostate cancers), and demonstrate interaction of the MLL complex with the AR, which is required for AR-mediated signalling. We also identified novel recurrent mutations in the AR collaborating factor FOXA1, which is mutated in 5 of 147 (3.4%) prostate cancers (both untreated localized prostate cancer and CRPC), and showed that mutated FOXA1 represses androgen signalling and increases tumour growth. Proteins that physically interact with the AR, such as the ERG gene fusion product, FOXA1, MLL2, UTX (also known as KDM6A) and ASXL1 were found to be mutated in CRPC. In summary, we describe the mutational landscape of a heavily treated metastatic cancer, identify novel mechanisms of AR signalling deregulated in prostate cancer, and prioritize candidates for future study.
BACKGROUND: KDM6A, a histone demethylase, is frequently mutated in bladder cancer (BCa). However, the role and detailed molecular mechanism of KDM6A involved in bladder cancer progression remains unknown. METHODS: Tissue specimens were used to determine the expression levels and prognostic values of KDM6A and ARHGDIB. The MTT, colony formation, wound healing and Transwell migration and invasion assays were employed to detect the BCa cell proliferation, migration and invasion, respectively. Chemotaxis of macrophages was used to evaluate the ability of KDM6A to recruit macrophages. A subcutaneous tumour model and tail vein tumour injection in nude mice were used to assess the role of KDM6A in vivo. RNA sequencing, qPCR, Western blot, ChIP and phalloidin staining assay were performed to investigate the molecular functions of KDM6A. Dual-luciferase reporter assay was used to determine the effects of KDM6A and FOXA1 on the promoters of the ARHGDIB and KDM6A. RESULTS: We showed that the KDM6A inhibited the motility and invasiveness of the BCa cells. Mechanistically, KDM6A promotes the transcription of ARHGDIB by demethylating histone H3 lysine di/trimethylation (H3K27me2/3) and consequently leads to inhibition of Rac1. EZH2, which catalyses the methylation of H3K27, functions to silence ARHGDIB expression, and an EZH2 inhibitor can neutralize the metastatic effect caused by KDM6A deficiency. Furthermore, we demonstrated that FOXA1 directly binds to the KDM6A promoter and thus transactivates KDM6A, leading to diminished metastatic potential. CONCLUSION: Our findings establish the critical role of the FOXA1-KDM6A-ARHGDIB axis in restraining the malignancy of BCa and identify KDM6A and EZH2 as potential therapeutic targets in the management of BCa.
Recent studies on mutations in cancer genomes have distinguished driver mutations from passenger mutations, which occur as byproducts of cancer development. The cancer genome atlas (TCGA) project identified 299 genes and 24 pathways/biological processes that drive tumor progression (Cell 173: 371-385 e318, 2018). Of the 299 driver genes, 12 genes are involved in histones, histone methylation, and demethylation (Table 1). Among these 12 genes, those encoding the histone demethylases JARID1C/KDM5C and UTX/KDM6A were identified as cancer driver genes. Furthermore, gain-of-function mutations in genes encoding metabolic enzymes, such as isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDH)1/2, drive tumor progression by producing an oncometabolite, D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG), which is a competitive inhibitor of alpha-ketoglutarate, O(2)-dependent dioxygenases such as Jumonji domain-containing histone demethylases, and DNA demethylases. Studies on oncometabolites suggest that histone demethylases mediate metabolic changes in chromatin structure. We have reviewed the most recent findings regarding cancer-specific metabolic reprogramming and the tumor-suppressive roles of JARID1C/KDM5C and UTX/KDM6A. We have also discussed mutations in other isoforms such as the JARID1A, 1B, 1D of KDM5 subfamilies and the JMJD3/KDM6B of KDM6 subfamilies, which play opposing roles in tumor progression as oncogenes or tumor suppressors depending on the cancer cell type. Table 1 Cancer driver genes involved in epigenetics Pathways involved in epigenetics Driver genes Tumor suppressor/oncogene prediction (by 20/20+(a)) Approved name Activity Cancer type(b) Other driver genes in this pathways Histone modification KDM6A tsg Lysine demethylase 6A, UTX H3K27me2/3 demethylase BLCA, HNSC, KIRP, LUSC, PAAD, PANCAN, PRAD PPP6C SETD2 tsg SET domain-containing 2 H3K36 methyl transferase KIRC, KIRP, LGG, LUAD, MESO, PANCAN Chromatin histone modifiers KDM5C tsg Lysine demethylase 5C, JARID1C H3K4me2/3 demethylase KIRC, PANCAN ARID5B, CREBBP, EP300, KANSL1, MEN1, NCOR1, NSD1, SIN3A, WHSC1, ZMYM3 KMT2A tsg Lysine methyltransferase 2A H3K4 methyl transferase PANCAN KMT2B tsg Lysine methyltransferase 2B H3K4 methyl transferase PANCAN, UCEC KMT2C tsg Lysine methyltransferase 2C H3K4 methyl transferase BLCA, BRCA, CESC, PANCAN, UCEC KMT2D tsg Lysine methyltransferase 2D H3K4 methyl transferase BLCA, CESC, DLBC, ESCA, HNSC, LUSC, PANCAN, PRAD Chromatin (other) H3F3A Possible oncogene H3 histone family member 3A, H3.3A PANCAN AJUBA, ASXL1, ASXL2, ATF7IP, BCOR, CHD3, CHD4, CHD8, CTCF, NIPBL, NPM1 H3F3C - H3 histone family member 3C, H3.5 PANCAN HIST1H1E Possible oncogene HIST1H1E, H1.4 DLBC Possible tsg HIST1H1E, H1.4 LIHC Metabolism IDH1 Oncogene Isocitrate dehydrogenase (NADP(+)) 1 NADP-dependent IDH, Cytosolic CHOL, GBM, LAML, LGG, LIHC, PANCAN, PRAD, SKCM - IDH2 Oncogene Isocitrate dehydrogenase (NADP(+)) 2 NADP-dependent IDH, Mitochondrial LAML, LGG, PANCAN Among the 299 driver genes mentioned by Bailey et al.(47), only the epigenetics-related pathways have been sorted out (a)20/20+: Classifies genes as an oncogene, tumor suppressor gene, or as a nondriver gene using Random Forests, http://2020plus.readthedocs.org (b)BLCA (bladder urothelial carcinoma), BRCA (breast invasive carcinoma), CESC (cervical squamous cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma), CHOL (cholangiocarcinoma), DLBC (lymphoid neoplasm diffuse large B-cell lymphoma), ESCA (esophageal carcinoma), GBM (glioblastoma multiforme), HNSC (head and neck squamous cell carcinoma), KIRC (kidney renal clear cell carcinoma), KIRP (kidney renal papillary cell carcinoma), LAML (acute myeloid leukemia), LGG (brain lower grade glioma), LIHC (liver hepatocellular carcinoma), LUAD (lung adenocarcinoma), LUSC (lung squamous cell carcinoma), MESO (mesothelioma), PAAD (pancreatic adenocarcinoma), PANCAN (Pan-cancer), PRAD (prostate adenocarcinoma), SKCM (skin cutaneous melanoma), THCA (thyroid carcinoma), UCEC (uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma).
Knowledge of somatic mutation accumulation in normal cells, which is essential for understanding cancer development and evolution, remains largely lacking. In this study, we investigated somatic clonal events in morphologically normal human urothelium (MNU; epithelium lining the bladder and ureter) and identified macroscopic clonal expansions. Aristolochic acid (AA), a natural herb-derived compound, was a major mutagenic driving factor in MNU. AA drastically accelerates mutation accumulation and enhances clonal expansion. Mutations in MNU were widely observed in chromatin remodeling genes such as KMT2D and KDM6A but rarely in TP53, PIK3CA, and FGFR3 KMT2D mutations were found to be common in urothelial cells, regardless of whether the cells experience exogenous mutagen exposure. Copy number alterations were rare and largely confined to small-scale regions, along with copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity. Single AA-associated clones in MNU expanded to a scale of several square centimeters in size.
UTX (also known as KDM6A) encodes a histone H3K27 demethylase and is an important tumour suppressor that is frequently mutated in human cancers(1). However, as the demethylase activity of UTX is often dispensable for mediating tumour suppression and developmental regulation(2-8), the underlying molecular activity of UTX remains unknown. Here we show that phase separation of UTX underlies its chromatin-regulatory activity in tumour suppression. A core intrinsically disordered region (cIDR) of UTX forms phase-separated liquid condensates, and cIDR loss caused by the most frequent cancer mutation of UTX is mainly responsible for abolishing tumour suppression. Deletion, mutagenesis and replacement assays of the intrinsically disordered region demonstrate a critical role of UTX condensation in tumour suppression and embryonic stem cell differentiation. As shown by reconstitution in vitro and engineered systems in cells, UTX recruits the histone methyltransferase MLL4 (also known as KMT2D) to the same condensates and enriches the H3K4 methylation activity of MLL4. Moreover, UTX regulates genome-wide histone modifications and high-order chromatin interactions in a condensation-dependent manner. We also found that UTY, the Y chromosome homologue of UTX with weaker tumour-suppressive activity, forms condensates with reduced molecular dynamics. These studies demonstrate a crucial biological function of liquid condensates with proper material states in enabling the tumour-suppressive activity of a chromatin regulator.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the major causes of death from cancer and has a very poor prognosis with few effective therapeutic options. Despite the approval of lenvatinib for the treatment of patients suffering from advanced HCC, only a small number of patients can benefit from this targeted therapy. METHODS: Diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-CCL4 mouse liver tumour and the xenograft tumour models were used to evaluate the function of KDM6A in HCC progression. The xenograft tumour model and HCC cell lines were used to evaluate the role of KDM6A in HCC drug sensitivity to lenvatinib. RNA-seq and ChIP assays were conducted for mechanical investigation. RESULTS: We revealed that KDM6A exhibited a significant upregulation in HCC tissues and was associated with an unfavourable prognosis. We further demonstrated that KDM6A knockdown remarkably suppressed HCC cell proliferation and migration in vitro. Moreover, hepatic Kdm6a loss also inhibited liver tumourigenesis in a mouse liver tumour model. Mechanistically, KDM6A loss downregulated the FGFR4 expression to suppress the PI3K-AKT-mTOR signalling pathway, leading to a glucose and lipid metabolism re-programming in HCC. KDM6A and FGFR4 levels were positively correlated in HCC specimens and mouse liver tumour tissues. Notably, KDM6A knockdown significantly inhibited the efficacy of lenvatinib therapy in HCC cells in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed that KDM6A promoted HCC progression by activating FGFR4 expression and may be an essential molecule for influencing the efficacy of lenvatinib in HCC therapy.
Medulloblastoma is the most common pediatric malignant brain tumor. Advances in molecular profiling have uncovered significant heterogeneity among medulloblastomas and led to the identification of four distinct subgroups (wingless [WNT], sonic hedgehog [SHH], group 3, and group 4) that represent distinct disease entities in both underlying biology and clinical characteristics. The rapidly expanding repertoire of tools to study developmental and cancer biology is providing a wealth of knowledge about these embryonal tumors and is continuously refining the understanding of this complex cancer. In this review, the history of discovery in medulloblastoma is discussed, setting a foundation to outline the current state of understanding of the molecular underpinnings of this disease, with a focus on genomic events that define the aforementioned subgroups and evolving areas of focus, such as the cell of origin of medulloblastoma and medulloblastoma subtypes. With these recent discoveries in mind, the current state of medulloblastoma treatment and clinical trials is reviewed, including a novel risk stratification system that accounts for the molecular biomarkers of patients with a high risk for refractory disease. Lastly, critical areas of focus for future basic science and clinical research on this disease are discussed, such as the complexities of medulloblastoma metastases and recurrence as well as the priorities and strategies to implement in future clinical trials.
Lysine (K)-specific demethylase 6A (KDM6A) is a frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). However, the impact of KDM6A loss on the PDAC tumor immune microenvironment is not known. This study used a genetically engineered, pancreas-specific Kdm6a knockout (KO) PDAC mouse model and human PDAC tissue samples to demonstrate that KDM6A loss correlates with increased tumor-associated neutrophils and neutrophil extracellular traps (NET) formation, which are known to contribute to PDAC progression. Genome-wide bromouridine sequencing analysis to evaluate nascent RNA synthesis showed that the expression of many chemotactic cytokines, especially CXC motif chemokine ligand 1 (CXCL1), was upregulated in KDM6A KO PDAC cells. KDM6A-deficient PDAC cells secreted higher levels of CXCL1 protein, which in turn recruited neutrophils. Furthermore, in a syngeneic orthotopic mouse model, treatment with a CXCL1 neutralizing antibody blocked the chemotactic and NET-promoting properties of KDM6A-deficient PDAC cells and suppressed tumor growth, confirming CXCL1 as a key mediator of chemotaxis and PDAC growth driven by KDM6A loss. These findings shed light on how KDM6A regulates the tumor immune microenvironment and PDAC progression and suggests that the CXCL1-CXCR2 axis may be a candidate target in PDAC with KDM6A loss. SIGNIFICANCE: KDM6A loss in pancreatic cancer cells alters the immune microenvironment by increasing CXCL1 secretion and neutrophil recruitment, providing a rationale for targeting the CXCL1-CXCR2 signaling axis in tumors with low KDM6A.
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) exists broadly in four molecular subtypes: ASCL1, NEUROD1, POU2F3 and Inflammatory. Initially, SCLC subtypes were thought to be mutually exclusive, but recent evidence shows intra-tumoural subtype heterogeneity and plasticity between subtypes. Here, using a CRISPR-based autochthonous SCLC genetically engineered mouse model to study the consequences of KDM6A/UTX inactivation, we show that KDM6A inactivation induced plasticity from ASCL1 to NEUROD1 resulting in SCLC tumours that express both ASCL1 and NEUROD1. Mechanistically, KDM6A normally maintains an active chromatin state that favours the ASCL1 subtype with its loss decreasing H3K4me1 and increasing H3K27me3 at enhancers of neuroendocrine genes leading to a cell state that is primed for ASCL1-to-NEUROD1 subtype switching. This work identifies KDM6A as an epigenetic regulator that controls ASCL1 to NEUROD1 subtype plasticity and provides an autochthonous SCLC genetically engineered mouse model to model ASCL1 and NEUROD1 subtype heterogeneity and plasticity, which is found in 35-40% of human SCLCs.
Lysine-specific demethylase 6A (KDM6A), also named UTX, is frequently mutated in bladder cancer (BCa). Although known as a tumor suppressor, KDM6A's therapeutic potential in the metastasis of BCa remains elusive. It also remains difficult to fulfill the effective up-regulation of KDM6A levels in bladder tumor tissues in situ to verify its potential in treating BCa metastasis. Here, we report a mucoadhesive messenger RNA (mRNA) nanoparticle (NP) strategy for the intravesical delivery of KDM6A-mRNA in mice bearing orthotopic Kdm6a-null BCa and show evidence of KDM6A's therapeutic potential in inhibiting the metastasis of BCa. Through this mucoadhesive mRNA NP strategy, the exposure of KDM6A-mRNA to the in situ BCa tumors can be greatly prolonged for effective expression, and the penetration can be also enhanced by adhering to the bladder for sustained delivery. This mRNA NP strategy is also demonstrated to be effective for combination cancer therapy with other clinically approved drugs (e.g., elemene), which could further enhance therapeutic outcomes. Our findings not only report intravesical delivery of mRNA via a mucoadhesive mRNA NP strategy but also provide the proof-of-concept for the usefulness of these mRNA NPs as tools in both mechanistic understanding and translational study of bladder-related diseases.
Oxygen sensing is central to metazoan biology and has implications for human disease. Mammalian cells express multiple oxygen-dependent enzymes called 2-oxoglutarate (OG)-dependent dioxygenases (2-OGDDs), but they vary in their oxygen affinities and hence their ability to sense oxygen. The 2-OGDD histone demethylases control histone methylation. Hypoxia increases histone methylation, but whether this reflects direct effects on histone demethylases or indirect effects caused by the hypoxic induction of the HIF (hypoxia-inducible factor) transcription factor or the 2-OG antagonist 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG) is unclear. Here, we report that hypoxia promotes histone methylation in a HIF- and 2-HG-independent manner. We found that the H3K27 histone demethylase KDM6A/UTX, but not its paralog KDM6B, is oxygen sensitive. KDM6A loss, like hypoxia, prevented H3K27 demethylation and blocked cellular differentiation. Restoring H3K27 methylation homeostasis in hypoxic cells reversed these effects. Thus, oxygen directly affects chromatin regulators to control cell fate.
BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome (KS), is a infrequent inherited malformation syndrome caused by mutations in a H3 lysine 4 methylase (KMT2D) or an X-linked histone H3 lysine 27 demethylase (UTX/KDM6A). The characteristics in patients with KS have not yet been well recognized. DATA SOURCES: We used databases including PubMed and Google Scholar to search for publications about the clinical features and the etiology of Kabuki syndrome. The most relevant articles to the scope of this review were chosen for analysis. RESULTS: Clinical diagnosis of KS is challenging in initial period, because many clinical characteristics become apparent only in subsequent years. Recently, the genetic and functional interaction between KS-associated genes and their products have been elucidated. New clinical findings were reported including nervous system and intellectual performance, endocrine-related disorders and immune deficiency and autoimmune disease. Cancer risks of Kabuki syndrome was reviewed. Meanwhile, we discussed the Kabuki-like syndrome. Digital clinical genetic service, such as dysmorphology database can improve availability and provide high-quality diagnostic services. Given the significant clinical relevance of KS-associated genes and epigenetic modifications crosstalk, efforts in the research for new mechanisms are thus of maximum interest. CONCLUSIONS: Kabuki syndrome has a strong clinical and biological heterogeneity. The main pathogenesis of Kabuki syndrome is the imbalance between switch-on and -off of the chromatin. The direction of drug research may be to regulate the normal opening of chromatin. Small molecule inhibitors of histone deacetylases maybe helpful in treatment of mental retardation and reduce cancer risk in KS.
Large granular lymphocyte (LGL) leukemia comprises a group of rare lymphoproliferative disorders whose molecular landscape is incompletely defined. We leveraged paired whole-exome and transcriptome sequencing in the largest LGL leukemia cohort to date, which included 105 patients (93 T-cell receptor alphabeta [TCRalphabeta] T-LGL and 12 TCRgammadelta T-LGL). Seventy-six mutations were observed in 3 or more patients in the cohort, and out of those, STAT3, KMT2D, PIK3R1, TTN, EYS, and SULF1 mutations were shared between both subtypes. We identified ARHGAP25, ABCC9, PCDHA11, SULF1, SLC6A15, DDX59, DNMT3A, FAS, KDM6A, KMT2D, PIK3R1, STAT3, STAT5B, TET2, and TNFAIP3 as recurrently mutated putative drivers using an unbiased driver analysis approach leveraging our whole-exome cohort. Hotspot mutations in STAT3, PIK3R1, and FAS were detected, whereas truncating mutations in epigenetic modifying enzymes such as KMT2D and TET2 were observed. Moreover, STAT3 mutations co-occurred with mutations in chromatin and epigenetic modifying genes, especially KMT2D and SETD1B (P < .01 and P < .05, respectively). STAT3 was mutated in 50.5% of the patients. Most common Y640F STAT3 mutation was associated with lower absolute neutrophil count values, and N647I mutation was associated with lower hemoglobin values. Somatic activating mutations (Q160P, D170Y, L287F) in the STAT3 coiled-coil domain were characterized. STAT3-mutant patients exhibited increased mutational burden and enrichment of a mutational signature associated with increased spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine. Finally, gene expression analysis revealed enrichment of interferon-gamma signaling and decreased phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt signaling for STAT3-mutant patients. These findings highlight the clinical and molecular heterogeneity of this rare disorder.
Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare but recognizable condition that consists of a characteristic face, short stature, various organ malformations, and a variable degree of intellectual disability. Mutations in KMT2D have been identified as the main cause for KS, whereas mutations in KDM6A are a much less frequent cause. Here, we report a mutation screening in a case series of 347 unpublished patients, in which we identified 12 novel KDM6A mutations (KS type 2) and 208 mutations in KMT2D (KS type 1), 132 of them novel. Two of the KDM6A mutations were maternally inherited and nine were shown to be de novo. We give an up-to-date overview of all published mutations for the two KS genes and point out possible mutation hot spots and strategies for molecular genetic testing. We also report the clinical details for 11 patients with KS type 2, summarize the published clinical information, specifically with a focus on the less well-defined X-linked KS type 2, and comment on phenotype-genotype correlations as well as sex-specific phenotypic differences. Finally, we also discuss a possible role of KDM6A in Kabuki-like Turner syndrome and report a mutation screening of KDM6C (UTY) in male KS patients.
Understanding sex differences in physiology and disease requires the identification of the molecular agents that cause phenotypic sex differences. Two groups of such agents are genes located on the sex chromosomes, and gonadal hormones. The former have coherent linkage to chromosomes that form differently in the two sexes under the influence of genomic forces that are not related to reproductive function, whereas the latter have a direct or indirect relationship to reproduction. Evidence published in the past 5 years supports the identification of several agents of sexual differentiation encoded by the X chromosome in mice, including Kdm5c, Kdm6a, Ogt and Xist. These X chromosome agents have wide pleiotropic effects, potentially influencing sex differences in many different tissues, a characteristic shared with the gonadal hormones. The identification of X chromosome agents of sexual differentiation will facilitate understanding of complex intersecting gene pathways underlying sex differences in disease.
Histone demethylases remove transcriptional repressive marks from histones in the nucleus. KDM6A (also known as UTX) is a lysine demethylase which acts on the trimethylated lysine at position 27 in histone 3. The KDM6A gene is located on the X chromosome but escapes X inactivation even though it is not located in the pseudoautosomal region. There is a homologue of KDM6A on the Y chromosome, known as UTY. UTY was thought to have lost its demethylase activity and to represent a non-functional remnant of the ancestral KDM6A gene. However, results with knockout mice suggest that the gene is expressed and the protein performs some function within the cell. Female mice with homozygous deletion of Kdm6a do not survive, but hemizygous males are viable, attributed to the presence of the Uty gene. KDM6A is mutated in the human condition Kabuki syndrome type 2 (OMIM 300867) and in many cases of cancer. The amino acid sequence of KDM6A has been conserved across animal phyla, although it is only found on the X chromosome in eutherian mammals. In this review, we reanalyse existing data from various sources (protein sequence comparison, evolutionary genetics, transcription factor binding and gene expression analysis) to determine the function, expression and evolution of KDM6A and UTY and show that UTY has a functional role similar to KDM6A in metabolism and development.
