Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for VEGFA, VEGFC and VEGFD. Plays an essential role in the regulation of angiogenesis, vascular development, vascular permeability, and embryonic hematopoiesis. Promotes proliferation, survival, migration and differentiation of endothelial cells. Promotes reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Isoforms lacking a transmembrane domain, such as isoform 2 and isoform 3, may function as decoy receptors for VEGFA, VEGFC and/or VEGFD. Isoform 2 plays an important role as negative reg [...] 
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an endothelial cell-specific mitogen in vitro and an angiogenic inducer in a variety of in vivo models. Hypoxia has been shown to be a major inducer of VEGF gene transcription. The tyrosine kinases Flt-1 (VEGFR-1) and Flk-1/KDR (VEGFR-2) are high-affinity VEGF receptors. The role of VEGF in developmental angiogenesis is emphasized by the finding that loss of a single VEGF allele results in defective vascularization and early embryonic lethality. VEGF is critical also for reproductive and bone angiogenesis. Substantial evidence also implicates VEGF as a mediator of pathological angiogenesis. In situ hybridization studies demonstrate expression of VEGF mRNA in the majority of human tumors. Anti-VEGF monoclonal antibodies and other VEGF inhibitors block the growth of several tumor cell lines in nude mice. Clinical trials with various VEGF inhibitors in a variety of malignancies are ongoing. Very recently, an anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody (bevacizumab; Avastin) has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration as a first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer in combination with chemotherapy. Furthermore, VEGF is implicated in intraocular neovascularization associated with diabetic retinopathy and age-related macular degeneration.
The liver is known for its remarkable regenerative ability through proliferation of hepatocytes. Yet, during chronic injury or severe hepatocyte death, proliferation of hepatocytes is exhausted. To overcome this hurdle, we propose vascular-endothelial-growth-factor A (VEGFA) as a therapeutic means to accelerate biliary epithelial-cell (BEC)-to-hepatocyte conversion. Investigation in zebrafish establishes that blocking VEGF receptors abrogates BEC-driven liver repair, while VEGFA overexpression promotes it. Delivery of VEGFA via nonintegrative and safe nucleoside-modified mRNA encapsulated into lipid nanoparticles (mRNA-LNPs) in acutely or chronically injured mouse livers induces robust BEC-to-hepatocyte conversion and elimination of steatosis and fibrosis. In human and murine diseased livers, we further identified VEGFA-receptor KDR-expressing BECs associated with KDR-expressing cell-derived hepatocytes. This work defines KDR-expressing cells, most likely being BECs, as facultative progenitors. This study reveals unexpected therapeutic benefits of VEGFA delivered via nucleoside-modified mRNA-LNP, whose safety is widely validated with COVID-19 vaccines, for harnessing BEC-driven repair to potentially treat liver diseases.
Oxygen is vital for the existence of all multicellular organisms, acting as a signalling molecule regulating cellular activities. Specifically, hypoxia, which occurs when the partial pressure of oxygen falls below 5%, plays a pivotal role during development, regeneration and cancer. Here we report a novel hypoxia-inducible (HI) hydrogel composed of gelatin and ferulic acid that can form hydrogel networks via oxygen consumption in a laccase-mediated reaction. Oxygen levels and gradients within the hydrogels can be accurately controlled and precisely predicted. We demonstrate that HI hydrogels guide vascular morphogenesis in vitro via hypoxia-inducible factors activation of matrix metalloproteinases and promote rapid neovascularization from the host tissue during subcutaneous wound healing. The HI hydrogel is a new class of biomaterials that may prove useful in many applications, ranging from fundamental studies of developmental, regenerative and disease processes through the engineering of healthy and diseased tissue models towards the treatment of hypoxia-regulated disorders.
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) infection is linked to the development of adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) and the neuroinflammatory disease, HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). The HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein regulates viral gene expression and persistently activates NF-kappaB to maintain the viability of HTLV-1-infected T cells. Here, we utilize a kinome-wide shRNA screen to identify the tyrosine kinase KDR as an essential survival factor of HTLV-1-transformed cells. Inhibition of KDR specifically induces apoptosis of Tax expressing HTLV-1-transformed cell lines and CD4 + T cells from HAM/TSP patients. Furthermore, inhibition of KDR triggers the autophagic degradation of Tax resulting in impaired NF-kappaB activation and diminished viral transmission in co-culture assays. Tax induces the expression of KDR, forms a complex with KDR, and is phosphorylated by KDR. These findings suggest that Tax stability is dependent on KDR activity which could be exploited as a strategy to target Tax in HTLV-1-associated diseases.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent tumor of the central nervous system, and its heterogeneity is a challenge in treatment. This study examined tumoral heterogeneity involving PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR gene amplification (GA) in 4q12 and its association with clinical parameters. Specimens from 22 GBM cases with GA for the 4q12 amplicon detected by FISH were investigated for homogeneous or heterogeneous coamplification patterns, diffuse or focal distribution of cells harboring GA throughout tumor sections, and pattern of clustering of fluorescence signals. Sixteen cases had homogenously amplification for all three genes (45.5%), for PDGFRA and KDR (22.7%), or only for PDGFRA (4.6%); six cases had heterogeneous GA patterns, with subpopulations including GA for all three genes and for two genes - PDGFRA and KDR (13.6%), or GA for all three and for only one gene - PDGFRA (9.1%) or KIT (4.6%). In 6 tumors (27.3%), GA was observed in focal tumor areas, while in the remaining 16 tumors (72.7%) it was diffusely distributed throughout the pathological specimen. Amplification was universally expressed as double minutes and homogenously stained regions. Coamplification of all three genes PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR, age >/= 60 years, and total tumor resection were statistically associated with poor prognosis. FISH proved effective for detailed interpretation of molecular heterogeneity. The study uncovered an even more diverse range of amplification patterns involving the 4q12 oncogenes in GBM than previously described, thus highlighting a complex tumoral heterogeneity to be considered when devising more effective therapies.
Mosquitoes within the Culex pipiens complex are widely distributed and important in the transmission of many human diseases. Insecticides, pyrethroids in particular, remain a mainstay for control of these important vectors. In this paper we review what is known about the levels, mechanisms and fitness costs of pyrethroid resistance in Cx. pipiens. Pyrethroid resistance in Cx. pipiens is a global problem, and resistance ratios of up to 7000-fold have been found in larvae of field collected mosquitoes. However, there is considerable variation between populations, indicating significant geographic heterogeneity of the resistance. The two major mechanisms of resistance to pyrethroids in Culex are mutations in Vssc (target site insensitivity) and overexpression of cytochrome P450(s) (increased detoxification). The most frequently reported Vssc mutation is L1014F (i.e. kdr), which has been found throughout the world. The L1014S mutation has been found in Cx. p. pallens from Japan and China, and in Cx. p. pipiens from China. The L1014C mutation has only been reported for Cx. p. pipens molestus from China and the V1016G mutation has only been reported from Saudi Arabia. Studies on the P450s of Cx. pipiens have identified several that are overexpressed (measured as transcript levels) in pyrethroid resistant strains. CYP9M10 is consistently overexpressed in pyrethroid resistant Cx. pipiens from at least seven countries, suggesting this P450 might be of global importance in resistance. Both CYP9M10-mediated pyrethroid resistance and kdr have fitness costs in the absence of insecticides under certain environmental conditions. Research needs and future directions are discussed.
Eleven known prenyl xanthones, isolated from the pericarp of Garcinia mangostana, were tested for their ability to inhibit the phosphorylation of kinase domain receptor (KDR) tyrosine kinase. alpha-Mangostin was found to inhibit phosphorylation of KDR. alpha-Mangostin also showed to inhibit phosphorylation of the Y1175 residue of KDR (10 muM). This is the first report that alpha-mangostin inhibited the phosphorylation of KDR tyrosine kinase and also the Y1175 residue of KDR. alpha-Mangostin also showed inhibitory effects on proliferation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) (IC(50) 1.2 muM) and human umbilical artery endothelial cells (IC(50) 2.4 muM), as well as the migration (IC(50) 0.034 muM) and tubule formation (at the concentrations of 0.6 and 1.2 muM) of HUVECs. These results suggest that the inhibition of the phosphorylation of KDR tyrosine kinase is concerned in the anti-angiogenic activity of alpha-mangostin.
AMG232 effectively inhibits cancers with wild-type p53 (also known as TP53) by reactivating p53, but whether it inhibits glioma angiogenesis remains unclear. This study confirms that AMG232 inhibits the proliferation of glioma endothelial cells (GECs) in a dose-dependent manner and inhibits the angiogenesis of GECs. p53 and RNA-binding motif protein 4 (RBM4) were expressed at low levels in GECs, while MDM2 and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2, also known as KDR) were highly expressed. In vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that AMG232 upregulated p53 and RBM4, and downregulated MDM2 and VEGFR2 by blocking the MDM2-p53 interaction. Both p53 silencing and RBM4 silencing significantly upregulated the expression of VEGFR2, promoted the proliferation, migration and tube formation of GECs, and reversed the effects of AMG232 on downregulating VEGFR2 and inhibiting the angiogenesis of GECs. AMG232 increased RBM4 expression by upregulating p53, and p53 bound to RBM4 and promoted its transcription. RBM4 bound to and shortened the half-life of VEGFR2, promoting its degradation. Finally, AMG232 produced a significant decrease in new vessels and hemoglobin content in vivo. This study proves that AMG232 inhibits glioma angiogenesis by blocking the MDM2-p53 interaction, in which the p53-RBM4-VEGFR2 pathway plays an important role.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays a crucial role in angiogenesis in development, in cancer and in other important diseases. VEGF regulates multiple endothelial cell functions including mitogenesis, permeability, vascular tone, and the production of vasoactive molecules. VEGF is related to several polypeptides which may have different and overlapping functions. The synthesis of VEGF is regulated by hypoxia-mediated control of gene transcription, alternative mRNA splicing and proteolytic processing. The diverse biological activities of VEGF are mediated through at least two receptor protein tyrosine kinases, KDR/Flk-1 and Flt-1. Because of VEGF's central importance for pathophysiological angiogenesis, the development of antagonists for VEGF in the treatment of cancer, and the use of VEGF therapeutically in cardiovascular diseases are now the focus of major research efforts.
The discovery of peripheral circulating cells that contribute to vasculogenesis and endothelial repair was one of the most fascinating breakthroughs in the domain of vascular research during the last two decades. The population of vasculogenic cells however, is heterogeneous and can be analyzed using different approaches including in vitro culture and flow cytometry. Circulating CD34(+)/KDR(+)/CD45(dim) endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) have a great potential as biomarkers in various cardiovascular diseases. With the expanding interest in this field, the development of standardized protocols is critical. In this review we describe in detail the pre-analytical and analytical factors that should be taken into account when quantifying CD34(+)/KDR(+)/CD45(dim) EPC using flow cytometry. Moreover, technical suggestions in order to enhance accuracy and reproducibility of this enumeration are provided.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an important mediator of endothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis via its receptor VEGFR2. A common tumor associated with elevated VEGFR2 signaling is infantile hemangioma that is caused by a rapid proliferation of vascular endothelial cells. The current first-line treatment for infantile hemangioma is the beta-adrenoceptor antagonist, propranolol, although its mechanism of action is not understood. Here we have used bioluminescence resonance energy transfer and VEGFR2 genetically tagged with NanoLuc luciferase to demonstrate that oligomeric complexes involving VEGFR2 and the beta(2)-adrenoceptor can be generated in both cell membranes and intracellular endosomes. These complexes are induced by agonist treatment and retain their ability to couple to intracellular signaling proteins. Furthermore, coupling of beta(2)-adrenoceptor to beta-arrestin2 is prolonged by VEGFR2 activation. These data suggest that protein-protein interactions between VEGFR2, the beta(2)-adrenoceptor, and beta-arrestin2 may provide insight into their roles in health and disease.
BACKGROUND: The physiopathology of life-threatening cerebrovascular complications in preeclampsia is unknown. We investigated whether disruption of the blood-brain barrier, generated using circulating small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) from women with preeclampsia or placentae cultured under hypoxic conditions, impairs the expression of tight junction proteins, such as CLDN5 (claudin-5), mediated by VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), and activation of KDR (VEGFR2 [VEGF receptor 2]). METHODS: We perform a preclinical mechanistic study using sEVs isolated from plasma of pregnant women with normal pregnancy (sEVs-NP; n=9), sEVs isolated from plasma of women with preeclampsia (sEVs-PE; n=9), or sEVs isolated from placentas cultured in normoxia (sEVs-Nor; n=10) or sEVs isolated from placentas cultured in hypoxia (sEVs-Hyp; n=10). The integrity of the blood-brain barrier was evaluated using in vitro (human [hCMEC/D3] and mouse [BEND/3 (brain endothelial cell 3)] brain endothelial cell lines) and in vivo (nonpregnant C57BL/6J mice [4-5 months old; n=13] injected with sEVs-Hyp) models. RESULTS: sEVs-PE and sEVs-Hyp reduced total and membrane-associated protein CLDN5 levels (P<0.05). These results were negated with sEVs-PE sonication. sEVs-Hyp injected into nonpregnant mice generated neurological deficits and blood-brain barrier disruption, specifically in the posterior area of the brain, associated with brain endothelial cell uptake of sEVs, sEVs-Hyp high extravasation, and reduction in CLDN5 levels in the brain cortex. Furthermore, sEVs-PE and sEVs-sHyp had higher VEGF levels than sEVs-NP and sEVs-Nor. Human brain endothelial cells exposed to sEVs-PE exhibited a reduction in the activation of KDR. Reduction in CLDN5 observed in cells treated with sEVs-Hyp was further enhanced in cells treated with KDR selective inhibitor. CONCLUSIONS: sEVs-PE disrupts the blood-brain barrier, an effect replicated with sEVs-Hyp, and involves reduced CLDN5 and elevated VEGF contained within these vesicles. However, our results do not support the participation of KDR activation in the downregulation of CLDN5 observed with sEVs-Hyp. These findings will improve our understanding of the pathophysiology of cerebrovascular alterations in women with preeclampsia.
Ex vivo monitored human CD34(+) stem cells (SCs) injected into myocardium scar tissue have shown real benefits for the recovery of patients with myocardial infarctions. They have been used previously in clinical trials with hopeful results and are expected to be promising for cardiac regenerative medicine following severe acute myocardial infarctions. However, some debates on their potential efficacy in cardiac regenerative therapies remain to be clarified. To elucidate the levels of CD34(+) SC implication and contribution in cardiac regeneration, better identification of the main regulators, pathways, and genes involved in their potential cardiovascular differentiation and paracrine secretion needs to be determined. We first developed a protocol thought to commit human CD34(+) SCs purified from cord blood toward an early cardiovascular lineage. Then, by using a microarray-based approach, we followed their gene expression during differentiation. We compared the transcriptome of undifferentiated CD34(+) cells to those induced at two stages of differentiation (i.e., day three and day fourteen), with human cardiomyocyte progenitor cells (CMPCs), as well as cardiomyocytes as controls. Interestingly, in the treated cells, we observed an increase in the expressions of the main regulators usually present in cardiovascular cells. We identified cell surface markers of the cardiac mesoderm, such as kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) and the cardiogenic surface receptor Frizzled 4 (FZD4), induced in the differentiated cells in comparison to undifferentiated CD34(+) cells. The Wnt and TGF-beta pathways appeared to be involved in this activation. This study underlined the real capacity of effectively stimulated CD34(+) SCs to express cardiac markers and, once induced, allowed the identification of markers that are known to be involved in vascular and early cardiogenesis, demonstrating their potential priming towards cardiovascular cells. These findings could complement their paracrine positive effects known in cell therapy for heart disease and may help improve the efficacy and safety of using ex vivo expanded CD34(+) SCs.
The central role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in angiogenesis in health and disease makes it attractive both as a therapeutic target for anti-angiogenic drugs and as a pro-angiogenic cytokine for the treatment of ischaemic heart disease. While VEGF binds to two receptor protein tyrosine kinases, VEGFR1 (Flt-1) and VEGFR2 (KDR), most biological functions of VEGF are mediated via VEGFR2, and the role of VEGFR1 is currently unknown. Neuropilin-1, a non-tyrosine kinase transmembrane molecule, may function as a co-receptor for VEGFR2. Considerable progress has recently been made towards delineating the signal transduction pathways distal to activation of VEGFR2. Activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase, protein kinase C and Akt pathways are all strongly implicated in mediating diverse cellular biological functions of VEGF, including cell survival, proliferation, the generation of nitric oxide and prostacyclin and angiogenesis. Upregulation of metalloproteinases, activation of focal adhesion kinase and interactions between VEGF receptors and integrins are strongly implicated in VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration. Recent findings suggest important roles for the vasodilators nitric oxide and prostacyclin, in linking post-receptor signaling networks to downstream biological effects and in mediating some in vivo endothelial functions of VEGF.
Dihydroartemisinin (DHA), an effective antimalarial drug, has been widely investigated as an anti-tumor agent. Although previous studies have indicated the potential therapeutic effects of DHA on multiple malignancies, its detailed molecular mechanisms in gastric cancer (GC) are still undocumented. In the present study, we applied network pharmacology and bioinformatics (gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses) to obtain the collective targets of DHA and GC and analyzed their involvement in constructing a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. The top 10% hub targets in this network were identified, and TCGA database was utilized for the single gene analysis of their correlation with the prognosis of GC. CCK8, EdU, Transwell, and flow cytometry analyses were conducted, and subcutaneous xenograft tumor models were constructed to assess the effects of DHA on the tumorigenesis and invasion of GC. Furthermore, the targets of DHA were verified by molecular docking, quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and western blot analyses in GC cells. The results indicated that the common targets of DHA and GC were enriched in multiple cancer-related pathways including KDR, STAT1 and apoptosis signaling pathways, where the core genes included KDR, MMP9, STAT1, TP53, CASP3/7 and BCL2L1. The lowered expression of KDR and increased expression of TP53 and CASP7 harbored a favorable survival for patients with GC patients. CASP7 showed a positive correlation with CASP3 but a negative correlation with KDR and could be regarded as an independent protective factor for overall survival in GC. Moreover, DHA treatment induced cell apoptosis and suppressed the cell proliferation, DNA synthesis, cycle progression and invasive capabilities both in vitro and in vivo. DHA also upregulated p53, CASP3, and cleaved-CASP3 and downregulated BCL2L1, MMP9, KDR, p-KDR, STAT1 and p-STAT1 in GC cell lines. In conclusion, DHA could suppress the tumorigenesis and invasion of GC by regulating STAT1/KDR/MMP9 and p53/BCL2L1/CASP3/7 pathways. Our findings might provide a novel approach for the treatment of GC.
Objective- To determine the role of a cytokine-like protein DKK3 (dikkopf-3) in directly transdifferentiating fibroblasts into endothelial cells (ECs) and the underlying mechanisms. Approach and Results- DKK3 overexpression in human fibroblasts under defined conditions for 4 days led to a notable change in cell morphology and progenitor gene expression. It was revealed that these cells went through mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and subsequently expressed KDR (kinase insert domain receptor) at high levels. Further culture in EC defined media led to differentiation of these progenitors into functional ECs capable of angiogenesis both in vitro and in vivo, which was regulated by the VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor)/miR (microRNA)-125a-5p/Stat3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription factor 3) axis. More importantly, fibroblast-derived ECs showed the ability to form a patent endothelium-like monolayer in tissue-engineered vascular grafts ex vivo. Conclusions- These data demonstrate that DKK3 is capable of directly differentiating human fibroblasts to functional ECs under defined media and provides a novel potential strategy for endothelial regeneration.
BACKGROUND: The current treatment of ocular neovascularization requires frequent intravitreal injections of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents that cause severe side effects. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to prepare and characterize a novel nanoscale delivery system of apatinib for ocular neovascularization. METHODS: The optimized formulation showed a particle size of 135.04 nm, polydispersity index (PDI) of 0.28 +/- 0.07, encapsulation efficiency (EE) of 65.92%, zeta potential (ZP) of -23.70 +/- 8.69 mV, and pH of 6.49 +/- 0.20. In vitro release was carried out to demonstrate a 3.13-fold increase in the sustainability of apatinib-loaded nanoparticles versus free apatinib solution. RESULT: Cell viability and VEGFA and VEGFR2 expression were analyzed in animal retinal pigment epithelial (ARPE-19) cells. CONCLUSION: The results confirmed the hypothesis that apatinib nanoparticles decreased toxicity (1.36 +/- 0.74 fold) and efficient VEGF inhibition (3.51 +/- 0.02 fold) via VEGFR2 mediation.
Metastatic breast cancer is a prevalent life-threatening disease. Paclitaxel (PTX) is widely used in metastatic breast cancer therapy, but the side effects limit its chemotherapeutic application. Multidrug strategies have recently been used to maximize potency and decrease the toxicity of a particular drug by reducing its dosage. Therefore, we have evaluated the combined anti-cancerous effect of PTX with tested natural compounds (andrographolide (AND), silibinin (SIL), mimosine (MIM) and trans-anethole (TA)) using 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, trypan blue dye exclusion assay, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) staining, network pharmacology, molecular docking, molecular dynamics (MD) and in vivo chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) angiogenesis assay. We observed a reduction in the IC(50) value of PTX with tested natural compounds. Further, the network pharmacology-based analysis of compound-disease-target (C-D-T) network showed that PTX, AND, SIL, MIM and TA targeted 55, 61, 56, 31 and 18 proteins of metastatic breast cancer, respectively. Molecular docking results indicated that AND and SIL inhibited the C-D-T network's core target kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) protein more effectively than others. While MD showed that the binding of AND with KDR was stronger and more stable than others. In trypan blue dye exclusion assay and PCNA staining, AND and SIL along with PTX were found to be more effective than PTX alone. CAM assay results suggested that AND, SIL and TA increase the anti-angiogenic potential of PTX. Thus, natural compounds can be used to improve the anti-cancer potential of PTX.
The preimplantation embryo produces several factors during its development to signal its presence to the maternal organism. This paper will focus on the role of two distinctive cytokine and growth factor systems (interleukin-1 (IL-1) system and the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) system) during early embryonic development and implantation. IL-1 receptor is expressed in the endometrium of various species and antagonising the biological effects of IL-1 leads to implantation failure in mice. We could show that this is due to an endometrial, not an embryonic effect. Furthermore, we could detect the expression of all components of the IL-1 system in preimplantation embryos from mice and humans. We could show a possible influence of IL-1 on other systems involved in embryonic implantation, including invasion (MMPs/TIMPs) and angiogenesis (VEGF), therefore suggesting a role of this cytokine family during early embryonic development. Immediately after contact to the endometrium, the embryo must induce angiogenesis to ensure its survival, VEGF is a potent angiogenetic growth factor. We have shown a cyclic regulation of the soluble VEGF-receptor, sflt, in human endometrium and have detected the expression of the transmembraneous VEGF-receptors, Flt-1 and kinase insert domain containing receptor (KDR) throughout the menstrual cycle. Furthermore, we have shown that the VEGF gene is one of the earliest genes activated during human preimplantation embryo development, giving rise to the assumption that VEGF is crucial for embryonic development.
PURPOSE: It is important to understand the development of the normal retinal vascular system, because it may provide clues for understanding the mechanisms underlying the neovascularization associated with several retinopathies of infancy and adulthood. However, little is known about normal human ocular vascularization. VEGF is a key growth factor during vascular development and one of its receptors, KDR, plays a pivotal role in endothelial cell proliferation and differentiation. The purpose of this study was to analyze VEGF and KDR gene expression patterns during the development of the human eye during the embryonic and fetal stages. METHODS: The gene expression of VEGF and KDR was analyzed by in situ hybridization in 7-week-old embryos and in 10- and 18-week-old fetuses. In addition, we performed VEGF and KDR immunohistochemistry experiments on 18-week-old fetus tissue sections. RESULTS: These results clearly demonstrated that the levels of VEGF and KDR transcripts are correlated during the normal development of the ocular vasculature in humans. The complementarity between the patterns of VEGF and KDR during the early stages of development suggests that VEGF-KDR interactions play a major role in the formation and regression of the hyaloid vascular system (HVS) and in the development of the choriocapillaris. In later stages (i.e., 18-weeks-old fetuses), the expression of KDR seems to be linked to the development of the retinal vascular system. VEGF and KDR transcripts were unexpectedly detected in some nonvascular tissues-that is, in the cornea and in the retina before the development of the retinal vascular system. CONCLUSIONS: The expression of VEGF and KDR correlates highly with the normal ocular vascularization in humans, but VEGF may also be necessary for nonvascular retinal developmental functions, especially for the coordination of neural retinal development and the preliminary steps of the establishment of the definitive stable retinal vasculature.
