KiSS-1 receptor; Receptor for metastin (kisspeptin-54 or kp-54), a C- terminally amidated peptide of KiSS1. KiSS1 is a metastasis suppressor protein that suppresses metastases in malignant melanomas and in some breast carcinomas without affecting tumorigenicity. The metastasis suppressor properties may be mediated in part by cell cycle arrest and induction of apoptosis in malignant cells. The receptor is essential for normal gonadotropin-released hormone physiology and for puberty. The hypothalamic KiSS1/KISS1R system is a pivotal factor in central regulation of the gonadotropic axis a [...] 
The discovery of kisspeptin as a critical central regulatory factor of GnRH release has given people a novel understanding of the neuroendocrine regulation in human reproduction. Kisspeptin activates the signaling pathway by binding to its receptor kisspeptin receptor (KISS1R) to promote GnRH secretion, thereby regulating the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG) axis. Recent studies have shown that kisspeptin neurons located in arcuate nucleus (ARC) co-express neurokinin B (NKB) and dynorphin (Dyn). Such neurons are called KNDy neurons. KNDy neurons participate in the positive and negative feedback of estrogen to GnRH secretion. In addition, kisspeptin is a key factor in the initiation of puberty, and also regulates the processes of female follicle development, oocyte maturation, and ovulation through the HPG axis. In male reproduction, kisspeptin also plays an important role, getting involved in the regulation of Leydig cells, spermatogenesis, sperm functions and reproductive behaviors. Mutations in the KISS1 gene or disorders of the kisspeptin/KISS1R system may lead to clinical symptoms such as idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (iHH), central precocious puberty (CPP) and female infertility. Understanding the influence of kisspeptin on the reproductive axis and related mechanisms will help the future application of kisspeptin in disease diagnosis and treatment. In this review, we critically appraise the role of kisspeptin in the HPG axis, including its signaling pathways, negative and positive feedback mechanisms, and its control on female and male reproduction.
Kisspeptin is now known to be an important regulator of the hypothalamic--pituitary-gonadal axis and is the target of a range of regulators, such as steroid hormone feedback, nutritional and metabolic regulation. Kisspeptin binds to its cognate receptor, KISS1R (also called GPR54), on GnRH neurons and stimulates their activity, which in turn provides an obligatory signal for GnRH secretion-thus gating down-stream events supporting reproduction. The development of peripherally active kisspeptin antagonists could offer a unique therapeutic agent for treating hormone-dependent disorders of reproduction, including precocious puberty, endometriosis, and metastatic prostate cancer. The following chapter discusses the advances made in the search for both peptide and small molecule kisspeptin antagonists and their use in delineating the role of kisspeptin within the reproductive system. To date, four peptide antagonists and one small molecule antagonist have been designed.
The G-protein coupled receptor GPR54 has an essential role in the initiation and maintenance of mammalian fertility. Humans and mice with mutations in GPR54 have hypogonadotropic hypogonadism characterized by absence of sexual maturation and low levels of gonadotropic hormones (LH and FSH). The ligand for GPR54 is encoded by the KISS1 gene, which produces a 54-amino-acid peptide (metastin or kisspeptin-54) that can be cleaved into shorter peptides (kisspeptins 14, 13 and 10) with similar potencies. Kisspeptin administration stimulates gonadotropin release in several species by inducing GnRH secretion from hypothalamic GnRH neurons expressing GPR54. Kisspeptins are produced by neurons located in the AVPV and ARC regions of the hypothalamus. Expression of Kiss1 in these neurons is differentially regulated by sex steroids providing a mechanism by which testosterone or estrogen can regulate GnRH release. The AVPV region is sexually dimorphic with highest expression of kisspeptin in females. Positive feedback by estrogen on expression of Kiss1 in the AVPV region may be responsible for the pre-ovulatory LH surge during the estrus cycle. Central administration of kisspeptin to immature female rats can induce precocious activation of the gonadotropic axis, causing advanced vaginal opening, elevated uterus weight, increased serum levels of LH and estrogen and induce ovulation. Kisspeptins/GPR54 have also been implicated in regulating the estrus cycle of seasonal breeders and in the control of lactational amenorrhea. Expression of Gpr54 and Kiss1 have also been reported in several peripheral tissues including the pituitary, ovary, testes and the placenta raising the possibility that these genes may have additional functions in these tissues. Regulation of kisspeptin expression by peripheral factors such as leptin may be involved in coordinating metabolic status with the reproductive axis.
Kisspeptins (KPs), peptide products of the kisspeptin-1 (KISS1) gene, are the endogenous ligands for the KISS1 receptor, KISS1R, which is a G protein-coupled receptor. In many human tumors, KISS1 functions as a metastasis-suppressor gene and KISS1/KISS1R signaling has antimetastatic and tumor-suppressor roles. On the contrary, emerging evidence indicates that the KP/KISS1R pathway plays detrimental roles in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), the most difficult type of breast cancer to treat. TNBC patients initially respond to chemotherapy, but tumors acquire drug resistance and many patients relapse and die of metastases within a few years. In this review, we summarize recent developments in the understanding of the mechanisms by which KP/KISS1R signaling plays an adverse role in TNBC. This includes focusing on how KISS1R signaling regulates the cell cytoskeleton to induce tumor invadopodia formation and how KISS1R communicates with growth factor receptors such as the epidermal growth factor receptor, the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL, and transforming growth factor-beta to promote cell invasion, metastasis, and drug resistance.
Kisspeptins, encoded by the KISS1 gene, are a family of polypeptides that bind the kisspeptin receptor (KISS1R) to perform biological functions. Produced mainly in the hypothalamus, these neuropeptides regulate the pulsatile secretion of GnRH and trigger the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis. Other peripheral organs also express kisspeptin, which inhibits metastasis. Kisspeptin and KISS1R are reportedly present in the endometrium and may play roles in limiting the migration and invasion of trophoblasts into the endometrium during pregnancy (decidua) to maintain endometrial homeostasis. A deficiency of kisspeptin and KISS1R in the endometrium can lead to pathological conditions such as endometriosis and endometrial carcinoma. Kisspeptin and KISS1R in the endometrium can also promote endometrial receptivity and decidualization. Overall, kisspeptin and KISS1R are important for maintaining the normal physiological functions of the endometrium. By summarizing the roles of kisspeptin and KISS1R in the endometrium, our review explores the regulatory roles in the peripheral reproductive system of this peptide family that plays broad and profound roles in many physiological processes.
The kisspeptins are a family of peptide hormones, which in recent years have been shown to play a critical role in the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, thus in turn influencing fertility and reproduction. This review examines the physiological role of kisspeptin and the kisspeptin receptor in the control of gonadotrophin and gonadal steroid hormone secretion and the implications of these findings with respect to fertility. In addition, the potential therapeutic use of kisspeptin in the treatment of reproductive disorders will be examined.
At puberty, pulsatile secretion of hormones initiates sexual maturation of the gonads. The G-protein-coupled receptor GPR54 is crucially involved in the initiation of puberty, along with its ligand metastin. Mice lacking GPR54 fail to undergo puberty and have immature reproductive organs and low levels of sex steroids and gonadotrophic hormones, but have normal levels of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone in the hypothalamus. In humans, several cases of hypogonadism have been ascribed to mutations in GPR54. Production of metastin and, to a lesser extent, GPR54 are negatively regulated by testosterone and oestrogen, and injecting GPR54 ligands can increase hormone secretion in rodents. Thus, GPR54 is required for normal functioning of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, probably at the level of gonadotrophin-releasing-hormone secretion.
Thyroid carcinoma (TC) is the most common malignancy of endocrine organs. The cell subpopulation in the lineage hierarchy that serves as cell of origin for the different TC histotypes is unknown. Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) with appropriate in vitro stimulation undergo sequential differentiation into thyroid progenitor cells (TPCs-day 22), which maturate into thyrocytes (day 30). Here, we create follicular cell-derived TCs of all the different histotypes based on specific genomic alterations delivered by CRISPR-Cas9 in hESC-derived TPCs. Specifically, TPCs harboring BRAF(V600E) or NRAS(Q61R) mutations generate papillary or follicular TC, respectively, whereas addition of TP53(R248Q) generate undifferentiated TCs. Of note, TCs arise by engineering TPCs, whereas mature thyrocytes have a very limited tumorigenic capacity. The same mutations result in teratocarcinomas when delivered in early differentiating hESCs. Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1)/Matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9)/Cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44) ternary complex, in cooperation with Kisspeptin receptor (KISS1R), is involved in TC initiation and progression. Increasing radioiodine uptake, KISS1R and TIMP1 targeting may represent a therapeutic adjuvant option for undifferentiated TCs.
Reproduction is safeguarded by multiple, often cooperative, regulatory networks. Kisspeptin signaling, via KISS1R, plays a fundamental role in reproductive control, primarily by regulation of hypothalamic GnRH neurons. We disclose herein a pathway for direct kisspeptin actions in astrocytes that contributes to central reproductive modulation. Protein-protein interaction and ontology analyses of hypothalamic proteomic profiles after kisspeptin stimulation revealed that glial/astrocyte markers are regulated by kisspeptin in mice. This glial-kisspeptin pathway was validated by the demonstrated expression of Kiss1r in mouse astrocytes in vivo and astrocyte cultures from humans, rats, and mice, where kisspeptin activated canonical intracellular signaling-pathways. Cellular coexpression of Kiss1r with the astrocyte markers GFAP and S100-beta occurred in different brain regions, with higher percentage in Kiss1- and GnRH-enriched areas. Conditional ablation of Kiss1r in GFAP-positive cells in the G-KiR-KO mouse altered gene expression of key factors in PGE2 synthesis in astrocytes and perturbed astrocyte-GnRH neuronal appositions, as well as LH responses to kisspeptin and LH pulsatility, as surrogate marker of GnRH secretion. G-KiR-KO mice also displayed changes in reproductive responses to metabolic stress induced by high-fat diet, affecting female pubertal onset, estrous cyclicity, and LH-secretory profiles. Our data unveil a nonneuronal pathway for kisspeptin actions in astrocytes, which cooperates in fine-tuning the reproductive axis and its responses to metabolic stress.
Although the functions of kisspeptin originally were believed to be restricted to metastasis suppression, a novel role for this protein was discovered in 2003. Loss-of-function mutations in its receptor, GPR54, were found to cause absence of puberty and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in humans. Mice with targeted deletions of GPR54 also have a hypogonadotropic phenotype, confirming the important role of this ligand-receptor family in the control of puberty and reproductive function. Since these discoveries, the peptide products of the KISS1 gene have been shown to be powerful stimulators of the gonadotropic axis. This review examines the role of kisspeptins and GPR54 in reproductive function.
In recent years, a substantial body of evidence has accumulated suggesting that the hypothalamic peptide hormone kisspeptin and its cognate receptor, G-protein-coupled receptor 54, play a fundamental role both as gatekeepers for the initiation of puberty and in the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. This review discusses the physiology of the kisspeptin signalling system and examines how findings from animal and human studies have contributed to our understanding of the pathophysiology of idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
BACKGROUND: Kisspeptin and its receptor, GPR54, are regarded as key regulators of and catalysts for male puberty onset, and also fundamental gatekeepers of spermatogenesis in mammals. Consequently, the loss function of kisspeptin or GPR54 leads to a symptom of Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism (HH) in human and HH accompanied by lower gonadotrophic hormone levels, smaller testes, impaired spermatogenesis and abnormal sexual maturation in mice. Besides its well-recognized functions in hypothalamus before and during puberty, accumulating data strongly support kisspeptin production in testis, and participation in somatic and germ cell development and sperm functions as well. This review aims to summarize recent findings regarding kisspeptin activity in the testes and sperm function. METHODS: We undertook a keyword search of peer-reviewed research literature including data from in vivo and in vitro studies in humans and genetically modified animal models to identify the roles of kisspeptins in male reproduction. RESULTS: A plethora of studies detail the role of kisspeptins and GPR54 in mammalian spermatogenesis in vivo and in vitro. This review identified recent findings regarding the kisspeptin system in male gonads, and regulation of kisspeptin in testicular physiology and male reproductive defects and disorders. CONCLUSION: The findings of this review confirm the importance role of kisspeptins in male fertility. Understanding their biphasic roles in testis may help to consider kisspeptins as potential pharmacological targets for treating human infertility.
It is widely acknowledged that kisspeptin and its receptor Kiss1R play central regulatory roles in the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonad (HPG) axis and reproduction. Mutations of KISS1 and KISS1R lead to disorders associated with pubertal development, such as central precocious puberty (CPP) and idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). This review focuses on KISS1 and KISS1R mutations found in CPP and IHH and its purposes are twofold: Firstly, based on the mutations found in KISS1 and KISS1R, this review provides insights into the precise mechanism of kisspeptin and the kisspeptin/Kiss1R pathway in the reproductive axis and in puberty. Secondly, G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are known to share highly conserved structural motifs; therefore, knowledge of mutations found at different structural domains of Kiss1R in the diseased state, and how they affect Kiss1R function can be used to decipher GPCR domain function.
BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common reproductive endocrine disorders. Accumulated evidence has suggested the indispensable role of kisspeptin-G protein-coupled receptor (GPR54) system and SHBG in development of PCOS. However, potential mechanisms and their relationship are unclear. Jiawei Buzhong Yiqi Decoction (JWBZYQ) has been reported to ameliorate obese PCOS. Whereas, potential mechanisms remain elusive. PURPOSE: To determine whether JWBZYQ attenuates PCOS by regulating the kisspeptin-GPR54 system and SHBG production. And to explore potential mechanisms. METHODS: An overweight PCOS rat model was developed with testosterone propionate (TP) and high-fat diet (HFD). The efficacy of JWBZYQ was assessed by tracking changes in weight, estrous cycle, ovarian morphology, and serum sex hormone levels. Additionally, kisspeptin-GPR54 system expression in multiple organs and PI3K-AKT pathway activity in liver of different rats were detected. Modifications in SHBG production were also measured. Kisspeptin54 was administered to establish a cellular model. The levels of AKT phosphorylation and SHBG protein within HepG2 cells were analyzed. Finally, confirmatory studies were performed using AKT phosphorylation activator and inhibitor. RESULTS: JWBZYQ effectively attenuated the overweight, disrupted estrous cycle, altered sex hormone levels, and aberrant ovarian morphology in PCOS rats. Meanwhile, PCOS rats exhibited elevated levels of kisspeptin and GPR54, along with reduced SHBG levels, which could be reversed by JWBZYQ. These alterations might be connected with the activation of AKT phosphorylation. In vitro experiment identified that JWBZYQ could rectify the hyperactivated AKT phosphorylation and deficient production of SHBG caused by kisspeptin54. CONCLUSIONS: Overexpressed kisspeptin-GPR54 system inhibited SHBG synthesis in PCOS. JWBZYQ curtailed the exorbitant expression of kisspeptin and GPR54, which moderated the rise in AKT phosphorylation and subsequently promoted the production of SHBG.
Hypothalamic-pituitary gonadal (HPG) axis is responsible for the development and regulation of the female reproductive system. In polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), there is a disturbance in the HPG axis. Kisspeptin, a neuropeptide produced by the KISS1 gene, plays a vital role in the regulation of HPG axis by binding with its receptors KISS1R/GPR54, and stimulates gonadotropin secretion from the hypothalamus into pituitary to release luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). Polymorphisms or mutations in the KISS1 gene can cause disturbance in the kisspeptin signaling pathway and is thought to disrupt HPG axis. Altered signaling of kisspeptin can cause abnormal secretion of GnRH pulse, which leads to increased LH/FSH ratio, thereby affecting androgen levels and ovulation. The increased levels of androgen worsen the symptoms of PCOS. In the present article, we review the molecular physiology and pathology of kisspeptin and how it is responsible for the development of PCOS. The goal of this review article is to provide an overview and metabolic profile of kisspeptin in PCOS patients and the expression of kisspeptin in PCOS animal models. In the present article, we also review the molecular physiology and pathology of kisspeptin and how it is responsible for the development of PCOS.
Over the last 10 years, kisspeptins--peptide products of varying lengths encoded by the KISS1 gene--have been found to be key regulators of normal reproductive function throughout life in animals and humans. By activating the kisspeptin receptor [previously known as orphan G protein-coupled receptor 54 (GPR54)], they elicit an effect on the central gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons. Administration of kisspeptin by either the subcutaneous or intravenous route potently stimulates endogenous gonadotropin hormone release in healthy men and women as well as in animals. Kisspeptin also stimulates endogenous release of gonadotropins in subfertile as well as healthy volunteers, and therefore it has potential as a novel therapeutic agent in reproductive disorders. Further human studies have shown that chronic, high-dose administration of kisspeptin causes desensitisation with rapid subsequent suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, and therefore high-dose long-acting analogues may have a clinical role in treating sex hormone-dependent malignancies. By further elucidating the intricacies and mechanisms of the kisspeptin signalling system, and the tissues it acts on during different phases of the reproductive timeline (including during puberty, fertility, pregnancy and menopause), pharmacologic analogues could become clinically useful.
Kisspeptin (KP) is now well recognized as a potent stimulator of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion and thereby a major regulator of the neuroendocrine-reproductive axis. KP signals via KISS1R, a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that activates the G proteins Galphaq/11. Modulation of the interaction of KP with KISS1R is therefore a potential new therapeutic target for stimulating (in infertility) or inhibiting (in hormone-dependent diseases) the reproductive hormone cascade. Major efforts are underway to target KISS1R in the treatment of sex steroid hormone-dependent disorders and to stimulate endogenous hormonal responses along the neuroendocrine axis as part of in vitro fertilization protocols. The development of analogs modulating KISS1R signaling will be aided by an understanding of the intracellular pathways and dynamics of KISS1R signaling under normal and pathological conditions. This review focuses on KISS1R recruitment of intracellular signaling (Galphaq/11- and beta-arrestin-dependent) pathways that mediate GnRH secretion and the respective roles of rapid desensitization, internalization, and recycling of resensitized receptors in maintaining an active population of KISS1R at the cell surface to facilitate prolonged KP signaling. Additionally, this review summarizes and discusses the major findings of an array of studies examining the desensitization of KP signaling in man, domestic and laboratory animals. This discussion highlights the major effects of ligand efficacy and concentration and the physiological, developmental, and metabolic status of the organism on KP signaling. Finally, the potential for the utilization of KP and analogs in stimulating and inhibiting the reproductive hormone cascade as an alternative to targeting the downstream GnRH receptor is discussed.
The discovery of Kisspeptin (Kiss) has opened a new direction in research on neuroendocrine control of reproduction in vertebrates. Belonging to the RF amide family of peptides, Kiss and its cognate receptor Gpr54 (Kissr) have a long and complex evolutionary history. Multiple forms of Kiss and Kissr are identified in non-mammalian vertebrates, with the exception of birds, and monotreme mammals. However, only a single form of the ligand (KISS1/Kiss1) and receptor (KISS1R/Kiss1r) is retained in higher mammals. Kiss1 is distributed in the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis and its primary function is to stimulate gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion. Kiss1 neurons are distributed in the rostral periventricular area of the third ventricle (RP3V) and arcuate/infundibular nucleus (ARN/IFN). The ARN/IFN is considered the GnRH pulse generator controlled by steroid negative feedback, and the RP3V neurons is concerned with GnRH surge induced by steroid positive feedback in females. The Kiss1-Kiss1r signaling is important in all aspects of reproduction: puberty onset, maintenance of adult gonadal functions and reproductive aging, and hence assumes therapeutic potentials in the treatment of reproductive dysfunctions and induction of artificial reproduction. This chapter reviews involvement of Kiss1 in the control of the HPG axis functions in female mammals.
The factors that trigger human puberty are among the central mysteries of reproductive biology. Several approaches, including mutational analysis of candidate genes, large-scale genome-wide association studies, whole exome sequencing, and whole genome sequencing have been performed in attempts to identify novel genetic factors that modulate the human hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis to result in premature sexual development. Genetic abnormalities involving excitatory and inhibitory pathways regulating gonadotropin-releasing hormone secretion, represented by the kisspeptin (KISS1 and KISS1R) and makorin ring finger 3 (MKRN3) systems, respectively, have been associated with sporadic and familial cases of central precocious puberty (CPP). More recently, paternally inherited genetic defects of DLK1 were identified in four families with nonsyndromic CPP and a metabolic phenotype. DLK1 encodes a transmembrane protein that is important for adipose tissue homeostasis and neurogenesis and is located in the imprinted chromosome 14q32 region associated with Temple syndrome. In this review, we highlight the clinical and genetic features of patients with CPP caused by DLK1 mutations and explore the involvement of Notch signaling and DLK1 in the control of pubertal onset.
Kisspeptins are a family of hypothalamic neuropeptides that are essential for the regulation of reproductive physiology. Their importance in reproductive health became apparent in 2003, when loss-of-function variants in the gene encoding the kisspeptin receptor were reported to result in isolated congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (CHH). It has since been ascertained that hypothalamic kisspeptin neurons regulate gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) secretion to thus stimulate the remainder of the reproductive endocrine axis. In this review, we discuss genetic variants that affect kisspeptin receptor signaling, summarize data on KISS1R agonists, and posit possible clinical uses of native and synthetic kisspeptin receptor agonists for the investigation and treatment of reproductive disorders.
