Mast/stem cell growth factor receptor Kit; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for the cytokine KITLG/SCF and plays an essential role in the regulation of cell survival and proliferation, hematopoiesis, stem cell maintenance, gametogenesis, mast cell development, migration and function, and in melanogenesis. In response to KITLG/SCF binding, KIT can activate several signaling pathways. Phosphorylates PIK3R1, PLCG1, SH2B2/APS and CBL. Activates the AKT1 signaling pathway by phosphorylation of PIK3R1, the regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Activat [...] 
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors in the human digestive tract, but their molecular etiology and cellular origin are unknown. Sequencing of c-kit complementary DNA, which encodes a proto-oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinase (KIT), from five GISTs revealed mutations in the region between the transmembrane and tyrosine kinase domains. All of the corresponding mutant KIT proteins were constitutively activated without the KIT ligand, stem cell factor (SCF). Stable transfection of the mutant c-kit complementary DNAs induced malignant transformation of Ba/F3 murine lymphoid cells, suggesting that the mutations contribute to tumor development. GISTs may originate from the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICCs) because the development of ICCs is dependent on the SCF-KIT interaction and because, like GISTs, these cells express both KIT and CD34.
Recent progress in the analysis of genetic alterations in melanoma has identified recurrent mutations that result in the activation of critical signaling pathways promoting growth and survival of tumors cells. Alterations in the RAS-RAF-MAP kinase and PI3-kinase signaling pathways are commonly altered in melanoma. Mutations in BRAF, NRAS, KIT, and GNAQ occur in a mutually exclusive pattern and lead to MAP-kinase activation. Loss of PTEN function, primarily by deletion, is the most common known genetic alteration in the PI3-kinase cascade, and is commonly associated with BRAF mutations (Curtin et al., N Engl J Med 353:2135-2147, 2005; Tsao et al., Cancer Res 60:1800-1804, 2000, J Investig Dermatol 122:337-341, 2004). The growth advantage conveyed by the constitutive activation of these pathways leads to positive selection of cells that have acquired the mutations and in many instances leads to critical dependency of the cancer cells on their activation. This creates opportunities for therapeutic interventions targeted at signaling components within these pathways that are amenable for pharmacological inhibition. This concept follows the paradigm established by the landmark discovery that inhibition of the fusion kinase BCR-ABL can be used to treat chronic myelogenous leukemia (Druker et al., N Engl J Med 344:1031-037, 2001). The review will focus primarily on kinases involved in signaling that are currently being evaluated for therapeutic intervention in melanoma.
Mastocytosis is a group of rare disorders characterized by abnormal accumulation of mast cells in one or several organs. Mastocytosis can be seen at any age; but, in adults, the disease is usually systemic and chronic. Patients with indolent systemic mastocytosis (SM) are usually treated symptomatically, but cytoreductive treatments are needed in more advanced SM. In most patients with SM, an activating KIT D816V mutation is found. Thus, patients with advanced SM benefit from treatment with KIT-targeting tyrosine kinase inhibitors. However, none of these drugs are curative; new targeted drugs or combinations are still needed to improve patients' outcome.
Mast cell activation disorders is a term proposed to cover diseases and conditions related to activation of mast cells and effects of mast cell mediators. In its broadest sense, the term encompasses a wide range of diseases from allergic asthma to rhinoconjunctivitis, urticaria, food allergy, anaphylaxis, mastocytosis, and other conditions where MC activation is contributing to the pathogenesis. This article focuses on clinical presentations, challenges, and controversies in pediatric mastocytosis and gives an overview of current knowledge and areas in need of further research.
The seminal work of Popescu and colleagues first demonstrated the existence of a new cell type - the telocytes. We were among the first who reported the presence of such cells in the female genital tract and performed TEM examinations, as well as immunohistochemical staining in the attempt to find a specific marker. Telocytes from rat and from the human uterus and from human fallopian tube were extensively investigated initially by comparison with interstitial cells of Cajal. Progress in telocyte research led to the identification of different subtypes suggestive for a heterogeneous telocyte population which can even coexist in the same location. As a consequence, the functions of TCs are still elusive and can be considered a versatile phenomenon that depends on a variety of conditions, including signal reception and transmission of information via extracellular vesicles or by direct intercellular contact.
OBJECTIVES: To observe the CISD2 expression among PCOS patients and to explore its profound impact on the follicular microenvironment. Moreover, we want to elucidate the intricate mechanistic contribution of CISD2 to the onset and progression of PCOS. METHODS: Oxidase NOX2, mitophagy-related proteins, and CISD2 were detected by WB. The changes in mitochondrial structure and quantity were observed by transmission electron microscopy. Mitochondrial and lysosome colocalization was used to detect the changes of mitophagy. MDA kit, GSH and GSSG Assay kit and ROS probe were used to detect oxidative stress damage. RESULTS: We found that CISD2, mitophagy and oxidase in the GCs of PCOS patients were significantly increased. Testosterone stimulation leads to the increase of oxidase, mitophagy, and CISD2 in KGN cells. CISD2 inhibition promoted the increase of mitophagy, and the activation of mitochondria-lysosome binding, while alleviating the oxidative stress. CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of CISD2 can improve the occurrence of oxidative stress by increasing the level of mitophagy, thus affecting the occurrence and development of PCOS diseases.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: KIT tyrosine kinase receptor is essential for several tissue stem cells, especially for hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Moderately decreased KIT signaling is well known to cause anemia and defective HSC self-renewal, whereas gain-of-function mutations are infrequently found in leukemias. Thus, maintaining KIT signal strength is critically important for homeostasis. KIT signaling in HSCs involves effectors such as SHP2 and PTPN11. This review summarizes the recent developments on the novel mechanisms regulating or reinforcing KIT signal strength in HSCs and its perturbation in polycythemia vera. RECENT FINDINGS: Stem cell leukemia (SCL) is a transcription factor that is essential for HSC development. Genetic experiments indicate that Kit, protein tyrosine phosphatase, nonreceptor type 11 (Ptpn11), or Scl control long-term HSC self-renewal, survival, and quiescence in adults. Kit is now shown to be centrally involved in two feedforward loops in HSCs, one with Ptpn11 and the other with Scl. SUMMARY: Knowledge of the regulatory mechanisms that favor self-renewal divisions or a lineage determination process is central to the design of strategies to expand HSCs for the purpose of cell therapy. In addition, transcriptome and phosphoproteome analyses of erythroblasts in polycythemia vera identified lower SCL expression and hypophosphorylated KIT, suggesting that the KIT-SCL loop is relevant to the pathophysiology of human blood disorders as well.
Mast cells (MC) are tissue elements derived from hematopoietic stem cells. Their differentiation and proliferation processes are under the influence of cytokines, including one of utmost importance known as stem cell factor (SCF). SCF receptor is encoded by the protooncogene c-kit, belongs to the type III receptor tyrosine kinase subfamily, and is also expressed on other hematopoietic or non-hematopoietic cells. Ligation of c-kit receptor by SCF induces its dimerization, followed by induction of multiple intracellular signaling pathways leading to cell proliferation and activation. Mastocytosis, a relatively rare group of diseases characterized by accumulation of MC in various tissues, are found isolated or sometimes associated with other hematological malignancies in humans. Although the initial events leading to mastocytosis are not yet unraveled, alterations of the c-kit gene have been described. Particularly interesting are acquired mutations resulting in a constitutively activated receptor, possibly involved in the increased numbers of MC in tissues. For this reason, future strategies might be envisaged to target specifically the mutated c-kit and/or its intracellular signaling.
Paracrine signalling between the oocyte and its surrounding somatic cells is fundamental to the processes of oogenesis and folliculogenesis in mammals. The study of animal models has revealed that the interaction of granulosa cell-derived kit ligand (KL) with oocyte and theca cell-derived c-Kit is important for multiple aspects of oocyte and follicle development, including the establishment of primordial germ cells within the ovary, primordial follicle activation, oocyte survival and growth, granulosa cell proliferation, theca cell recruitment and the maintenance of meiotic arrest. Though little is known about the specific roles of KL and c-Kit during human oogenesis, the expression profiles for KL and c-Kit within the human ovary suggest that they are also functionally relevant to female fertility. This review details our current understanding of the roles of KL and c-Kit within the mammalian ovary, with a particular focus on the functional diversity of this receptor-ligand interaction at different stages of oocyte and follicle development.
G-Quadruplexes are non-B form DNA structures present at regulatory regions in the genome, such as promoters of proto-oncogenes and telomeres. The prominence in such sites suggests G-quadruplexes serve an important regulatory role in the cell. Indeed, oxidized G-quadruplexes found at regulatory sites are regarded as epigenetic elements and are associated with an interlinking of DNA repair and transcription. PARP-1 binds damaged DNA and non-B form DNA, where it covalently modifies repair enzymes or chromatin-associated proteins respectively with poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR). PAR serves as a signal in regulation of transcription, chromatin remodeling, and DNA repair. PARP-1 is known to bind G-quadruplexes with stimulation of enzymatic activity. We show that PARP-1 binds several G-quadruplex structures with nanomolar affinities, but only a subset promote PARP-1 activity. The G-quadruplex forming sequence found in the proto-oncogene c-KIT promoter stimulates enzymatic activity of PARP-1. The loop-forming characteristics of the c-KIT G-quadruplex sequence regulate PARP-1 catalytic activity, whereas eliminating these loop features reduces PARP-1 activity. Oxidized G-quadruplexes that have been suggested to form unique, looped structures stimulate PARP-1 activity. Our results support a functional interaction between PARP-1 and G-quadruplexes. PARP-1 enzymatic activation by G-quadruplexes is dependent on the loop features and the presence of oxidative damage.
The roles of SPRED proteins in signaling, development, and cancer are becoming increasingly recognized. SPRED proteins comprise an N-terminal EVH-1 domain, a central c-Kit-binding domain, and C-terminal SROUTY domain. They negatively regulate signaling from tyrosine kinases to the Ras-MAPK pathway. SPRED1 binds directly to both c-KIT and to the RasGAP, neurofibromin, whose function is completely dependent on this interaction. Loss-of-function mutations in SPRED1 occur in human cancers and cause the developmental disorder, Legius syndrome. Genetic ablation of SPRED genes in mice leads to behavioral problems, dwarfism, and multiple other phenotypes including increased risk of leukemia. In this review, we summarize and discuss biochemical, structural, and biological functions of these proteins including their roles in normal cell growth and differentiation and in human disease.
The current understanding of kit signaling is that a limited number of signaling proteins interact to build multiple interacting networks that allow diverse cellular responses. Cytoplasmic signaling proteins are increasingly seen to form networks directed through converging and interacting pathways rather than following a simple linear model. There are also numerous cross-connections between signaling proteins more distal to the receptor. Ras thus binds PI3 kinase and potentiates its activation, whereas the Rac-dependent protein kinase PAK phosphorylates MEK and thereby stabilizes its association with Raf. A signaling network with multiple intersecting pathways can obtain a single, coherent response from numerous, potentially conflicting signals. There is still limited information about the effect of activating mutations on various aspects of kit signaling. There is, however, mounting evidence that an activating mutation may enhance kit signaling and also induce factor-independent activation of kit. For instance, this activation could occur through degradation of SHP-1, the protein tyrosine phosphatase that negatively regulates kit signaling. There is also emerging evidence that inherent inhibitory factors may exist in the juxtamembrane of kit and may be suppressed as a result of a mutation in that region. Understanding the impact of these activating mutations on kit signaling is important, not only in contributing to the understanding of the pathogenesis of mastocytosis but ultimately in forming the basis for more effective therapeutic intervention in this disease.
Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) is a serious and fatal disease. Recently, m6A has been reported to play an important role in the lungs of IPAH patients and experimental pulmonary hypertension models. However, the meaning of m6A mRNAs in the peripheral blood of IPAH patients remains largely unexplored. We aimed to construct a transcriptome-wide map of m6A mRNAs in the peripheral blood of IPAH patients. M6A RNA Methylation Quantification Kit was utilized to measure the total m6A levels in the peripheral blood of IPAH patients. A combination of MeRIP-seq, RNA-seq and bioinformatics analysis was utilized to select m6A-modified hub genes of IPAH. MeRIP-qPCR and RT-qPCR were used to measure the m6A levels and mRNA levels of TP53, RPS27A, SMAD3 and FoxO3 in IPAH patients. Western blot was performed to assess the protein levels of m6A related regulators and m6A related genes in experimental PH animal models, hypoxia-treated and PDGF-BB induced PASMCs. We found that the total m6A levels were increased in peripheral blood of IPAH patients and verified that m6A levels of RPS27A and SMAD3 were significantly elevated and m6A levels of TP53 and FoxO3 were significantly reduced. The mRNA or protein levels of RPS27A, SMAD3, TP53 and FoxO3 were changed in human blood samples, experimental PH animal models and PDGF-BB induced PASMCs. Moreover, METTL3 and YTHDF1 were increased in the hypoxia induced pulmonary hypertension rat model, hypoxia-treated and PDGF-BB induced PASMCs. These finding suggested that m6A may play an important role in IPAH.
Maintaining the delicate balance between cell survival and death is of the utmost importance for the proper development of germ cells and subsequent fertility. On the other hand, the fine regulation of tissue homeostasis by mechanisms that control cell fate is a factor that can prevent carcinogenesis. c-KIT is a type III receptor tyrosine kinase activated by its ligand, stem cell factor (SCF). c-KIT signaling plays a crucial role in cell fate decisions, specifically controlling cell proliferation, differentiation, survival, and apoptosis. Indeed, deregulating the SCF/c-KIT system by attenuation or overactivation of its signaling strength is linked to male infertility and cancer, and rebalancing its activity via c-KIT inhibitors has proven beneficial in treating human tumors that contain gain-of-function mutations or overexpress c-KIT. This review addresses the roles of SCF and c-KIT in the male reproductive tract, and discusses the potential application of c-KIT target therapies in disorders of the reproductive system.
We previously described a novel in vitro culture technique for dedifferentiated human adult skin melanocytes. Melanocytes cultured in a defined, cholera toxin and PMA free medium became bipolar, unpigmented, and highly proliferative. Furthermore, TRP-1 and c-Kit expression disappeared and EGFR receptor and nestin expression were induced in the cells. Here, we further characterized the phenotype of these dedifferentiated cells and by comparing them to mature pigmented melanocytes we detected crucial steps in their phenotype change. Our data suggest that normal adult melanocytes easily dedifferentiate into pluripotent stem cells given the right environment. This dedifferentiation process described here for normal melanocyte is very similar to what has been described for melanoma cells, indicating that phenotype switching driven by environmental factors is a general characteristic of melanocytes that can occur independent of malignant transformation.
The past decade has been one of rapid innovation in genome-editing technology. The opportunity now exists for investigators to manipulate virtually any gene in a diverse range of cell types and organisms with targeted nucleases designed with sequence-specific DNA-binding domains. The rapid development of the field has allowed for highly efficient, precise, and now cost-effective means by which to generate human and animal models of disease using these technologies. This review will outline the recent development of genome-editing technology, culminating with the use of CRISPR-Cas9 to generate novel mammalian models of disease. While the road to using this same technology for treatment of human disease is long, the pace of innovation over the past five years and early successes in model systems build anticipation for this prospect.
Receptor tyrosine kinases play an important role in many cellular processes, and their dysregulation leads to diseases, most importantly cancer. One such receptor tyrosine kinase is c-Kit, a type-III receptor tyrosine kinase, which is involved in various intracellular signaling pathways. The role of different mutant isoforms of c-Kit has been established in several types of cancers. Accordingly, promising c-Kit inhibition results have been reported for the treatment of different cancers (e.g., gastrointestinal stromal tumors, melanoma, acute myeloid leukemia, and other tumors). Therefore, lots of effort has been put to target c-Kit for the treatment of cancer. Here, we provide a comprehensive compilation to provide an insight into c-Kit inhibitor discovery. This compilation provides key information regarding the structure, signaling pathways related to c-Kit, and, more importantly, pharmacophores, binding modes, and SAR analysis for almost all small-molecule heterocycles reported for their c-Kit inhibitory activity. This work could be used as a guide in understanding the basic requirements for targeting c-Kit, and how the selectivity and efficacy of the molecules have been achieved till today.
Most of the 231 unique membrane protein structures (as of 3/2010) are of bacterial membrane proteins (MPs) expressed in bacteria, or eukaryotic MPs from natural sources. However eukaryotic membrane proteins, especially those with more than three membrane crossings rarely succumb to any suitable expression in bacterial cells. They typically require expression in eukaryotic cells that can provide appropriate endoplasmic reticulum, chaperones, targeting and post-translational processing. In evidence, only approximately 20 eukaryotic MP structures have resulted from heterologous expression. This is required for a general approach to target particular human or pathogen membrane proteins of importance to human health. The first of these appeared in 2005. Our review addresses the special issues that pertain to the expression of eukaryotic and human membrane proteins, and recent advances in the tool kit for crystallization and structure determination.
BACKGROUND: Regular coffee consumption has beneficial and preventative effects on liver and chronic neurodegenerative diseases. However, the studies performed with the ingredients found in coffee beverages have not clarified the responsible mechanisms. Exosomes are small, membrane-coated cargo packages secreted by prokaryote and eukaryote cells. Exosomes regulate intercellular communication and affect cellular metabolic activities even among different species. In this study, we aimed to isolate and characterize the edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticles from roasted hot coffee beverages, hypothesizing that the edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticles were responsible for the beneficial effects of coffee. METHODS: Size exclusion chromatography and commercial kits were used for the isolation process. Efficient coffee edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticle fractions were determined by an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer. Harvested coffee edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticles were characterized by transmission electron microscopy. The quantification procedure was performed using a commercial kit. Coffee edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticles' proliferative effects on human hepatic stellate cells and human hepatocellular carcinoma cells were studied using an MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide) assay. Whole-exosome RNA sequencing was performed. RESULTS: Transmission electron microscopy scanning analysis indicated round-shaped nanoparticles with sizes ranging from 40 to 100 nm. Both size exclusion chromatography and kit-isolated edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticle samples showed maximum absorbance at 227.5 nm in ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer analysis. Regarding the quantitation results, kit isolation was more efficient than the size exclusion chromatography method when the harvested particle numbers were compared. An important MTT assay finding confirmed the observed beneficial effects of coffee beverages: coffee edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticles significantly suppressed hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation. As a result of sequencing, we identified 15 mature miRNAs. A MapReduce-based MicroRNA Target Prediction Method (The DIANA tools' MR-microT algorithm) highlighted 2 genes specifically associated with the miRNAs that we obtained: KMT2C and ZNF773. CONCLUSION: For the first time in the literature, coffee edible plant-derived exosome-like nanoparticles were identified. These nanoparticles may have therapeutic effects on chronic liver diseases. Experimental studies, therefore, should be performed on disease models to demonstrate their efficacy.
The Kit proto-oncogene was found as a consequence of the discovery of the feline v-kit sarcoma oncogene. Stem cell factor (SCF) is the Kit ligand and it mediates Kit dimerization and activation. The Kit receptor contains an extracellular segment that is made up of five immunoglobulin-like domains (D1/2/3/4/5), a transmembrane segment, a juxtamembrane segment, a protein-tyrosine kinase domain that contains an insert of 77 amino acid residues, and a carboxyterminal tail. Activating somatic mutations in Kit have been documented in various neoplasms including gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), mast cell overexpression (systemic mastocytosis), core-binding factor acute myeloid leukemias (AML), melanomas, and seminomas. In the case of gastrointestinal stromal tumors, most activating mutations occur in the juxtamembrane segment and these mutants are initially sensitive to imatinib. As with many targeted anticancer drugs, resistance to Kit antagonists occurs in about two years and is the result of secondary KIT mutations. An activation segment exon 17 D816V mutation is one of the more common resistance mutations in Kit and this mutant is resistant to imatinib and sorafenib. Type I protein kinase inhibitors interact with the active enzyme form with DFG-D of the proximal activation segment directed inward toward the active site (DFG-D(in)). In contrast, type II inhibitors bind to their target with the DFG-D pointing away from the active site (DFG-D(out)). Based upon the X-ray crystallographic structures, imatinib, sunitinib, and ponatinib are Type II Kit inhibitors. We used the Schrodinger induced fit docking protocol to model the interaction of midostaurin with Kit and the result indicates that it binds to the DFG-D(in) conformation of the receptor and is thus classified as type I inhibitor. This medication inhibits the notoriously resistant Kit D816V mutant and is approved for the treatment of systemic mastocytosis and is effective against tumors bearing the D816V activation/resistance mutation.
