Krueppel-like factor 4; Transcription factor; can act both as activator and as repressor. Binds the 5'-CACCC-3' core sequence. Binds to the promoter region of its own gene and can activate its own transcription. Regulates the expression of key transcription factors during embryonic development. Plays an important role in maintaining embryonic stem cells, and in preventing their differentiation. Required for establishing the barrier function of the skin and for postnatal maturation and maintenance of the ocular surface. Involved in the differentiation of epithelial cells and may also fu [...] 
Differentiated cells can be reprogrammed to an embryonic-like state by transfer of nuclear contents into oocytes or by fusion with embryonic stem (ES) cells. Little is known about factors that induce this reprogramming. Here, we demonstrate induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic or adult fibroblasts by introducing four factors, Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4, under ES cell culture conditions. Unexpectedly, Nanog was dispensable. These cells, which we designated iPS (induced pluripotent stem) cells, exhibit the morphology and growth properties of ES cells and express ES cell marker genes. Subcutaneous transplantation of iPS cells into nude mice resulted in tumors containing a variety of tissues from all three germ layers. Following injection into blastocysts, iPS cells contributed to mouse embryonic development. These data demonstrate that pluripotent stem cells can be directly generated from fibroblast cultures by the addition of only a few defined factors.
Successful reprogramming of differentiated human somatic cells into a pluripotent state would allow creation of patient- and disease-specific stem cells. We previously reported generation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, capable of germline transmission, from mouse somatic cells by transduction of four defined transcription factors. Here, we demonstrate the generation of iPS cells from adult human dermal fibroblasts with the same four factors: Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. Human iPS cells were similar to human embryonic stem (ES) cells in morphology, proliferation, surface antigens, gene expression, epigenetic status of pluripotent cell-specific genes, and telomerase activity. Furthermore, these cells could differentiate into cell types of the three germ layers in vitro and in teratomas. These findings demonstrate that iPS cells can be generated from adult human fibroblasts.
BACKGROUND: Dysregulated BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) or TGF-beta (transforming growth factor beta) signaling pathways are imperative in idiopathic and familial pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) as well as experimental pulmonary hypertension (PH) in rodent models. MED1 (mediator complex subunit 1) is a key transcriptional co-activator and KLF4 (Kruppel-like factor 4) is a master transcription factor in endothelium. However, MED1 and KLF4 epigenetic and transcriptional regulations of the BMP/TGF-beta axes in pulmonary endothelium and their dysregulations leading to PAH remain elusive. We investigate the MED1/KLF4 co-regulation of the BMP/TGF-beta axes in endothelium by studying the epigenetic regulation of BMPR2 (BMP receptor type II), ETS-related gene (ERG), and TGFBR2 (TGF-beta receptor 2) and their involvement in the PH. METHODS: High-throughput screening involving data from RNA-seq, MED1 ChIP-seq, H3K27ac ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq, and high-throughput chromosome conformation capture together with in silico computations were used to explore the epigenetic and transcriptional regulation of BMPR2, ERG, and TGFBR2 by MED1 and KLF4. In vitro experiments with cultured pulmonary arterial endothelial cells (ECs) and bulk assays were used to validate results from these in silico analyses. Lung tissue from patients with idiopathic PAH, animals with experimental PH, and mice with endothelial ablation of MED1 (EC-MED1(-/-)) were used to study the PH-protective effect of MED1. RESULTS: Levels of MED1 were decreased in lung tissue or pulmonary arterial endothelial cells from idiopathic PAH patients and rodent PH models. Mechanistically, MED1 acted synergistically with KLF4 to transactivate BMPR2, ERG, and TGFBR2 via chromatin remodeling and enhancer-promoter interactions. EC-MED1(-/-) mice showed PH susceptibility. In contrast, MED1 overexpression mitigated the PH phenotype in rodents. CONCLUSIONS: A homeostatic regulation of BMPR2, ERG, and TGFBR2 in ECs by MED1 synergistic with KLF4 is essential for the normal function of the pulmonary endothelium. Dysregulation of MED1 and the resulting impairment of the BMP/TGF-beta signaling is implicated in the disease progression of PAH in humans and PH in rodent models.
Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) is an evolutionarily conserved zinc finger-containing transcription factor that regulates diverse cellular processes such as cell growth, proliferation, and differentiation. Since its discovery in 1996, KLF4 has been gaining a lot of attention, particularly after it was shown in 2006 as one of four factors involved in the induction of pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Here we review the current knowledge about the different functions and roles of KLF4 in various tissue and organ systems.
Current paradigms suggest that two macrophage subsets, termed M1 and M2, are involved in inflammation and host defense. While the distinct functions of M1 and M2 macrophages have been intensively studied - the former are considered proinflammatory and the latter antiinflammatory - the determinants of their speciation are incompletely understood. Here we report our studies that identify Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) as a critical regulator of macrophage polarization. Macrophage KLF4 expression was robustly induced in M2 macrophages and strongly reduced in M1 macrophages, observations that were recapitulated in human inflammatory paradigms in vivo. Mechanistically, KLF4 was found to cooperate with Stat6 to induce an M2 genetic program and inhibit M1 targets via sequestration of coactivators required for NF-kappaB activation. KLF4-deficient macrophages demonstrated increased proinflammatory gene expression, enhanced bactericidal activity, and altered metabolism. Furthermore, mice bearing myeloid-specific deletion of KLF4 exhibited delayed wound healing and were predisposed to developing diet-induced obesity, glucose intolerance, and insulin resistance. Collectively, these data identify KLF4 as what we believe to be a novel regulator of macrophage polarization.
Atherosclerosis is characterized by the plaque formation that restricts intraarterial blood flow. The disturbed blood flow with the associated oscillatory stress (OS) at the arterial curvatures and branch points can trigger endothelial activation and is one of the risk factors of atherosclerosis. Many studies reported the mechanotransduction related to OS and atherogenesis; however, the transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms of atherosclerosis remain unclear. Herein, we investigated the role of N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) RNA methylation in mechanotransduction in endothelial cells (ECs) because of its important role in epitranscriptome regulation. We have identified m(6)A methyltransferase METTL3 as a responsive hub to hemodynamic forces and atherogenic stimuli in ECs. OS led to an up-regulation of METTL3 expression, accompanied by m(6)A RNA hypermethylation, increased NF-kappaB p65 Ser(536) phosphorylation, and enhanced monocyte adhesion. Knockdown of METTL3 abrogated this OS-induced m(6)A RNA hypermethylation and other manifestations, while METTL3 overexpression led to changes resembling the OS effects. RNA-sequencing and m(6)A-enhanced cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (eCLIP) experiments revealed NLRP1 and KLF4 as two hemodynamics-related downstream targets of METTL3-mediated hypermethylation. The METTL3-mediated RNA hypermethylation up-regulated NLRP1 transcript and down-regulated KLF4 transcript through YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 m(6)A reader proteins, respectively. In the in vivo atherosclerosis model, partial ligation of the carotid artery led to plaque formation and up-regulation of METTL3 and NLRP1, with down-regulation of KLF4; knockdown of METTL3 via repetitive shRNA administration prevented the atherogenic process, NLRP3 up-regulation, and KLF4 down-regulation. Collectively, we have demonstrated that METTL3 serves a central role in the atherogenesis induced by OS and disturbed blood flow.
BACKGROUND: S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase proenzyme (AMD1) is a key enzyme involved in the synthesis of spermine (SPM) and spermidine (SPD), which are associated with multifarious cellular processes. It is also found to be an oncogene in multiple cancers and a potential target for tumor therapy. Nevertheless, the role AMD1 plays in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is still unknown. METHODS: HCC samples were applied to detect AMD1 expression and evaluate its associations with clinicopathological features and prognosis. Subcutaneous and orthotopic tumor mouse models were constructed to analyze the proliferation and metastasis of HCC cells after AMD1 knockdown or overexpression. Drug sensitive and tumor sphere assay were performed to investigate the effect of AMD1 on HCC cells stemness. Real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot, immunohistochemical (IHC) and m6A-RNA immunoprecipitation (Me-RIP) sequencing/qPCR were applied to explore the potential mechanisms of AMD1 in HCC. Furthermore, immunofluorescence, co-IP (Co-IP) assays, and mass spectrometric (MS) analyses were performed to verify the proteins interacting with AMD1. RESULTS: AMD1 was enriched in human HCC tissues and suggested a poor prognosis. High AMD1 level could promote SRY-box transcription factor 2 (SOX2), Kruppel like factor 4 (KLF4), and NANOG expression of HCC cells through obesity-associated protein (FTO)-mediated mRNA demethylation. Mechanistically, high AMD1 expression increased the levels of SPD in HCC cells, which could modify the scaffold protein, Ras GTPase-activating-like protein 1 (IQGAP1) and enhance the interaction between IQGAP1 and FTO. This interaction could enhance the phosphorylation and decrease the ubiquitination of FTO. CONCLUSIONS: AMD1 could stabilize the interaction of IQGAP1 with FTO, which then promotes FTO expression and increases HCC stemness. AMD1 shows prospects as a prognostic predictor and a therapeutic target for HCC.
AIMS: Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is a pulmonary vascular disease characterized by a high mortality rate. Pulmonary arterial endothelium cells (PAECs) serve as a primary sensor of various environmental cues, such as shear stress and hypoxia, but PAEC dysfunction may trigger vascular remodelling during the onset of PH. This study aimed to illustrate the role of Sirtuin 7 (SIRT7) in endothelial dysfunction during PH and explore the potential therapeutic strategy for PH. METHODS AND RESULTS: SIRT7 levels were measured in human and murine experimental PH samples. Bioinformatic analysis, immunoprecipitation, and deacetylation assay were used to identify the association between SIRT7 and Krupple-like factor 4 (KLF4), a key transcription factor essential for endothelial cell (EC) homeostasis. Sugen5416 + hypoxia (SuHx)-induced PH mouse models and cell cultures were used for the study of the therapeutic effect of SIRT7 for PH. SIRT7 level was significantly reduced in lung tissues and PAECs from PH patients and the SuHx-induced PH mouse model as compared with healthy controls. Pulmonary endothelium-specific depletion of Sirt7 increased right ventricular systolic pressure and exacerbated right ventricular hypertrophy in the SuHx-induced PH model. At the molecular level, we identified KLF4 as a downstream target of SIRT7, which deacetylated KLF4 at K228 and inhibited the ubiquitination-proteasome degradation. Thus, the SIRT7/KLF4 axis maintained PAEC homeostasis by regulating proliferation, migration, and tube formation. PAEC dysfunction was reversed by adeno-associated virus type 1 vector-mediated endothelial overexpression of Sirt7 or supplementation with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)+ intermediate nicotinamide riboside which activated Sirt7; both approaches successfully reversed PH phenotypes. CONCLUSION: The SIRT7/KLF4 axis ensures PAEC homeostasis, and pulmonary endothelium-specific SIRT7 targeting might constitute a PH therapeutic strategy.
Dendritic cells function in the immune system to instruct adaptive immune cells to respond accordingly to different threats. While conventional dendritic cells can be subdivided into two main subtypes, termed cDC1s and cDC2s, it is clear that further heterogeneity exists within these subtypes, particularly for cDC2s. Understanding the signals involved in specifying each of these lineages and subtypes thereof is crucial to (i) enable us to determine their specific functions and (ii) put us in a position to be able to target these cells to promote or prevent a specific function in any given disease setting. Although we still have much to learn regarding the specification of these cells, here we review the most recent advances in our understanding of this and highlight some of the next questions for the future.
Inflammation is the response of the human body to injury, infection, or other abnormal states, which is involved in the development of many diseases. As a member of the Kruppel-like transcription factors (KLFs) family, KLF4 plays a crucial regulatory role in physiological and pathological processes due to its unique dual domain of transcriptional activation and inhibition. A growing body of evidence has demonstrated that KLF4 plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of various inflammatory disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease, osteoarthritis, renal inflammation, pneumonia, neuroinflammation, and so on. Consequently, KLF4 has emerged as a promising new therapeutic target for inflammatory diseases. This review systematically generalizes the molecular regulatory network, specific functions, and mechanisms of KLF4 to elucidate its complex roles in inflammatory diseases. An in-depth study on the biological function of KLF4 is anticipated to offer a novel research perspective and potential intervention strategies for inflammatory diseases.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a disease with a high incidence and mortality rate worldwide. However, the mechanisms underlying its pathogenesis are still elusive. In recent years, studies on functions of Kruppel-like factors (KLFs) in HCC have shed new light on this field. To date, five members (KLF4, KLF6, KLF8, KLF9, and KLF17) in the KLF family have been reported to function in the pathogenesis of HCC in multiple ways, which hold the potential of deepening and widening our understanding in the initiation and progression of HCC. In this review, we focus on the functions, roles, and regulatory networks of these five KLFs in HCC, summarize key pathways, and propose areas for further investigation, with the hope that this review will provide a reliable and concise reference for readers interested in this area.
BACKGROUND: Uveal melanoma (UM), the most common adult intraocular tumor, is characterized by high malignancy and poor prognosis in advanced stages. Angiogenesis is critical for UM development, however, not only the role of vascular endothelial dysfunction in UM remains unknown, but also their analysis at the single-cell level has been lacking. A comprehensive analysis is essential to clarify the role of the endothelium in the development of UM. METHODS: By using single-cell RNA transcriptomics data of 11 cases of primary and liver metastasis UM, we analyzed the endothelial cell status. In addition, we analyzed and validated ECs in the in vitro model and collected clinical specimens. Subsequently, we explored the impact of endothelial dysfunction on UM cell migration and explored the mechanisms responsible for the endothelial cell abnormalities and the reasons for their peripheral effects. RESULTS: UM metastasis has a significantly higher percentage of vascular endothelial cells compared to in situ tumors, and endothelial cells in metastasis show significant senescence. Senescent endothelial cells in metastatic tumors showed significant Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) upregulation, overexpression of KLF4 in normal endothelial cells induced senescence, and knockdown of KLF4 in senescent endothelium inhibited senescence, suggesting that KLF4 is a driver gene for endothelial senescence. KLF4-induced endothelial senescence drove tumor cell migration through a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), of which the most important component of the effector was CXCL12 (C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 12), and participated in the composition of the immunosuppressive microenvironment. CONCLUSION: This study provides an undesirable insight of senescent endothelial cells in promoting UM metastasis.
Dysregulated Krupsilonppel-like factor (KLF) gene expression appears in many disease-associated pathologies. In this review, we discuss physiological functions of KLFs in the kidney with a focus on potential pharmacological modulation/therapeutic applications of these KLF proteins. KLF2 is critical to maintaining endothelial barrier integrity and preventing gap formations and in prevention of glomerular endothelial cell and podocyte damage in diabetic mice. KLF4 is renoprotective in the setting of AKI and is a critical regulator of proteinuria in mice and humans. KLF6 expression in podocytes preserves mitochondrial function and prevents podocyte apoptosis, while KLF5 expression prevents podocyte apoptosis by blockade of ERK/p38 MAPK pathways. KLF15 is a critical regulator of podocyte differentiation and is protective against podocyte injury. Loss of KLF4 and KLF15 promotes renal fibrosis, while fibrotic kidneys have increased KLF5 and KLF6 expression. For therapeutic modulation of KLFs, continued screening of small molecules will promote drug discoveries targeting KLF proteins.
Bladder cancer is a common malignancy with a poor prognosis worldwide. Positive cofactor 4 (PC4) is widely reported to promote malignant phenotypes in various tumors. Nonetheless, the biological function and mechanism of PC4 in bladder cancer remain unclear. Here, for the first time, we report that PC4 is elevated in bladder cancer and is associated with patient survival. Moreover, PC4 deficiency obviously inhibited bladder cancer cell proliferation and metastasis by reducing the expression of genes related to cancer stemness (CD44, CD47, KLF4 and c-Myc). Through RNA-seq and experimental verification, we found that activation of the Wnt5a/beta-catenin pathway is involved in the malignant function of PC4. Mechanistically, PC4 directly interacts with Sp1 to promote Wnt5a transcription. Thus, our study furthers our understanding of the role of PC4 in cancer stemness regulation and provides a promising strategy for bladder cancer therapy.
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is characterized by vascular remodeling predominantly driven by a phenotypic switching in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs). However, the underlying mechanisms for this phenotypic alteration remain incompletely understood. Here, we identified that RNA methyltransferase METTL3 is significantly elevated in the lungs of hypoxic PH (HPH) mice and rats, as well as in the pulmonary arteries (PAs) of HPH rats. Targeted deletion of Mettl3 in smooth muscle cells exacerbated hemodynamic consequences of hypoxia-induced PH and accelerated pulmonary vascular remodeling in vivo. Additionally, the absence of METTL3 markedly induced phenotypic switching in PASMCs in vitro. Mechanistically, METTL3 depletion attenuated m(6)A modification and hindered the processing of pri-miR-143/145, leading to a downregulation of miR-143-3p and miR-145-5p. Inhibition of hnRNPA2B1, an m(6)A mediator involved in miRNA maturation, similarly resulted in a significant reduction of miR-143-3p and miR-145-5p. We demonstrated that miR-145-5p targets Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) and miR-143-3p targets fascin actin-bundling protein 1 (FSCN1) in PASMCs. The decrease of miR-145-5p subsequently induced an upregulation of KLF4, which in turn suppressed miR-143/145 transcription, establishing a positive feedback circuit between KLF4 and miR-143/145. This regulatory circuit facilitates the persistent suppression of contractile marker genes, thereby sustaining PASMC phenotypic switch. Collectively, hypoxia-induced upregulation of METTL3, along with m(6)A mediated regulation of miR-143/145, might serve as a protective mechanism against phenotypic switch of PASMCs. Our results highlight a potential therapeutic strategy targeting m(6)A modified miR-143/145-KLF4 loop in the treatment of PH.
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be generated from mouse or human fibroblasts by exogenous expression of four factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc, and hold great potential for transplantation therapies and regenerative medicine. However, use of retroviral vectors during iPS cell generation has limited the technique's clinical application due to the potential risks resulting from genome integration of transgenes, including insertional mutations and altered differentiation potentials of the target cells, which may lead to pathologies such as tumorigenesis. Here we review recent progress in generating safer transgene-free or integration-free iPS cells, including the use of non-integrating vectors, excision of vectors after integration, DNA-free delivery of factors and chemical induction of pluripotency.
N-myc downstream regulated gene 1 (NDRG1) has recently drawn increasing attention because of its involvement in angiogenesis, cell proliferation, and differentiation. We used in vitro [human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (hPASMCs)] and in vivo (rat) models under hypoxic conditions and found a vital role of NDRG1 in reducing apoptosis and increasing proliferation and migration by overexpressing and knocking down NDRG1. We also proved that hypoxia induced the protein expression of dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1) and stimulated The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/ Protein kinase B (Akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways, and these effects were reversed by NDRG1 knockdown. The relationship between NDRG1 and DRP1 and the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway was further evaluated by adding mdivi-1 (DRP1 inhibitor) or LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor). NDRG1 was found to regulate the proliferation, apoptosis, and migration of hypoxia-treated hPASMCs via DRP1 and PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathways. We explored the upstream regulators of NDRG1 using in vivo and in vitro hypoxia models. Hypoxia was found to upregulate and downregulate KLF transcription factor 4 (KLF4) protein expression in the cytoplasm and nucleus, respectively. Further, we showed that KLF4 regulated the proliferation and migration of hypoxia-treated hPASMCs via NDRG1. These results indicated a link between KLF4, NDRG1, and DRP1 for the first time, providing new ideas for treating hypoxic pulmonary hypertension.
BACKGROUND: Inflammation is one of the significant consequences of ox-LDL-induced endothelial cell (EC) dysfunction. The senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) is a critical source of inflammation factors. However, the molecular mechanism by which the SASP is regulated in ECs under ox-LDL conditions remains unknown. RESULTS: The level of SASP was increased in ox-LDL-treated ECs, which could be augmented by KLF4 knockdown whereas restored by KLF4 knock-in. Furthermore, we found that KLF4 directly promoted PDGFRA transcription and confirmed the central role of the NAPMT/mitochondrial ROS pathway in KLF4/PDGFRA-mediated inhibition of SASP. Animal experiments showed a higher SASP HFD-fed mice, compared with normal feed (ND)-fed mice, and the endothelium of EC-specific KLF4-/- mice exhibited a higher proportion of SA-beta-gal-positive cells and lower PDGFRA/NAMPT expression. CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed that KLF4 inhibits the SASP of endothelial cells under ox-LDL conditions through the PDGFRA/NAMPT/mitochondrial ROS. METHODS: Ox-LDL-treated ECs and HFD-fed mice were used as endothelial senescence models in vitro and in vivo. SA-beta-gal stain, detection of SAHF and the expression of inflammatory factors determined SASP and senescence of ECs. The direct interaction of KLF4 and PDGFRA promotor was analyzed by EMSA and fluorescent dual luciferase reporting analysis.
X-chromosome inactivation, or the silencing of one X chromosome that occurs initially in the female somatic four-cell-stage embryo, is reversed during embryonic development first at the time of inner cell mass formation and again during formation of germ cell precursors. Such X-chromosome reactivation in the mouse implies the silencing of the Xist gene and the transcription of its antisense partner, Tsix, from both X chromosomes. In murine embryonic stem cells, both genes are under the transcriptional control of a series of critical pluripotency factors, namely, OCT3/4, NANOG, SOX2, KLF4, C-MYC and REX1. Although the inactive/active status of the two X chromosomes present in female human embryonic stem cells remains controversial, the reactivation of X-chromosome inactivation seems to be a signature for the naive pluripotent state.
AIM: Myocardial infarction remains the leading cause of heart failure. The adult human heart lacks the capacity to undergo endogenous regeneration. New blood vessel growth is integral to regenerative medicine necessitating a comprehensive understanding of the pathways that regulate vascular regeneration. We sought to define the transcriptomic dynamics of coronary endothelial cells following ischaemic injuries in the developing and adult mouse and human heart and to identify new mechanistic insights and targets for cardiovascular regeneration. METHODS AND RESULTS: We carried out a comprehensive meta-analysis of integrated single-cell RNA-sequencing data of coronary vascular endothelial cells from the developing and adult mouse and human heart spanning healthy and acute and chronic ischaemic cardiac disease. We identified species-conserved gene regulatory pathways aligned to endogenous neovascularization. We annotated injury-associated temporal shifts of the endothelial transcriptome and validated four genes: VEGF-C, KLF4, EGR1, and ZFP36. Moreover, we showed that ZFP36 regulates human coronary endothelial cell proliferation and defined that VEGF-C administration in vivo enhances clonal expansion of the cardiac vasculature post-myocardial infarction. Finally, we constructed a coronary endothelial cell meta-atlas, CrescENDO, to empower future in-depth research to target pathways associated with coronary neovascularization. CONCLUSION: We present a high-resolution single-cell meta-atlas of healthy and injured coronary endothelial cells in the mouse and human heart, revealing a suite of novel targets with great potential to promote vascular regeneration, and providing a rich resource for therapeutic development.
