GTPase KRas, N-terminally processed; Ras proteins bind GDP/GTP and possess intrinsic GTPase activity. Plays an important role in the regulation of cell proliferation. Plays a role in promoting oncogenic events by inducing transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells in a ZNF304-dependent manner.
RAS proteins are binary switches, cycling between ON and OFF states during signal transduction. These switches are normally tightly controlled, but in RAS-related diseases, such as cancer, RASopathies, and many psychiatric disorders, mutations in the RAS genes or their regulators render RAS proteins persistently active. The structural basis of the switch and many of the pathways that RAS controls are well known, but the precise mechanisms by which RAS proteins function are less clear. All RAS biology occurs in membranes: a precise understanding of RAS' interaction with membranes is essential to understand RAS action and to intervene in RAS-driven diseases.
The discovery of small-molecule inhibitors requires suitable binding pockets on protein surfaces. Proteins that lack this feature are considered undruggable and require innovative strategies for therapeutic targeting. KRAS is the most frequently activated oncogene in cancer, and the active state of mutant KRAS is such a recalcitrant target. We designed a natural product-inspired small molecule that remodels the surface of cyclophilin A (CYPA) to create a neomorphic interface with high affinity and selectivity for the active state of KRAS(G12C) (in which glycine-12 is mutated to cysteine). The resulting CYPA:drug:KRAS(G12C) tricomplex inactivated oncogenic signaling and led to tumor regressions in multiple human cancer models. This inhibitory strategy can be used to target additional KRAS mutants and other undruggable cancer drivers. Tricomplex inhibitors that selectively target active KRAS(G12C) or multiple RAS mutants are in clinical trials now (NCT05462717 and NCT05379985).
KRAS(G12C) was recently identified to be potentially druggable by allele-specific covalent targeting of Cys-12 in vicinity to an inducible allosteric switch II pocket (S-IIP). Success of this approach requires active cycling of KRAS(G12C) between its active-GTP and inactive-GDP conformations as accessibility of the S-IIP is restricted only to the GDP-bound state. This strategy proved feasible for inhibiting mutant KRAS in vitro; however, it is uncertain whether this approach would translate to in vivo. Here, we describe structure-based design and identification of ARS-1620, a covalent compound with high potency and selectivity for KRAS(G12C). ARS-1620 achieves rapid and sustained in vivo target occupancy to induce tumor regression. We use ARS-1620 to dissect oncogenic KRAS dependency and demonstrate that monolayer culture formats significantly underestimate KRAS dependency in vivo. This study provides in vivo evidence that mutant KRAS can be selectively targeted and reveals ARS-1620 as representing a new generation of KRAS(G12C)-specific inhibitors with promising therapeutic potential.
KRAS mutations are the most common genetic abnormalities in cancer, but the distribution of specific mutations across cancers and the differential responses of patients with specific KRAS mutations in therapeutic clinical trials suggest that different KRAS mutations have unique biochemical behaviors. To further explain these high-level clinical differences and to explore potential therapeutic strategies for specific KRAS isoforms, we characterized the most common KRAS mutants biochemically for substrate binding kinetics, intrinsic and GTPase-activating protein (GAP)-stimulated GTPase activities, and interactions with the RAS effector, RAF kinase. Of note, KRAS G13D shows rapid nucleotide exchange kinetics compared with other mutants analyzed. This property can be explained by changes in the electrostatic charge distribution of the active site induced by the G13D mutation as shown by X-ray crystallography. High-resolution X-ray structures are also provided for the GDP-bound forms of KRAS G12V, G12R, and Q61L and reveal additional insight. Overall, the structural data and measurements, obtained herein, indicate that measurable biochemical properties provide clues for identifying KRAS-driven tumors that preferentially signal through RAF. IMPLICATIONS: Biochemical profiling and subclassification of KRAS-driven cancers will enable the rational selection of therapies targeting specific KRAS isoforms or specific RAS effectors.
KRAS is one of the most frequently activated oncogenes in human cancers. Although the role of KRAS mutation in tumorigenesis and tumor maintenance has been extensively studied, the relationship between KRAS and the tumor immune microenvironment is not fully understood. Here, we identified a role of KRAS in driving tumor evasion from innate immune surveillance. In samples of lung adenocarcinoma from patients and Kras-driven genetic mouse models of lung cancer, mutant KRAS activated the expression of cluster of differentiation 47 (CD47), an antiphagocytic signal in cancer cells, leading to decreased phagocytosis of cancer cells by macrophages. Mechanistically, mutant KRAS activated PI3K/STAT3 signaling, which restrained miR-34a expression and relieved the posttranscriptional repression of miR-34a on CD47. In 3 independent cohorts of patients with lung cancer, the KRAS mutation status positively correlated with CD47 expression. Therapeutically, disruption of the KRAS/CD47 signaling axis with KRAS siRNA, the KRASG12C inhibitor AMG 510, or a miR-34a mimic suppressed CD47 expression, enhanced the phagocytic capacity of macrophages, and restored innate immune surveillance. Our results reveal a direct mechanistic link between active KRAS and innate immune evasion and identify CD47 as a major effector underlying the KRAS-mediated immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment.
KRAS is the most frequently mutated oncogene found in pancreatic, colorectal, and lung cancers. Although it has been challenging to identify targeted therapies for cancers harboring KRAS mutations, KRAS(G12C) can be targeted by small-molecule inhibitors that form covalent bonds with cysteine 12 (C12). Here, we designed a library of C12-directed covalent degrader molecules (PROTACs) and subjected them to a rigorous evaluation process to rapidly identify a lead compound. Our lead degrader successfully engaged CRBN in cells, bound KRAS(G12C)in vitro, induced CRBN/KRAS(G12C) dimerization, and degraded GFP-KRAS(G12C) in reporter cells in a CRBN-dependent manner. However, it failed to degrade endogenous KRAS(G12C) in pancreatic and lung cancer cells. Our data suggest that inability of the lead degrader to effectively poly-ubiquitinate endogenous KRAS(G12C) underlies the lack of activity. We discuss challenges for achieving targeted KRAS(G12C) degradation and proposed several possible solutions which may lead to efficient degradation of endogenous KRAS(G12C).
Thousands of proteins have been validated genetically as therapeutic targets for human diseases(1). However, very few have been successfully targeted, and many are considered 'undruggable'. This is particularly true for proteins that function via protein-protein interactions-direct inhibition of binding interfaces is difficult and requires the identification of allosteric sites. However, most proteins have no known allosteric sites, and a comprehensive allosteric map does not exist for any protein. Here we address this shortcoming by charting multiple global atlases of inhibitory allosteric communication in KRAS. We quantified the effects of more than 26,000 mutations on the folding of KRAS and its binding to six interaction partners. Genetic interactions in double mutants enabled us to perform biophysical measurements at scale, inferring more than 22,000 causal free energy changes. These energy landscapes quantify how mutations tune the binding specificity of a signalling protein and map the inhibitory allosteric sites for an important therapeutic target. Allosteric propagation is particularly effective across the central beta-sheet of KRAS, and multiple surface pockets are genetically validated as allosterically active, including a distal pocket in the C-terminal lobe of the protein. Allosteric mutations typically inhibit binding to all tested effectors, but they can also change the binding specificity, revealing the regulatory, evolutionary and therapeutic potential to tune pathway activation. Using the approach described here, it should be possible to rapidly and comprehensively identify allosteric target sites in many proteins.
KRAS(G12D), the most frequent KRAS oncogenic mutation, is a promising target for cancer therapy. Herein, we report the design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of a series of KRAS(G12D) PROTACs by connecting the analogues of MRTX1133 and the VHL ligand. Structural modifications of the linker moiety and KRAS inhibitor part suggested a critical role of membrane permeability in the degradation activity of the KRAS(G12D) PROTACs. Mechanism studies with the representative compound 8o demonstrated that the potent, rapid, and selective degradation of KRAS(G12D) induced by 8o was via a VHL- and proteasome-dependent manner. This compound selectively and potently suppressed the growth of multiple KRAS(G12D) mutant cancer cells, displayed favorable pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties in mice, and showed significant antitumor efficacy in the AsPC-1 xenograft mouse model. Further optimization of 8o appears to be promising for the development of a new chemotherapy for KRAS(G12D)-driven cancers as the complementary therapeutic strategy to KRAS inhibition.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly aggressive tumor that is almost uniformly lethal in humans. Activating mutations of KRAS are found in >90% of human PDACs and are sufficient to promote acinar-to-ductal metaplasia (ADM) during tumor initiation. The roles of miRNAs in oncogenic Kras-induced ADM are incompletely understood. METHODS: The Ptf1a(Cre/+)LSL-Kras(G12D/+) and Ptf1a(Cre/+)LSL-Kras(G12D/+)LSL-p53R172H/(+) and caerulein-induced acute pancreatitis mice models were used. mir-802 was conditionally ablated in acinar cells to study the function of miR-802 in ADM. RESULTS: We show that miR-802 is a highly abundant and acinar-enriched pancreatic miRNA that is silenced during early stages of injury or oncogenic Kras(G12D)-induced transformation. Genetic ablation of mir-802 cooperates with Kras(G12D) by promoting ADM formation. miR-802 deficiency results in de-repression of the miR-802 targets Arhgef12, RhoA, and Sdc4, activation of RhoA, and induction of the downstream RhoA effectors ROCK1, LIMK1, COFILIN1, and EZRIN, thereby increasing F-actin rearrangement. mir-802 ablation also activates SOX9, resulting in augmented levels of ductal and attenuated expression of acinar identity genes. Consistently with these findings, we show that this miR-802-RhoA-F-actin network is activated in biopsies of pancreatic cancer patients and correlates with poor survival. CONCLUSIONS: We show miR-802 suppresses pancreatic cancer initiation by repressing oncogenic Kras-induced ADM. The role of miR-802 in ADM fills the gap in our understanding of oncogenic Kras-induced F-actin reorganization, acinar reprogramming, and PDAC initiation. Modulation of the miR-802-RhoA-F-actin network may be a new strategy to interfere with pancreatic carcinogenesis.
KRAS gain-of-function mutations occur in approximately 30% of all human cancers. Despite more than 30 years of KRAS-focused research and development efforts, no targeted therapy has been discovered for cancers with KRAS mutations. Here, we describe ARS-853, a selective, covalent inhibitor of KRAS(G12C) that inhibits mutant KRAS-driven signaling by binding to the GDP-bound oncoprotein and preventing activation. Based on the rates of engagement and inhibition observed for ARS-853, along with a mutant-specific mass spectrometry-based assay for assessing KRAS activation status, we show that the nucleotide state of KRAS(G12C) is in a state of dynamic flux that can be modulated by upstream signaling factors. These studies provide convincing evidence that the KRAS(G12C) mutation generates a "hyperexcitable" rather than a "statically active" state and that targeting the inactive, GDP-bound form is a promising approach for generating novel anti-RAS therapeutics. SIGNIFICANCE: A cell-active, mutant-specific, covalent inhibitor of KRAS(G12C) is described that targets the GDP-bound, inactive state and prevents subsequent activation. Using this novel compound, we demonstrate that KRAS(G12C) oncoprotein rapidly cycles bound nucleotide and responds to upstream signaling inputs to maintain a highly active state.
The protein KRAS has for decades been considered a holy grail of cancer drug discovery. For most of that time, it has also been considered undruggable. Since 2018, five compounds have entered the clinic targeting a single mutant form of KRAS, G12C. Here, we review each of these compounds along with additional approaches to targeting this and other mutants. Remaining challenges include expanding the identification of inhibitors to a broader range of known mutants and to conformations of the protein more likely to avoid development of resistance.
Since the late 1980s, mutations in the RAS genes have been recognized as major oncogenes with a high occurrence rate in human cancers. Such mutations reduce the ability of the small GTPase RAS to hydrolyze GTP, keeping this molecular switch in a constitutively active GTP-bound form that drives, unchecked, oncogenic downstream signaling. One strategy to reduce the levels of active RAS is to target guanine nucleotide exchange factors, which allow RAS to cycle from the inactive GDP-bound state to the active GTP-bound form. Here, we describe the identification of potent and cell-active small-molecule inhibitors which efficiently disrupt the interaction between KRAS and its exchange factor SOS1, a mode of action confirmed by a series of biophysical techniques. The binding sites, mode of action, and selectivity were elucidated using crystal structures of KRAS(G12C)-SOS1, SOS1, and SOS2. By preventing formation of the KRAS-SOS1 complex, these inhibitors block reloading of KRAS with GTP, leading to antiproliferative activity. The final compound 23 (BAY-293) selectively inhibits the KRAS-SOS1 interaction with an IC(50) of 21 nM and is a valuable chemical probe for future investigations.
KRAS mutations are broadly recognized as promising targets for tumor therapy. T cell receptors (TCRs) can specifically recognize KRAS mutant neoantigens presented by human lymphocyte antigen (HLA) and mediate T cell responses to eliminate tumor cells. In the present study, we identify two TCRs specific for the 9-mer KRAS-G12V mutant neoantigen in the context of HLA-A*11:01. The TCR-T cells are constructed and display cytokine secretion and cytotoxicity upon co-culturing with varied tumor cells expressing the KRAS-G12V mutation. Moreover, 1-2C TCR-T cells show anti-tumor activity in preclinical models in female mice. The 9-mer KRAS-G12V mutant peptide exhibits a distinct conformation from the 9-mer wildtype peptide and its 10-mer counterparts. Specific recognition of the G12V mutant by TCR depends both on distinct conformation from wildtype peptide and on direct interaction with residues from TCRs. Our study reveals the mechanisms of presentation and TCR recognition of KRAS-G12V mutant peptide and describes TCRs with therapeutic potency for tumor immunotherapy.
KRAS is the most frequently mutated oncogene in human neoplasia. Despite a large investment to understand the effects of KRAS mutation in cancer cells, the direct effects of the oncogenetic KRAS activation on immune cells remain elusive. Here, we report that extracellular KRAS(G12D) is essential for pancreatic tumor-associated macrophage polarization. Oxidative stress induces KRAS(G12D) protein release from cancer cells succumbing to autophagy-dependent ferroptosis. Extracellular KRAS(G12D) packaged into exosomes then is taken up by macrophages through an AGER-dependent mechanism. KRAS(G12D) causes macrophages to switch to an M2-like pro-tumor phenotype via STAT3-dependent fatty acid oxidation. Consequently, the disruption of KRAS(G12D) release and uptake can abolish the macrophage-mediated stimulation of pancreatic adenocarcinomas in mouse models. Importantly, the level of KRAS(G12D) expression in macrophages correlates with poor survival in pancreatic cancer patients. These findings not only identify extracellular KRAS(G12D) as a key mediator of cancer cell-macrophage communication, but also provide a novel KRAS-targeted anticancer strategy. Abbreviations: DAMP, damage-associated molecular pattern; PBMCMs, peripheral blood mononuclear cell-derived macrophages; PDAC, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; s.c., subcutaneously; TAMs, tumor-associated macrophages; TME, tumor microenvironment.
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt axis is one of the most frequently activated pathways and is demonstrated as a therapeutic target in Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS)-mutated colorectal cancer (CRC). Targeting the PI3K-Akt pathway has been a challenging undertaking through the decades. Here we unveiled an essential role of E3 ligase SMAD ubiquitylation regulatory factor 1 (Smurf1)-mediated phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) neddylation in PI3K-Akt signaling and tumorigenesis. Upon growth factor stimulation, Smurf1 immediately triggers PDK1 neddylation and the poly-neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 8 (poly-Nedd8) chains recruit methyltransferase SET domain bifurcated histone lysine methyltransferase 1 (SETDB1). The cytoplasmic complex of PDK1 assembled with Smurf1 and SETDB1 (cCOMPASS) consisting of PDK1, Smurf1 and SETDB1 directs Akt membrane attachment and T308 phosphorylation. Smurf1 deficiency dramatically reduces CRC tumorigenesis in a genetic mouse model. Furthermore, we developed a highly selective Smurf1 degrader, Smurf1-antagonizing repressor of tumor 1, which exhibits efficient PDK1-Akt blockade and potent tumor suppression alone or combined with PDK1 inhibitor in KRAS-mutated CRC. The findings presented here unveil previously unrecognized roles of PDK1 neddylation and offer a potential strategy for targeting the PI3K-Akt pathway and KRAS mutant cancer therapy.
Over the past decades, designing therapeutic strategies to target KRAS-mutant cancers, which is one of the most frequent mutant oncogenes among all cancer types, have proven unsuccessful regardless of many concerted attempts. There are key challenges for KRAS-mutant anticancer therapy, as the complex cellular processes involved in KRAS signaling has present. Herein, we highlight the emerging therapeutic approaches for inhibiting KRAS signaling and blocking KRAS functions, in hope to serve as a more effective guideline for future development of therapeutics.
KRAS proteins play a major role in human cancer, but have not yielded to therapeutic attack. New technologies in drug discovery and insights into signaling pathways that KRAS controls have promoted renewed efforts to develop therapies through direct targeting of KRAS itself, new ways of blocking KRAS processing, or by identifying targets that KRAS cancers depend on for survival. Although drugs that block the well-established downstream pathways, RAF-MAPK and PI3K, are being tested in the clinic, new efforts are under way to exploit previously unrecognized vulnerabilities, such as altered metabolic networks, or novel pathways identified through synthetic lethal screens. Furthermore, new ways of suppressing KRAS gene expression and of harnessing the immune system offer further hope that new ways of treating KRAS are finally coming into view. These issues are discussed in this edition of CCR Focus.
RAS proteins play major roles in many human cancers, but programs to develop direct RAS inhibitors so far have only been successful for the oncogenic KRAS mutant G12C. As an alternative approach, inhibitors for the RAS guanine nucleotide exchange factor SOS1 have been investigated by several academic groups and companies, and major progress has been achieved in recent years in the optimization of small molecule activators and inhibitors of SOS1. Here, we review the discovery and development of small molecule modulators of SOS1 and their molecular binding modes and modes of action. As targeting the RAS pathway is expected to result in the development of resistance mechanisms, SOS1 inhibitors will most likely be best applied in vertical combination approaches where two nodes of the RAS signaling pathway are hit simultaneously. We summarize the current understanding of which combination partners may be most beneficial for patients with RAS driven tumors.
KRAS is the most frequently mutated oncogene in cancer and KRAS mutation is commonly associated with poor prognosis and resistance to therapy. Since the KRAS oncoprotein is, as yet, not directly druggable, efforts to target KRAS mutant cancers focus on identifying vulnerabilities in downstream signaling pathways or in stress response pathways that are permissive for strong oncogenic signaling. One aspect of KRAS biology that is not well appreciated is the potential biological differences between the many distinct KRAS activating mutations. This review draws upon insights from both clinical and experimental studies to explore similarities and differences among KRAS alleles. Historical and emerging evidence supports the notion that the specific biology related to each allele might be exploitable for allele-specific therapy.
Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS and RNS, respectively) activate the redox-sensitive Ras small GTPases. The three canonical genes (HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS) are archetypes of the superfamily of small GTPases and are the most common oncogenes in human cancer. Oncogenic Ras is intimately linked to redox biology, mainly in the context of tumorigenesis. The Ras protein structure is highly conserved, especially in effector-binding regions. Ras small GTPases are redox-sensitive proteins thanks to the presence of the NKCD motif (Asn116-Lys 117-Cys118-Asp119). Notably, the ROS- and RNS-based oxidation of Cys118 affects protein stability, activity, and localization, and protein-protein interactions. Cys residues at positions 80, 181, 184, and 186 may also help modulate these actions. Moreover, oncogenic mutations of Gly12Cys and Gly13Cys may introduce additional oxidative centres and represent actionable drug targets. Here, the pathophysiological involvement of Cys-redox regulation of Ras proteins is reviewed in the context of cancer and heart and brain diseases.
