Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2; Protein tyrosine kinase that is part of several cell surface receptor complexes, but that apparently needs a coreceptor for ligand binding. Essential component of a neuregulin-receptor complex, although neuregulins do not interact with it alone. GP30 is a potential ligand for this receptor. Regulates outgrowth and stabilization of peripheral microtubules (MTs). Upon ERBB2 activation, the MEMO1-RHOA-DIAPH1 signaling pathway elicits the phosphorylation and thus the inhibition of GSK3B at cell membrane. This prevents the phosphorylation of APC and  [...] 
Triple-Negative Breast Cancer (TNBC) has a poor prognosis and adverse clinical outcomes among all breast cancer subtypes as there is no available targeted therapy. Overexpression of Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been shown to correlate with TNBC's poor prognosis, but the contribution of EZH2 catalytic (H3K27me3) versus non-catalytic EZH2 (NC-EZH2) function in TNBC progression remains elusive. We reveal that selective hyper-activation of functional EZH2 (H3K27me3) over NC-EZH2 alters TNBC metastatic landscape and fosters its peritoneal metastasis, particularly splenic. Instead of H3K27me3-mediated repression of gene expression; here, it promotes KRT14 transcription by attenuating binding of repressor SP1 to its promoter. Further, KRT14 loss significantly reduces TNBC migration, invasion, and peritoneal metastasis. Consistently, human TNBC metastasis displays positive correlation between H3K27me3 and KRT14 levels. Finally, EZH2 knockdown or H3K27me3 inhibition by EPZ6438 reduces TNBC peritoneal metastasis. Altogether, our preclinical findings suggest a rationale for targeting TNBC with EZH2 inhibitors.
Metastasis is the leading cause of melanoma-related mortality. Current therapies are rarely curative for metastatic melanoma, revealing the urgent need to identify more effective preventive and therapeutic targets. This study aimed to screen the core genes and molecular mechanisms related to melanoma metastasis. A gene expression profile, GSE8401, including 31 primary melanoma and 52 metastatic melanoma clinical samples, was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between melanoma metastases and primary melanoma were screened using GEO2R tool. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome (KEGG) analyses of DEGs were performed using the Database for Annotation Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID). The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) and Cytoscape with Molecular Complex Detection (MCODE) plug-in tools were utilized to detect the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network among DEGs. The top 10 genes with the highest degrees of the PPI network were defined as hub genes. In the results, 425 DEGs, including 60 upregulated genes and 365 downregulated genes, were identified. The upregulated genes were enriched in ECM-receptor interactions and the regulation of actin cytoskeleton, while 365 downregulated genes were enriched in amoebiasis, melanogenesis, and ECM-receptor interactions. The defined hub genes included CDK1, COL17A1, EGFR, DSG1, KRT14, FLG, CDH1, DSP, IVL, and KRT5. In addition, the mRNA and protein levels of the hub genes during melanoma metastasis were verified in the TCGA database and paired post- and premetastatic melanoma cells, respectively. Finally, KRT5-specific siRNAs were utilized to reduce the KRT5 expression in melanoma A375 cells. An MTT assay and a colony formation assay showed that KRT5 knockdown significantly promoted the proliferation of A375 cells. A Transwell assay further suggested that KRT5 knockdown significantly increased the cell migration and cell invasion of A375 cells. This bioinformatics study provided a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms of melanoma metastasis. The in vitro experiments showed that KRT5 played the inhibitory effects on melanoma metastasis. Therefore, KRT5 may serve important roles in melanoma metastasis.
The precise mechanism through which macroautophagy/autophagy affects psoriasis is poorly understood. Here, we found that keratinocyte (KC) autophagy, which was positively correlated with psoriatic severity in patients and mouse models and could be inhibited by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family inactivation. The impairment of autophagic flux alleviated psoriasisform inflammation. We also found that an autophagy-based unconventional secretory pathway (autosecretion) dependent on ATG5 (autophagy related 5) and GORASP2 (golgi reassembly stacking protein 2) promoted psoriasiform KC inflammation. Moreover, the alarmin HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1) was more effective than other autosecretory proteins in regulating psoriasiform cutaneous inflammation. HMGB1 neutralization in autophagy-efficient KCs eliminated the differences in psoriasiform inflammation between Krt14(+/+)-Atg5(f/f) KCs and Krt14(Cre/+)-atg5(f/f) KCs, and conversely, recombinant HMGB1 almost completely restored psoriasiform inflammation in Krt14(Cre/+)-atg5(f/f) KCs in vivo. These results suggest that HMGB1-associated autosecretion plays a pivotal role in cutaneous in fl ammation. Finally, we demonstrated that Krt14(Cre/+)-hmgb1(f/f) mice displayed attenuated psoriatic in fl ammation due to the essential crosstalk between KC-specific HMGB1-associated autosecretion and gammadeltaT cells. Thus, this study uncovered a novel autophagy mechanism in psoriasis pathogenesis, and the findings imply the clinical significance of investigating and treating psoriasis.Abbreviations: 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; ACTB: actin beta; AGER: advanced glycosylation end-product specific receptor; Anti-HMGB1: anti-HMGB1 neutralizing antibody; Anti-IL18: anti-IL18 neutralizing antibody; Anti-IL1B: anti-IL1B neutralizing antibody; ATG5: autophagy related 5; BAF: bafilomycin A(1); BECN1: beclin 1; CASP1: caspase 1; CCL: C-C motif chemokine ligand; CsA: cyclosporine A; ctrl shRNA: lentivirus harboring shRNA against control; CXCL: C-X-C motif chemokine ligand; DCs: dendritic cells; DMEM: dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium; ELISA: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EM: electron microscopy; FBS: fetal bovine serum; GORASP2 shRNA: lentivirus harboring shRNA against GORASP2; GORASP2/GRASP55: golgi reassembly stacking protein 2; GR1: a composite epitope between LY6 (lymphocyte antigen 6 complex) locus C1 and LY6 locus G6D antigens; H&E: hematoxylin and eosin; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1; HMGB1 shRNA: lentivirus harboring shRNA against HMGB1; IFNG/IFN-gamma: interferon gamma; IL17A: interleukin 17A; IL18: interleukin 18; IL1A/IL-1alpha: interleukin 1 alpha; IL1B/IL-1beta: interleukin 1 beta; IL22/IL-22: interleukin 22; IL23A: interleukin 23 subunit alpha; IL23R: interleukin 23 receptor; IMQ: imiquimod; ITGAM/CD11B: integrin subunit alpha M; ITGAX/CD11C: integrin subunit alpha X; IVL: involucrin; KC: keratinocyte; KD: knockdown; KO: knockout; Krt14(+/+)-Atg5(f/f) mice: mice bearing an Atg5 flox allele, in which exon 3 of the Atg5 gene is flanked by two loxP sites; Krt14(+/+)-Hmgb1(f/f): mice bearing an Hmgb1 flox allele, in which exon 2 to 4 of the Hmgb1 gene is flanked by two loxP sites; Krt14(Cre/+)-atg5(f/f) mice: keratinocyte-specific atg5 knockout mice generated by mating Atg5-floxed mice with mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the promoter of Krt4; Krt14(Cre/+)-hmgb1(f/f) mice: keratinocyte-specific hmgb1 knockout mice generated by mating Hmgb1-floxed mice with mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the promoter of Krt14; Krt14-Vegfa mice: mice expressing 164-amino acid Vegfa splice variant recombinase under the control of promoter of Krt14; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; LORICRIN: loricrin cornified envelope precursor protein; M5: TNF, IL1A, IL17A, IL22 and OSM in combination; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAPK: mitogen-activated protein kinase; MKI67: marker of proliferation Ki-67; MTT: thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide; NFKB/NF-kappaB: nuclear factor kappa B; NHEKs: primary normal human epidermal keratinocytes; NS: not significant; OSM: oncostatin M; PASI: psoriasis area and severity index; PtdIns3K: class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; qRT-PCR: quantitative RT-PCR; RELA/p65: RELA proto-oncogene, NF-kB subunit; rHMGB1: recombinant HMGB1; rIL18: recombinant interleukin 18; rIL1B: recombinant interleukin 1 beta; S100A: S100 calcium binding protein A; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; T17: IL17A-producing T; TCR: T-cell receptor; tcrd KO mice: tcrd (T cell receptor delta chain) knockout mice, which show deficient receptor expression in all adult lymphoid and epithelial organs; TLR: toll-like receptor; TNF/TNF-alpha: tumor necrosis factor; WOR: wortmannin; WT: wild-type; gammadeltaT17 cells: IL17A-producing gammadelta T cells.
Located at the skin surface, keratinocytes (KCs) are constantly exposed to external stimuli and are the first responders to invading pathogens and injury. Upon skin injury, activated KCs secrete an array of alarmin molecules, providing a rapid and specific innate immune response against danger signals. However, dysregulation of the innate immune response of KCs may lead to uncontrolled inflammation and psoriasis pathogenesis. Keratins (KRT) are the major structural intermediate filament proteins in KCs and are expressed in a highly specific pattern at different differentiation stages of KCs. While KRT14-KRT5 is restricted to basal proliferative KCs, and KRT10-KRT1 is restricted to suprabasal differentiated KCs in normal skin epidermis, the wound proximal KCs downregulate KRT10-K1 and upregulate KRT16/KRT17-KRT6 upon skin injury. Recent studies have recognized KRT6/16/17 as key early barrier alarmins and upregulation of these keratins alters proliferation, cell adhesion, migration and inflammatory features of KCs, contributing to hyperproliferation and innate immune activation of KCs in response to an epidermal barrier breach, followed by the autoimmune activation of T cells that drives psoriasis. Here, we have reviewed how keratins are dysregulated during skin injury, their roles in wound repairs and in initiating the innate immune system and the subsequent autoimmune amplification that arises in psoriasis.
The prevalence of epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is estimated to be approximately 6 to 30 per 1 million live births. The disease is usually caused by missense mutations in KRT5 and KRT14, encoding keratins mostly expressed in the epidermal basal layer. Major advances in understanding of the molecular basis of EBS and other keratin disorders have led to the development of DNA-based prenatal testing.
Human thymic epithelial tumors (TET) are common malignancies in the anterior mediastinum with limited biological understanding. Here we show, by single cell analysis of the immune landscape, that the developmental pattern of intra-tumoral T-cells identify three types within TETs. We characterize the developmental alterations and TCR repertoires of tumor-infiltrating T cells in the context of the distinguishing epithelial tumor cell types. We demonstrate that a subset of tumor cells, featuring medullary thymic epithelial cell (TEC) phenotype and marked by KRT14/GNB3 expression, accumulate in type 1 TETs, while T-cell positive selection is inhibited. Type 2 TETs are dominated by CCL25(+) cortical TEC-like cells that appear to promote T-cell positive selection. Interestingly, the CHI3L1(+) medullary TEC-like cells that are the characteristic feature of type 3 TETs don't seem to support T-cell development, however, they may induce a tissue-resident CD8(+) T cell response. In summary, our work suggests that the molecular subtype of epithelial tumour cells in TETs determine their tumour immune microenvironment, thus GNB3 and CHI3L1 might predict the immunological behavior and hence prognosis of these tumours.
The pseudostratified epithelium of the mouse trachea and human airways contains a population of basal cells expressing Trp-63 (p63) and cytokeratins 5 (Krt5) and Krt14. Using a KRT5-CreER(T2) transgenic mouse line for lineage tracing, we show that basal cells generate differentiated cells during postnatal growth and in the adult during both steady state and epithelial repair. We have fractionated mouse basal cells by FACS and identified 627 genes preferentially expressed in a basal subpopulation vs. non-BCs. Analysis reveals potential mechanisms regulating basal cells and allows comparison with other epithelial stem cells. To study basal cell behaviors, we describe a simple in vitro clonal sphere-forming assay in which mouse basal cells self-renew and generate luminal cells, including differentiated ciliated cells, in the absence of stroma. The transcriptional profile identified 2 cell-surface markers, ITGA6 and NGFR, which can be used in combination to purify human lung basal cells by FACS. Like those from the mouse trachea, human airway basal cells both self-renew and generate luminal daughters in the sphere-forming assay.
Bone regeneration originates from proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitors via either endochondral or intramembranous ossification; and the regeneration capacities decline with age and estrogen loss. Maxillary sinus floor lifting (MSFL) is a commonly used surgical procedure for guiding bone regeneration in maxilla. Radiographic analysis of 1210 clinical cases of maxilla bone regeneration after MSFL revealed that the intrasinus osteogenic efficacy was independent of age and gender, however; and this might be related to the Schneiderian membrane that lines the sinus cavity. In view of the particularity of this biological process, our present study aimed to elucidate the underlying mechanism of MSFL-induced bone regeneration. We first established a murine model to simulate the clinical MSFL. By single-cell RNA-sequencing and flow cytometry-based bulk RNA-sequencing, we identified a novel Krt14(+)Ctsk(+) subset of cells that display both epithelial and mesenchymal properties and the transcriptomic feature of osteoprogenitors. Dual recombinases-mediated lineage tracing and loss-of-function analyses showed that these Krt14(+)Ctsk(+) progenitors contribute to both MSFL-induced osteogenesis and physiological bone homeostasis by differentiating into Krt14(-)Ctsk(+) descendants which show robust osteogenic capacity. In addition, we detected a similar population of Krt14(+)Ctsk(+) cells in human samples of Schneiderian membrane, which show a highly similar osteogenic potential and transcriptomic feature to the corresponding cells in mice. The identification of this Krt14(+)Ctsk(+) population, featured by osteoprogenitor characteristics and dual epithelial-mesenchymal properties, provides new insight into the understanding of bone regeneration and may open more possibilities for clinical applications.
BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic, food-driven allergic disease, characterized by eosinophil-rich inflammation in the esophagus. The histopathological and clinical features of EoE have been attributed to overproduction of the type 2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-13, which mediate profound alterations in the esophageal epithelium and neutralizing of their shared receptor component (IL-4Ralpha) with a human antibody drug (dupilumab) demonstrates clinical efficacy. Yet, the relative contribution of IL-4 and IL-13 and whether the type II IL-4 receptor (comprised of the IL-4Ralpha chain in association with IL-13Ralpha1) mediates this effect has not been determined. METHODS: Experimental EoE was induced in WT, Il13ra1(-/-) , and Krt14(Cre) /Il13ra1(fl/fl) mice by skin-sensitized using 4-ethoxymethylene-2-phenyl-2-oxazolin (OXA) followed by intraesophageal challenges. Esophageal histopathology was determined histologically. RNA was extracted and sequenced for transcriptome analysis and compared with human EoE RNAseq data. RESULTS: Induction of experimental EoE in mice lacking Il13ra1 and in vivo IL-13 antibody-based neutralization experiments blocked antigen-induced esophageal epithelial and lamina propria thickening, basal cell proliferation, eosinophilia, and tissue remodeling. In vivo targeted deletion of Il13ra1 in esophageal epithelial cells rendered mice protected from experimental EoE. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis of human EoE biopsies revealed predominant expression of IL-13Ralpha1 in epithelial cells and that EoE signature genes correlated with IL-13 expression compared with IL-4. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate a definitive role for IL-13 signaling via IL-13Ralpha1 in EoE. These data provide mechanistic insights into the mode of action of current therapies in EoE and highlight the type II IL-4R as a future therapeutic target.
Single-nucleus analysis allows robust cell-type classification and helps to establish relationships between chromatin accessibility and cell-type-specific gene expression. Here, using samples from 92 women of several genetic ancestries, we developed a comprehensive chromatin accessibility and gene expression atlas of the breast tissue. Integrated analysis revealed ten distinct cell types, including three major epithelial subtypes (luminal hormone sensing, luminal adaptive secretory precursor (LASP) and basal-myoepithelial), two endothelial and adipocyte subtypes, fibroblasts, T cells, and macrophages. In addition to the known cell identity genes FOXA1 (luminal hormone sensing), EHF and ELF5 (LASP), TP63 and KRT14 (basal-myoepithelial), epithelial subtypes displayed several uncharacterized markers and inferred gene regulatory networks. By integrating breast epithelial cell gene expression signatures with spatial transcriptomics, we identified gene expression and signaling differences between lobular and ductal epithelial cells and age-associated changes in signaling networks. LASP cells and fibroblasts showed genetic ancestry-dependent variability. An estrogen receptor-positive subpopulation of LASP cells with alveolar progenitor cell state was enriched in women of Indigenous American ancestry. Fibroblasts from breast tissues of women of African and European ancestry clustered differently, with accompanying gene expression differences. Collectively, these data provide a vital resource for further exploring genetic ancestry-dependent variability in healthy breast biology.
BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of cholesterol metabolism is associated with the metastasis of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) is widely recognized for its pivotal role in regulating cholesterol efflux and maintaining cellular cholesterol homeostasis. However, further exploration is needed to determine whether it inhibits TNBC metastasis by affecting cholesterol metabolism. Additionally, it is necessary to investigate whether ApoA1-based oncolytic virus therapy can be used to treat TNBC. METHODS: In vitro experiments and mouse breast cancer models were utilized to evaluate the molecular mechanism of ApoA1 in regulating cholesterol efflux and inhibiting breast cancer progression and metastasis. The gene encoding ApoA1 was inserted into the adenovirus genome to construct a recombinant adenovirus (ADV-ApoA1). Subsequently, the efficacy of ADV-ApoA1 in inhibiting the growth and metastasis of TNBC was evaluated in several mouse models, including orthotopic breast cancer, spontaneous breast cancer, and human xenografts. In addition, a comprehensive safety assessment of Syrian hamsters and rhesus monkeys injected with oncolytic adenovirus was conducted. RESULTS: This study found that dysregulation of cholesterol homeostasis is critical for the progression and metastasis of TNBC. In a mouse orthotopic model of TNBC, a high-cholesterol diet promoted lung and liver metastasis, which was associated with keratin 14 (KRT14), a protein responsible for TNBC metastasis. Furthermore, studies have shown that ApoA1, a cholesterol reverse transporter, inhibits TNBC metastasis by regulating the cholesterol/IKBKB/FOXO3a/KRT14 axis. Moreover, ADV-ApoA1 was found to promote cholesterol efflux, inhibit tumor growth, reduce lung metastasis, and prolonged the survival of mice with TNBC. Importantly, high doses of ADV-ApoA1 administered intravenously and subcutaneously were well tolerated in rhesus monkeys and Syrian hamsters. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a promising oncolytic virus treatment strategy for TNBC based on targeting dysregulated cholesterol metabolism. It also establishes a basis for subsequent clinical trials of ADV-ApoA1 in the treatment of TNBC.
Differentiated cells can be converted into pluripotent stem cells by expressing the transcription factors OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and MYC (OSKM) in a process known as reprogramming. Here, using single-cell RNA sequencing of pancreas undergoing reprogramming, we identify markers along the trajectory from acinar cell identity to pluripotency. These markers allow direct in situ visualization of cells undergoing dedifferentiation and acquiring features of early and advanced intermediate reprogramming. We also find that a fraction of cells do not dedifferentiate upon OSKM expression and are characterized by stress markers of the REG3 and AP-1 families. Importantly, most markers of intermediate reprogramming in the pancreas are also observed in stomach, colon, and cultured fibroblasts expressing OSKM. Among them is LY6A, a protein characteristic of progenitor cells and generally upregulated during tissue repair. Our roadmap defines intermediate reprogramming states that could be functionally relevant for tissue regeneration and rejuvenation.
Keratin intermediate filaments play an important role in maintaining the integrity of the skin structure. Understanding the importance of this subject is possible with the investigation of keratin defects in epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS). Nowadays, in addition to clinical criteria, new molecular diagnostic methods, such as next generation sequencing, can help to distinguish the subgroups of EBS more precisely. Because the most important and most commonly occurring molecular defects in these patients are the defects of keratins 5 and14 (KRT5 and KRT14), comprehending the nature structure of these proteins and their involved processes can be very effective in understanding the pathophysiology of this disease and providing new and effective therapeutic platforms to treat it. Here, we summarized the various aspects of the presence of KRT5 and KRT14 in the epidermis, their relation to the incidence and severity of EBS phenotypes, and the processes with which these proteins can affect them.
PURPOSE: FSTL3 expression is altered in various types of cancer. However, the role and mechanism of action of FSTL3 in lung adenocarcinoma development and tumor immunity are unknown. We investigated the association between FSTL3 expression and clinical characteristics and immune cell infiltration in lung adenocarcinoma samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and a separate validation set from our hospital. METHODS: Data on immune system infiltration, gene expression, and relevant clinical information were obtained by analyzing lung adenocarcinoma sample data from TCGA database. Using online tools like GEPIA, the correlations between FSTL3 expression and prognosis, clinical stage, survival status, and tumor-infiltrating immune cells were examined. In a validation dataset, immunohistochemistry was performed to analyze FSTL3 expression and its related clinical characteristics. RESULTS: FSTL3 expression was markedly reduced in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. N stage, pathological stage, and overall survival were significantly correlated with FSTL3 expression. According to GSEA, FSTL3 is strongly linked to signaling pathways such as DNA replication and those involved in cell cycle regulation. Examination of TCGA database and TIMER online revealed a correlation between FSTL3 and B cell, T cell, NK cell, and neutrophil levels. The prognosis of patients with lung adenocarcinoma was significantly affected by six genes (KRT6A, VEGFC, KRT14, KRT17, SNORA12, and KRT81) related to FSTL3. CONCLUSION: FSTL3 is significantly associated with the prognosis and progression of lung adenocarcinoma and the infiltration of immune cells. Thus, targeting FSTL3 and its associated genes in immunotherapy could be potentially beneficial for the treatment of lung adenocarcinoma.
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is a rare skin disease inherited mostly in an autosomal dominant manner. Patients display a skin fragility that leads to blisters and erosions caused by minor mechanical trauma. EBS phenotypic and genotypic variants are caused by genetic defects in intracellular proteins whose function is to provide the attachment of basal keratinocytes to the basement membrane zone and most EBS cases display mutations in keratin 5 (KRT5) and keratin 14 (KRT14) genes. Besides palliative treatments, there is still no long-lasting effective cure to correct the mutant gene and abolish the dominant negative effect of the pathogenic protein over its wild-type counterpart. Here, we propose a molecular strategy for EBS01 patient's keratinocytes carrying a monoallelic c.475/495del21 mutation in KRT14 exon 1. Through the CRISPR-Cas9 system, we perform a specific cleavage only on the mutant allele and restore a normal cellular phenotype and a correct intermediate filament network, without affecting the epidermal stem cell, referred to as holoclones, which play a crucial role in epidermal regeneration.
Basal-like breast cancers, an aggressive breast cancer subtype that has poor treatment options, are thought to arise from luminal mammary epithelial cells that undergo basal plasticity through poorly understood mechanisms. Using genetic mouse models and ex vivo primary organoid cultures, we show that conditional co-deletion of the LATS1 and LATS2 kinases, key effectors of Hippo pathway signaling, in mature mammary luminal epithelial cells promotes the development of Krt14 and Sox9-expressing basal-like carcinomas that metastasize over time. Genetic co-deletion experiments revealed that phenotypes resulting from the loss of LATS1/2 activity are dependent on the transcriptional regulators YAP/TAZ. Gene expression analyses of LATS1/2-deleted mammary epithelial cells notably revealed a transcriptional program that associates with human basal-like breast cancers. Our study demonstrates in vivo roles for the LATS1/2 kinases in mammary epithelial homeostasis and luminal-basal fate control and implicates signaling networks induced upon the loss of LATS1/2 activity in the development of basal-like breast cancer.
A variety of abnormal epithelial cells and immature and mature immune cells in thymic epithelial tumors (TETs) affect histopathological features, the degree of malignancy, and the response to treatment. Here, gene expression, trajectory inference, and T cell antigen receptor (TCR)-based lineage tracking are profiled in TETs at single-cell resolution. An original subpopulation of KRT14(+) progenitor cells with a spindle cell phenotype is shown. An abnormal infiltration of immature T cells with a TCR hyper-rearrangement state is revealed, due to the lack of CCL21(+) medullary epithelial cells. For thymic carcinoma, the novel biomarkers of MSLN, CCL20, and SLC1A5 are identified and observed an elevated expression of LAG3 and HAVCR2 in malignant tumorn-infiltrating mature T cells. These common features based on the single-cell populations may inform pathological reclassification of TETs. Meanwhile, it is found that macrophages (MACs) attract thymic tumor cells through the LGALS9-SLC1A5 axis, providing them with glutamine to elicit metabolic reprogramming. This MAC-based metabolic pattern can promote malignancy progression. Additionally, an interactive immune environment in TETs is identified that correlates with the infiltration of abnormal FOXI1(+) CFTR(-) ionocytes. Collectively, the data broaden the knowledge of TET cellular ecosystems, providing a basis for tackling histopathological diagnosis and related treatment.
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of mechanobullous diseases characterized by non-scarring blisters and erosions on the skin and mucous membranes upon mechanical trauma. The simplex form (EBS) is characterized by recurrent blister formation within the basal layer of the epidermis. It most often results from dominant mutations in the genes coding for keratin (K) 5 or 14 proteins (KRT5 and KRT14). A disruptive mutation in KRT5 or KRT14 will not only structurally impair the cytoskeleton, but it will also activate a cascade of biochemical mechanisms contributing to EBS. Skin lesions are painful and disfiguring and have a significant impact on life quality. Several gene expression studies were accomplished on mouse model and human keratinocytes to define the gene expression signature of EBS. Several key genes associated with EBS were identified as specific immunological mediators, keratins, and cell junction components. These data deepened the understanding of the EBS pathophysiology and revealed important functional biological processes, particularly inflammation. This review emphasizes the three EBS subtypes caused by dominant mutations on either KRT5 or KRT14 (localized, intermediate, and severe). It aims to summarize current knowledge about the EBS expression profiling pattern and predicted molecular mechanisms involved and to outline progress in therapy.
PURPOSES: To identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to the immune microenvironment and elucidate the biological functions of key genes in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) by analyzing the immune microenvironment. METHODS: The relative quantities of immune and matrix components in 507 patients with PTC were calculated from the TCGA database. Analysis of differentially expressed genes in tumor samples throughout the genome, intersection of DEGs obtained from PTC patients, and genome-wide tumor samples and survival analysis were performed. Survival analysis was used for identification of prognostic factor. Immunohistochemical analysis of the TREM2 expression in PTC tissues, flow cytometry, and transwell assays were used to detect the effect of TREM2 on PTC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. RESULTS: There were a total of 1242 upregulated genes with high intersection in the immune score and 124 downregulated genes with low intersection in the stromal score. A total of 1,366 genes in these DEGs may be determinants in the immune microenvironment. GO enrichment and KEGG enrichment analysis revealed that the overall function of DEGs appeared to map onto immune-related activities. Gene intersection and survival analysis showed that there were 435 DEG crosses in PTC patients and genome-wide tumor samples, only CXCL10, CD40LG, KRT14, TRAT1, and TREM2 were associated with patient prognosis, and TCGA showed that only the TREM2 expression was upregulated in PTC. TREM2 knockdown inhibited the cell cycle and cell proliferation, migration, and invasion by PTC cells. TREM2 was associated with the immunosuppressive microenvironment by via NF-kappaB pathway in PTC. CONCLUSION: TREM2 possibly was a potential indicator of altered TME status in PTC, and that TREM2 promoted PTC cell proliferation and cell cycle, migration, and invasion by NF-kappaB pathway.
