Lysophosphatidic acid receptor 3; Receptor for lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), a mediator of diverse cellular activities. May play a role in the development of ovarian cancer. Seems to be coupled to the G(i)/G(o) and G(q) families of heteromeric G proteins.
BACKGROUND: Our previous studies have shown that lipoxin A(4) (LXA(4)) can serve as a potential biomarker for assessing the efficacy of exercise therapy in knee osteoarthritis (KOA), and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) may play a crucial role in KOA pain as well as in the progression of the pathology. OBJECTIVE: By analyzing the GSE29746 dataset and collecting synovial samples from patients with different Kellgren-Lawrence (KL) grades for validation, we focused on exploring the potential effect of LXA(4) on ferroptosis in FLSs through the ESR2/LPAR3/Nrf2 axis to alleviate pain and pathological advancement in KOA. METHODS: The association between FLSs ferroptosis and chondrocyte matrix degradation was explored by cell co-culture. We overexpressed and knocked down LPAR3 in vitro to explore its potential mechanism in FLSs. A rat model of monosodium iodoacetate (MIA)-induced KOA was constructed and intervened with moderate-intensity treadmill exercise and intraperitoneal injection of PHTPP to investigate the effects of the LXA(4) intracellular receptor ESR2 on exercise therapy. RESULTS: ESR2, LPAR3, and GPX4 levels in the synovium decreased with increasing KL grade. After LXA(4) intervention in the co-culture system, GPX4, LPAR3, and ESR2 were upregulated in FLSs, collagen II was upregulated in chondrocytes, and MMP3 and ADAM9 were downregulated. LPAR3 overexpression upregulated the expression of GPX4, Nrf2, and SOD1 in FLSs, while downregulating the expression of MMP13 and MMP3; LPAR3 knockdown reversed these changes. Moderate-intensity platform training improved the behavioral manifestations of pain in KOA rats, whereas PHTPP treatment partially reversed the improvement in synovial and cartilage pathologies induced by platform training. CONCLUSION: LXA(4) inhibited FLSs ferroptosis by activating the ESR2/LPAR3/Nrf2 axis, thereby alleviating the pain and pathological progression of KOA. This study brings a new target for the treatment of KOA and also leads to a deeper understanding of the potential mechanisms of exercise therapy for KOA.
BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence suggests a strong association between polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and ovarian cancer (OC), but the potential molecular mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we identified previously unrecognized genes that are significantly correlated with PCOS and OC via bioinformatics. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Multiple bioinformatic analyses, such as differential expression analysis, univariate Cox analysis, functional and pathway enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction, survival analysis, and immune infiltration analysis, were utilized. We further evaluated the effect of OGN on FSHR expression via immunofluorescence. RESULTS: TCGA-OC, GSE140082 (for OC) and GSE34526 (for PCOS) datasets were downloaded. Twelve genes, including RNF144B, LPAR3, CRISPLD2, JCHAIN, OR7E14P, IL27RA, PTPRD, STAT1, NR4A1, OGN, GALNT6 and CXCL11, were identified as signature genes. Drug sensitivity analysis showed that OGN might represent a hub gene in the progression of PCOS and OC. Experimental analysis found that OGN could increase FSHR expression, indicating that OGN could regulate the hormonal response in PCOS and OC. Furthermore, correlation analysis indicated that OGN function might be closely related to m6A and ferroptosis. CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a 12-gene signature that might be involved in the prognostic significance of OC. Furthermore, the hub gene OGN represent a significant gene involved in OC and PCOS progression by regulating the hormonal response.
BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer (OV) is a common malignant tumor of the female reproductive system with a 5-year survival rate of  approximately 30 %. Inefficient early diagnosis and prognosis leads to poor survival in most patients. G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs, the largest family of human cell surface receptors) are associated with OV. We aimed to identify GPCR-related gene (GPCRRG) signatures and develop a novel model to predict OV prognosis. METHOD: We downloaded data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases. Prognostic GPCRRGs were screened using least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) Cox regression analysis, and a prognostic model was constructed. The predictive ability of the model was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier (K-M) survival analysis. The levels of GPCRRGs were examined in normal and OV cell lines using quantitative reverse-Etranscription polymerase chain reaction. The immunological characteristics of the high- and low-risk groups were analyzed using single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) and CIBERSORT. RESULTS: Based on the risks scores, 17 GPCRRGs were associated with OV prognosis. CXCR4, GPR34, LGR6, LPAR3, and RGS2 were significantly expressed in three OV datasets and enabled accurate OV diagnosis. K-M analysis of the prognostic model showed that it could differentiate high- and low-risk patients, which correspond to poorer and better prognoses, respectively. GPCRRG expression was correlated with immune infiltration rates. CONCLUSIONS: Our prognostic model elaborates on the roles of GPCRRGs in OV and provides a new tool for prognosis and immune response prediction in patients with OV.
Circular RNA (circRNA) is considered to be an important regulator that mediates cancer chemoresistance. But whether circ-LPAR3 is involved in ovarian cancer (OC) cisplatin (DDP) resistance is unclear. The circ-LPAR3, miR-634 and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1) expression was measured by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Cell cisplatin resistance and viability were measured by 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. In addition, cell colony number, apoptosis, and metastasis were assessed by colony formation assay, flow cytometry and transwell assay. Furthermore, in vivo experiments were performed by constructing mice xenograft models. RNA interaction was confirmed by dual-luciferase reporter assay, and PDK1 protein expression was examined by Western blot analysis. Our results showed that circ-LPAR3 was markedly upregulated in DDP-resistant OC tissues and cells. Silencing of circ-LPAR3 enhanced the DDP sensitivity of OC cells and tumors. MiR-634 could interact with circ-LPAR3, and its inhibitor overturned the regulation of si-circ-LPAR3 on cell DDP resistance. Additionally, PDK1 was targeted by miR-634, and its overexpression inverted the effect of miR-634 on cell DDP resistance. To sum up, circ-LPAR3 might contribute to the DDP resistance of OC via the miR-634/PDK1 axis.
Ferroptosis, a unique form of programmed cell death trigged by lipid peroxidation and iron accumulation, has been implicated in embryonic erythropoiesis and aging. Our previous research demonstrated that lysophosphatidic acid receptor 3 (LPA(3)) activation mitigated oxidative stress in progeria cells and accelerated the recovery of acute anemia in mice. Given that both processes involve iron metabolism, we hypothesized that LPA(3) activation might mediate cellular ferroptosis. In this study, we used an LPA(3) agonist, 1-Oleoyl-2-O-methyl-rac-glycerophosphothionate (OMPT), to activate LPA(3) and examine its effects on the ferroptosis process. OMPT treatment elevated anti-ferroptosis gene protein expression, including solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11), glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), and ferritin heavy chain (FTH1), in erastin-induced cells. Furthermore, OMPT reduced lipid peroxidation and intracellular ferrous iron accumulation, as evidenced by C11 BODIPY 581/591 Lipid Peroxidation Sensor and FerroOrange staining. These observations were validated by applying LPAR3 siRNA in the experiments mentioned above. In addition, the protein expression level of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (NRF2), a key regulator of oxidative stress, was also enhanced in OMPT-treated cells. Lastly, we verified that LPA(3) plays a critical role in erastin-induced ferroptotic human erythroleukemia K562 cells. OMPT rescued the erythropoiesis defect caused by erastin in K562 cells based on a Gly A promoter luciferase assay. Taken together, our findings suggest that LPA(3) activation inhibits cell ferroptosis by suppressing lipid oxidation and iron accumulation, indicating that ferroptosis could potentially serve as a link among LPA(3), erythropoiesis, and aging.
BACKGROUND: circ_LPAR3 is an oncogene in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. However, its role in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is unknown. PURPOSE: To reveal the functions of circ_LPAR3 in OSCC. METHODS: Online bioinformatic analysis was performed to disclose the differential expression of circ_LPAR3, VEGFC, AKT1 in OSCC and also the target predictions of miR-513b-5p. Transfection was applied in OSCC cells. RT-qPCR was used to detect the RNA expression and western blot to measure the proteins, VEGFC and phosphor-AKT1 (ser473, p-AKT1). CCK8 kit was used for viability detection and Flow cytometry for apoptosis evaluation. RNA pull-down and luciferase reporter methods were used to validate the binding sites to miR-513b-5p on circ_LPAR3, VEGFC and AKT1. OSCC mice models were established to further unveil the functions of circ_LPAR3 in OSCC in vivo. H&E staining and immunohistochemistry (CD34, VEGFC and p-AKT1) were further applied to analyze the pathological changes in association with circ_LPAR3 downregulation. RESULTS: circ_LPAR3 was upregulated in OSCC. Its knockdown in cells could decrease cell survival and mobility and in mice model, could inhibit the tumor growth and angiogenesis. Circ_LPAR3 promoted VEGFC and AKT1 activity by sponging miR-513b-5p in OSCC cells. CONCLUSION: Knockdown of circ_LPAR3 could inhibit the OSCC progression by sponging miR-513b-5p and activating VEGFC and AKT1.
Osteosarcoma (OS) is a highly malignant tumor with a poor prognosis and a growing incidence. LncRNAs and microRNAs control the occurrence and development process of osteosarcoma through ceRNA patterns. The LPAR3 gene is important in cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis and disease development. However, the regulatory mechanism of the ceRNA network through which LPAR3 participates in osteosarcoma has not been clarified. Herein, our study demonstrated that the AP003352.1/miR-141-3p axis drives LPAR3 expression to induce the malignant progression of osteosarcoma. First, the expression of LPAR3 is regulated by the changes in AP003352.1 and miR-141-3p. Similar to the ceRNA of miR-141-3p, AP003352.1 regulates the expression of LPAR3 through this mechanism. In addition, the regulation of AP003352.1 in malignant osteosarcoma progression depends to a certain degree on miR-141-3p. Importantly, the AP003352.1/miR-141-3p/LPAR3 axis can better serve as a multi-gene diagnostic marker for osteosarcoma. In conclusion, our research reveals a new ceRNA regulatory network, which provides a novel potential target for the diagnosis and treatment of osteosarcoma.
Schwann cell-derived neoplasms known as malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are the most common malignancy and the leading cause of death in individuals with neurofibromatosis Type 1. Using genome-scale shRNA screens, we have previously found evidence suggesting that lysophosphatidic acid receptors (LPARs) are essential for MPNST proliferation and/or survival. Here, we examine the expression and mutational status of all six LPA receptors in MPNSTs, assess the role that individual LPA receptors play in MPNST physiology and examine their ability to activate key neurofibromin-regulated signaling cascades. We found that human Schwann cells express LPAR1 and LPAR6, while MPNST cells express predominantly LPAR1 and LPAR3. Whole exome sequencing of 16 MPNST cell lines showed no evidence of mutations in any LPAR genes or ENPP2, a gene encoding a major LPA biosynthetic enzyme. Oleoyl-LPA, an LPA variant with an unsaturated side chain, promoted MPNST cell proliferation and migration. LPAR1 knockdown ablated the promigratory effect of LPA, while LPAR3 knockdown decreased proliferation. Inhibition of R-Ras signaling with a doxycycline-inducible dominant negative (DN) R-Ras mutant, which inhibits both R-Ras and R-Ras2, blocked LPA's promigratory effect. In contrast, DN R-Ras did not affect migration induced by neuregulin-1beta (NRG1beta), suggesting that LPA and NRG1beta promote MPNST migration via distinct pathways. LPA-induced migration was also inhibited by Y27632, an inhibitor of the ROCK1/2 kinases that mediate R-Ras effects in MPNSTs. Thus, LPAR1 and aberrantly expressed LPAR3 mediate distinct effects in MPNSTs. These receptors and the signaling pathways that they regulate are potentially useful therapeutic targets in MPNSTs.
How a mammalian embryo determines and arrives at its attachment site has been studied for decades, but our understanding of this process is far from complete. Using confocal imaging and image analysis, we evaluate embryo location along the longitudinal oviductal-cervical axis of murine uteri. Our analysis reveals three distinct pre-implantation phases: embryo entry, unidirectional movement of embryo clusters and bidirectional scattering and spacing of embryos. We show that unidirectional clustered movement is facilitated by a mechanical stimulus of the embryo and is regulated by adrenergic uterine smooth muscle contractions. Embryo scattering, on the other hand, depends on embryo-uterine communication reliant on the LPAR3 signaling pathway and is independent of adrenergic muscle contractions. Finally, we demonstrate that uterine implantation sites in mice are neither random nor predetermined but are guided by the number of embryos entering the uterine lumen. These studies have implications for understanding how embryo-uterine communication is key to determining an optimal implantation site necessary for the success of a pregnancy.
In this study, we explored expression and functions of circular RNA LPAR3 (circLPAR3) in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). The differential expression of circular RNAs (circRNAs) in 10 ESCC and corresponding paracarcinoma tissues was analyzed through circRNA microarray, then the candidate circRNAs were detected and verified through quantitative RT-PCR, and a novel circRNA was screened, which was circLPAR3. Circular RNA LPAR3 showed apparently high expression in ESCC tissues and cells, which was closely correlated with the clinical stage and lymph node metastasis of ESCC patients. Circular RNA LPAR3 was mainly located in the cytoplasm of ESCC cells, which was more stable than the baseline gene. Circular RNA LPAR3 upregulated MET gene expression through sponge adsorption of microRNA (miR)-198, activated the RAS/MAPK and the PI3K/Akt pathways, and promoted ESCC cell migration, invasion, and metastasis in vivo and in vitro. However, it had no effect on ESCC cell proliferation. Circular RNA LPAR3 can regulate the miR-198-MET signal axis to promote the migration, invasion, and metastasis of esophageal cancer cells, which can thereby serve as a potential diagnostic and therapeutic target of esophageal cancer.
Lysophosphatidic acid receptors (LPARs) are six G-protein-coupled receptors that mediate LPA signaling to promote tumorigenesis and therapy resistance in many cancer subtypes, including breast cancer. Individual-receptor-targeted monotherapies are under investigation, but receptor agonism or antagonism effects within the tumor microenvironment following treatment are minimally understood. In this study, we used three large, independent breast cancer patient cohorts (TCGA, METABRIC, and GSE96058) and single-cell RNA-sequencing data to show that increased tumor LPAR1, LPAR4, and LPAR6 expression correlated with a less aggressive phenotype, while high LPAR2 expression was particularly associated with increased tumor grade and mutational burden and decreased survival. Through gene set enrichment analysis, it was determined that cell cycling pathways were enriched in tumors with low LPAR1, LPAR4, and LPAR6 expression and high LPAR2 expression. LPAR levels were lower in tumors over normal breast tissue for LPAR1, LPAR3, LPAR4, and LPAR6, while the opposite was observed for LPAR2 and LPAR5. LPAR1 and LPAR4 were highest in cancer-associated fibroblasts, while LPAR6 was highest in endothelial cells, and LPAR2 was highest in cancer epithelial cells. Tumors high in LPAR5 and LPAR6 had the highest cytolytic activity scores, indicating decreased immune system evasion. Overall, our findings suggest that potential compensatory signaling via competing receptors must be considered in LPAR inhibitor therapy.
BACKGROUND: Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a lipid mediator with diverse biological functions through its receptors on the cell membrane. As one of the six LPA receptors, LPA receptor 3 (LPAR3) is highly expressed in mouse kidneys, but its physiological function in the kidney has been poorly explored. METHODS: Wild-type (WT) and Lpar3(-/-) mice were used to investigate the renal physiological function of LPAR3 under hypoxia. The expression levels of LPA receptors in the kidneys of WT mice with or without exposure to hypoxia (8% O(2)) were detected by RT‒qPCR. RNA sequencing analysis was performed to identify differences in gene expression profiles between the hypoxic kidneys of WT and Lpar3(-/-) mice. The effects of LPAR3 deficiency and treatment with the LPAR1/3 inhibitor Ki16425 or the LPAR3 selective agonist 2S-OMPT on erythropoietin (EPO) production in the kidneys of hypoxic mice were determined by RT‒qPCR and ELISAs. The mechanism of LPAR3-mediated regulation of EPO expression was further studied in vivo with mouse models and in vitro with cultured human cells. RESULTS: LPAR3 is the major LPA receptor in mouse kidneys, and its expression is significantly upregulated under hypoxic conditions. RNA sequencing analysis revealed that, compared with WT mice, Lpar3(-/-) mice presented a significant decrease in hypoxia-induced EPO expression in the kidney, together with reduced plasma EPO levels and lower hematocrit and hemoglobin levels. Hypoxic renal EPO expression in WT mice was diminished by the administration of the LPAR1/3 inhibitor Ki16425 and increased by 2S-OMPT, a selective agonist of LPAR3. Hypoxia-induced HIF-2alpha accumulation in mouse kidneys was impaired by LPAR3 deficiency. Further studies revealed that the PI3K/Akt pathway participated in the regulation of HIF-2alpha accumulation and EPO expression by LPAR3 under hypoxic conditions. CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed the role of LPAR3 in promoting the HIF-2alpha‒EPO axis in hypoxic mouse kidneys, suggesting that the LPA receptor may serve as a novel potential pharmaceutical target to regulate renal EPO production in hypoxia-related situations, such as chronic kidney disease and altitude disease.
Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) interacts with at least six G protein-coupled transmembrane LPA receptors (LPA(1)-LPA(6)). Recently, we have reported that LPA(3) indicated opposite effects on cell migration, depending on the cell types. In the present study, to assess an involvement of LPA(3) on cell migration of sarcoma cells, we generated LPA receptor-3 (LPAR3)-knockdown (HT1080-sh3 and HOS-sh3, respectively) cells from fibrosarcoma HT1080 and osteosarcoma HOS cells, and measured their cell migration abilities. In cell motility assay with a Cell Culture Insert, both LPAR3-knockdown cells showed significantly lower cell motile activities than control cells. Next, to investigate the effect of LPAR3-knockdown on invasion activity, which degraded the extracellular matrices, the Matrigel-coated filter was used. HT1080-sh3 cells showed significantly low invasive activity compared with control cells, while no invasive activity was found in HOS-sh3 cells. In gelatin zymography, no significant difference of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 activities were detected in all cells. The results indicated that LPA(3) acts as a positive regulator of cell motility and invasion in sarcoma cells, suggesting that LPA signaling pathway via LPA(3) may be involved in the progression of sarcoma cells.
Ovarian cancer characterizes as the fourth leading consequence of death associated with cancer for women. Accumulating evidence underscores the vital roles of microRNAs (miRNAs) in preventing ovarian cancer development. Besides, induction of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase/serine/threonine kinase (PI3K/Akt) pathway associated with the ovarian cancer cell migration and invasion. The study aims to examine the effects of miR-15b on the proliferation, apoptosis, and senescence of human ovarian cancer cells by binding to lysophosphatidic acid receptor 3 (LPAR3) with the involvement of the PI3K/Akt pathway. The positive expression of LPAR3 protein was detected by immunohistochemistry. Then the interaction between miR-15b and LPAR3 was examined. The possible role of miR-15b in ovarian cancer was explored using gain- and loss-of-function experiments. Subsequently, the functions of miR-15b on PI3K/Akt pathway, proliferation, migration, invasion, senescence and apoptosis of ovarian cancer cells were assessed. Furthermore, in vivo tumorigenicity assay in nude mice was performed. LPAR3 was overexpressed, whereas miR-15b was poorly expressed in ovarian cancer tissues. LPAR3 is a direct target of miR-15b. Restored miR-15b promoted Bax expression, apoptosis, and senescence, inhibited expression of LPAR3 and Bcl-2, the extent of PI3K and Akt phosphorylation, as well as ovarian cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Further, tumor growth was observed to be prevented by miR-15b overexpression. Collectively, our study demonstrates that miR-15b represses the proliferation and drives the senescence and apoptosis of ovarian cancer cells through the suppression of LPAR3 and the PI3K/Akt pathway, highlighting an antitumorigenic role of miR-15b.
BACKGROUND: Oral squamous cell carcinoma is an aggressive neoplasm with serious morbidity and mortality, which typically spreads through local invasive growth. Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is involved in a number of biological processes, and may have a role in cancer cell migration and invasiveness. LPA is present in most tissues and can activate cells through six different LPA receptors (LPAR1-6). Although LPA is predominantly promigratory, some of the receptors may have antimigratory effects in certain cells. The signalling mechanisms of LPA are not fully understood, and in oral carcinoma cells the specific receptors and pathways involved in LPA-stimulated migration are unknown. METHODS: The oral carcinoma cell lines E10, SCC-9, and D2 were investigated. Cell migration was studied in a scratch wound assay, and invasion was demonstrated in organotypic three dimensional co-cultures. Protein and mRNA expression of LPA receptors was studied with Western blotting and qRT-PCR. Activation of signalling proteins was examined with Western blotting and isoelectric focusing, and signalling mechanisms were further explored using pharmacological agents and siRNA directed at specific receptors and pathways. RESULTS: LPA stimulated cell migration in the two oral carcinoma cell lines E10 and SCC-9, but was slightly inhibitory in D2. The receptor expression profile and the effects of specific pharmacological antagonist and agonists indicated that LPA-stimulated cell migration was mediated through LPAR3 in E10 and SCC-9. Furthermore, in both these cell lines, the stimulation by LPA was dependent on PKC activity. However, while LPA induced transactivation of EGFR and the stimulated migration was blocked by EGFR inhibitors in E10 cells, LPA did not induce EGFR transactivation in SCC-9 cells. In D2 cells, LPA induced EGFR transactivation, but this was associated with slowing of a very high inherent migration rate in these cells. CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate LPA-stimulated migration in oral carcinoma cells through LPAR3, mediated further by PKC, which acts either in concert with or independently of EGFR transactivation.
Neuropathic pain, which results from impairment of the somatosensory system, has affected about 8% population around the world and leads to considerable burdens for patients and world health care system. However, its underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, we hypothesized that miR-24-3p was involved in the progression of neuropathic pain in CCI rat models. By measuring miR-24-3p expression in CCI rats, we found that miR-24-3p expression was increased in CCI rats, suggesting miR-24-3p might participate in neuropathic pain progression. Next, by conducting a serial in vitro and vivo experiments, we found that miR-24-3p regulated Wnt5a/beta-Catenin Signaling levels to promote neuropathic pain progression via targeting LPAR3 in CCI rats. Furthermore, we explored the upstream regulator of miR-24-3p by conducting bioinformatics analysis, we found that circular RNA cZRANB1 might sponge to miR-24-3p. Then we applied biotinylated RNA pull-down and luciferase reporter assays to assess the association between cZRANB1 and miR-24-3p. It was found that cZRANB1 mediated LPAR3 expression via sponging miR-24-3p. Collectively, our study suggests that cZRNAB1 regulated Wnt5a/beta-Catenin Signaling expression via miR-24-3p/LPAR3 axis in CCI rat models.
Peripheral inflammation is always accompanied by a noxious sensation, either pain or itch, providing a protective warning for the occurrence of pathological changes; however, the mechanisms determining whether pain, itch, or both will be elicited under certain inflammatory statuses are still far from clear. Complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) contains heat killed and dried Mycobacterium tuberculosis widely used to induce inflammatory pain models, but how CFA treatment affects itch sensation and the possible mechanisms are still unclear. In this study, using itch behavior testing and calcium imaging, we showed that both the behaviors and calcium responses associated with Transient Receptor Potential Vanilloid 1 (TRPV1)-mediated histamine-dependent itch and Transient Receptor Potential Ankyrin 1 (TRPA1)-mediated histamine-independent itch were significantly suppressed by CFA treatment. Furthermore, to explore the possible cellular mechanisms, high-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing and real-time PCR were used to detect CFA-induced changes of itch-related genes in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Our results revealed that although both nociceptive Trpv1+ and Trpa1+ DRG neurons were increased after CFA treatment, most known pruriceptors, including Hrh1+, Mrgpra3+, Mrgprd+, Htr3a+, Htr1f+, IL31ra+, Osmr+, and Lpar3+ DRG neurons, were significantly decreased, which may explain that CFA treatment caused itch suppression. This study indicated that itch sensation was affected after CFA treatment, although negatively, and comprehensive but not specific suppression of different pruriceptors was observed after CFA treatment, suggesting that a unified adaptive change of increased pain and decreased itch will occur simultaneously under CFA-induced inflammatory conditions.
Dyslipidemia is a risk factor for intimal hyperplasia (IH). Key to IH is vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) migration. Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) is a matricellular protein that stimulates VSMC migration. HYPOTHESIS: HDL will inhibit and LDL will augment TSP-1-induced VSMC chemotaxis. VSMC chemotaxis will be inhibited by the HDL moiety, S1P, through the S1PR1 receptor, and augmented by the LDL component, LPA, through the LPAR1 receptor. The goal of this study was to determine the effect of HDL and LDL and their receptors on TSP-1-induced VSMC chemotaxis. For VSMC chemotaxis to TSP-1 cells received the following pretreatments: low (25 microg/ml) or optimal (75 microg/ml) concentration of HDL, S1P, optimal (75 microg/ml) or high (175 microg/ml) concentration of LDL, or LPA. For the receptor studies, VSMCs were transfected with siRNA to S1PR1, S1PR3, LPAR1, LPAR2, LPAR3, or a S1PR2 receptor antagonist. The TSP-1-induced chemotaxis results were (1) HDL (25 microg/ml) or LDL (75 microg/ml) exhibited no effect on chemotaxis; (2) HDL (75 microg/ml) inhibited chemotaxis by 50.9 +/- 8 % and S1P by 43.4 +/- 11.6 %; (3) LDL (175 microg/ml) augmented chemotaxis by 30 +/- 10.4 % and LPA by 25.6 +/- 12.3 %; (4) S1PR1 and S1PR3 knockdown and S1PR2 antagonist-treated cells augmented chemotaxis; and (5) LPAR1 and LPAR2 knockdown inhibited and LPAR3 knockdown had no effect on chemotaxis. In conclusion, HDL/S1P inhibits, while LDL/LPA stimulates TSP-1-induced VSMC chemotaxis. The HDL/S1P effect is mediated by the S1PR1-3 receptors. The LDL/LPA effects are mediated by the LPAR1 and LPAR2 receptors, but not LPAR3. Therefore, lipids have significant effects on TSP-1-induced VSMC chemotaxis.
Purpose: Melanosis coli (MC) is a disorder of pigmentation of the wall of the colon, often identified at the time of colonoscopy. The aim of the present study is to identify candidate biomarkers for MC. Methods: The transcriptome data for MC (GSE78933) with five MC tissues and five corresponding normal tissues is obtained from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. R/Bioconductor package limma was used to screen differently expressed genes (DEGs). ClueGO of cytoscape was applied for Gene Ontology (GO) functional and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment. Based on STRING V10 database, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed. The pathological tissue and normal tissue from 23 MC patients and 23 controls were collected, respectively. The relative expression of hub nodes was detected by qRT-PCR and Western blot. For regulating the expression of these genes, overexpression vector was constructed or siRNA transfection was used. Finally, apoptosis was detected by flow cytometry. Results: Total 1342 DEGs were screened, including 786 up-regulated and 556 down-regulated genes. These genes were mainly enriched in stimulatory C-type lectin receptor signaling pathway, polysaccharide biosynthetic process, intracellular, and oxidative phosphorylation. PPI network was then constructed with 426 DEGs and 895 interactions. Thereinto, G-protein subunit gamma 5 (GNG5), lysophosphatidic acid receptor 3 (LPAR3), mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 (MAPK8), NHP2L1, proteasome 26S subunit, ATPase 6 (PSMC6), and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit beta (PIK3CB) were hub nodes with higher degree. RT-PCR and Western blot results showed that GNG5, LPAR3, MAPK8, and PSMC6 were differently expressed with significance. The expression of these screened genes is also related with cell apoptosis. Conclusion: GNG5, LPAR3, MAPK8, and PSMC6 might be candidate biomarkers associated with apoptosis in MC.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a novel class of non-coding RNAs which play important roles in human diseases and tumor progression. However, the function of circRNAs in ovarian cancer remains to be uncovered. Here we found a large amount of circRNAs that are differentially expressed in ovarian cancer tissues compared with normal ovarian tissues. We further identified one circRNA derived from the LPAR3 gene and termed Circ0004390, which was frequently upregulated in ovarian cancer tissues. The knockdown of Circ0004390 can significantly reduce the proliferation of ovarian cancer cells. We further demonstrated that Circ0004390 may promote cell proliferation by acting as a sponge for the miR-198 family to regulated the MET expression in ovarian cancer cells. The level of Circ0004390 was closely related with overall survival of ovarian cancer patients. Our findings suggested that Circ0004390 regulated ovarian cancer proliferation by miR-198/MET axis, which might provide a potential target for the treatment of ovarian cancer.
