Lactoperoxidase; Antimicrobial agent which utilizes hydrogen peroxide and thiocyanate (SCN) to generate the antimicrobial substance hypothiocyanous acid (HOSCN) (By similarity). May contribute to airway host defense against infection.
The increased incidence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) has become a global phenomenon that could be related to adoption of a Western life-style. Westernization of dietary habits is partly characterized by enrichment with the omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) arachidonic acid (AA), which entails risk for developing IBD. Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) protects against lipid peroxidation (LPO) and cell death termed ferroptosis. We report that small intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) in Crohn's disease (CD) exhibit impaired GPX4 activity and signs of LPO. PUFAs and specifically AA trigger a cytokine response of IECs which is restricted by GPX4. While GPX4 does not control AA metabolism, cytokine production is governed by similar mechanisms as ferroptosis. A PUFA-enriched Western diet triggers focal granuloma-like neutrophilic enteritis in mice that lack one allele of Gpx4 in IECs. Our study identifies dietary PUFAs as a trigger of GPX4-restricted mucosal inflammation phenocopying aspects of human CD.
Members of Chordata peroxidase subfamily [1] expressed in mammals, including myeloperoxidase (MPO), eosinophil peroxidase (EPO), lactoperoxidase (LPO), and thyroid peroxidase (TPO), express conserved motifs around the heme prosthetic group essential for their activity, a calcium-binding site, and at least two covalent bonds linking the heme group to the protein backbone. Although most studies of the biosynthesis of these peroxidases have focused on MPO, many of the features described occur during biosynthesis of other members of the protein subfamily. Whereas MPO biosynthesis includes events typical for proteins generated in the secretory pathway, the importance and consequences of heme insertion are events uniquely associated with peroxidases. This Review summarizes decades of work elucidating specific steps in the biosynthetic pathway of human MPO. Discussion includes cotranslational glycosylation and subsequent modifications of the N-linked carbohydrate sidechains, contributions by molecular chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, cleavage of the propeptide from proMPO, and proteolytic processing of protomers and dimerization to yield mature MPO. Parallels between the biosynthesis of MPO and TPO as well as the impact of inherited mutations in the MPO gene on normal biosynthesis will be summarized. Lastly, specific gaps in our knowledge revealed by this review of our current understanding will be highlighted.
BACKGROUND: Nuclear erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a transcription factor, is critically involved in the regulation of oxidative stress and inflammation. However, the role of endothelial Nrf2 in atherogenesis has yet to be defined. In addition, how endothelial Nrf2 is activated and whether Nrf2 can be targeted for the prevention and treatment of atherosclerosis is not explored. METHODS: RNA-sequencing and single-cell RNA sequencing analysis of mouse atherosclerotic aortas were used to identify the differentially expressed genes. In vivo endothelial cell (EC)-specific activation of Nrf2 was achieved by injecting adeno-associated viruses into ApoE(-/-) mice, while EC-specific knockdown of Nrf2 was generated in Cdh5(Cre)Cas9(floxed-stop)ApoE(-/-) mice. RESULTS: Endothelial inflammation appeared as early as on day 3 after feeding of a high cholesterol diet (HCD) in ApoE(-/-) mice, as reflected by mRNA levels, immunostaining and global mRNA profiling, while the immunosignal of the end-product of lipid peroxidation (LPO), 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), started to increase on day 10. TNF-alpha, 4-HNE, and erastin (LPO inducer), activated Nrf2 signaling in human ECs by increasing the mRNA and protein expression of Nrf2 target genes. Knockdown of endothelial Nrf2 resulted in augmented endothelial inflammation and LPO, and accelerated atherosclerosis in Cdh5(Cre)Cas9(floxed-stop)ApoE(-/-) mice. By contrast, both EC-specific and pharmacological activation of Nrf2 inhibited endothelial inflammation, LPO, and atherogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: Upon HCD feeding in ApoE(-/-) mice, endothelial inflammation is an earliest event, followed by the appearance of LPO. EC-specific activation of Nrf2 inhibits atherosclerosis while EC-specific knockdown of Nrf2 results in the opposite effect. Pharmacological activators of endothelial Nrf2 may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of atherosclerosis.
Glaucoma, a blind-leading disease largely since chronic pathological intraocular high pressure (ph-IOP). Hitherto, it is reckoned incurable for irreversible neural damage and challenges in managing IOP. Thus, it is significant to develop neuroprotective strategies. Ferroptosis, initially identified as an iron-dependent regulated death that triggers Fenton reactions and culminates in lipid peroxidation (LPO), has emerged as a focal point in multiple tumors and neurodegenerative diseases. Researches show that iron homeostasis play critical roles in the optic nerve (ON) and retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), suggesting targeted treatments could be effective. In glaucoma, apart from neural lesions, disrupted metal balance and increased oxidative stress in trabecular meshwork (TM) are observed. These disturbances lead to extracellular matrix excretion disorders, known as sclerotic mechanisms, resulting in refractory blockages. Importantly, oxidative stress, a significant downstream effect of ferroptosis, is also a key factor in cell senescence. It plays a crucial role in both the etiology and risk of glaucoma. Moreover, ferroptosis also induces non-infectious inflammation, which exacerbate glaucomatous injury. Therefore, the relevance of ferroptosis in glaucoma is extensive and multifaceted. In this review, the study delves into the current understanding of ferroptosis mechanisms in glaucoma, aiming to provide clues to inform clinical therapeutic practices.
Oxidative stress is a common feature of genetic and idiopathic neurological diseases that thus far have been intractable to drug therapy. Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) form cellular, mitochondrial, retinal, and other membranes highly important in neuronal function. However, PUFAs are susceptible to the noxious lipid peroxidation (LPO) chain reaction, which is a common feature of various neurological and age-related pathologies, making this pathway an attractive target for therapeutic intervention. Regioselective deuteration that reinforces oxidation-prone, bis-allylic sites of PUFAs is a novel, nonantioxidant treatment modality that dramatically reduces LPO, potentially mitigating numerous diseases through preservation of membrane properties and amelioration of oxidative stress. Animal disease models and several ongoing human clinical trials highlight the potential of the deuterated-PUFA (D-PUFA) drug candidates currently in development.
Sarcopenia is prevalent in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and can adversely affect their outcomes. This study aims to explore the key mechanisms in the crosstalk between sarcopenia and HCC based on multi-omics profiling. A total of 136 male patients with HCC were enrolled. Sarcopenia was an independent risk factor for poor outcomes after liver transplantation (p < 0.05). Inflammatory cytokine and metabolomic profiling on these patients identified elevated plasma sTNF-R1/CHI3L1 and dysregulated lipid metabolism as related to sarcopenia and tumor recurrence risk concurrently (p < 0.05). Integrated analysis revealed close relationship between CHI3L1 and fatty acid metabolism. In mouse cachectic models by intraperitoneal injection of H22 cells, CHI3L1 was significantly elevated in the atrophic muscle tissue, as well as in circulation. In-vitro, CHI3L1 was up-regulated in muscle cells to protect itself from inflammatory damage through TNF-alpha/TNF-R1 signaling. CHI3L1 secreted by the muscle cells promoted the invasion of co-cultured HCC cells. Tumor tissue transcriptome data for 73 out of the 136 patients revealed that CHI3L1 may regulate fatty acid metabolism and oxidative stress. In vitro, CHI3L1 caused ROS and lipid accumulation. Targeted lipid profiling further proved that CHI3L1 was able to activate arachidonic acid metabolism, leading to lipid peroxide (LPO) accumulation. Meanwhile, LPO inhibition could compromise the remarkable pro-cancerous effects of CHI3L1. In conclusion, sarcopenia adversely affects the outcomes of liver transplantation for HCC. In sarcopenic patients, CHI3L1 was up-regulated and secreted by the skeletal muscle to protect itself through TNF-alpha/TNF-R1 signaling, which, in turn, can promote HCC tumor progression by inducing LPO accumulation.
Hydrogen (H(2)) therapy is an emerging, novel, and safe therapeutic modality that uses molecular hydrogen for effective treatment. However, the impact of H(2) therapy is limited because hydrogen molecules predominantly depend on the systemic administration of H(2) gas, which cannot accumulate at the lesion site with high concentration, thus leading to limited targeting and utilization. Biomaterials are developed to specifically deliver H(2) and control its release. In this review, the development process, stimuli-responsive release strategies, and potential therapeutic mechanisms of biomaterial-based H(2) therapy are summarized. H(2) therapy. Specifically, the produced H(2) from biomaterials not only can scavenge free radicals, such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and lipid peroxidation (LPO), but also can inhibit the danger factors of initiating diseases, including pro-inflammatory cytokines, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and heat shock protein (HSP). In addition, the released H(2) can further act as signal molecules to regulate key pathways for disease treatment. The current opportunities and challenges of H(2)-based therapy are discussed, and the future research directions of biomaterial-based H(2) therapy for clinical applications are emphasized.
Lipid peroxidation (LPO) product accumulation in human tissues is a major cause of tissular and cellular dysfunction that plays a major role in ageing and most age-related and oxidative stress-related diseases. The current evidence for the implication of LPO in pathological processes is discussed in this review. New data and literature review are provided evaluating the role of LPO in the pathophysiology of ageing and classically oxidative stress-linked diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes and atherosclerosis (the main cause of cardiovascular complications). Striking evidences implicating LPO in foetal vascular dysfunction occurring in pre-eclampsia, in renal and liver diseases, as well as their role as cause and consequence to cancer development are addressed.
Aerobes require oxygen for metabolism and normal free radical formation. As a result, maintaining the redox homeostasis is essential for brain cell survival due to their high metabolic energy requirement to sustain electrochemical gradients, neurotransmitter release, and membrane lipid stability. Further, brain antioxidant levels are limited compared to other organs and less able to compensate for reactive oxygen and nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) generation which contribute oxidative/nitrative stress (OS/NS). Antioxidant treatments such as vitamin E, minocycline, and resveratrol mediate neuroprotection by prolonging the incidence of or reversing OS and NS conditions. Redox imbalance occurs when the antioxidant capacity is overwhelmed, consequently leading to activation of alternate pathways that remain quiescent under normal conditions. If OS/NS fails to lead to adaptation, tissue damage and injury ensue, resulting in cell death and/or disease. The progression of OS/NS-mediated neurodegeneration along with contributions from microglial activation, dopamine metabolism, and diabetes comprise a detailed interconnected pathway. This review proposes a significant role for OS/NS and more specifically, lipid peroxidation (LPO) and other lipid modifications, by triggering microglial activation to elicit a neuroinflammatory state potentiated by diabetes or abnormal dopamine metabolism. Subsequently, sustained stress in the neuroinflammatory state overwhelms cellular defenses and prompts neurotoxicity resulting in the onset or amplification of brain damage.
The fatal clinical course of human glioblastoma (GBM) despite aggressive adjuvant therapies is due to high rates of recurrent tumor growth driven by tumor cells with stem-cell characteristics (glioma stem cells, GSCs). The aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) family of enzymes has been shown to be a biomarker for GSCs, and ALDH1 seems to be involved in the biological processes causing therapy resistance. Ferroptosis is a recently discovered cell death mechanism, that depends on iron overload and lipid peroxidation, and it could, therefore, be a potential therapeutic target in various cancer types. Since both ALDH1 and ferroptosis interact with lipid peroxidation (LPO), we aimed to investigate a possible connection between ALDH1 and ferroptosis. Here, we show that RSL3-induced LPO and ferroptotic cell death revealed RSL3-sensitive and -resistant malignant glioma cell lines. Most interestingly, RSL3 sensitivity correlates with ALDH1a3 expression; only high ALDH1a3-expressing cells seem to be sensitive to ferroptosis induction. In accordance, inhibition of ALDH1a3 enzymatic activity by chemical inhibition or genetic knockout protects tumor cells from RSL3-induced ferroptotic cell death. Both RSL-3-dependent binding of ALDH1a3 to LC3B and autophagic downregulation of ferritin could be completely blocked by ALDH inhibition. Therefore, ALDH1a3 seems to be involved in ferroptosis through the essential release of iron by ferritinophagy. Our results also indicate that ferroptosis induction might be a particularly interesting clinical approach for targeting the highly aggressive cell population of GSC.
BACKGROUND: Keloid is a chronic proliferative fibrotic disease caused by abnormal fibroblasts proliferation and excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) production. Numerous fibrotic disorders are significantly influenced by ferroptosis, and targeting ferroptosis can effectively mitigate fibrosis development. This study aimed to investigate the role and mechanism of ferroptosis in keloid development. METHODS: Keloid tissues from keloid patients and normal skin tissues from healthy controls were collected. Iron content, lipid peroxidation (LPO) level, and the mRNA and protein expression of ferroptosis-related genes including solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11), glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), transferrin receptor (TFRC), and nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) were determined. Mitochondrial morphology was observed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Keloid fibroblasts (KFs) were isolated from keloid tissues, and treated with ferroptosis inhibitor ferrostatin-1 (fer-1) or ferroptosis activator erastin. Iron content, ferroptosis-related marker levels, LPO level, mitochondrial membrane potential, ATP content, and mitochondrial morphology in KFs were detected. Furthermore, the protein levels of alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), collagen I, and collagen III were measured to investigate whether ferroptosis affect fibrosis in KFs. RESULTS: We found that iron content and LPO level were substantially elevated in keloid tissues and KFs. SLC7A11, GPX4, and Nrf2 were downregulated and TFRC was upregulated in keloid tissues and KFs. Mitochondria in keloid tissues and KFs exhibited ferroptosis-related pathology. Fer-1 treatment reduced iron content, restrained ferroptosis and mitochondrial dysfunction in KFs, Moreover, ferrostatin-1 restrained the protein expression of alpha-SMA, collagen I, and collagen III in KFs. Whereas erastin treatment showed the opposite results. CONCLUSION: Ferroptosis exists in keloid. Ferrostatin-1 restrained ECM deposition and fibrosis in keloid through inhibiting ferroptosis, and erastin induced ECM deposition and fibrosis through intensifying ferroptosis.
BACKGROUND: Osteoarthritis (OA) is a common degenerative disease involving articular cartilage, in which ferroptosis of chondrocytes plays an important role. Baicalin (BAI) exerts regulatory effects in a wide range of orthopedic diseases including OA, but its effect on ferroptosis of chondrocytes (CHs) is still unclear. The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of BAI on ferroptosis in human OA chondrocytes (OACs), and to explore its possible mechanism. METHODS: CHs were treated with IL-1beta (10 ng/mL) to simulate inflammation in vitro. Immunofluorescence, quantitative RT-PCR, Western blotting and cell viability assay were performed to evaluate the impacts of BAI on Fe(2+) level, mitochondrial dysfunction, ferroptosis-related proteins, oxidative stress and cytotoxicity in CHs. Additionally, siRNA was made use of to knock out nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) to analyze the role played by Nrf2 in BAI-induced CH ferroptosis. RESULTS: BAI eliminated IL-1beta-induced Fe(2+) accumulation, changes in mitochondrial membrane potential and ferroptosis-related protein GPX4, SLC7A11, P53 and ACSL4 levels, as well as reactive oxygen species (ROS), lipid peroxidation (LPO) and malondialdehyde (MDA) accumulation in CHs. Besides, BAI reversed IL-1beta-induced decrease of Collagen II and increase of MMP13 in CHs. Meanwhile, BAI attenuated IL-1beta-induced CH toxicity and promoted Nrf2 antioxidant system activation. When Nrf2 was knocked down by siRNA, the effects of BAI on IL-1beta-induced ferroptosis-related proteins and antioxidant stress in CHs were significantly weakened. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that IL-1beta can induce CH ferroptosis. BAI is able to inhibit IL-1beta-induced CH ferroptosis and ECM degradation, and the specific mechanism may be that it can inhibit IL-1beta-induced CH ferroptosis by activating Nrf2 antioxidant system to attenuate the accumulation of intracellular ROS and lipid ROS.
Redox balance is essential for normal brain, hence dis-coordinated oxidative reactions leading to neuronal death, including programs of regulated death, are commonly viewed as an inevitable pathogenic penalty for acute neuro-injury and neurodegenerative diseases. Ferroptosis is one of these programs triggered by dyshomeostasis of three metabolic pillars: iron, thiols, and polyunsaturated phospholipids. This review focuses on: (1) lipid peroxidation (LPO) as the major instrument of cell demise, (2) iron as its catalytic mechanism, and (3) thiols as regulators of pro-ferroptotic signals, hydroperoxy lipids. Given the central role of LPO, we discuss the engagement of selective and specific enzymatic pathways versus random free radical chemical reactions in the context of the phospholipid substrates, their biosynthesis, intracellular location, and related oxygenating machinery as participants in ferroptotic cascades. These concepts are discussed in the light of emerging neuro-therapeutic approaches controlling intracellular production of pro-ferroptotic phospholipid signals and their non-cell-autonomous spreading, leading to ferroptosis-associated necroinflammation.
The accumulation of lipid hydroperoxides (LOOHs) has long been associated with numerous pathologies and has more recently been shown to drive a specific type of cell death known as ferroptosis. In competition with their detoxification by glutathione peroxidases, LOOHs can react with both one-electron reductants and one-electron oxidants to afford radicals that initiate lipid peroxidation (LPO) chain reactions leading to more LOOH. These radicals can alternatively undergo a variety of (primarily unimolecular) reactions leading to electrophilic species that destabilize the membrane and/or react with cellular nucleophiles. While some reaction mechanisms leading to lipid-derived electrophiles have been known for some time, others have only recently been elucidated. Since LOOH (and related peroxides, LOOL) undergo these various reactions at different rates to afford distinct product distributions specific to their structures, not all LOOHs (and LOOLs) should be equivalently problematic for the cell - be it in their propensity to initiate further LPO or fragment to electrophiles, drive membrane permeabilization and eventual cell death. Herein we briefly review the fates of LOOH and discuss how they may contribute to the modulation of cell sensitivity to ferroptosis by different lipids.
SIGNIFICANCE: Oxidative stress provokes the peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids in cellular membranes, leading to the formation of aldheydes that, due to their high chemical reactivity, are considered to act as second messengers of oxidative stress. Among the aldehydes formed during lipid peroxidation (LPO), 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) is produced at a high level and easily reacts with both low-molecular-weight compounds and macromolecules, such as proteins and DNA. In particular, HNE-protein adducts have been extensively investigated in diseases characterized by the pathogenic contribution of oxidative stress, such as cancer, neurodegenerative, chronic inflammatory, and autoimmune diseases. RECENT ADVANCES: In this review, we describe and discuss recent insights regarding the role played by covalent adducts of HNE with proteins in the development and evolution of those among the earlier mentioned disease conditions in which the functional consequences of their formation have been characterized. CRITICAL ISSUES: Results obtained in recent years have shown that the generation of HNE-protein adducts can play important pathogenic roles in several diseases. However, in some cases, the generation of HNE-protein adducts can represent a contrast to the progression of disease or can promote adaptive cell responses, demonstrating that HNE is not only a toxic product of LPO but also a regulatory molecule that is involved in several biochemical pathways. FUTURE DIRECTIONS: In the next few years, the refinement of proteomical techniques, allowing the individuation of novel cellular targets of HNE, will lead to a better understanding the role of HNE in human diseases.
As an iron dependent regulatory cell death process driven by excessive lipid peroxides (LPO), ferroptosis is recognized as a powerful weapon for pancreatic cancer (PC) therapy. However, the tumor microenvironment (TME) with hypoxia and elevated glutathione (GSH) expression not only inhibits LPO production, but also induces glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) mediated LPO clearance, which greatly compromise the therapeutic outcomes of ferroptosis. To address these issues, herein, a novel triple-enhanced ferroptosis amplifier (denoted as Zal@HM-PTBC) is rationally designed. After intravenous injection, the overexpressed H(2)O(2)/GSH in TME induces the collapse of Zal@HM-PTBC and triggers the production of oxygen and reactive oxygen species (ROS), which synergistically amplify the degree of lipid peroxidation (broaden sources). Concurrently, GSH consumption because of the degradation of the hollow manganese dioxide (HM) significantly weakens the activity of GPX4, resulting in a decrease in LPO clearance (reduce expenditure). Moreover, the loading and site-directed release of zalcitabine further promotes autophagy-dependent LPO accumulation (enhance effectiveness). Both in vitro and in vivo results validated that the ferroptosis amplifier demonstrated superior specificity and favorable therapeutic responses. Overall, this triple-enhanced LPO accumulation strategy demonstrates the ability to facilitate the efficacy of ferroptosis, injecting vigorous vitality into the treatment of PC.
This article continues a series of reviews on the abundance and roles of intrinsic disorder in milk proteins. Besides caseins, which are the major proteinaceous constituents of any milk that can be isolated by isoelectric precipitation, milk contains a set of soluble whey proteins, such as beta-lactoglobulin, alpha-lactalbumin, serum albumin, immunoglobulins, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, glycomacropeptide, and proteose peptone (the last two are soluble casein derivatives). Lactoferrin and lactoperoxidase (LPO) are known to possess prominent biocidal activity, serving as efficient antibiotics and antiviral agents against a wide spectrum of bacteria, fungi, and viruses. LPO is a heme-containing peroxidase expressed as preproprotein. The mature protein has a single catalytic domain, structure of which is known for a protein isolated from several species. Functionally, LPO is a crucial component of the LPO system that includes LPO, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and thiocyanate (SCN(-)), being a well-studied, naturally occurring antimicrobial system in milk that is effective against many microorganisms and some viruses. Although various aspects of LPO structure and function are rather well studied and were subjects of several recent reviews, the abundance and potential functional roles of intrinsically disordered regions in this protein have never being addressed as of yet. The major goal of this article is to fill this gap and to show how intrinsic disorder is encoded in the amino acid sequence of LPO, and how intrinsic disorder is related to functions of this important milk protein.
OBJECTIVE: The majority of age-dependent skin changes happen in the dermis layer inducing changes in skin collagen and in the proteoglycans. The main aim of this work is to study the efficacy of a Proteum serum, containing soybean-fragmented proteoglycans, against skin aging. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In vitro tests were performed to evaluate the Proteum serum ability on activating the production of collagen and proteoglycans. An in vivo long-term study was performed to determine the efficacy of the Proteum serum when applied on skin. Protection of healthy skin against detergent-induced dermatitis and the antioxidant properties of the applied Proteum serum were also studied. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The in vitro tests demonstrated that the Proteum serum was able to elevate the production of molecules which are essential for supporting the dermal extracellular matrix organization. These results were correlated by the in vivo measurements where a clear trend on improving the measured skin parameters due to the Proteum serum application was found. CONCLUSIONS: A beneficial effect of the Proteum serum was demonstrated with an improvement in the skin roughness and a reinforcement of the skin barrier function. Moreover, a significant protector effect on human stratum corneum against lipids peroxides (LPO) was demonstrated.
Dual oxidase 1 (DUOX1) is an NADPH oxidase that is highly expre-ssed in respiratory epithelial cells and produces H(2)O(2) in the airway lumen. While a line of prior in vitro observations suggested that DUOX1 works in partnership with an airway peroxidase, lactoperoxidase (LPO), to produce antimicrobial hypothiocyanite (OSCN(-)) in the airways, the in vivo role of DUOX1 in mammalian organisms has remained unproven to date. Here, we show that Duox1 promotes antiviral innate immunity in vivo. Upon influenza airway challenge, Duox1(-/-) mice have enhanced mortality, morbidity, and impaired lung viral clearance. Duox1 increases the airway levels of several cytokines (IL-1beta, IL-2, CCL1, CCL3, CCL11, CCL19, CCL20, CCL27, CXCL5, and CXCL11), contributes to innate immune cell recruitment, and affects epithelial apoptosis in the airways. In primary human tracheobronchial epithelial cells, OSCN(-) is generated by LPO using DUOX1-derived H(2)O(2) and inactivates several influenza strains in vitro. We also show that OSCN(-) diminishes influenza replication and viral RNA synthesis in infected host cells that is inhibited by the H(2)O(2) scavenger catalase. Binding of the influenza virus to host cells and viral entry are both reduced by OSCN(-) in an H(2)O(2)-dependent manner in vitro. OSCN(-) does not affect the neuraminidase activity or morphology of the influenza virus. Overall, this antiviral function of Duox1 identifies an in vivo role of this gene, defines the steps in the infection cycle targeted by OSCN(-), and proposes that boosting this mechanism in vivo can have therapeutic potential in treating viral infections.
Abstract Background: Despite many known health benefits of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), there is a concern that their high degree of unsaturation may actually increase oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation (LPO), and chronic inflammatory diseases. METHODS: In this review, we have analyzed results from published human studies regarding the effects of n-3 PUFA supplementation on markers of lipid peroxidation. RESULTS: Of the 22 published human studies, nine found no change, eight a decrease, and five an increase in markers of LPO. These inconsistencies may be due to methods, subject characteristics, dose, duration, fatty acid and antioxidant composition of supplements, and basal diets. METHODS used for analysis seem to be the most significant factor. Six of eight studies with a decrease in LPO determined F2-isoprostanes produced in vivo, and two determined plasma antioxidant capacity or hydroperoxides. n-3 PUFA can serve as scavengers for free radicals and also modulate expression of genes that determine the balance between oxidative and antioxidative status. Recent studies that monitored oxidation products of cholesterol and fatty acids support the hypothesis that n-3 PUFA decrease LPO. Most of the studies showing no change or increase in LPO determined markers that involved ex vivo sample preparation or oxidation (malondialdehyde, low-density lipoprotein oxidation, lipid hydroperoxides). CONCLUSION: A majority of studies do not indicate that n-3 PUFA increased LPO. Future studies need to investigate the effects of dose, duration, and composition of n-3 PUFA with standardized diets and methods on concentrations and types of LPO products produced.
