Beta-1 adrenergic receptor; Beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. This receptor binds epinephrine and norepinephrine with approximately equal affinity. Mediates Ras activation through G(s)-alpha- and cAMP-mediated signaling. Involved in the regulation of sleep/wake behaviors ; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRB1 sub-subfamily.
The redox homeostasis system regulates many biological processes, intracellular antioxidant production and redox signaling. However, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) involved in redox regulation have rarely been reported. Herein, we reported that downregulation of MAGI2-AS3 decreased the superoxide level in Human fibroblasts (Fbs), a replicative aging model, as detected by the fluorescent probes dihydroethidium (DHE) and MitoSOX Red. RNA pulldown combined with mass spectrometry showed that HSPA8 is a novel interacting protein of MAGI2-AS3, which was further confirmed by photoactivatable ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP). Downregulation of MAGI2-AS3 decreased the hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) content by stabilizing the HSPA8 protein level via inhibiting the protesome degradation of HSPA8. Further evidence showed that MAGI2-AS3 interacted with the C-terminal domain (CTD) of HSPA8. Downregulation of MAGI2-AS3 delayed cell senescence, while this antiaging effect was abolished by HSPA8 knockdown. The underlying molecular mechanism by which MAGI2-AS3 knockdown inhibited cell senescence was mediated via suppression of the ROS/MAP2K6/p38 signaling pathway. Taken together, these findings revealed that downregulation of lncRNA MAGI2-AS3 decreased the H(2)O(2) content and delayed cell senescence by stabilizing the HSPA8 protein level, identifying a potential antiaging application.
Membrane-associated guanylate kinase with an inverted arrangement of protein-protein interaction domains (MAGI)2 (also called synaptic scaffolding molecule (S-SCAM), atrophin-1-interacting protein 1, activin receptor-interacting protein 1) is a scaffold protein that binds a wide variety of receptors, cell adhesion molecules and signalling molecules. It also interacts with other scaffold proteins and adaptors, and forms a protein network that supports cell junctions. As it is highly expressed in brain, the study on its roles in synaptic organization initially preceded. However, mounting evidence indicates that MAGI2/S-SCAM functions as a tumour suppressor and plays essential roles to maintain the integrity of cell structures in non-neuronal tissues. We review the articles regarding to MAGI2/S-SCAM outside brain and discuss future perspectives for the research of MAGI family proteins.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) refer to elements of genomic transcription with more than 200 nucleotides that are not translated into proteins, but have crucial roles in cancer progression. MAGI2-AS3, a novel lncRNA, has been reported to be aberrantly expressed in many solid tumors. Increasingly, studies have demonstrated that MAGI2-AS3 expression is significantly correlated with patient clinical characteristics, and that MAGI2-AS3 can regulate multiple biological processes through target-gene regulation. Furthermore, MAGI2-AS3 may serve as both a diagnostic biomarker and as a promising therapeutic target against solid tumors. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge regarding the biological functions and related molecular mechanisms of MAGI2-AS3 in solid-tumor progression. We conclude that understanding MAGI2-AS3 properties may provide new insights into the diagnoses and treatments of solid tumors.
MAGI2 Antisense RNA 3 (MAGI2-AS3) is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcribed from a locus on 7q21.11. This lncRNA has been described to be abnormally expressed in a variety of malignancies in correlation with many clinical characteristics. Moreover, it might participate in the pathogenesis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Alzheimer's disease and intervertebral disc degeneration. Mechanistically, MAGI2-AS3 can serve as a molecular sponge for miR-142-3p, miR-424-5p, miR-15b, miR-233, miR-452-5p, miR-629-5p, miR-25, miR-155, miR-23a-3p, miR-519c-3p, miR-374b-5p, miR-374a, miR-31-5p, miR-3163, miR-525-5p, miR-15-5p, miR-374a-5p, miR-374b-5p, miR-218-5p, miR-141-3p and miR-200a-3p to regulate expression of their mRNA targets. The current review summarizes the role of MAGI2-AS3 in different disorders to highlight its importance in their pathophysiology.
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are noncoding RNAs more than 200 nucleotides in length. A growing number of reports indicate that lncRNAs play a key role in multiple cancers by serving as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. MAGI2 antisense RNA 3 (MAGI2-AS3) is ubiquitously expressed in human cancers, and the level of MAGI2-AS3 expression is associated with the progression and prognosis of cancers. Moreover, dysregulation of MAGI2-AS3 has been found to regulate cancer cell proliferation, cell death, invasion and metastasis and treatment resistance by serving as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA), epigenomic regulator, and transcriptional regulator. Moreover, increasing evidence shows that MAGI2-AS3 may be a potential biomarker for cancer prognosis and a potential target for cancer therapy. In this review, we summarize current research on the functions, mechanisms and clinical significance of the lncRNA MAGI2-AS3 in cancer development.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) ranks as the third most fatal malignant tumor worldwide, with a strong reliance on fatty acid metabolism. CLDN6, a candidate BC suppressor gene, was previously identified as a regulator of fatty acid biosynthesis; however, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. In this research, we aim to clarify the specific mechanism through which CLDN6 modulates fatty acid anabolism and its impact on BC growth and metastasis. METHODS: Cell function assays, tumor xenograft mouse models, and lung metastasis mouse models were conducted to evaluate BC growth and metastasis. Human palmitic acid assay, triglyceride assay, Nile red staining, and oil red O staining were employed to investigate fatty acid anabolism. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), western blot, immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay, nuclear fractionation, immunofluorescence (IF), immunoprecipitation and acyl-biotin exchange (IP-ABE), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), dual luciferase reporter assay, and co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) were applied to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanism. Moreover, tissue microarrays of BC were analyzed to explore the clinical implications. RESULTS: We identified that CLDN6 inhibited BC growth and metastasis by impeding RAS palmitoylation both in vitro and in vivo. We proposed a unique theory suggesting that CLDN6 suppressed RAS palmitoylation through SREBP1-modulated de novo palmitic acid synthesis. Mechanistically, CLDN6 interacted with MAGI2 to prevent KLF5 from entering the nucleus, thereby restraining SREBF1 transcription. The downregulation of SREBP1 reduced de novo palmitic acid synthesis, hindering RAS palmitoylation and subsequent endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT)-mediated plasma membrane localization required for RAS oncogenic activation. Besides, targeting inhibition of RAS palmitoylation synergized with CLDN6 to repress BC progression. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide compelling evidence that CLDN6 suppresses the palmitic acid-induced RAS palmitoylation through the MAGI2/KLF5/SREBP1 axis, thereby impeding BC malignant progression. These results propose a new insight that monitoring CLDN6 expression alongside targeting inhibition of palmitic acid-mediated palmitoylation could be a viable strategy for treating oncogenic RAS-driven BC.
In many cells and tissues, including the glomerular filtration barrier, scaffold proteins are critical in optimizing signal transduction by enhancing structural stability and functionality of their ligands. Recently, mutations in scaffold protein membrane-associated guanylate kinase inverted 2 (MAGI-2) encoding gene were identified among the etiology of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. MAGI-2 interacts with core proteins of multiple pathways, such as transforming growth factor-beta signaling, planar cell polarity pathway, and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in podocyte and slit diaphragm. Through the interaction with its ligand, MAGI-2 modulates the regulation of apoptosis, cytoskeletal reorganization, and glomerular development. This review aims to summarize recent findings on the role of MAGI-2 and some other scaffold proteins, such as nephrin and synaptopodin, in the underlying mechanisms of glomerulopathy.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Nuclear translocation of dendrin is observed in injured podocytes, but the mechanism and its consequence are unknown. In nephropathy mouse models, dendrin ablation attenuates proteinuria, podocyte loss, and glomerulosclerosis. The nuclear translocation of dendrin promotes c-Jun N -terminal kinase phosphorylation in podocytes, altering focal adhesion and enhancing cell detachment-induced apoptosis. We identified mediation of dendrin nuclear translocation by nuclear localization signal 1 (NLS1) sequence and adaptor protein importin- alpha . Inhibition of importin- alpha prevents nuclear translocation of dendrin, decreases podocyte loss, and attenuates glomerulosclerosis in nephropathy models. Thus, inhibiting importin- alpha -mediated nuclear translocation of dendrin is a potential strategy to halt podocyte loss and glomerulosclerosis. BACKGROUND: Nuclear translocation of dendrin is observed in the glomeruli in numerous human renal diseases, but the mechanism remains unknown. This study investigated that mechanism and its consequence in podocytes. METHODS: The effect of dendrin deficiency was studied in adriamycin (ADR) nephropathy model and membrane-associated guanylate kinase inverted 2 ( MAGI2 ) podocyte-specific knockout ( MAGI2 podKO) mice. The mechanism and the effect of nuclear translocation of dendrin were studied in podocytes overexpressing full-length dendrin and nuclear localization signal 1-deleted dendrin. Ivermectin was used to inhibit importin- alpha . RESULTS: Dendrin ablation reduced albuminuria, podocyte loss, and glomerulosclerosis in ADR-induced nephropathy and MAGI2 podKO mice. Dendrin deficiency also prolonged the lifespan of MAGI2 podKO mice. Nuclear dendrin promoted c-Jun N -terminal kinase phosphorylation that subsequently altered focal adhesion, reducing cell attachment and enhancing apoptosis in cultured podocytes. Classical bipartite nuclear localization signal sequence and importin- alpha mediate nuclear translocation of dendrin. The inhibition of importin- alpha / beta reduced dendrin nuclear translocation and apoptosis in vitro as well as albuminuria, podocyte loss, and glomerulosclerosis in ADR-induced nephropathy and MAGI2 podKO mice. Importin- alpha 3 colocalized with nuclear dendrin in the glomeruli of FSGS and IgA nephropathy patients. CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear translocation of dendrin promotes cell detachment-induced apoptosis in podocytes. Therefore, inhibiting importin- alpha -mediated dendrin nuclear translocation is a potential strategy to prevent podocyte loss and glomerulosclerosis.
Gastric cancer is the fifth most common cancer and the third leading cause of cancer-related mortality globally. Abnormal DNA methylation is closely related to gastric cancer. The purpose of the study was to investigate the methylation of the SYNE1 and MAGI2 gene promoter and its relationship with the clinical-pathological factors, chemotherapy efficacy, and survival, thus providing a new biomarker for the prognosis and chemotherapy efficacy in gastric cancer.The methylation status of SYNE1 and MAGI2 in gastric cancer and adjacent tissues was detected by MSP method in 70 cases of advanced gastric cancer paraffin specimens.The methylation rate of the SYNE1 and MAGI2 gene promoter region was higher in gastric cancer tissues compared with adjacent tissues. The methylation status of SYNE1 was associated with the age at diagnosis and the size of the primary tumors, but no clinical or pathological factors have been found to be related with the methylation status of MAGI2 promoter. A high level of SYNE1 promoter methylation was associated with poorer chemotherapy efficacy in recurrent patients with gastric cancer. Thirty-three percent of the 70 patients exhibited highly methylated MAGI2; in this group, the median progression-free survival time was 4.1 months, shorter than those with negative methylated MAGI2 whose PFS was 5.1 months.MAGI2 is more methylated in gastric cancer than in adjacent tissues suggesting that hypermethylation changes in MAGI2 may be one of the mechanisms of tumorigenesis in gastric cancer. The methylation status of the SYNE1 and MAGI2 promoter regions may affect the chemotherapy efficacy of advanced gastric cancer. The prognosis of MAGI2-negative patients was better than that of positive ones, suggesting that MAGI2 may be an independent prognostic factor for PFS in patients with advanced gastric cancer.
Wilms tumor-1(WT1) is a crucial transcription factor that regulates podocyte development. However, the epigenomic mechanism underlying the function of WT1 during podocyte development has yet to be fully elucidated. Here, single-cell chromatin accessibility and gene expression maps of foetal kidneys and kidney organoids are generated. Functional implications of WT1-targeted genes, which are crucial for the development of podocytes and the maintenance of their structure, including BMPER/PAX2/MAGI2 that regulates WNT signaling pathway, MYH9 that maintains actin filament organization and NPHS1 that modulates cell junction assembly are identified. To further illustrate the functional importance of WT1-mediated transcriptional regulation during podocyte development, cultured and implanted patient-derived kidney organoids derived from the Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (iPSCs) of a patient with a heterozygous missense mutation in WT1 are generated. Results from single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and functional assays confirm that the WT1 mutation leads to delays in podocyte development and causes damage to cell structures, due to its failure to activate the targeting genes MAGI2, MYH9, and NPHS1. Notably, correcting the mutation in the patient iPSCs using CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing rescues the podocyte phenotype. Collectively, this work elucidates the WT1-related epigenomic landscape with respect to human podocyte development and identifies the disease-causing role of a WT1 mutation.
Breast cancer is one of the most threatening diseases for women. Long noncoding RNAs were reported to be involved in breast cancer development. In this study, we analyzed The Cancer Genome Atlas breast cancer tissue high-throughput sequencing data and screened and validated the low-expressing long noncoding RNA named MAGI2-AS3. Through gene coexpression analysis, we found that MAGI2-AS3 has a good expression correlation with MAGI2. Overexpression of MAGI2-AS3 or MAGI2 in breast cancer cells MCF-7 would inhibit the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway and inhibit cell proliferation and migration. Gene structure and DNA methylation analysis results indicated that MAGI2-AS3 may act as a cis-acting regulatory element downregulating the DNA methylation level of the MAGI2 promoter region, and the DNA demethylase TET1 inhibitor can reverse MAGI2-AS3 overexpression caused upregulation of MAGI2 and cellular effects. Our findings reveal the role of MAGI2-AS3 in breast cancer and provide potential novel therapeutic targets for metastatic breast cancer intervention.
AIP1 (ASK1-interacting protein-1; encoded by the DAB2IP gene), a signaling scaffolding protein, is abundantly expressed in vascular endothelial cells (EC). While it was initially discovered as an apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1)-interacting protein, AIP1 broadly suppresses inflammatory responses triggered by cytokines and stresses such as TNF, LPS, VEGF, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in EC (therefore, AIP1 is an anti-inflammatory protein). Human genome-wide association study (GWAS) has identified DAB2IP gene variants conferring susceptibility to cardiovascular diseases. Consistently, a global or vascular EC-specific deletion of DAB2IP in mice strongly enhances inflammatory responses and exacerbates atherosclerosis and graft arteriosclerosis progression in mouse models. Mechanisms for AIP1 function and regulation associated with human cardiovascular diseases need further investigations.
BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) are recognized as a pivotal element in the processes of fracture healing and the osteogenic differentiation of stem cells. This study investigated the molecular mechanism and regulatory significance of lncRNA MAGI2-AS3 (MAGI2-AS3) in fracture healing. METHODS: Serum levels of MAGI2-AS3 in patients with normal and delayed fracture healing were verified by RT-qPCR assays. The predictive efficacy of MAGI2-AS3 for delayed fracture healing was analyzed by ROC curve. Osteogenic markers were quantified by RT-qPCR assays. MC3T3-E1 cell viability was detected using CCK-8 assay, and flow cytometry was utilized to measure cell apoptosis. The dual-luciferase reporter gene assay was used to determine the targeted binding between MAGI2-AS3 and miR-223-3p. RESULTS: Serum MAGI2-AS3 expression was decreased in patients with delayed fracture healing compared with patients with normal healing. Elevated MAGI2-AS3 resulted in an upregulation of the proliferative capacity of MC3T3-E1 cells and a decrease in mortality, along with increased levels of both osteogenic markers. However, after transfection silencing MAGI2-AS3, the trend was reversed. Additionally, miR-223-3p was the downstream target of MAGI2-AS3 and was controlled by MAGI2-AS3. miR-223-3p mimic reversed the promoting effects of MAGI2-AS3 overexpression on osteogenic marker levels and cell growth, and induced cell apoptosis. CONCLUSION: The upregulation of MAGI2-AS3 may expedite the healing of fracture patients by targeting miR-223-3p, offering a novel biomarker for diagnosing patients with delayed healing.
Podocytes, the key component of the glomerular filtration barrier (GFB), are gradually lost during the progression of diabetic kidney disease (DKD), severely compromising kidney functionality. The molecular mechanisms regulating the survival of podocytes in DKD are incompletely understood. Here, we show that membrane-associated guanylate kinase inverted 2 (MAGI2) is specifically expressed in renal podocytes, and promotes podocyte survival in DKD. We found that MAGI2 expression was downregulated in podocytes cultured with high-glucose in vitro, and in kidneys of db/db mice as well as DKD patients. Conversely, we found enforced expression of MAGI2 via AAV transduction protected podocytes from apoptosis, with concomitant improvement of renal functions. Mechanistically, we found that MAGI2 deficiency induced by high glucose levels activates TGF-beta signaling to decrease the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins. These results indicate that MAGI2 protects podocytes from cell death, and can be harnessed therapeutically to improve renal function in diabetic kidney disease.
Prostate cancer is a common male cancer with high morbidity and mortality worldwide. According to current research, the integration of long non-coding RNA (lncRNAs) and microRNA(miRNAs) can be expressed in a variety of cancers and play an important role in diagnosis. Based on this, this study explored the clinical role of lncRNA MAGI2-AS3 (MAGI2-AS3) in prostate cancer. By detecting the expression levels of MAGI2-AS3 and miR-142-3p, the correlation between the MAGI2-AS3 expression and the characteristics of clinical data was analyzed. ROC curve analysis was performed and the area under the ROC curve (AUC) was used to evaluate the diagnostic value of MAGI2-AS3 in distinguishing prostate cancer patients from healthy controls. The function of MAGI2-AS3 in prostate cancer cells was explored through CCK-8 and Transwell assays, and the relationship between MAGI2-AS3 and miR-142-3p was investigated by luciferase activity assay. MAGI2-AS3 has descended expression while miR-142-3p has an ascendant one in prostate cancer serum samples and cells. ROC curve analysis revealed that the AUC was 0.953 for MAGI2-AS3, with a sensitivity of 91.5% and specificity of 84.7%. Overexpression of MAGI2-AS3 in LNCaP and PC3 cells suppressed the biological function of the cell including proliferation capacity, migration level, and invasion. MAGI2-AS3 was considered a diagnostic biomarker for prostate cancer patients and inhibited prostate cancer progression by targeting miR-142-3p.
The diagnosis of minimal prostatic adenocarcinoma can be challenging on prostate needle biopsy, and immunohistochemistry may be used to support the diagnosis of cancer. The International Society of Urologic Pathology currently recommends the use of the basal cell markers high-molecular-weight cytokeraratin and p63, and alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme-A racemase. However, there are caveats associated with the interpretation of these markers, particularly with benign mimickers. Another issue is that of early detection of presence and progression of disease and prediction of recurrence after clinical intervention. There remains a lack of reliable biomarkers to accurately predict low-risk cancer and avoid over treatment. As such, aggressive forms of prostate cancer may be missed and indolent disease may be subjected to unnecessary radical therapy. New biomarker discovery promises to improve early detection and prognosis and to provide targets for therapeutic interventions. In this review, we present the emerging immunohistochemical biomarkers of prostate cancer PTEN, ERG, FASN, MAGI-2, and SPINK1, and address their diagnostic and prognostic advantages and limitations.
BACKGROUND: Membrane-associated guanylate kinase, WW and PDZ domain-containing protein 2 (MAGI2) promotes the activity of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). Recent studies suggest that dysregulation of this signaling pathway has a role in prostate carcinogenesis. Our study aims to determine the prognostic significance of MAGI2 expression in prostate cancer. METHODS: Tissue microarrays from 51 radical prostatectomy cases including benign prostatic tissue, high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN), and adenocarcinoma were constructed. Immunohistochemistry with double staining for MAGI2 and p63 was performed and analyzed by image analysis as percent of analyzed area (%AREA). Multivariable logistic regression was used to correlate MAGI2 expression with clinical outcomes. Generalized Estimating Equations (GEE) with linear and logistic regression was used to correlate MAGI2 with intrapatient histology. RESULTS: MAGI2 %AREA was inversely associated with progression from HGPIN to adenocarcinoma of low to high Gleason score (OR, 0.980; slope, -0.02; P = 0.005) and HGPIN to cancer of any Gleason score (OR, 0.969; P = 0.007). After adjusting for grade, stage, and margin status, MAGI2 %AREA was a significant independent predictor of biochemical recurrence (BCR) (OR, 0.936; 95%CI, 0.880-0.996; P = 0.037; bootstrap P = 0.017). The addition of MAGI2 %AREA to these standard clinical parameters improved accuracy of predicting BCR by 2.9% (91.0% vs 88.1%). CONCLUSIONS: These results reveal that MAGI2 expression is reduced during prostate cancer progression and that retention of MAGI2 signal reduces odds of BCR. The study results further suggest a possible role of MAGI2 in prostate neoplasia. Decreased MAGI2 expression may help predict prostate cancer aggressiveness and provide new insight for treatment decisions and post-operative surveillance intervals.
BACKGROUND: Cervical cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths among women, and more than 85% of cervical cancer deaths occur in low and middle-income countries. The purpose of this study is to investigate the functions of MAGI2-AS3 and miR-15b in cervical cancer. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The mRNA levels of MAGI2-AS3, miR-15b, and CCNE1 were evaluated using RT-qPCR assay. Dual-luciferase reporter gene assay was used to confirm whether miR-15b binds to CCNE1. RESULTS: LncRNA MAGI2-AS3 was downregulated, while miR-15b was upregulated in cervical cancer. Cervical cancer patients with low expression of MAGI2-AS3 have a poor prognosis. Upregulation of MAGI2-AS3 inhibited proliferative and invasive abilities of HeLa cells via regulating the expression of miRNA-15b. MiR-15b inhibitor suppressed cell proliferation and invasion. CCNE1 was a direct target gene of miR-15b, which binds to the 3'-UTR of its mRNA. MiR-15b partially reversed the inhibitory effect of overexpression of MAGI2-AS3 on the proliferation and invasion of HeLa cells. MAGI2-AS3 mediated the expression of CCNE1 in HeLa cells. CONCLUSION: LncRNA MAGI2-AS3 inhibits the proliferation and invasion of cervical cancer cells via the miRNA-15/CCNE1 axis. Our results illustrates that MAGI2-AS3 can be used as a useful clinical predictor for early diagnosis and prognosis assessment of cervical cancer.
Background: MAGI2-AS3 has been reported to be a tumor suppressor in breast cancer and bladder cancer. This study analyzed the role of MAGI2-AS3 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Results: The authors found that MAGI2-AS3 and suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS-1) were both downregulated in NSCLC. MAGI2-AS3 and SOCS-1 were significantly and positively correlated in NSCLC tumor tissues. During follow-up, low levels of MAGI2-AS3 and SOCS-1 were found to be significantly correlated with patients' poor survival. In NSCLC cells, MAGI2-AS3 overexpression mediated the upregulated, while miR-155 expression mediated the downregulated SOCS-1 overexpression. RNA binding analysis showed that MAGI2-AS3 may be a sponge of miR-155. Cell proliferation revealed decreased cell proliferation rate of NSCLC cells after MAGI2-AS3 and SOCS-1 overexpression. MiR-155 played an opposite role and reduced the effects of MAGI2-AS3 overexpression. Conclusion: Therefore, MAGI2-AS3 upregulates cytokine signaling 1 by sponging miR-155 to inhibit NSCLC cell proliferation.
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have an effect on the occurrence and progression of a considerable number of diseases, especially cancer. Existing research has suggested that MAGI2 antisense RNA 3 (MAGI2-AS3) takes on a critical significance in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma and lung cancer. However, the functions of MAGI2-AS3 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) remain unclear. In this study, MAGI2-AS3 expression level in LSCC tissue and cell lines was detected, and the effect of MAGI2-AS3 overexpressed on LSCC phenotypes and the possible influence mechanisms were examined. MAGI2-AS3 was downregulated in the tissues of LSCC patients versus non-tumor tissues, and it was correlated with advanced TNM (tumor, node, metastasis) stage and lymph node metastases, as indicated by the results of this study. MAGI2-AS3 inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of LSCC cells in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the hypermethylation level of the MAGI2-AS3 promoter region was indicated by bisulfite genomic sequencing and methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction, such that MAGI2-AS3 expression was downregulated. Besides, MAGI2-AS3 promoter hypermethylation was regulated by DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), and MAGI2-AS3 expression was reversed by 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza). Moreover, the result of the RNA pull-down experiment suggested that 38 proteins were enriched in the MAGI2-AS3 group versus the control group in TU177 cells. To be specific, SPT6 (ie, a conserved protein) was enriched by fold change >10. SPT6 knockdown reduced the antitumor effect of MAGI2-AS3 in TU177 and AMC-HN-8 cells. Meanwhile, SPT6 overexpression inhibited the proliferation, metastasis, and invasion of TU177 and AMC-HN-8 cells. As revealed by the above findings, DNMT1-regulated MAGI2-AS3 promoter hypermethylation led to downregulated MAGI2-AS3 expression, such that the presence and progression of LSCC were inhibited in an SPT6 binding-dependent manner.
