Alcohol dehydrogenase 1A, alpha polypeptide; Belongs to the zinc-containing alcohol dehydrogenase family.
Over the past two decades, research has revealed that genetic factors shape the propensity for aggressive, antisocial, and violent behavior. The best-documented gene implicated in aggression is MAOA (Monoamine oxidase A), which encodes the key enzyme for the degradation of serotonin and catecholamines. Congenital MAOA deficiency, as well as low-activity MAOA variants, has been associated with a higher risk for antisocial behavior (ASB) and violence, particularly in males with a history of child maltreatment. Indeed, the interplay between low MAOA genetic variants and early-life adversity is the best-documented gene x environment (G x E) interaction in the pathophysiology of aggression and ASB. Additional evidence indicates that low MAOA activity in the brain is strongly associated with a higher propensity for aggression; furthermore, MAOA inhibition may be one of the primary mechanisms whereby prenatal smoke exposure increases the risk of ASB. Complementary to these lines of evidence, mouse models of Maoa deficiency and G x E interactions exhibit striking similarities with clinical phenotypes, proving to be valuable tools to investigate the neurobiological mechanisms underlying antisocial and aggressive behavior. Here, we provide a comprehensive overview of the current state of the knowledge on the involvement of MAOA in aggression, as defined by preclinical and clinical evidence. In particular, we show how the convergence of human and animal research is proving helpful to our understanding of how MAOA influences antisocial and violent behavior and how it may assist in the development of preventative and therapeutic strategies for aggressive manifestations.
Genetic and metabolic studies have been done on a large kindred in which several males are affected by a syndrome of borderline mental retardation and abnormal behavior. The types of behavior that occurred include impulsive aggression, arson, attempted rape, and exhibitionism. Analysis of 24-hour urine samples indicated markedly disturbed monoamine metabolism. This syndrome was associated with a complete and selective deficiency of enzymatic activity of monoamine oxidase A (MAOA). In each of five affected males, a point mutation was identified in the eighth exon of the MAOA structural gene, which changes a glutamine to a termination codon. Thus, isolated complete MAOA deficiency in this family is associated with a recognizable behavioral phenotype that includes disturbed regulation of impulsive aggression.
Conduct disorder (CD) is a moderately heritable psychiatric disorder of childhood and adolescence characterized by aggression toward people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, and serious violation of rules. Genome-wide scans using linkage and association methods have identified a number of suggestive genomic regions that are pending replication. A small number of candidate genes (e.g., GABRA2, MAOA, SLC6A4, AVPR1A) are associated with CD related phenotypes across independent studies; however, failures to replicate also exist. Studies of gene-environment interplay show that CD genetic predispositions also contribute to selection into higher-risk environments, and that environmental factors can alter the importance of CD genetic factors and differentially methylate CD candidate genes. The field's understanding of CD etiology will benefit from larger, adequately powered studies in gene identification efforts; the incorporation of polygenic approaches in gene-environment interplay studies; attention to the mechanisms of risk from genes to brain to behavior; and the use of genetically informative data to test quasi-causal hypotheses about purported risk factors.
The concept that genetic factors contribute to the complex trait of suicidal behaviour has stimulated much work aimed at identifying susceptibility genes. So far molecular genetic studies focused on the serotonergic pathway as the intent to die and the lethality of suicide acts were related to the serotonergic system. Two genes have so far emerged as being involved in the vulnerability for suicidality: first, the intronic polymorphisms (A218C or A779C) of the tryptophan hydroxylase 1 (TPH1) gene, which was suggested as a quantitative risk factor for suicidal behaviour; second, the insertion/deletion polymorphism of the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR), which does not seem to be involved in general suicidal behaviour, but in violent and repeated suicide attempts. The data have further shown that the MAOA gene, which is consistently associated with impulsive-aggressive personality traits, is not related to suicide but might induce violent methods in subjects with other suicide risk factors. Predominantly negative were the findings with any type of the serotonin receptors and inconsistent with catecholamine-synthesizing and -metabolizing enzymes or with the dopaminergic receptors. This paper reviews the status of current knowledge in this area, points to the weakness of the investigations and presents new approaches beyond the serotonergic system.
Aggression may be present across a large part of the spectrum of psychopathology, and underlies costly criminal antisocial behaviors. Human aggression is a complex and underspecified construct, confounding scientific discovery. Nevertheless, some biologically tractable subtypes are apparent, and one in particular-impulsive (reactive) aggression-appears to account for many facets of aggression-related dysfunction in psychiatric illness. Impulsive-aggression is significantly heritable, suggesting genetic transmission. However, the specific neurobiological mechanisms that mediate genetic risk for impulsive-aggression remain unclear. Here, we review extant data on the genetics and neurobiology of individual differences in impulsive-aggression, with particular attention to the role of genetic variation in Monoamine Oxidase A (MAOA) and its impact on serotonergic signaling within corticolimbic circuitry.
Prior research has demonstrated a genetic basis for motivated exercise, with evidence of a role for nescient helix-loop-helix-2 (NHLH2/Nhlh2). Nhlh2 transcriptionally regulates the monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) gene. This article examines the evidence for the hypothesis that polymorphisms in NHLH2 or MAO-A contribute to differences in the human motivation for exercise and physical activity. The genetic pathways that link exercise and motivation are discussed.
As flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent enzymes, monoamine oxidases (MAOs) catalyze the oxidative deamination of various endogenous and exogenous amines. MAO-A inhibitors are thought to be effective therapeutic agents for treating neurological diseases including depression and anxiety. Due to the academic challenge of developing new human (h) MAO-A inhibitors and the potential for discovering substances with remarkable properties compared to existing MAO-A inhibitors, numerous research groups are looking into novel classes of chemical compounds that may function as selective hMAO-A inhibitors. beta-Carbolines are reported to be a prominent class of bioactive molecules exhibiting MAO-A inhibition. Chemically, beta-carboline is a tricyclic pyrido-3,4-indole ring. It has only recently been discovered that this chemotype has highly effective and specific MAO-A inhibitory activity. In this review, structure-activity relationship studies included in particular research publications from the 1960s to the present are discussed with regard to beta-carboline and its analogs. This comprehensive information helps to design and develop a new family of MAO-A inhibitors for the management of depressive disorders.
Monoamine oxidases, both MAO-A and MAO-B, have been implicated in personality traits and complex behaviour, including drug use. Findings supporting the involvement of MAO-A and MAO-B in shaping personality and in the development of strategies of making behavioural choices come from a variety of studies that have examined either prevalence of gene variants in clinical groups or population-derived samples, estimates of enzyme activity in blood or, by positron emission tomography, in the brain and, most recently, measurement of methylation of the gene. Most of the studies converge in associating MAO-A and MAO-B with impulsive, aggressive or antisocial personality traits or behaviours, including alcohol-related problems, and for MAO-A available evidence strongly supports interaction with adverse environmental exposures in childhood. What is known about genotype effects, and on expression and activity of the enzyme in the brain and in blood has not yet been possible to unite into a mechanistic model of the role of monoamine systems, but the reason for this low degree of generalization is likely caused by the cross-sectional nature of investigation that has not incorporated the developmental effects of MAO-s in critical time windows, including the foetal period. The "risk variants" of both MAO-s appear to increase behavioural plasticity, as supportive environments may particularly well enhance the hidden potential of their carriers. Importantly, male and female brain and behaviours have been found very different with regard to MAOxlife events interaction. Future studies need to take into consideration these developmental aspects and sex/gender, as well as to specify the role of different types of environmental factors.
The two monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes, A and B, catalyze the metabolism of monoamine neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine. The phenotypic outcomes of MAO congenital deficiency have been studied in humans and animal models, to explore the role of these enzymes in behavioral regulation. The clinical condition caused by MAOA deficiency, Brunner syndrome, was first described as a disorder characterized by overt antisocial and aggressive conduct. Building on this discovery, subsequent studies were focused on the characterization of the role of MAOA in the neurobiology of antisocial conduct. MAO A knockout mice were found to display high levels of intermale aggression; however, further analyses of these mutants unveiled additional behavioral abnormalities mimicking the core symptoms of autism-spectrum disorder. These findings were strikingly confirmed in newly reported cases of Brunner syndrome. The role of MAOB in behavioral regulation remains less well-understood, even though Maob-deficient mice have been found to exhibit greater behavioral disinhibition and risk-taking responses, supporting previous clinical studies showing associations between low MAO B activity and impulsivity. Furthermore, lack of MAOB was found to exacerbate the severity of psychopathological deficits induced by concurrent MAOA deficiency. Here, we summarize how the convergence of clinical reports and behavioral phenotyping in mutant mice has helped frame a complex picture of psychopathological features in MAO-deficient individuals, which encompass a broad spectrum of neurodevelopmental problems. This emerging knowledge poses novel conceptual challenges towards the identification of the endophenotypes shared by autism-spectrum disorder, antisocial behavior and impulse-control problems, as well as their monoaminergic underpinnings.
Genetic factors undoubtedly play an important role in determining vulnerability to bipolar disorder but the task of finding susceptibility genes is not trivial. Candidate gene studies, usually employing the association approach, offer the potential to discover the genes of relatively modest effect size that are expected for a complex genetic disorder. Candidate gene approaches depend crucially on our current understanding of disease pathophysiology, and attention has consequently been focussed on a limited range of neurotransmitter systems implicated by the action of drug treatments. Despite no unequivocal, consistently replicated findings, a number of intriguing results have emerged in the literature, both for bipolar disorder in general and for subtypes such as bipolar affective puerperal psychosis and rapid cycling bipolar illness. Genes of particular current interest include those encoding the serotonin transporter, monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) and catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT). As susceptibility genes are found and knowledge of aetiology advanced it is likely that many more candidate genes in novel biological systems will attract attention.
Aggressive behavior can have adaptive value in certain environmental contexts, but when extreme or executed inappropriately, can also lead to maladaptive outcomes. Neurogenetic studies performed in nonhuman primates have shown that genetic variation that impacts reward sensitivity, impulsivity, and anxiety can contribute to individual differences in aggressive behavior. Genetic polymorphisms in the coding or promoter regions of the Mu-Opioid Receptor (OPRM1), Corticotropin Releasing Hormone (CRH), Monoamine Oxidase A (MAOA), Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4), and Serotonin Transporter (SLC6A4) genes have been shown to be functionally similar in humans and rhesus macaques and have been demonstrated to contribute to individual differences in aggression. This body of literature suggests mechanisms by which genetic variation that promotes aggressivity could simultaneously increase evolutionary success while making modern humans more vulnerable to psychopathology.
Monoamine oxidases play an integral role in brain function. Both monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) regulate neurochemistry by degrading monoamine neurotransmitters (serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine). Any alteration in MAO levels can have devastating effects on the brain and behavior by lowering or raising neurotransmitter levels and producing toxic reactive oxygen species. In this review article, MAO is examined in terms of function and genetic organization, with special focus on recent discoveries related to the transcriptional regulation of MAO. In recent studies, transcriptional regulation involves a repressor protein, R1, for MAO-A and an activator protein, KLF11 (a Kruppel-like factor; also referred to as transforming growth factor-beta early inducible gene 2, TIEG2), for both MAO-A and MAO-B, by binding to Sp/KLF sites in the core promoters of MAO and regulating MAO gene expression. Furthermore, KLF11 may influence MAO-B expression and augment glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) to upregulate MAO-B transcription upon exposure to ethanol. Finally, we review recent progress in MAO research and highlight the roles that MAOs play in several psychiatric conditions, including chronic stress, major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence. Further research in this area is needed to better understand MAOs, their transcription factors and signaling pathways in psychiatric illnesses in order to develop new strategies for pharmacological advancement.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is an important drug target as the MAO isoforms play key roles in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, as well as in neuropsychiatric diseases such as depression. Methylene blue is an inhibitor of MAO-A, while azure B, the major metabolite of methylene blue, and various other structural analogues retain the ability to inhibit MAO-A. Based on this, the present study evaluated 22 dyes, many of which are structurally related to methylene blue, as potential inhibitors of human MAO-A and MAO-B. The results highlighted three dye compounds as good potency competitive and reversible MAO inhibitors, and which exhibit higher MAO inhibition than methylene blue: acridine orange, oxazine 170 and Darrow red. Acridine orange was found to be a MAO-A specific inhibitor (IC(50)  = 0.017 muM), whereas oxazine 170 is a MAO-B specific inhibitor (IC(50)  = 0.0065 muM). Darrow red was found to be a non-specific MAO inhibitor (MAO-A, IC(50)  = 0.059 muM; MAO-B, IC(50)  = 0.065 muM). These compounds may be advanced for further testing and preclinical development, or be used as possible lead compounds for the future design of MAO inhibitors.
The monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes metabolise neurotransmitter amines in the central and peripheral tissues, and thereby contribute to the regulation of neurotransmission. Inhibitors of MAO modulate the levels of neurotransmitters in the central nervous system, and have been used for several decades for the treatment of depression and Parkinson's disease, while potential new therapeutic applications in other diseases such as prostate cancer and heart failure may exist. In the interest of discovering new classes of chemical compounds that potently inhibit the MAOs, the present study synthesises a series of ten isatoic anhydrides and evaluates their potential as in vitro inhibitors of human MAO-A and MAO-B. The isatoic anhydrides bear structural similarity to a series of 3,4-dihydro-2(1H)-quinolinones as well as to series of isatins and phthalimides that have been reported to act as potent MAO-B inhibitors. The results document that the isatoic anhydrides inhibit both MAO isoforms with the most potent inhibitors exhibiting IC(50) values of 0.010 microM (1b and 1h) and 0.0047 microM (1j) for MAO-A and MAO-B, respectively. Molecular docking suggests that isatoic anhydrides exhibit similar binding modes and interactions with MAO-A and MAO-B, which may explain their potent inhibition of both isoforms. It may be concluded that the isatoic anhydrides represent a new class of MAO inhibitors, while it is interesting to note that very few studies on the pharmacological actions of isatoic anhydrides have been reported. As a secondary aim, the isatoic anhydrides were also evaluated as potential inhibitors of d-amino acid oxidase (DAAO), acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE).
MAOA and, to a lesser extent, MAOB polymorphisms have been related to aggression traits and suicidality. We aimed to investigate the role of MAOA and MAOB in suicidal versus non-suicidal participants and interactions between genetic variation and suicidal status on aggression and anger-related traits. The sample was composed of three groups: one group of suicide attempters (n = 171, males 35.1 %), one group of suicide completers (n = 90, males 57.8 %) and a healthy control group (n = 317, males 43.8 %). We examined the following markers: MAOA rs909525, rs6323, and rs2064070, and MAOB rs1799836. Anger traits were measured with the state-trait anger expression inventory (STAXI) and aggression traits with the questionnaire for measuring factors of aggression (FAF). Associations were separately examined for males and females. Variation in the three MAOA variants was associated with higher levels of anger expressed outwards (STAXI "anger-out" subscale) in male suicidal patients compared to controls (p < 0.001). In females, the C allele of rs6323 showed higher scores on the same subscale ("anger out") (p = 0.002). Allele frequencies of the MAOA rs909525 were associated with suicidality (p < 0.007). Our findings show an association between genetic variation in three polymorphisms of the MAOA and anger traits in suicidal males and one replication for the functional variant rs6323 in females. This relationship was stronger than a direct genetic association with suicide status. Future studies incorporating endophenotypic measures of anger and aggression in suicidal participants are warranted.
OBJECTIVE: Previous studies have indicated that neurotransmitters play important roles in the occurrence and development of gastric cancer. MAOA is an important catecholamine neurotransmitter-degrading enzyme involved in the degradation of norepinephrine, epinephrine and serotonin. To find a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of gastric cancer, the biological functions of MAOA and the underlying mechanism in gastric cancer need to be explored. METHODS: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets, Kaplan‒Meier (KM) plotter were used to identify the differentially expressed genes, which mainly involved the degradation and synthesis enzymes of neurotransmitters in gastric cancer. We also investigated the expression pattern of MAOA in human and mouse tissues and cell lines by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting analysis. Western blotting, quantitative real-time PCR, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and a Seahorse experiment were used to identify the molecular mechanism of cancer cell glycolysis. MAOA expression and patient survival were analysed in the Ren Ji cohort, and univariate and multivariate analyses were performed based on the clinicopathological characteristics of the above samples. RESULTS: MAOA expression was significantly downregulated in gastric cancer tissue and associated with poor patient prognosis. Moreover, the expression level of MAOA in gastric cancer tissue had a close negative correlation with the SUXmax value of PET-CT in patients. MAOA suppressed tumour growth and glycolysis and promoted cancer cell apoptosis. We also reported that MAOA can interact with NDRG1 and regulate glycolysis through suppression of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. MAOA expression may serve as an independent prognostic factor in gastric cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: MAOA attenuated glycolysis and inhibited the progression of gastric cancer through the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. Loss of function or downregulation of MAOA can facilitate gastric cancer progression. Overexpression of MAOA and inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway may provide a potential method for gastric cancer treatment in clinical therapeutic regimens.
Psychopathy is characterized by callous affect, interpersonal manipulation, a deviant lifestyle, and antisocial behavior. Previous research has linked psychopathic traits to childhood trauma, but also to the upstream variable number tandem repeat (uVNTR) polymorphism of the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) gene. An interaction between childhood trauma and MAOA genotype has been associated with antisocial behavior, but so far little is known about interaction effects of childhood trauma and the MAOA uVNTR on psychopathy. In order to bridge this gap, we used data of 1531 male and 1265 female twins and their siblings from a Finnish community sample to estimate structural equation models. The psychopathy and childhood trauma constructs were conceptualized as bifactor models with one general and two orthogonal group factors. Data comprised self-reports on childhood trauma and psychopathic traits as well as MAOA uVNTR genotype. In both genders, childhood trauma was associated with the general factor that represents the overarching psychopathy construct, and with the group factor that captures social deviance, but not with the group factor capturing psychopathic core personality traits. Women with a low activity variant of the MAOA uVNTR reported slightly higher levels of psychopathy than those with a high activity allele, but only with respect to the general psychopathy factor. There was no evidence for an interaction effect between MAOA uVNTR genotype and childhood trauma on psychopathy in either gender. Our results suggest that psychopathy in general and social deviance in particular are associated with childhood trauma in men and women, and that psychopathic traits are subject to variation in the MAOA uVNTR genotype in women.
Serotonin (5-HT) has long been considered as a key transmitter in the neurocircuitry controlling aggression. Impaired regulation of each subtype of 5-HT receptor, 5-HT transporter, synthetic and metabolic enzymes has been linked particularly to impulsive aggression. The current summary focuses mostly on recent findings from pharmacological and genetic studies. The pharmacological treatments and genetic manipulations or polymorphisms of aspecific target (e.g., 5-HT1A receptor) can often result in inconsistent results on aggression, due to "phasic" effects of pharmacological agents versus "trait"-like effects of genetic manipulations. Also, the local administration of a drug using the intracranial microinjection technique has shown that activation of specific subtypes of 5-HT receptors (5-HT1A and 5-HT1B) in mesocorticolimbic areas can reduce species-typical and other aggressive behaviors, but the same receptors in the medial prefrontal cortex or septal area promote escalated forms of aggression. Thus, there are receptor populations in specific brain regions that preferentially modulate specific types of aggression. Genetic studies have shown important gene-environment interactions; it is likely that the polymorphisms in the genes of 5-HT transporters or rate-limiting synthetic and metabolic enzymes of 5-HT (e.g., MAOA) determine the vulnerability to adverse environmental factors that escalate aggression. We also discuss the interaction between the 5-HT system and other systems. Modulation of 5-HT neurons in the dorsalraphe nucleus by GABA, glutamate and CRF profoundly regulate aggressive behaviors. Also, interactions of the 5-HT system with other neuropeptides(arginine vasopressin, oxytocin, neuropeptide Y, opioid) have emerged as important neurobiological determinants of aggression. Studies of aggression in genetically modified mice identified several molecules that affect the 5-HT system directly (e.g., Tph2, 5-HT1B, 5-HT transporter, Pet1, MAOA) or indirectly[e.g., BDNF, neuronal nitric oxide (nNOS), aCaMKII, Neuropeptide Y].The future agenda delineates specific receptor subpopulations for GABA, glutamate and neuropeptides as they modulate the canonical aminergic neurotransmitters in brainstem, limbic and cortical regions with the ultimate outcome of attenuating or escalating aggressive behavior.
Human aggression/impulsivity-related traits have a complex background that is greatly influenced by genetic and non-genetic factors. The relationship between aggression and anxiety is regulated by highly conserved brain regions including amygdala, which controls neural circuits triggering defensive, aggressive, or avoidant behavioral models. The dysfunction of neural circuits responsible for emotional control was shown to represent an etiological factor of violent behavior. In addition to the amygdala, these circuits also involve the anterior cingulated cortex and regions of the prefrontal cortex. Excessive reactivity in the amygdala coupled with inadequate prefrontal regulation serves to increase the likelihood of aggressive behavior. Developmental alterations in prefrontal-subcortical circuitry as well as neuromodulatory and hormonal abnormality appear to play a role. Imbalance in testosterone/serotonin and testosterone/cortisol ratios (e.g., increased testosterone levels and reduced cortisol levels) increases the propensity toward aggression because of reduced activation of the neural circuitry of impulse control and self-regulation. Serotonin facilitates prefrontal inhibition, and thus insufficient serotonergic activity can enhance aggression. Genetic predisposition to aggression appears to be deeply affected by the polymorphic genetic variants of the serotoninergic system that influences serotonin levels in the central and peripheral nervous system, biological effects of this hormone, and rate of serotonin production, synaptic release and degradation. Among these variants, functional polymorphisms in the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) and serotonin transporter (5-HTT) may be of particular importance due to the relationship between these polymorphic variants and anatomical changes in the limbic system of aggressive people. Furthermore, functional variants of MAOA and 5-HTT are capable of mediating the influence of environmental factors on aggression-related traits. In this review, we consider genetic determinants of human aggression, with special emphasis on genes involved in serotonin and dopamine metabolism and function.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) are flavoenzymes that metabolize neurotransmitter, dietary and xenobiotic amines to their corresponding aldehydes with the production of hydrogen peroxide. Two isoforms, MAO-A and MAO-B, are expressed in humans and mammals, and display different substrate and inhibitor specificities as well as different physiological roles. MAO inhibitors are of much therapeutic value and are used for the treatment of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders such as depression, anxiety disorders, and Parkinson's disease. To discover MAO inhibitors with good potencies and interesting isoform specificities, the present study synthesized a series of 2,1-benzisoxazole (anthranil) derivatives and evaluated them as in vitro inhibitors of human MAO. The compounds were in most instances specific inhibitors of MAO-B with the most potent MAO-B inhibition observed for 7a (IC(50) = 0.017 microM) and 7b (IC(50) = 0.098 microM). The most potent MAO-A inhibition was observed for 3l (IC(50) = 5.35 microM) and 5 (IC(50) = 3.29 microM). It is interesting to note that 3-(2-aminoethoxy)-1,2-benzisoxazole derivatives, the 1,2-benzisoxazole, zonisamide, as well as the isoxazole compound, leflunomide, have been described as MAO inhibitors. This is however the first report of MAO inhibition by derivatives of the 2,1-benzisoxazole structural isomer.
