Amine oxidase [flavin-containing] B; Catalyzes the oxidative deamination of biogenic and xenobiotic amines and has important functions in the metabolism of neuroactive and vasoactive amines in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues. MAOB preferentially degrades benzylamine and phenylethylamine; Belongs to the flavin monoamine oxidase family.
Prostate cancer (PC) develops in a microenvironment where the stromal cells modulate adjacent tumor growth and progression. Here, we demonstrated elevated levels of monoamine oxidase B (MAOB), a mitochondrial enzyme that degrades biogenic and dietary monoamines, in human PC stroma, which was associated with poor clinical outcomes of PC patients. Knockdown or overexpression of MAOB in human prostate stromal fibroblasts indicated that MAOB promotes cocultured PC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and co-inoculated prostate tumor growth in mice. Mechanistically, MAOB induces a reactive stroma with activated marker expression, increased extracellular matrix remodeling, and acquisition of a protumorigenic phenotype through enhanced production of reactive oxygen species. Moreover, MAOB transcriptionally activates CXCL12 through Twist1 synergizing with TGFbeta1-dependent Smads in prostate stroma, which stimulates tumor-expressed CXCR4-Src/JNK signaling in a paracrine manner. Pharmacological inhibition of stromal MAOB restricted PC xenograft growth in mice. Collectively, these findings characterize the contribution of MAOB to PC and suggest MAOB as a potential stroma-based therapeutic target.
Selegiline, the R-optical enantiomer of deprenyl (phenyl-isopropyl-methyl-propargylamine), was almost exclusively used MAO-B inhibitor during the past decades to treat Parkinson's disease. Oral treatment prolongs the need of levodopa administration. Selegiline is rapidly metabolized by the microsomal enzymes to amphetamine, methamphetamine, and desmethyl-deprenyl. In addition, the flavin-containing monooxigenase is synthesizing deprenyl-N-oxide. Selegiline in rather low concentrations (10(-)(9)-10(-)(1)(3) M), does not influence MAO-B, but it has an antiapoptotic activity in tissue culture. The neuroprotective effect of selegiline has a biphasic character. In higher concentrations than 10(-)(7) M increases the rate of apoptosis (proapoptotic activity). The metabolites are also taking part in the complex pharmacological activity of selegiline. The simultaneous presence of the pro- and antiapoptotic effects of selegiline and its metabolites frequently hindered its clinical usage. During the past years rasagiline has been introduced to replace selegiline in clinical application. MAO-B inhibitors beside their effect on the enzyme MAO-B could hold different spectrum of pharmacological activities. Selegiline is administered orally and it possesses an intensive "first pass" metabolism. To circumvent the "first pass" metabolism, parenteral administration of the drug might lead to different distribution and pharmacological activity of selegiline.
Monoamine oxidases (MAOs) are mitochondrial bound enzymes, which catalyze the oxidative deamination of monoamine neurotransmitters. Inside the brain, MAOs are present in two isoforms: MAO-A and MAO-B. The activity of MAO-B is generally higher in patients affected by neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Therefore, the search for potent and selective MAO-B inhibitors is still a challenge for medicinal chemists. Nature has always been a source of inspiration for the discovery of new lead compounds. Moreover, natural medicine is a major component in all traditional medicine systems. In this review, we present the latest discoveries in the search for selective MAO-B inhibitors from natural sources. For clarity, compounds have been classified on the basis of structural analogy or source: flavonoids, xanthones, tannins, proanthocyanidins, iridoid glucosides, curcumin, alkaloids, cannabinoids, and natural sources extracts. MAO inhibition values reported in the text are not always consistent due to the high variability of MAO sources (bovine, pig, rat brain or liver, and human) and to the heterogeneity of the experimental protocols used.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive brain disease characterised by progressive memory loss and cognition impairment, ultimately leading to death. There are three FDA-approved acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine, AChEIs) for the symptomatic treatment of AD. Monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) has been considered to contribute to pathologies of AD. Therefore, we reviewed the dual inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and MAO-B developed in the last five years. In this review, these dual-target inhibitors were classified into six groups according to the basic parent structure, including chalcone, coumarin, chromone, benzo-fused five-membered ring, imine and hydrazine, and other scaffolds. Their design strategies, structure-activity relationships (SARs), and molecular docking studies with AChE and MAO-B were analysed and discussed, giving valuable insights for the subsequent development of AChE and MAO-B dual inhibitors. Challenges in the development of balanced and potent AChE and MAO-B dual inhibitors were noted, and corresponding solutions were provided.
With the significant growth of patients suffering from neurodegenerative diseases (NDs), novel classes of compounds targeting monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) are promptly emerging as distinguished structures for the treatment of the latter. As a promising function of computer-aided drug design (CADD), structure-based virtual screening (SBVS) is being heavily applied in processes of drug discovery and development. The utilization of molecular docking, as a helping tool for SBVS, is providing essential data about the poses and the occurring interactions between ligands and target molecules. The current work presents a brief discussion of the role of MAOs in the treatment of NDs, insight into the advantages and drawbacks of docking simulations and docking software, and a look into the active sites of MAO-A and MAO-B and their main characteristics. Thereafter, we report new chemical classes of MAO-B inhibitors and the essential fragments required for stable interactions focusing mainly on papers published in the last five years. The reviewed cases are separated into several chemically distinct groups. Moreover, a modest table for rapid revision of the revised works including the structures of the reported inhibitors together with the utilized docking software and the PDB codes of the crystal targets applied in each study is provided. Our work could be beneficial for further investigations in the search for novel, effective, and selective MAO-B inhibitors.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) plays an important role in psychiatric and neurological disorders, such as depression and Parkinson's disease. As a result, MAO represents a key target for developing drugs to treat these conditions. The present study aimed to synthesise and discover compounds that inhibit the MAO enzymes and which may be relevant to the treatment of neurological disorders. A series of nine 2H-1,4-benzothiazin-3(4H)-ones were synthesised and evaluated as potential in vitro inhibitors of human MAO-A and MAO-B. The benzothiazinones bear structural similarity to a series of 3,4-dihydro-2(1H)-quinolinones that have been shown to be highly potent MAO-B inhibitors. The results show that the benzothiazinones inhibit both MAO isoforms but are more potent MAO-B inhibitors. The most potent inhibitors exhibit IC(50) values of 0.0027 (1b), 0.0082 (1c), 0.0096 (1d), and 0.0041 microM (1h) for MAO-B, and 0.714 microM (1d) for MAO-A. These benzothiazinone derivatives exhibit promising MAO inhibition activities and may be developed into clinically useful agents for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Interestingly, related 4H-3,1-benzothiazin-4-ones have previously been investigated as dual-target-directed drugs that inhibit MAO-B and antagonize adenosine A(2A) receptors for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Based on an interest in d-amino acid oxidase (DAAO) as a target for the treatment for schizophrenia, the 2H-1,4-benzothiazin-3(4H)-ones were also evaluated as in vitro inhibitors of this enzyme. Among the study compounds, only 7-hydroxy-2H-1,4-benzothiazin-3(4H)-one (IC(50) = 4.20 microM) was an active DAAO inhibitor. Finally, molecular docking was employed to gain insight into the binding modes and interactions of the 2H-1,4-benzothiazin-3(4H)-ones with MAO.
This chapter reviews the two mitochondrial flavin containing isozymes of monoamine oxidase. Section 1, "Biochemistry" discusses assays, substrates and inhibitors, phylogenic and tissue distribution, interactions with lipids, nutritional studies, protein structure, kinetic and chemical mechanistic proposals, and biosynthesis. Section 2, "Inheritance" discusses possible genes involved in expression, genetic studies of platelet MAO-B and fibroblast MAO-A, and chromosomal location. Section 3, "Molecular Genetics" reviews the cloning of their cDNAs, their intra- and interspecies homology and structural inferences made from deduced amino acid sequences. Section 4, "Regulation" gives an overview of levels in development and aging, and effect of drugs. The final section 5, "Role in Human Disease" discusses physiological function and effects of altered levels in humans and animal models including complete absence due to a submicroscopic chromosomal deletion in several human patients.
Phenylketonuria (PKU), the most frequent inborn error of metabolism (1/15,000 live births), is an autosomal recessive condition caused by phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency. Despite early and strict dietary control, some PKU children still exhibit behavioral and cognitive difficulties suggestive of a partly prenatal brain injury. The reported variability between the cognitive and clinical phenotypes within the same family raises the question of modifying genes in PKU. We suggest here that monoamine oxidase type B, MAOB, an enzyme degrading phenylethylamine, a very toxic metabolite of phenylalanine, could act as a modifying gene since a variant enzymatic activity of MAOB in PKU patients with similar phenylalanine levels would result in different phenylethylamine levels and different clinical outcomes. Finally the report of low MAOB, and consequently expectedly high phenylethylamine levels in neonates is consistent with a phenylethylamine-mediated brain injury possibly causing irreversible damages in PKU newborns prior to onset of the low protein diet.
Solid tumours often endure nutrient insufficiency during progression. How tumour cells adapt to temporal and spatial nutrient insufficiency remains unclear. We previously identified STC2 as one of the most upregulated genes in cells exposed to nutrient insufficiency by transcriptome screening, indicating the potential of STC2 in cellular adaptation to nutrient insufficiency. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying STC2 induction by nutrient insufficiency and subsequent adaptation remain elusive. Here, we report that STC2 protein is dramatically increased and secreted into the culture media by Gln-/Glc- deprivation. STC2 promoter contains cis-elements that are activated by ATF4 and p65/RelA, two transcription factors activated by a variety of cellular stress. Biologically, STC2 induction and secretion promote cell survival but attenuate cell proliferation during nutrient insufficiency, thus switching the priority of cancer cells from proliferation to survival. Loss of STC2 impairs tumour growth by inducing both apoptosis and necrosis in mouse xenografts. Mechanistically, under nutrient insufficient conditions, cells have increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and lack of STC2 further elevates ROS levels that lead to increased apoptosis. RNA-Seq analyses reveal STC2 induction suppresses the expression of monoamine oxidase B (MAOB), a mitochondrial membrane enzyme that produces ROS. Moreover, a negative correlation between STC2 and MAOB levels is also identified in human tumour samples. Importantly, the administration of recombinant STC2 to the culture media effectively suppresses MAOB expression as well as apoptosis, suggesting STC2 functions in an autocrine/paracrine manner. Taken together, our findings indicate that nutrient insufficiency induces STC2 expression, which in turn governs the adaptation of cancer cells to nutrient insufficiency through the maintenance of redox homoeostasis, highlighting the potential of STC2 as a therapeutic target for cancer treatment.
Monoamine oxidases, both MAO-A and MAO-B, have been implicated in personality traits and complex behaviour, including drug use. Findings supporting the involvement of MAO-A and MAO-B in shaping personality and in the development of strategies of making behavioural choices come from a variety of studies that have examined either prevalence of gene variants in clinical groups or population-derived samples, estimates of enzyme activity in blood or, by positron emission tomography, in the brain and, most recently, measurement of methylation of the gene. Most of the studies converge in associating MAO-A and MAO-B with impulsive, aggressive or antisocial personality traits or behaviours, including alcohol-related problems, and for MAO-A available evidence strongly supports interaction with adverse environmental exposures in childhood. What is known about genotype effects, and on expression and activity of the enzyme in the brain and in blood has not yet been possible to unite into a mechanistic model of the role of monoamine systems, but the reason for this low degree of generalization is likely caused by the cross-sectional nature of investigation that has not incorporated the developmental effects of MAO-s in critical time windows, including the foetal period. The "risk variants" of both MAO-s appear to increase behavioural plasticity, as supportive environments may particularly well enhance the hidden potential of their carriers. Importantly, male and female brain and behaviours have been found very different with regard to MAOxlife events interaction. Future studies need to take into consideration these developmental aspects and sex/gender, as well as to specify the role of different types of environmental factors.
Fourteen (hetero-)(arylidene)arylhydrazide derivatives (ABH1-ABH14) were synthesized, and their inhibitory activities against monoamine oxidases (MAOs) and acetylcholinesterase (AChE) were evaluated. Compound ABH5 most potently inhibited MAO-B with an IC(50) value of 0.025 +/- 0.0019 muM; ABH2 and ABH3 exhibited high IC(50) values as well. Most of the compounds weakly inhibited MAO-A, except ABH5 (IC(50) = 3.31 +/- 0.41 muM). Among the active compounds, ABH2 showed the highest selectivity index (SI) of 174 for MAO-B, followed by ABH5 (SI = 132). ABH3 and ABH5 effectively inhibited AChE with IC(50) values of 15.7 +/- 6.52 and 16.5 +/- 7.29 muM, respectively, whereas the other compounds were weak inhibitors of AChE. ABH5 was shown to be a reversible competitive inhibitor for MAO-A and MAO-B with K(i) values of 0.96 +/- 0.19 and 0.024 +/- 0.0077 muM, respectively, suggesting that this molecule can be considered as an interesting candidate for further development as a multitarget inhibitor relating to neurodegenerative disorders.
This study aimed to identify immune-based prognostic biomarkers associated with metastasis of osteosarcoma. Based on the GEO and TCGA databases, 437 differentially expressed genes were screened between primary and metastatic osteosarcoma. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) revealed 496 genes in turquoise module which had the highest correlation with osteosarcoma metastasis. Within these two group genes, 122 common genes involved in osteosarcoma metastasis were identified. These genes were enriched in chemokine activity, chemokine receptor binding, TNF signaling pathway, etc. Survival analysis revealed 8 prognostic genes (ANK3, EGR1, FBP1, FOS, KIFC3, MAOB, ISLR and MFAP4) from the 122 genes. RT-qPCR showed that all of these eight genes were differentially expressed between 143B and MNNG/HOS Cl cells. Various infiltrating immune cells showed significant differences between primary and metastatic osteosarcoma. Expression of all the 8 prognostic genes was correlated with infiltration abundance of multiple immune cells, such as follicular helper T cells, activated dendritic cells. In addition, 10 microRNAs and 7 transcription factors that targeted these prognostic genes were predicted. In conclusion, 8 immune-based prognostic genes associated with osteosarcoma metastasis were identified.
MAOA and, to a lesser extent, MAOB polymorphisms have been related to aggression traits and suicidality. We aimed to investigate the role of MAOA and MAOB in suicidal versus non-suicidal participants and interactions between genetic variation and suicidal status on aggression and anger-related traits. The sample was composed of three groups: one group of suicide attempters (n = 171, males 35.1 %), one group of suicide completers (n = 90, males 57.8 %) and a healthy control group (n = 317, males 43.8 %). We examined the following markers: MAOA rs909525, rs6323, and rs2064070, and MAOB rs1799836. Anger traits were measured with the state-trait anger expression inventory (STAXI) and aggression traits with the questionnaire for measuring factors of aggression (FAF). Associations were separately examined for males and females. Variation in the three MAOA variants was associated with higher levels of anger expressed outwards (STAXI "anger-out" subscale) in male suicidal patients compared to controls (p < 0.001). In females, the C allele of rs6323 showed higher scores on the same subscale ("anger out") (p = 0.002). Allele frequencies of the MAOA rs909525 were associated with suicidality (p < 0.007). Our findings show an association between genetic variation in three polymorphisms of the MAOA and anger traits in suicidal males and one replication for the functional variant rs6323 in females. This relationship was stronger than a direct genetic association with suicide status. Future studies incorporating endophenotypic measures of anger and aggression in suicidal participants are warranted.
Monoamine oxidases play an integral role in brain function. Both monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) regulate neurochemistry by degrading monoamine neurotransmitters (serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine). Any alteration in MAO levels can have devastating effects on the brain and behavior by lowering or raising neurotransmitter levels and producing toxic reactive oxygen species. In this review article, MAO is examined in terms of function and genetic organization, with special focus on recent discoveries related to the transcriptional regulation of MAO. In recent studies, transcriptional regulation involves a repressor protein, R1, for MAO-A and an activator protein, KLF11 (a Kruppel-like factor; also referred to as transforming growth factor-beta early inducible gene 2, TIEG2), for both MAO-A and MAO-B, by binding to Sp/KLF sites in the core promoters of MAO and regulating MAO gene expression. Furthermore, KLF11 may influence MAO-B expression and augment glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) to upregulate MAO-B transcription upon exposure to ethanol. Finally, we review recent progress in MAO research and highlight the roles that MAOs play in several psychiatric conditions, including chronic stress, major depressive disorder and alcohol dependence. Further research in this area is needed to better understand MAOs, their transcription factors and signaling pathways in psychiatric illnesses in order to develop new strategies for pharmacological advancement.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is an important drug target as the MAO isoforms play key roles in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, as well as in neuropsychiatric diseases such as depression. Methylene blue is an inhibitor of MAO-A, while azure B, the major metabolite of methylene blue, and various other structural analogues retain the ability to inhibit MAO-A. Based on this, the present study evaluated 22 dyes, many of which are structurally related to methylene blue, as potential inhibitors of human MAO-A and MAO-B. The results highlighted three dye compounds as good potency competitive and reversible MAO inhibitors, and which exhibit higher MAO inhibition than methylene blue: acridine orange, oxazine 170 and Darrow red. Acridine orange was found to be a MAO-A specific inhibitor (IC(50)  = 0.017 muM), whereas oxazine 170 is a MAO-B specific inhibitor (IC(50)  = 0.0065 muM). Darrow red was found to be a non-specific MAO inhibitor (MAO-A, IC(50)  = 0.059 muM; MAO-B, IC(50)  = 0.065 muM). These compounds may be advanced for further testing and preclinical development, or be used as possible lead compounds for the future design of MAO inhibitors.
The monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes metabolise neurotransmitter amines in the central and peripheral tissues, and thereby contribute to the regulation of neurotransmission. Inhibitors of MAO modulate the levels of neurotransmitters in the central nervous system, and have been used for several decades for the treatment of depression and Parkinson's disease, while potential new therapeutic applications in other diseases such as prostate cancer and heart failure may exist. In the interest of discovering new classes of chemical compounds that potently inhibit the MAOs, the present study synthesises a series of ten isatoic anhydrides and evaluates their potential as in vitro inhibitors of human MAO-A and MAO-B. The isatoic anhydrides bear structural similarity to a series of 3,4-dihydro-2(1H)-quinolinones as well as to series of isatins and phthalimides that have been reported to act as potent MAO-B inhibitors. The results document that the isatoic anhydrides inhibit both MAO isoforms with the most potent inhibitors exhibiting IC(50) values of 0.010 microM (1b and 1h) and 0.0047 microM (1j) for MAO-A and MAO-B, respectively. Molecular docking suggests that isatoic anhydrides exhibit similar binding modes and interactions with MAO-A and MAO-B, which may explain their potent inhibition of both isoforms. It may be concluded that the isatoic anhydrides represent a new class of MAO inhibitors, while it is interesting to note that very few studies on the pharmacological actions of isatoic anhydrides have been reported. As a secondary aim, the isatoic anhydrides were also evaluated as potential inhibitors of d-amino acid oxidase (DAAO), acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE).
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) are flavoenzymes that metabolize neurotransmitter, dietary and xenobiotic amines to their corresponding aldehydes with the production of hydrogen peroxide. Two isoforms, MAO-A and MAO-B, are expressed in humans and mammals, and display different substrate and inhibitor specificities as well as different physiological roles. MAO inhibitors are of much therapeutic value and are used for the treatment of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders such as depression, anxiety disorders, and Parkinson's disease. To discover MAO inhibitors with good potencies and interesting isoform specificities, the present study synthesized a series of 2,1-benzisoxazole (anthranil) derivatives and evaluated them as in vitro inhibitors of human MAO. The compounds were in most instances specific inhibitors of MAO-B with the most potent MAO-B inhibition observed for 7a (IC(50) = 0.017 microM) and 7b (IC(50) = 0.098 microM). The most potent MAO-A inhibition was observed for 3l (IC(50) = 5.35 microM) and 5 (IC(50) = 3.29 microM). It is interesting to note that 3-(2-aminoethoxy)-1,2-benzisoxazole derivatives, the 1,2-benzisoxazole, zonisamide, as well as the isoxazole compound, leflunomide, have been described as MAO inhibitors. This is however the first report of MAO inhibition by derivatives of the 2,1-benzisoxazole structural isomer.
Monoamine oxidase is a flavin enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of monoamine neurotransmitters in the brain. Various toxic by-products, aldehydes and hydrogen peroxide produced during the catalytic process, can cause oxidative stress and neuronal cell death. Overexpression of MAO-B and insufficient dopamine concentration are recognized as pathological factors in neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) including Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Therefore, the inhibition of MAO-B is an attractive target for the treatment of NDs. Despite significant efforts, few selective and reversible MAO-B inhibitors have been clinically approved. Natural products have emerged as valuable sources of lead compounds in drug discovery. Compounds such as chromone, coumarin, chalcone, caffeine, and aurone, present in natural structures, are considered as privileged scaffolds in the synthesis of MAO-B inhibitors. In this review, we summarized the structure-activity relationship (SAR) of MAO-B inhibitors based on the naturally privileged scaffolds over the past 20 years. Additionally, we proposed a balanced discussion on the advantages and limitations of natural scaffold-based MAO-B inhibitors with providing a future perspective in drug development.
The structural elucidations of human monoamine oxidases A and B (MAO-A and -B) have provided novel insights into their similarities and differences. Although the enzymes exhibit  approximately 70% sequence identities, highly conserved chain folds, and are structurally identical in their flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-binding sites, they differ considerably in the structures of their active sites opposite the flavin cofactor. MAO-A has a monopartite cavity of  approximately 550 A(3), and MAO-B exhibits a bipartite cavity structure with an entrance cavity of 290 A(3) and a substrate cavity of  approximately 400 A(3). Ile199 functions as a conformational "gate" separating the two cavities. Both enzymes are anchored to the outer mitochondrial membrane via C-terminal helical tails. Loop structures are found at the entrances to their active sites at the membrane surface. Although the crystal structure of human MAO-A is monomeric while MAO-B is dimeric, both enzymes are dimeric in their membrane-bound forms. Dimerization may be important for the favorable orientation of the resultant protein dipole moment toward the anionic membrane surface.
The monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes are key metabolic enzymes of neurotransmitter and other bioactive amines, and represent important drug targets for the treatment of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. Inhibitors of MAO are established medications for the treatment of depression and Parkinson's disease, and may have future roles in other disease states such as the therapy of prostate cancer, cardiovascular disease and inflammatory diseases. Based on these considerations, the present study synthesizes a series of 22 pyrazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-4-one derivatives and evaluated them as potential inhibitors of human MAO-A and MAO-B. The results show that 8 derivatives inhibit MAO-A, and 3 derivatives inhibit MAO-B with IC(50) values in the submicromolar range (<1 microM). The most potent MAO-A inhibitor, N-[5-(acetyloxy)-2-(4-chlorophenyl)-4-oxo-4,5-dihydropyrazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-7-yl]acetamide (7c), exhibit an IC(50) value of 0.028 microM and displays 50-fold selectivity for MAO-A over MAO-B. The most potent MAO-B inhibitor, 2-(4-methylphenyl)-4-oxo-4,5-dihydropyrazolo[1,5-a]quinoxaline-7-carbonitrile (4f), exhibit an IC(50) value of 0.617 microM and displays 8-fold selectivity for MAO-B. This is the first report of MAO inhibition by pyrazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-4-one derivatives, and this study concludes that these compounds are suitable leads for the future development of MAO inhibitors, particularly of the MAO-A isoform.
