Adrenocorticotropic hormone receptor; Receptor for corticotropin (ACTH). This receptor is mediated by G proteins (G(s)) which activate adenylate cyclase (cAMP). Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD) and triple A syndrome belong to a rare group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) insensitivity. Unlike triple A syndrome which presents a range of clinical features, FGD is solely characterized by glucocorticoid deficiency. ACTH regulates steroid biosynthesis in the adrenal cortex by exerting its effects via the ACTH receptor (melanocortin- 2 receptor, MC2R). In FGD, mutations in the MC2R account for only approximately 25% of cases (FGD type 1). The inability to express a functional MC2R in non-adrenal cell lines had implied the presence of an adrenal specific accessory factor(s), essential for MC2R expression. More recently, this factor was identified as melanocortin receptor accessory protein (MRAP). Mutations in MRAP account for 20% of cases (FGD type 2). Like the receptor activity-modifying proteins (RAMPs) and receptor transporter proteins (RTPs), which are well-characterized accessory proteins for G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), MRAP is a small single transmembrane domain protein. MRAP is essential for the functional expression of the MC2R. About 55% of FGD cases have no identifiable gene defect, implying the involvement of additional genes. This chapter briefly describes the clinical and biochemical features of ACTH resistance syndromes. However, we will focus on the recent progress made towards understanding the molecular defect underlying these conditions, in particular the interaction of MC2R and MRAP.
Aberrant G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) expression is highly prevalent in cortisol-secreting primary bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PBMAH) and unilateral adenomas. The aberrant expression of diverse GPCRs and their ligands play an important role in the over-function of various endocrine tumours. Examples include aberrant expression of MC2R, 5-HT4R, AVPR1A, LHCGR, and GnRHR in primary aldosteronism; GCGR, LHCGR, and 5-HT4R in phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas; TRHR, GnRHR, GIPR, and GRP101 in pituitary somatotroph tumours; AVPR2, D2DR, and SSTR5 in pituitary corticotroph tumours; GLP1R, GIPR, and somatostatin receptors in medullary thyroid carcinoma; and SSTRs, GLP1R, and GIPR in other neuroendocrine tumours. The genetic mechanisms causing the ectopic expression of GIPR in cortisol-secreting PBMAHs and unilateral adenomas have been identified, but distinct mechanisms are implicated in other endocrine tumours. Development of functional imaging targeting aberrant GPCRs should be useful for identification and for specific therapies of this wide spectrum of tumours. The aim of this review is to show that the regulation of endocrine tumours by aberrant GPCR is not restricted to cortisol-secreting adrenal lesions, but also occurs in tumours of several other organs.
Immune privilege in the eye involves physical barriers, immune regulation and secreted proteins that together limit the damaging effects of intraocular immune responses and inflammation. The neuropeptide alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) normally circulates in the aqueous humour of the anterior chamber and the vitreous fluid, secreted by iris and ciliary epithelium, and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). alpha-MSH plays an important role in maintaining ocular immune privilege by helping the development of suppressor immune cells and by activating regulatory T-cells. alpha-MSH functions by binding to and activating melanocortin receptors (MC1R to MC5R) and receptor accessory proteins (MRAPs) that work in concert with antagonists, otherwise known as the melanocortin system. As well as controlling immune responses and inflammation, a broad range of biological functions is increasingly recognised to be orchestrated by the melanocortin system within ocular tissues. This includes maintaining corneal transparency and immune privilege by limiting corneal (lymph)angiogenesis, sustaining corneal epithelial integrity, protecting corneal endothelium and potentially enhancing corneal graft survival, regulating aqueous tear secretion with implications for dry eye disease, facilitating retinal homeostasis via maintaining blood-retinal barriers, providing neuroprotection in the retina, and controlling abnormal new vessel growth in the choroid and retina. The role of melanocortin signalling in uveal melanocyte melanogenesis however remains unclear compared to its established role in skin melanogenesis. The early application of a melanocortin agonist to downregulate systemic inflammation used adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-based repository cortisone injection (RCI), but adverse side effects including hypertension, edema, and weight gain, related to increased adrenal gland corticosteroid production, impacted clinical uptake. Compared to ACTH, melanocortin peptides that target MC1R, MC3R, MC4R and/or MC5R, but not adrenal gland MC2R, induce minimal corticosteroid production with fewer adverse systemic effects. Pharmacological advances in synthesising MCR-specific targeted peptides provide further opportunities for treating ocular (and systemic) inflammatory diseases. Following from these observations and a renewed clinical and pharmacological interest in the diverse biological roles of the melanocortin system, this review highlights the physiological and disease-related involvement of this system within human eye tissues. We also review the emerging benefits and versatility of melanocortin receptor targeted peptides as non-steroidal alternatives for inflammatory eye diseases such as non-infectious uveitis and dry eye disease, and translational applications in promoting ocular homeostasis, for example, in corneal transplantation and diabetic retinopathy.
Inherited adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) insensitivity syndromes comprise a group of rare diseases in which resistance to ACTH is either the sole feature or associated with other symptoms. This review focuses on two autosomal recessive disorders, familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD) (MIM*202200) and the triple A syndrome (MIM*231550), which have at least three different molecular aetiologies. In FGD, several missense mutations within the coding region of the ACTH receptor (MC2-R) have been identified in some, but not all patients, and segregation analyses and functional studies in a Y6 cell expression system confirmed that these mutations cause the disease. Some cases of FGD are not linked to the MC2-R locus on chromosome 18p11.2 suggesting genetic heterogeneity. The triple A syndrome is clinically characterized by the triad of adrenal insufficiency, achalasia and alacrima and a variety of neurological symptoms. After excluding several candidate genes we mapped this syndrome to a 6 cM interval on chromosome 12q13 with no indication for genetic heterogeneity. The identification of the gene(s) causing FGD without mutations in the MC2-R and causing the triple A syndrome may reveal novel aspects in cell signalling and neuroendocrinology.
The melanocortin receptors (MCRs) and their accessory proteins (MRAPs) are involved in regulation of a diverse range of endocrine pathways. Genetic variants of these components result in phenotypic variation and disease. The MC1R is expressed in skin and variants in the MC1R gene are associated with ginger hair color. The MC2R mediates the action of ACTH in the adrenal gland to stimulate glucocorticoid production and MC2R mutations result in familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD). MC3R and MC4R are involved in metabolic regulation and their gene variants are associated with severe pediatric obesity, whereas the function of MC5R remains to be fully elucidated. MRAPs have been shown to modulate the function of MCRs and genetic variants in MRAPs are associated with diseases including FGD type 2 and potentially early onset obesity. This review provides an insight into recent advances in MCRs and MRAPs physiology, focusing on the disorders associated with their dysfunction.
Recent advances in molecular genetics investigations of primary macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PMAH) have been providing new insights for the research on this issue. The cAMP-dependent pathway is physiologically triggered by ACTH and its receptor, MC2-R, in adrenocortical cells. Different mechanisms of this cascade may be altered in some functioning adrenal cortical disorders. Activating somatic mutations of the GNAS gene (known as gsp oncogene) which encodes the stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit (Gsalpha) have been found in a small number of adrenocortical secreting adenomas and rarely in PMAH. Lately, ARMC5 was linked to the cyclic AMP signaling pathway, which could be implicated in all of mechanisms of cortisol-secreting by macronodules adrenal hyperplasia and the molecular defects in: G protein aberrant receptors; MC2R; GNAS; PRKAR1A; PDE11A; PDE8B. Around 50 % of patient's relatives with PMAH and 30 % of apparently sporadic hypercortisolism carried ARMC5 mutations. Therefore, PMAH is genetically determined more frequently than previously believed. This review summarizes the most important molecular mechanisms involved in PMAH.
Human adrenal development is a complex and relatively poorly understood process. However, significant insight into some of the mechanisms regulating adrenal development and function is being obtained through the analysis of individuals and families with adrenal hypoplasia. Adrenal hypoplasia can occur: (1) secondary to defects in pituitary adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) synthesis, processing and release (secondary adrenal hypoplasia; e.g. HESX1, LHX4, SOX3, TPIT, pituitary POMC, PC1); (2) as part of several ACTH resistance syndromes (e.g. MC2R/ACTHR, MRAP, Alacrima, Achalasia, Addison disease), or as (3) a primary defect in the development of the adrenal gland itself (primary adrenal hypoplasia; e.g. DAX1/NR0B1 - dosage-sensitive sex reversal, adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on the X chromosome 1). Indeed, the X-linked form of primary adrenal hypoplasia due to deletions or mutations in the orphan nuclear receptor DAX1 occurs in around half of male infants presenting with a salt-losing adrenal crisis, where no obvious steroidogenic defect (e.g. 21-hydroxylase deficiency), metabolic abnormality (e.g. neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy) or physical cause (e.g. adrenal haemorrhage) is found. Establishing the underlying basis of adrenal failure can have important implications for investigating associated features, the likely long-term approach to treatment, and for counselling families about the risk of other children being affected.
The melanocortins are a group of small protein hormones derived by post-translational cleavage of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene product. The known melanocortin hormones include alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH), beta-MSH, gamma-MSH and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Five melanocortin receptors (MCIR through to MC5R) have been identified and most of these show tissue-specific expression patterns, as well as different binding affinities for each of the melanocortin hormones. The central melanocortin system consists of alpha-MSH, agouti-related protein (AGRP), MC3R and MC4R. AGRP and alpha-MSH are believed to be the natural antagonist and agonist respectively of MC3R and MC4R. This central melanocortin system is thought to play a fundamental role in the control of feeding and body weight. Knock-out mice models and genetic studies have pointed to the importance of the melanocortins in complex human pathways such as pigmentation, lipolysis, food intake, thermogenesis, sexual behaviour, memory and inflammatory response. Recently the melanocortins and their receptors have been the target for drug-based treatment of human physiological processes. MC3R and MC4R are likely targets for controlling body weight; MCIR may be used in the treatment of inflammation and MC2R for the treatment of glucocortical deficiency. A role for MCSR still remains unclear, but the evidence suggests an exocrine gland function.
The network regulating human adrenal development is complex. Studies of patients with adrenal insufficiency due to gene mutations established a central role for transcription factors GLI3, SF1 and DAX1 in the initial steps of adrenal formation. Adrenal differentiation seems to depend on adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation and signalling, including biosynthesis and action of POMC, PC1, TPIT, MC2R, MRAP and ALADIN, all of which cause adrenocortical hypoplasia when mutated in humans. Studies of knockout mice revealed many more factors involved in adrenal development; however, in contrast to rodents, in humans several of those factors had no adrenal phenotype when mutated (e.g. WT1, WNT4) or, alternatively, human mutations have not (yet) been identified. Tissue profiling of fetal and adult adrenals suggested 69 genes involved in adrenal development. Among them were genes coding for steroidogenic enzymes, transcription and growth factors, signalling molecules, regulators of cell cycle and angiogenesis, and extracellular matrix proteins; however, the exact role of most of them remains to be elucidated.
BACKGROUND: Somatic gene mutations that facilitate inappropriate intracellular calcium entrance have been identified in most aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs). Studies suggest that angiotensin II and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) augment aldosterone production from APAs. Little is known, however, regarding possible variations in response to hormonal stimuli between APAs with different aldosterone-driver mutations. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the transcript expression of type 1 angiotensin II receptors (AGTR1), ACTH receptors (MC2R), and melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein (MRAP) in APAs with known aldosterone-driver somatic mutations. METHODS: RNA was isolated from APAs with mutations in: KCNJ5 (n = 14), ATP1A1 (n = 14), CACNA1D (n = 14), and ATP2B3 (n = 5), and from normal adjacent adrenal tissue (n = 45). Transcript expression of MC2R, MRAP, AGTR1, aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2), 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1), and 11beta-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) were quantified using quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to beta-actin. RESULTS: Compared to adjacent normal adrenal tissue, APAs had higher transcript levels of CYP11B2 (2,216.4 [1,112.0, 2,813.5]-fold, p < 0.001), MC2R (2.88 [2.00, 4.52]-fold, p < 0.001), and AGTR1 (1.80 [1.02, 2.80]-fold, p < 0.001]), and lower transcript levels of MRAP, CYP17A1, and CYP11B1 (0.28-0.36, p < 0.001 for all). MC2R and CYP11B2 transcripts were lower in APAs with KCNJ5 vs. other mutations (p < 0.01 for both). MC2R expression correlated positively with that of AGTR1 in APAs harboring KCNJ5 and CACNA1D mutations, and with MRAP expression in APAs harboring ATPase mutations. CONCLUSIONS: While MC2R and AGTR1 are expressed in all APAs, differences were observed based on the underlying aldosterone-driver somatic mutations. In tandem, our findings suggest that APAs with ATPase-mutations are more responsive to ACTH than KCNJ5-mutated APAs.
The adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) receptor, known as the melanocortin-2 receptor (MC2R), plays a key role in regulating adrenocortical function. ACTH receptor is a subtype of the melanocortin receptor family which is a member of the G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily. ACTH receptor has unique characteristics among MCRs. alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, gamma-MSH and ACTH are agonists for MCRs but only ACTH is the agonist for ACTH receptor. In addition, the melanocortin receptor accessory protein (MRAP) is required for ACTH receptor expression at cell surface and function. In this review, we summarized the information available on the relationship between ACTH and ACTH receptor and provide the latest understanding of the molecular basis of the ACTH receptor responsible for ligand selectivity and function.
Hereditary adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) resistance syndromes encompass the genetically heterogeneous isolated or Familial Glucocorticoid Deficiency (FGD) and the distinct clinical entity known as Triple A syndrome. The molecular basis of adrenal resistance to ACTH includes defects in ligand binding, MC2R/MRAP receptor trafficking, cellular redox balance, cholesterol synthesis and sphingolipid metabolism. Biochemically, this manifests as ACTH excess in the setting of hypocortisolaemia. Triple A syndrome is an inherited condition involving a tetrad of adrenal insufficiency, achalasia, alacrima and neuropathy. FGD is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by the presence of isolated glucocorticoid deficiency, classically in the setting of preserved mineralocorticoid secretion. Primarily there are three established subtypes of the disease: FGD 1, FGD2 and FGD3 corresponding to mutations in the Melanocortin 2 receptor MC2R (25%), Melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein MRAP (20%), and Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein STAR (5-10%) respectively. Together, mutations in these 3 genes account for approximately half of cases. Whole exome sequencing in patients negative for MC2R, MRAP and STAR mutations, identified mutations in minichromosome maintenance 4 MCM4, nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase NNT, thioredoxin reductase 2 TXNRD2, cytochrome p450scc CYP11A1, and sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase SGPL1 accounting for a further 10% of FGD. These novel genes have linked replicative and oxidative stress and altered redox potential as a mechanism of adrenocortical damage. However, a genetic diagnosis is still unclear in about 40% of cases. We describe here an updated list of FGD genes and provide a description of relevant mouse models that, despite some being flawed, have been precious allies in the understanding of FGD pathobiology.
Research into the functions and mechanisms of action of the melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R) has been severely hampered by difficulties in expressing this gene in heterologous cells. This probably arises because of the need for a cofactor for cell surface expression. Using either the Y1 cell line that expresses endogenous MC2R or the Y6 cell line that expresses this putative expression factor, we have explored the mechanisms of desensitization and internalization after agonist stimulation. Protein kinase A dependence of desensitization has been demonstrated, although internalization is apparently independent of this kinase and dependent on a G protein receptor kinase. Possible underlying reasons for this paradox are discussed.
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are essential for the maintenance of homeostasis and enable the organism to prepare for, respond to and manage stress, either physical or emotional. Cortisol, the principal GC in humans, is synthesized in the adrenal cortex. It is released in the circulation in a pulsatile and circadian pattern. GC secretion is governed by hypothalamus and pituitary. The hypothalamus senses changes in the external and internal environment that may disrupt the homeostatic balance of the organism (i.e. stressors), and responds by releasing corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and arginine vasopressin (AVP) from parvocellular neurons projecting from the paraventricular nucleus to the median eminence. These neurohormones are released into the anterior pituitary where they act synergistically via specific receptors (CRH-R1 and V1B receptor, respectively) to trigger the release of the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the corticotrope cells into the systemic circulation. In turn, ACTH exerts its actions on the adrenal cortex via specific receptors, type 2 melanocortin receptors (MC2-R), to initiate the synthesis of cortisol, which is released immediately into the systemic circulation by diffusion. Hypothalamic CRH and AVP, pituitary ACTH and adrenal GCs comprise the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. In this brief review, the HPA axis and the various factors that regulate its function are described.
BACKGROUND: Suicide behavior (SB) has been highly associated with the response to stress and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. The aim of this study was to summarize the results obtained in genetic studies that analyzed the HPA axis-stress pathway and SB through a systematic review. METHODS: We performed an online search in PubMed, EBSCO, Web of Science, Scopus, and PsycoInfo databases up to May 2021. We followed the PRISMA guidelines for systematic reviews. We included case-control and expression studies that provided data on mRNA expression and single-nucleotide polymorphisms of genes associated with SB. RESULTS: A total of 21,926 individuals participated across 41 studies (not repeats); 34 studies provided data on single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 21,284 participants and 11 studies reported data on mRNA expression in 1034 participants. Ten genes were identified: FKBP5, CRH, CRHBP, CRHR1, CRHR2, NR3C1, NR3C2, SKA2, MC2R, and POMC. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that key stress pathway genes are significantly associated with SB and show potential as biomarkers for SB.
The melanocortin system integrates different agonists, competitive or inverse agonists, and receptors. Recent investigations have also discovered a specific system of melanocortin receptor accessory proteins (MRAPs) that are involved in the regulation of the functional expression of these receptors. MRAP1 mutations are responsible for type 2 familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD2), a rare autosomal disorder characterized by high plasma adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) levels but severe cortisol deficiency. ACTH binds melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R), a G protein-coupled receptor, in the adrenal gland to promote corticosteroid synthesis. In the absence of MRAP1, MC2R cannot translocate from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane and ACTH-induced signaling is extinguished. A second MRAP protein, called MRAP2, also modulates MC2R activity. MRAPs also interact with the other melanocortin receptors, adjusting their pharmacological properties. In this paper, we briefly review the MRAP system and its interaction with melanocortin receptors.
The processed products of the proopiomelanocortin gene (ACTH, alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, gamma-MSH, etc.) interact with five melanocortin receptors, the MC1R, MC2R, MC3R, MC4R, and MC5R to modulate and control many important biological functions crucial for good health both peripherally (as hormones) and centrally (as neurotransmitters). Pivotal biological functions include pigmentation, adrenal function, response to stress, fear/flight, energy homeostasis, feeding behavior, sexual function and motivation, pain, immune response, and many others, and are believed to be involved in many disease states including pigmentary disorders, adrenal disorders, obesity, anorexia, prolonged and neuropathic pain, inflammatory response, etc. The melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R) is found primarily in the brain and spinal cord and also in the periphery, and its biological functions are still not well understood. Here we review some of the biological functions attributed to the MC3R, and then examine in more detail efforts to design and synthesize ligands that are potent and selective for the MC3R, which might help resolve the many questions still remaining about its function. Though some progress has been made, there is still much to be done in this critical area.
The tetrapods are a diverse assemblage of vertebrates, and that diversity is reflected in the sequences of tetrapod melanocortin-2 receptors (MC2Rs). In this review, the features common to human (mammal), Gallus gallus (bird), Anolis carolinensis (reptile), and Xenopus tropicalis (amphibian) MC2Rs in terms of ligand selectivity, requirements for interaction with MRAP1, and the effects of alanine substitutions to three amino acid motifs in the ligand hACTH(1-24) are discussed. Analysis of the effects of alanine substitutions to the H(6)F(7)R(8)W(9) and the K(15)K(16)R(17)R(18)P(19) motifs of hACTH(1-24) indicated that activation of A. carolinensis MC2R and X. tropicalis MC2R was more adversely affected by alanine substitutions at these positions as compared to the response of human MC2R to these same analogs. Furthermore, single alanine substitutions in the G(10)K(11)P(12)V(13)G(14) motif of hACTH(1-24) had negative affects on activation of both A. carolinensis MC2R and X. tropicalis MC2R that were not observed for human MC2R. The implications of responses to the various analogs of hACTH(1-24) in terms of the mechanism for mediating the activation of these various tetrapod melanocortin-2 receptors are discussed.
