Melanocortin receptor 3; Receptor for MSH (alpha, beta and gamma) and ACTH. This receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylate cyclase. Required for expression of anticipatory patterns of activity and wakefulness during periods of limited nutrient availability and for the normal regulation of circadian clock activity in the brain.
Immune privilege in the eye involves physical barriers, immune regulation and secreted proteins that together limit the damaging effects of intraocular immune responses and inflammation. The neuropeptide alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) normally circulates in the aqueous humour of the anterior chamber and the vitreous fluid, secreted by iris and ciliary epithelium, and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). alpha-MSH plays an important role in maintaining ocular immune privilege by helping the development of suppressor immune cells and by activating regulatory T-cells. alpha-MSH functions by binding to and activating melanocortin receptors (MC1R to MC5R) and receptor accessory proteins (MRAPs) that work in concert with antagonists, otherwise known as the melanocortin system. As well as controlling immune responses and inflammation, a broad range of biological functions is increasingly recognised to be orchestrated by the melanocortin system within ocular tissues. This includes maintaining corneal transparency and immune privilege by limiting corneal (lymph)angiogenesis, sustaining corneal epithelial integrity, protecting corneal endothelium and potentially enhancing corneal graft survival, regulating aqueous tear secretion with implications for dry eye disease, facilitating retinal homeostasis via maintaining blood-retinal barriers, providing neuroprotection in the retina, and controlling abnormal new vessel growth in the choroid and retina. The role of melanocortin signalling in uveal melanocyte melanogenesis however remains unclear compared to its established role in skin melanogenesis. The early application of a melanocortin agonist to downregulate systemic inflammation used adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-based repository cortisone injection (RCI), but adverse side effects including hypertension, edema, and weight gain, related to increased adrenal gland corticosteroid production, impacted clinical uptake. Compared to ACTH, melanocortin peptides that target MC1R, MC3R, MC4R and/or MC5R, but not adrenal gland MC2R, induce minimal corticosteroid production with fewer adverse systemic effects. Pharmacological advances in synthesising MCR-specific targeted peptides provide further opportunities for treating ocular (and systemic) inflammatory diseases. Following from these observations and a renewed clinical and pharmacological interest in the diverse biological roles of the melanocortin system, this review highlights the physiological and disease-related involvement of this system within human eye tissues. We also review the emerging benefits and versatility of melanocortin receptor targeted peptides as non-steroidal alternatives for inflammatory eye diseases such as non-infectious uveitis and dry eye disease, and translational applications in promoting ocular homeostasis, for example, in corneal transplantation and diabetic retinopathy.
Melanocortin 3 receptor (MC3R) is a G-protein coupled receptor which has been defined mostly as a regulator of the appetite/hunger balance mechanisms to date. In addition to its function regarding the weight gain and appetite control mechanisms of MC3R, recent studies have shown that MC3R controls growth, puberty, and circadian rhythms as well. Despite the drastic effects of MC3R deficiency in humans and other mammals, its cellular mechanisms are still under investigation. In this review paper, we aimed to point out the importance of MC3R regulations in three main areas: 1) its impact on weight and appetite control, 2) its role in the control of growth, puberty, and the circadian rhythm, and, 3) its protein-protein interactions and cellular mechanisms.
The central melanocortin system is a well-established neuronal pathway involved in regulating energy metabolism. Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) neurons, agouti gene-related protein (AgRP) neurons, and their downstream cells expressing the melanocortin-3 (MC3R) and melanocortin-4 receptors (MC4R) are three key components of the central melanocortin pathway. This chapter focuses on the Pomc gene and the POMC neural system. First, I summarize the established role of this system in inhibiting food intake. Second, in light of new cutting-edge techniques, our understanding of how POMC neurons function to regulate energy homeostasis has been refined during the last few years. I describe some recent advances and discuss bidirectional effects of POMC neurons on feeding. Finally, the physiological significance beyond energy metabolism, in particular for reward and sex, is also discussed.
Pubertal timing varies considerably and is associated with later health outcomes. We performed multi-ancestry genetic analyses on ~800,000 women, identifying 1,080 signals for age at menarche. Collectively, these explained 11% of trait variance in an independent sample. Women at the top and bottom 1% of polygenic risk exhibited ~11 and ~14-fold higher risks of delayed and precocious puberty, respectively. We identified several genes harboring rare loss-of-function variants in ~200,000 women, including variants in ZNF483, which abolished the impact of polygenic risk. Variant-to-gene mapping approaches and mouse gonadotropin-releasing hormone neuron RNA sequencing implicated 665 genes, including an uncharacterized G-protein-coupled receptor, GPR83, which amplified the signaling of MC3R, a key nutritional sensor. Shared signals with menopause timing at genes involved in DNA damage response suggest that the ovarian reserve might signal centrally to trigger puberty. We also highlight body size-dependent and independent mechanisms that potentially link reproductive timing to later life disease.
The melanocortin receptors (MCRs) and their accessory proteins (MRAPs) are involved in regulation of a diverse range of endocrine pathways. Genetic variants of these components result in phenotypic variation and disease. The MC1R is expressed in skin and variants in the MC1R gene are associated with ginger hair color. The MC2R mediates the action of ACTH in the adrenal gland to stimulate glucocorticoid production and MC2R mutations result in familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD). MC3R and MC4R are involved in metabolic regulation and their gene variants are associated with severe pediatric obesity, whereas the function of MC5R remains to be fully elucidated. MRAPs have been shown to modulate the function of MCRs and genetic variants in MRAPs are associated with diseases including FGD type 2 and potentially early onset obesity. This review provides an insight into recent advances in MCRs and MRAPs physiology, focusing on the disorders associated with their dysfunction.
Patients with monogenic obesity display numerous medical features on top of hyperphagic obesity, but no study to date has provided an exhaustive description of their semiology. Two reviewers independently conducted a systematic review of MEDLINE, Embase, and Web of Science Core Collection databases from inception to January 2022 to identify studies that described symptoms of patients carrying pathogenic mutations in at least one of eight monogenic obesity genes (ADCY3, LEP, LEPR, MC3R, MC4R, MRAP2, PCSK1, and POMC). Of 5207 identified references, 269 were deemed eligible after title and abstract screening, full-text reading, and risk of bias and quality assessment. Data extraction included mutation spectrum and mode of inheritance, clinical presentation (e.g., anthropometry, energy intake and eating behaviors, digestive function, puberty and fertility, cognitive features, infectious diseases, morphological characteristics, chronic respiratory disease, and cardiovascular disease), biological characteristics (metabolic profile, endocrinology, hematology), radiological features, and treatments. The review provides an exhaustive description of mandatory, non-mandatory, and unique symptoms in heterozygous and homozygous carriers of mutation in eight monogenic obesity genes. This information is critical to help clinicians to orient genetic testing in subsets of patients with suspected monogenic obesity and provide actionable treatments (e.g., recombinant leptin and MC4R agonist).
The global prevalence of obesity highlights the importance of understanding on regulation of energy homeostasis. The central melanocortin system is an important intersection connecting the neural pathways controlling satiety and energy expenditure to regulate energy homeostasis by sensing and integrating the signals of external stimuli. In this system, neural melanocortin receptors (MCRs), melanocortin-3 and -4 receptors (MC3R and MC4R), play crucial roles in the regulation of energy homeostasis. Recently, multiple intracellular signaling pathways and biased signaling at neural MCRs have been discovered, providing new insights into neural MCR signaling. This review attempts to summarize biased signaling including biased receptor mutants (both naturally occurring and lab-generated) and biased ligands at neural MCRs, and to provide a better understanding of obesity pathogenesis and new therapeutic implications for obesity treatment.
Inactivating mutations in the melanocortin 3 receptor (Mc3r) have been described as causing obesity in mice, but the physiologic effects of MC3R mutations in humans have been less clear. Here we review the MC3R polymorphisms and mutations identified in humans, and the in vitro, murine, and human cohort studies examining their putative effects. Some, but not all, studies suggest that the common human MC3R variant T6K+V81I, as well as several other rare, function-altering mutations, are associated with greater adiposity and hyperleptinemia with altered energy partitioning. In vitro, the T6K+V81I variant appears to decrease MC3R expression and therefore cAMP generation in response to ligand binding. Knockin mouse studies confirm that the T6K+V81I variant increases feeding efficiency and the avidity with which adipocytes derived from bone or adipose tissue stem cells store triglycerides. Other MC3R mutations occur too infrequently in the human population to make definitive conclusions regarding their clinical effects. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Melanocortin Receptors - edited by Ya-Xiong Tao.
Rates of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and hypertension are increasing rapidly in urbanizing sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). While lifestyle factors drive the increases in T2D and hypertension prevalence, evidence across populations shows that genetic variation, which is driven by evolutionary forces including a natural selection that shaped the human genome, also plays a role. Here we report the evidence for the effect of selection in African genomes on mechanisms underlying T2D and hypertension, including energy metabolism, adipose tissue biology, insulin action and salt retention. Selection effects found for variants in genes PPARA and TCF7L2 may have enabled Africans to respond to nutritional challenges by altering carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. Likewise, African-ancestry-specific characteristics of adipose tissue biology (low visceral adipose tissue [VAT], high intermuscular adipose tissue and a strong association between VAT and adiponectin) may have been selected for in response to nutritional and infectious disease challenges in the African environment. Evidence for selection effects on insulin action, including insulin resistance and secretion, has been found for several genes including MPHOSPH9, TMEM127, ZRANB3 and MC3R. These effects may have been historically adaptive in critical conditions, such as famine and inflammation. A strong correlation between hypertension susceptibility variants and latitude supports the hypothesis of selection for salt retention mechanisms in warm, humid climates. Nevertheless, adaptive genomics studies in African populations are scarce. More work is needed, particularly genomics studies covering the wide diversity of African populations in SSA and Africans in diaspora, as well as further functional assessment of established risk loci.
The melanocortin (MC) system is composed of different peptides centrally produced by proopiomelanocortin neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus (N.Arc) and the medulla. These peptides act through five subtypes of melanocortin receptors (MCRs) that belong to the family of seven-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors that are coupled through Galpha(s) signaling pathways. MC3R and MC4R are the predominant MCR subtypes in the brain, and they are widely expressed in brain regions thought to modulate drug self-administration, including the nucleus accumbens, the hypothalamus, and the ventral tegmental area. The MC system is unique in terms of having an endogenous antagonist/inverse agonist, agouti-related protein (AgRP), also produces in the N.Arc and secreted in terminals expressing MCRs. There is a large body of research showing the role of the MC and AgRP systems in neurobiological responses to drugs of abuse, in particular, neurobiological responses to ethanol. In this chapter, we discuss the most recent evidence that supports the role of the MC/AgRP systems in modulating neurobiological responses to drugs of abuse, with a focus on ethanol consumption.
Incidence of overweight and obesity in dogs exceeds 30%, and several breeds are predisposed to this heritable phenotype. Rapid progress of canine genomics and advanced knowledge on the genetic background of human obesity bring a unique opportunity to perform such studies in dogs. Natural candidate genes for obesity are these encoding adipokines. Extended studies in humans indicated that polymorphisms of three of them, i.e. ADIPOQ, IL1 and TNF, are associated with predisposition to obesity. On the other hand, the use of genome-wide association studies revealed an association between human obesity and polymorphism of more than 50 other genes. Until now only few preliminary reports on polymorphism of canine FTO, MC4R, MC3R and PPARG genes have been published. Since the dog is a valuable model organism for human diseases one can foresee that such studies may also contribute to an in-depth understanding of human obesity pathogenesis.
The prevalence of obesity calls for novel therapeutic targets. The melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R) has been increasingly recognized as an important regulator of energy homeostasis and MC3R has been intensively analyzed in molecular genetic studies for obesity-related traits. Twenty-seven MC3R mutations and two common polymorphic variants have been identified so far in different cohorts. The mutant MC3Rs demonstrate multiple defects in functional analysis and can be cataloged into different classes according to receptor life cycle based classification system. Although the pathogenic role of MC3R in human obesity remains controversial, recent findings in the noncanonical signaling pathway of MC3R mutants have provided new insights. Potential therapeutic strategies for obesity related to MC3R mutations are highlighted.
The melanocortin peptides derived from pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) were originally understood in terms of the biological actions of alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) on pigmentation and adrenocorticotrophic hormone on adrenocortical glucocorticoid production. However, the discovery of POMC mRNA and melanocortin peptides in the CNS generated activities directed at understanding the direct biological actions of melanocortins in the brain. Ultimately, discovery of unique melanocortin receptors expressed in the CNS, the melanocortin-3 (MC3R) and melanocortin-4 (MC4R) receptors, led to the development of pharmacological tools and genetic models leading to the demonstration that the central melanocortin system plays a critical role in the regulation of energy homeostasis. Indeed, mutations in MC4R are now known to be the most common cause of early onset syndromic obesity, accounting for 2-5% of all cases. This review discusses the history of these discoveries, as well as the latest work attempting to understand the molecular and cellular basis of regulation of feeding and energy homeostasis by the predominant melanocortin peptide in the CNS, alpha-MSH.
Ablation of hypothalamic AgRP (Agouti-related protein) neurons is known to lead to fatal anorexia, whereas their activation stimulates voracious feeding and suppresses other motivational states including fear and anxiety. Despite the critical role of AgRP neurons in bidirectionally controlling feeding, there are currently no therapeutics available specifically targeting this circuitry. The melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R) is expressed in multiple brain regions and exhibits sexual dimorphism of expression in some of those regions in both mice and humans. MC3R deletion produced multiple forms of sexually dimorphic anorexia that resembled aspects of human anorexia nervosa. However, there was no sexual dimorphism in the expression of MC3R in AgRP neurons, 97% of which expressed MC3R. Chemogenetic manipulation of arcuate MC3R neurons and pharmacologic manipulation of MC3R each exerted potent bidirectional regulation over feeding behavior in male and female mice, whereas global ablation of MC3R-expressing cells produced fatal anorexia. Pharmacological effects of MC3R compounds on feeding were dependent on intact AgRP circuitry in the mice. Thus, the dominant effect of MC3R appears to be the regulation of the AgRP circuitry in both male and female mice, with sexually dimorphic sites playing specialized and subordinate roles in feeding behavior. Therefore, MC3R is a potential therapeutic target for disorders characterized by anorexia, as well as a potential target for weight loss therapeutics.
Mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) result in hyperphagia and obesity and are the most common cause of monogenic obesity in humans. Preclinical rodent studies have determined that the critical role of the MC4R in controlling feeding can be mapped in part to its expression in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (paraventricular nucleus [PVN]), where it regulates the activity of anorexic neural circuits. Despite the critical role of PVN MC4R neurons in regulating feeding, the in vivo neuronal activity of these cells remains largely unstudied, and the network activity of PVN MC4R neurons has not been determined. Here, we utilize in vivo single-cell endomicroscopic and mathematical approaches to determine the activity and network dynamics of PVN MC4R neurons in response to changes in energy state and pharmacological manipulation of central melanocortin receptors. We determine that PVN MC4R neurons exhibit both quantitative and qualitative changes in response to fasting and refeeding. Pharmacological stimulation of MC4R with the therapeutic MC4R agonist setmelanotide rapidly increases basal PVN MC4R activity, while stimulation of melanocortin 3 receptor (MC3R) inhibits PVN MC4R activity. Finally, we find that distinct PVN MC4R neuronal ensembles encode energy deficit and energy surfeit and that energy surfeit is associated with enhanced network connections within PVN MC4R neurons. These findings provide valuable insight into the neural dynamics underlying hunger and energy surfeit.
The brain controls energy homeostasis by regulating food intake through signaling within the melanocortin system. Whilst we understand the role of the hypothalamus within this system, how extra-hypothalamic brain regions are involved in controlling energy balance remains unclear. Here we show that the melanocortin 3 receptor (MC3R) is expressed in the paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus (PVT). We tested whether fasting would change the activity of MC3R neurons in this region by assessing the levels of c-Fos and pCREB as neuronal activity markers. We determined that overnight fasting causes a significant reduction in pCREB levels within PVT-MC3R neurons. We then questioned whether perturbation of MC3R signaling, during fasting, would result in altered refeeding. Using chemogenetic approaches, we show that modulation of MC3R activity, during the fasting period, does not impact body weight regain or total food intake in the refeeding period. However, we did observe significant differences in the pattern of feeding-related behavior. These findings suggest that the PVT is a region where MC3R neurons respond to energy deprivation and modulate refeeding behavior.
The melanocortin system is a primordial and critical system for survival, involved in a wide variety of physiological functions. It includes melanocortin receptors (MCRs) and melanotropin ligands (MCLs). MCRs are important drug targets that can regulate several key physiological processes. Extensive efforts have been made to develop peptide and peptidomimetics targeting melanocortin receptors including MC1R, MC3R, MC4R and MC5R. Most research is focused on developing potent and selective melanotropins. However, developing bioavailable melanotropins remains challenging. Areas covered: Herein, the authors summarize promising strategies for developing bioavailable MCLs by using cyclized N-methylated melanotropins, and using cyclotide and tetrapeptide as templates. They discuss their unique advantages in oral availability and targeting MCRs in the central nervous system or in peripheral tissues. Finally, they discuss the observed differences in thepharmacology of MCRs between in vitro and in vivo tests. Expert opinion: N-methylated cyclized melanotropins have great potential to become bio- available drugs targeting MCRs in the brain, while MCR-grafted cyclotides tend to target MCRs in peripheral tissue. A better understanding of the biased signaling process is a new challenge and opportunity for the future discovery of bioavailable MCLs.
