Melanocortin receptor 4; Receptor specific to the heptapeptide core common to adrenocorticotropic hormone and alpha-, beta-, and gamma-MSH. Plays a central role in energy homeostasis and somatic growth. This receptor is mediated by G proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase (cAMP).
Setmelanotide (IMCIVREE, Rhythm Pharmaceuticals) is a melanocortin-4 (MC4) receptor agonist developed for the treatment of obesity arising from proopiomelanocortin (POMC), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1), or leptin receptor (LEPR) deficiency. The drug has received its first approval in the USA for chronic weight management in patients 6 years and older with obesity caused by POMC, PCSK1 and LEPR deficiency and has been granted PRIority MEdicines (PRIME) designation by the European Medicines Agency for the treatment of obesity and the control of hunger associated with deficiency disorders of the MC4 receptor pathway. Setmelanotide is also being developed in other rare genetic disorders associated with obesity including Bardet-Biedl Syndrome, Alstrom Syndrome, POMC and other MC4R pathway heterozygous deficiency obesities, and POMC epigenetic disorders. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of setmelanotide leading to this first approval for obesity caused by POMC, PCSK1 and LEPR deficiency.
BACKGROUND: Obesity is caused by an imbalance between energy intake, i.e. eating and energy expenditure (EE). Severe obesity is more prevalent in women than men worldwide, and obesity pathophysiology and the resultant obesity-related disease risks differ in women and men. The underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. Pre-clinical and clinical research indicate that ovarian hormones may play a major role. OBJECTIVE AND RATIONALE: We systematically reviewed the clinical and pre-clinical literature on the effects of ovarian hormones on the physiology of adipose tissue (AT) and the regulation of AT mass by energy intake and EE. SEARCH METHODS: Articles in English indexed in PubMed through January 2016 were searched using keywords related to: (i) reproductive hormones, (ii) weight regulation and (iii) central nervous system. We sought to identify emerging research foci with clinical translational potential rather than to provide a comprehensive review. OUTCOMES: We find that estrogens play a leading role in the causes and consequences of female obesity. With respect to adiposity, estrogens synergize with AT genes to increase gluteofemoral subcutaneous AT mass and decrease central AT mass in reproductive-age women, which leads to protective cardiometabolic effects. Loss of estrogens after menopause, independent of aging, increases total AT mass and decreases lean body mass, so that there is little net effect on body weight. Menopause also partially reverses women's protective AT distribution. These effects can be counteracted by estrogen treatment. With respect to eating, increasing estrogen levels progressively decrease eating during the follicular and peri-ovulatory phases of the menstrual cycle. Progestin levels are associated with eating during the luteal phase, but there does not appear to be a causal relationship. Progestins may increase binge eating and eating stimulated by negative emotional states during the luteal phase. Pre-clinical research indicates that one mechanism for the pre-ovulatory decrease in eating is a central action of estrogens to increase the satiating potency of the gastrointestinal hormone cholecystokinin. Another mechanism involves a decrease in the preference for sweet foods during the follicular phase. Genetic defects in brain alpha-melanocycte-stimulating hormone-melanocortin receptor (melanocortin 4 receptor, MC4R) signaling lead to a syndrome of overeating and obesity that is particularly pronounced in women and in female animals. The syndrome appears around puberty in mice with genetic deletions of MC4R, suggesting a role of ovarian hormones. Emerging functional brain-imaging data indicates that fluctuations in ovarian hormones affect eating by influencing striatal dopaminergic processing of flavor hedonics and lateral prefrontal cortex processing of cognitive inhibitory controls of eating. There is a dearth of research on the neuroendocrine control of eating after menopause. There is also comparatively little research on the effects of ovarian hormones on EE, although changes in ovarian hormone levels during the menstrual cycle do affect resting EE. WIDER IMPLICATIONS: The markedly greater obesity burden in women makes understanding the diverse effects of ovarian hormones on eating, EE and body adiposity urgent research challenges. A variety of research modalities can be used to investigate these effects in women, and most of the mechanisms reviewed are accessible in animal models. Therefore, human and translational research on the roles of ovarian hormones in women's obesity and its causes should be intensified to gain further mechanistic insights that may ultimately be translated into novel anti-obesity therapies and thereby improve women's health.
Oestrogen depletion in rodents and humans leads to inactivity, fat accumulation and diabetes(1,2), underscoring the conserved metabolic benefits of oestrogen that inevitably decrease with age. In rodents, the preovulatory surge in 17beta-oestradiol (E2) temporarily increases energy expenditure to coordinate increased physical activity with peak sexual receptivity. Here we report that a subset of oestrogen-sensitive neurons in the ventrolateral ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMHvl)(3-7) projects to arousal centres in the hippocampus and hindbrain, and enables oestrogen to rebalance energy allocation in female mice. Surges in E2 increase melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) signalling in these VMHvl neurons by directly recruiting oestrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) to the Mc4r gene. Sedentary behaviour and obesity in oestrogen-depleted female mice were reversed after chemogenetic stimulation of VMHvl neurons expressing both MC4R and ERalpha. Similarly, a long-term increase in physical activity is observed after CRISPR-mediated activation of this node. These data extend the effect of MC4R signalling - the most common cause of monogenic human obesity(8) - beyond the regulation of food intake and rationalize reported sex differences in melanocortin signalling, including greater disease severity of MC4R insufficiency in women(9). This hormone-dependent node illuminates the power of oestrogen during the reproductive cycle in motivating behaviour and maintaining an active lifestyle in women.
The melanocortin 2 receptor accessory protein (MRAP) was originally discovered to be an essential co-receptor for the ACTH receptor/melanocortin 2 receptor, and it physically interacts with this receptor and is required for receptor trafficking and ligand binding. A related molecule, MRAP2, is mainly expressed in the CNS and appears to have a role with the melanocortin 4 receptor. Consistent with this is the observation that a massively obese phenotype develops when the Mrap2 gene is deleted in mice. However, the characteristics of this phenotype differ from those of Mc4r-deleted mice and suggest that an additional role, possibly resulting from an interaction with other receptors is possible. In support of this, a functional interaction with the prokineticin receptors was recently reported. Evidence for other receptor interactions and aspects of the tissue distribution of MRAP and MRAP2 gene expression may indicate that these accessory proteins have a wider role than with the melanocortin receptors alone.
The melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) is a G protein-coupled receptor whose disruption causes obesity. We functionally characterized 61 MC4R variants identified in 0.5 million people from UK Biobank and examined their associations with body mass index (BMI) and obesity-related cardiometabolic diseases. We found that the maximal efficacy of beta-arrestin recruitment to MC4R, rather than canonical Galpha(s)-mediated cyclic adenosine-monophosphate production, explained 88% of the variance in the association of MC4R variants with BMI. While most MC4R variants caused loss of function, a subset caused gain of function; these variants were associated with significantly lower BMI and lower odds of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and coronary artery disease. Protective associations were driven by MC4R variants exhibiting signaling bias toward beta-arrestin recruitment and increased mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway activation. Harnessing beta-arrestin-biased MC4R signaling may represent an effective strategy for weight loss and the treatment of obesity-related cardiometabolic diseases.
OBJECTIVE: Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC)-derived peptides act on neurons expressing the Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) to reduce body weight. Setmelanotide is a highly potent MC4R agonist that leads to weight loss in diet-induced obese animals and in obese individuals with complete POMC deficiency. While POMC deficiency is very rare, 1-5% of severely obese individuals harbor heterozygous mutations in MC4R. We sought to assess the efficacy of Setmelanotide in human MC4R deficiency. METHODS: We studied the effects of Setmelanotide on mutant MC4Rs in cells and the weight loss response to Setmelanotide administration in rodent studies and a human clinical trial. We annotated the functional status of 369 published MC4R variants. RESULTS: In cells, we showed that Setmelanotide is significantly more potent at MC4R than the endogenous ligand alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone and can disproportionally rescue signaling by a subset of severely impaired MC4R mutants. Wild-type rodents appear more sensitive to Setmelanotide when compared to MC4R heterozygous deficient mice, while MC4R knockout mice fail to respond. In a 28-day Phase 1b clinical trial, Setmelanotide led to weight loss in obese MC4R variant carriers. Patients with POMC defects upstream of MC4R show significantly more weight loss with Setmelanotide than MC4R deficient patients or obese controls. CONCLUSIONS: Setmelanotide led to weight loss in obese people with MC4R deficiency; however, further studies are justified to establish whether Setmelanotide can elicit clinically meaningful weight loss in a subset of the MC4R deficient obese population.
BACKGROUND: Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) deficiency is the commonest monogenic form of obesity. However, the clinical spectrum and mode of inheritance have not been defined, pathophysiological mechanisms leading to obesity are poorly understood, and there is little information regarding genotype-phenotype correlations. METHODS: We determined the nucleotide sequence of the MC4R gene in 500 probands with severe childhood obesity. Family studies were undertaken to examine cosegregation of identified mutations with obesity. Subjects with MC4R deficiency underwent metabolic and endocrine evaluation; the results were correlated with the signaling properties of mutant receptors. RESULTS: Twenty-nine probands (5.8 percent) had mutations in MC4R; 23 were heterozygous, and 6 were homozygous. Mutation carriers had severe obesity, increased lean mass, increased linear growth, hyperphagia, and severe hyperinsulinemia; homozygotes were more severely affected than heterozygotes. Subjects with mutations retaining residual signaling capacity had a less severe phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in MC4R result in a distinct obesity syndrome that is inherited in a codominant manner. Mutations leading to complete loss of function are associated with a more severe phenotype. The correlation between the signaling properties of these mutant receptors and energy intake emphasizes the key role of this receptor in the control of eating behavior in humans.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to present current information on genes underlying severe obesity, with the main emphasis on the three genes LEP, LEPR and MC4R. RECENT FINDINGS: There is a substantial amount of evidence that variants in at least ten different genes are the cause of severe monogenic obesity. The majority of these are involved in the leptin-melanocortin signalling pathway. Due to the frequency of some of the identified variants, it is clear that monogenic variants also make a significant contribution to common obesity. The artificial distinction between rare monogenic obesity and common polygenic obesity is now obsolete with the identification of MC4R variants of strong effect in the general population.
Obesity has emerged as a critical and urgent health burden during the current global pandemic. Among multiple genetic causes, melanocortin receptor-4 (MC4R), involved in food intake and energy metabolism regulation through various signaling pathways, has been reported to be the lead genetic factor in severe and early onset obesity and hyperphagia disorders. Most previous studies have illustrated the roles of MC4R signaling in energy intake versus expenditure in the central system, while some evidence indicates that MC4R is also expressed in peripheral systems, such as the gut and endocrine organs. However, its physiopathological function remains poorly defined. This review aims to depict the central and peripheral roles of MC4R in energy metabolism and endocrine hormone homeostasis, the diversity of phenotypes, biased downstream signaling caused by distinct MC4R mutations, and current drug development targeting the receptor.
BACKGROUND: The global rise in the prevalence of obesity and associated comorbidities such as type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer represents a major public health concern. CONTENT: Studies in rodents with the use of global and targeted gene disruption, and mapping of neurocircuitry by using optogenetics and designer receptors exclusively activated by designer drugs (DREADDs) have greatly advanced our understanding of the neural control of body weight. In conjunction with analytical chemistry techniques involving classical immunoassays and mass spectrometry, many neuropeptides that are key to energy homeostasis have been identified. The actions of neuropeptides are diverse, from paracrine modulation of local neurotransmission to hormonal control of distant target organs. SUMMARY: Multiple hormones, such as the adipocyte-derived leptin, insulin, and gut hormones, and nutrients signal peripheral energy state to the central nervous system. Neurons in distinct areas of the hypothalamus and brainstem integrate and translate this information by both direct inhibitory/excitatory projections and anorexigenic or orexigenic neuropeptides into actions on food intake and energy expenditure. The importance of these neuropeptides in human energy balance is most powerfully illustrated by genetic forms of obesity that involve neuropeptides such as melanocortin-4-receptor (MC4R) deficiency. Drugs that mimic the actions of neuropeptides are being tested for the treatment of obesity. Successful therapeutic strategies in obesity will require in-depth knowledge of the neuronal circuits they are working in, the downstream targets, and potential compensatory mechanisms.
Neural circuits in the hypothalamus play a key role in the regulation of human energy homeostasis. A critical circuit involves leptin-responsive neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus (the infundibular nucleus in humans) expressing the appetite-suppressing neuropeptide proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and the appetite-stimulating Agouti-related peptide. In the fed state, the POMC-derived melanocortin peptide alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone stimulates melanocortin-4 receptors (MC4Rs) expressed on second-order neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN). Agonism of MC4R leads to reduced food intake and increased energy expenditure. Disruption of this hypothalamic circuit by inherited mutations in the genes encoding leptin, the leptin receptor, POMC, and MC4R can lead to severe obesity in humans. The characterization of these and closely related genetic obesity syndromes has informed our understanding of the neural pathways by which leptin regulates energy balance, neuroendocrine function, and the autonomic nervous system. A broader understanding of these neural and molecular mechanisms has paved the way for effective mechanism-based therapies for patients whose severe obesity is driven by disruption of these pathways.
The melanocortin receptors (MCRs) and their accessory proteins (MRAPs) are involved in regulation of a diverse range of endocrine pathways. Genetic variants of these components result in phenotypic variation and disease. The MC1R is expressed in skin and variants in the MC1R gene are associated with ginger hair color. The MC2R mediates the action of ACTH in the adrenal gland to stimulate glucocorticoid production and MC2R mutations result in familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD). MC3R and MC4R are involved in metabolic regulation and their gene variants are associated with severe pediatric obesity, whereas the function of MC5R remains to be fully elucidated. MRAPs have been shown to modulate the function of MCRs and genetic variants in MRAPs are associated with diseases including FGD type 2 and potentially early onset obesity. This review provides an insight into recent advances in MCRs and MRAPs physiology, focusing on the disorders associated with their dysfunction.
Obesity is a global and growing problem. The detrimental health consequences of obesity are significant and include co-morbidities such as diabetes, cancer and coronary heart disease. The marked rise in obesity observed over the last three decades suggests that behavioural and environmental factors underpin the chronic mismatch between energy intake and energy expenditure. However, not all individuals become obese, suggesting that there is considerable variation in responsiveness to 'obesogenic' environments. Some individuals defend easily against a propensity to accumulate fat mass and become overweight whilst others are predisposed to gain weight, possibly as a function of genotype. The genetic contribution to obesity is well established. Common obesity is polygenic, involving complex gene-gene and gene-environment interactions, and it is these interactions that produce the multi-factorial obese phenotypes. Candidate gene variants for polygenic obesity appear to disrupt pathways involved in the regulation of energy intake and expenditure and include adrenergic receptors, uncoupling proteins, PPARG, POMC, MC4R and a set of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FTO locus. Notably, the FTO gene is the most robust gene for common obesity characterised to date, and recent data shows that the FTO locus seems to confer risk of obesity through increasing energy intake and reduced satiety. Gene variants involved in pathways regulating addiction and reward behaviours may also play a role in predisposition to obesity. Understanding the routes through which the genotype is expressed will ultimately provide opportunities for developing strategies to intervene, as the interaction between genotype and environment is potentially modifiable through behaviour change.
The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) plays a vital role in regulating energy homeostasis. Mutations in the MC4R cause early-onset severe obesity. The majority of loss of function MC4R mutants are retained intracellularly, many of which are not terminally misfolded and can be stabilized and targeted to the plasma membrane by different chaperones. Some of the mutants might be functional once coaxed to the cell surface. Molecular chaperones and chemical chaperones correct the misfolding of some mutant MC4Rs. However, their therapeutic application is very limited due to their non-specific mechanism of action and, for chemical chaperone, high dosage needed to be effective. Several pharmacological chaperones have been identified for the MC4R and Ipsen 5i and Ipsen 17 are the most potent and efficacious. Here we provide a comprehensive review on how different approaches have been applied to rescue misfolded MC4R mutants. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Melanocortin Receptors - edited by Ya-Xiong Tao.
Nearly 90 clinicians and researchers from around the world attended the first IMPROVE 2022 International Meeting on Pathway-Related Obesity. Delegates attended in person or online from across Europe, Argentina and Israel to hear the latest scientific and clinical developments in hyperphagia and severe, early-onset obesity, and set out a vision of excellence for the future for improving the diagnosis, treatment, and care of patients with melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) pathway-related obesity. The meeting co-chair Peter Kuhnen, Charite Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Germany, indicated that change was needed with the rapidly increasing prevalence of obesity and the associated complications to improve the understanding of the underlying mechanisms and acknowledge that monogenic forms of obesity can play an important role, providing insights that can be applied to a wider group of patients with obesity. World-leading experts presented the latest research and led discussions on the underlying science of obesity, diagnosis (including clinical and genetic approaches such as the role of defective MC4R signalling), and emerging clinical data and research with targeted pharmacological approaches. The aim of the meeting was to agree on the questions that needed to be addressed in future research and to ensure that optimised diagnostic work-up was used with new genetic testing tools becoming available. This should aid the planning of new evidence-based treatment strategies for the future, as explained by co-chair Martin Wabitsch, Ulm University Medical Center, Germany.
The dysfunction of melanocortin signaling has been associated with obesity, given the important role in the regulation of energy homeostasis, food intake, satiety and body weight. In the hypothalamus, the melanocortin-3 receptor (MC3R) and melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) contribute to the stability of these processes, but MC3R and MC4R are also localized in the mesolimbic dopamine system, the region that responds to the reinforcing properties of highly palatable food (HPF) and where these two receptors seem to affect food reward and motivation. Loss of function of the MC4R, resulting from genetic mutations, leads to overeating in humans, but to date, a clear understanding of the underlying mechanisms and behaviors that promote overconsumption of caloric foods remains unknown. Moreover, the MC4R demonstrated to be a crucial modulator of the stress response, factor that is known to be strictly related to binge eating behavior. In this review, we will explore the preclinical and clinical studies, and the controversies regarding the involvement of melanocortin system in altered eating patterns, especially binge eating behavior, food reward and motivation.
Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), the most important monogenetic cause of human metabolic disorders, has been of great interest to many researchers in the field of energy homeostasis and public health. Because MC4R is a vital pharmaceutical target for maintaining controllable appetite and body weight for professional athletes, previous studies have mainly focused on the central, rather than the peripheral, roles of MC4R. Thus, the local expression of MC4R and its behavioral regulation remain unclear. In an attempt to shed light on different directions for future studies of MC4R signaling, we review a series of recent and important studies exploring the peripheral functions of MC4R and the direct physiological interaction between peripheral organs and central MC4R neurons in this article.
A primary cilium, a hair-like protrusion of the plasma membrane, is a pivotal organelle for sensing external environmental signals and transducing intracellular signaling. An interesting linkage between cilia and obesity has been revealed by studies of the human genetic ciliopathies Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Alstrom syndrome, in which obesity is a principal manifestation. Mouse models of cell type-specific cilia dysgenesis have subsequently demonstrated that ciliary defects restricted to specific hypothalamic neurons are sufficient to induce obesity and hyperphagia. A potential mechanism underlying hypothalamic neuron cilia-related obesity is impaired ciliary localization of G protein-coupled receptors involved in the regulation of appetite and energy metabolism. A well-studied example of this is melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), mutations in which are the most common cause of human monogenic obesity. In the paraventricular hypothalamus neurons, a blockade of ciliary trafficking of MC4R as well as its downstream ciliary signaling leads to hyperphagia and weight gain. Another potential mechanism is reduced leptin signaling in hypothalamic neurons with defective cilia. Leptin receptors traffic to the periciliary area upon leptin stimulation. Moreover, defects in cilia formation hamper leptin signaling and actions in both developing and differentiated hypothalamic neurons. The list of obesity-linked ciliary proteins is expending and this supports a tight association between cilia and obesity. This article provides a brief review on the mechanism of how ciliary defects in hypothalamic neurons facilitate obesity.
CONTEXT: The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) plays an important role in body weight regulation. Pathogenic MC4R variants are the most common cause of monogenic obesity. OBJECTIVE: We have identified 17 MC4R variants in adult and pediatric patients with obesity. Here we aimed to functionally characterize these variants by analyzing 4 different aspects of MC4R signaling. In addition, we aimed to analyze the effect of setmelanotide, a potent MC4R agonist, on these MC4R variants. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell surface expression and alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH)- or setmelanotide-induced cAMP response, beta-arrestin-2 recruitment, and ERK activation were measured in cells expressing either wild type or variant MC4R. RESULTS: We found a large heterogeneity in the function of these variants. We identified variants with a loss of response for all studied MC4R signaling, variants with no cAMP accumulation or ERK activation but normal beta-arrestin-2 recruitment, and variants with normal cAMP accumulation and ERK activation but decreased beta-arrestin-2 recruitment, indicating disrupted desensitization and signaling mechanisms. Setmelanotide displayed a greater potency and similar efficacy as alpha-MSH and induced significantly increased maximal cAMP responses of several variants compared to alpha-MSH. Despite the heterogeneity in functional response, there was no apparent difference in the obesity phenotype in our patients. CONCLUSION: We show that these obesity-associated MC4R variants affect MC4R signaling differently yet lead to a comparable clinical phenotype. Our results demonstrate the clinical importance of assessing the effect of MC4R variants on a range of molecular signaling mechanisms to determine their association with obesity, which may aid in improving personalized treatment.
The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) is a class A G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), essential for regulation of appetite and metabolism. Pathogenic inactivating MC4R mutations are the most frequent cause of monogenic obesity, a growing medical and socioeconomic problem worldwide. The MC4R mediates either ligand-independent or ligand-dependent signaling. Agonists such as alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) induce anorexigenic effects, in contrast to the endogenous inverse agonist agouti-related peptide (AgRP), which causes orexigenic effects by suppressing high basal signaling activity. Agonist action triggers the binding of different subtypes of G proteins and arrestins, leading to concomitant induction of diverse intracellular signaling cascades. An increasing number of experimental studies have unraveled molecular properties and mechanisms of MC4R signal transduction related to physiological and pathophysiological aspects. In addition, the MC4R crystal structure was recently determined at 2.75 A resolution in an inactive state bound with a peptide antagonist. Underpinned by structural homology models of MC4R complexes simulating a presumably active-state conformation compared to the structure of the inactive state, we here briefly summarize the current understanding and key players involved in the MC4R switching process between different activity states. Finally, these perspectives highlight the complexity and plasticity in MC4R signaling regulation and identify gaps in our current knowledge.
