Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2; Receptor for melanin-concentrating hormone, coupled to G proteins that activate phosphoinositide hydrolysis.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a small cyclic peptide expressed in all mammals, mainly in the hypothalamus. MCH acts as a robust integrator of several physiological functions and has crucial roles in the regulation of sleep-wake rhythms, feeding behaviour and metabolism. MCH signalling has a very broad endocrine context and is involved in physiological functions and emotional states associated with metabolism, such as reproduction, anxiety, depression, sleep and circadian rhythms. MCH mediates its functions through two receptors (MCHR1 and MCHR2), of which only MCHR1 is common to all mammals. Owing to the wide variety of MCH downstream signalling pathways, MCHR1 agonists and antagonists have great potential as tools for the directed management of energy balance disorders and associated metabolic complications, and translational strategies using these compounds hold promise for the development of novel treatments for obesity. This Review provides an overview of the numerous roles of MCH in energy and glucose homeostasis, as well as in regulation of the mesolimbic dopaminergic circuits that encode the hedonic component of food intake.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), a neuropeptide expressed in central and peripheral nervous systems, plays an important role in the control of feeding behaviors and energy metabolism. An orphan G protein-coupled receptor (SLC-1/GPR24) has recently been identified as a receptor for MCH (MCHR1). We report here the identification and characterization of a G protein-coupled receptor as the MCH receptor subtype 2 (MCHR2). MCHR2 has higher protein sequence homology to MCHR1 than any other G protein-coupled receptor. The expression of MCHR2 has been detected in many regions of the brain. In contrast to MCHR1, which is intronless in the coding region and is located at the chromosomal locus 22q13.3, the MCHR2 gene has multiple exons and is mapped to locus 6q21. MCHR2 is specifically activated by nanomolar concentrations of MCH, binds to MCH with high affinity, and signals through Gq protein. This discovery is important for a full understanding of MCH biology and the development of potential therapeutics for diseases involving MCH, including obesity.
The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19 aminoacid peptide found in mammals predominantly in neurons located in the lateral hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic area. The biological function of MCH is mediated by two G-protein-coupled receptors known as MCHR1 and MCHR2, although the latter is expressed only in carnivores, primates and man. The MCHR1 couples to Gi, Gq and Go proteins, with Gi leading to the inhibition of both excitatory and inhibitory synaptic events. Within the central nervous system (CNS) MCH participates in a number of functions including sleep-wake behavior. In this respect, MCHergic neurons project widely throughout the CNS to brain regions involved in the regulation of behavioral states. MCHergic neurons are silent during wakefulness (W), increase their firing during slow wave sleep (SWS) and still more during REM sleep (REMS). Studies in knockout mice for MCH (MCH(-/-)) have shown a reduction in SWS and an increase of W during the light and the dark phase of the light-dark cycle. Moreover, in response to food deprivation a marked reduction in REMS time was observed in these animals. Conflicting effects on sleep variables have been reported in MCHR1(-/-) mice by different authors. The i.c.v. administration of MCH increases REMS and SWS in the rat. In addition, an enhancement of REMS has been described following the microinjection of the neuropeptide into the nucleus pontis oralis of the cat, while its infusion into the dorsal raphe nucleus (DR) and the basal forebrain (horizontal limb of the diagonal band of Broca) is followed by an increase of REMS and a reduction of W in the rat. Immunoneutralization of MCH in the DR augmented W and suppressed REMS in the rat, as did the s.c. injection of selective MCHR1 antagonists. The robust REMS-inducing effect of MCH is likely related to the deactivation of monoaminergic, orexinergic, glutamatergic, cholinergic (W-on) and GABAergic (REM-off) neurons involved in the generation of W and the inhibition of REMS. On the basis of preclinical studies, it can be proposed that selective MCHR1 receptor agonists could constitute potential therapeutic modalities in the arsenal of insomnia pharmacotherapy. Due to the lack of adequate animal models, the role of the MCHR2 on sleep is still unknown.
PURPOSE: The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) has become an important pharmacological target, since it may be involved in various diseases, such as diabetes, insulin resistance, and obesity. Hence, a suitable positron emission tomography radiotracer for the in vivo assessment of the MCHR1 pharmacology is imperative. The current paper contrasts the extensive in vitro, in vivo, and ex vivo assessments of the radiotracers [(18)F]FE@SNAP and [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and provides comprehensive information about their biological and physicochemical properties. Furthermore, it examines their suitability for first-in-man imaging studies. PROCEDURES: Kinetic real-time cell-binding studies with [(18)F]FE@SNAP and [(11)C]SNAP-7941 were conducted on adherent Chines hamster ovary (CHO-K1) cells stably expressing the human MCHR1 and MCHR2. Small animal imaging studies on mice and rats were performed under displacement and baseline conditions, as well as after pretreatment with the P-glycoprotein/breast cancer resistant protein inhibitor tariquidar. After the imaging studies, detailed analyses of the ex vivo biodistribution were performed. Ex vivo metabolism was determined in rat blood and brain and analyzed at various time points using a quantitative radio-HPLC assay. RESULTS: [(11)C]SNAP-7941 demonstrates high uptake on CHO-K1-hMCHR1 cells, whereas no uptake was detected for the CHO-K1-hMCHR2 cells. In contrast, [(18)F]FE@SNAP evinced binding to CHO-K1-hMCHR1 and CHO-K1-hMCHR2 cells. Imaging studies with [(18)F]FE@SNAP and [(11)C]SNAP-7941 showed an increased brain uptake after tariquidar pretreatment in mice, as well as in rats, and exhibited a significant difference between the time-activity curves of the baseline and blocking groups. Biodistribution of both tracers demonstrated a decreased uptake after displacement. [(11)C]SNAP-7941 revealed a high metabolic stability in rats, whereas [(18)F]FE@SNAP was rapidly metabolized. CONCLUSIONS: Both radiotracers demonstrate appropriate imaging properties for the MCHR1. However, the pronounced metabolic stability as well as superior selectivity and affinity of [(11)C]SNAP-7941 underlines the decisive superiority over [(18)F]FE@SNAP.
Obesity development during psychotropic treatments represents a major health issue in psychiatry. Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCHR2) is a central receptor involved in energy homeostasis. MCHR2 shares its promoter region with MCHR2-AS1, a long antisense non-coding RNA. The aim of this study was to determine whether tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) of MCHR2 and MCHR2-AS1 are associated with the body mass index (BMI) in the psychiatric and in the general population. The influence of MCHR2 and MCHR2-AS1 tSNPs on BMI was firstly investigated in a discovery psychiatric sample (n1 = 474). Positive results were tested for replication in two other psychiatric samples (n2 = 164, n3 = 178) and in two population-based samples (CoLaus, n4 = 5409; GIANT, n5 = 113809). In the discovery sample, TT carriers of rs7754794C>T had 1.08 kg/m2 (p = 0.04) lower BMI as compared to C-allele carriers. This observation was replicated in an independent psychiatric sample (-2.18 kg/m2; p = 0.009). The association of rs7754794C>T and BMI seemed stronger in subjects younger than 45 years (median of age). In the population-based sample, a moderate association was observed (-0.17 kg/m2; p = 0.02) among younger individuals (<45y). Interestingly, this association was totally driven by patients meeting lifetime criteria for atypical depression, i.e. major depressive episodes characterized by symptoms such as an increased appetite. Indeed, patients with atypical depression carrying rs7754794-TT had 1.17 kg/m2 (p = 0.04) lower BMI values as compared to C-allele carriers, the effect being stronger in younger individuals (-2.50 kg/m2; p = 0.03; interaction between rs7754794 and age: p-value = 0.08). This study provides new insights on the possible influence of MCHR2 and/or MCHR2-AS1 on obesity in psychiatric patients and on the pathophysiology of atypical depression.
The neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is expressed in central and peripheral tissues where it participates in the complex network regulating energy homeostasis as well as in other physiologically important functions. Two MCH receptor subtypes, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, have been cloned which signal through activation of Gi/o/q proteins and hence regulate different intracellular signals, such as inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of IP3 production, increase in intracellular free Ca2+ and/or activation of MAP kinases. Most of the data were obtained with cell systems heterologously expressing either of the MCH receptors. Fewer reports exist on studies with cell lines which endogenously express MCH receptors. Here, we describe human and other mammalian cell lines with which MCH receptor activation can be studied under "natural" conditions and we summarize the characteristics and signaling pathways of the MCH receptors in the different cell systems.
OBJECTIVES: The high morbidity and mortality of colorectal cancer (CRC) have posed great threats to human health. Circular RNA (circRNA) and microRNA (miRNA), acting as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs), have been found to play vital roles in carcinogenesis. This paper aims to construct a circRNA/miRNA/mRNA regulatory network so as to explore the molecular mechanism of CRC. METHODS: The sequencing data of circRNA from CRC were obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The differential circRNA was screened and its structure was identified by Cancer-specific CircRNA Database (CSCD); the sequencing data of miRNA and messenger RNA (mRNAs) were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and the differentially expressed genes were screened; the corresponding miRNA of differential circRNAs were predicted by CircInteractome database; DIANA, Miranda, PicTar, and TargetScan databases were used to predict the target genes of different miRNAs; the target genes from Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were enriched by R language; String database combined with Cytoscape 3.7.2 software was used to construct protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and hub genes were screened; the expressions of mRNAs in the Top10 hub genes were verified in CRC. The network diagrams of circRNAs/miRNAs/mRNAs and circRNAs/miRNAs/Top10 hub mRNAs were constructed by Cytoscape3.7.2. Real-time PCR was used to examine the expression levels of hsa_circRNA_0065173, hsa-mir-450b, hsa-mir-582, adenylate cyclase 5 (ADCY5), muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M2 (CHRM2), cannabinoid receptor 1 (CNR1), and lysophosphatidic acid receptor 1 (LPAR1) in the CRC tissues and the adjacent normal tissues. RESULTS: A total of 14 differential circRNAs were identified, and 8 were found in CSCD; 34 miRNAs targeted by circRNAs were obtained. The PPI network was constructed, and the Top10 hub genes were identified, which were CHRM2, melanin concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCHR2), G-protein gamma 3 subunit (GNG3), neuropeptide Y receptor Y1 (NPY1R), CNR1, LPAR1, ADCY5, adenylate cyclase 2 (ADCY2), gamma 7 (GNG7) and chemokine 12 (CXCL12), respectively. The expressions of Top 10 hub genes were also verified, and the results showed that the Top 10 hub genes were down-regulated in CRC; the constructed network diagram showed that hsa_circRNA_0065173 may regulate ADCY5, CHRM2, and Hsa-mir-450b by modulating hsa-mir-450b and hsa-mir-582. CNR1 and LPAR1 genes might serve as potentially relevant targets for the treatment of CRC. Real-time PCR results showed that the expression levels of hsa_circRNA_0065173, ADCY5, CHRM2, CNR1 and LPAR1 in the CRC tissues were significantly reduced compared with the adjacent normal tissues (all P<0.05); the expression levels of hsa-mir-450b and hsa-miR-582 were significantly increased (both P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In this study, a potential circRNAs/miRNAs/mRNAs network is successfully constructed, which provides a new insight for CRC development mechanism through ceRNA mediated by circRNAs.
Alopecia areata (AA) is a common hair loss disorder of autoimmune aetiology, which often results in pronounced psychological distress. Understanding of the pathophysiology of AA is increasing, due in part to recent genetic findings implicating common variants at several genetic loci. To date, no study has investigated the contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) to AA, a prominent class of genomic variants involved in other autoimmune disorders. Here, we report a genomewide- and a candidate gene-focused CNV analysis performed in a cohort of 585 patients with AA and 1340 controls of Central European origin. A nominally significant association with AA was found for CNVs in the following five chromosomal regions: 4q35.2, 6q16.3, 9p23, 16p12.1 and 20p12.1. The most promising finding was a 342.5-kb associated region in 6q16.3 (duplications in 4/585 patients; 0/1340 controls). The duplications spanned the genes MCHR2 and MCHR2-AS1, implicated in melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) signalling. These genes have not been implicated in previous studies of AA pathogenesis. However, previous research has shown that MCHR2 affects the scale colour of barfin flounder fish via the induction of melanin aggregation. AA preferentially affects pigmented hairs, and the hair of patients with AA frequently shows a change in colour when it regrows following an acute episode of AA. This might indicate a relationship between AA, pigmentation and MCH signalling. In conclusion, the present results provide suggestive evidence for the involvement of duplications in MCHR2 in AA pathogenesis.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is an orexigenic neuropeptide that is a ligand for two subtypes of MCH receptors, MCHR1 and MCHR2. MCHR1 is universally expressed in mammals ranging from rodents to humans, but the expression of MCHR2 is substantially restricted. In mammals, MCHR2 has been defined in primates as well as other species such as cats and dogs but is not seen in rodents. Although the role of MCHR1 in mediating the actions of MCH on energy balance is clearly defined using mouse models, the role of MCHR2 is harder to characterize because of its limited expression. To determine any potential role of MCHR2 in energy balance, we generated a transgenic MCHR1R2 mouse model, where human MCHR2 is coexpressed in MCHR1-expressing neurons. As shown previously, control wild-type mice expressing only native MCHR1 developed diet-induced obesity when fed a high-fat diet. In contrast, MCHR1R2 mice had lower food intake, leading to their resistance to diet-induced obesity. Furthermore, we showed that MCH action is altered in MCHR1R2 mice. MCH treatment in wild-type mice inhibited the activation of the immediate-early gene c-fos, and coexpression of MCHR2 reduced the inhibitory actions of MCHR1 on this pathway. In conclusion, we developed an experimental animal model that can provide insight into the action of MCHR2 in the central nervous system and suggest that some actions of MCHR2 oppose the endogenous actions of MCHR1.
To investigate the influence of melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCHR2) on preadipocyte proliferation and differentiation, a 3T3-L1-MCHR2 cell line stably expressing human MCHR2 was established. The expression level and biological activity of MCHR2 were evaluated by immunofluorescence and radioligand binding assays. A 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and cell cycle analysis showed that MCH did not affect 3T3-L1-MCHR2 and 3T3-L1-mock cell proliferation. MCH accelerated preadipocyte differentiation of the two cell lines when they were administered various doses of standard adipogenic inducers. The rate and degree of differentiation of the 3T3-L1-MCHR2 cells were higher than those of the 3T3-L1-mock cells. The expression levels of adipocyte-specific marker genes, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptorgamma2 (PPARgamma2), CCAAT enhancer-binding proteinalpha (C/EBPalpha), adipocyte-specific fatty acid-binding protein (aP(2)) and leptin were significantly up-regulated, especially in 3T3-L1-MCHR2 cells. These findings suggest that MCHR2 positively mediates the regulation of MCH during preadipocyte differentiation and is involved in energy balance regulation without affecting preadipocyte proliferation.
Cellular models for the study of the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) have become indispensable tools for pharmacological profiling and signaling analysis of MCH and its synthetic analogues. Although expression of MCH receptors is most abundant in the brain, MCH-R(1) is also found in different peripheral tissues. Therefore, not only cell lines derived from nervous tissue but also from peripheral tissues that naturally express MCH receptors have been used to study receptor signaling and regulation. For screening of novel compounds, however, heterologous expression of MCH-R(1) or MCH-R(2) genes in HEK293, Chinese hamster ovary, COS-7, or 3T3-L1 cells, or amplified MCH-R(1) expression/signaling in IRM23 cells transfected with the G(q) protein gene are the preferred tools because of more distinct pharmacological effects induced by MCH, which include inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of inositol triphosphate production, increase in intracellular free Ca(2+) and/or activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Most of the published data originate from this type of model system, whereas data based on studies with cell lines endogenously expressing MCH receptors are more limited. This review presents an update on the different cellular models currently used for the analysis of MCH receptor interaction and signaling.
The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic peptide exerting its actions through two G-protein-coupled receptors, MCHR1 and MCHR2. MCH is implicated in the regulation of different physiological functions, including energy homeostasis and mood that is supported by the distribution of MCH and MCHR1 in the hypothalamus as well as corticolimbic structures. Genetic manipulation of MCH and MCHR1 results in a lean phenotype with increased resting energy expenditure as well as anxiolytic and antidepressant phenotypes. Similar observations have been demonstrated pharmacologically using different classes of selective MCHR1 antagonists. Here, we summarize the reported genetic and pharmacological evidence for the role played by the MCH system in the regulation of both energy homeostasis and mood disorders. We also comment on the utility of small-molecule MCHR1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity and affective disorders compared to existing therapies and provide a critical overview of the potential risks.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a neuropeptide that was originally isolated from salmon pituitary where it causes pigment aggregation. MCH is also abundantly present in mammalian neurons and expressed in the lateral hypothalamus and zona incerta, brain regions that are known to be at the center of feeding behavior. MCH binds to and activates two G protein-coupled receptors, MCH1R and MCH2R. Although MCH2R is non-functional in rodents, genetic and pharmacological studies have demonstrated that rodent MCH1R is involved in the regulation of feeding behavior and energy balance. Unexpectedly, some antagonists have provided evidence that MCH signaling participates in the regulation of other processes, such as emotion and stress. The discovery of MCH receptors has extensively promoted the progress of MCH studies and may represent an ideal example of how deorphanized receptors can open new directions toward more detailed physiological studies.
Epilepsy is most common in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC). However, in addition to the challenging treatment, the pathogenesis of epilepsy is still controversial. To determine the transcriptome characteristics of perituberal tissue (PT) and clarify its role in the pathogenesis of epilepsy, GSE16969 was downloaded from the GEO database for further study by comprehensive bioinformatics analysis. Identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), functional enrichment analysis, construction of protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, and selection of Hub genes were performed using R language, Metascape, STRING, and Cytoscape, respectively. Comparing with cortical tuber (CT), 220 DEGs, including 95 upregulated and 125 downregulated genes, were identified in PT and mainly enriched in collagen-containing extracellular matrix and positive regulation of receptor-mediated endocytosis, as well as the pathways of ECM-receptor interaction and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. As for normal cortex (NC), 1549 DEGs, including 30 upregulated and 1519 downregulated genes, were identified and mainly enriched in presynapse, dendrite and axon, and also the pathways of dopaminergic synapse and oxytocin signaling pathway. In the PPI network, 4 hub modules were found between PT and CT, and top 5 hub modules were selected between PT and NC. C3, APLNR, ANXA2, CD44, CLU, CP, MCHR2, HTR1E, CTSG, APP, and GNG2 were identified as Hub genes, of which, C3, CD44, ANXA2, HTR1E, and APP were identified as Hub-BottleNeck genes. In conclusion, PT has the unique characteristics different from CT and NC in transcriptome and makes us further understand its importance in the TSC-associated epilepsy.
Appetite regulating neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) has been implicated in obesity. It functions through its two receptors MCHR1 and MCHR2. While MCH and MCHR1 have been studied more extensively, the function of MCHR2 remains largely unknown, due to the lack of suitable in vitro and in vivo models. To create an in vitro system of genetic knock-down of MCHR2 in mammalian cells, we constructed four small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) against human MCHR2 in eukaryotic expression vector, and transfected the plasmids into CHO cells that stably express human MCHR2. Using the empty vector or a negative shRNA control plasmid, we show that MCHR2-shRNAs suppressed 45.8% - 66.4% of MCHR2 expression at both mRNA and protein levels. As the result, in cells carrying the MCHR2-shRNAs, binding of MCHR2 to MCH was decreased by 39.4% - 78.7% accompanied by a similar decrease in affinity of the receptor to ligand by 40.9% - 81.9%. These cells still respond to MCH treatment, but intracellular Ca2+ release as the downstream signaling event was also decreased by 114.8% - 822.4%. Together, this study generated a set of shRNAs and cell lines as valuable reagents for further study on MCHR2 functions. These results will ultimately help to advance our knowledge about appetite regulating neuropeptide receptors.
The genetic origin of human skin pigmentation remains an open question in biology. Several skin disorders and diseases originate from mutations in conserved pigmentation genes, including albinism, vitiligo, and melanoma. Teleosts possess the capacity to modify their pigmentation to adapt to their environmental background to avoid predators. This background adaptation occurs through melanosome aggregation (white background) or dispersion (black background) in melanocytes. These mechanisms are largely regulated by melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH), two hypothalamic neuropeptides also involved in mammalian skin pigmentation. Despite evidence that the exogenous application of MCH peptides induces melanosome aggregation, it is not known if the MCH system is physiologically responsible for background adaptation. In zebrafish, we identify that MCH neurons target the pituitary gland-blood vessel portal and that endogenous MCH peptide expression regulates melanin concentration for background adaptation. We demonstrate that this effect is mediated by MCH receptor 2 (Mchr2) but not Mchr1a/b. mchr2 knock-out fish cannot adapt to a white background, providing the first genetic demonstration that MCH signaling is physiologically required to control skin pigmentation. mchr2 phenotype can be rescued in adult fish by knocking-out pomc, the gene coding for the precursor of alpha-MSH, demonstrating the relevance of the antagonistic activity between MCH and alpha-MSH in the control of melanosome organization. Interestingly, MCH receptor is also expressed in human melanocytes, thus a similar antagonistic activity regulating skin pigmentation may be conserved during evolution, and the dysregulation of these pathways is significant to our understanding of human skin disorders and cancers.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a potent orexigenic neuropeptide and a physiological antagonist of alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH) in the brain as well as at peripheral sites, including the pigmentary systems of specific vertebrates. Two receptor subtypes for MCH, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, have been cloned, but other receptor subtypes are likely to exist. Based on our own data and the current literature, we have compared the expression of different receptors for MCH in various mammalian cell lines and tissues. Summarizing all data currently available, we conclude that the two cloned MCH receptors, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, exhibit differences in their expression pattern, although MCH-R1 is generally colocalized in all tissues where MCH-R2 expression is found. It appears that MCH-R1 is more abundant and has a wider distribution pattern than MCH-R2. Other hypothetical MCH-R subtypes may be expressed in specific tissues, e.g., in the pigment cell system.
BACKGROUND: Prader Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a syndromic form of obesity caused by a chromosomal aberration on chromosome 15q11.2-q13. Patients with a comparable phenotype to PWS not carrying the 15q11.2-q13 defect are classified as Prader Willi like (PWL). In literature, PWL patients do frequently harbor deletions at 6q16, which led to the identification of the single-minded 1 (SIM1) gene as a possible cause for the presence of obesity in these patients. However, our previous work in a PWL cohort showed a rather limited involvement of SIM1 in the obesity phenotype. In this paper, we investigated the causal role of the melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 2 (MCHR2) gene in PWL patients, as most of the reported 6q16 deletions also encompass this gene and it is suggested to be active in the control of feeding behavior and energy metabolism. METHODS: Copy number variation analysis of the MCHR2 genomic region followed by mutation analysis of MCHR2 was performed in a PWL cohort. RESULTS: Genome-wide microarray analysis of 109 patients with PWL did not show any gene harboring deletions on chromosome 6q16. Mutation analysis in 92 patients with PWL demonstrated three MCHR2 variants: p.T47A (c.139A>G), p.A76A (c.228T>C) and c.*16A>G. We identified a significantly higher prevalence of the c.228T>C C allele in our PWL cohort compared to previously published results and controls of the ExAC Database. CONCLUSION: Overall, our results are in line with some previously performed studies suggesting that MCHR2 is not a major contributor to human obesity and the PWL phenotype.
Understanding of the genetic regulation of puberty timing has come largely from studies of rare disorders and population-based studies in women. Here, we report the largest genomic analysis for puberty timing in 55,871 men, based on recalled age at voice breaking. Analysis across all genomic variants reveals strong genetic correlation (0.74, P=2.7 x 10(-70)) between male and female puberty timing. However, some loci show sex-divergent effects, including directionally opposite effects between sexes at the SIM1/MCHR2 locus (Pheterogeneity=1.6 x 10(-12)). We find five novel loci for puberty timing (P<5 x 10(-8)), in addition to nine signals in men that were previously reported in women. Newly implicated genes include two retinoic acid-related receptors, RORB and RXRA, and two genes reportedly disrupted in rare disorders of puberty, LEPR and KAL1. Finally, we identify genetic correlations that indicate shared aetiologies in both sexes between puberty timing and body mass index, fasting insulin levels, lipid levels, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
Binge eating disorder (BED) is the most common eating disorder, yet its genetic architecture remains largely unknown. Studying BED is challenging because it is often comorbid with obesity, a common and highly polygenic trait, and it is underdiagnosed in biobank data sets. To address this limitation, we apply a supervised machine-learning approach (using 822 cases of individuals diagnosed with BED) to estimate the probability of each individual having BED based on electronic medical records from the Million Veteran Program. We perform a genome-wide association study of individuals of African (n = 77,574) and European (n = 285,138) ancestry while controlling for body mass index to identify three independent loci near the HFE, MCHR2 and LRP11 genes and suggest APOE as a risk gene for BED. We identify shared heritability between BED and several neuropsychiatric traits, and implicate iron metabolism in the pathophysiology of BED. Overall, our findings provide insights into the genetics underlying BED and suggest directions for future translational research.
