Melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1; Receptor for melanin-concentrating hormone, coupled to both G proteins that inhibit adenylyl cyclase and G proteins that activate phosphoinositide hydrolysis; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Bipolar disorder is a heritable mental illness with complex etiology. We performed a genome-wide association study of 41,917 bipolar disorder cases and 371,549 controls of European ancestry, which identified 64 associated genomic loci. Bipolar disorder risk alleles were enriched in genes in synaptic signaling pathways and brain-expressed genes, particularly those with high specificity of expression in neurons of the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus. Significant signal enrichment was found in genes encoding targets of antipsychotics, calcium channel blockers, antiepileptics and anesthetics. Integrating expression quantitative trait locus data implicated 15 genes robustly linked to bipolar disorder via gene expression, encoding druggable targets such as HTR6, MCHR1, DCLK3 and FURIN. Analyses of bipolar disorder subtypes indicated high but imperfect genetic correlation between bipolar disorder type I and II and identified additional associated loci. Together, these results advance our understanding of the biological etiology of bipolar disorder, identify novel therapeutic leads and prioritize genes for functional follow-up studies.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1), a G protein-coupled receptor, is poised for interaction with its ligands on the plasma membrane. Analyses of MCHR1 knockout mice suggest that this receptor could be a therapeutic target for the treatment of appetite disorders, glucose metabolism, psychiatric disorders, and inflammation. Binding of MCH to MCHR1 initiates calcium signaling, which is subsequently attenuated through receptor internalization. However, the ultimate destiny of the receptor post-internalization remains unexplored. In this study, we report the extracellular secretion of MCHR1 via exosomes. The recruitment of MCHR1 to exosomes occurs subsequent to its internalization, which is induced by stimulation with the ligand MCH. Although a highly glycosylated form of MCHR1, potentially representing a mature form, is selectively recruited to exosomes, the MCHR1 transferred into other cells does not exhibit functionality. The truncation of MCHR1 at the C-terminus not only impairs its response to MCH but also hinders its recruitment to exosomes. These findings imply that functional MCHR1 could be secreted extracellularly via exosomes, a process that may represent a mechanism for the termination of intracellular MCHR1 signaling.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a small cyclic peptide expressed in all mammals, mainly in the hypothalamus. MCH acts as a robust integrator of several physiological functions and has crucial roles in the regulation of sleep-wake rhythms, feeding behaviour and metabolism. MCH signalling has a very broad endocrine context and is involved in physiological functions and emotional states associated with metabolism, such as reproduction, anxiety, depression, sleep and circadian rhythms. MCH mediates its functions through two receptors (MCHR1 and MCHR2), of which only MCHR1 is common to all mammals. Owing to the wide variety of MCH downstream signalling pathways, MCHR1 agonists and antagonists have great potential as tools for the directed management of energy balance disorders and associated metabolic complications, and translational strategies using these compounds hold promise for the development of novel treatments for obesity. This Review provides an overview of the numerous roles of MCH in energy and glucose homeostasis, as well as in regulation of the mesolimbic dopaminergic circuits that encode the hedonic component of food intake.
Membrane transporters are integral membrane proteins that mediate the passage of solutes across lipid bilayers. These proteins undergo conformational transitions between outward- and inward-facing states, which lead to alternating access of the substrate-binding site to the aqueous environment on either side of the membrane. Dozens of different transporter families have evolved, providing a wide variety of structural solutions to achieve alternating access. A sub-set of structurally diverse transporters operate by mechanisms that are collectively named 'elevator-type'. These transporters have one common characteristic: they contain a distinct protein domain that slides across the membrane as a rigid body, and in doing so it 'drags" the transported substrate along. Analysis of the global conformational changes that take place in membrane transporters using elevator-type mechanisms reveals that elevator-type movements can be achieved in more than one way. Molecular dynamics simulations and experimental data help to understand how lipid bilayer properties may affect elevator movements and vice versa.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have reported substantial genomic loci significantly associated with clinical risk of bipolar disorder (BD), and studies combining techniques of genetics, neuroscience, neuroimaging, and pharmacology are believed to help tackle clinical problems (e.g., identifying novel therapeutic targets). However, translating findings of psychiatric genetics into biological mechanisms underlying BD pathogenesis remains less successful. Biological impacts of majority of BD GWAS risk loci are obscure, and the involvement of many GWAS risk genes in this illness is yet to be investigated. It is thus necessary to review the progress of applying BD GWAS risk genes in the research and intervention of the disorder. A comprehensive literature search found that a number of such risk genes had been investigated in cellular or animal models, even before they were highlighted in BD GWAS. Intriguingly, manipulation of many BD risk genes (e.g., ANK3, CACNA1C, CACNA1B, HOMER1, KCNB1, MCHR1, NCAN, SHANK2 etc.) resulted in altered murine behaviors largely restoring BD clinical manifestations, including mania-like symptoms such as hyperactivity, anxiolytic-like behavior, as well as antidepressant-like behavior, and these abnormalities could be attenuated by mood stabilizers. In addition to recapitulating phenotypic characteristics of BD, some GWAS risk genes further provided clues for the neurobiology of this illness, such as aberrant activation and functional connectivity of brain areas in the limbic system, and modulated dendritic spine morphogenesis as well as synaptic plasticity and transmission. Therefore, BD GWAS risk genes are undoubtedly pivotal resources for modeling this illness, and might be translational therapeutic targets in the future clinical management of BD. We discuss both promising prospects and cautions in utilizing the bulk of useful resources generated by GWAS studies. Systematic integrations of findings from genetic and neuroscience studies are called for to promote our understanding and intervention of BD.
One pharmacological principle for the treatment of obesity is blockade of the melanin concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHr1), which in rodents has been shown to be strongly associated with food intake and energy expenditure. However, discovery of safe and efficacious MCHr1 antagonists has proved to be complex. So far, six compounds have been progressed into clinical trials, but clinical validation of the concept is still lacking. An account of discovery of the three most recent clinical candidates targeting the MCHr1 receptor is given, with an emphasis on their physicochemical properties.
Obesity is growing at an alarming rate with huge consequences on health and economy. The worldwide prevalence of obesity has nearly doubled in less than 35 years. Obesity causes many physiological dysfunctions that affect nearly every organ producing multiple morbidities. Despite these facts, there is still no clear, well-defined solution. Notwithstanding the devastating prevalence and consequences of obesity, today only five medicines, orlistat, lorcaserin, phentermine-topiramate, bupropion-naltrexone and liraglutide, are approved by the FDA for long-term treatment of obesity. In this review, the current approaches to treat obesity such as the development of diacylglycerol Oacyltransferase- 1 inhibitors, growth hormone secretagogue receptor-1a antagonists/inverse agonists, melanocortin-3 receptors agonists and melanin concentrating hormone receptor-1 antagonists, will be discussed. The main focus will be on the molecules that were able to reach clinical trials. The last section is dedicated to the "browning" phenomenon of white adipose tissues and the potential of Aldh1a1 inhibitors to treat obesity.
Obesity has reached epidemic proportions across the developed world. Even though there have been numerous scientific advances in terms of the understanding of the regulation of energy homeostasis, few novel anti-obesity drugs have emerged. Furthermore, those that are available have limited efficacy in producing and maintaining a weight loss beyond 10%. This is partly attributable to the complex neuronal circuitry at play within the central nervous system and periphery, which acts to regulate food intake and energy expenditure. This article will focus on a selection of the many products (peptides, neurotransmitters and others) such as endocannabinoids, Neuropeptide Y, Orexins, Melanin-Concentrating Hormone, Melanocortins, Cocaine and Amphetamine Regulated Transcript and Serotonin, expressed within the brain, that have been shown to influence energy balance. The true relevance of many of these to the regulation of human energy balance remains uncertain, but some novel anti-obesity drugs aimed at these targets are likely to emerge in the next few years.
Although extensive research on brown adipose tissue (BAT) has stimulated optimism in the battle against obesity and diabetes, BAT physiology and organ crosstalk are not fully understood. Besides BAT, melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and its receptor (MCHR1) play an important role in energy homeostasis. Because of the link between hypothalamic MCH neurons and sympathetic BAT activation via beta-adrenoceptors, we investigated the expression and physiological role of the MCHR1 in BAT. MCHR1 was detected in rodent and human BAT with RT-qPCR and western blot analyses. In vivo imaging in rats used the glucose analog [(18) F]FDG and the MCHR1-tracer [(11) C]SNAP-7941. We found that the beta3-adrenoceptor (ADRB3) agonist CL316,243 increased [(11) C]SNAP-7941 uptake in BAT. Additionally, a pharmacological concentration of SNAP-7941-a low-affinity ADRB3 ligand-stimulated [(18) F]FDG uptake, reflecting BAT activation. In cultured human adipocytes, CL316,243 induced MCHR1 expression, further supporting a direct interaction between MCHR1 and ADRB3. These findings characterized MCHR1 expression in rodent and human BAT for the first time, including in vitro and in vivo data demonstrating a link between MCHR1 and the beta3-adrenergic system. The presence of MCHR1 in BAT emphasizes the role of BAT in energy homeostasis and may help uncover treatment approaches for obesity.
PURPOSE: The melanin-concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) has become an important pharmacological target, since it may be involved in various diseases, such as diabetes, insulin resistance, and obesity. Hence, a suitable positron emission tomography radiotracer for the in vivo assessment of the MCHR1 pharmacology is imperative. The current paper contrasts the extensive in vitro, in vivo, and ex vivo assessments of the radiotracers [(18)F]FE@SNAP and [(11)C]SNAP-7941 and provides comprehensive information about their biological and physicochemical properties. Furthermore, it examines their suitability for first-in-man imaging studies. PROCEDURES: Kinetic real-time cell-binding studies with [(18)F]FE@SNAP and [(11)C]SNAP-7941 were conducted on adherent Chines hamster ovary (CHO-K1) cells stably expressing the human MCHR1 and MCHR2. Small animal imaging studies on mice and rats were performed under displacement and baseline conditions, as well as after pretreatment with the P-glycoprotein/breast cancer resistant protein inhibitor tariquidar. After the imaging studies, detailed analyses of the ex vivo biodistribution were performed. Ex vivo metabolism was determined in rat blood and brain and analyzed at various time points using a quantitative radio-HPLC assay. RESULTS: [(11)C]SNAP-7941 demonstrates high uptake on CHO-K1-hMCHR1 cells, whereas no uptake was detected for the CHO-K1-hMCHR2 cells. In contrast, [(18)F]FE@SNAP evinced binding to CHO-K1-hMCHR1 and CHO-K1-hMCHR2 cells. Imaging studies with [(18)F]FE@SNAP and [(11)C]SNAP-7941 showed an increased brain uptake after tariquidar pretreatment in mice, as well as in rats, and exhibited a significant difference between the time-activity curves of the baseline and blocking groups. Biodistribution of both tracers demonstrated a decreased uptake after displacement. [(11)C]SNAP-7941 revealed a high metabolic stability in rats, whereas [(18)F]FE@SNAP was rapidly metabolized. CONCLUSIONS: Both radiotracers demonstrate appropriate imaging properties for the MCHR1. However, the pronounced metabolic stability as well as superior selectivity and affinity of [(11)C]SNAP-7941 underlines the decisive superiority over [(18)F]FE@SNAP.
Primary cilia are thin hair-like organelles that protrude from the surface of most mammalian cells. They act as specialized cell antennas that can vary widely in response to specific stimuli. However, the effect of changes in cilia length on cellular signaling and behavior remains unclear. Therefore, we aimed to characterize the elongated primary cilia induced by different chemical agents, lithium chloride (LiCl), cobalt chloride (CoCl2) and rotenone, using human retinal pigmented epithelial 1 (hRPE1) cells expressing ciliary G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) receptor 1 (MCHR1). MCH induces cilia shortening mainly via MCHR1-mediated Akt phosphorylation. Therefore, we verified the proper functioning of the MCH-MCHR1 axis in elongated cilia. Although MCH shortened cilia that were elongated by LiCl and rotenone, it did not shorten CoCl2-induced elongated cilia, which exhibited lesser Akt phosphorylation. Furthermore, serum readdition was found to delay cilia shortening in CoCl2-induced elongated cilia. In contrast, rotenone-induced elongated cilia rapidly shortened via a chopping mechanism at the tip of the cilia. Conclusively, we found that each chemical exerted different effects on ciliary GPCR signaling and serum-mediated ciliary structure dynamics in cells with elongated cilia. These results provide a basis for understanding the functional consequences of changes in ciliary length.
There are over 420 human solute carrier (SLC) transporters from 65 families that are expressed ubiquitously in the body. The SLCs mediate the movement of ions, drugs, and metabolites across membranes and their dysfunction has been associated with a variety of diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, and central nervous system (CNS) disorders. Thus, SLCs are emerging as important targets for therapeutic intervention. Recent technological advances in experimental and computational biology allow better characterization of SLC pharmacology. Here we describe recent approaches to modulate SLC transporter function, with an emphasis on the use of computational approaches and computer-aided drug design (CADD) to study nutrient transporters. Finally, we discuss future perspectives in the rational design of SLC drugs.
Human vitiligo is an acquired depigmenting skin disorder characterized by milk-white skin macules resulting from a chronic and progressive loss of melanocytes. It has been suggested that autoimmune mechanisms are involved in this disorder. We undertook this project to obtain an MCHR1-C linear peptide containing four main MCHR1 B-cell epitopes in an attempt to detect the IgG antibody against MCHR1 in vitiligo. The target gene encoding the MCHR1-C peptide was cloned into a pGEX-4T-2 expression vector, expressed in Escherichia coli BL21, and purified using a GST column. The molecular weight was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and western blotting. The IgG antibody response to MCHR1 was detected by ELISA with MCHR1-C as a coated antigen, and the absorption experiment was used to assess the binding ability of the Ab detected by MCHR1-C with a membrane protein in human epidermal melanocytes. The purified peptide MCHR1-C with a molecular weight of 33 kDa was obtained, and could bind to the MCHR1 antibody in human sera. Of the vitiligo patient sera examined, 24 of 145 (16.55%) tested positive for the MCHR1 antibody, and the frequency in the vitiligo patient group was significantly greater compared to the normal control. However, no significant difference between gender, disease duration, clinical subtype or family history between the two groups was observed. In addition, the Ab detected by MCHR1-C in sera was specifically absorbed by the membrane protein obtained from human epidermal melanocytes. Collectively, our data suggest that the MCHR1-C peptide can be used to detect the MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo patients as a coated antigen instead of MCHR1 protein. We conclude that the level of MCHR1 antibody in active vitiligo patients is significantly higher than that in healthy individuals, while gender, disease duration, clinical subtype and family history have no association with the level of MCHR1 antibody in vitiligo patients.
INTRODUCTION: The cyclic neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) shows appetite-stimulating effects indicating an involvement in obesity. Large efforts have been invested in discovery programs to identify novel MCH1 receptor (MCHR1) antagonists. Other indications where MCHR1 antagonists may have a potential use include: anxiety/depression and, more recently, inflammatory responses in the gastrointestinal tract. AREAS COVERED: The current review covers the patent literature on MCHR1 antagonists published from November 2010 to March 2014. The applications have been grouped by filing company, and weight has been put on commenting compounds with disclosed in vivo biological data. EXPERT OPINION: Achieving sufficient separation of the human EtheR-a-Go-go channel has prevented many programs from reaching the clinic. For clinical programs, CNS exposure seems to have been a major challenge. Although clinical studies of MCHR1 antagonists have not been able to conclusively evaluate the concept, the body of evidence suggesting a role for MCHR1 antagonists in weight management is strong and novel chemical series still appear in the patent literature. An MCHR1 antagonist with the appropriate physical chemical properties is needed to convincingly evaluate the MCHR1 concept for obesity treatment and, as knowledge from previous programs are shared, the discovery of such a compound should be achievable.
The neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is expressed in central and peripheral tissues where it participates in the complex network regulating energy homeostasis as well as in other physiologically important functions. Two MCH receptor subtypes, MCH-R1 and MCH-R2, have been cloned which signal through activation of Gi/o/q proteins and hence regulate different intracellular signals, such as inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of IP3 production, increase in intracellular free Ca2+ and/or activation of MAP kinases. Most of the data were obtained with cell systems heterologously expressing either of the MCH receptors. Fewer reports exist on studies with cell lines which endogenously express MCH receptors. Here, we describe human and other mammalian cell lines with which MCH receptor activation can be studied under "natural" conditions and we summarize the characteristics and signaling pathways of the MCH receptors in the different cell systems.
Behavioral impulsivity is common in various psychiatric and metabolic disorders. Here we identify a hypothalamus to telencephalon neural pathway for regulating impulsivity involving communication from melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)-expressing lateral hypothalamic neurons to the ventral hippocampus subregion (vHP). Results show that both site-specific upregulation (pharmacological or chemogenetic) and chronic downregulation (RNA interference) of MCH communication to the vHP increases impulsive responding in rats, indicating that perturbing this system in either direction elevates impulsivity. Furthermore, these effects are not secondary to either impaired timing accuracy, altered activity, or increased food motivation, consistent with a specific role for vHP MCH signaling in the regulation of impulse control. Results from additional functional connectivity and neural pathway tracing analyses implicate the nucleus accumbens as a putative downstream target of vHP MCH1 receptor-expressing neurons. Collectively, these data reveal a specific neural circuit that regulates impulsivity and provide evidence of a novel function for MCH on behavior.
Despite the high number of drug-discovery programs dedicated to finding small-molecule MCH-R1 antagonists for the treatment of obesity and/or mood disorders, a very limited number of these have progressed into the clinic. Beyond the common challenges in drug design related to ADME and safety profiles, cardiovascular risk involving hERG binding and the potential for subsequent drug-induced QTc prolongation has been a major hurdle for a significant number of MCH-R1 research programs. Many of these programs have evolved, and effectively designed MCH antagonists having decreased hERG-binding affinity have emerged. Currently, however, only a selected few candidates have progressed to clinical development. Drug-design strategies, in vivo efficacy, ADME, and cardiovascular safety profiles for a selection of MCH-R1 antagonist research programs are discussed ahead.
The melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a 19 aminoacid peptide found in mammals predominantly in neurons located in the lateral hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic area. The biological function of MCH is mediated by two G-protein-coupled receptors known as MCHR1 and MCHR2, although the latter is expressed only in carnivores, primates and man. The MCHR1 couples to Gi, Gq and Go proteins, with Gi leading to the inhibition of both excitatory and inhibitory synaptic events. Within the central nervous system (CNS) MCH participates in a number of functions including sleep-wake behavior. In this respect, MCHergic neurons project widely throughout the CNS to brain regions involved in the regulation of behavioral states. MCHergic neurons are silent during wakefulness (W), increase their firing during slow wave sleep (SWS) and still more during REM sleep (REMS). Studies in knockout mice for MCH (MCH(-/-)) have shown a reduction in SWS and an increase of W during the light and the dark phase of the light-dark cycle. Moreover, in response to food deprivation a marked reduction in REMS time was observed in these animals. Conflicting effects on sleep variables have been reported in MCHR1(-/-) mice by different authors. The i.c.v. administration of MCH increases REMS and SWS in the rat. In addition, an enhancement of REMS has been described following the microinjection of the neuropeptide into the nucleus pontis oralis of the cat, while its infusion into the dorsal raphe nucleus (DR) and the basal forebrain (horizontal limb of the diagonal band of Broca) is followed by an increase of REMS and a reduction of W in the rat. Immunoneutralization of MCH in the DR augmented W and suppressed REMS in the rat, as did the s.c. injection of selective MCHR1 antagonists. The robust REMS-inducing effect of MCH is likely related to the deactivation of monoaminergic, orexinergic, glutamatergic, cholinergic (W-on) and GABAergic (REM-off) neurons involved in the generation of W and the inhibition of REMS. On the basis of preclinical studies, it can be proposed that selective MCHR1 receptor agonists could constitute potential therapeutic modalities in the arsenal of insomnia pharmacotherapy. Due to the lack of adequate animal models, the role of the MCHR2 on sleep is still unknown.
The Abelson-helper integration site 1 (AHI1) gene encodes for a ciliary transition zone localizing protein that when mutated causes the human ciliopathy, Joubert syndrome. We prepared and examined neuronal cultures derived from male and female embryonic Ahi1(+/+) and Ahi1(-/-) mice (littermates) and found that the distribution of ciliary melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MchR1) was significantly reduced in Ahi1(-/-) neurons; however, the total and surface expression of MchR1 on Ahi1(-/-) neurons was similar to controls (Ahi1(+/+)). This indicates that a pathway for MchR1 trafficking to the surface plasma membrane is intact, but the process of targeting MchR1 into cilia is impaired in Ahi1-deficient mouse neurons, indicating a role for Ahi1 in localizing MchR1 to the cilium. Mouse Ahi1(-/-) neurons that fail to accumulate MchR1 in the ciliary membrane have significant decreases in two downstream MchR1 signaling pathways [cAMP and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk)] on MCH stimulation. These results suggest that the ciliary localization of MchR1 is necessary and critical for MchR1 signaling, with Ahi1 participating in regulating MchR1 localization to cilia, and further supporting cilia as critical signaling centers in neurons.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Our work here demonstrates that neuronal primary cilia are powerful and focused signaling centers for the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), melanin-concentrating hormone receptor-1 (MCHR1), with a role for the ciliary transition zone protein, Abelson-helper integration site 1 (AHI1), in mediating ciliary trafficking of MCHR1. Moreover, our manuscript further expands the repertoire of cilia functions on neurons, a cell type that has not received significant attention in the cilia field. Lastly, our work demonstrates the significant influence of ciliary GPCR signaling in the overall signaling of neurons.
Cellular models for the study of the neuropeptide melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) have become indispensable tools for pharmacological profiling and signaling analysis of MCH and its synthetic analogues. Although expression of MCH receptors is most abundant in the brain, MCH-R(1) is also found in different peripheral tissues. Therefore, not only cell lines derived from nervous tissue but also from peripheral tissues that naturally express MCH receptors have been used to study receptor signaling and regulation. For screening of novel compounds, however, heterologous expression of MCH-R(1) or MCH-R(2) genes in HEK293, Chinese hamster ovary, COS-7, or 3T3-L1 cells, or amplified MCH-R(1) expression/signaling in IRM23 cells transfected with the G(q) protein gene are the preferred tools because of more distinct pharmacological effects induced by MCH, which include inhibition of cAMP formation, stimulation of inositol triphosphate production, increase in intracellular free Ca(2+) and/or activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Most of the published data originate from this type of model system, whereas data based on studies with cell lines endogenously expressing MCH receptors are more limited. This review presents an update on the different cellular models currently used for the analysis of MCH receptor interaction and signaling.
