Thymidylate synthase; Contributes to the de novo mitochondrial thymidylate biosynthesis pathway.
The enzyme lactase that is located in the villus enterocytes of the small intestine is responsible for digestion of lactose in milk. Lactase activity is high and vital during infancy, but in most mammals, including most humans, lactase activity declines after the weaning phase. In other healthy humans, lactase activity persists at a high level throughout adult life, enabling them to digest lactose as adults. This dominantly inherited genetic trait is known as lactase persistence. The distribution of these different lactase phenotypes in human populations is highly variable and is controlled by a polymorphic element cis-acting to the lactase gene. A putative causal nucleotide change has been identified and occurs on the background of a very extended haplotype that is frequent in Northern Europeans, where lactase persistence is frequent. This single nucleotide polymorphism is located 14 kb upstream from the start of transcription of lactase in an intron of the adjacent gene MCM6. This change does not, however, explain all the variation in lactase expression.
Rationale: Hyperactivation of Hippo-Yes-associated protein (YAP) signaling pathway governs tumorigenesis of gastric cancer (GC). Here we reveal that minichromosome maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6) is a critical transcriptional target of YAP in GC. We aim to investigate the function, mechanism of action, and clinical implication of MCM6 in GC. Methods: The downstream targets of YAP were screened by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and microarray, and further validated by chromatin immunoprecipitation PCR and luciferase reporter assays. The clinical implication of MCM6 was assessed in multiple GC cohorts. Biological function of MCM6 was evaluated in vitro, in patient-derived organoids, and in vivo. RNA-seq was performed to unravel downstream signaling of MCM6. Potential MCM6 inhibitor was identified and the effect of MCM6 inhibition on GC growth was evaluated. Results: Integrative RNA sequencing and microarray analyses revealed MCM6 as a potential YAP downstream target in GC. The YAP-TEAD complex bound to the promoter of MCM6 to induce its transcription. Increased MCM6 expression was commonly observed in human GC tissues and predicted poor patients survival. MCM6 knockdown suppressed proliferation and migration of GC cells and patient-derived organoids, and attenuated xenograft growth and peritoneal metastasis in mice. Mechanistically, MCM6 activated PI3K/Akt/GSK3beta signaling to support YAP-potentiated gastric tumorigenicity and metastasis. Furthermore, MCM6 deficiency sensitized GC cells to chemo- or radiotherapy by causing DNA breaks and blocking ATR/Chk1-mediated DNA damage response (DDR), leading to exacerbated cell death and tumor regression. As there are no available MCM6 inhibitors, we performed high-throughput virtual screening and identified purpureaside C as a novel MCM6 inhibitor. Purpureaside C not only suppressed GC growth but also synergized with 5-fluorouracil to induce cell death. Conclusions: Hyperactivated YAP in GC induces MCM6 transcription via binding to its promoter. YAP-MCM6 axis facilitates GC progression by inducing PI3K/Akt signaling. Targeting MCM6 suppresses GC growth and sensitizes GC cells to genotoxic agents by modulating ATR/Chk1-dependent DDR, providing a promising strategy for GC treatment.
The RNA-binding protein Apobec1 complementation factor (A1CF) regulates posttranscriptional ApoB mRNA editing, but the range of RNA targets and the long-term effect of altered A1CF expression on liver function are unknown. Here we studied hepatocyte-specific A1cf-transgenic (A1cf+/Tg), A1cf+/Tg Apobec1-/-, and A1cf-/- mice fed chow or high-fat/high-fructose diets using RNA-Seq, RNA CLIP-Seq, and tissue microarrays from human hepatocellular cancer (HCC). A1cf+/Tg mice exhibited increased hepatic proliferation and steatosis, with increased lipogenic gene expression (Mogat1, Mogat2, Cidea, Cd36) associated with shifts in polysomal RNA distribution. Aged A1cf+/Tg mice developed spontaneous fibrosis, dysplasia, and HCC, and this development was accelerated on a high-fat/high-fructose diet and was independent of Apobec1. RNA-Seq revealed increased expression of mRNAs involved in oxidative stress (Gstm3, Gpx3, Cbr3), inflammatory response (Il19, Cxcl14, Tnfalpha, Ly6c), extracellular matrix organization (Mmp2, Col1a1, Col4a1), and proliferation (Kif20a, Mcm2, Mcm4, Mcm6), and a subset of mRNAs (including Sox4, Sox9, Cdh1) were identified in RNA CLIP-Seq. Increased A1CF expression in human HCC correlated with advanced fibrosis and with reduced survival in a subset with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. In conclusion, we show that hepatic A1CF overexpression selectively alters polysomal distribution and mRNA expression, promoting lipogenic, proliferative, and inflammatory pathways leading to HCC.
MCM6 is a significant DNA replication regulator that plays a crucial role in sustaining the cell cycle. In many cancer cells, MCM6 expression is enhanced. For example, persistently increased expression of MCM6 promotes the formation, development and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Up- and down-regulation studies have indicated that MCM6 regulates cell cycle, proliferation, metastasis, immune response and the maintenance of the DNA replication system. MCM6 can also regulate downstream signaling such as MEK/ERK thus promoting carcinogenesis. Accordingly, MCM6 may represent a sensitive and specific biomarker to predict adverse progression and poor outcome. Furthermore, inhibition of MCM6 may be an effective cancer treatment. The present review summarizes the latest results on the inactivating and activating functions of MCM6, underlining its function in carcinogenesis. Further studies of the carcinogenic functions of MCM6 may provide novel insight into cancer biology and shed light on new approaches for cancer diagnosis and treatment.
The causal relationship between gut microbiota (GM) and pancreatic cancer (PC) remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the potential genes underlying this mechanism. GM Genome-wide association study (GWAS) summary data were from the MiBioGen consortium. PC GWAS data were from the National Human Genome Research Institute-European Bioinformatics Institute (NHGRI-EBI) GWAS Catalogue. To detect the causal relationship between GM and PC, we implemented three complementary Mendelian randomization (MR) methods: Inverse Variance Weighting (IVW), MR-Egger and Weighted Median, followed by sensitivity analyses. Furthermore, we integrated GM GWAS data with blood cis-expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) and blood cis-DNA methylation QTL (mQTLs) using Summary data-based Mendelian Randomization (SMR) methods. This integration aimed to prioritize potential GM-affecting genes through SMR analysis of two molecular traits. PC cis-eQTLs and cis-mQTLs were summarized from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data. Through colocalization analysis of GM cis-QTLs and PC cis-QTLs data, we identified common genes that influence both GM and PC. Our study found a causal association between GM and PC, including four protective and five risk-associated GM [Inverse Variance Weighted (IVW), p < 0.05]. No significant heterogeneity of instrumental variables (IVs) or horizontal pleiotropy was found. The gene SVBP was identified as a GM-affecting gene using SMR analysis of two molecular traits (FDR<0.05, P_HEIDI>0.05). Additionally, two genes, MCM6 and RPS26, were implicated in the interaction between GM and PC based on colocalization analysis (PPH4>0.5). In summary, this study provides evidence for future research aimed at developing suitable therapeutic interventions and disease prevention.
Lung cancer is a leading cause of mortality worldwide and shows substantial clinical and biomolecular heterogeneity. Currently, specific therapeutic strategies are lacking, so effective drug targets are urgently needed. E6AP/UBE3A is a multifaceted ubiquitin ligase that controls various signaling pathways implicated in neurological diseases and various cancers; however, its role in lung cancer is incompletely understood. Here, MCM6 was identified as an interacting partner of E6AP using the yeast two-hybrid assay. MCM2 and MCM4 were then shown to interact with E6AP. E6AP knockout enhanced the ubiquitination of MCM2/4/6, suggesting that E6AP was not the E3 ubiquitin ligase for these three MCM proteins. Ablation of E6AP inhibited proliferation and migration, but had no significant effect on apoptosis in A549 and H1975 cells, and proliferation and migration inhibition was also observed in MCM6 knockdown cells. Furthermore, ablation of MCM6 and E6AP synergistically suppressed the proliferation and migration of A549 and H1975 cells. To verify the above findings in vivo, we established tumor models in nude mice and identified that the tumorigenicity of human lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells was synergistically regulated by MCM6 and E6AP. Moreover, the expression levels of MCM6 and E6AP were higher in LUAD tissues than in adjacent tissues. Furthermore, the expression levels of MCM6 and E6AP were positively correlated in human LUAD samples. Thus, our study suggests that the interaction of E6AP and MCM proteins plays an important role in the progression of LUAD, which might offer potential therapeutic targets for cancer treatment.
BACKGROUND: Minichromosome Maintenance family (MCMs), as replication licensing factors, is involved in the pathogenesis of tumors. Here, we investigated the expression of MCMs and their values in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). METHODS: MCMs were analyzed in 105 samples including normal livers (n = 15), cirrhotic livers (n = 40), HCC (n = 50) using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) (Cohort 1). Significantly up-regulated MCMs were verified in 102 HCC and matched peritumoral livers using PCR (Cohort 2), and the correlations with clinical features and outcomes were determined. In addition, the focused MCMs were analyzed in parallel immunohistochemistry of 345 samples on spectrum of hepatocarcinogenesis (Cohort 3) and queried for the potential specific role in cell cycle. RESULTS: MCM2-7, MCM8 and MCM10 was significantly up-regulated in HCC in Cohort 1. In Cohort 2, overexpression of MCM2-7, MCM8 and MCM10 was verified and significantly correlated with each other. Elevated MCM2, MCM6 and MCM7 were associated with adverse tumor features and poorer outcomes. In Cohort 3, MCM6 exhibited superior HCC diagnostic performance compared with MCM2 and MCM7 (AUC: 0.896 vs. 0.675 and 0.771, P < 0.01). Additionally, MCM6 other than MCM2 and MCM7 independently predicted poorer survival in 175 HCC patients. Furthermore, knockdown of MCM6 caused a delay in S/G2-phase progression as evidenced by down-regulation of CDK2, CDK4, CyclinA, CyclinB1, CyclinD1, and CyclinE in HCC cells. CONCLUSIONS: We analyze MCMs mRNA and protein levels in tissue samples during hepatocarcinogenesis. MCM6 is identified as a driver of S/G2 cell cycle progression and a potential diagnostic and prognostic marker in HCC.
Minichromosome maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6), a member of the MCM family, plays a pivotal role in DNA replication initiation and genome duplication of proliferating cells. MCM6 is upregulated in multiple malignancies and is considered a novel diagnostic biomarker. However, the functional contributions and prognostic value of MCM6 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) remain unexplored. In this study, we investigated the molecular function of MCM6 in ICC. Data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, GSE107943) indicated an upregulation of MCM6 in tumor tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis performed on 115 cases of ICC samples confirmed the upregulation of MCM6 and further suggested that a high level of MCM6 expression predicted shorter overall and disease-free survival in ICC patients. Functional studies suggested that MCM6 knockdown significantly suppressed cell viability, blocked cell cycle progression and inhibited metastasis, while the enhancement of MCM6 expression promoted the proliferation and migration of ICC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) suggested that the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and E2F1-correlated genes were enriched in ICC tissues with high MCM6 expression. Further verification indicated that MCM6 promoted the EMT of ICC cells via upregulating E2F1. In addition, E2F1 knockdown partially blocked the pro-malignant effects of MCM6 overexpression. In summary, MCM6 was found to be a novel prognostic and predictive marker for ICC. MCM6 promoted ICC progression via activation of E2F1-mediated EMT.
Premature ovarian failure (POF), which is often comorbid with dry eye disease (DED) is a key issue affecting female health. Here, we explored the mechanism underlying comorbid POF and DED to further elucidate disease mechanisms and improve treatment. Datasets related to POF (GSE39501) and DED (GSE44101) were identified from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and subjected to weighted gene coexpression network (WGCNA) and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) analyses, respectively, with the intersection used to obtain 158 genes comorbid in POF and DED. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses of comorbid genes revealed that identified genes were primarily related to DNA replication and Cell cycle, respectively. Protein-Protein interaction (PPI) network analysis of comorbid genes obtained the 15 hub genes: CDC20, BIRC5, PLK1, TOP2A, MCM5, MCM6, MCM7, MCM2, CENPA, FOXM1, GINS1, TIPIN, MAD2L1, and CDCA3. To validate the analysis results, additional POF- and DED-related datasets (GSE48873 and GSE171043, respectively) were selected. miRNAs-lncRNAs-genes network and machine learning methods were used to further analysis comorbid genes. The DGIdb database identified valdecoxib, amorfrutin A, and kaempferitrin as potential drugs. Herein, the comorbid genes of POF and DED were identified from a bioinformatics perspective, providing a new strategy to explore the comorbidity mechanism, opening up a new direction for the diagnosis and treatment of comorbid POF and DED.
BACKGROUND: The tumor-promoting effects of MCM6 in numerous tumors have been widely revealed, yet its specific role in bladder cancer (BLCA) is still elusive. The objective of this research was to explore the underlying impact of MCM6 on BLCA. METHODS: Integrating transcriptomic and proteomic data, MCM6 was identified to be strongly correlated with BLCA through weighted gene co-expression network analysis(WGCNA) and venn analyses. Then, the clinical value of MCM6 was validated with public database data. The different molecular/immune characteristics and the benefit of immunotherapy were also found in MCM6-defined subgroups. Additionally, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data was choose for quantify MCM6 expression in the distinct BLCA cell types. The biological role of MCM6 were evaluated via in vitro functional experiments. RESULTS: It was testified that the MCM6 could distinguish patients outcome in TCGA and GEO cohorts. Moreover, compared with the MCM6 low-expression group, the MCM6 high-expression group was related to more tumor-promoting related pathways, aggressive phenotypes, and benefit from immunotherapy. Analysis of scRNA-seq data resulted in MCM6 was mainly expressed in BLCA epithelial cells and the proportion of MCM6-expressing tumor epithelial cells is higher than the normal epithelial cells. Moreover, vitro experiments demonstrated that MCM6 knockdown repressed proliferation, cell cycle, migration, and invasion of BLCA cells. CONCLUSION: This research indicated MCM6 is a promising marker for both prognosis and immunotherapy benefit and could promote the cells proliferation, invasion and migration in BLCA.
AIM: Minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins are involved in initiation of DNA replication and cell-cycle progression. Loss of MCM function results in genomic instability and causes carcinogenesis. Among MCM genes, the role and prognostic value of MCM6 expression in clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) has not been elucidated. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We assessed the mRNA expression level of MCM6 using the Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis database and investigated MCM6 protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 238 ccRCC cases. RESULTS: High MCM6 expression was significantly associated with increasing tumor size, pT, stage, tumor necrosis, and metastasis. Furthermore, high MCM6 expression was significantly associated with shorter overall and disease-free survival, and was an independent unfavorable prognostic marker. Regarding patients with metastasis, high MCM6-expressing ccRCC conferred significantly shorter survival than for those with low expression. CONCLUSION: A high MCM6 expression level may be a promising biomarker to predict tumor progression, metastasis, and survival in patients with ccRCC.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression profile of MCM6 in HCC and the relationship between MCM6 level and clinicopathological parameters through bioinformatics analysis of several databases. METHODS: MCM expression level, clinical parameters, survival data, and gene set enrichment analysis were analyzed by bioinformatics database, including Oncomine, UALCAN, HCCDB, TCGA, cBioPortal, and LinkedOmics. Real-time PCR, western blotting, and IHC staining were conducted to identify the expression of MCM6 in HCC compared to normal liver tissues. RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis indicated that the mRNA of MCM6 was obviously increased in multiple cancer types, especially in HCC. MCM6 level was positively associated with multiple clinical parameters (stage 3 and grades 3 and 4) and negatively associated with patient outcomes (overall survival). Moreover, enrichment of functions and signaling pathways analysis of MCM6 suggested that MCM6 might mediate DNA replication and cellular metabolism to promote the development and progression of HCC. Furthermore, IHC staining and western blotting indicated that the MCM6 was enhanced in HCC tissue, and MCM6 could promote HCC proliferation in activating Notch pathway via WB and bioinformatic analysis. CONCLUSION: This study actually revealed the expression and related functions of MCM6 in HCC. Furthermore, MCM6 is a carcinogenic role in activating Notch pathway to promote HCC cell proliferation, which may be a new prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for HCC patients.
OBJECTIVES: In non small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC), earlier studies supported a prognostic value of intra-cytoplasmic HuR expression. HuR is a RNA binding protein previously shown to stimulate proliferation, but the link between HuR and proliferation in NSCLC has not yet been evaluated. The first objective of this study was to analyze the expression of HuR in a series of NSCLC and to correlate this to two proliferation markers, Ki-67 and MCM6. As potential post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms for HuR expression, two miRNAs, miR16 and miR519, were also analyzed. Finally, because HuR methylation could be involved in its nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, the expression of methyl(R217)HuR and its relation to cancer survival were determined. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate the expression of HuR, methy(R217)HuR, Ki-67 and MCM6 in a series of 190 NSCLCs. The level of miR16 and miR519 was determined by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: Higher cytoplasmic HuR staining was found in tumor vs. control paired normal lung (p<0.0001), but without correlation with survival. The level of methyl(R217)HuR was correlated both significantly with intra-cytoplasmic HuR staining (p<0.001), and overall survival (p=0.01). MCM6 correlated to a poorer overall survival (p<0.01). Both MCM6 and Ki-67 were positively correlated with HuR nuclear staining (p<0.0001 and p<0.001, respectively). On the contrary, MCM6 and Ki-67 correlated inversely to methyl(R217)HuR (p<0.001 and p=0.01, respectively). The levels of miR16 and miR519 were significantly lower in tumor tissue vs. paired normal lung (p<0.0001), but only miR519 correlated inversely to HuR expression (p=0.01). CONCLUSION: While overall cytoplasmic HuR level was higher in tumor tissues, we found unexpectedly that methyl(R217)HuR was a marker of good prognosis. Furthermore, our data suggest that HuR level could be regulated by miR519. Finally, we demonstrated that Ki-67 and MCM6, both correlated with HuR, are valuable markers of poor prognosis in NSCLC.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the commonest global malignancy and the primary cause of carcinoma death. MCM6 is vital to carcinogenesis, but the pathogenesis of MCM6 remains unclear. METHODS: MCM6 expression in patients with breast cancer was examined through The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, immunohistochemistry, Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT‒PCR) and Western blotting. The prognostic factors were assessed by the Kaplan‒Meier method and Cox regression. On the basis of the key factors selected by multivariable Cox regression analysis, a nomogram risk prediction model was adopted for clinical risk assessment. The TCGA database was utilized to determine how MCM6 is correlated with chemotherapy sensitivity, immune checkpoint-related genes (ICGs), tumor-infiltrating immune cells, along with tumor mutation burden (TMB) and methylation. The impact of MCM6 on carcinoma cells was investigated in terms of proliferation, cell cycle as well as migrating and invasive behavior through CCK assays, flow cytometry, wound healing assays, Transwell assays and xenotransplantation experiments. RESULTS: MCM6 expression was upregulated, which is closely associated with the size of the tumor (p = 0.001) and lymph node metastasis (p = 0.012) in patients with breast cancer. Multivariate analysis revealed MCM6 to be an independent risk factor for prognosis in patients with breast carcinoma. The nomograph prediction model included MCM6, age, ER, M and N stage, which displayed good discrimination with a C index of 0.817 and good calibration. Overexpression of MCM6 correlated with chemotherapy sensitivity, immune checkpoint-related genes (ICGs), tumor-infiltrating immune cells, tumor mutation burden (TMB), and methylation. Silencing MCM6 significantly inhibited proliferation, prolonged the G1 phase of the cell cycle, and restrained the proliferation, migration and invasive behavior of cancerous cells and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Our research shows that MCM6 is highly expressed in breast cancer and can be used as an independent prognostic factor, which is expected to become a new target for the treatment of breast cancer in the future.
The concept of lactose intolerance has become embedded in Western medicine and developing economy medicine. It is based on evidence that intestinal lactase activity persists into later childhood and throughout life in only a minority of the world's population, notably northern European-derived populations. These people have the T single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the rs49882359 allele (C/T), also known as C/T-13910, the MCM6 gene which positively influences the lactase LCT gene. Other lactase persistent (LP) populations are found in Africa and the Middle East with different genetic variants. These SNPs represent co-evolution with dairying since the agricultural revolution and nutrient-dependent ecological adaptation. That said, gastrointestinal symptoms considered due to small intestinal lactose malabsorption are poorly correlated with lactase non-persistence (LNP), the situation for most people. With LNP, colonic microbiome lactase enables lactose fermentation to occur so that none is found in faeces. Whether the short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and gases (hydrogen, carbon dioxide and methane) produced cause symptoms is dose-dependent. Up to 25 g of lactose at any one time can usually be consumed by a LNP person, but its food and meal pattern context, the microbiomic characteristics, age and other factors may alter tolerance. Thus, the notion that lactose intolerance is a disorder or disease of LNP people is misplaced and has been one of cultural perspective. What actually matters is whether a particular dairy product as normally consumed give rise to symptoms. It is, therefore, proposed that lactose tolerance tests be replaced with dairy food tolerance tests.
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease comprising the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive luminal subtype which is subdivided into luminal A and luminal B and ER-negative breast cancer which includes the triple-negative subtype. This study has four aims: 1) to examine whether Minichromosome Maintenance (MCM)2, MCM4, and MCM6 can be used as markers to differentiate between luminal A and luminal B subtypes; 2) to study whether MCM2, MCM4, and MCM6 are highly expressed in triple-negative breast cancer, as there is an urgent need to search for surrogate markers in this aggressive subtype, for drug development purposes; 3) to compare the prognostic values of these markers in predicting relapse-free survival; and 4) to compare the three approaches used for scoring the protein expression of these markers by immunohistochemistry (IHC). MCM2, MCM4, MCM6, and MKI67 mRNA expression was first studied using in silico analysis of available breast cancer datasets. We next used IHC to evaluate their protein expression on tissue microarrays using three scoring methods. MCM2, MCM4, and MCM6 can help in distinction between luminal A and luminal B whose therapeutic management and clinical outcomes are different. MCM2, MCM4, MCM6, and Ki-67 are highly expressed in breast cancer of high histological grades that comprise clinically aggressive tumors such as luminal B, HER2-positive, and triple-negative subtypes. Low transcript expression of these markers is associated with increased probability of relapse-free survival. A positive relationship exists among the three scoring methods of each of the four markers. An independent validation cohort is needed to confirm their clinical utility.
Protein microarrays provide a powerful tool for the study of protein function. However, they are not widely used, in part because of the challenges in producing proteins to spot on the arrays. We generated protein microarrays by printing complementary DNAs onto glass slides and then translating target proteins with mammalian reticulocyte lysate. Epitope tags fused to the proteins allowed them to be immobilized in situ. This obviated the need to purify proteins, avoided protein stability problems during storage, and captured sufficient protein for functional studies. We used the technology to map pairwise interactions among 29 human DNA replication initiation proteins, recapitulate the regulation of Cdt1 binding to select replication proteins, and map its geminin-binding domain.
Cellular aging is characterized by the loss of DNA replication capability and is mainly brought about by various changes in chromatin structure. Here, we examined changes in MCM2-7 proteins, which act as a replicative DNA helicase, during aging of human WI38 fibroblasts at the single-cell level. We used nuclear accumulation of p21 as a marker of senescent cells, and examined changes in MCM2-7 by western blot analysis. First, we found that senescent cells are enriched for cells with a DNA content higher than 4N. Second, the levels of MCM2, MCM3, MCM4 and MCM6 proteins decreased in senescent cells. Third, cytoplasmic localization of MCM2 and MCM7 was observed in senescent cells, from an analysis of MCM2-7 except for MCM5. Consistent with this finding, fragmented MCM2 was predominant in these cells. These age-dependent changes in MCM2-7, a protein complex that directly affects cellular DNA replication, may play a critical role in cellular senescence.
BACKGROUND: Minichromosome maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6), as an important replication permission factor, is involved in the pathogenesis of various tumors. Here we studied the expression of MCM6 in neuroblastoma and its influence on tumor characteristics and prognosis. METHODS: Publicly available datasets were used to explore the influence of the differential expression of MCM6 on neuroblastoma tumor stage, risk and prognosis. In cell experiments, human neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-SH and SK-N-BE [ (2)] were utilized to verify the ability of MCM6 to promote cell proliferation, migration and invasion. We further explored the possible molecular mechanism of MCM6 affecting the phenotype of neuroblastoma cells by mutual verification of RNA-seq and western blotting, and flow cytometry to inquire about its potential specific roles in the cell cycle. RESULTS: Through multiple datasets mining, we found that high expression of MCM6 was positively correlated with elevated tumor stage, high risk and poor prognosis in neuroblastoma. At the cellular level, neuroblastoma cell proliferation, migration and invasion were significantly inhibited after MCM6 was interfered by siRNA. Mutual verification of RNA-seq and western blotting suggested that the downstream cell cycle-related genes were differentially expressed after MCM6 interference. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that neuroblastoma cells were blocked in G1/S phase after MCM6 interference. CONCLUSION: MCM6 is considered to be the driving force of G1/S cell cycle progression, and it is also a prognostic marker and a potential novel therapeutic target in neuroblastoma.
Breast cancer is associated with high morbidity and mortality, which are closely influenced by protein post-translational modifications (PTMs). Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) serves as a newly identified PTM type that plays a role in various biological processes; however, its involvement in breast cancer progression remains unclear. Minichromosome maintenance 6 (MCM6) is a critical component of DNA replication and has been previous confirmed to exhibit a significant role in tumorigenesis. Despite this, a comprehensive analysis of MCM6, particularly regarding its modifications in breast cancer is lacking. In this study, we found MCM6 is upregulated in breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA) and is associated with poorer overall survival by regulating the DNA damage repair mechanisms. Furthermore, MCM6-knockdown resulted in decreased cell proliferation and inhibited the DNA replication, leading to DNA replication stress and sustained DNA damage, thereby enhancing the chemotherapeutic sensitivity of breast cancer. Additionally, SIRT7-mediated crotonylation of MCM6 at K599 (MCM6-K599cr) was significantly upregulated in response to DNA replication stress, primarily due to the disassemebly of the MCM2-7 complex and regulated by RNF8-mediated ubiquitination. Concurrently, kaempferol, which acts as a regulator of SIRT7, was found to enhance the Kcr level of MCM6, reducing tumour weight, particular when combined with paclitaxel, highlighting its potential chemotherapeutic target for BRCA therapy.
