Thymidylate synthase; Contributes to the de novo mitochondrial thymidylate biosynthesis pathway.
Phospholipase C epsilon 1 (PLCE1) is a well-established susceptibility gene for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Identification of the underlying mechanism(s) regulated by PLCE1 could lead to a better understanding of ESCC tumorigenesis. In this study, we found that PLCE1 enhances tumor progression by regulating the replicative helicase MCM7 via two pathways. PLCE1 activated PKCalpha-mediated phosphorylation of E2F1, which led to the transcriptional activation of MCM7 and miR-106b-5p. The increased expression of miR-106b-5p, located in intron 13 of MCM7, suppressed autophagy and apoptosis by targeting Beclin-1 and RBL2, respectively. Moreover, MCM7 cooperated with the miR-106b-25 cluster to promote PLCE1-dependent cell-cycle progression both in vivo and in vitro. In addition, PLCE1 potentiated the phosphorylation of MCM7 at six threonine residues by the atypical kinase RIOK2, which promoted MCM complex assembly, chromatin loading, and cell-cycle progression. Inhibition of PLCE1 or RIOK2 hampered MCM7-mediated DNA replication, resulting in G1-S arrest. Furthermore, MCM7 overexpression in ESCC correlated with poor patient survival. Overall, these findings provide insights into the role of PLCE1 as an oncogenic regulator, a promising prognostic biomarker, and a potential therapeutic target in ESCC. SIGNIFICANCE: PLCE1 promotes tumor progression in ESCC by activating PKCalpha-mediated phosphorylation of E2F1 to upregulate MCM7 and miR-106b-5p expression and by potentiating MCM7 phosphorylation by RIOK2.
BACKGROUND: Cellular senescence, a permanent state of replicative arrest in otherwise proliferating cells, is a hallmark of aging and has been linked to aging-related diseases. Many genes play a role in cellular senescence, yet a comprehensive understanding of its pathways is still lacking. RESULTS: We develop CellAge (http://genomics.senescence.info/cells), a manually curated database of 279 human genes driving cellular senescence, and perform various integrative analyses. Genes inducing cellular senescence tend to be overexpressed with age in human tissues and are significantly overrepresented in anti-longevity and tumor-suppressor genes, while genes inhibiting cellular senescence overlap with pro-longevity and oncogenes. Furthermore, cellular senescence genes are strongly conserved in mammals but not in invertebrates. We also build cellular senescence protein-protein interaction and co-expression networks. Clusters in the networks are enriched for cell cycle and immunological processes. Network topological parameters also reveal novel potential cellular senescence regulators. Using siRNAs, we observe that all 26 candidates tested induce at least one marker of senescence with 13 genes (C9orf40, CDC25A, CDCA4, CKAP2, GTF3C4, HAUS4, IMMT, MCM7, MTHFD2, MYBL2, NEK2, NIPA2, and TCEB3) decreasing cell number, activating p16/p21, and undergoing morphological changes that resemble cellular senescence. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our work provides a benchmark resource for researchers to study cellular senescence, and our systems biology analyses reveal new insights and gene regulators of cellular senescence.
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a transcriptional regulator of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory response in all cell types. It also activates the transcription of genes important for macrophage function. Nrf2 activity declines with age and has been closely linked to atherosclerosis, but its specific role in this vascular pathology is not clear. Atherosclerotic plaques contain several macrophage subsets with distinct, yet not completely understood, functions in the lesion development. The aim of this study was to analyze the transcriptome of diverse Nrf2-deficient macrophage subpopulations from murine atherosclerotic aortas. Mice with transcriptionally inactive Nrf2 in Cdh5-expressing cells (Nrf2 (Cdh5tKO)) were used in the experiments. These mice lack transcriptional Nrf2 activity in endothelial cells, but also in a proportion of leukocytes. We confirmed that the bone marrow-derived and tissue-resident macrophages isolated from Nrf2 (Cdh5tKO) mice exhibit a significant decline in Nrf2 activity. Atherosclerosis was induced in Nrf2 (Cdh5tKO) and appropriate control mice via adeno-associated viral vector (AAV)-mediated overexpression of murine proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (Pcsk9) in the liver and high-fat diet feeding. After 21 weeks, live aortic cells were sorted on FACS and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was performed. Unsupervised clustering singled out 13 distinct aortic cell types. Among macrophages, 9 subclusters were identified. Differential gene expression analysis revealed cell subtype-specific expression patterns. A subset of inflammatory macrophages from atherosclerotic Nrf2 (Cdh5tKO) mice demonstrated downregulation of DNA replication genes (e.g. Mcm7, Lig1, Pola1) concomitant with upregulation of DNA damage sensor Atr gene. Atherosclerotic Nrf2 (Cdh5tKO) Lyve1+ resident macrophages showed strong upregulation of IFN-stimulated genes, as well as changes in the expression of death pathways-associated genes (Slc40a1, Bcl2a1). Furthermore, we observed subtype-specific expression of core ferroptosis genes (e.g. Cp, Hells, Slc40a1) in inflammatory versus tissue resident macrophages. This observation suggested a link between ferroptosis and inflammatory microenvironment appearing at a very early stage of atherogenesis. Our findings indicate that Nrf2 deficiency in aortic macrophages leads to subtype-specific transcriptomic changes associated with inflammation, iron homeostasis, cell injury or death pathways. This may help understanding the role of aging-associated decline of Nrf2 activity and the function of specific macrophage subtypes in atherosclerotic lesion development.
Recently published structural and functional analyses of the CMG complex have provided insight into the mechanism of its DNA helicase function and into the distinct roles of its central six component proteins MCM2-MCM7 (MCM2-7). To activate CMG helicase, the two protein kinases CDK and DDK, as well as MCM10, are required. In addition to the initiation of DNA replication, MCM function must be regulated at the DNA replication steps of elongation and termination. Polyubiquitylation of MCM7 is involved in terminating MCM function. Reinitiation of DNA replication in a single cell cycle, which is prevented mainly by CDK, is understood at the molecular level. MCM2-7 gene expression is regulated during cellular aging and the cell cycle, and the expression depends on oxygen concentration. These regulatory processes have been described recently. Genomic structural alteration, which is an essential element in cancer progression, is mainly generated by disruptions of DNA replication fork structures. A point mutation in MCM4 that disturbs MCM2-7 function results in genomic instability, leading to the generation of cancer cells. In this review, I focus on the following points: 1) function of the MCM2-7 complex, 2) activation of MCM2-7 helicase, 3) regulation of MCM2-7 function, 4) MCM2-7 expression, and 5) the role of MCM mutation in cancer progression.
In regenerative medicine, the tumorigenic potency of cells in cellular therapy products (CTPs) is a major concern for their application to patients. This study presents a method-the soft agar colony formation assay using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-to evaluate tumorigenicity. MRC-5 cells, contaminated with HeLa cells, were cultured for up to 4 weeks in soft agar medium. Cell-proliferation-related mRNAs, Ki-67 and cyclin B, could be detected in 0.01% of HeLa cells after 5 days of culture, whereas cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) could be detected after 2 weeks. On the other hand, CDK2, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), and minichromosome maintenance protein 7 (MCM7) were not useful to detect HeLa cells even after 4 weeks of culture. The cancer stem cell (CSC) markers, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) and CD133 in 0.01% of HeLa cells, could be detected 2 and 4 weeks after culture, respectively. However, another CSC marker CD44 was not useful because its expression was also detected in MRC-5 cells alone. This study suggests that the application of the PCR method to the soft agar colony formation assay could evaluate not only the tumorigenic potency in the short-term but also characterize the colonies, eventually improving the safety of CTPs.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Chronic viral infections present serious public health challenges; however, direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) are now able to cure nearly all patients infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV), representing the only cure of a human chronic viral infection to date. DAAs provide a valuable opportunity to study immune pathways in the reversal of chronic immune failures in an in vivo human system. METHODS: To leverage this opportunity, we used plate-based single-cell RNA-seq to deeply profile myeloid cells from liver fine needle aspirates in patients with HCV before and after DAA treatment. We comprehensively characterised liver neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells, conventional dendritic cells, plasmacytoid dendritic cells, classical monocytes, non-classical monocytes, and macrophages, and defined fine-grained subpopulations of several cell types. RESULTS: We discovered cell type-specific changes post-cure, including an increase in MCM7+STMN1+ proliferating CD1C+ conventional dendritic cells, which may support restoration from chronic exhaustion. We observed an expected downregulation of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) post-cure as well as an unexpected inverse relationship between pre-treatment viral load and post-cure ISG expression in each cell type, revealing a link between viral loads and sustained modifications of the host's immune system. We found an upregulation of PD-L1/L2 gene expression in ISG-high neutrophils and IDO1 expression in eosinophils, pinpointing cell subpopulations crucial for immune regulation. We identified three recurring gene programmes shared by multiple cell types, distilling core functions of the myeloid compartment. CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive single-cell RNA-seq atlas of human liver myeloid cells in response to cure of chronic viral infections reveals principles of liver immunity and provides immunotherapeutic insights. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02476617). IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: Chronic viral liver infections continue to be a major public health problem. Single-cell characterisation of liver immune cells during hepatitis C and post-cure provides unique insights into the architecture of liver immunity contributing to the resolution of the first curable chronic viral infection of humans. Multiple layers of innate immune regulation during chronic infections and persistent immune modifications after cure are revealed. Researchers and clinicians may leverage these findings to develop methods to optimise the post-cure environment for HCV and develop novel therapeutic approaches for other chronic viral infections.
Assembly of the CMG (CDC-45-MCM-2-7-GINS) helicase is the key regulated step during eukaryotic DNA replication initiation. Until now, it was unclear whether metazoa require additional factors that are not present in yeast. In this work, we show that Caenorhabditis elegans DNSN-1, the ortholog of human DONSON, functions during helicase assembly in a complex with MUS-101/TOPBP1. DNSN-1 is required to recruit the GINS complex to chromatin, and a cryo-electron microscopy structure indicates that DNSN-1 positions GINS on the MCM-2-7 helicase motor (comprising the six MCM-2 to MCM-7 proteins), by direct binding of DNSN-1 to GINS and MCM-3, using interfaces that we show are important for initiation and essential for viability. These findings identify DNSN-1 as a missing link in our understanding of DNA replication initiation, suggesting that initiation defects underlie the human disease syndrome that results from DONSON mutations.
DNA replication is a complex process that needs to be executed accurately before cell division in order to maintain genome integrity. DNA replication is divided into three main stages: initiation, elongation and termination. One of the key events during initiation is the assembly of the replicative helicase at origins of replication, and this mechanism has been very well described over the last decades. In the last six years however, researchers have also focused on deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying the disassembly of the replicative helicase during termination. Similar to replisome assembly, the mechanism of replisome disassembly is strictly regulated and well conserved throughout evolution, although its complexity increases in higher eukaryotes. While budding yeast rely on just one pathway for replisome disassembly in S phase, higher eukaryotes evolved an additional mitotic pathway over and above the default S phase specific pathway. Moreover, replisome disassembly has been recently found to be a key event prior to the repair of certain DNA lesions, such as under-replicated DNA in mitosis and inter-strand cross-links (ICLs) in S phase. Although replisome disassembly in human cells has not been characterised yet, they possess all of the factors involved in these pathways in model organisms, and de-regulation of many of them are known to contribute to tumorigenesis and other pathological conditions.
Premature ovarian failure (POF), which is often comorbid with dry eye disease (DED) is a key issue affecting female health. Here, we explored the mechanism underlying comorbid POF and DED to further elucidate disease mechanisms and improve treatment. Datasets related to POF (GSE39501) and DED (GSE44101) were identified from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and subjected to weighted gene coexpression network (WGCNA) and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) analyses, respectively, with the intersection used to obtain 158 genes comorbid in POF and DED. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses of comorbid genes revealed that identified genes were primarily related to DNA replication and Cell cycle, respectively. Protein-Protein interaction (PPI) network analysis of comorbid genes obtained the 15 hub genes: CDC20, BIRC5, PLK1, TOP2A, MCM5, MCM6, MCM7, MCM2, CENPA, FOXM1, GINS1, TIPIN, MAD2L1, and CDCA3. To validate the analysis results, additional POF- and DED-related datasets (GSE48873 and GSE171043, respectively) were selected. miRNAs-lncRNAs-genes network and machine learning methods were used to further analysis comorbid genes. The DGIdb database identified valdecoxib, amorfrutin A, and kaempferitrin as potential drugs. Herein, the comorbid genes of POF and DED were identified from a bioinformatics perspective, providing a new strategy to explore the comorbidity mechanism, opening up a new direction for the diagnosis and treatment of comorbid POF and DED.
Accumulating studies suggest that splicing factors play important roles in many diseases including human cancers. Our study revealed that WBP11, a core splicing factor, is highly expressed in ovarian cancer (OC) tissues and associated with a poor prognosis. WBP11 inhibition significantly impaired the proliferation and mobility of ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, FOXM1 transcriptionally activated WBP11 expression by directly binding to its promoter in OC cells. Importantly, RNA-seq and alternative splicing event analysis revealed that WBP11 silencing decreased the expression of MCM7 by regulating intron 4 retention. MCM7 inhibition attenuated the increase in malignant behaviors of WBP11-overexpressing OC cells. Overall, WBP11 was identified as an oncogenic splicing factor that contributes to malignant progression by repressing intron 4 retention of MCM7 in OC cells. Thus, WBP11 is an oncogenic splicing factor with potential therapeutic and prognostic implications in OC.
The power of proteomics in cultured skin fibroblasts from individuals with either systemic sclerosis or recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa has led to the common finding of senescence and deficiencies in autophagy. Both of these disorders exert high demand on fibroblast activity, and without the protective action of autophagy cellular stress could have many adverse effects that are further amplified by the senescent phenotype.
BACKGROUND: Meningioma is one of the most common central nervous system tumors that derived from meningothelial (arachnoid cap) cells. This paper identified the network-based Protein-Protein Interactions (PPI) for meningioma relative to healthy control. METHODS: Gene expression data including 384 gene or protein names extracted from a number of beforehand investigations. RESULTS: Out of these 384 proteins, 176 were found to be exclusively expressed in meningiomas and 208 proteins were down-regulated. The networks of related differentially expressed genes were explored using cytoscape and the PPI analysis methods such as MCODE and ClueGO. Results analysis introduced a number of hub proteins and 27 clusters (protein complex) with distinctive seed genes. Identified ClueGO Pathways based on subnetworks mined by MCODE composed of positive regulation in RBC homeostasis, dysregulation of transport from ER to Golgi, disruption regulation of cell cycle and antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen and neutralization of exogenous dsRNA. Combination of over expression of TCEA1, UBE2E1, XRCC5, IFIT1, IFIT-3, MCM2, and MCM7 and under expression of CDC25A, SEC31A, and CDK6 can serve as diagnostic biomarker panel for meningiomas. CONCLUSION: These introduced network-based biomarkers for the meningioma patterns may be helpful in diagnosis, prognosis and treatment processes however biomarker validation is necessary.
Cellular aging is characterized by the loss of DNA replication capability and is mainly brought about by various changes in chromatin structure. Here, we examined changes in MCM2-7 proteins, which act as a replicative DNA helicase, during aging of human WI38 fibroblasts at the single-cell level. We used nuclear accumulation of p21 as a marker of senescent cells, and examined changes in MCM2-7 by western blot analysis. First, we found that senescent cells are enriched for cells with a DNA content higher than 4N. Second, the levels of MCM2, MCM3, MCM4 and MCM6 proteins decreased in senescent cells. Third, cytoplasmic localization of MCM2 and MCM7 was observed in senescent cells, from an analysis of MCM2-7 except for MCM5. Consistent with this finding, fragmented MCM2 was predominant in these cells. These age-dependent changes in MCM2-7, a protein complex that directly affects cellular DNA replication, may play a critical role in cellular senescence.
The proliferation of eukaryotic cells is a highly regulated process that depends on the precise duplication of chromosomal DNA in each cell cycle. Regulation of the replication licensing system, which promotes the assembly of complexes of proteins termed Mcm2-7 onto replication origins, is responsible for preventing re-replication of DNA in a single cell cycle. Recent work has shown how the licensing system is directly controlled by cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs). Repression of origin licensing is emerging as a ubiquitous route by which the proliferative capacity of cells is lowered, and Mcm2-Mcm7 proteins show promise as diagnostic markers of early cancer stages. These results have prompted us to propose a functional distinction between the proliferative state and the non-proliferative state (including G0) depending on whether origins are licensed.
BACKGROUND: Minichromosomal maintenance (MCM) complex components 2, 4, 5 and 6 have been linked to human disease with phenotypes including microcephaly and intellectual disability. The MCM complex has DNA helicase activity and is thereby important for the initiation and elongation of the replication fork and highly expressed in proliferating neural stem cells. METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing was applied to identify the genetic cause underlying the neurodevelopmental disease of the index family. The expression pattern of Mcm7 was characterised by performing quantitative real-time PCR, in situ hybridisation and immunostaining. To prove the disease-causative nature of identified MCM7, a proof-of-principle experiment was performed. RESULTS: We reported that the homozygous missense variant c.793G>A/p.A265T (g.7:99695841C>T, NM_005916.4) in MCM7 was associated with autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH), severe intellectual disability and behavioural abnormalities in a consanguineous pedigree with three affected individuals. We found concordance between the spatiotemporal expression pattern of Mcm7 in mice and a proliferative state: Mcm7 expression was higher in early mouse developmental stages and in proliferative zones of the brain. Accordingly, Mcm7/MCM7 levels were detectable particularly in undifferentiated mouse embryonal stem cells and human induced pluripotent stem cells compared with differentiated neurons. We further demonstrate that the downregulation of Mcm7 in mouse neuroblastoma cells reduces cell viability and proliferation, and, as a proof-of-concept, that this is counterbalanced by the overexpression of wild-type but not mutant MCM7. CONCLUSION: We report mutations of MCM7 as a novel cause of autosomal recessive MCPH and intellectual disability and highlight the crucial function of MCM7 in nervous system development.
MCM7 is one of the pivotal DNA replication licensing factors in controlling DNA synthesis and cell entry into S phase. Its expression and DNA copy number are some of the most predictive factors for the growth and behavior of human malignancies. In this study, we identified that MCM7 interacts with the receptor for activated protein kinase C 1 (RACK1), a protein kinase C (PKC) adaptor, in vivo and in vitro. The RACK1 binding motif in MCM7 is located at the amino acid 221-248. Knocking down RACK1 significantly reduced MCM7 chromatin association, DNA synthesis, and cell cycle entry into S phase. Activation of PKC by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate dramatically decreased MCM7 DNA replication licensing and induced cell growth arrest. Activation of PKC induced redistribution of RACK1 from nucleus to cytoplasm and decreased RACK1-chromatin association. The MCM7 mutant that does not bind RACK1 has no DNA replication licensing or oncogenic transformation activity. As a result, this study demonstrates a novel signaling mechanism that critically controls DNA synthesis and cell cycle progression.
The CMG helicase is the stable core of the eukaryotic replisome and is ubiquitylated and disassembled during DNA replication termination. Fungi and animals use different enzymes to ubiquitylate the Mcm7 subunit of CMG, suggesting that CMG ubiquitylation arose repeatedly during eukaryotic evolution. Until now, it was unclear whether cells also have ubiquitin-independent pathways for helicase disassembly and whether CMG disassembly is essential for cell viability. Using reconstituted assays with budding yeast CMG, we generated the mcm7-10R allele that compromises ubiquitylation by SCF(Dia2). mcm7-10R delays helicase disassembly in vivo, driving genome instability in the next cell cycle. These data indicate that defective CMG ubiquitylation explains the major phenotypes of cells lacking Dia2. Notably, the viability of mcm7-10R and dia2∆ is dependent upon the related Rrm3 and Pif1 DNA helicases that have orthologues in all eukaryotes. We show that Rrm3 acts during S-phase to disassemble old CMG complexes from the previous cell cycle. These findings indicate that CMG disassembly is essential in yeast cells and suggest that Pif1-family helicases might have mediated CMG disassembly in ancestral eukaryotes.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare recessive genetic disease characterized by congenital abnormalities, bone marrow failure and heightened cancer susceptibility in early adulthood. FA is caused by biallelic germ-line mutation of any one of 16 genes. While several functions for the FA proteins have been ascribed, the prevailing hypothesis is that the FA proteins function cooperatively in the FA-BRCA pathway to repair damaged DNA. A pivotal step in the activation of the FA-BRCA pathway is the monoubiquitination of the FANCD2 and FANCI proteins. Despite their importance for DNA repair, the domain structure, regulation, and function of FANCD2 and FANCI remain poorly understood. In this review, we provide an overview of our current understanding of FANCD2 and FANCI, with an emphasis on their posttranslational modification and common and unique functions.
The complex pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) limits the effectiveness of current therapies. Through RNA sequencing of cancerous and adjacent non-cancerous tissues from six HCC patients, we identified a significant upregulation of MCM2-7 genes, which encode proteins that form the MCM complex, a DNA helicase involved in DNA replication and cell cycle progression. We focused on MCM2, MCM3, and MCM7, and observed that knockdown of these proteins inhibited HCC cell proliferation. Further analysis revealed a critical regulatory axis involving EZH2, the MCM complex, and hTERT. EZH2 was found to be highly correlated with MCM complex gene expression and directly bound to the MCM gene promoters, regulating their expression. This EZH2/MCM complex/hTERT axis may play a key role in suppressing cellular senescence, thereby promoting HCC progression. Knocking down MCM complex genes reduced hTERT expression, inducing HCC cell senescence and enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of sorafenib. These findings suggest that the EZH2/MCM complex/hTERT axis could serve as a novel therapeutic target for HCC.
