Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; Nuclear receptor that binds peroxisome proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids. Once activated by a ligand, the nuclear receptor binds to DNA specific PPAR response elements (PPRE) and modulates the transcription of its target genes, such as acyl-CoA oxidase. It therefore controls the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty acids. Key regulator of adipocyte differentiation and glucose homeostasis. ARF6 acts as a key regulator of the tissue-specific adipocyte P2 (aP2) enhancer. Acts as a critical regulator of gut ho [...] 
Super-enhancers (SEs) are clusters of enhancers that cooperatively assemble a high density of the transcriptional apparatus to drive robust expression of genes with prominent roles in cell identity. Here we demonstrate that the SE-enriched transcriptional coactivators BRD4 and MED1 form nuclear puncta at SEs that exhibit properties of liquid-like condensates and are disrupted by chemicals that perturb condensates. The intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of BRD4 and MED1 can form phase-separated droplets, and MED1-IDR droplets can compartmentalize and concentrate the transcription apparatus from nuclear extracts. These results support the idea that coactivators form phase-separated condensates at SEs that compartmentalize and concentrate the transcription apparatus, suggest a role for coactivator IDRs in this process, and offer insights into mechanisms involved in the control of key cell-identity genes.
BACKGROUND: Dysregulated BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) or TGF-beta (transforming growth factor beta) signaling pathways are imperative in idiopathic and familial pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) as well as experimental pulmonary hypertension (PH) in rodent models. MED1 (mediator complex subunit 1) is a key transcriptional co-activator and KLF4 (Kruppel-like factor 4) is a master transcription factor in endothelium. However, MED1 and KLF4 epigenetic and transcriptional regulations of the BMP/TGF-beta axes in pulmonary endothelium and their dysregulations leading to PAH remain elusive. We investigate the MED1/KLF4 co-regulation of the BMP/TGF-beta axes in endothelium by studying the epigenetic regulation of BMPR2 (BMP receptor type II), ETS-related gene (ERG), and TGFBR2 (TGF-beta receptor 2) and their involvement in the PH. METHODS: High-throughput screening involving data from RNA-seq, MED1 ChIP-seq, H3K27ac ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq, and high-throughput chromosome conformation capture together with in silico computations were used to explore the epigenetic and transcriptional regulation of BMPR2, ERG, and TGFBR2 by MED1 and KLF4. In vitro experiments with cultured pulmonary arterial endothelial cells (ECs) and bulk assays were used to validate results from these in silico analyses. Lung tissue from patients with idiopathic PAH, animals with experimental PH, and mice with endothelial ablation of MED1 (EC-MED1(-/-)) were used to study the PH-protective effect of MED1. RESULTS: Levels of MED1 were decreased in lung tissue or pulmonary arterial endothelial cells from idiopathic PAH patients and rodent PH models. Mechanistically, MED1 acted synergistically with KLF4 to transactivate BMPR2, ERG, and TGFBR2 via chromatin remodeling and enhancer-promoter interactions. EC-MED1(-/-) mice showed PH susceptibility. In contrast, MED1 overexpression mitigated the PH phenotype in rodents. CONCLUSIONS: A homeostatic regulation of BMPR2, ERG, and TGFBR2 in ECs by MED1 synergistic with KLF4 is essential for the normal function of the pulmonary endothelium. Dysregulation of MED1 and the resulting impairment of the BMP/TGF-beta signaling is implicated in the disease progression of PAH in humans and PH in rodent models.
ACOX1: acyl-CoA oxidase 1; ADH5: alcohol dehydrogenase 5 (class III), chi polypeptide; ADIPOQ: adiponectin, C1Q and collagen domain containing; ATG: autophagy related; BECN1: beclin 1; CRTC2: CREB regulated transcription coactivator 2; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; F2RL1: F2R like trypsin receptor 1; FA: fatty acid; FOXO1: forkhead box O1; GLP1R: glucagon like peptide 1 receptor; GRK2: G protein-coupled receptor kinase 2; GTPase: guanosine triphosphatase; HFD: high-fat diet; HSCs: hepatic stellate cells; HTRA2: HtrA serine peptidase 2; IRGM: immunity related GTPase M; KD: knockdown; KDM6B: lysine demethylase 6B; KO: knockout; LAMP2: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2; LAP: LC3-associated phagocytosis; LDs: lipid droplets; Li KO: liver-specific knockout; LSECs: liver sinusoidal endothelial cells; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAP3K5: mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 5; MED1: mediator complex subunit 1; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MTORC1: mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1; NAFLD: non-alcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH: non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; NFE2L2: NFE2 like bZIP transcription factor 2; NOS3: nitric oxide synthase 3; NR1H3: nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group H member 3; OA: oleic acid; OE: overexpression; OSBPL8: oxysterol binding protein like 8; PA: palmitic acid; RUBCNL: rubicon like autophagy enhancer; PLIN2: perilipin 2; PLIN3: perilipin 3; PPARA: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha; PRKAA2/AMPK: protein kinase AMP-activated catalytic subunit alpha 2; RAB: member RAS oncogene family; RPTOR: regulatory associated protein of MTOR complex 1; SCD: stearoyl-CoA desaturase; SIRT1: sirtuin 1; SIRT3: sirtuin 3; SNARE: soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; SREBF1: sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 1;SREBF2: sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 2; STING1: stimulator of interferon response cGAMP interactor 1; STX17: syntaxin 17; TAGs: triacylglycerols; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TP53/p53: tumor protein p53; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; VMP1: vacuole membrane protein 1.
TAZ promotes growth, development and tumorigenesis by regulating the expression of target genes. However, the manner in which TAZ orchestrates the transcriptional responses is poorly defined. Here we demonstrate that TAZ forms nuclear condensates through liquid-liquid phase separation to compartmentalize its DNA-binding cofactor TEAD4, coactivators BRD4 and MED1, and the transcription elongation factor CDK9 for transcription. TAZ forms phase-separated droplets in vitro and liquid-like nuclear condensates in vivo, and this ability is negatively regulated by Hippo signalling through LATS-mediated phosphorylation and is mediated by the coiled-coil (CC) domain. Deletion of the TAZ CC domain or substitution with the YAP CC domain prevents the phase separation of TAZ and its ability to induce the expression of TAZ-specific target genes. Thus, we identify a mechanism of transcriptional activation by TAZ and demonstrate that pathway-specific transcription factors also engage the phase-separation mechanism for efficient and specific transcriptional activation.
Nuclear localization of HIPPO-YAP fusion proteins has been implicated in supratentorial ependymoma development. Here, unexpectedly, we find that liquid-liquid phase separation, rather than nuclear localization, of recurrent patient-derived YAP fusions, YAP-MAMLD1 and C11ORF95-YAP, underlies ependymoma tumourigenesis from neural progenitor cells. Mutagenesis and chimaera assays demonstrate that an intrinsically disordered region promotes oligomerization of the YAP fusions into nuclear, puncta-like, membrane-less condensates. Oligomerization and nuclear condensates induced by YAP fusion with a coiled-coil domain of transcriptional activator GCN4 also promote ependymoma formation. YAP-MAMLD1 concentrates transcription factors and co-activators, including BRD4, MED1 and TEAD, in condensates while excluding transcriptional repressive PRC2, and induces long-range enhancer-promoter interactions that promote transcription and oncogenic programmes. Blocking condensate-mediated transcriptional co-activator activity inhibits tumourigenesis, indicating a critical role of liquid phase separation for YAP fusion oncogenic activity in ependymoma. YAP fusions containing the intrinsically disordered region features are common in human tumours, suggesting that nuclear condensates could be targeted to treat YAP-fusion-induced cancers.
The nucleus contains diverse phase-separated condensates that compartmentalize and concentrate biomolecules with distinct physicochemical properties. Here, we investigated whether condensates concentrate small-molecule cancer therapeutics such that their pharmacodynamic properties are altered. We found that antineoplastic drugs become concentrated in specific protein condensates in vitro and that this occurs through physicochemical properties independent of the drug target. This behavior was also observed in tumor cells, where drug partitioning influenced drug activity. Altering the properties of the condensate was found to affect the concentration and activity of drugs. These results suggest that selective partitioning and concentration of small molecules within condensates contributes to drug pharmacodynamics and that further understanding of this phenomenon may facilitate advances in disease therapy.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogeneous and clinically aggressive disease for which there is no targeted therapy. BET bromodomain inhibitors, which have shown efficacy in several models of cancer, have not been evaluated in TNBC. These inhibitors displace BET bromodomain proteins such as BRD4 from chromatin by competing with their acetyl-lysine recognition modules, leading to inhibition of oncogenic transcriptional programs. Here we report the preferential sensitivity of TNBCs to BET bromodomain inhibition in vitro and in vivo, establishing a rationale for clinical investigation and further motivation to understand mechanisms of resistance. In paired cell lines selected for acquired resistance to BET inhibition from previously sensitive TNBCs, we failed to identify gatekeeper mutations, new driver events or drug pump activation. BET-resistant TNBC cells remain dependent on wild-type BRD4, which supports transcription and cell proliferation in a bromodomain-independent manner. Proteomic studies of resistant TNBC identify strong association with MED1 and hyper-phosphorylation of BRD4 attributable to decreased activity of PP2A, identified here as a principal BRD4 serine phosphatase. Together, these studies provide a rationale for BET inhibition in TNBC and present mechanism-based combination strategies to anticipate clinical drug resistance.
The 1.3-megadalton transcription factor IID (TFIID) is required for preinitiation complex (PIC) assembly and RNA polymerase II (Pol II)-mediated transcription initiation on almost all genes. The 26-subunit Mediator stimulates transcription and cyclin-dependent kinase 7 (CDK7)-mediated phosphorylation of the Pol II C-terminal domain (CTD). We determined the structures of human Mediator in the Tail module-extended (at near-atomic resolution) and Tail-bent conformations and structures of TFIID-based PIC-Mediator (76 polypeptides, ~4.1 megadaltons) in four distinct conformations. PIC-Mediator assembly induces concerted reorganization (Head-tilting and Middle-down) of Mediator and creates a Head-Middle sandwich, which stabilizes two CTD segments and brings CTD to CDK7 for phosphorylation; this suggests a CTD-gating mechanism favorable for phosphorylation. The TFIID-based PIC architecture modulates Mediator organization and TFIIH stabilization, underscoring the importance of TFIID in orchestrating PIC-Mediator assembly.
Damage-induced long non-coding RNAs (dilncRNA) synthesized at DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by RNA polymerase II are necessary for DNA-damage-response (DDR) focus formation. We demonstrate that induction of DSBs results in the assembly of functional promoters that include a complete RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex, MED1 and CDK9. Absence or inactivation of these factors causes a reduction in DDR foci both in vivo and in an in vitro system that reconstitutes DDR events on nucleosomes. We also show that dilncRNAs drive molecular crowding of DDR proteins, such as 53BP1, into foci that exhibit liquid-liquid phase-separation condensate properties. We propose that the assembly of DSB-induced transcriptional promoters drives RNA synthesis, which stimulates phase separation of DDR factors in the shape of foci.
Neurological diseases, including traumatic brain injuries, stroke (haemorrhagic and ischemic), and inherent neurodegenerative diseases cause acquired disability in humans, representing a leading cause of death worldwide. The Mediator complex (MED) is a large, evolutionarily conserved multiprotein that facilities the interaction between transcription factors and RNA Polymerase II in eukaryotes. Some MED subunits have been found altered in the brain, although their specific functions in neurodegenerative diseases are not fully understood. Mutations in MED subunits were associated with a wide range of genetic diseases for MED12, MED13, MED13L, MED20, MED23, MED25, and CDK8 genes. In addition, MED12 and MED23 were deregulated in the Alzheimer's Disease. Interestingly, most of the genomic mutations have been found in the subunits of the kinase module. To date, there is only one evidence on MED1 involvement in post-stroke cognitive deficits. Although the underlying neurodegenerative disorders may be different, we are confident that the signal cascades of the biological-cognitive mechanisms of brain adaptation, which begin after brain deterioration, may also differ. Here, we analysed relevant studies in English published up to June 2023. They were identified through a search of electronic databases including PubMed, Medline, EMBASE and Scopus, including search terms such as "Mediator complex", "neurological disease", "brains". Thematic content analysis was conducted to collect and summarize all studies demonstrating MED alteration to understand the role of this central transcriptional regulatory complex in the brain. Improved and deeper knowledge of the regulatory mechanisms in neurological diseases can increase the ability of physicians to predict onset and progression, thereby improving diagnostic care and providing appropriate treatment decisions.
BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSCC) is known for its high aggressiveness and susceptibility to cervical lymph node metastasis, which greatly contributes to its poor prognosis. During tumorigenesis, many types of cancer cells acquire oncogenic super-enhancers (SEs) that drive the overexpression of oncogenes, thereby maintaining malignant progression. This study aimed to identify and validate the role of oncogenic SE-associated genes in the malignant progression of HNSCC. METHODS: We identified HNSCC cell-specific SE-associated genes through H3K27Ac ChIP-seq and overlapped them with HNSCC-associated genes obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets using weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) to identify hub genes. The expression of IGF2BP2 and KLF7 in HNSCC was detected using clinical samples. To determine the biological role of IGF2BP2, we performed CCK-8, colony formation assay, Transwell migration assay, invasion assay, and orthotopic xenograft model experiments. Furthermore, we utilized a CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing system, small-molecule inhibitors, ChIP-qPCR, and dual-luciferase reporter assays to investigate the molecular mechanisms of IGF2BP2 and its upstream transcription factors. RESULTS: Our study identified IGF2BP2 as a hub SE-associated gene that exhibited aberrant expression in HNSCC tissues. Increased expression of IGF2BP2 was observed to be linked with malignant progression and unfavorable prognosis in HNSCC patients. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that IGF2BP2 promotes the tumorigenicity and metastasis of HNSCC by promoting cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically, the IGF2BP2-SE region displayed enrichment for H3K27Ac, BRD4, and MED1, which led to the inhibition of IGF2BP2 transcription and expression through deactivation of the SE-associated transcriptional program. Additionally, KLF7 was found to induce the transcription of IGF2BP2 and directly bind to its promoter and SE regions. Moreover, the abundance of KLF7 exhibited a positive correlation with the abundance of IGF2BP2 in HNSCC. Patients with high expression of both KLF7 and IGF2BP2 showed poorer prognosis. Lastly, we demonstrated that the small molecule inhibitor JQ1, targeting BRD4, attenuated the proliferation and metastatic abilities of HNSCC cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals the critical role of IGF2BP2 overexpression mediated by SE and KLF7 in promoting HNSCC progression. Targeting SE-associated transcriptional programs may represent a potential therapeutic strategy in managing HNSCC.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) often develops resistance to single-agent treatment, which can be circumvented using targeted combinatorial approaches. Here, we demonstrate that the simultaneous inhibition of LOXL2 and BRD4 synergistically limits TNBC proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, LOXL2 interacts in the nucleus with the short isoform of BRD4 (BRD4S), MED1, and the cell cycle transcriptional regulator B-MyB. These interactions sustain the formation of BRD4 and MED1 nuclear transcriptional foci and control cell cycle progression at the gene expression level. The pharmacological co-inhibition of LOXL2 and BRD4 reduces BRD4 nuclear foci, BRD4-MED1 colocalization, and the transcription of cell cycle genes, thus suppressing TNBC cell proliferation. Targeting the interaction between BRD4S and LOXL2 could be a starting point for the development of new anticancer strategies for the treatment of TNBC.
RNA transcribed from enhancers, i.e., eRNA, has been suggested to directly activate transcription by recruiting transcription factors and co-activators. Although there have been specific examples of eRNA functioning in this way, it is not clear how general this may be. We find that the AT-hook of SWI/SNF preferentially binds RNA and, as part of the esBAF complex, associates with eRNA transcribed from intronic and intergenic regions. Our data suggest that SWI/SNF is globally recruited in cis by eRNA to cell-type-specific enhancers, representative of two distinct stages that mimic early mammalian development, and not at enhancers that are shared between the two stages. In this manner, SWI/SNF facilitates recruitment and/or activation of MLL3/4, p300/CBP, and Mediator to stage-specific enhancers and super-enhancers that regulate the transcription of metabolic and cell lineage priming-related genes. These findings highlight a connection between ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling and eRNA in cell identity and typical- and super-enhancer activation.
G-quadruplexes (G4s) can recruit transcription factors to activate gene expression, but detailed mechanisms remain enigmatic. Here, we demonstrate that G4s in the CCND1 promoter propel the motility in MAZ phase-separated condensates and subsequently activate CCND1 transcription. Zinc finger (ZF) 2 of MAZ is a responsible for G4 binding, while ZF3-5, but not a highly disordered region, is critical for MAZ condensation. MAZ nuclear puncta overlaps with signals of G4s and various coactivators including BRD4, MED1, CDK9 and active RNA polymerase II, as well as gene activation histone markers. MAZ mutants lacking either G4 binding or phase separation ability did not form nuclear puncta, and showed deficiencies in promoting hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and xenograft tumor formation. Overall, we unveiled that G4s recruit MAZ to the CCND1 promoter and facilitate the motility in MAZ condensates that compartmentalize coactivators to activate CCND1 expression and subsequently exacerbate hepatocarcinogenesis.
While immunotherapy has revolutionized cancer treatment, its safety has been hampered by immunotherapy-related adverse events. Unexpectedly, we show that Mediator complex subunit 1 (MED1) is required for T regulatory (T(reg)) cell function specifically in the tumor microenvironment. T(reg) cell-specific MED1 deletion does not predispose mice to autoimmunity or excessive inflammation. In contrast, MED1 is required for T(reg) cell promotion of tumor growth because MED1 is required for the terminal differentiation of effector T(reg) cells in the tumor. Suppression of these terminally differentiated T(reg) cells is sufficient for eliciting antitumor immunity. Both human and murine T(reg) cells experience divergent paths of differentiation in tumors and matched tissues with non-malignant inflammation. Collectively, we identify a pathway promoting the differentiation of a T(reg) cell effector subset specific to tumors and demonstrate that suppression of a subset of T(reg) cells is sufficient for promoting antitumor immunity in the absence of autoimmune consequences.
Prostate cancer (PCa) is witnessing a concerning rise in incidence annually, with the androgen receptor (AR) emerging as a pivotal contributor to its growth and progression. Mounting evidence underscores the AR's ability to recruit cofactors, influencing downstream gene transcription and thereby fueling the proliferation and metastasis of PCa cells. Although, clinical strategies involving AR antagonists provide some relief, managing castration resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) remains a formidable challenge. Thus, the need of the hour lies in unearthing new drugs or therapeutic targets to effectively combat PCa. This review encapsulates the pivotal roles played by coactivators and corepressors of AR, notably androgen receptor-associated protein (ARA) and steroid receptor Coactivators (SRC) in PCa. Our data unveils how these cofactors intricately modulate histone modifications, cell cycling, SUMOylation, and apoptosis through their interactions with AR. Among the array of cofactors scrutinised, such as ARA70beta, ARA24, ARA160, ARA55, ARA54, PIAS1, PIAS3, SRC1, SRC2, SRC3, PCAF, p300/CBP, MED1, and CARM1, several exhibit upregulation in PCa. Conversely, other cofactors like ARA70alpha, PIASy, and NCoR/SMRT demonstrate downregulation. This duality underscores the complexity of AR cofactor dynamics in PCa. Based on our findings, we propose that manipulating cofactor regulation to modulate AR function holds promise as a novel therapeutic avenue against advanced PCa. This paradigm shift offers renewed hope in the quest for effective treatments in the face of CRPC's formidable challenges.
Cardiovascular disease is a main cause of mortality in the world and the highest incidence of all diseases. However, the mechanism of the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease is still unclear, and we need to continue to explore its mechanism of action. The occurrence and development of cardiovascular disease is significantly associated with genetic abnormalities, and gene expression is affected by transcriptional regulation. In this complex process, the protein-protein interaction promotes the RNA polymerase II to the initiation site. And in this process of transcriptional regulation, transcriptional cofactors are responsible for passing cues from enhancers to promoters and promoting the binding of RNA polymerases to promoters, so transcription cofactors playing a key role in gene expression regulation. There is growing evidence that transcriptional cofactors play a critical role in cardiovascular disease. Transcriptional cofactors can promote or inhibit transcription by affecting the function of transcription factors. It can affect the initiation and elongation process of transcription by forming complexes with transcription factors, which are important for the stabilization of DNA rings. It can also act as a protein that interacts with other proteins to affect the expression of other genes. Therefore, the aim of this overview is to summarize the effect of some transcriptional cofactors such as BRD4, EP300, MED1, EZH2, YAP, SIRT6 in cardiovascular disease and to provide a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.
Mediator subunit mediator 1 (MED1) mediates ligand-dependent binding of the mediator coactivator complex to various nuclear receptors and plays a critical role in embryonic development, lipid and glucose metabolism, liver regeneration, and tumorigenesis. However, the precise role of MED1 in the development of liver fibrosis has been unclear. Here, we showed that MED1 expression was increased in livers from nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) patients and mice and positively correlated with transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling and profibrotic factors. Upon treatment with carbon tetrachloride (CCl(4)), hepatic fibrosis was much less in liver-specific MED1 deletion (MED1(DeltaLiv)) mice than in MED1(fl/fl) littermates. TGF-beta/Smad2/3 signaling pathway was inhibited, and gene expression of fibrotic markers, including alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), collagen type 1 alpha 1 (Col1a1), matrix metalloproteinase-2 (Mmp2), and metallopeptidase inhibitor 1 (Timp1) were decreased in livers of MED1(DeltaLiv) mice with CCl(4) injection. Transcriptomic analysis revealed that the differentially expressed genes in livers of CCl(4)-administered MED1(DeltaLiv) mice were enriched in the pathway of oxidoreductase activity, followed by robustly reduced oxidoreductase activity-related genes, such as Gm4756, Txnrd3, and Etfbkmt. More importantly, we found that the reduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in MED1 knockdown hepatocytes blocked the activation of TGF-beta/Smad2/3 pathway and the expression of fibrotic genes in LX2 cells. These results indicate that MED1 is a positive regulator for hepatic fibrogenesis, and MED1 may be considered as a potential therapeutic target for the regression of liver fibrosis.NEW & NOTEWORTHY In this study, we present the first evidence that liver mediator 1 (MED1) deficiency attenuated carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic fibrosis in mouse. The underlying mechanism is that MED1 deficiency reduces reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in hepatocytes, thus restricts the activation of TGF-beta/Smad2/3 signaling pathway and fibrogenic genes expression in hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). These data suggest that MED1 is an essential regulator for hepatic fibrogenesis, and MED1 may be considered as a potential therapeutic target for liver fibrosis.
Breast cancer, one of the most frequent cancer types, is a leading cause of death in women worldwide. Estrogen receptor (ER) alpha is a nuclear hormone receptor that plays key roles in mammary gland development and breast cancer. About 75% of breast cancer cases are diagnosed as ER-positive; however, nearly half of these cancers are either intrinsically or inherently resistant to the current anti-estrogen therapies. Recent studies have identified an ER coactivator, Mediator Subunit 1 (MED1), as a unique, tissue-specific cofactor that mediates breast cancer metastasis and treatment resistance. MED1 is overexpressed in over 50% of human breast cancer cases and co-amplifies with another important breast cancer gene, receptor tyrosine kinase HER2. Clinically, MED1 expression highly correlates with poor disease-free survival of breast cancer patients, and recent studies have reported an increased frequency of MED1 mutations in the circulating tumor cells of patients after treatment. In this review, we discuss the biochemical characterization of MED1 and its associated MED1/Mediator complex, its crosstalk with HER2 in anti-estrogen resistance, breast cancer stem cell formation, and metastasis both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, we elaborate on the current advancements in targeting MED1 using state-of-the-art RNA nanotechnology and discuss the future perspectives as well.
