Mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription subunit 7; Component of the Mediator complex, a coactivator involved in the regulated transcription of nearly all RNA polymerase II-dependent genes. Mediator functions as a bridge to convey information from gene- specific regulatory proteins to the basal RNA polymerase II transcription machinery. Mediator is recruited to promoters by direct interactions with regulatory proteins and serves as a scaffold for the assembly of a functional preinitiation complex with RNA polymerase II and the general transcription factors.
One hundred and twenty-five million women in malaria-endemic areas become pregnant each year (see Dellicour et al. PLoS Med7: e1000221 [2010]) and require protection from infection to avoid disease and death for themselves and their offspring. Chloroquine prophylaxis was once a safe approach to prevention but has been abandoned because of drug-resistant parasites, and intermittent presumptive treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, which is currently used to protect pregnant women throughout Africa, is rapidly losing its benefits for the same reason. No other drugs have yet been shown to be safe, tolerable, and effective as prevention for pregnant women, although monthly dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine has shown promise for reducing poor pregnancy outcomes. Insecticide-treated nets provide some benefits, such as reducing placental malaria and low birth weight. However, this leaves a heavy burden of maternal, fetal, and infant morbidity and mortality that could be avoided. Women naturally acquire resistance to Plasmodium falciparum over successive pregnancies as they acquire antibodies against parasitized red cells that bind chondroitin sulfate A in the placenta, suggesting that a vaccine is feasible. Pregnant women are an important reservoir of parasites in the community, and women of reproductive age must be included in any elimination effort, but several features of malaria during pregnancy will require special consideration during the implementation of elimination programs.
OBJECTIVE: MED subunits have been reported to be associated with various types of tumors, however, the potential role of MED7 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was still unclear. The aim of the study was to explore the role of MED7 in HCC. METHODS: In this study, MED7 mRNA expression levels between HCC and adjacent normal tissues were first analyzed by several public datasets. Then we utilized a tissue microarray (TMA) to investigate the clinical role of MED7 in HCC by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Meanwhile, the potential mechanisms of MED7 based on gene-gene correlation analyses were also explored. RESULTS: High mRNA level of MED7 correlated with advanced stage and worse grade of differentiation. IHC results showed that MED7 protein level was upregulated in HCC and associated with Edmondson grade and Microvascular invasion in 330 cases of HCC. GO (Gene Ontology) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) analysis revealed that MED7 co-expressed genes participate primarily in ribonucleoprotein complex biogenesis, protein targeting, mRNA processing and nucleoside triphosphate metabolic process et cetera. Further analysis also revealed that MED7 mRNA level has significant correlation with immune cells infiltration levels. CONCLUSION: MED7 was upregulated in HCC and correlated with progression of HCC. Meanwhile, MED7 may promote HCC through participating in multiple gene networks to influence tumorigenesis as well as immune response in HCC microenvironment.
The human thyroid hormone receptor-associated proteins (TRAP)/Mediator and related complexes mediate transcription through regulatory factors. To further understand the structural and functional diversity of these complexes we established three HeLa cell lines each expressing one of three epitope-tagged human TRAP/Mediator subunits, MED6, MED7, and CDK8 and isolated the complexes in which these subunits were contained by affinity and HPLC-gel filtration chromatography. The largest complexes from each cell line had a molecular mass of 1.5 MDa and possessed almost identical subunit compositions; we designated these complexes TRAP/Mediator-like complex 1 (TMLC1). Two potential subcomplexes were additionally observed: a 1-MDa complex from the CDK8-cell line (TMLC2) and a 600-kDa complex from the MED6-cell line (TMLC3). All three complexes regulated transcription in vitro; TMLC1 and TMLC3 augmented transcriptional activation, whereas TMLC2 repressed it. TMLC1 and TMLC2 phosphorylated RNA polymerase II (Pol II), but TMLC3 did not. Furthermore, TMLC1 predominantly interacted with the general transcription factors TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH, which function during transcription initiation and the transition to elongation. In a final experiment, knockdown of CDK8 using RNA interference prevented transcriptional activation by Gal4-VP16 in a luciferase-assay. This, together with the effect of TMLC1 on transcription in vitro, suggests that CDK8 play positive roles in transcriptional activation.
HIV-1 exploits multiple host proteins during infection. siRNA-based screenings have identified new proteins implicated in different pathways of the viral cycle that participate in a broad range of cellular functions. The human Mediator complex (MED) is composed of 28 elements and represents a fundamental component of the transcription machinery, interacting with the RNA polymerase II enzyme and regulating its ability to express genes. Here, we provide an evaluation of the MED activity on HIV replication. Knockdown of 9 out of 28 human MED proteins significantly impaired viral replication without affecting cell viability, including MED6, MED7, MED11, MED14, MED21, MED26, MED27, MED28, and MED30. Impairment of viral replication by MED subunits was at a post-integration step. Inhibition of early HIV transcripts was observed by siRNA-mediated knockdown of MED6, MED7, MED11, MED14, and MED28, specifically affecting the transcription of the nascent viral mRNA transactivation-responsive element. In addition, MED14 and MED30 were shown to have special relevance during the formation of unspliced viral transcripts (p < 0.0005). Knockdown of the selected MED factors compromised HIV transcription induced by Tat, with the strongest inhibitory effect shown by siMED6 and siMED14 cells. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggested physical interaction between MED14 and HIV-1 Tat protein. A better understanding of the mechanisms and factors controlling HIV-1 transcription is key to addressing the development of new strategies required to inhibit HIV replication or reactivate HIV-1 from the latent reservoirs.
BACKGROUND: Mediator complex (MED) proteins have a key role in transcriptional regulation, some interacting with the oestrogen receptor (ER). Interrogation of the METABRIC cohort suggested that MED7 may regulate lymphovascular invasion (LVI). Thus MED7 expression was assessed in large breast cancer (BC) cohorts to determine clinicopathological significance. METHODS: MED7 gene expression was investigated in the METABRIC cohort (n = 1980) and externally validated using bc-GenExMiner v4.0. Immunohistochemical expression was assessed in the Nottingham primary BC series (n = 1280). Associations with clinicopathological variables and patient outcome were evaluated. RESULTS: High MED7 mRNA and protein expression was associated with good prognostic factors: low grade, smaller tumour size, good NPI, positive hormone receptor status (p < 0.001), and negative LVI (p = 0.04) status. Higher MED7 protein expression was associated with improved BC-specific survival within the whole cohort and ER+/luminal subgroup. Pooled MED7 gene expression data in the external validation cohort confirmed association with better survival, corroborating with the protein expression. On multivariate analysis, MED7 protein was independently predictive of longer BC-specific survival in the whole cohort and Luminal A subtype (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: MED7 is an important prognostic marker in BC, particularly in ER+luminal subtypes, associated with improved survival and warrants future functional analysis.
BACKGROUND: Retinoid X Receptor Gamma (RXRG) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily and plays a role in tumour suppression. This study aims to explore the prognostic significance of RXRG in breast cancer. METHODS: Primary breast cancer tissue microarrays (n = 923) were immuno-stained for RXRG protein and correlated with clinicopathological features, and patient outcome. RESULTS: Nuclear RXRG expression was significantly associated with smaller tumour size (p = 0.036), lower grade (p < 0.001), lobular histology (p = 0.016), lower Nottingham Prognostic Index (p = 0.04) and longer breast cancer-specific survival (p < 0.001), and longer time to distant metastasis (p = 0.002). RXRG expression showed positive association with oestrogen receptor (ER)-related biomarkers: GATA3, FOXA1, STAT3 and MED7 (all p < 0.001) and a negative correlation with the Ki67 proliferation marker. Multivariate analysis demonstrated RXRG protein as an independent predictor of longer breast cancer-specific survival and distant metastasis-free survival. In the external validation cohorts, RXRG expression was associated with improved patients' outcome (p = 0.025). In ER-positive tumours, high expression of RXRG was associated with better patient outcome regardless of adjuvant systemic therapy. ER signalling pathway was the top predicted master regulator of RXRG protein expression (p = 0.005). CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence for the prognostic value of RXRG in breast cancer particularly the ER-positive tumours.
Mediator plays an integral role in activation of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription. A key step in activation is binding of Mediator to Pol II to form the Mediator-Pol II holoenzyme. Here, we exploit a combination of biochemistry and macromolecular EM to investigate holoenzyme assembly. We identify a subset of human Mediator head module subunits that bind Pol II independent of other subunits and thus probably contribute to a major Pol II binding site. In addition, we show that binding of human Mediator to Pol II depends on the integrity of a conserved "hinge" in the middle module MED21-MED7 heterodimer. Point mutations in the hinge region leave core Mediator intact but lead to increased disorder of the middle module and markedly reduced affinity for Pol II. These findings highlight the importance of Mediator conformation for holoenzyme assembly.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis. Baicalein, a natural compound, can regulate multiple cellular processes in various cancer types. In this study, we investigated the role of baicalein in regulating HCC and explored its potential mechanism. The expression of mediator complex subunit 7 (MED7) and E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) was analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction or Western blotting assay. Cell proliferation was assessed by cell colony formation assay and 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine assay. Cell migration was analyzed by transwell assay and wound-healing assay. Cell invasion was analyzed by transwell assay. Angiogenic ability of HCC cells was assessed by tube formation assay. Dual-luciferase reporter assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay were performed to validate the association between E2F1 and MED7. The xenograft mouse model assay was conducted to determine the effects of baicalein and E2F1 overexpression on tumor formation. Immunohistochemistry assay was used to determine positive expression rates of proteins. Upregulation of MED7 and E2F1 expression was observed in both HCC tissues and cells. Knockdown of MED7 suppressed HCC cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and tube formation. Transcriptional activation of MED7 by E2F1 was demonstrated in HCC cells. Overexpression of MED7 mitigated the effects induced by E2F1 depletion in HCC cells. Additionally, baicalein treatment effectively inhibited the tumor property of HCC cells by decreasing E2F1 expression in both in vitro and in vivo models. Baicalein inhibited the tumor property of HCC cells through the inactivation of the E2F1/MED7 axis, highlighting its potential clinical application in the treatment of HCC.
The Mediator complex provides an interface between gene-specific regulatory proteins and the general transcription machinery including RNA polymerase II (RNAP II). The complex has a modular architecture (Head, Middle, and Tail) and cryoelectron microscopy analysis suggested that it undergoes dramatic conformational changes upon interactions with activators and RNAP II. These rearrangements have been proposed to play a role in the assembly of the preinitiation complex and also to contribute to the regulatory mechanism of Mediator. In analogy to many regulatory and transcriptional proteins, we reasoned that Mediator might also utilize intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) to facilitate structural transitions and transmit transcriptional signals. Indeed, a high prevalence of IDRs was found in various subunits of Mediator from both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens, especially in the Tail and the Middle modules. The level of disorder increases from yeast to man, although in both organisms it significantly exceeds that of multiprotein complexes of a similar size. IDRs can contribute to Mediator's function in three different ways: they can individually serve as target sites for multiple partners having distinctive structures; they can act as malleable linkers connecting globular domains that impart modular functionality on the complex; and they can also facilitate assembly and disassembly of complexes in response to regulatory signals. Short segments of IDRs, termed molecular recognition features (MoRFs) distinguished by a high protein-protein interaction propensity, were identified in 16 and 19 subunits of the yeast and human Mediator, respectively. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the functional roles of 11 MoRFs have been experimentally verified, and those in the Med8/Med18/Med20 and Med7/Med21 complexes were structurally confirmed. Although the Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Homo sapiens Mediator sequences are only weakly conserved, the arrangements of the disordered regions and their embedded interaction sites are quite similar in the two organisms. All of these data suggest an integral role for intrinsic disorder in Mediator's function.
Human embryonic germ cells (EGCs) provide a powerful model for identifying molecules involved in the pluripotent state when compared to their progenitors, primordial germ cells (PGCs), and other pluripotent stem cells. Microarray and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) reveals for the first time that human EGCs possess a transcription profile distinct from PGCs and other pluripotent stem cells. Validation with qRT-PCR confirms that human EGCs and PGCs express many pluripotency-associated genes but with quantifiable differences compared to pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs), induced pluripotent stem cells (IPSCs), and embryonal carcinoma cells (ECCs). Analyses also identified a number of target genes that may be potentially associated with their unique pluripotent states. These include IPO7, MED7, RBM26, HSPD1, and KRAS which were upregulated in EGCs along with other pluripotent stem cells when compared to PGCs. Other potential target genes were also found which may contribute toward a primed ESC-like state. These genes were exclusively up-regulated in ESCs, IPSCs and ECCs including PARP1, CCNE1, CDK6, AURKA, MAD2L1, CCNG1, and CCNB1 which are involved in cell cycle regulation, cellular metabolism and DNA repair and replication. Gene classification analysis also confirmed that the distinguishing feature of EGCs compared to ESCs, ECCs, and IPSCs lies primarily in their genetic contribution to cellular metabolism, cell cycle, and cell adhesion. In contrast, several genes were found upregulated in PGCs which may help distinguish their unipotent state including HBA1, DMRT1, SPANXA1, and EHD2. Together, these findings provide the first glimpse into a unique genomic signature of human germ cells and pluripotent stem cells and provide genes potentially involved in defining different states of germ-line pluripotency.
Mediator was resolved from yeast as a multiprotein complex on the basis of its requirement for transcriptional activation in a fully defined system. Three groups of mediator polypeptides could be distinguished: the products of five SRB genes, identified as suppressors of carboxy-terminal domain (CTD)-truncation mutants; products of four genes identified as global repressors; and six members of a new protein family, termed Med, thought to be primarily responsible for transcriptional activation. Notably absent from the purified mediator were Srbs 8, 9, 10, and 11, as well as members of the SWI/SNF complex. The CTD was required for function of mediator in vitro, in keeping with previous indications of involvement of the CTD in transcriptional activation in vivo. Evidence for human homologs of several mediator proteins, including Med7, points to similar mechanisms in higher cells.
We have purified the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme from Schizosaccharomyces pombe to near homogeneity. The Mediator complex is considerably smaller than its counterpart in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, containing only nine polypeptides larger than 19 kDa. Five of these Mediator subunits have been identified as the S. pombe homologs to Rgr1, Srb4, Med7, and Nut2 found in S. cerevisiae and the gene product of a previously uncharacterized open reading frame, PMC2, with no clear homologies to any described protein. The presence of Mediator in a S. pombe RNA polymerase II holoenzyme stimulated phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by TFIIH purified from S. pombe. This stimulation was species-specific, because S. pombe Mediator could not stimulate TFIIH purified from S. cerevisiae. We suggest that the overall structure and mechanism of the Mediator is evolutionary conserved. The subunit composition, however, has evolved to respond properly to physiological signals.
A multiprotein complex isolated from murine cells is identified as a counterpart of the yeast Mediator of transcriptional regulation on the basis of the following: homologs of two subunits of yeast Mediator, Srb7 and Med7, copurify with the complex; peptide sequencing reveals, in addition, homologs of the yeast Mediator subunits Rgr1 and Med6; as with yeast Mediator, the mouse complex binds to the RNA polymerase II C-terminal domain (CTD) and stimulates phosphorylation of the CTD by TFIIH. Peptide sequencing also identifies a component of mouse Mediator as a relative of Ring-3 protein, a mitogen-activated nuclear protein kinase, raising the possibility of Mediator as an end point of signal transduction pathways.
Gene expression is regulated by a large complex of proteins that bind to the promoter/enhancer region of a gene. We determined whether a streptavidin-bead binding assay might be useful in detecting individual proteins in the complex comprising transactivators, coactivators, mediators, and general transcription factors. We used biotinylated cyclooxygenase-2 promoter probes as a model. Nuclear extracts obtained from human fibroblasts treated with or without an agonist were incubated with a 5(')-biotinylated probe and streptavidin-agarose beads at room temperature for 1h. After centrifugation, the pellet was washed and proteins in the complex were assessed by immunoblots. An array of transcription factors was detectable concurrently in the same batch of pellets at basal state. p300 and its associated factor PCAF levels but not Srb7, Med7, or TFII(B) were increased by phorbol ester or tumor necrosis factor alpha stimulation. Only trace of CREB-binding protein was detected. These results suggest that p300 and PCAF are the predominant coactivators for COX-2 promoter activation. Our findings indicate that the streptavidin-bead pulldown assay is valuable for determining the binding of a large number of transcription factors to promoter/enhancer and evaluating the relationship of protein binding with regulation of gene expression.
Mediator is a conserved multisubunit complex that acts as a functional interface between regulatory transcription factors and the general RNA polymerase II initiation apparatus. MED1 is a pivotal component of the complex that binds to nuclear receptors and a broad array of other gene-specific activators. Paradoxically, MED1 is found in only a fraction of the total cellular Mediator complexes, and the mechanisms regulating its binding to the core complex remain unclear. Here, we report that phosphorylation of MED1 by mitogen-activated protein kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK-ERK) promotes its association with Mediator. We show that MED1 directly binds to the MED7 subunit and that ERK phosphorylation of MED1 enhances this interaction. Interestingly, we found that both thyroid and steroid hormones stimulate MED1 phosphorylation in vivo and that MED1 phosphorylation is required for its nuclear hormone receptor coactivator activity. Finally, we show that MED1 phosphorylation by ERK enhances thyroid hormone receptor-dependent transcription in vitro. Our findings suggest that ERK phosphorylation of MED1 is a regulatory mechanism that promotes MED1 association with Mediator and, as such, may facilitate a novel feed-forward action of nuclear hormones.
Mammalian counterparts of the yeast SRB/MED transcriptional 'mediator' complex have recently been identified. These complexes define a common cofactor requirement for diverse transcriptional activators and underscore the conserved nature of the transcriptional machinery among eukaryotic organisms.
Activation of gene transcription in metazoans is a multistep process that is triggered by factors that recognize transcriptional enhancer sites in DNA. These factors work with co-activators to direct transcriptional initiation by the RNA polymerase II apparatus. One class of co-activator, the TAF(II) subunits of transcription factor TFIID, can serve as targets of activators and as proteins that recognize core promoter sequences necessary for transcription initiation. Transcriptional activation by enhancer-binding factors such as Sp1 requires TFIID, but the identity of other necessary cofactors has remained unknown. Here we describe a new human factor, CRSP, that is required together with the TAF(II)s for transcriptional activation by Sp1. Purification of CRSP identifies a complex of approximate relative molecular mass 700,000 (M(r) approximately 700K) that contains nine subunits with M(r) values ranging from 33K to 200K. Cloning of genes encoding CRSP subunits reveals that CRSP33 is a homologue of the yeast mediator subunit Med7, whereas CRSP150 contains a domain conserved in yeast mediator subunit Rgr1. CRSP p200 is identical to the nuclear hormone-receptor co-activator subunit TRIP2/PBP. CRSPs 34, 77 and 130 are new proteins, but the amino terminus of CRSP70 is homologous to elongation factor TFIIS. Immunodepletion studies confirm that these subunits have an essential cofactor function. The presence of common subunits in distinct cofactor complexes suggests a combinatorial mechanism of co-activator assembly during transcriptional activation.
The best characterized effect of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is its stimulatory effect on insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells. Recently, it was demonstrated that some cases of primary adrenal Cushing's syndrome were secondary to the ectopic expression of non-mutated GIP receptor (GIP-R) in bilateral adrenal hyperplasias or unilateral adrenal adenomas, resulting in food-dependent steroidogenesis. Using a human multiple-expression tissue array, GIP-R was found to be expressed in a large number of human adult and fetal tissues, but not in the adrenal gland. The analysis of the promoter region of human (h) GIP-R gene revealed six consensus sequences important in regulating the reporter gene activity and capable of binding to Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors. Data obtained by gene array and semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed an increase in the expression of Sp3 and CRSP9 (co-regulator of Sp1 transcription factor, subunit 9) in the adrenal adenomas or bilateral macronodular hyperplasias of patients with GIP-dependent Cushing's syndrome; they were, however, also increased in some patients with non-GIP-dependent cortisol-secreting adenomas or with ACTH-dependent Cushing's disease. This study represents the first step in our understanding of the mechanisms involved in the regulation of the expression of the hGIP-R gene.
Transcription mediators are evolutionarily conserved from yeast to human. We previously reported the specific in vivo roles of mediators during development. Transcriptional mediators including med-6, med-7, and med-10 were shown to be involved in the regulated transcription of specific genes, but not in the transcription of ubiquitous genes. In this report we have identified and characterized the Caenorhabditis elegans med-7 gene. A genetic mutation in the med-7 gene was identified by comparing genetic and physical maps and determining the molecular lesion. let-49 was found to have a nonsense mutation in the coding region of the med-7 gene. The identification of let-49 as the med-7 gene was confirmed by rescue experiments. The phenotype of the let-49 mutation indicated that the med-7 gene is required for normal postembryonic development. RNAi experiments showed that med-7 is also involved in embryogenesis and the gonad and germ cell development.
