Cytochrome P450 2B6; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of endocannabinoids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH-- hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide) to 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15- epoxyeicosatrienoic acid ethanolamides (EpETrE-EAs), potentially modulating endocannabinoid system signaling. Hydroxylates steroid hormon [...] 
LTC(4) synthase conjugates LTA(4) with glutathione (GSH) to form LTC(4), the parent compound of the cysteinyl leukotrienes. LTC(4) synthase is a membrane protein that functions as a non-covalent homodimer of two 18-kDa polypeptides. The enzymatic activity of LTC(4) synthase is augmented by Mg(2+) and inhibited by Co(2+) and the FLAP inhibitor MK-886. The K(m) and V(max) values of human LTC(4) synthase are 3.6 microM and 1.3 micromol/mg/min for LTA(4) and 1.6 mM and 2.7 micromol/mg/min for GSH, respectively. The deduced amino acid sequence and the predicted secondary structure of LTC(4) synthase share significant homology to FLAP, mGST-2, and mGST-3. Site-directed mutagenesis of LTC(4) synthase suggests that Arg-51 is involved in opening the epoxide ring of LTA(4) and Tyr-93 in GSH thiolate anion formation during catalytic conjugation. LTC(4) synthase is a TATA-less gene whose transcription involved both cell- and non-specific regulatory elements. LTC(4) synthase gene disrupted mice grow normally, and are attenuated for innate and adaptive immune inflammatory permeability responses.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review will critically highlight the role of leukotrienes as mediators of renal diseases and drug nephrotoxicity. It will also discuss the recently identified mechanism of cysteinyl leukotrienes induction and action, and will propose clinical implementation of these findings. RECENT FINDINGS: Since last reviewed in 1994, leukotrienes were shown to mediate drug-associated nephrotoxicity, transplant rejection and morbidity in several models of renal diseases. Although leukotrienes may be released by various infiltrating leukocytes, a recent study demonstrated that cytotoxic agents trigger production of leukotriene C4 (LTC4) in mouse kidney cells by activating a biosynthetic pathway based on microsomal glutathione-S-transferase 2 (MGST2). LTC4 then elicits nuclear accumulation of hydrogen peroxide-generating NADPH oxidase 4, leading to oxidative DNA damage and cell death. LTC4 inhibitors, commonly used as systemic asthma drugs, alleviated drug-associated damage to proximal tubular cells and attenuated mouse morbidity. SUMMARY: Cysteinyl leukotrienes released by mast cells trigger the symptoms of asthma, including bronchoconstriction and vasoconstriction. Therefore, effective leukotriene inhibitors were approved as orally administered asthma drugs. The findings that leukotrienes mediate the cytotoxicity of nephrotoxic drugs, and are involved in numerous renal diseases, suggest that such asthma drugs may ameliorate drug-induced nephrotoxicity, as well as some renal diseases.
Microsomal glutathione transferase 1 (MGST1) belongs to a superfamily named MAPEG (membrane-associated proteins in eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism). This family is represented in all life forms, except archae. Of the six human members, three are specialized in the synthesis of leukotrienes and prostaglandin E, whereas the others (MGST1-3) have potential roles in drug metabolism. MGST1 has a well-established role in the conjugation of electrophiles and oxidative stress protection, whereas MGST2 and 3 have been less studied. Here, we review the recent advances regarding the structure, mechanism, and functional roles of MGST1. Emerging data show that the enzyme is overexpressed in certain tumors and support a role for the enzyme in protecting cells from cytostatic drugs.
Eicosanoids are potent lipid mediators involved in central physiological processes such as hemostasis, renal function and parturition. When formed in excess, eicosanoids become critical players in a range of pathological conditions, in particular pain, fever, arthritis, asthma, cardiovascular disease and cancer. Eicosanoids are generated via oxidative metabolism of arachidonic acid along the cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX) pathways. Specific lipid species are formed downstream of COX and LOX by specialized synthases, some of which reside on the nuclear and endoplasmic reticulum, including mPGES-1, FLAP, LTC4 synthase, and MGST2. These integral membrane proteins are members of the family "membrane-associated proteins in eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism" (MAPEG). Here we focus on this enzyme family, which encompasses six human members typically catalyzing glutathione dependent transformations of lipophilic substrates. Enzymes of this family have evolved to combat the topographical challenge and unfavorable energetics of bringing together two chemically different substrates, from cytosol and lipid bilayer, for catalysis within a membrane environment. Thus, structural understanding of these enzymes are of utmost importance to unravel their molecular mechanisms, mode of substrate entry and product release, in order to facilitate novel drug design against severe human diseases.
Microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2 (MGST2) produces leukotriene C(4), key for intracrine signaling of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, oxidative DNA damage and cell death. MGST2 trimer restricts catalysis to only one out of three active sites at a time, but the molecular basis is unknown. Here, we present crystal structures of human MGST2 combined with biochemical and computational evidence for a concerted mechanism, involving local unfolding coupled to global conformational changes that regulate catalysis. Furthermore, synchronized changes in the biconical central pore modulate the hydrophobicity and control solvent influx to optimize reaction conditions at the active site. These unique mechanistic insights pertain to other, structurally related, drug targets.
Enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) can serve as an independent prognostic factor for poor outcomes of cancer patients. The purpose of this study was to identify a vital eRNA signature that has prognostic value for thyroid cancer based on GTEx and TCGA screening. We downloaded gene expression data and clinical data of thyroid cancer included in the GTEx and TCGA databases and conducted data consolidation. eRNA expression data were extracted, and subjected to differential analysis and cluster analysis. Univariate Cox regression was used to screen the prognostic factors of thyroid cancer. Multivariate Cox regression was applied for prognostic risk assessment model construction, with the efficacy evaluated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Downstream regulatory genes of candidate eRNAs were determined using correlation analysis. There were 79 differentially expressed eRNAs associated with thyroid cancer. These differentially expressed eRNAs could assign all thyroid cancer samples into three molecular subtypes, which showed a strong link to lymph node metastasis (N stage) of thyroid cancer patients. Additionally, four key eRNAs AC141930.1, NBDY, MEG3 and AP002358.1 closely related to the prognosis of thyroid cancer patients. The risk model based on the four eRNAs predicted the prognosis of thyroid cancer patients effectively. TPO, MGST2, THBS2 and SLC25A47P1 were potential downstream regulators of the four eRNAs involved in the development of thyroid cancer. Collectively, our data suggest that a four-eRNA signature consisting of AC141930.1, NBDY, MEG3 and AP002358.1 can accurately predict the prognosis of thyroid cancer patients.
Resolution of inflammation is an active process regulated by specialized proresolving mediators where we identified 3 new pathways producing allylic epoxide-derived mediators that stimulate regeneration [i.e., peptido-conjugates in tissue regeneration (CTRs)]. Here, using self-limited Escherichia coli peritonitis in mice, we identified endogenous maresin (MaR) CTR (MCTR), protectin (PD) CTR (PCTR), and resolvin CTR in infectious peritoneal exudates and distal spleens, as well as investigated enzymes involved in their biosynthesis. PCTRs were identified to be temporally regulated in peritoneal exudates and spleens. PCTR1 and MCTR1 were each produced by human recombinant leukotriene (LT) C(4) synthase (LTC(4)S) and glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) [microsomal GST (mGST)2, mGST3, and GST-mu (GSTM)4] from their epoxide precursors [16S,17S-epoxy-PD (ePD) and 13S,14S-epoxy-MaR (eMaR)], with preference for GSTM4. Both eMaR and ePD inhibited LTB(4) production by LTA(4) hydrolase. LTC(4)S, mGST2, mGST3, and GSTM4 were each expressed in human M1- and M2-like macrophages where LTC(4)S inhibition increased CTRs. Finally, PCTR1 showed potent analgesic action. These results demonstrate CTR biosynthesis in mouse peritonitis, human spleens, and human macrophages, as well as identification of key enzymes in these pathways. Moreover, targeting LTC(4)S increases CTR metabolomes, giving a new strategy to stimulate resolution and tissue regeneration.-Jouvene, C. C., Shay, A. E., Soens, M. A., Norris, P. C., Haeggstrom, J. Z., Serhan, C. N. Biosynthetic metabolomes of cysteinyl-containing immunoresolvents.
Microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2 (MGST2) is a 17 kDa trimeric integral membrane protein homologous to leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S). MGST2 has been suggested to catalyze the biosynthesis of the pro-inflammatory mediator leukotriene C4 (LTC4) in cells devoid of LTC4S. A detailed biochemical study of MGST2 is critical for the understanding of its cellular function and potential role as an LTC4-producing enzyme. Here we have characterized the substrate specificity and catalytic properties of purified MGST2 by steady-state and pre-steady-state kinetic experiments. In comparison with LTC4S, which has a catalytic efficiency of 8.7 x 10(5) M(-1) s(-1), MGST2, with a catalytic efficiency of 1.8 x 10(4) M(-1) s(-1), is considerably less efficient in producing LTC4. However, the two enzymes display a similar KM(LTA4) of 30-40 muM. While LTC4S has one activated glutathione (GSH) (forming a thiolate) per enzyme monomer, the MGST2 trimer seems to display only third-of-the-sites reactivity for thiolate activation, which in part would explain its lower catalytic efficiency. Furthermore, MGST2 displays GSH-dependent peroxidase activity of  approximately 0.2 mumol min(-1) mg(-1) toward several lipid hydroperoxides. MGST2, but not LTC4S, is efficient in catalyzing conjugation of the electrophilic substrate 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB) and the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal with GSH. Using stopped-flow pre-steady-state kinetics, we have characterized the full catalytic reaction of MGST2 with CDNB and GSH as substrates, showing an initial rapid equilibrium binding of GSH followed by thiolate formation. Burst kinetics for the CDNB-GSH conjugation step was observed only at low GSH concentrations (thiolate anion formation becoming rate-limiting under these conditions). Product release is rapid and does not limit the overall reaction. Therefore, in general, the chemical conjugation step is rate-limiting for MGST2 at physiological GSH concentrations. MGST2 and LTC4S exhibit distinct catalytic and mechanistic properties, reflecting adaptation to broad and specific physiological functions, respectively.
Protein abundance data of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters (DMETs) are useful for scaling in vitro and animal data to humans for accurate prediction and interpretation of drug clearance and toxicity. Targeted DMET proteomics that relies on synthetic stable isotope-labeled surrogate peptides as calibrators is routinely used for the quantification of selected proteins; however, the technique is limited to the quantification of a small number of proteins. Although the global proteomics-based total protein approach (TPA) is emerging as a better alternative for large-scale protein quantification, the conventional TPA does not consider differential sequence coverage by identifying unique peptides across proteins. Here, we optimized the TPA approach by correcting protein abundance data by the sequence coverage, which was applied to quantify 54 DMETs for characterization of 1) differential tissue DMET abundance in the human liver, kidney, and intestine, and 2) interindividual variability of DMET proteins in individual intestinal samples (n = 13). Uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 (UGT2B7), microsomal glutathione S-transferases (MGST1, MGST2, and MGST3) carboxylesterase 2 (CES2), and multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) were expressed in all three tissues, whereas, as expected, four cytochrome P450s (CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP2C9, and CYP4F2), UGT1A1, UGT2B17, CES1, flavin-containing monooxygenase 5, MRP3, and P-glycoprotein were present in the liver and intestine. The top three DMET proteins in individual tissues were: CES1>CYP2E1>UGT2B7 (liver), CES2>UGT2B17>CYP3A4 (intestine), and MGST1>UGT1A6>MGST2 (kidney). CYP3A4, CYP3A5, UGT2B17, CES2, and MGST2 showed high interindividual variability in the intestine. These data are relevant for enhancing in vitro to in vivo extrapolation of drug absorption and disposition and can be used to enhance the accuracy of physiologically based pharmacokinetic prediction of systemic and tissue concentration of drugs. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This study quantified the abundance and compositions of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in pooled human liver, intestine, and kidney microsomes as well as individual intestinal microsomes using an optimized global proteomics approach. The data revealed large intertissue differences in the abundance of these proteins and high intestinal interindividual variability in the levels of cytochrome P450s (e.g., CYP3A4 and CYP3A5), uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyltransferase 2B17, carboxylesterase 2, and microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2. These data are applicable for the prediction of first-pass metabolism and tissue-specific drug clearance.
5-Lipoxygenase (5-LO) catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid (AA) into leukotriene (LT) A(4) and 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid. LTA(4) can then be converted into LTB(4) by LTA(4) hydrolase or into LTC(4) by LTC(4) synthase and the LTC(4) synthase isoenzymes MGST2 and MGST3. LTB(4) is a potent chemoattractant for neutrophils, eosinophils and monocytes leading to adherence of phagocytes to vessel walls, neutrophil degranulation and release of superoxide anions. LTC(4) and its metabolite, LTD(4), are potent bronchoconstrictors that increase vascular permeability and stimulate mucus secretion from airways. Recent data also suggest that LT have an immunomodulatory role. Due to these properties, the increased biosynthesis of LT in asthma, and based upon clinical data obtained with CysLT(1) receptor antagonists in asthma patients, there is a consensus that CysLT play a prominent role in asthma. In this review, we summarize the knowledge on possible functions of the 5-LO pathway in various diseases like asthma, cancer and cardiovascular events and review the corresponding potential therapeutic roles of 5-LO inhibitors.
Human microsomal glutathione transferase 2 (MGST2) is a trimeric integral membrane protein that belongs to the membrane-associated proteins in eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism (MAPEG) family. The mammalian MAPEG family consists of six members where four have been structurally determined. MGST2 activates glutathione to form a thiolate that is crucial for GSH peroxidase activity and GSH conjugation reactions with electrophilic substrates, such as 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (CDNB). Several studies have shown that MGST2 is able to catalyze a GSH conjugation reaction with the epoxide LTA4 forming the pro-inflammatory LTC4. Unlike its closest homologue leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S), MGST2 appears to activate its substrate GSH using only one of the three potential active sites [Ahmad S, et al. (2013) Biochemistry. 52, 1755-1764]. In order to demonstrate and detail the mechanism of one-third of the sites reactivity of MGST2, we have determined the enzyme oligomeric state, by Blue native PAGE and Differential Scanning Calorimetry, as well as the stoichiometry of substrate and substrate analog inhibitor binding to MGST2, using equilibrium dialysis and Isothermal Titration Calorimetry, respectively. Global simulations were used to fit kinetic data to determine the catalytic mechanism of MGST2 with GSH and CDNB (1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) as substrates. The best fit was observed with 1/3 of the sites catalysis as compared with a simulation where all three sites were active. In contrast to LTC4S, MGST2 displays a 1/3 the sites reactivity, a mechanism shared with the more distant family member MGST1 and recently suggested also for microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1.
The glutathione S-transferase (GST) family comprises cytosolic, mitochondrial, and microsomal GSTs, all essential enzymes that metabolize a wide range of endogenous and exogenous substrates. Among the microsomal GSTs (MGSTs) in humans, MGST1, MGST2, and MGST3 are involved in detoxification; however, MGSTs have not been fully investigated in cynomolgus macaque, an important primate species widely used in drug metabolism and toxicity studies. In the present study, cynomolgus MGST2 and MGST3 cDNAs were isolated from liver tissue and characterized along with previously isolated cynomolgus MGST1. For comparison with the cynomolgus cDNAs, MGST2 and MGST3 cDNAs were also isolated from rhesus macaque (closely related to cynomolgus macaque) liver. Cynomolgus MGST2 and MGST3, respectively, were highly identical (99 and 98%) to human MGST2 and MGST3 and nearly identical to the amino acid sequences of the rhesus orthologs, and they were closely clustered with human MGST2 and MGST3 by phylogenetic analysis. The analysis of genome data indicated that MGST1, MGST2, and MGST3, respectively, had similar gene structures and genomic organization in macaque and human. Therefore, cynomolgus MGSTs have molecular similarities to the corresponding human MGSTs. Cynomolgus MGST2 and MGST3 were expressed in liver, jejunum, and kidney, but at lower levels than MGST1. GST activities were measured with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene and 1,2-epoxy-3-(p-nitrophenoxy)propane as substrates, using proteins heterologously expressed in Escherichia coli. Cynomolgus MGST1, MGST2, and MGST3 conjugated 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene and 1,2-epoxy-3-(p-nitrophenoxy)propane, indicating that cynomolgus MGST1, MGST2, and MGST3 are functional enzymes. These results suggest that these functional cynomolgus MGST enzymes and the corresponding human MGSTs are molecularly similar.
Glutathione transferase (GST) isoezymes are encoded by three separate families of genes (designated cytosolic, microsomal and mitochondrial transferases), with distinct evolutionary origins, that provide mammalian species with protection against electrophiles and oxidative stressors in the environment. Members of the cytosolic class Alpha, Mu, Pi and Theta GST, and also certain microsomal transferases (MGST2 and MGST3), are up-regulated by a diverse spectrum of foreign compounds typified by phenobarbital, 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene, pregnenolone-16alpha-carbonitrile, 3-methylcholanthrene, 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin, beta-naphthoflavone, butylated hydroxyanisole, ethoxyquin, oltipraz, fumaric acid, sulforaphane, coumarin, 1-[2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9(11)-dien-28-oyl]imidazole, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, dexamethasone and thiazolidinediones. Collectively, these compounds induce gene expression through the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), the pregnane X receptor (PXR), the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) and CAATT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) beta. The microsomal T family includes 5-lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP), leukotriene C(4) synthase (LTC4S) and prostaglandin E(2) synthase (PGES-1), and these are up-regulated by tumour necrosis factor-alpha, lipopolysaccharide and transforming growth factor-beta. Induction of genes encoding FLAP, LTC4S and PGES-1 is mediated by the transcription factors C/EBPalpha, C/EBPdelta, C/EBPϵ, nuclear factor-kappaB and early growth response-1. In this article we have reviewed the literature describing the mechanisms by which cytosolic and microsomal GST are up-regulated by xenobiotics, drugs, cytokines and endotoxin. We discuss cross-talk between the different induction mechanisms, and have employed bioinformatics to identify cis-elements in the upstream regions of GST genes to which the various transcription factors mentioned above may be recruited.
Leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S) conjugates LTA4 with glutathione (GSH) to form LTC4, the parent compound of the cysteinyl LTs. LTC4S is an 18 kDa membrane protein and functions as a noncovalent homodimer. The enzyme activity of LTC4S is augmented by Mg2+ and inhibited by Co2+ and the function of 5-lipoxygenase (LO) activating protein (FLAP) inhibitor MK-886. The Km and Vmax values are 3.6 microM and 1.3 micromol/mg/min for LTA4 and 1.6 mM and 2.7 micromol/mg/min for GSH, respectively. The deduced amino acid sequence and the predicted secondary of LTC4S shares significant homology to FLAP, mGST-2 and mGST-3 which are all members of MAPEG protein superfamily. LTC4S and FLAP exhibited identical genomic organization of five exons and four introns. Site-directed mutagenesis suggests that Arg-51 is involved in opening the epoxide ring of LTA4 and Tyr-93 in GSH thiolate anion formation during catalytic conjugation. LTC4S is a TATA-less gene whose transcription assessed in a reporter construct involved both cell-specific and nonspecific regulatory elements. LTC4S-/- mice grow normally, and are attenuated for innate and adaptive immune inflammatory permeability responses.
A balanced translocation was recently identified in a German psoriasis patient. One of the breakpoints was mapped immediately upstream of the microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2 (MGST2) gene, suggesting it as a candidate gene. Here, we report the identification of a novel non-synonymous mutation in MGST2 by a comprehensive sequence analysis of MGST2's coding region in Chinese psoriasis samples. We demonstrate that this mutation co-segregated with the disease phenotype within a Chinese family affected with psoriasis vulgaris and is predicted to have an impact on the normal function of MGST2 protein. However, the mutation was absent in 551 additional cases and 384 healthy Chinese controls. While requiring independent confirmation, our results suggest that this rare mutation could play a causal role in a small subset of psoriasis individuals.
Inevitable long-term therapy with nucleos(t)ide analogs in patients with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection has selected reverse-transcriptase (rt) mutants in a substantial proportion of patients. Some of these mutants introduce premature stop codons in the overlapping surface (s) gene, including rtA181T/sW172*, which has been shown to enhance oncogenicity. The oncogenicity of another drug-resistant mutant, rtM204I/sW196*, has not been studied. We constructed plasmids harboring rtM204I/sW196* and assessed the in vitro cell transformation, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response, and xenograft tumorigenesis of the transformants. Cellular gene expression was analyzed by cDNA microarray and was validated. The rtM204I/sW196* transformants, compared with the control or wild type, showed enhanced transactivation activities for c-fos, increased cell proliferation, decreased apoptosis, more anchorage-independent growth, and enhanced tumor growth in mouse xenografts. X box-binding protein-1 (XBP1) splicing analysis showed no ER stress response. Altered gene expressions, including up-regulated MGST2 and HIF1A, and downregulated transforming growth factor beta-induced (TGFbi), were unveiled by cDNA microarray and validated by RT-qPCR. The TGFbi alteration occurred in transformants with wild type or mutated HBV. The altered MGST2 and HIF1A were found only with mutated HBV. The rtM204I/sW196* preS/S truncation may endorse the cell transformation and tumorigenesis ability via altered host gene expressions, including MGST2, HIF1A, and TGFbi. Downregulated TGFbi may be a common mechanism for oncogenicity in HBV surface truncation mutants.
Crohn's disease affects the mucosal layer of the intestine, predominantly ileum and colon segments, with the potential to affect the expression of intestinal enzymes and transporters, and consequently, oral drug bioavailability. We carried out a quantitative proteomic analysis of inflamed and non-inflamed ileum and colon tissues from Crohn's disease patients and healthy donors. Homogenates from samples in each group were pooled and protein abundance determined by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). In inflamed Crohn's ileum, CYP3A4, CYP20A1, CYP51A1, ADH1B, ALPI, FOM1, SULT1A2, SULT1B1 and ABCB7 showed >/=10-fold reduction in abundance compared with healthy baseline. By contrast, only MGST1 showed >/=10 fold reduction in inflamed colon. Ileal UGT1A1, MGST1, MGST2, and MAOA levels increased by >/=2 fold in Crohn's patients, while only ALPI showed >/=2 fold increase in the colon. Counter-intuitively, non-inflamed ileum had a higher magnitude of fold change than inflamed tissue when compared with healthy tissue. Marked but non-uniform alterations were observed in the expression of various enzymes and transporters in ileum and colon compared with healthy samples. Modelling will allow improved understanding of the variable effects of Crohn's disease on bioavailability of orally administered drugs.
Exposure to ultraviolet B (UVB) irradiation results in multitude of cellular responses including generation of reactive oxygen species and DNA damage and is responsible for non-melanoma skin cancers (NMSCs). Although genetic mutation is well documented, the epi-mutation, the alteration in epigenetics, remains elusive. In this study, we utilized CpG Methyl-seq to identify a genome-wide DNA CpG methylation, to profile the DNA methylation in UVB-irradiated SKH-1 mouse skin epidermis and non-melanoma skin papillomas at various stages. Methyl-seq and RNA-seq were performed to examine the methylation and corresponding transcriptome alterations. The methylation profiles in mouse epidermis were altered by UVB-irradiation as time progresses. Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA) identified many cancer related pathways including PTEN, p53, Nrf2 and inflammatory signaling in UVB-irradiation induced carcinogenesis. Additionally, some novel genes involved in skin carcinogenesis that were not previously reported were differentially methylated, including Enf2, Mgst2, Vegfa, and Cdk4. Taken together, the current study provides novel profiles and insights of methylation and transcriptomic changes at different stages of carcinogenesis in UVB-irradiation induced NMSC and offers potential targets for prevention and treatment of NMSC at different stages of human skin cancer.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and major chemotherapeutic agents damage DNA by generating reactive oxygen species (ROS). Here we show that ER stress and chemotherapy induce leukotriene C4 (LTC4) biosynthesis by transcriptionally upregulating and activating the enzyme microsomal glutathione-S-transferase 2 (MGST2) in cells of non-haematopoietic lineage. ER stress and chemotherapy also trigger nuclear translocation of the two LTC4 receptors. Acting in an intracrine manner, LTC4 then elicits nuclear translocation of NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4), ROS accumulation and oxidative DNA damage. Mgst2 deficiency, RNAi and LTC4 receptor antagonists abolish ER stress- and chemotherapy-induced ROS and oxidative DNA damage in vitro and in mouse kidneys. Cell death and mouse morbidity are also significantly attenuated. Hence, MGST2-generated LTC4 is a major mediator of ER stress- and chemotherapy-triggered oxidative stress and oxidative DNA damage. LTC4 inhibitors, commonly used for asthma, could find broad clinical use in major human pathologies associated with ER stress-activated NOX4.
Several recent studies have demonstrated the possible involvement of the microsomal glutathione S-transferase 2 (MGST2) gene in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. The objectives of this work are to determine whether the genetic polymorphisms of the MGST2 gene were associated with an increased risk of psoriasis in Chinese patients. We first characterized the linkage disequilibrium pattern within MGST2 and identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for tagging common genetic variants. Genotype- and haplotype-based analyses were then performed by genotyping the Tag SNPs in a large-scale sample of cases and controls. We characterized the linkage disequilibrium pattern within MGST2 using 12 densely distributed SNPs and identified 6 SNPs for tagging common genetic variants. We then performed an association analysis by genotyping the six SNPs in 552 cases and 384 controls, but none of the genotype- and haplotype-based analyses revealed significant evidence for association. We also performed family-based association analysis by genotyping the six SNPs in 95 trios; no evidence for association was identified. Our comprehensive genetic analysis of MGST2 common variants in a large Chinese sample of psoriasis did not provide any supporting evidence for MGST2 to be the susceptibility gene within the PSORS9 locus.
