Motilin receptor; Receptor for motilin; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
We describe a strategy that combines histologic and molecular mapping that permits interrogation of the chronology of changes associated with cancer development on a whole-organ scale. Using this approach, we present the sequence of alterations around RB1 in the development of bladder cancer. We show that RB1 is not involved in initial expansion of the preneoplastic clone. Instead, we found a set of contiguous genes that we term "forerunner" genes whose silencing is associated with the development of plaque-like field effects initiating carcinogenesis. Specifically, we identified five candidate forerunner genes (ITM2B, LPAR6, MLNR, CAB39L, and ARL11) mapping near RB1. Two of these genes, LPAR6 and CAB39L, are preferentially downregulated in the luminal and basal subtypes of bladder cancer, respectively. Their loss of function dysregulates urothelial differentiation, sensitizing the urothelium to N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)nitrosamine-induced cancers, which recapitulate the luminal and basal subtypes of human bladder cancer.
Motilin, produced in endocrine cells in the mucosa of the upper intestine, is an important regulator of gastrointestinal (GI) motility and mediates the phase III of interdigestive migrating motor complex (MMC) in the stomach of humans, dogs and house musk shrews through the specific motilin receptor (MLN-R). Motilin-induced MMC contributes to the maintenance of normal GI functions and transmits a hunger signal from the stomach to the brain. Motilin has been identified in various mammals, but the physiological roles of motilin in regulating GI motility in these mammals are well not understood due to inconsistencies between studies conducted on different species using a range of experimental conditions. Motilin orthologs have been identified in non-mammalian vertebrates, and the sequence of avian motilin is relatively close to that of mammals, but reptile, amphibian and fish motilins show distinctive different sequences. The MLN-R has also been identified in mammals and non-mammalian vertebrates, and can be divided into two main groups: mammal/bird/reptile/amphibian clade and fish clade. Almost 50 years have passed since discovery of motilin, here we reviewed the structure, distribution, receptor and the GI motility regulatory function of motilin in vertebrates from fish to mammals.
Background and objectives: The presenting study aimed to elucidate the prognostic role of the metastatic lymph node ratio (mLNR) in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC), using a meta-analysis. Materials and Methods: Using data from 90,274 patients from 14 eligible studies, we performed a meta-analysis for the correlation between mLNR and survival rate. Besides, subgroup analyses were performed, based on tumor stage, tumor location, and mLNR. Results: A high mLNR showed significant correlation with worse overall survival and disease-free survival rates in CRC patients (hazard ratio (HR), 1.617, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.393-1.877, and HR 2.345, 95% CI 1.879-2.926, respectively). In patients with stage III, who had regional LN metastasis, the HRs were 1.730 (95% CI 1.266-2.362) and 2.451 (95% CI 1.719-3.494) for overall and disease-free survival, respectively. According to tumor location, rectal cancer showed a worse survival rate when compared to colon cancer. In the analysis for overall survival, when mLNR was 0.2, HR was the highest across the different subgroups (HR 5.040, 95% CI 1.780-14.270). However, in the analysis for disease-free survival, the subgroup with an mLNR < 0.2 had a higher HR than the other subgroups (HR 2.878, 95% CI 1.401-5.912). Conclusions: The mLNR may be a useful prognostic factor for patients with CRC, regardless of the tumor stage or tumor location. Further studies are necessary for the detailed criteria of mLNR before its application in daily practice.
OBJECTIVE: Metastatic lymph node ratio (MLNR) is a known significant predictor of disease-free survival in differentiated thyroid cancer. The authors investigated the ability of preoperative fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (F-FDG) PET/CT to predict recurrence after surgery with radioactive iodine therapy considering MLNR. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 274 patients who underwent preoperative PET/CT and surgery with radioactive iodine therapy were enrolled. The tumor-to-liver uptake ratio on PET/CT was calculated by dividing the maximum standardized uptake value of a primary lesion by the mean standardized uptake value of the normal liver. High F-FDG uptake was defined as tumor-to-liver uptake ratio more than the median cutoff value (2.1). MLNR was calculated by dividing the number of metastatic lymph nodes (LNs) by the number of cervical LNs removed. A high MLNR was also defined as one more than a threshold value (0.4), identified by plotting Kaplan-Meier survival curves and comparing them using the log-rank test. The prognostic significances of clinicopathologic variables were analyzed. RESULTS: Fifteen (5.5%) patients developed recurrence in the thyroid bed or in cervical LNs. Cox regression analysis showed that a high MLNR was significantly associated with a worse disease-free survival (odds ratio 6.95; 95% confidence interval: 2.36-20.47; P<0.001). A subgroup analysis of 70 patients with a high MLNR showed that only high F-FDG uptake was significantly associated with a worse disease-free survival (odds ratio 5.77; 95% confidence interval: 1.22-27.16; P=0.027). CONCLUSION: High F-FDG uptake of primary lesion on preoperative PET/CT has selective prognostic value according to the extent of metastatic LNs (MLNR>0.4).
To identify genes involving in the pathogenesis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). In this study, the comprehensive analysis of GSE8157 was downloaded. Overlapping genes of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, and enrichment analysis for these genes was performed. A modular network of differentially expressed genes was constructed by weighted gene co-expression network analyses (WGCNA), and a total of 322 differentially expressed genes in 5 stable modules were screened. The correlations of genes of the stable modules in BioGRID 3.4, STRING 10.5, HPRD9 databases were screened, and the interaction network of 104 DEGs was constructed. In addition, some genes and the key words were searched in CTD. A total of 596 differentially expressed genes were screened, including 379 genes that were up-regulated in case group and down-regulated in control group and treat group, and 217 genes that were down-regulated in case group and up-regulated in control group and treat group. The differentially expressed genes were enriched in PPAR signaling pathway, Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, cAMP signaling pathway, of which pathways were involved in the cancer development. Finally, 7 important target genes were identified, such as APOC3 was interacted with pioglitazone, ADCY2 involved in cAMP signaling pathway, and the genes (C3AR1, HRH2, GRIA1, MLNR and TAAR2) involved in neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. In addition, the important target genes were significantly differential expression. These results implied that the 7 important target genes were played an important role in the development and progression of PCOS. Our study implied that genes had played a key role in the development and progression of PCOS, the results showed that microarray can be use as a method for the discovery of new biomarkers and therapeutic targets for PCOS.
PURPOSE: To investigate the clinical features, prognostic factors, and treatment outcome in early-stage cervical carcinoma patients treated with postoperative radiotherapy (RT)/radiochemotherapy (RCT). METHODS: The records of 256 Stage IB and II cervical cancer patients treated with postoperative RT/RCT from 1992-2007 were retrospectively reviewed. Median age of the patients was 47 (range: 25-78). Two hundred one (78.6%) patients had squamous cell carcinoma and 29 (11.3%) had adenocarcinoma. One hundred and eighty-seven (73.0%) had FIGO Stage IB and 69 (27%) had Stage II disease. Concomitant cisplatin-based chemotherapy was administered to 47 (18.4%) patients. Metastatic lymph node ratio (MLNR), defined as number of metastatic lymph nodes divided by the number of dissected lymph nodes, was 0 in 142 (55.5%) patients, from 1% to 10% in 27 (10.5%) and > 10% in 31 (12.1%) patients. RESULTS: Median follow-up duration was 60.5 months (range: 6-202 months). Five-year locoregional control (LRC), disease-free survival (DFS), disease specific survival (DSS) and overall survival (OS) rates were 90.8%, 83.4%, 91.2%, and 85%, respectively. In multivariate analysis; bulky tumor (> 4 cm) was shown as an important prognostic factor for LRC, DFS and DSS. Pretreatment hemoglobin level (< 10 g/dl) was associated with lower OS rate. Endometrial involvement was associated with lower LRC and DFS. Treatment break > 14 days showed significance for DFS and DSS. MLNR was found as a valuable prognostic factor for all endpoints (LRC, DFS, DSS and OS). The rate of grade 3-4 late toxicity was 3.6% and 2%, respectively. CONCLUSION: Postoperative RT/RCT is an effective treatment modality for early-stage cervical cancer patients with unfavorable features and provides satisfactory local control and survival rates with low morbidity.
Specific interactions among biomolecules drive virtually all cellular functions and underlie phenotypic complexity and diversity. Biomolecules are not isolated particles, but are elements of integrated interaction networks, and play their roles through specific interactions. Simultaneous emergence or loss of multiple interacting partners is unlikely. If one of the interacting partners is lost, then what are the evolutionary consequences for the retained partner? Taking advantages of the availability of the large number of mammalian genome sequences and knowledge of phylogenetic relationships of the species, we examined the evolutionary fate of the motilin (MLN) hormone gene, after the pseudogenization of its specific receptor, MLN receptor (MLNR), on the rodent lineage. We speculate that the MLNR gene became a pseudogene before the divergence of the squirrel and other rodents about 75 mya. The evolutionary consequences for the MLN gene were diverse. While an intact open reading frame for the MLN gene, which appears functional, was preserved in the kangaroo rat, the MLN gene became inactivated independently on the lineages leading to the guinea pig and the common ancestor of the mouse and rat. Gain and loss of specific interactions among biomolecules through the birth and death of genes for biomolecules point to a general evolutionary dynamic: gene birth and death are widespread phenomena in genome evolution, at the genetic level; thus, once mutations arise, a stepwise process of elaboration and optimization ensues, which gradually integrates and orders mutations into a coherent pattern.
Pathological staging and histological grading systems are useful, but imperfect, predictors of recurrence in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Aberrant promoter methylation is the main type of epigenetic modification that plays a role in the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. To identify new potential prognostic markers, we investigated the promoter methylation status of five neuropeptide receptor genes. The methylation status of the target genes was compared with clinical characteristics in 278 cases; 72 hypopharyngeal cancers, 54 laryngeal cancers, 75 oropharyngeal cancers, and 77 oral cavity cancers were studied. We found that the NTSR1, NTSR2, GHSR, MLNR, and NMUR1 promoters were methylated in 47.8%, 46.8%, 54.3%, 39.2%, and 43.5% of the samples, respectively. GHSR and NMUR1 promoter methylation independently predicted recurrence in HNSCC. In patients with oropharyngeal cancer (n = 75), GHSR and NMUR1 promoter methylation significantly correlates with survival in surgically treated patients. We classified our patients as having a low, intermediate, or high-risk of death based on three factors: HPV status, and GHSR and NMUR1 promoter methylation. The disease-free survival (DFS) rates were 87.1%, 42.7%, and 17.0%, respectively. Combined data analysis of the methylation status of ten-eleven translocation (TET) family genes indicated a trend toward greater methylation indices as the number of TET methylation events increased. In the current study, we presented the relationship between the methylation status of the GHSR and NMUR1 genes and recurrence in HNSCC, specifically in risk classification of oropharyngeal carcinomas cases with HPV status.
Lymph node stages (pN stages) are primary contributors to survival heterogeneity of the 7(th) AJCC staging system for colorectal cancer (CRC), indicating spaces for modifications. To implement the modifications, we selected eligible CRC patients from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database as participants in a training (n = 6675) and a test cohort (n = 6760), and verified tumor deposits to be metastatic lymph nodes to derive modified lymph node count (mLNC), lymph node ratio (mLNR), and positive lymph node count (mPLNC). After multivariate Cox regression analyses with forward stepwise elimination of the mLNC and mPLNC for the training cohort, a nomogram was constructed to predict overall survival (OS) via incorporating preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen, pT stages, negative lymph node count, mLNR and metastasis. Internal validations of the nomogram showed concordance indexes (c-index) of 0.750 (95% CI, 0.736-0.764) and 0.749 before and after corrections for overfitting. Serial performance evaluations indicated that the nomogram outperformed the AJCC stages (c-index = 0.725) with increased accuracy, net benefits, risk assessment ability, but comparable complexity and clinical validity. All the results were reproducible in the test cohort. In summary, the proposed nomogram may serve as an alternative to the AJCC stages. However, validations with longer follow-up periods are required.
Motilin (MLN), a 22-amino-acid peptide hormone, is generally present in the mucosa of the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract, mainly the duodenum of mammals, and it regulates GI motility, especially that related to interdigestive migrating contraction. However, MLN and its receptor are absent in mice and rats, and MLN does not cause any mechanical responses in the rat and mouse GI tracts. The guinea-pig is also a rodent, but expression of the MLN gene in the guinea-pig has been reported. In the present study, two guinea-pig MLNs, FIPIFTYSELRRTQEREQNKGL found in the Ensemble Genome Database (gpMLN-1) and FVPIFTYSELRRTQEREQNKRL reported by Xu et al. (2001) (gpMLN-2), were synthesized, and their biological activities were evaluated in the rabbit duodenum and guinea-pig GI tract in vitro. Both gpMLNs showed contractile activity in longitudinal muscle strips of the rabbit duodenum. The EC(50) values of gpMLN-1 and gpMLN-2 were slightly higher than that of human MLN (hMLN), but the maximum contractions were as same as that of hMLN. Treatment with GM109 and hMLN-induced receptor desensitization decreased the contractile activity of both gpMLNs, indicating that the two gpMLN candidates are able to activate the MLN receptor (MLN-R) of the rabbit duodenum. In guinea-pig GI preparations, hMLN and gpMLNs did not show any mechanical responses in circular muscle strips from the gastric antrum or in longitudinal strips of the duodenum, ileum and colon although acetylcholine and 1,1-dimethyl-4-phenylpiperazinium (DMPP) caused definite mechanical responses. The DMPP-induced neural responses in the gastric circular muscle and ileal longitudinal muscles were not modified by gpMLN-1. Even in the gastric and ileal strips with intact mucosa, no mechanical responses were seen with either of the gpMLNs. Furthermore, RT-PCR using various primer sets failed to amplify the gpMLN-2 mRNA. In conclusion, gpMLNs including one that was already reported and the other that was newly found in a database were effective to the rabbit MLN-R, whereas they did not cause any contractions or modification of neural responses in the guinea-pig GI tract, indicating that the MLN system is vestigial and not functional in regulation of GI motility in the guinea-pig as well as in other rodents such as rats and mice.
CONTEXT: Stimulation of cortisol secretion through abnormally expressed G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) is a frequent feature of ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH). This has opened a pharmacological strategy that targets GPCRs for the treatment of Cushing's syndrome in AIMAH. However, only few drugs are available for the presently described GPCRs. OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to identify new GPCR targets for the pharmacological treatment of adrenal Cushing's syndrome. DESIGN AND PATIENTS: We designed a cDNA chip containing 865 nucleotidic sequences of GPCRs. mRNAs were extracted from three normal adrenals, 18 AIMAHs, four adrenals from Cushing's disease patients, and 13 cortisol-secreting adenomas. A set of GPCR mRNAs that showed significantly higher or lower expression in AIMAH than in normal adrenal were studied by quantitative RT-PCR analysis. Analysis of protein expression and function were performed on selected GPCRs. SETTING: The study was conducted at a tertiary care center and basic research laboratories. RESULTS: The ACTH MC2 receptor showed a low expression in 15 of 18 AIMAHs samples, whereas several previously undescribed GPCR genes were found highly expressed in a subset of AIMAH, such as the receptors for motilin (MLNR; three of 18 AIMAHs) and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABBR1; five of 18 AIMAHs), and the alpha2A adrenergic receptor (ADRA2A; 13 of 18 AIMAHs), on which we focused our attention. Western blot and immunochemistry analyses showed expression of ADRA2A protein in AIMAH but not in normal adrenal cortex. The ADRA2A agonist clonidine enhanced both basal and stimulated cortisol production. Clonidine-induced increase in basal cortisol levels was blocked by the ADRA2A antagonist yohimbine. CONCLUSION: ADRA2A is a potential target for pharmacological treatment of Cushing's syndrome linked to AIMAH.
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) was initially discovered as a neuropeptide synthesized in the hypothalamus. Receptors for this hormone include TRH-receptor-1 (TRH-R1) and -2 (TRH-R2). Previous studies have shown that TRH-R1 and TRH-R2 are localized exclusively in adult Leydig cells (ALCs). We have investigated TRH-R1 and TRH-R2 expression in the testes of postnatal 8-, 14-, 21- 35-, 60-, and 90-day-old rats and in ethane dimethane sulfonate (EDS)-treated adult rats by using Western blotting, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence. The effects of TRH on testosterone secretion of primary cultured ALCs from 90-day-old rats and DNA synthesis in Leydig cells from 21-day-old rats have also been examined. Western blotting and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that TRH-R1 and TRH-R2 were expressed in fetal Leydig cells (in 8-day-old rats) and in all stages of adult-type Leydig cells during development. Immunofluorescence double-staining revealed that newly regenerated Leydig cells in post-EDS 21-day rats expressed TRH-R1 and TRH-R2 on their first reappearance. Incubation with various doses of TRH affected testosterone secretion of primary cultured ALCs. Low concentrations of TRH (0.001, 0.01, and 0.1 ng/ml) inhibited basal and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)-stimulated testosterone secretion of isolated ALCs, whereas relatively high doses of TRH (1 and 10 ng/ml) increased hCG-stimulated testosterone secretion. As detected by a 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation test, the DNA synthesis of Leydig cells from 21-day-old rats was promoted by low TRH concentrations. Thus, we have clarified the effect of TRH on testicular function: TRH might regulate the development of Leydig cells before maturation and the secretion of testosterone after maturation.
The prognostic value and conflicting results of metastatic lymph node ratio (mLNR) on breast cancer have aroused an increasing concern. We aimed to evaluate the imperative of mLNR classification and prognostic factors in breast cancer with molecular subtypes.This study uses the database of surveillance, epidemiology, and end results (SEER) to investigate the imperative for reliable mLNR classification and critical prognostic factors in breast cancer with different molecular subtypes.The prognostic characteristics for disease-specific survival (DSS) of breast cancer were investigated in the SEER cohort (n = 3651). mLNR (P = .017) and histology grade (P < .001) were independent factors. A novel grade-lymph node ratio (G-R) staging system was proposed for breast cancer prognosis. The receiver operating characteristic curves revealed that the G-R staging system had an accurate 1-, 3-, and 5-year DSS prediction. Further stratification analysis with molecular subtypes of breast cancer (Luminal and TNBC) first proved robust prognostic values of the G-R staging system among molecular subtypes.The current population-based cohort demonstrated the capacity of mLNR serving as a critical prognostic factor. Also, G-R staging system has the potential to be regarded as reliable classification for breast cancer patients with different molecular subtypes.
This study aimed to construct a nomogram to predict survival of patients with resectable gastric cancer (RGC) based on both clinicopathology characteristics and systemic inflammatory response markers (SIRMs). Of 3,452 RGC patients after D2 gastrectomy at the Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 1058 patients who met the inclusion criterion were analyzed. The patients operated on from January 1, 2005 to December 31, 2009 were assigned to the training set (817 patients) to establish a nomogram, and the rest (241 patients) were selected as validation set. Based on the training set, seven independent risk factors were selected in the nomogram. The calibration curves for probability of 1-year, 3-year and 5-year overall survival (OS) showed satisfactory accordance between nomogram prediction and actual observation. When the metastatic lymph node stage (mLNS) is replaced by metastasis lymph node ratio (mLNR) in validation set, the C-index in predicting OS rise from 0.77 to 0.79, higher than that of 7th American Joint Committee on Cancer 7th (AJCC) staging system (0.70; p<0.001). In conclusions, the proposed nomogram which including mLNR and routine detected SIRMs resulted in optimal survival prediction for RGC patients after D2 gastrectomy.
Two drug-resistant variants of the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 have been shown previously to exhibit radiation resistance associated with an increase in the size of the shoulder on the radiation survival curve. In the present study, glutathione (GSH) depletion was achieved by exposure of cells to buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) with, in some cases, additional treatment with dimethyl fumarate. Levels of GSH in the adriamycin-resistant subline MCF-7 ADRR are initially lower than in the other two sublines and are depleted to a greater extent by exposure to BSO. Wild-type MCF-7 cells are not sensitized by GSH depletion when irradiated under aerated conditions but are sensitized under hypoxic conditions to an extent which is related to the level of GSH depletion. In contrast both the drug-resistant sublines (MCF-7 ADRR and the melphalan-resistant line MCF-7 MLNR) are radiosensitized by GSH depletion under both aerated and hypoxic conditions. It is hypothesized that in the case of the MCF-7 ADRR cell line, which expresses high levels of the GSH-associated redox enzyme systems, GSH-S-transferase and GSH-peroxidase (GSH-Px), radiosensitization results when GSH-Px is inhibited in GSH-depleted cells. The reasons for radiosensitization of aerated MCF-7 MLNR cells cannot be explained on this basis, however, and other factors are being examined.
Human breast carcinoma (MCF7-MLNr) cells resistant to the bifunctional drugs L-phenylalanine mustard (L-PAM, 5-fold resistance), mechlorethamine (9-fold), cisplatin (3-fold), and BCNU (3-fold) were used to investigate the role of DNA repair in the development of resistance to alkylating agents. We have previously shown that neither L-PAM transport and metabolism nor glutathione-associated enzymes were altered in MCF7-MLNr cells, compared to the sensitive cells MCF7-WT. This study shows that treatment of pRSV-CAT plasmid with L-PAM at concentrations up to 1 microM proportionally inhibit the expression of chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) activity, while higher concentrations abolished CAT activity. pRSV-CAT reactivation was significantly increased when plasmid was transfected into MCF7-MLNr cells, compared to MCF7-WT cells. This indicates that resistant cells have more efficient capacity to recognize and repair L-PAM induced DNA damage. The mRNA expression of DNA nucleotide excision repair genes ERCC1, XPD (ERCC2), XPB (ERCC3), and polymerase beta was found to be similar in both the MCF7-WT and MCF7-MLNr cells. Western blot analysis also reveals no difference in the expression of ERCC1, AP endonuclease, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase, and alkyl-N-purine-DNA glycosylase proteins. The lack of correlation between enhanced host cell reactivation capacity in resistant cells, and the expression of these specific DNA repair genes suggests that proteins encoded by these genes are not rate limiting steps for resistance to bi-functional alkylating drugs in human breast cancer cells.
