22 kDa interstitial collagenase; Cleaves collagens of types I, II, and III at one site in the helical domain. Also cleaves collagens of types VII and X. In case of HIV infection, interacts and cleaves the secreted viral Tat protein, leading to a decrease in neuronal Tat's mediated neurotoxicity.
Our understanding of the regulatory processes of reepithelialization during wound healing is incomplete. In an attempt to map the genes involved in epidermal regeneration and differentiation, we measured gene expression in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded standardized epidermal wounds induced by the suction-blister technique with associated nonwounded skin using NanoString technology. The transcripts of 139 selected genes involved in clotting, immune response to tissue injury, signaling pathways, cell adhesion and proliferation, extracellular matrix remodeling, zinc transport and keratinocyte differentiation were evaluated. We identified 22 upregulated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in descending order of fold change (MMP1, MMP3, IL6, CXCL8, SERPINE1, IL1B, PTGS2, HBEGF, CXCL5, CXCL2, TIMP1, CYR61, CXCL1, MMP12, MMP9, HGF, CTGF, ITGB3, MT2A, FGF7, COL4A1 and PLAUR). The expression of the most upregulated gene, MMP1, correlated strongly with MMP3 followed by IL6 and IL1B. rhIL-1beta, but not rhIL-6, exposure of cultured normal human epidermal keratinocytes and normal human dermal fibroblasts increased both MMP1 mRNA and MMP-1 protein levels, as well as TIMP1 mRNA levels. The increased TIMP1 in wounds was validated by immunohistochemistry. The six downregulated DEGs (COL7A1, MMP28, SLC39A2, FLG1, KRT10 and FLG2) were associated with epidermal maturation. KLK8 showed the strongest correlation with MKI67 mRNA levels and is a potential biomarker for keratinocyte proliferation. The observed gene expression changes correlate well with the current knowledge of physiological reepithelialization. Thus, the gene expression panel described in this paper could be used in patients with impaired healing to identify possible therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Destruction of extracellular matrix (ECM) leads to intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD), which underlies many spine-related disorders. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and disintegrins and metalloproteinases with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTSs) are believed to be the major proteolytic enzymes responsible for ECM degradation in the intervertebral disc (IVD). PURPOSE: To summarize the current literature on gene expression and regulation of MMPs, ADAMTSs, and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) in IVD aging and IDD. METHODS: A comprehensive literature review of gene expression of MMP, ADAMTS, and TIMP in human IDD and reported studies on regulatory factors controlling their expressions and activities in both human and animal model systems. RESULTS: Upregulation of specific MMPs (MMP-1, -2, -3, -7, -8, -10, and -13) and ADAMTS (ADAMTS-1, -4, and -15) were reported in human degenerated IVDs. However, it is still unclear from conflicting published studies whether the expression of ADAMTS-5, the predominant aggrecanase, is increased with IDD. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase-3 is downregulated, whereas TIMP-1 is upregulated in human degenerated IVDs relative to nondegenerated IVDs. Numerous studies indicate that the expression levels of MMP and ADAMTS are modulated by a combination of many factors, including mechanical, inflammatory, and oxidative stress, some of which are mediated in part through the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. Genetic predisposition also plays an important role in determining gene expression of MMP-1, -2, -3, and -9. CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of MMP and ADAMTS expression and enzymatic activity is implicated in disc ECM destruction, leading to the development of IDD. Future IDD therapeutics depends on identifying specific MMPs and ADAMTSs whose dysregulation result in pathological proteolysis of disc ECM.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a malignant tumor with a high incidence and mortality worldwide. Currently, the underlying molecular mechanisms of CRC are still unclear. Zinc finger protein 3 (ZNF3) is a zinc-finger transcription factor that has been reported as a candidate for breast cancer prognosis, suggesting its involvement in the regulation of tumorigenesis. However, the association between ZNF3 and CRC remains unknown. To investigate the role of ZNF3 in CRC, we first analyze the correlation between ZNF3 expression and CRC, and the results demonstrate that ZNF3 is highly expressed in CRC tissue and cells, which is associated with the age of CRC patients. In vitro studies show that ZNF3 overexpression promotes CRC cell migration. Compared to control cells, knockdown of ZNF3 markedly suppresses CRC cell proliferation, migration and invasion and promotes G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest. The expressions of the EMT-related markers TWIST and MMP1 are significantly decreased when ZNF3 is silenced. Additionally, overexpression of MMP1 and TWIST exacerbates CRC cell proliferation, accelerates the S phase cell cycle in ZNF3-knockdown SW480 cells, and increases cell migration and invasion through Transwell chambers. These data suggest that ZNF3 is involved in cellular proliferation, migration and invasion by regulating MMP1 and TWIST in CRC cells.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are strongly implicated in menstruation. Messenger RNA for proMMP-1 and -3 was detectable in normal cycle endometrium only peri-menstrually and menstrually, although mRNA for their tissue inhibitors, TIMP-1 and TIMP-2, was present throughout the cycle. MMP-1, -3 and -9 were demonstrated immunohistochemically to be specifically associated with degraded tissue in menstrual endometrium. Activated mast cells and eosinophils, which release regulators of MMP expression and activators of latent enzymes, were also a marked feature of menstrual endometrium. Cultured endometrial stromal cells released MMP-1, -2, -3 and -9 and TIMP-1 and -2, whereas production by epithelial cells was minimal. Progesterone withdrawal from stromal cell cultures (for the final 4 days of a 10 day culture) increased the release of all four enzymes: all but MMP-2 were also stimulated by interleukin-1 or tumour necrosis factor alpha added to short-term stromal cultures. We postulate that an alteration in the balance of MMP and their inhibitors and the activation of MMP are prerequisites for tissue degradation at menstruation, and that this is regulated by a combination of progesterone withdrawal and paracrine factors from epithelial and stromal cells and from mast cells and eosinophils.
The matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-containing endopeptidases that play a key role in both physiological and pathological tissue remodeling. Human fibroblast collagenase (MMP-1) was the first vertebrate collagenase purified as a protein and cloned as a cDNA, and is considered the prototype for all the interstitial collagenases. It is synthesized as a zymogen where N-terminal residues are removed by proteolysis and shares with other MMPs a catalytic domain and a carboxy terminal domain with sequence similarity to hemopexin. Importantly, MMP-1 should be considered a multifunctional molecule since it participates not only in the turnover of collagen fibrils in the extracellular space but also in the cleavage of a number of non-matrix substrates and cell surface molecules suggesting a role in the regulation of cellular behaviour. Furthermore, an extensive body of evidence indicates that MMP-1 plays an important role in diverse physiologic processes such as development, tissue morphogenesis, and wound repair. Likewise, it seems to be implicated in a variety of human diseases including cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, pulmonary emphysema and fibrotic disorders, suggesting that its inhibition or stimulation may open therapeutic avenues.
Osteosarcoma is a malignant bone tumor affecting adolescents and children. No effective treatment is currently available. Asiatic acid (AA), a triterpenoid compound found in Centella asiatica, possesses anti-tumor, anti-inflammatory, and anti-oxidant properties in various types of tumor cells. This study aims to determine whether AA exerts antitumor effects in human osteosarcoma cells. Our results indicate that AA does not influence the viability, proliferative rate, or cell cycle phase of human osteosarcoma cells under non-toxic conditions. AA suppressed osteosarcoma cell migration and invasion by down-regulating matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) expression. Data in the TNMplot database suggested MMP1 expression was higher in osteosarcoma than in normal tissues, with associated clinical significance observed in osteosarcoma patients. Overexpression of MMP1 in osteosarcoma cells reversed the AA-induced suppression of cell migration and invasion. AA treatment decreased the expression of specificity protein 1 (Sp1), while Sp1 overexpression abolished the effect of AA on MMP1 expression and cell migration and invasion. AA inhibited AKT phosphorylation, and treatment with a PI3K inhibitor (wortmannin) increased the anti-invasive effect of AA on osteosarcoma cells via the p-AKT/Sp1/MMP1 axis. Thus, AA exhibits the potential for use as an anticancer drug against human osteosarcoma.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of osteoporosis (OP) with matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) gene polymorphism. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 199 patients as observation group (OP) and 180 healthy subjects (control group) were enrolled in the study, and the general data, the expression levels of serum calcium, serum phosphate and MMP-1 were collected and determined. The bone mineral density was determined using a bone sonometer, and the method of TaqMan-MGB probe was adopted for the detection of gene polymorphism of MMP-1 rs494379. RESULTS: The level of serum calcium and bone mineral density were lower in observation group than those in control group (p>0.05), while the levels of serum phosphate and MMP-1 were higher than those in control group (p>0.05). There were differences in rs494379 genotype and allele in MMP-1 gene between the two groups (p<0.05). In the analysis of the genetic model, the dominant models between the two groups were different (p<0.05), while there were no differences in the recessive model and additive model (p>0.05). The MMP-1 level was higher in rs494379 AA genotype than that in GG, GT genotype in MMP-1 gene. CONCLUSIONS: Gene polymorphism of MMP-1 rs494379 has a correlation with the occurrence of OP.
Matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) encodes endopeptidases associated with degradation of multiple components of the extracellular matrix. This function has increasingly been considered to play a major proteolysis role in tumor invasion and metastasis. However, the relationship between MMP1 gene expression, tumor-immune microenvironment and prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma patients remains mostly unclear. This study focused on a comprehensive analysis of MMP1 in hepatocellular carcinoma, specifically the prognosis and tumor-immune microenvironment. MMP1 expression was analyzed using TCGA database and clinical samples. MMP1 associated mechanisms, pathways, mutations and prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma were evaluated. We also analyzed the tumor-immune microenvironment and corresponding treatments. Our research demonstrated that MMP1 expression was upregulated in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma and correlated with poor survival. A prognostic model was established and its performance evaluated. We also found and report various correlations between MMP1 and immune-related cells/genes, as well the potential therapeutic agents. These findings indicate that MMP1 can potentially be a promising prognostic biomarker and indicator of the tumor-immune microenvironment status in hepatocellular carcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies have reported a positive association between hypercholesterolemia and shoulder disease. Previous studies have focused on the effect of hypercholesterolemia on tendinopathy. Moreover, hypercholesterolemia has also been linked to joint pathology in the knee and hand. However, the effect of hyperlipidemia on glenohumeral joint remain unclear. A hypercholesterolemic condition has been reported to alter levels of A Disintegrin and Metalloprotease with Thrombospondin Motifs (ADAMTSs) and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) in synovium of the knee joint. Here, we evaluated the mRNA expression of ADAMTSs and MMPs in the glenohumeral synovium of patients with and without hypercholesterolemia. METHODS: Study participants were 73 patients who underwent arthroscopic rotator cuff repair for degenerative rotator cuff tears. They were divided into two groups according to total cholesterol (TC) and triglyceride levels. Synovial membrane samples were harvested at the rotator interval during surgery, and mRNA expression levels of the aggrecanases ADAM-TS4 and ADAM-TS5 and MMPs (MMP-1, 3, 9, and 13) were analyzed quantitatively. RESULTS: ADAM-TS5 and MMP1 mRNA levels were significantly higher in the high TC group than in the low TC group (P = 0.023 and P = 0.025, respectively). In contrast, no significant differences were observed in ADAMTS4 or MMPs 3, 9, and 13 (ADAMTS4, P = 0.547; MMP3, P = 0.55; MMP9, P = 0.521; and MMP13, P = 0.785). CONCLUSION: Hypercholesterolemia may alter MMP1 and ADAMTS5 expression in the synovium of the glenohumeral joint.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: MicroRNAs (miRs) are transcribed as stem-loop precursors harboring two different miRs on either side of the structure. Both miRs can modulate levels of cellular transcripts based on sequence complementarity between the miR and the mRNA target. The miR of the current study, miR-675, is encoded in the H19 gene with high expression in fetal/placental tissues but low levels in most adult tissues except for skeletal muscle and articular cartilage. miR-675 has a supportive role in expression of the major collagen component of articular cartilage (COL2A1) but it is unknown which arm contributes to this effect. Objectives: To determine the active arm of miR-675 in human articular chondrocytes. To evaluate effects of overexpression of both arms of miR-675 on MMP1 and MMP13, two enzymes involved in breakdown of COL2A1. To investigate whether abundance of both arms of miR-675 is dynamic. METHODS: miR-arm activity was determined by association with the AGO2 complex using immunoprecipitation with an AGO2 specific antibody. miR overexpression and inhibition was used to identify indirect downstream effects on two targets of the Matrix-Metalloprotease family, MMP1 and MMP13. Data was evaluated by qPCR and enzymatic activity assays. Early passage human articular chondrocytes (up to passage 2) obtained from cartilage from both healthy and osteoarthritis affected tissue were used. To evaluate miR-675 levels in a different model, myotube differentiation was employed. RESULTS: We show that both arms of miR-675 have opposing effects on MMP1 and MMP13; however only one arm, miR-675-3' is active in human articular chondrocytes. We demonstrate that during myotube differentiation, high expression of both arms of miR-675 is observed as well as an increase in expression of MMP1. CONCLUSION: We show that both arms of miR-675 result in opposing effects on two downstream molecules MMP1 and MMP13. We propose that miR abundance may arise as response to direct target transcript levels and are thus dynamic to meet the requirements of the cellular environment.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are endopeptidases, and their activity depends on calcium and zinc metal ions. These enzymes are expressed originally in zymogenic form, where the active site of proteins is closed by a prodomain which is removed during activation. A homeostatic balance of their activity is primarily regulated by a 'cysteine switch' located on a consensus sequence of the prodomain and natural endogenous inhibitors, called tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Breakage of this homeostasis may lead to various pathological conditions, which may require further activation and/or inhibition of these enzymes to regenerate that balance. Here, we report four modulators, more specifically, three inhibitors (I1, I2 and I3), and one exogenous activator (L) of the active form of human collagenase MMP-1 (without prodomain). The results were confirmed by binding studies using fluorescence-based enzyme assays.
Instead of molecularly imprinting a whole protein molecule, imprinting protein epitopes is gaining popularity due to cost and solubility issues. Belonging to the matrix metalloproteinase protein family, MMP-1 is an interstitial collagenase that degrades collagen and may be involved in cell migration, cell proliferation, the pro-inflammatory effect, and cancer progression. Hence, it can serve as a disease protein biomarker and thus be useful in early diagnosis. Herein, epitopes of MMP-1 were identified by screening its crystal structure. To identify possible epitopes for imprinting, MMP-1 was cleaved in silico with trypsin, pepsin at pH = 1.3, and pepsin at pH > 2.0 using Peptide Cutter, generating peptide fragments containing 8 to 12 amino acids. Five criteria were applied to select the peptides most suitable as potential epitopes for MMP-1. The triphenylamine rhodanine-3-acetic acid (TPARA) functional monomer was synthesized to form a stable pre-polymerization complex with a selected template epitope. The complexed functional monomer was then copolymerized with 3,4-ethoxylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) using potentiodynamic electropolymerization onto indium-tin-oxide (ITO) electrodes. The composition of the molecularly imprinted poly(TPARA-co-EDOT) (MIP) was optimized by maximizing the film's electrical conductivity. Cyclic voltammetry was used to determine MMP-1 concentration in the presence of the Fe(CN)63-/Fe(CN)64- redox probe actuating the "gate effect." A calibration curve was constructed and used to determine the usable concentration range and the limit of detection as ca. 0.001 to 10.0 pg/mL and 0.2 fg/mL MMP-1, respectively. Finally, the MMP-1 concentration in the A549 human lung (carcinoma) culture medium was measured, and this determination accuracy was confirmed using an ELISA assay.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc (Zn)-dependent endopeptidases that are collectively capable of cleaving virtually all extracellular matrix (ECM) substrates and play an important role in diverse physiological and pathological processes. The activity of MMPs is regulated at multiple levels. The transcriptional regulation of MMP appears to represent the key step in MMP regulation. There are diverse types of MMPs that differ structural and functionally. MMP-1 is the most ubiquitously expressed interstitial collagenase and has a prominent role in initial cleavage of the ECM. The level of MMP-1 expression can be influenced by different single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the promoter region. A functional polymorphism at position -1607 has been shown to alter the transcriptional activity of MMP-1 and was associated with diverse pathological processes. The aim of our review was to discuss some topics related to MMP in physiological and pathological processes, with a focus on MMP-1 polymorphism.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are evolutionarily conserved extracellular matrix proteinases. Genetic analysis of the Drosophila MMPs, Mmp1 and Mmp2, in vivo reveal that they play vital roles in tissue remodeling. Although the catalytic domain (CD) undertakes most MMP functions, few studies have sought to demonstrate the biochemical properties of the CDs of fly MMPs. Here, we identified the overexpression, purification, and refolding of the CDs of Drosophila Mmp1 and Mmp2 for biochemical studies. Zymography assays and substrate degradation analysis showed that both Mmp1-CD and Mmp2-CD were able to digest casein, gelatin, fibronectin, collagen (types I, IV, and V), while Mmp2-CD showed much higher degradation activity compared with Mmp1-CD. Moreover, human collagen III could be degraded by Mmp1-CD but not Mmp2-CD, and rat collagen I and laminin could be degraded by Mmp2-CD but not Mmp1-CD, suggesting that Drosophila Mmp1 and Mmp2 might have overlapping yet distinct substrate specificity. Using synthetic fluorescent substrates, we further demonstrated that the enzymatic activity of Mmp1-CD and Mmp2-CD could be inhibited by human tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs). These results reveal the context of the cooperative yet distinct roles of Mmp1 and Mmp2 in tissue remodeling.
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disorder of haematopoietic stem cells or progenitor cells. Metalloproteinases (MMPs) are proteolytic enzymes whose activity is increased in different types of solid tumours. These enzymes regulate many processes associated with tumour progression. In haematological malignancy, the role of MMPs seems to be underestimated, and only metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2) and metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) have been widely examined so far. In this work, differences in metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) gene expression between patients with AML and healthy individuals were assessed. The relative expression level of the MMP1 gene was obtained by a real time PCR method preceded by reverse transcription. The relative level of MMP1 gene expression in patients with AML was decreased when compared to that of the control group. The role of MMP1 in AML could be different from that in solid tumours. Decreased MMP1 gene expression in AML similar to that of MMP9, shows a greater role for MMP1 in normal haematopoiesis than in the development of leukaemic cells.
BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)1, MMP9, MMP11, and MMP13 are overexpressed in malignant melanoma (MM), being associated with tumor invasive phase, metastases, and more aggressive neoplastic phenotypes. AIM: The main objective of the current study was to correlate the expression of the MMPs with the evolution of MM toward distant metastasis. PATIENTS, MATERIALS AND METHODS: We designed a retrospective cohort study, including 13 patients with metastatic MM. Data concerning age, sex, localization of the primary lesion and metastasis, and histological and immunohistochemical features (intensity of expression and percent of positive cells for MMPs) were statistically processed. RESULTS: The time between the diagnosis of primitive melanoma and the diagnosis of metastasis ranged between 0 and 73 months, with a mean value of 18.3 months. The metastases rich in MMP1- and MMP9-positive cells occurred earlier than the metastases with low levels of positive cells. The mean period until metastasis was shorter for the MMP1-expressing tumors than the ones without MMP1 expression. MMP13 expression in the tumor and its metastasis was significantly linked with the time until the metastasis occurrence. CONCLUSIONS: This study emphasizes the roles of MMP1, MMP9, and MMP13 in the process of metastasis in melanoma and the opportunity to use them as therapeutic targets and surveillance molecules.
MMP1 is an essential enzyme for tissue remodeling both in normal and pathological states. We report a method of purifying activated human MMP1 in E. coli without using urea or 4-Aminophenylmercuric acetate (APMA). Instead, a non-ionic detergent, Triton X-100, was used in the lysis buffer to solubilize MMP1 followed by the protease activities of both trypsin and MMP1 to digest E. coli proteins and activate pro-MMP1. Identity of activated MMP1 was confirmed by Western blot using anti-human MMP1 antibodies, whereas the mass was determined to be 43 kD using matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI TOF-MS). Collagen and gelatin degradation by purified MMP1 were confirmed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS PAGE) of degraded FITC-labeled type-1 collagen and gelatin zymogram. Broad-spectrum protease activity of purified MMP1 was also confirmed by lysis of native E. coli proteins. Inexpensive high throughput purification of recombinant human MMP1 in E. coli will enable easier MMP1 production for diverse applications.
Efficient recruitment and angiogenesis of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are critical during a thrombus event. However, the details of EPC recruitment and the regulation of angiogenesis have not been fully determined. The aim of this study was to determine the role of the long noncoding (lnc)RNA Wilms tumor 1 associated protein pseudogene 1 (WTAPP1) in regulation of the migration and angiogenesis of EPCs. EPCs were isolated from human peripheral blood and characterized by flow cytometry, after which lentivirus-mediated lncRNA WTAPP1 overexpression and knockdown were performed. Scratch assay, Transwell assay, and in vitro and in vivo tube formation assays were performed to measure cell migration, invasion, and angiogenic abilities, respectively. Moreover, a microarray screen, bioinformatic prediction, and quantitative PCR and Western blot of miRNAs interacting with lncRNA WTAPP1 were conducted. Western blot was carried out to elucidate the relationship among WTAPP1, miR-3120-5P, and MMP-1 in the autophagy pathway. WTAPP1 positively regulated migration, invasion, and in vitro and in vivo tube formation in EPCs by increasing MMP-1 expression and activating PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling. Furthermore, WTAPP1 contains a putative miR-3120-5P binding site. Suppression of WTAPP1 by miR-3120-5P decreased the level of MMP-1. In addition, we demonstrated that suppression of the autophagy pathway is involved in the effects of WTAPP1 on EPC migration and angiogenesis. The lncRNA WTAPP1, a molecular decoy for miR-3120-5p, regulates MMP-1 expression via the PI3K/Akt and autophagy pathways, thereby mediating cell migration and angiogenesis in EPCs. Acting as a potential therapeutic target, the lncRNA WTAPP1 may play an important role in the pathogenesis of DVT. Stem Cells 2018;36:1863-12.
Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, MMP-8 and MMP-13 are interstitial collagenases that degrade type II collagen in cartilage; this is a committed step in the progression of rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. Of these enzymes, the expression of MMP-1 and MMP-13 is substantially increased in response to IL-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and elevated levels of these collagenases are observed in arthritic tissues. Therefore, cytokine-mediated MMP-1 and MMP-13 gene regulation is an important issue in arthritis research. In this review, we discuss current models of MMP-1 and MMP-13 transcriptional regulation, with a focus on signaling intermediates and transcription factors that may be future targets for the development of new arthritis drugs.
Advanced ovarian cancers are highly metastatic due to frequent peritoneal dissemination, resulting in dismal prognosis. Here we report the functions of cancer-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are emerging as important mediators of tumour metastasis. The EVs from highly metastatic cells strongly induce metastatic behaviour in moderately metastatic tumours. Notably, the cancer EVs efficiently induce apoptotic cell death in human mesothelial cells in vitro and in vivo, thus resulting in the destruction of the peritoneal mesothelium barrier. Whole transcriptome analysis shows that MMP1 is significantly elevated in mesothelial cells treated with highly metastatic cancer EVs and intact MMP1 mRNAs are selectively packaged in the EVs. Importantly, MMP1 expression in ovarian cancer is tightly correlated with a poor prognosis. Moreover, MMP1 mRNA-carrying EVs exist in the ascites of cancer patients and these EVs also induce apoptosis in mesothelial cells. Our findings elucidate a previously unknown mechanism of peritoneal dissemination via EVs.
