Myeloperoxidase heavy chain; Part of the host defense system of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. It is responsible for microbicidal activity against a wide range of organisms. In the stimulated PMN, MPO catalyzes the production of hypohalous acids, primarily hypochlorous acid in physiologic situations, and other toxic intermediates that greatly enhance PMN microbicidal activity; Belongs to the peroxidase family. XPO subfamily.
Necrotizing and crescentic GN (NCGN) with a paucity of glomerular immunoglobulin deposits is associated with ANCA. The most common ANCA target antigens are myeloperoxidase (MPO) and proteinase 3. In a manner that requires activation of the alternative complement pathway, passive transfer of antibodies to mouse MPO (anti-MPO) induces a mouse model of ANCA NCGN that closely mimics human disease. Here, we confirm the importance of C5aR/CD88 in the mediation of anti-MPO-induced NCGN and report that C6 is not required. We further demonstrate that deficiency of C5a-like receptor (C5L2) has the reverse effect of C5aR/CD88 deficiency and results in more severe disease, indicating that C5aR/CD88 engagement enhances inflammation and C5L2 engagement suppresses inflammation. Oral administration of CCX168, a small molecule antagonist of human C5aR/CD88, ameliorated anti-MPO-induced NCGN in mice expressing human C5aR/CD88. These observations suggest that blockade of C5aR/CD88 might have therapeutic benefit in patients with ANCA-associated vasculitis and GN.
Myeloperoxidase participates in innate immune defense mechanism through formation of microbicidal reactive oxidants and diffusible radical species. A unique activity is its ability to use chloride as a cosubstrate with hydrogen peroxide to generate chlorinating oxidants such as hypochlorous acid, a potent antimicrobial agent. However, chronic MPO activation can lead to indiscriminate protein modification causing tissue damage, and has been associated with chronic inflammatory diseases, atherosclerosis, and acute cardiovascular events. This has attracted considerable interest in the development of therapeutically useful MPO inhibitors. Today, based on the profound knowledge of structure and function of MPO and its biochemical and biophysical differences with the other homologous human peroxidases, various rational and high-throughput screening attempts were performed in developing specific irreversible and reversible inhibitors. The most prominent candidates as well as MPO inhibitors already studied in clinical trials are introduced and discussed.
Phagocytes, such as neutrophils and macrophages, engulf microbes into phagosomes and launch chemical attacks to kill and degrade them. Such a critical innate immune function necessitates ion participation. Chloride, the most abundant anion in the human body, is an indispensable constituent of the myeloperoxidase (MPO)-H2 O2 -halide system that produces the potent microbicide hypochlorous acid (HOCl). It also serves as a balancing ion to set membrane potentials, optimize cytosolic and phagosomal pH, and regulate phagosomal enzymatic activities. Deficient supply of this anion to or defective attainment of this anion by phagocytes is linked to innate immune defects. However, how phagocytes acquire chloride from their residing environment especially when they are deployed to epithelium-lined lumens, and how chloride is intracellularly transported to phagosomes remain largely unknown. This review article will provide an overview of chloride protein carriers, potential mechanisms for phagocytic chloride preservation and acquisition, intracellular chloride supply to phagosomes for oxidant production, and methods to measure chloride levels in phagocytes and their phagosomes.
Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction have been believed to play an important role in the pathogenesis of aging and neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD). The excess of reactive oxygen species (ROS) increases with age and causes a redox imbalance, which contributes to the neurotoxicity of PD. Accumulating evidence suggests that NADPH oxidase (NOX)-derived ROS, especially NOX4, belong to the NOX family and is one of the major isoforms expressed in the central nervous system (CNS), associated with the progression of PD. We have previously shown that NOX4 activation regulates ferroptosis via astrocytic mitochondrial dysfunction. We have previously shown that activation of NOX4 regulates ferroptosis through mitochondrial dysfunction in astrocytes. However, it remains unclear why an increase in NOX4 in neurodegenerative diseases leads to astrocyte cell death by certain mediators. Therefore, this study was designed to evaluate how NOX4 in the hippocampus is involved in PD by comparing an MPTP-induced PD mouse model compared to human PD patients. We could detect that the hippocampus was dominantly associated with elevated levels of NOX4 and alpha-synuclein during PD and the neuroinflammatory cytokines, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and osteopontin (OPN), were upregulated particularly in astrocytes. Intriguingly, NOX4 suggested a direct intercorrelation with MPO and OPN in the hippocampus. Upregulation of MPO and OPN induces mitochondrial dysfunction by suppressing five protein complexes in the mitochondrial electron transport system (ETC) and increases the level of 4-HNE leading to ferroptosis in human astrocytes. Overall, our findings indicate that the elevation of NOX4 cooperated with the MPO and OPN inflammatory cytokines through mitochondrial aberration in hippocampal astrocytes during PD.
Members of Chordata peroxidase subfamily [1] expressed in mammals, including myeloperoxidase (MPO), eosinophil peroxidase (EPO), lactoperoxidase (LPO), and thyroid peroxidase (TPO), express conserved motifs around the heme prosthetic group essential for their activity, a calcium-binding site, and at least two covalent bonds linking the heme group to the protein backbone. Although most studies of the biosynthesis of these peroxidases have focused on MPO, many of the features described occur during biosynthesis of other members of the protein subfamily. Whereas MPO biosynthesis includes events typical for proteins generated in the secretory pathway, the importance and consequences of heme insertion are events uniquely associated with peroxidases. This Review summarizes decades of work elucidating specific steps in the biosynthetic pathway of human MPO. Discussion includes cotranslational glycosylation and subsequent modifications of the N-linked carbohydrate sidechains, contributions by molecular chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, cleavage of the propeptide from proMPO, and proteolytic processing of protomers and dimerization to yield mature MPO. Parallels between the biosynthesis of MPO and TPO as well as the impact of inherited mutations in the MPO gene on normal biosynthesis will be summarized. Lastly, specific gaps in our knowledge revealed by this review of our current understanding will be highlighted.
Acute liver failure caused by alcoholic hepatitis (AH) is only effectively treated with liver transplantation. Livers of patients with AH show a unique molecular signature characterized by defective hepatocellular redox metabolism, concurrent to hepatic infiltration of neutrophils that express myeloperoxidase (MPO) and form neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). Exacerbated NET formation and MPO activity contribute to liver damage in mice with AH and predicts poor prognosis in AH patients. The identification of pathways that maladaptively exacerbate neutrophilic activity in liver could inform of novel therapeutic approaches to treat AH. Whether the redox defects of hepatocytes in AH directly exacerbate neutrophilic inflammation and NET formation is unclear. Here we identify that the protein content of the mitochondrial biliverdin exporter ABCB10, which increases hepatocyte-autonomous synthesis of the ROS-scavenger bilirubin, is decreased in livers from humans and mice with AH. Increasing ABCB10 expression selectively in hepatocytes of mice with AH is sufficient to decrease MPO gene expression and histone H3 citrullination, a specific marker of NET formation. These anti-inflammatory effects can be explained by ABCB10 function reducing ROS-mediated actions in liver. Accordingly, ABCB10 gain-of-function selectively increased the mitochondrial GSH/GSSG ratio and decreased hepatic 4-HNE protein adducts, without elevating mitochondrial fat expenditure capacity, nor mitigating steatosis and hepatocyte death. Thus, our study supports that ABCB10 function regulating ROS-mediated actions within surviving hepatocytes mitigates the maladaptive activation of infiltrated neutrophils in AH. Consequently, ABCB10 gain-of-function in human hepatocytes could potentially decrease acute liver failure by decreasing the inflammatory flare caused by excessive neutrophil activity.
Calreticulin (CALR) is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-retained chaperone that assists glycoproteins in obtaining their structure. CALR mutations occur in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), and the ER retention of CALR mutants (CALR MUT) is reduced due to a lacking KDEL sequence. Here, we investigate the impact of CALR mutations on protein structure and protein levels in MPNs by subjecting primary patient samples and CALR-mutated cell lines to limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry (LiP-MS). Especially glycoproteins are differentially expressed and undergo profound structural alterations in granulocytes and cell lines with homozygous, but not with heterozygous, CALR mutations. Furthermore, homozygous CALR mutations and loss of CALR equally perturb glycoprotein integrity, suggesting that loss-of-function attributes of mutated CALR chaperones (CALR MUT) lead to glycoprotein maturation defects. Finally, by investigating the misfolding of the CALR glycoprotein client myeloperoxidase (MPO), we provide molecular proof of protein misfolding in the presence of homozygous CALR mutations.
The heme-containing enzyme myeloperoxidase (MPO) is secreted from polymorphonuclear leukocytes and monocytes. It is involved in host defence and inflammation by oxidation of numerous small molecules. This review summarises our current results on the determination of redox properties of all intermediates involved in the halogenation and peroxidase cycle of MPO. The standard reduction potentials of the redox couples compound I/native MPO, compound I/compound II of MPO, and compound II/native MPO have been determined to be 1.16 V, 1.35 V, and 0.97 V, respectively, at pH 7 and 25 degrees C. Thus, for the first time, a full description of these important thermodynamic parameters of myeloperoxidase has been performed, allowing a better understanding of its extraordinary reactivity.
Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory process where oxidative damage within the artery wall is implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease. Mononuclear phagocytes, an inflammatory cell capable of generating a variety of oxidizing species, are early components of arterial lesions. Their normal functions include host defense and surveillance through regulated generation of diffusible radical species, reactive oxygen or nitrogen species, and HOCl (hypochlorous acid). However, under certain circumstances an excess of these oxidizing species can overwhelm local antioxidant defenses and lead to oxidant stress and oxidative tissue injury, processes implicated in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. This review focuses on oxidation reactions catalyzed by myeloperoxidase (MPO), an abundant heme protein secreted from activated phagocytes which is present in human atherosclerotic lesions. Over the past several years, significant evidence has accrued demonstrating that MPO is one pathway for protein and lipoprotein oxidation during the evolution of cardiovascular disease. Multiple distinct products of MPO are enriched in human atherosclerotic lesions and LDL recovered from human atheroma. However, the biological consequences of these MPO-catalyzed reactions in vivo are still unclear. Here we discuss evidence for the occurrence of MPO-catalyzed oxidation reactions in vivo and the potential role MPO plays in both normal host defenses and inflammatory diseases like atherosclerosis.
Rational drug design is a general approach using protein-structure technique in which the discovery of a ligand can be driven either by chance, screening, or rational theory. Myeloperoxidase (MPO) was rapidly identified as a therapeutical target because of its involvement in chronic inflammatory syndromes. In this context, the research of MPO inhibitors was intensified and development of new chemical entities was rationally driven by the research of ligands that enter into the MPO catalytic pocket. Actually, as soon as crystallography data of MPO have become available and its structure was virtually designed, the rational drug design has been applied to this peroxidase. Pharmaceutical industries and academic laboratories apply rational drug design on MPO by either optimizing known inhibitors or searching new molecules by high-throughput virtual screening. By these ways, they were able to find efficient MPO inhibitors and understand their interactions with the enzyme. During this quest of MPO inhibition, it appears that Glu268 is a crucial residue in order to optimize ligand-target interaction. This amino acid should be carefully considered by medicinal chemist when they design inhibitors interfering with MPO activity.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), by definition is a heterogeneous, multifactorial, polygenic syndrome which results from insulin receptor dysfunction. It is an outcome of oxidative stress caused by interactions of reactive metabolites (RMs) interactions with lipids, proteins and other mechanisms of human body. Production of RMs mainly superoxide (O2(-)) has been found in a variety of predominating cellular enzyme systems including NAD(P)H oxidase, xanthine oxidase (XO), cyclooxygenase (COX), uncoupled endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and myeloperoxidase (MPO). The four main RM related molecular mechanisms are: increased polyol pathway flux; increased advanced glycation end-product (AGE) formation; activation of protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms and increased hexosamine pathway flux which have been implicated in glucose-mediated vascular damage. Superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), glutathione-S-transferase (GST), nitric oxide synthase (NOS) are antioxidant enzymes involved in scavenging RMs in normal individuals. Functional polymorphisms of these antioxidant enzymes have been reported to be involved in pathogenesis of T2DM individuals. The low levels of antioxidant enzymes or their non-functionality results in excessive RMs which initiate stress related pathways thereby leading to insulin resistance and T2DM. An attempt has been made to review the role of RMs and antioxidant enzymes in oxidative stress resulting in T2DM.
Despite remarkable advancements in the treatment of multiple myeloma (MM), relapse remains a challenge. However, the mechanisms underlying this disease remain unclear. This study aimed to identify potential biomarkers that could open new avenues for MM treatment. Microarray data and clinical characteristics of patients with MM were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differential expression analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction were used to identify hub genes associated with MM. Predictive performance was further assessed using receiver operating characteristic curves and nomogram construction. Functional enrichment analysis was conducted to investigate possible mechanisms. Mendelian randomization (MR) was used to evaluate the causal relationship between the crucial gene and MM risk. Topological analysis of the PPI network revealed five hub genes associated with MM, with myeloperoxidase (MPO) being the key gene owing to its highest degree and area under the curve values. MPO showed significant differences between patients with MM and controls across all datasets. Functional enrichment analysis revealed a strong association between MPO and immune-related pathways in MM. MR analysis confirmed a causal relationship between MPO and the risk of MM. By integrating microarray analysis and MR, we successfully identified and validated MPO as a promising biomarker for MM that is potentially implicated in MM pathogenesis and progression through immune-related pathways.
Low circulating high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are not only defining criteria for metabolic syndrome, but are more generally associated with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) and other chronic diseases. Oxidative stress, a hallmark of cardio-metabolic disease, further influences HDL activity by suppressing their function. Especially the leukocyte- derived enzyme myeloperoxidase (MPO) has recently attracted great interest as it catalyzes the formation of oxidizing reactive species that modify the structure and function of HDL, ultimately increasing cardiovascular risk. Contrariwise, paraoxonase-1 (PON1) is an HDL-associated enzyme that protects HDL from lipid oxidation and then acts as a protective factor against ASCVD. It is noteworthy that recent studies have demonstrated how MPO, PON1 and HDL form a functional complex in which PON1 partially inhibits the MPO activity, while MPO in turn partially inactivates PON1.In line with that, a high MPO/PON1 ratio characterizes patients with ASCVD and metabolic syndrome and has been suggested as a potential marker of dysfunctional HDL as well as a predictor of ASCVD. In this review, we summarize the evidence on the interactions between MPO and PON1 with regard to their structure, function and interaction with HDL activity. We also provide an overview of in vitro and experimental animal models, finally focusing on clinical evidence from a cohort of patients with ASCVD and metabolic syndrome.
BACKGROUND: NAD (P) H: quinone oxidoreductase (1) (NQO1-HGNC: 2874) and myeloperoxidase (MPO-HGNC: 7218) are two enzymes involved in phase II of the xenobiotic metabolism pathway. METHODS: In this study, a case-control analysis was conducted to investigate the relationship between genetic variations in the NQO1 (C609T, rs1800566; IVS1-27 C >G, rs689452) and MPO (G463A, rs2333227) genes and the risk for bladder cancer among Tunisian population. RESULTS: We have found that the MPO 463GA genotype was associated with a decreased risk of developing bladder cancer (p = 0.049; OR = 0.696; 95% CI 0.484-0.999). In contrast, we have found that the NQO1 609CT genotype could increase the risk of bladder cancer patients (p = 0.0039; OR = 1.454; 95% CI = 1.017-2.078). Moreover, patients with "NQO1 609 CT/IVS1-27 CG" genotype show a 2.180-fold increasing risk for developing bladder cancer in comparison to the control group with wild genotype. This OR is estimated at 5.6-fold in smokers patients with "NQO1 609 CT/IVS1-27 CG" genotype. Lastly, study findings suggest that the NQO1 IVS-27 *CG genotype (rs689452) is associated with a risk of progression to muscle invasive bladder cancer. CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that environmental risk factors in association to NQO1 genotypes (NQO1 609 CT/IVS1-27 CG) play an important role in the development of bladder cancer in Tunisian population.
SIGNIFICANCE: When neutrophils kill microorganisms, they ingest them into phagosomes and bombard them with a burst of reactive oxygen species. RECENT ADVANCES: This review focuses on what oxidants are produced and how they kill. The neutrophil NADPH oxidase is activated and shuttles electrons from NADPH in the cytoplasm to oxygen in the phagosomal lumen. Superoxide is generated in the narrow space between the ingested organism and the phagosomal membrane and kinetic modeling indicates that it reaches a concentration of around 20 muM. Degranulation leads to a very high protein concentration with up to millimolar myeloperoxidase (MPO). MPO has many substrates, but its main phagosomal reactions should be to dismutate superoxide and, provided adequate chloride, catalyze efficient conversion of hydrogen peroxide to hypochlorous acid (HOCl). Studies with specific probes have shown that HOCl is produced in the phagosome and reacts with ingested bacteria. The amount generated should be high enough to kill. However, much of the HOCl reacts with phagosomal proteins. Generation of chloramines may contribute to killing, but the full consequences of this are not yet clear. CRITICAL ISSUES: Isolated neutrophils kill most of the ingested microorganisms rapidly by an MPO-dependent mechanism that is almost certainly due to HOCl. However, individuals with MPO deficiency rarely have problems with infection. A possible explanation is that HOCl provides a frontline response that kills most of the microorganisms, with survivors killed by nonoxidative processes. The latter may deal adequately with low-level infection but with high exposure, more efficient HOCl-dependent killing is required. FUTURE DIRECTIONS: Better quantification of HOCl and other oxidants in the phagosome should clarify their roles in antimicrobial action.
The first detailed report of a specific interaction of CP (caeruloplasmin) with another protein described its complex with LF (lactoferrin) in 2000. Since then, several protein-protein interactions involving CP have been reported, mostly concerning iron-containing proteins. The CP-LF complex was studied thoroughly, and evidence of reciprocal effects of CP and LF was obtained. Another specific interaction investigated in detail occurs between CP and MPO (myeloperoxidase). CP-LF, CP-MPO and CP-LF-MPO complexes were found in sera of patients with inflammation. Modelling in vitro allowed understanding of which structural peculiarities of CP and partners allow the modification of their functions in a complex. The present paper reviews the latest data on complexes of CP with LF and MPO, and advances some suggestions about their role in health and disease.
Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is an important component of the human innate immune system and the main source of a strong oxidizing and chlorinating species, hypochlorous acid (HOCl). Inadvertent, misplaced, or excessive generation of HOCl by MPO is associated with multiple human inflammatory diseases. Therefore, there is a considerable interest in the development of MPO inhibitors. Here, we report the synthesis and characterization of a boronobenzyl derivative of acetaminophen (AMBB), which can function as a proinhibitor of MPO and release acetaminophen, the inhibitor of chlorination cycle of MPO, in the presence of inflammatory oxidants, i.e., hydrogen peroxide, hypochlorous acid, or peroxynitrite. We demonstrate that the AMBB proinhibitor undergoes conversion to acetaminophen by all three oxidants, with the involvement of the primary phenolic product intermediate, with relatively long half-life at pH 7.4. The determined rate constants of the reaction of the AMBB proinhibitor with hydrogen peroxide, hypochlorous acid, or peroxynitrite are equal to 1.67, 1.6 x 10(4), and 1.0 x 10(6) M(-1) s(-1), respectively. AMBB showed lower MPO inhibitory activity (IC(50) > 0.3 mM) than acetaminophen (IC(50) = 0.14 mM) toward MPO-dependent HOCl generation. Finally, based on the determined reaction kinetics and the observed inhibitory effects of two plasma components, uric acid and albumin, on the extent of AMBB oxidation by ONOO(-) and HOCl, we conclude that ONOO(-) is the most likely potential activator of AMBB in human plasma.
BACKGROUND: Monocytes are involved in the pathogenesis of ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV). Monocyte/macrophages are the dominant infiltrating cells in the glomeruli of patients with myeloperoxidase-AAV (MPO-AAV). However, how human monocyte subsets extravasate to the kidney in MPO-AAV with renal damage is unclear. METHODS: 30 MPO-AAV patients with renal damage and 22 healthy controls were enrolled in this study. Monocyte subsets and monocyte-related chemokines in the blood and kidneys of MPO-AAV patients were detected. The chemoattractant activity of the CX3CL1-CX3CR1 axis on CD16(+) monocytes was observed. The effect of MPO-ANCA on the migration of CD16(+) monocytes to human glomerular endothelial cells (HGECs) was detected by flow cytometry and transwell migration assay. RESULTS: Compared with controls, CD16(+) monocytes were significantly decreased in the blood and increased in the glomeruli of MPO-AAV patients with renal damage. The level of CX3CL1, but not CCL2, was significantly increased in the plasma of MPO-AAV patients. CX3CL1 co-localized with glomerular endothelial cells in MPO-AAV patients with renal damage. Moreover, we initially found that MPO-ANCA promotes an increase of the chemokine CX3CL1 on HGECs, imposing recruitment on CD16(+) monocytes. Finally, the percentage of CD16(+) monocytes in the blood was found to be positively correlated with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and negatively correlated with urinary protein creatinine ratio in MPO-AAV patients with renal damage. Furthermore, the urinary protein creatinine ratio was positively correlated with the infiltrating of CD14(+) and CD16(+) cells in the kidneys. CONCLUSION: Enhanced extravasation of CD16(+) monocytes to the kidney via the CX3CL1-CX3CR1 axis may be involved in renal damage in MPO-AAV.
BACKGROUND: Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent endopeptidases with an important role in physiological and pathological remodeling. Their activity is regulated by tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs). Excess MMPs and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity have been associated with loss of tooth supporting tissues in periodontal disease (PD). We investigate the changes in salivary MMP-8, MMP-9, TIMP-1, TIMP-2, and MPO concentrations during PD treatment and compare results with plasma levels. METHODS: MMP-8, MMP-9, TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 were analyzed by ELISA. Gelatinolytic activity of MMP-9 forms was determined by zymography, and the MPO activity was determined by colorimetric assay. RESULTS: Subjects were divided into 2 groups: PD and control, which were further divided into 2 subgroups each, namely PD before (PB) and after 3 months (PA) of non-surgical periodontal therapy, and healthy volunteers at baseline (CB) and 3months after baseline (CA). Subgroup PA presented lower gelatinolytic activity and MMP-8 and TIMP-2 concentrations in the saliva compared with PB (p<0.05). The MPO activity was higher in PB compared with CB (p<0.05). There were significant correlations between the gelatinolytic activity of the saliva and MMP-8 and MMP-9 plasma levels. There was a significant correlation between plasma and saliva TIMP-2 levels. CONCLUSION: These results suggest attenuation of some inflammatory markers in the saliva and plasma after PD treatment. Moreover, correlations between salivary and plasma levels exist for some of these markers.
The tool box of site-specific cleavage for nucleic acid has been an increasingly attractive subject. Especially, the recent emergence of the orthogonally activatable DNA device is closely related to the site-specific scission. However, most of these cleavage strategies are based on exogenous assistance, such as laser irradiation. Endogenous strategies are highly desirable for the orthogonally regulatable DNA machine to explore the crucial intracellular biological process and cell signal network. Here, we found that the accurate site-specific cleavage reaction of phosphorothioate (PT) modified DNA by using myeloperoxidase (MPO). A scissors-like mechanism by which MPO breaks PT modification through chloride oxidation has been revealed. Furthermore, we have successfully applied the scissors to activate PT-modified hairpin-DNA machines to produce horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-mimicking DNAzyme or initiate hybridization chain reaction (HCR) amplification. Since MPO plays an important role in the pathway related to oxidative stress in cells, through the HCR amplification activated by this tool box, the oxidative stress in living cells has been robustly imaged. This work proposes an accurate and endogenous site-specific cleavage tool for the research of biostimuli and the construction of DNA molecular devices.
