Mevalonate kinase; Catalyzes the phosphorylation of mevalonate to mevalonate 5- phosphate, a key step in isoprenoid and cholesterol biosynthesis ; Belongs to the GHMP kinase family. Mevalonate kinase subfamily.
BACKGROUND: First-line chemotherapy for advanced or metastatic human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma has a median overall survival (OS) of less than 1 year. We aimed to evaluate first-line programmed cell death (PD)-1 inhibitor-based therapies in gastric, gastro-oesophageal junction, and oesophageal adenocarcinoma. We report the first results for nivolumab plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone. METHODS: In this multicentre, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial (CheckMate 649), we enrolled adults (>/=18 years) with previously untreated, unresectable, non-HER2-positive gastric, gastro-oesophageal junction, or oesophageal adenocarcinoma, regardless of PD-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression from 175 hospitals and cancer centres in 29 countries. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1:1 while all three groups were open) via interactive web response technology (block sizes of six) to nivolumab (360 mg every 3 weeks or 240 mg every 2 weeks) plus chemotherapy (capecitabine and oxaliplatin every 3 weeks or leucovorin, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin every 2 weeks), nivolumab plus ipilimumab, or chemotherapy alone. Primary endpoints for nivolumab plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone were OS or progression-free survival (PFS) by blinded independent central review, in patients whose tumours had a PD-L1 combined positive score (CPS) of five or more. Safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of the assigned treatment. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02872116. FINDINGS: From March 27, 2017, to April 24, 2019, of 2687 patients assessed for eligibility, we concurrently randomly assigned 1581 patients to treatment (nivolumab plus chemotherapy [n=789, 50%] or chemotherapy alone [n=792, 50%]). The median follow-up for OS was 13.1 months (IQR 6.7-19.1) for nivolumab plus chemotherapy and 11.1 months (5.8-16.1) for chemotherapy alone. Nivolumab plus chemotherapy resulted in significant improvements in OS (hazard ratio [HR] 0.71 [98.4% CI 0.59-0.86]; p<0.0001) and PFS (HR 0.68 [98 % CI 0.56-0.81]; p<0.0001) versus chemotherapy alone in patients with a PD-L1 CPS of five or more (minimum follow-up 12.1 months). Additional results showed significant improvement in OS, along with PFS benefit, in patients with a PD-L1 CPS of one or more and all randomly assigned patients. Among all treated patients, 462 (59%) of 782 patients in the nivolumab plus chemotherapy group and 341 (44%) of 767 patients in the chemotherapy alone group had grade 3-4 treatment-related adverse events. The most common any-grade treatment-related adverse events (>/=25%) were nausea, diarrhoea, and peripheral neuropathy across both groups. 16 (2%) deaths in the nivolumab plus chemotherapy group and four (1%) deaths in the chemotherapy alone group were considered to be treatment-related. No new safety signals were identified. INTERPRETATION: Nivolumab is the first PD-1 inhibitor to show superior OS, along with PFS benefit and an acceptable safety profile, in combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone in previously untreated patients with advanced gastric, gastro-oesophageal junction, or oesophageal adenocarcinoma. Nivolumab plus chemotherapy represents a new standard first-line treatment for these patients. FUNDING: Bristol Myers Squibb, in collaboration with Ono Pharmaceutical.
BACKGROUND: KRAS G12C is a mutation that occurs in approximately 3 to 4% of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. Monotherapy with KRAS G12C inhibitors has yielded only modest efficacy. Combining the KRAS G12C inhibitor sotorasib with panitumumab, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, may be an effective strategy. METHODS: In this phase 3, multicenter, open-label, randomized trial, we assigned patients with chemorefractory metastatic colorectal cancer with mutated KRAS G12C who had not received previous treatment with a KRAS G12C inhibitor to receive sotorasib at a dose of 960 mg once daily plus panitumumab (53 patients), sotorasib at a dose of 240 mg once daily plus panitumumab (53 patients), or the investigator's choice of trifluridine-tipiracil or regorafenib (standard care; 54 patients). The primary end point was progression-free survival as assessed by blinded independent central review according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, version 1.1. Key secondary end points were overall survival and objective response. RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 7.8 months (range, 0.1 to 13.9), the median progression-free survival was 5.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.2 to 6.3) and 3.9 months (95% CI, 3.7 to 5.8) in the 960-mg sotorasib-panitumumab and 240-mg sotorasib-panitumumab groups, respectively, as compared with 2.2 months (95% CI, 1.9 to 3.9) in the standard-care group. The hazard ratio for disease progression or death in the 960-mg sotorasib-panitumumab group as compared with the standard-care group was 0.49 (95% CI, 0.30 to 0.80; P = 0.006), and the hazard ratio in the 240-mg sotorasib-panitumumab group was 0.58 (95% CI, 0.36 to 0.93; P = 0.03). Overall survival data are maturing. The objective response was 26.4% (95% CI, 15.3 to 40.3), 5.7% (95% CI, 1.2 to 15.7), and 0% (95% CI, 0.0 to 6.6) in the 960-mg sotorasib-panitumumab, 240-mg sotorasib-panitumumab, and standard-care groups, respectively. Treatment-related adverse events of grade 3 or higher occurred in 35.8%, 30.2%, and 43.1% of patients, respectively. Skin-related toxic effects and hypomagnesemia were the most common adverse events observed with sotorasib-panitumumab. CONCLUSIONS: In this phase 3 trial of a KRAS G12C inhibitor plus an EGFR inhibitor in patients with chemorefractory metastatic colorectal cancer, both doses of sotorasib in combination with panitumumab resulted in longer progression-free survival than standard treatment. Toxic effects were as expected for either agent alone and resulted in few discontinuations of treatment. (Funded by Amgen; CodeBreaK 300 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT05198934.).
Most head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas that develop in the upper aerodigestive epithelium after exposure to carcinogens such as tobacco and alcohol. Human papillomavirus has also been strongly implicated as a causative agent in a subset of these cancers. The complex anatomy and vital physiological role of the tumour-involved structures dictate that the goals of treatment are not only to improve survival outcomes but also to preserve organ function. Major improvements have been accomplished in surgical techniques and radiotherapy delivery. Moreover, systemic therapy including chemotherapy and molecularly targeted agents--namely, the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors--has been successfully integrated into potentially curative treatment of locally advanced squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. In deciding which treatment strategy would be suitable for an individual patient, important considerations include expected functional outcomes, ability to tolerate treatment, and comorbid illnesses. The collaboration of many specialties is the key for optimum assessment and decision making. We review the epidemiology, molecular pathogenesis, diagnosis and staging, and the latest multimodal management of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck.
Systemic autoinflammatory diseases (SAIDs) are defined as disorders of innate immunity. They were initially defined in opposition to autoimmune diseases due to the lack of involvement of the adaptive immune system and circulating autoantibodies. The four historical monogenic diseases are familial Mediterranean fever (associated with MEFV mutations), cryopyrinopathies (NLRP3 mutations), tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TNFRSF1A mutations), and mevalonate kinase deficiency (MVK mutations). In the last 10 years, more than 50 new monogenic SAIDs have been discovered thanks to advances in genetics. Diagnosis is largely based on personal and family history and detailed analysis of signs and symptoms associated with febrile attacks, in the setting of elevated inflammatory markers. Increasingly efficient techniques of genetic analysis can contribute to refining the diagnosis. This review is a guide for the clinician in suspecting and establishing a diagnosis of SAID.
Recent advances in medical genetics elucidated the background of diseases characterized by superficial dermal and epidermal inflammation with resultant aberrant keratosis. This led to introducing the term autoinflammatory keratinization diseases encompassing entities in which monogenic mutations cause spontaneous activation of the innate immunity and subsequent disruption of the keratinization process. Originally, autoinflammatory keratinization diseases were attributed to pathogenic variants of CARD14 (generalized pustular psoriasis with concomitant psoriasis vulgaris, palmoplantar pustulosis, type V pityriasis rubra pilaris), IL36RN (generalized pustular psoriasis without concomitant psoriasis vulgaris, impetigo herpetiformis, acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau), NLRP1 (familial forms of keratosis lichenoides chronica), and genes of the mevalonate pathway, i.e., MVK, PMVK, MVD, and FDPS (porokeratosis). Since then, endotypes underlying novel entities matching the concept of autoinflammatory keratinization diseases have been discovered (mutations of JAK1, POMP, and EGFR). This review describes the concept and pathophysiology of autoinflammatory keratinization diseases and outlines the characteristic clinical features of the associated entities. Furthermore, a novel term for NLRP1-associated autoinflammatory disease with epithelial dyskeratosis (NADED) describing the spectrum of autoinflammatory keratinization diseases secondary to NLRP1 mutations is proposed.
MEVALONATE KINASE DEFICIENCY. Mevalonate kinase deficiency is a rare, autosomal recessive, auto- inflammatory disease, linked to mutations in the gene MVK, resulting in the activation of pyrin inflammasome and hypersecretion of interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta). The clinical spectrum realizes a continuum which extends from the mild phenotype of the partial MVK deficiency (hyperimmunoglobulinemia D) resulting in periodic fever syndrome to a letal form of mevalonate aciduria (MA, complete MVK deficiency). Symptoms occur before the age of one, often with a trigger. The partial MVK deficiency (HIDS) is characterized by recurrent episodes of fever with an intense inflammatory syndrome, accompanied with lymphadenopathy, aphthous stomatitis, digestive, articular and cutaneous symptoms. There is in more in mevalonate aciduria a psychomotor retardation, a failure to thrive, a cerebellar ataxia and a dysmorphic syndrome. The diagnosis is based on the mevalonic aciduria during febrile attack and the search for mutations in MVK. The most severe patients can be treated by anti-IL-1.
PARP7 is a monoPARP that catalyzes the transfer of single units of ADP-ribose onto substrates to change their function. Here, we identify PARP7 as a negative regulator of nucleic acid sensing in tumor cells. Inhibition of PARP7 restores type I interferon (IFN) signaling responses to nucleic acids in tumor models. Restored signaling can directly inhibit cell proliferation and activate the immune system, both of which contribute to tumor regression. Oral dosing of the PARP7 small-molecule inhibitor, RBN-2397, results in complete tumor regression in a lung cancer xenograft and induces tumor-specific adaptive immune memory in an immunocompetent mouse cancer model, dependent on inducing type I IFN signaling in tumor cells. PARP7 is a therapeutic target whose inhibition induces both cancer cell-autonomous and immune stimulatory effects via enhanced IFN signaling. These data support the targeting of a monoPARP in cancer and introduce a potent and selective PARP7 inhibitor to enter clinical development.
SCAP (SREBF chaperone) regulates SREBFs (sterol regulatory element binding transcription factors) processing and stability, and, thus, becomes an emerging drug target to treat dyslipidemia and fatty liver disease. However, the current known SCAP inhibitors, such as oxysterols, induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and NR1H3/LXRalpha (nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group H member 3)-SREBF1/SREBP-1 c-mediated hepatic steatosis, which severely limited the clinical application of this inhibitor. In this study, we identified a small molecule, lycorine, which binds to SCAP, which suppressed the SREBF pathway without inducing ER stress or activating NR1H3. Mechanistically, lycorine promotes SCAP lysosomal degradation in a macroautophagy/autophagy-independent pathway, a mechanism completely distinct from current SCAP inhibitors. Furthermore, we determined that SQSTM1 captured SCAP after its exit from the ER. The interaction of SCAP and SQSTM1 requires the WD40 domain of SCAP and the TB domain of SQSTM1. Interestingly, lycorine triggers the lysosome translocation of SCAP independent of autophagy. We termed this novel protein degradation pathway as the SQSTM1-mediated autophagy-independent lysosomal degradation (SMAILD) pathway. In vivo, lycorine ameliorates high-fat diet-induced hyperlipidemia, hepatic steatosis, and insulin resistance in mice. Our study demonstrated that the inhibition of SCAP through the SMAILD pathway could be employed as a useful therapeutic strategy for treating metabolic diseases.Abbreviation: 25-OHD: 25-hydroxyvitamin D; 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; ABCG5: ATP binding cassette subfamily G member 5; ABCG8: ATP binding cassette subfamily G member 8; ACACA: acetyl-CoA carboxylase alpha; AEBSF: 4-(2-aminoethyl) benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride; AHI: anhydroicaritin; AKT/protein kinase B: AKT serine/threonine kinase; APOE: apolipoprotein E; ATF6: activating transcription factor 6; ATG: autophagy-related; BAT: brown adipose tissue; CD274/PD-L1: CD274 molecule; CETSA: cellular thermal shift assay; CMA: chaperone-mediated autophagy; COPII: cytoplasmic coat protein complex-II; CQ: chloroquine; DDIT3/CHOP: DNA damage inducible transcript 3; DNL: de novo lipogenesis; EE: energy expenditure; EGFR: epithelial growth factor receptor; eMI: endosomal microautophagy; ERN1/IRE1alpha: endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 1; FADS2: fatty acid desaturase 2; FASN: fatty acid synthase; GOT1/AST: glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 1; GPT/ALT: glutamic-pyruvate transaminase; HMGCR: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase; HMGCS1: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1; HSP90B1/GRP94: heat shock protein 90 beta family member 1; HSPA5/GRP78: heat hock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5; HSPA8/HSC70: heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 8; INSIG1: insulin induced gene 1; LAMP2A: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2A; LDLR: low density lipoprotein receptor; LyTACs: lysosome targeting chimeras; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MBTPS1: membrane bound transcription factor peptidase, site 1; MEF: mouse embryonic fibroblast; MST: microscale thermophoresis; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MVK: mevalonate kinase; PROTAC: proteolysis targeting chimera; RQ: respiratory quotient; SCAP: SREBF chaperone; SCD1: stearoyl-coenzemy A desaturase 1; SMAILD: sequestosome 1 mediated autophagy-independent lysosomal degradation; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; SREBF: sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor; TNFRSF10B/DR5: TNF receptor superfamily member 10b; TRAF6: TNF receptor associated factor 6; UPR: unfolded protein response; WAT: white adipose tissue; XBP1: X-box binding protein 1.
Autoinflammatory diseases (AIDs) are defined as disorders of innate immunity. They were initially defined in contrast to autoimmune diseases because of the lack of involvement of the adaptive immune system and circulating autoantibodies. The four monogenic AIDs first described are called the 'historical' AIDs and include FMF (associated with MEFV mutations), cryopyrinopathies (associated with NLRP3 mutations), TNF receptor-associated periodic syndrome (associated with TNFRSF1A mutations) and mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD; associated with MVK mutations). In the last 10 years, >50 new monogenic AIDs have been discovered due to genetic advances. The most important discovery for adult patients is VEXAS syndrome associated with somatic UBA1 mutations leading to an AID affecting mostly elderly men. Diagnosis of monogenic AIDs is based on personal and family history and detailed analysis of symptoms associated with febrile attacks in the context of elevated peripheral inflammatory markers. This review proposes a practical approach for the diagnosis of the main monogenic AIDs among adult patients.
SARS-CoV-2 infection poses a major threat to the lungs and multiple other organs, occasionally causing death. Until effective vaccines are developed to curb the pandemic, it is paramount to define the mechanisms and develop protective therapies to prevent organ dysfunction in patients with COVID-19. Individuals that develop severe manifestations have signs of dysregulated innate and adaptive immune responses. Emerging evidence implicates neutrophils and the disbalance between neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation and degradation plays a central role in the pathophysiology of inflammation, coagulopathy, organ damage, and immunothrombosis that characterize severe cases of COVID-19. Here, we discuss the evidence supporting a role for NETs in COVID-19 manifestations and present putative mechanisms, by which NETs promote tissue injury and immunothrombosis. We present therapeutic strategies, which have been successful in the treatment of immunomicron-inflammatory disorders and which target dysregulated NET formation or degradation, as potential approaches that may benefit patients with severe COVID-19.
BACKGROUND: Asthma exacerbations are a serious public health concern due to high healthcare resource utilization, work/school productivity loss, impact on quality of life, and risk of mortality. The genetic basis of asthma exacerbations has been studied in several populations, but no prior study has performed a multi-ancestry meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (meta-GWAS) for this trait. We aimed to identify common genetic loci associated with asthma exacerbations across diverse populations and to assess their functional role in regulating DNA methylation and gene expression. METHODS: A meta-GWAS of asthma exacerbations in 4989 Europeans, 2181 Hispanics/Latinos, 1250 Singaporean Chinese, and 972 African Americans analyzed 9.6 million genetic variants. Suggestively associated variants (p </= 5 x 10(-5) ) were assessed for replication in 36,477 European and 1078 non-European asthma patients. Functional effects on DNA methylation were assessed in 595 Hispanic/Latino and African American asthma patients and in publicly available databases. The effect on gene expression was evaluated in silico. RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-six independent variants were suggestively associated with asthma exacerbations in the discovery phase. Two variants independently replicated: rs12091010 located at vascular cell adhesion molecule-1/exostosin like glycosyltransferase-2 (VCAM1/EXTL2) (discovery: odds ratio (OR(T allele) ) = 0.82, p = 9.05 x 10(-6) and replication: OR(T allele)  = 0.89, p = 5.35 x 10(-3) ) and rs943126 from pantothenate kinase 1 (PANK1) (discovery: OR(C allele)  = 0.85, p = 3.10 x 10(-5) and replication: OR(C allele)  = 0.89, p = 1.30 x 10(-2) ). Both variants regulate gene expression of genes where they locate and DNA methylation levels of nearby genes in whole blood. CONCLUSIONS: This multi-ancestry study revealed novel suggestive regulatory loci for asthma exacerbations located in genomic regions participating in inflammation and host defense.
Missense mutations in the TP53 gene lead to accumulation of dysfunctional TP53 proteins in tumors, showing oncogenic gain-of-function (GOF) activities. Stabilization of mutant TP53 (mutp53) is required for the GOF; however, the mechanisms by which mutp53 promotes cancer progression and how mutp53 stability is regulated are not completely understood. Recent work from our laboratory has identified statins, inhibitors of the mevalonate pathway, as degraders of conformational mutp53. Specific reduction of mevalonate-5-phosphate (MVP), a metabolic intermediate in the mevalonate pathway, by statins or mevalonate kinase (MVK) knockdown triggers CHIP ubiquitin ligase-mediated degradation of conformational mutp53 by inhibiting interaction between mutp53 and DNAJA1, a Hsp40 family member. Thus, the mevalonate pathway contributes to mutp53 stabilization. Given that mutp53 is shown to promote cancer progression by upregulating mRNA expression of mevalonate pathway enzymes by binding to the sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2 (SREBP2) and subsequently increasing activities of mevalonate pathway-associated oncogenic proteins (e.g., Ras, Rho, YAP/TAZ), there is a positive-feedback loop between mutp53 and the mevalonate pathway. Here, we summarize recent evidence linking the mevalonate pathway-mutp53 axis with cancer progression and further discuss the clinical relevance of this axis.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has had great societal and health consequences. Despite the availability of vaccines, infection rates remain high due to immune evasive Omicron sublineages. Broad-spectrum antivirals are needed to safeguard against emerging variants and future pandemics. We used messenger RNA (mRNA) display under a reprogrammed genetic code to find a spike-targeting macrocyclic peptide that inhibits SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) Wuhan strain infection and pseudoviruses containing spike proteins of SARS-CoV-2 variants or related sarbecoviruses. Structural and bioinformatic analyses reveal a conserved binding pocket between the receptor-binding domain, N-terminal domain, and S2 region, distal to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor-interaction site. Our data reveal a hitherto unexplored site of vulnerability in sarbecoviruses that peptides and potentially other drug-like molecules can target.
Currently over 70 genes known to be causative in very early onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEOIBD) have been identified. In the current issue of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, 2 articles describing monogenetic forms of VEOIBD are highlighted. One describes a patient with life-threatening VEOIBD and a mutation in ITGA6, illustrating the importance of the epithelial barrier in maintaining mucosal homeostasis. The other describes the presentation and management of 10 patients with VEOIBD secondary to damaging mutations in MVK, resulting in mevalonate kinase deficiency. Though most monogenic causes of VEOIBD remain "private," understanding the different categories of pathways affected in children with VEOIBD is critical and has already resulted in invaluable insight in the management of patients with VEOIBD and may hold strong implications for the care of IBD overall.
Innate immunity is a critical partner in the regulation of inflammation and some mutations in genes implied in innate immunity pathways can cause genetic disorders characterized by seemingly unprovoked self-limited inflammatory attacks. These rare conditions are collectively named "hereditary periodic fever syndromes" (HPFS), and protean pathogenetic mechanisms combined with several clinical phenotypes characterize at least four distinct conditions: (1) familial Mediterranean fever, which is the prototype and the most widely recognized among HPFS, inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder showing recurrent dysregulated inflammatory processes, caused by an abnormal interaction between cytoskeleton and inflammasome, a key-signaling platform that releases interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta); (2) the group of cryopyrin-associated periodic syndrome, which upsets directly the production of IL-1beta, with a dominant pattern of inheritance; (3) tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated periodic syndrome, which is an autosomal dominant disorder subverting the functions and traffic of a cell membrane protein; and (4) mevalonate kinase deficiency, which is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder halting the biosynthesis of cholesterol. MEFV, NLRP3, TNFRSF1A, and MVK are respectively the four causing genes of these conditions, all resulting in excessive IL-1beta signaling, though the encoded proteins act at different levels in cytoskeletal filament organization, apoptosis, and activation of the IL-1beta-structured inflammasome. The differential diagnosis of HPFS can be challenging, as there are no universally accepted diagnostic algorithms, and near half of patients may have a specific disease without any genetic pathogenetic variant identified. Herein, we outline the most relevant aspects of HPFS at the crossroads between clinical medicine and immunology and all the most recent advances in their treatment, as the increasing use of IL-1 antagonists has achieved unexpected clinical results in a large number of patients.
PURPOSE: Enzymolysis clearance strategy, characterized by releasing the non-reabsorbable radioactive fragment under the specific cleavage of enzymes, is confirmed to be a safe and effective way to reduce the renal radioactivity accumulation in mice. However, the effectiveness of this strategy in humans remains unknown. Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is overexpressed in various types of tumors, and radiolabeled HER2 Affibody is believed to be an attractive tool for HER2-targeted theranostics. However, its wide application is limited by the high and persistent renal uptake. In this study, we intend to validate the effectiveness of enzymolysis clearance strategy in reducing renal accumulation by using a modified HER2 Affibody. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A new HER2 Affibody ligand, NOTA-MVK-Z(HER2:2891), containing a cleavable Met-Val-Lys (MVK) linker was synthesized and labeled with (68)Ga. The microPET imaging study was performed in SKOV-3 tumor mice to assess the uptakes of the control ligand and the MVK one in tumors and kidneys. Seven healthy volunteers were included for biodistribution and dosimetric studies with both the control and MVK ligands performed 1 week apart. Urine and blood samples from healthy volunteers were collected for in vivo metabolism study of the two ligands. Four HER2-positive and two HER2-negative patients were recruited for [(68)Ga]Ga-NOTA-MVK-Z(HER2:2891) PET/CT imaging at 2 and 4 h post-injection (p.i.). RESULTS: [(68)Ga]Ga-NOTA-MVK-Z(HER2:2891) was stable both in PBS and in mouse serum. MicroPET images showed that the tumor uptake of [(68)Ga]Ga-NOTA-MVK-Z(HER2:2891) was comparable to that of [(68)Ga]Ga-NOTA-Z(HER2:2891) at all the time points, while the kidney uptake was significantly reduced 40 min p.i. (P < 0.05). The biodistribution study in healthy volunteers showed that the kidney uptake of MVK ligand was significantly lower than that of the control ligand at 1 h p.i. (P < 0.05), with the SUV(mean) of 34.3 and 45.8, respectively, while the uptakes of the two ligands in the other organs showed negligible difference. The effective doses of the MVK ligand and the control one were 26.1 and 28.7 microSv/MBq, respectively. The enzymolysis fragment of [(68)Ga]Ga-NOTA-Met-OH was observed in the urine samples of healthy volunteers injected with the MVK ligand, indicating that the enzymolysis clearance strategy worked in humans. The PET/CT study of patients showed that the range of SUV(max) of HER2-positive lesions was 9.4-21, while that of HER2-negative lesions was 2.7-6.2, which suggested that the MVK modification did not affect the ability of Z(HER2:2891) structure to bind with HER2. CONCLUSION: We for the first time demonstrated that enzymolysis clearance strategy can effectively reduce renal radioactivity accumulation in humans. This strategy is expected to decrease renal radiation dose of peptide and small protein-based radiotracers, especially in the field of radionuclide therapy.
BACKGROUND: The macrophage theory of depression states that macrophages play an important role in Major Depressive Disorder (MDD). METHODS: MDD patients (N = 140) and healthy controls (N = 120) participated in a cross-sectional study investigating the expression of apoptosis/growth and lipid/cholesterol pathway genes (BAX, BCL10, EGR1, EGR2, HB-EGF, NR1H3, ABCA1, ABCG1, MVK, CD163, HMOX1) in monocytes (macrophage/microglia precursors). Gene expressions were correlated to a set of previously determined and reported inflammation-regulating genes and analyzed with respect to various clinical parameters. RESULTS: MDD monocytes showed an overexpression of the apoptosis/growth/cholesterol and the TNF genes forming an inter-correlating gene cluster (cluster 3) separate from the previously described inflammation-related gene clusters (containing IL1 and IL6). While upregulation of monocyte gene cluster 3 was a hallmark of monocytes of all MDD patients, upregulation of the inflammation-related clusters was confirmed to be found only in the monocytes of patients with childhood adversity. The latter group also showed a downregulation of the cholesterol metabolism gene MVK, which is known to play an important role in trained immunity and proneness to inflammation. CONCLUSIONS: The upregulation of cluster 3 genes in monocytes of all MDD patients suggests a premature aging of the cells, i.e. mitochondrial apoptotic dysfunction and TNF "inflammaging", as a general feature of MDD. The overexpression of the IL-1/IL-6 containing inflammation clusters and the downregulation of MVK in monocytes of patients with childhood adversity indicates a shift in this condition to a more severe inflammation form (pyroptosis) of the cells, additional to the signs of premature aging and inflammaging.
Porokeratosis is a clonal keratinization disorder characterized by solitary, linearly arranged, or generally distributed multiple skin lesions. Previous studies showed that genetic alterations in MVK, PMVK, MVD, or FDPS-genes in the mevalonate pathway-cause hereditary porokeratosis, with skin lesions harboring germline and lesion-specific somatic variants on opposite alleles. Here, we identified non-hereditary porokeratosis associated with epigenetic silencing of FDFT1, another gene in the mevalonate pathway. Skin lesions of the generalized form had germline and lesion-specific somatic variants on opposite alleles in FDFT1, representing FDFT1-associated hereditary porokeratosis identified in this study. Conversely, lesions of the solitary or linearly arranged localized form had somatic bi-allelic promoter hypermethylation or mono-allelic promoter hypermethylation with somatic genetic alterations on opposite alleles in FDFT1, indicating non-hereditary porokeratosis. FDFT1 localization was uniformly diminished within the lesions, and lesion-derived keratinocytes showed cholesterol dependence for cell growth and altered expression of genes related to cell-cycle and epidermal development, confirming that lesions form by clonal expansion of FDFT1-deficient keratinocytes. In some individuals with the localized form, gene-specific promoter hypermethylation of FDFT1 was detected in morphologically normal epidermis adjacent to methylation-related lesions but not distal to these lesions, suggesting that asymptomatic somatic epigenetic mosaicism of FDFT1 predisposes certain skin areas to the disease. Finally, consistent with its genetic etiology, topical statin treatment ameliorated lesions in FDFT1-deficient porokeratosis. In conclusion, we identified bi-allelic genetic and/or epigenetic alterations of FDFT1 as a cause of porokeratosis and shed light on the pathogenesis of skin mosaicism involving clonal expansion of epigenetically altered cells.
INTRODUCTION: Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) is a monogenic auto-inflammatory disease. Its manifestations range from partial MKD to mevalonic aciduria (MVA). All patients display a periodic fever, and MVA patients additionally exhibit severe neurological involvement. The objective of this work was to describe neurological manifestations of MKD. METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed from January 1990 to January 2022. Forty-five patients from 18 case reports and five cohort studies were included in the analysis. RESULTS: In cohort studies, the most-reported manifestations were headaches (41%) and fatigue (31%). Serious involvements including ataxia and developmental delay were described less than 1% of patients but 22-31% of case reports. They consistently appeared in the first years of life. Retinal dystrophy was frequently reported (31%) in case reports. Other manifestations, including uveitis, aseptic meningitis, and stroke remained rare. DISCUSSION: Severe neurological manifestations are rare in MKD but are responsible for major functional disabilities. They are present at onset and never appear at follow-up of patients with mild MKD. Conversely, headaches and fatigue are frequent symptoms that should be investigated. Visual examinations should be performed on the appearance of visual symptoms. The efficacy of anti-IL-1beta therapy on neurological manifestations should be further investigated.
