Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1; Receptor for cysteinyl leukotrienes mediating bronchoconstriction of individuals with and without asthma. Stimulation by LTD4 results in the contraction and proliferation of smooth muscle, edema, eosinophil migration and damage to the mucus layer in the lung. This response is mediated via a G-protein that activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. The rank order of affinities for the leukotrienes is LTD4 >> LTE4 = LTC4 >> LTB4.
INTRODUCTION: Targeted alpha-particle therapy agents have shown promising responses in patients who have developed resistance to beta(-)-particle emitting radionuclides, albeit off-target toxicity remains a concern. Astatine-211 emits only one alpha-particle per decay and may alleviate the toxicity from alpha-emitting daughter radionuclides. Previously, we developed the low-molecular-weight PSMA-targeted agent [(211)At]L3-Lu that showed suitable therapeutic efficacy and was well tolerated in mice. Although [(211)At]L3-Lu had good characteristics, we now have evaluated a closely related analogue, [(211)At]YF2, to determine the better molecule for clinical translation. METHODS: The tin precursors and unlabeled iodo standards for [(211)At]YF2 and [(211)At]L3-Lu each were synthesized and a new one-step labeling method was developed to produce [(211)At]YF2 and [(211)At]L3-Lu from the respective tin precursor. RCY and RCP were determined using RP-HPLC. Cell uptake, internalization and in vitro cell-killing (MTT) assays were performed on PSMA(+) PC-3 PIP cells in parallel experiments to compare [(211)At]YF2 and [(211)At]L3-Lu directly. A paired-label biodistribution study was performed in athymic mice with subcutaneous PSMA-positive PC-3 PIP xenografts as a head-to-head comparison of [(131)I]YF2 and [(125)I]L3-Lu. The tissue distribution of [(211)At]YF2 and [(211)At]L3-Lu were determined individually in the same animal model. RESULTS: The syntheses of tin precursors and unlabeled iodo standards were accomplished in reasonable yields. A streamlined and scalable radiolabeling method (1 h total synthesis time) was developed for the radiosynthesis of both [(211)At]YF2 and [(211)At]L3-Lu with 86 +/- 7 % (n = 10) and 87 +/- 5 % (n = 7) RCY, respectively, and > 95 % RCP for both. The maximum activity of [(211)At]YF2 produced to date was 666 MBq. An alternative method that did not involve HPLC purification was developed that provided similar RCY and RCP. Significantly higher cell uptake, internalization and cytotoxicity was seen for [(211)At]YF2 compared with [(211)At]L3-Lu. Significantly higher uptake and longer retention in tumor was seen for [(131)I]YF2 than for co-administered [(125)I]L3-Lu, while considerably higher renal uptake was seen for [(131)I]YF2. The biodistribution of [(211)At]YF2 was consistent with that of [(131)I]YF2. CONCLUSION: [(211)At]YF2 exhibited higher cellular uptake, internalization and cytotoxicity than [(211)At]L3-Lu on PSMA-positive PC3 PIP cells. Likewise, higher uptake and longer retention in tumor was seen for [(211)At]YF2. Experiments to evaluate the dosimetry and therapeutic efficacy of [(211)At]YF2 are under way.
The understanding of metabolic disease and diabetes on a molecular level has increased significantly due to the recent advances in molecular biology and biotechnology. However, in vitro studies and animal models do not always translate to the human disease, perhaps illustrated by the failure of many drug candidates in the clinical phase. Non-invasive biomedical imaging techniques such as Positron Emission Tomography (PET) offer tools for direct visualization and quantification of molecular processes in humans. Developments in this area potentially enable longitudinal in vivo studies of receptors and processes involved in diabetes guiding drug development and diagnosis in the near future. This mini-review focuses on describing the overall perspective of how PET can be used to increase our understanding and improve treatment of diabetes. The methodological aspects and future developments and challenges are highlighted.
A symposium at George Washington University on Receptor-Binding Radiotracers in 1980 and three follow-up meetings held at University of California, San Diego provided a forum for debating the critical concepts involved in the new field of designing and evaluating radiotracers for imaging receptors and transporters. This review is intended to educate young investigators who may be relatively new to receptor radiopharmaceutical development. Our anticipated audience includes researchers in basic pharmacology, radiochemistry, imaging technology and kinetic data analysis and how these disciplines have worked together to build our understanding of the human biology of transporters and receptor signaling in health and disease. We have chosen to focus on radiochemical design of a useful imaging agent and how design is coupled to analysis of data collected from dynamic imaging with that agent. Some pharmacology may be required for designing the imaging agent and some imaging physics may be important in optimizing the quality of data that is collected. However, the key to a successful imaging agent is matching the radiotracer to the target receptor and to analysis of the time-course data that is used to parse delivery from specific binding and subsequent metabolism or degradation. Properly designed imaging agents are providing critical information about human biology in health and disease as well as pharmacodynamic response to drug interventions. The review emphasizes some of the ideas that were controversial at the 1980 conference and chronicles with literature examples how they have resolved over the four decades of using radiotracers to study transporters and receptors in human subjects. These examples show that there are situations where a very small K(D), i.e. high affinity, has the potential to yield an image that reflects blood flow more than receptor density. The examples also show that by combining two studies, one with high specific activity and a second with low specific activity injections one can unravel the pseudo-first order rate B'(max) into the true second-order rate constant, k(3), and the unoccupied receptor density. The final section describes how mathematical methods first presented to the receptor-imaging community in 1980 are now being used to provide confidence in the analysis of kinetic biodistribution studies. Our hope is that by bringing these concepts together in a single review, the next generation of scientists developing receptor imaging agents can be much more efficient than their pioneers in developing useful imaging methods.
Human growth hormone (GH) represents a family of related proteins arising from two genes, alternative mRNA splicing, and several post-translational modifications. In addition, post-secretory events occur when GH enters the circulation. The full scale of GH heterogeneity is only beginning to be appreciated, and new GH forms or related proteins may be discovered in the future. GH measurements are affected by GH heterogeneity. Immunoassays are influenced by the mixture of GH variants, but are not sensitive to GH binding proteins (GHBPs). In contrast, radioreceptor assays are sensitive to both GH variant mixtures and to the high affinity GHBP. It is hoped that in the future, these problems can be minimized by rigorous characterization of existing antibodies with respect to epitope recognition on various GH forms, and ultimately, by production of GH variant-specific antibodies that permit direct and individual assessment of the circulating members of the GH family.
The stress system provides integration of both neurochemical and somatic physiologic functions within organisms as an adaptive mechanism to changing environmental conditions throughout evolution. In mammals and primates the complexity and sophistication of these systems have surpassed other species in triaging neurochemical and physiologic signaling to maximize chances of survival. Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) and its related peptides and receptors have been identified over the last three decades and are fundamental molecular initiators of the stress response. They are crucial in the top down regulatory cascade over a myriad of neurochemical, neuroendocrine and sympathetic nervous system events. From neuroscience, we've seen that stress activation impacts behavior, endocrine and somatic physiology and influences neurochemical events that one can capture in real time with current imaging technologies. To delineate these effects one can demonstrate how the CRH neuronal networks infiltrate critical cognitive, emotive and autonomic regions of the central nervous system (CNS) with somatic effects. Abundant preclinical and clinical studies show inter-regulatory actions of CRH with multiple neurotransmitters/peptides. Stress, both acute and chronic has epigenetic effects which magnify genetic susceptibilities to alter neurochemistry; stress system activation can add critical variables in design and interpretation of basic and clinical neuroscience and related research. This review will attempt to provide an overview of the spectrum of known functions and speculative actions of CRH and stress responses in light of imaging technology and its interpretation. Metabolic and neuroreceptor positron emission/single photon tomography (PET/SPECT), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), anatomic MRI, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (pMRS) are technologies that can delineate basic mechanisms of neurophysiology and pharmacology. Stress modulates the myriad of neurochemical and networks within and controlled through the central and peripheral nervous system and the effects of stress activation on imaging will be highlighted.
OBJECTIVES: (89)Zr-labelled proteins are gaining importance in clinical research in a variety of diseases. To date, no clinical study has been reported that utilizes an automated approach for radiosynthesis of (89)Zr-labelled radiopharmaceuticals. We aim to develop an automated method for the clinical production of (89)Zr-labelled proteins and apply this method to Durvalumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting PD-L1 immune-checkpoint protein. PD-L1 expression is poorly understood and can be up-regulated over the course of chemo- and radiotherapy treatment. The ImmunoPET multicentre study aims to examine the dynamics of PD-L1 expression via (89)Zr-Durvalumab PET imaging before, during, and after chemoradiotherapy. The developed automated technique will enable reproducible clinical production of [(89)Zr]Zr-DFOSq-Durvalumab for this study at three different sites. METHODS: Conjugation of Durvalumab to H(3)DFOSqOEt was optimized for optimal chelator-to-antibody ratio. Automated radiolabelling of H(3)DFOSq-Durvalumab with zirconium-89 was optimized on the disposable cassette based iPHASE technologies MultiSyn radiosynthesizer using a modified cassette. Activity losses were tracked using a dose calibrator and minimized by optimizing fluid transfers, reaction buffer, antibody formulation additives and pH. The biological profile of the radiolabelled antibody was confirmed in vivo in PD-L1+ (HCC827) and PD-L1- (A549) murine xenografts. Clinical process validation and quality control were performed at three separate study sites to satisfy clinical release criteria. RESULTS: H(3)DFOSq-Durvalumab with an average CAR of 3.02 was obtained. Radiolabelling kinetics in succinate (20 mM, pH 6) were significantly faster when compared to HEPES (0.5 M, pH 7.2) with >90 % conversion observed after 15 min. Residual radioactivity in the (89)Zr isotope vial was reduced from 24 % to 0.44 % +/- 0.18 % (n = 7) and losses in the reactor vial were reduced from 36 % +/- 6 % (n = 4) to 0.82 % +/- 0.75 % (n = 4) by including a surfactant in the reaction and formulation buffers. Overall process yield was 75 % +/- 6 % (n = 5) and process time was 40 min. Typically, 165 MBq of [(89)Zr]Zr-DFOSq-Durvalumab with an apparent specific activity of 315 MBq/mg +/- 34 MBq/mg (EOS) was obtained in a volume of 3.0 mL. At end-of-synthesis (EOS), radiochemical purity and protein integrity were always >99 % and >96 %, respectively, and dropped to 98 % and 65 % after incubation in human serum for 7 days at 37  degrees C. Immunoreactive fraction in HEK293/PD-L1 cells was 83.3 +/- 9.0 (EOS). Preclinical in vivo data at 144 h p.i. showed excellent SUV(max) in PD-L1+ tumour (8.32 +/- 0.59) with a tumour-background ratio of 17.17 +/- 3.96. [(89)Zr]Zr-DFOSq-Durvalumab passed all clinical release criteria at each study site and was deemed suitable for administration in a multicentre imaging trial. CONCLUSION: Fully automated production of [(89)Zr]Zr-DFOSq-Durvalumab for clinical use was achieved with minimal exposure to the operator. The cassette-based approach allows for consecutive productions on the same day and offers an alternative to currently used manual protocols. The method should be broadly applicable to other proteins and has the potential for clinical impact considering the growing number of clinical trials investigating (89)Zr-labelled antibodies.
BACKGROUND: The C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) is overexpressed in many cancers, e.g. multiple myeloma and acute leukemia, yet solely [(68)Ga]PentixaFor is used for clinical PET imaging. The aim of this study was to develop and assess a second generation Al(18)F-labeled D-amino acid peptide based on the viral macrophage inflammatory protein II for CXCR4 targeted molecular imaging. METHODS: We designed a library of monomer and multimer constructs and evaluated their binding affinity for human and mouse CXCR4. Based on these results, we selected the best vector molecule for development of an Al(18)F-labeled ligand, [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s), which was further evaluated in a cell-based binding assay to assess its binding properties and specificity for CXCR4. Next, pharmacokinetics and tumor uptake of [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) were evaluated in naive mice and mice with xenografts derived from U87.CXCR4 cells. Finally, we performed an imaging study in a non-human primate to assess the in vivo distribution of this novel radioligand in a species closely related to humans. RESULTS: The lead ligand AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) showed six-fold higher affinity for human CXCR4 compared to Ga-Pentixafor. The corresponding radiotracer was obtained in a good radiochemical yield of 40.1 +/- 13.5 % (n = 4) and apparent molar activity of 20.4 +/- 3.3 MBq/nmol (n = 4) after optimization. In U87.CD4.CXCR4 cell binding assays, the total bound fraction of [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-(2x)DV1(c11sc12s) was 32.4 +/- 1.8 %. This fraction could be reduced by 82.5 % in the presence of 75 muM AMD3100. In naive mice, [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) accumulated in organs expressing mouse CXCR4, e.g. the liver (SUV(mean) (mean standardized uptake value) 75 min p.i. 11.7 +/- 0.6), which was blockable by co-injecting AMD3100 (5 mg/kg). In U87.CXCR4 xenografted tumor mice, the tumor uptake of [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) remained low (SUV(mean) 0.5 +/- 0.1), but was reduced by co-administration of AMD3100. Surprisingly, [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) exhibited a similar biodistribution in a non-human primate as in mice indicating off-target binding of [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) in liver tissue. We confirmed that [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) is taken up by hepatocytes using in vitro studies and that the uptake can be blocked with AMD3100 and rifampicin, a potent organic anion-transporting-polypeptide (OATP)1B1 and OATP1B3 inhibitor. CONCLUSION: The second generation D-peptide AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) showed high affinity for human CXCR4 and the corresponding radiotracer was produced in good radiochemical yields. However, [(18)F]AlF-NOTA-2xDV1(c11sc12s) is not specific for CXCR4 and is also a substrate for OATP1B1 and/or OATP1B3, known to mediate hepatic uptake. Therefore, D-amino acid peptides, based on the viral macrophage inflammatory protein II, are not the prefered vector molecule for the development of CXCR4 targeting molecular imaging tools.
With the exception of beryllium, divalent cations of every alkaline earth metal are characterized by their calcimimetic behavior. Thus, in vivo biodistribution of these cations mostly occurs in form of a massive accumulation in bone tissues, consisting of hydroxyapatite to a major extent. Apart from the lightest elements beryllium and magnesium, animal studies and human studies regarding the overall in vivo behavior were carried out by using radioisotopes of the elements calcium, strontium, barium and radium. To date, only strontium with its radioisotopes and radium gained importance for applications in nuclear medicine, mainly for pain-reducing and palliative treatment of bone metastases. In contrast, barium radioisotopes can be ascertained as useful imaging agents and possible diagnostic analogues for theranostic approaches. This review focuses on the characteristic and chemical behavior of barium compounds, possible radioactive barium isotopes for future applications in nuclear medicine and radiopharmacy as well as recent results regarding barium-131 as diagnostic match for radium isotopes used in targeted alpha therapy.
The combination of low molecular weight, reversible human serum albumin (HSA) binders with targeted radiopharmaceuticals in dual-targeted radioconjugates holds great promise, in particular for endoradiotherapy. Attachment of HSA-binders to radiopharmaceuticals extends their blood circulation time and results in an enhanced tumour uptake as well as often in an improved pharmacokinetic profile. In this mini-review, an overview of currently pursued approaches of this novel strategy is provided.
INTRODUCTION: The norepinephrine transporter (NET) presents an important target for therapy and diagnosis of ADHD and other neurodegenerative and psychiatric diseases. Thus, PET is the diagnostic method of choice, using radiolabeled NET-ligands derived from reboxetine. So far, [(18)F]FMeNER-D2 showed best pharmacokinetic and -dynamic properties. However, the disadvantage of reboxetine derived PET tracers is their high metabolic cleavage-resulting in impeding signals in the PET scans, which hamper a proper quantification of the NET in cortical areas. METHODS: Metabolic stability testing was performed in vitro using a plethora of human and murine enzymes. RESULTS: No metabolism was observed using monoamine oxidase A and B or catechol-O-methyl transferase. Incubation of [(18)F]FMeNER-D2 with CYP450-enzymes, predominantly located in the liver, led to a significant and fast metabolism of the tracer. Moreover, the arising three radiometabolites were found to be more polar than [(18)F]FMeNER-D2. Surprisingly, definitely no formation of free [(18)F]fluoride was observed. CONCLUSION: According to our in vitro data, the interfering uptake in cortical regions might be attributed to these emerging radiometabolites but does not reflect bonding in bone due to defluorination. Further research on these radiometabolites is necessary to elucidate the in vivo situation. This might include an analysis of human blood samples after injection of [(18)F]FMeNER-D2, to enable a better correction of the PET-input function.
The deuterium labelling of pharmaceuticals is a useful strategy for altering pharmacokinetic properties, particularly for improving metabolic resistance. The pharmacological effects of such metabolites are often assumed to be negligible during standard drug discovery and are factored in later at the clinical phases of development, where the risks and benefits of the treatment and side-effects can be wholly assessed. This paradigm does not translate to the discovery of radiopharmaceuticals, however, as the confounding effects of radiometabolites can inevitably show in preliminary positron emission tomography (PET) scans and thus complicate interpretation. Consequently, the formation of radiometabolites is crucial to take into consideration, compared to non-radioactive metabolites, and the application of deuterium labelling is a particularly attractive approach to minimise radiometabolite formation. Herein, we provide a comprehensive overview of the deuterated carbon-11 and fluorine-18 radiopharmaceuticals employed in PET imaging experiments. Specifically, we explore six categories of deuterated radiopharmaceuticals used to investigate the activities of monoamine oxygenase (MAO), choline, translocator protein (TSPO), vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2), neurotransmission and the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease; from which we derive four prominent deuteration strategies giving rise to a kinetic isotope effect (KIE) for reducing the rate of metabolism. Synthetic approaches for over thirty of these deuterated radiopharmaceuticals are discussed from the perspective of deuterium and radioisotope incorporation, alongside an evaluation of the deuterium labelling and radiolabelling efficacies across these independent studies. Clinical and manufacturing implications are also discussed to provide a more comprehensive overview of how deuterated radiopharmaceuticals may be introduced to routine practice.
PURPOSE: Positron Emission Tomography is an important molecular imaging technique for detection and diagnoses of various disease states. This work aims to develop novel titanium-45 (t((1/2)) = 3.08 h) PET tracers using Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen (PSMA) targeting vectors for imaging of prostate cancer as proof of concept for this relatively unexplored isotope. PROCEDURES: Titanium-45 was produced on the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) TR24 cyclotron using proton bombardments on natural scandium foils and separated using procedures described previously [1]. After purification, Titanium-45 was used to radiolabel two PSMA-targeting molecules; DFO-DUPA and LDFC-DUPA. Radiochemical yields were determined via radio-high purity liquid chromatography (radioHPLC). The radiolabeled compounds were tested both in vitro and in vivo using PSMA+ cell lines (LNCaP and 22Rv1) and PSMA- cell lines (PC3). RESULTS: Titanium-45 was produced and purified in yields suitable for research studies. Radiochemical yields of up to 98 +/- 1% were achieved with DFO-DUPA and 92 +/- 7% with LDFC-DUPA. PSMA specific targeting was observed in vitro in PSMA positive cells (LNCaP (0.6% +/- 0.05%) and confirmed by blocking (0.15% +/- 0.04%) (P < 0.0001)), compared to uptake in the PSMA negative cells (PC3 (0.07% +/- 0.008%)) and confirmed by blocking (0.07% +/- 0.01%) (P = 0.5253). In vivo studies demonstrated statistically significant uptake in LNCaP tumors (2.3% +/- 0.3% ID/g) compared to PC3 tumor uptake (0.1% +/- 0.07%). CONCLUSIONS: This work shows that titanium-45 can be used to radiolabel PSMA targeting compounds with high radiochemical yields. These radiolabeled compounds remain intact in serum for at least two half-lives of titanium-45, showing that these compounds would be appropriate for implementation in the clinical setting. This study shows the feasibility of using titanium-45 as positron emitting radiometal for use in imaging PSMA+ prostate cancer, and illustrates that further research is in this area is warranted.
INTRODUCTION: Thallium-201 is a radionuclide that has previously been used clinically for myocardial perfusion scintigraphy. Although in this role it has now been largely replaced by technetium-99 m radiopharmaceuticals, thallium-201 remains attractive in the context of molecular radionuclide therapy for cancer micrometastases or single circulating tumour cells. This is due to its Auger electron (AE) emissions, which are amongst the highest in total energy and number per decay for AE-emitters. Currently, chemical platforms to achieve this potential through developing thallium-201-labelled targeted radiopharmaceuticals are not available. Here, we describe convenient methods to oxidise [(201)Tl]Tl(I) to chelatable [(201)Tl]Tl(III) and identify challenges in stable chelation of thallium to support future synthesis of effective [(201)Tl]-labelled radiopharmaceuticals. METHODS: A plasmid pBR322 assay was carried out to determine the DNA damaging properties of [(201)Tl]Tl(III). A range of oxidising agents (ozone, oxygen, hydrogen peroxide, chloramine-T, iodogen, iodobeads, trichloroisocyanuric acid) and conditions (acidity, temperature) were assessed using thin layer chromatography. Chelators EDTA, DTPA and DOTA were investigated for their [(201)Tl]Tl(III) radiolabelling efficacy and complex stability. RESULTS: Isolated plasmid studies demonstrated that [(201)Tl]Tl(III) can induce single and double-stranded DNA breaks. Iodo-beads, iodogen and trichloroisocyanuric acid enabled more than 95% conversion from [(201)Tl]Tl(I) to [(201)Tl]Tl(III) under conditions compatible with future biomolecule radiolabelling (mild pH, room temperature and post-oxidation removal of oxidising agent). Although chelation of [(201)Tl]Tl(III) was possible with EDTA, DTPA and DOTA, only radiolabeled DOTA showed good stability in serum. CONCLUSIONS: Decay of [(201)Tl]Tl(III) in proximity to DNA causes DNA damage. Iodobeads provide a simple, mild method to convert thallium-201 from a 1+ to 3+ oxidation state and [(201)Tl]Tl(III) can be chelated by DOTA with moderate stability. Of the well-established chelators evaluated, DOTA is most promising for future molecular radionuclide therapy using thallium-201; nevertheless, a new generation of chelating agents offering resistance to reduction and dissociation of [(201)Tl]Tl(III) complexes is required.
BACKGROUND: Targeted radionuclide therapy is established as a highly effective strategy for the treatment of metastatic tumors; however, the co-development of suitable imaging companions to therapy remains significant challenge. Theranostic isotopes of terbium ((149)Tb, (152)Tb, (155)Tb, (161)Tb) have the potential to provide chemically identical radionuclidic pairs, which collectively encompass all modes of nuclear decay relevant to nuclear medicine. Herein, we report the first radiochemistry and preclinical studies involving (155)Tb- and (161)Tb-labeled crown-alphaMSH, a small peptide-based bioconjugate suitable for targeting melanoma. METHODS: (155)Tb was produced via proton induced spallation of Ta targets using the isotope separation and acceleration facility at TRIUMF with isotope separation on-line (ISAC/ISOL). The radiolabeling characteristics of crown-alphaMSH with (155)Tb and/or (161)Tb were evaluated by concentration-dependence radiolabeling studies, and radio-HPLC stability studies. LogD(7.4) measurements were obtained for [(161)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH. Competitive binding assays were undertaken to determine the inhibition constant for [(nat)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH in B16-F10 cells. Pre-clinical biodistribution and SPECT/CT imaging studies of (155)Tb and (161)Tb labeled crown-alphaMSH were undertaken in male C57Bl/6 J mice bearing B16-F10 melanoma tumors to evaluate tumor specific uptake and imaging potential for each radionuclide. RESULTS: Quantitative radiolabeling of crown-alphaMSH with [(155)Tb]Tb(3+) and [(161)Tb]Tb(3+) was demonstrated under mild conditions (RT, 10 min) and low chelator concentrations; achieving high molar activities (23-29 MBq/nmol). Radio-HPLC studies showed [(161)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH maintains excellent radiochemical purity in human serum, while gradual metabolic degradation is observed in mouse serum. Competitive binding assays showed the high affinity of [(nat)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH toward MC1R. Two different methods for preparation of the [(155)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH radiotracer were investigated and the impacts on the biodistribution profile in tumor bearing mice is compared. Preclinical in vivo studies of (155)Tb- and (161)Tb- labeled crown-alphaMSH were performed in parallel, in mice bearing B16-F10 tumors; where the biodistribution results showed similar tumor specific uptake (6.06-7.44 %IA/g at 2 h pi) and very low uptake in nontarget organs. These results were further corroborated through a series of single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) studies, with [(155)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH and [(161)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH showing comparable uptake profiles and excellent image contrast. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our studies highlight the promising characteristics of [(155)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH and [(161)Tb]Tb-crown-alphaMSH as theranostic pair for nuclear imaging ((155)Tb) and radionuclide therapy ((161)Tb).
OBJECTIVE: Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor (GLP1R) specifically expressed on the surface of pancreatic beta-cells and insulinoma, is a potential biomarker for imaging beta-cell mass (BCM). In this study, two new (68)Ga-labelled GLP1R targeting agents were prepared and their biological properties for imaging BCM and insulinoma were evaluated. METHODS: [(68)Ga]Ga-HBED-CC-MAL-Cys(39)-exendin-4 ([(68)Ga]Ga-4) and its dimer ([(68)Ga]Ga-5) were synthesized from corresponding precursors. Cell uptake studies were evaluated in INS-1 cells. Biodistribution and microPET studies were performed in male normal Sprague-Dawley rats, diabetic rats and insulinoma xenograft NOD/SCID mice. RESULTS: [(68)Ga]Ga-4 and [(68)Ga]Ga-5 were efficiently radiolabelled by a simple one-step reaction without purification leading to high radiochemical yields and radiochemical purities (both >95%, decay corrected, n = 6, molar activity 15 GBq/mumol). They both showed excellent stability (~95%) in phosphate-buffered saline, pH 7.4, and in rat serum (~90%) for 2 h. Biodistribution studies and small animal PET/CT imaging showed that [(68)Ga]Ga-4 displayed specific uptake in rat pancreas and mouse insulinoma, and a reduced uptake in the pancreas of diabetic rat was observed (~62% reduction). Notably, it exhibited a rapid time-to-peak pancreatic uptake (0.96 +/- 0.19%ID/g in 15 min) and fast clearance from the kidney (42% clearance in 30 min). Results suggested a favorable in vivo kinetics for human imaging studies. CONCLUSIONS: [(68)Ga]Ga-4 targeting GLP1R of pancreatic beta-cells may be a potentially useful PET agent and a suitable candidate for further structural modification studies. This agent has demonstrated several advantages, rapid time-to-peak pancreatic uptake and faster clearance from the kidney, factors may enhance diagnosis of diabetes and insulinoma.
Because of the broad incidence, morbidity and mortality associated with prostate-derived cancer, the development of more effective new technologies continues to be an important goal for the accurate detection and treatment of localized prostate cancer, lymphatic involvement and metastases. Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA; Glycoprotein II) is expressed in high levels on prostate-derived cells and is an important target for visualization and treatment of prostate cancer. Radiolabeled peptide targeting technologies have rapidly evolved over the last decade and have focused on the successful development of radiolabeled small molecules that act as inhibitors to the binding of the N-acetyl-l-aspartyl-l-glutamate (NAAG) substrate to the PSMA molecule. A number of radiolabeled PSMA inhibitors have been described in the literature and labeled with SPECT, PET and therapeutic radionuclides. Clinical studies with these agents have demonstrated the improved potential of PSMA-targeted PET imaging agents to detect metastatic prostate cancer in comparison with conventional imaging technologies. Although many of these agents have been evaluated in humans, by far the most extensive clinical literature has described use of the (68)Ga and (177)Lu agents. This review describes the design and development of these agents, with a focus on the broad clinical introduction of PSMA targeting motifs labeled with (68)Ga for PET-CT imaging and (177)Lu for therapy. In particular, because of availability from the long-lived (68)Ge (T(1/2)=270days)/(68)Ga (T(1/2)=68min) generator system and increasing availability of PET-CT, the (68)Ga-labeled PSMA targeted agent is receiving widespread interest and is one of the fastest growing radiopharmaceuticals for PET-CT imaging.
Targeting specific cell membrane markers for both diagnostic imaging and radionuclide therapy is a rapidly evolving field in cancer research. Some of these applications have now found a role in routine clinical practice and have been shown to have a significant impact on patient management. Several molecular targets are being investigated in ongoing clinical trials and show promise for future implementation. Advancements in molecular biology have facilitated the identification of new cancer-specific targets for radiopharmaceutical development.
INTRODUCTION: (11)C-DPA-713 is a positron emission tomography (PET) radiotracer developed for imaging the expression of the translocator protein (TSPO) in glial cells, which is considered to be a marker of the neuroinflammatory burden. This study investigated the pharmacokinetic profile of (11)C-DPA-713 and evaluated kinetic modeling and non-invasive TSPO quantification using dynamic PET imaging data in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) and cognitive normal (CN) participants. METHODS: Eleven patients with AD and 6 CN participants were examined using dynamic (11)C-DPA-713 PET imaging for 60 min with arterial blood sampling. Time-activity curves were calculated from the cerebellum and three composite regions of interest (ROIs), according to the anatomical definitions of Braak's stages 1 to 3, stage 4, stage 5, and stage 6 that correspond to the pathological stages of tangle deposition. The total distribution volume (V(T)) was evaluated using compartmental modeling and graphical analysis. Reference region-based methods were implemented using an optimal area that was assumed to be void of the radiotracer target as reference tissue. RESULTS: The concentration of radioactivity in plasma demonstrated rapid clearance. (11)C-DPA-713 peaked rapidly in the gray matter. Compartmental modeling resulted in a good fit, and the one-tissue model with estimated blood volume correction (1Tv) showed the best performance. The estimated V(T) obtained from the graphical plasma methods was highly correlated with that obtained from 1Tv. Reference region-based analysis was conducted using the Braak 6 area as the reference region, and the estimated non-displaceable binding potential was highly correlated with that obtained from 1Tv. CONCLUSION: (11)C-DPA-713 possesses properties suitable for TSPO quantification with PET imaging. The Braak 6 area was shown to be a useful reference region in the patients with AD and the CN participants, and non-invasive reference tissue models using the Braak 6 area as a reference region can be employed for TSPO quantification with (11)C-DPA-713-PET imaging as an alternative to the invasive compartmental model.
The highly bidirectional dialogue between the gut and the brain is markedly stimulated and influenced by the microbiome through integrated neuroendocrine, neurological and immunological processes. Gut microbiota itself communicate with the host producing hormonal intermediates, metabolites, proteins, and toxins responsible for a variety of biochemical and functional inputs, thereby shaping host homeostasis. Indeed, a dysregulated microbiota-gut-brain axis might be the origin of many neuroimmune-mediated disorders, e.g. autism, multiple sclerosis, depression, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease, which appear months or even years prior to a diagnosis, corroborating the theory that the pathological process is spread from the gut to the brain. A much deeper comprehension of how commensal microbe can be manipulated to interfere with disease progression is crucial for developing new strategies to diagnose and treat diseases. In recent years, the potential of positron-emission-tomography (PET) in the field of bacteria detection has gained attention. The uptake of several PET tracers has been evaluated to investigate infection pathophysiology, e.g. sterile or pathogen-mediated infection, monitoring of progression, or as a surrogate endpoint in clinical trials. In this minireview, we briefly describe the role of microbiome-gut-brain axis in health and disease and we discuss the imaging modalities and agents that could be applied to study the dynamic interactions between microbiome, gut and brain. These are key aspects in understanding the biochemical lexicon underpinning the microbiome-host crosstalk that would enable the development of diagnostics and therapeutics by targeting the human microbiota.
INTRODUCTION: With respect to the broad application of FAPI-46 in therapy and diagnostics, there is a need for an efficient as well as convenient way for routine production and quality control of the theranostic pair [(90)Y]Y/[(68)Ga]Ga-FAPI-46, since no monograph is currently available for radiolabelled FAPI derivatives. The aim of the current work is to create a GMP compliant theranostic set up for the production and quality control of the diagnostic [(68)Ga]Ga-FAPI-46 as well as the therapeutic drug [90 Y]Y-FAPI-46, which can be the basis for future monographic standards. METHODS: Sterile [(90)Y]yttrium chloride solution and a pharmaceutical grade (68)Ge/(68)Ga generator were applied for the labelling of FAPI-46 using the cassette based synthesis module Trasis EASYONE. All chemicals were GMP-grade and excipients were with marketing authorisation. The quality control included test procedures according to Ph. Eur. RESULTS: Fully automated synthesis of the theranostic pair [(90)Y]Y/[(68)Ga]Ga-FAPI-46 was achieved on the Trasis EasyOne synthesizer with a radiochemical yield of 88 +/- 7% and 56 +/- 5% with a radiochemical purity of >99%. Stability experiments showed a durability for [(68)Ga]Ga-FAPI-46 within 4 h and for [(90)Y]Y-FAPI-46 within 24 h. All obtained specifications and validations were compliant with the European Pharmacopoeia and regulatory guidelines. Both products were successfully applied in cancer patients. CONCLUSION: In the present work, efficient and robust procedures for the automated production and quality control of the theranostic pair [(68)Ga]/[(90)Y]FAPI 46 were developed and validated using the same synthetic platform. The described methods were evaluated in accordance with existing guidelines and toxicological limits, which can be a valuable basis for future monographic standards.
