Neuromedin-B receptor; Receptor for neuromedin-B.
Human bombesin receptors, GRPR and NMBR, are two of the most frequently overexpressed G-protein-coupled-receptors by lung-cancers. Recently, GRPR/NMBR are receiving considerable attention because they act as growth factor receptors often in an autocrine manner in different lung-cancers, affect tumor angiogenesis, their inhibition increases the cytotoxic potency of tyrosine-kinase inhibitors reducing lung-cancer cellular resistance/survival and their overexpression can be used for sensitive tumor localization as well as to target cytotoxic agents to the cancer. The orphan BRS-3-receptor, because of homology is classified as a bombesin receptor but has received little attention, despite the fact that it is also reported in a number of studies in lung-cancer cells and has growth effects in these cells. To address its potential importance, in this study, we examined the frequency/relative quantitative expression of human BRS-3 compared to GRPR/NMBR and the effects of its activation on cell-signaling/growth in 13 different human lung-cancer cell-lines. Our results showed that BRS-3 receptor is expressed in 92% of the cell-lines and that it is functional in these cells, because its activation stimulates phospholipase-C with breakdown of phosphoinositides and changes in cytosolic calcium, stimulates ERK/MAPK and stimulates cell growth by EGFR transactivation in some, but not all, the lung-cancer cell-lines. These results suggest that human BRS-3, similar to GRPR/NMBR, is frequently ectopically-expressed by lung-cancer cells in which, it is functional, affecting cell signaling/growth. These results suggest that similar to GRPR/NMBR, BRS-3 should receive increased attention as possible approach for the development of novel treatments and/or diagnosis in lung-cancer.
Bombesin (Bn) receptor subtype 3(BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor of the Bn family, which does not bind any natural Bn peptide with high affinity. Receptor knockout studies show that the animals develop diabetes, obesity, altered temperature control, and other central nervous system (CNS)/endocrine/gastrointestinal changes. It is present in CNS, peripheral tissues, and tumors; however, its role in normal physiology/pathophysiology, as well as its receptor localization/pharmacology is largely unknown, in part due to the lack of a convenient, specific, direct radiolabeled ligand. This study was designed to address this problem and to develop and characterize a specific radiolabeled ligand for BRS-3. The peptide antagonist Bantag-1 had >10,000-fold selectivity for human BRS-3 (hBRS-3) over other mammalian Bn receptors (BnRs) [i.e., gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRPR) and neuromedin B receptor (NMBR)]. Using iodogen and basic conditions, it was radiolabeled to high specific activity (2200 Ci/mmol) and found to bind with high affinity/specificity to hBRS-3. Binding was saturable, rapid, and reversible. The ligand only interacted with known BRS-3 ligands, and not with other specific GRPR/NMBR ligands or ligands for unrelated receptors. The magnitude of (125)I-Bantag-1 binding correlated with BRS-3 mRNA expression and the magnitude of activation of phospholipase C in lung cancer cells, as well as readily identifying BRS-3 in lung cancer cells and normal tissues, allowing the direct assessment of BRS-3 receptor pharmacology/numbers on cells containing BRS-3 with other BnRs, which is usually the case. This circumvents the need for subtraction assays, which are now frequently used to assess BRS-3 indirectly using radiolabeled pan-ligands, which interact with all BnRs.
Neuromedin B (NMB) is one of the bombesin (BN)-related peptides in mammals. It was originally purified from pig spinal cords, and it has been shown to be present in central nervous system as well as in gastrointestinal tract. BN and its related peptides have various physiological effects. These include regulation of exocrine and endocrine secretions, smooth muscle contraction, feeding, blood pressure, blood glucose, body temperature and cell growth. NMB exerts its effect by binding to the cell surface receptor. A high affinity receptor, NMB receptor (NMB-R) has been identified. This is a G-protein coupled receptor with seven membrane-spanning regions. Upon agonist binding, several intracellular signaling cascades including phospholipase activation, calcium mobilization and protein kinase C (PKC) activation lead to expression of several genes, DNA synthesis or cellular effects such as secretion. Existence of NMB-R has been demonstrated in several brain regions, notably in olfactory and thalamic regions, and in gastrointestinal tracts. Recent analysis using NMB-R-deficient mice, generated by gene-targeting technique, enables to distinguish functional properties of NMB-R from GRP-R. In this review, molecular characterization, anatomical distribution and pharmacological properties of NMB and NMB-R will be presented. Moreover, physiological roles of NMB and its receptor demonstrated by the analysis of NMB-R-deficient mice will be reported. Comparison with GRP/GRP-R system will provide important information about BN-like peptide systems in mammals.
BACKGROUND: We investigated phosphodiesterase 7B (PDE7B), neuromedin B receptor (NMBR) and epilepsy progressive myoclonus type 2A (EPM2A) genes in schizophrenia (SCZ). To the best of our knowledge, these genes have been poorly investigated in studies of SCZ. METHODS: Five hundred and seventy-three SCZ inpatients of Korean ethnicity and 560 healthy controls were genotyped for 2 PDE7B, 3 NMBR and 3 EPM2A polymorphisms. Differences in the allelic and genetic frequencies among healthy subjects and patients were calculated using the x03C7;2 statistics. Repeated-measure ANOVA was used to test possible influences of single-nucleotide polymorphisms on treatment efficacy. In case of positive findings, clinical and demographic variables were added as covariates, in order to investigate possible stratixFB01;cation bias. RESULTS: The rs2717 and rs6926279 within the NMBR gene and rs702304 and rs2235481 within the EPM2A gene were associated with SCZ liability. rs1415744 was also associated with Positive and Negative Symptom Scale negative clinical improvement. The results remained the same after inclusion of the covariates and were partially confirmed in the allelic and haplotype analyses. CONCLUSION: Our preliminary findings suggest a possible role of NMBR and EPM2A genes in SCZ susceptibility and, for the second one, also in antipsychotic pharmacogenetics. Nonetheless, further research is needed to conxFB01;rm our findings.
PURPOSE: Cushing's disease (CD) results from autonomous adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion by corticotroph adenomas, leading to excessive cortisol production, ultimately affecting morbidity and mortality. Pasireotide is the only FDA approved tumor directed treatment for CD, but it is effective in only about 25% of patients, and is associated with a high rate of hyperglycemia. Neuromedin B (NMB), a member of the bombesin-like peptide family, regulates endocrine secretion and cell proliferation. Here, we assessed NMB and NMB receptor (NMBR) expression in human corticotroph adenomas and the effects of NMBR antagonist PD168368 on murine and human corticotroph tumors. METHODS: To investigate NMB and NMBR expression, real-time qPCR and immunostaining on human pathological specimens of corticotroph, non-functional and somatotroph adenomas were performed. The effects of PD168368 on hormone secretion and cell proliferation were studied in vitro, in vivo and in seven patient-derived corticotroph adenoma cells. NMB and NMBR were expressed in higher extent in human corticotroph adenomas compared with non-functional or somatotroph adenomas. RESULTS: In murine AtT-20 cells, PD168368 reduced proopiomelanocortin (Pomc) mRNA/protein expression and ACTH secretion as well as cell proliferation. In mice with tumor xenografts, tumor growth, ACTH and corticosterone were downregulated by PD168368. In patient-derived adenoma cells, PD168368 reduced POMC mRNA expression in four out of seven cases and ACTH secretion in two out of five cases. A PD168368-mediated cyclin E suppression was also identified in AtT-20 and patient-derived cells. CONCLUSION: NMBR antagonist represents a potential treatment for CD and its effect may be mediated by cyclin E suppression.
Perineural invasion (PNI) is a new approach of cervical cancer invasion and metastasis, involving the cross-talk between tumor and nerve. However, the initiating signals and cellular interaction mechanisms of PNI remain largely elusive. The nerve-sparing radical hysterectomy (NSRH) proposed to improve postoperative quality of life is only applicable to cervical cancer patients without PNI. Therefore, it is important to elucidate the underlying mechanisms initiating PNI, and suggest the effective biomarkers to predict PNI before NSRH surgery. Here, we found that PNI is the characteristic of advanced cervical cancer, and Schwann cells were the antecedent cells that initiating PNI. Further, neuropeptide neuromedin B (NMB) produced by cervical cancer cells was determined to induce PNI by reprogramming Schwann cells, including driving their morphological and transcriptional changes, promoting their proliferation and migration, and initiating PNI by secreting CCL2 and directing axon regeneration. Mechanistically, cervical cancer cells-produced NMB activated its receptor NMBR in Schwann cells, and opened the T-type calcium channels to stimulate Ca(2+) influx through PKA signaling, which could be blocked by the inhibitor. Clinically, combined examination of serum NMB and CCL2 levels was suggested to effectively predict PNI in cervical cancer patients. Our data demonstrate that cervical cancer-produced NMB initiates the reprograming of Schwann cells, which then direct axon regeneration, thus causing PNI onset. The elevated serum NMB and CCL2 levels may be useful for the decision-making to nerve sparing during hysterectomy surgery of cervical cancer patients.
Bombesin receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) is an orphan G-protein coupled receptor which is classified in the bombesin receptor (BnR) family with which it shares high homology. It is present widely in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues and primarily receptor-knockout studies suggest it is involved in metabolic-glucose-insulin homeostasis, feeding and other CNS behaviors, gastrointestinal motility and cancer growth. However, the role of BRS-3 physiologically or in pathologic disorders has been not well defined because the natural ligand is unknown. Until recently, no selective agonists/antagonists were available; however, recently synthetic high-affinity agonists, chiral-diazepines nonpeptide-analogs (3F, 9D, 9F, 9G) with low CNS penetrance, were described, but are not well-categorized pharmacologically or in different labarotory species. The present study characterizes the affinities, potencies, selectivities of the chiral-diazepine BRS-3 agonists in human and rodents (mice,rat). In human BRS-3 receptors, the relative affinities of the chiral-diazepines was 9G>9D>9F>3F; each was selective for BRS-3. For stimulating PLC activity, in h-BRS-3 each of the four chiral diazepine analogs was fully efficacious and their relative potencies were: 9G (EC50: 9 nM)>9D (EC50: 9.4 nM)>9F (EC50: 39 nM)>3F (EC50: 48 nM). None of the four chiral diazepine analogs activated r,m,h-GRPR/NMBR. The nonpeptide agonists showed marked differences from each other and a peptide agonist in receptor-coupling-stiochiometry and in affinities/potencies in different species. These results demonstrate that chiral diazepine analogs (9G, 9D, 9F, 3F) have high/affinity/potency for the BRS-3 receptor in human and rodent cells, but different coupling-relationships and species differences from a peptide agonist.
Whether glutamate or itch-selective neurotransmitters are used to confer itch specificity is still under debate. We focused on an itch-selective population of primary afferents expressing MRGPRA3, which highly expresses Vglut2 and the neuropeptide neuromedin B (Nmb), to investigate this question. Optogenetic stimulation of MRGPRA3(+) afferents triggers scratching and other itch-related avoidance behaviors. Using a combination of optogenetics, spinal cord slice recordings, Vglut2 conditional knockout mice, and behavior assays, we showed that glutamate is essential for MRGPRA3(+) afferents to transmit itch. We further demonstrated that MRGPRA3(+) afferents form monosynaptic connections with both NMBR(+) and NMBR(-) neurons and that NMB and glutamate together can enhance the activity of NMBR(+) spinal DH neurons. Moreover, Nmb in MRGPRA3(+) afferents and NMBR(+) DH neurons are required for chloroquine-induced scratching. Together, our results establish a new model in which glutamate is an essential neurotransmitter in primary afferents for itch transmission, whereas NMB signaling enhances its activities.
OBJECTIVES: To systematically review findings of GWAS in schizophrenia (SZ) and in bipolar disorder (BD); and to interpret findings, with a focus on identifying independent replications. METHOD: PubMed search, selection and review of all independent GWAS in SZ or BD, published since March 2011, i.e. studies using non-overlapping samples within each article, between articles, and with those of the previous review (Li et al., 2012). RESULTS: From the 22 GWAS included in this review, the genetic associations surviving standard GWAS-significance were for genetic markers in the regions of ACSL3/KCNE4, ADCY2, AMBRA1, ANK3, BRP44, DTL, FBLN1, HHAT, INTS7, LOC392301, LOC645434/NMBR, LOC729457, LRRFIP1, LSM1, MDM1, MHC, MIR2113/POU3F2, NDST3, NKAPL, ODZ4, PGBD1, RENBP, TRANK1, TSPAN18, TWIST2, UGT1A1/HJURP, WHSC1L1/FGFR1 and ZKSCAN4. All genes implicated across both reviews are discussed in terms of their function and implication in neuropsychiatry. CONCLUSION: Taking all GWAS to date into account, AMBRA1, ANK3, ARNTL, CDH13, EFHD1 (albeit with different alleles), MHC, PLXNA2 and UGT1A1 have been implicated in either disorder in at least two reportedly non-overlapping samples. Additionally, evidence for a SZ/BD common genetic basis is most strongly supported by the implication of ANK3, NDST3, and PLXNA2.
Mammalian bombesin-like peptides neuromedin B (NMB) and gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) act by activating NMB receptors (NMBR, BBl) and GRP receptors (GRPR,BB2), respectively. These two bombesin receptors are members of the G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily.In the brain, NMBR and GRPR are highly expressed in the brain areas involved in memory processing and emotional responses, such as the hippocampus and the amygdaloid nuclei. An increasing number of pharmacological and genetic studies in rodents indicate that NMBRs and GRPRs in brain regions including the dorsal hippocampus,the nucleus tractus solitarius, the basolateral amygdala,and cortical areas, regulate memory formation and expression, particularly for memories related to emotionally arousing tasks. GRPR signaling interacts with multiple protein kinase pathways as well as with other neurotransmitter,hormone, and growth factor systems in influencing memory formation. Together with evidence from human studies, the findings from rodent experiments suggest that bombesin receptors may be therapeutic targets in brain disorders involving memory dysfunction and anxiety.
Amphibian bombesin and its related peptides consist a family of neuropeptides in many vertebrate species. Bombesin and two major bombesin-like peptide in mammals, gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and neuromedin B (NMB), have been shown to elicit various physiological effects. These include inhibition of feeding, smooth muscle contraction, exocrine and endocrine secretions, thermoregulation, blood pressure and sucrose regulations and cell growth. Receptors for GRP and NMB (GRP-R and NMB-R), as well as third subtype of bombesin-like peptide receptor (BRS-3) have been cloned. These receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors and are expressed in various brain regions and in the digestive tract. In this paper, we will summarize studies on these peptides and their receptors, with special reference to research using gene-knockout mice. These studies clearly demonstrated the role of three receptors in vivo and in vitro. We will also discuss the phylogeny of these receptors.
Histamine-dependent and -independent itch is conveyed by parallel peripheral neural pathways that express gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) and neuromedin B (NMB), respectively, to the spinal cord of mice. B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) has been proposed to transmit both types of itch via its receptor NPRA encoded by Npr1. However, BNP also binds to its cognate receptor, NPRC encoded by Npr3 with equal potency. Moreover, natriuretic peptides (NP) signal through the G(i)-couped inhibitory cGMP pathway that is supposed to inhibit neuronal activity, raising the question of how BNP may transmit itch information. Here, we report that Npr3 expression in laminae I-II of the dorsal horn partially overlaps with NMB receptor (NMBR) that transmits histaminergic itch via G(q)-couped PLCbeta-Ca(2+) signaling pathway. Functional studies indicate that NPRC is required for itch evoked by histamine but not chloroquine (CQ), a nonhistaminergic pruritogen. Importantly, BNP significantly facilitates scratching behaviors mediated by NMB, but not GRP. Consistently, BNP evoked Ca(2+) responses in NMBR/NPRC HEK 293 cells and NMBR/NPRC dorsal horn neurons. These results reveal a previously unknown mechanism by which BNP facilitates NMB-encoded itch through a novel NPRC-NMBR cross-signaling in mice. Our studies uncover distinct modes of action for neuropeptides in transmission and modulation of itch in mice.
A key question in our understanding of itch coding mechanisms is whether itch is relayed by dedicated molecular and neuronal pathways. Previous studies suggested that gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) is an itch-specific neurotransmitter. Neuromedin B (NMB) is a mammalian member of the bombesin family of peptides closely related to GRP, but its role in itch is unclear. Here, we show that itch deficits in mice lacking NMB or GRP are non-redundant and Nmb/Grp double KO (DKO) mice displayed additive deficits. Furthermore, both Nmb/Grp and Nmbr/Grpr DKO mice responded normally to a wide array of noxious stimuli. Ablation of NMBR neurons partially attenuated peripherally induced itch without compromising nociceptive processing. Importantly, electrophysiological studies suggested that GRPR neurons receive glutamatergic input from NMBR neurons. Thus, we propose that NMB and GRP may transmit discrete itch information and NMBR neurons are an integral part of neural circuits for itch in the spinal cord.
Bombesin (Bn) is a 14-amino acid peptide isolated from the skin of the frog Bombina bombina. The mammalian homologs of this peptide include three forms of gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP): GRP-10, GRP-27, and GRP-29, and a 10-amino acid peptide referred to as neuromedin-B (NMB). These peptides evoke a number of responses, including hyperthermia, bradycardia, inhibition of gastric emptying and inhibition of food intake, by activating one of three G protein-coupled receptors: an NMB-R or BB(1), a GRP-R or BB(2) and an orphan Bn receptor subtype-3 (BRS-3) or BB(3). Bombesin, GRP, and NMB have a role in the short-term control of food intake. These peptides reduce meal size (MS) and they prolong the intermeal interval (IMI), the time between the first and second meals. Studies have shown that the vagus and the splanchnic nerves in the upper gastrointestinal tract, which communicate with the feeding areas of the hindbrain, are necessary for reduction of MS and prolongation of the IMI by Bn, GRP, and NMB. In addition, one-tenth of the intraperitoneal dose of Bn, GRP, and NMB given in either the left gastric artery, which supplies the stomach, or the cranial mesenteric artery, which supplies the intestine, or the femoral vein, also reduces MS and prolongs the IMI. Thus, a potential neurocrine or an endocrine mode of action for these peptides requires further investigation.
The precise mechanisms that lead to parturition remain unclear. In our initial complementary DNA (cDNA) microarray experiment, we found that the neuromedin B receptor (NMBR) was differentially expressed in the human myometrium during spontaneous or oxytocin-induced labor. We have previously shown that neuromedin B (NMB) could induce interleukin 6 (IL-6) and type 2 cyclo-oxygenase enzyme (COX-2) expression in the primary human myometrial cells via nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) transcription factor p65 (p65) and Jun proto-oncogene, activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor subunit (c-Jun). This study is aimed to investigate whether NMBR is required for NMB-induced effect. Primary myometrial cell culture was established to provide a suitable model to investigate the mechanism of NMB in labor initiation. Immunochemical staining was conducted to validate the NMBR expression in primary myometrial cells. The mRNA and protein expression of NMBR, p65, c-Jun, COX-2 and IL-6 were assessed by Quantitative Real Time PCR (RT-qPCR) and western blotting. Lentiviruses with shRNAs targeting NMBR or containing cDNA sequence of NMBR were transfected to primary myometrial cells to knockdown or overexpress NMBR. Cell death was determined by annexin V and propidium iodide staining and analyzed by flow cytometry. The upregulation of COX-2 and IL-6 and phosphorylation of p65 and c-Jun were significantly attenuated by knockdown of NMBR and enhanced by overexpressed NMBR following NMB treatment, with no significant change in total p65 and c-Jun. In summary, this study showed that NMBR-mediated NMB-induced NF-kappaB and AP-1 activation, which in turn, induce expression of IL-6 and COX-2 in primary myometrial cells.
Iron overload heritability remains partly unexplained. By performing whole exome sequencing in three patients with a clinical phenotype of hemochromatosis not accounted by known genetic risk factors, we identified in all patients rare variants predicted to alter activity of Neuromedin-B receptor (NMBR). Coding NMBR mutations were enriched in 129 patients with hereditary hemochromatosis or iron overload phenotype, as compared to ethnically matched controls, including 100 local healthy blood donors and 1000Genomes project participants (15.5% vs 5%, P = .0038 at burden test), and were associated with higher transferrin saturation in regular blood donors (P = .04). Consistently, in 191 patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver, the most common low-frequency p.L390 M variant was independently associated with higher ferritin (P = .03). In 58 individuals, who underwent oral iron challenge, carriage of the p.L390 M variant was associated with higher transferrin saturation and lower hepcidin release. Furthermore, the circulating concentration of the natural NMBR ligand, Neuromedin-B, was reduced in response to iron challenge. It was also decreased in individuals carrying the p.L390 M variant and with hemochromatosis in parallel with increased transferrin saturation. In mice, Nmbr was induced by chronic dietary iron overload in the liver, gut, pancreas, spleen, and skeletal muscle, while Nmb was downregulated in gut, pancreas and spleen. Finally, Nmb amplified holo-transferrin dependent induction of hepcidin in primary mouse hepatocytes, which was associated with Jak2 induction and abolished by the NMBR antagonist PD168368. In conclusion, NMBR natural variants were enriched in patients with iron overload, and associated with facilitated iron absorption, possibly related to a defect of iron-induced hepcidin release.
Despite accumulating evidence in rodents, the functional role of neuromedin B (NMB) in regulating somatosensory systems in primate spinal cord is unknown. We aimed to compare the expression patterns of NMB and its receptor (NMBR) and the behavioral effects of intrathecal (i.t.) NMB with gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP) on itch or pain in non-human primates (NHPs). We used six adult rhesus monkeys. The mRNA or protein expressions of NMB, GRP, and their receptors were evaluated by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, or in situ hybridization. We determined the behavioral effects of NMB or GRP via acute thermal nociception, capsaicin-induced thermal allodynia, and itch scratching response assays. NMB expression levels were greater than those of GRP in the dorsal root ganglia and spinal dorsal horn. Conversely, NMBR expression was significantly lower than GRP receptor (GRPR). I.t. NMB elicited only mild scratching responses, whereas GRP caused robust scratching responses. GRP- and NMB-elicited scratching responses were attenuated by GRPR (RC-3095) and NMBR (PD168368) antagonists, respectively. Moreover, i.t. NMB and GRP did not induce thermal hypersensitivity and GRPR and NMBR antagonists did not affect peripherally elicited thermal allodynia. Consistently, NMBR expression was low in both itch- and pain-responsive neurons in the spinal dorsal horn. Spinal NMB-NMBR system plays a minimal functional role in the neurotransmission of itch and pain in primates. Unlike the functional significance of the GRP-GRPR system in itch, drugs targeting the spinal NMB-NMBR system may not effectively alleviate non-NMBR-mediated itch.
There is increased interest in the Bn-receptor family because they are frequently over/ectopically expressed by tumors and thus useful as targets for imaging or receptor-targeted-cytotoxicity. The synthetic Bn-analog, [D-Tyr(6), beta-Ala(11), Phe(13), Nle(14)]Bn(6-14) [Univ.Lig] has the unique property of having high affinity for all three human BNRs (GRPR, NMBR, BRS-3), and thus could be especially useful for this approach. However, the molecular basis of this property is unclear and is the subject of this study. To accomplish this, site-directed mutagenesis was used after identifying potentially important amino acids using sequence homology analysis of all BnRs with high affinity for Univ.Lig compared to the Cholecystokinin-receptor (CCK(A)R), which has low affinity. Using various criteria 74 amino acids were identified and 101 mutations made in GRPR by changing each to those of CCK(A)R or to alanine. 22 GRPR mutations showed a significant decrease in affinity for Univ.Lig (>2-fold) with 2 in EC2[D97N, G112V], 1 in UTM6[Y284A], 2 in EC4[R287N, H300S] showing >10-fold decrease in Univ.Lig affinity. Additional mutations were made to explore the molecular basis for these changes. Our results show that high affinity for Univ.Lig by human Bn-receptors requires positively charged amino acids in extracellular (EC)-domain 4 and to a lesser extent EC2 and EC3 suggesting charge-charge interactions may be particularly important for determining the general high affinity of this ligand. Furthermore, transmembrane amino acids particularly in UTM6 are important contributing both charge-charge interactions as well as interaction with a tyrosine residue in close proximity suggesting possible receptor-peptide cation-pi or H-bonding interactions are also important for determining its high affinity.
The many biological activities of the hormone gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), including stimulation of acid secretion and of tumour growth, are mediated by the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor (GRP-R). Here sequence comparisons are utilised to investigate the likely bioactive regions of the 125 amino acid GRP precursor and of GRP-R. Comparison of the sequences of the GRP precursor from 21 species revealed homology not only in the GRP region between amino acids 1 and 30, but also in C-terminal regions from amino acids 43 to 97. This observation is consistent with recent reports that peptides derived from the C-terminal region are biologically active. Comparison of the GRP-R sequence with the related receptors NMB-R and BRS-3 revealed that the family could be distinguished from other G-protein coupled receptors by the presence of the motif GVSVFTLTALS at the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane helix 3. Comparison of the sequences of the GRP-R from 21 species revealed that the most highly conserved regions occurred in transmembrane helices 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7, and in the third intracellular loop. These results will be important in guiding future structure-function studies of the GRP precursor and of GRP receptors.
The peptide neuromedin B (NMB) and its receptor (NMBR) represent a system (NMB/NMBR) of neuromodulation. Here, it was demonstrated that the expression of NMBR in cells or murine lung tissues was clearly upregulated in response to H1N1/PR8 influenza A virus infection. Furthermore, the in vitro and in vivo activities of NMB/NMBR during PR8 infection were investigated. It was observed that A549 cells lacking endogenous NMBR were more susceptible to virus infection than control cells, as evidenced by the increased virus production in the cells. Interestingly, a significant decrease in IFN-alpha and increased IL-6 expression were observed in these cells. The role of this system in innate immunity against PR8 infection was probed by treating mice with NMB. The NMB-treated mice were less susceptible to virus challenge, as evidenced by increased survival, increased body weight, and decreased viral NP expression compared with the control animals. Additionally, the results showed that exogenous NMB not only enhanced IFN-alpha expression but also appeared to inhibit the expression of NP and IL-6 in PR8-infected cells and animals. As expected, opposing effects were observed in the NMBR antagonist-treated cells and mice, which further confirmed the effects of NMB. Together, these data suggest that NMB/NMBR may be an important component of the host defence against influenza A virus infection. Thus, these proteins may serve as promising candidates for the development of novel antiviral drugs.
