Neuromedin-U receptor 1; Receptor for the neuromedin-U and neuromedin-S neuropeptides.
BACKGROUND: The link between the gut microbiota (GM) and Sjogren's Syndrome (SS) is well-established and apparent. Whether GM is causally associated with SS is uncertain. METHODS: The MiBioGen consortium's biggest available genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis (n=13,266) was used as the basis for a two-sample Mendelian randomization study (TSMR). The causal relationship between GM and SS was investigated using the inverse variance weighted, MR-Egger, weighted median, weighted model, MR-PRESSO, and simple model methods. In order to measure the heterogeneity of instrumental variables (IVs), Cochran's Q statistics were utilized. RESULTS: The results showed that genus Fusicatenibacter (odds ratio (OR) = 1.418, 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.072-1.874, P = 0.0143) and genus Ruminiclostridium9 (OR = 1.677, 95% CI, 1.050-2.678, P = 0.0306) were positively correlated with the risk of SS and family Porphyromonadaceae (OR = 0.651, 95% CI, 0.427-0.994, P = 0.0466), genus Subdoligranulum (OR = 0.685, 95% CI, 0.497-0.945, P = 0.0211), genus Butyricicoccus (OR = 0.674, 95% CI, 0.470-0.967, P = 0.0319) and genus Lachnospiraceae (OR = 0.750, 95% CI, 0.585-0.961, P = 0.0229) were negatively correlated with SS risk using the inverse variance weighted (IVW) technique. Furthermore, four GM related genes: ARAP3, NMUR1, TEC and SIRPD were significant causally with SS after FDR correction (FDR<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence for either positive or negative causal effects of GM composition and its related genes on SS risk. We want to provide novel approaches for continued GM and SS-related research and therapy by elucidating the genetic relationship between GM and SS.
Emerging studies indicate that cooperation between neurons and immune cells regulates antimicrobial immunity, inflammation and tissue homeostasis. For example, a neuronal rheostat provides excitatory or inhibitory signals that control the functions of tissue-resident group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) at mucosal barrier surfaces(1-4). ILC2s express NMUR1, a receptor for neuromedin U (NMU), which is a prominent cholinergic neuropeptide that promotes ILC2 responses(5-7). However, many functions of ILC2s are shared with adaptive lymphocytes, including the production of type 2 cytokines(8,9) and the release of tissue-protective amphiregulin (AREG)(10-12). Consequently, there is controversy regarding whether innate lymphoid cells and adaptive lymphocytes perform redundant or non-redundant functions(13-15). Here we generate a new genetic tool to target ILC2s for depletion or gene deletion in the presence of an intact adaptive immune system. Transgenic expression of iCre recombinase under the control of the mouse Nmur1 promoter enabled ILC2-specific deletion of AREG. This revealed that ILC2-derived AREG promotes non-redundant functions in the context of antiparasite immunity and tissue protection following intestinal damage and inflammation. Notably, NMU expression levels increased in inflamed intestinal tissues from both mice and humans, and NMU induced AREG production in mouse and human ILC2s. These results indicate that neuropeptide-mediated regulation of non-redundant functions of ILC2s is an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that integrates immunity and tissue protection.
Rationale: In asthma, sputum group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) are activated within 7 hours after allergen challenge. Neuroimmune interactions mediate rapid host responses at mucosal interfaces. In murine models of asthma, lung ILC2s colocalize to sensory neuronal termini expressing the neuropeptide neuromedin U (NMU), which stimulates type 2 (T2) cytokine secretion by ILC2s, with additive effects to alarmins in vitro. Objectives: To investigate the effect of the NMU/NMUR1 (NMU receptor 1) axis on early activation of ILC2s in asthma. Methods: Subjects with mild asthma (n = 8) were enrolled in a diluent-controlled allergen inhalation challenge study. Sputum ILC2 expression of NMUR1 and T2 cytokines was enumerated by flow cytometry, and airway NMU levels were assessed by ELISA. This was compared with samples from subjects with moderate to severe asthma (n = 9). Flow sort-purified and ex vivo-expanded ILC2s were used for functional assays and transcriptomic analyses. Measurements and Main Results: Significant increases in sputum ILC2s expressing NMUR1 were detected 7 hours after allergen versus diluent challenge whereby the majority of NMUR1(+) ILC2s expressed IL-5/IL-13. Sputum NMUR1(+) ILC2 counts were significantly greater in mild versus moderate to severe asthma, and NMUR1(+) ILC2s correlated inversely with the dose of inhaled corticosteroid in the latter group. Coculturing with alarmins upregulated NMUR1 in ILC2s, which was attenuated by dexamethasone. NMU-stimulated T2 cytokine expression by ILC2s, maximal at 6 hours, was abrogated by dexamethasone or specific signaling inhibitors for mitogen-activated protein kinase 1/2 and phosphoinositol 3-kinase but not the IL-33 signaling moiety MyD88 in vitro. Conclusions: The NMU/NMUR1 axis stimulates rapid effects on ILC2s and may be an important early activator of these cells in eosinophilic inflammatory responses in asthma.
Type 2 immunity is associated with adipose tissue (AT) homeostasis and infection with parasitic helminths, but whether AT participates in immunity to these parasites is unknown. We found that the fat content of mesenteric AT (mAT) declined in mice during infection with a gut-restricted helminth. This was associated with the accumulation of metabolically activated, interleukin-33 (IL-33), thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), and extracellular matrix (ECM)-producing stromal cells. These cells shared transcriptional features, including the expression of Dpp4 and Pi16, with multipotent progenitor cells (MPC) that have been identified in numerous tissues and are reported to be capable of differentiating into fibroblasts and adipocytes. Concomitantly, mAT became infiltrated with resident T helper 2 (T(H)2) cells that responded to TSLP and IL-33 by producing stromal cell-stimulating cytokines, including transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFbeta(1)) and amphiregulin. These T(H)2 cells expressed genes previously associated with type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2), including Nmur1, Calca, Klrg1, and Arg1, and persisted in mAT for at least 11 months after anthelmintic drug-mediated clearance of infection. We found that MPC and T(H)2 cells localized to ECM-rich interstitial spaces that appeared shared between mesenteric lymph node, mAT, and intestine. Stromal cell expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), the receptor for amphiregulin, was required for immunity to infection. Our findings point to the importance of MPC and T(H)2 cell interactions within the interstitium in orchestrating AT remodeling and immunity to an intestinal infection.
Obesity is now a public health concern. The leading cause of obesity is an energy imbalance between ingested and expended calories. The mechanisms of feeding behavior and energy metabolism are regulated by a complex of various kinds of molecules, including anorexigenic and orexigenic neuropeptides. One of these neuropeptides, neuromedin U (NMU), was isolated in the 1980s, and its specific receptors, NMUR1 and NMUR2, were defined in 2000. A series of subsequent studies has revealed many of the physiological roles of the NMU system, including in feeding behavior, energy expenditure, stress responses, circadian rhythmicity, and inflammation. Particularly over the past decades, many reports have indicated that the NMU system plays an essential and direct role in regulating body weight, feeding behavior, energy metabolism, and insulin secretion, which are tightly linked to obesity pathophysiology. Furthermore, another ligand of NMU receptors, NMS (neuromedin S), was identified in 2005. NMS has physiological functions similar to those of NMU. This review summarizes recent observations of the NMU system in relation to the pathophysiology of obesity in both the central nervous systems and the peripheral tissues.
Since the discovery of neuromedin U (NmU) from porcine spinal cord in 1985, this neuropeptide has been subsequently identified in many other species with multiple physiological and pathophysiological roles detected, ranging from smooth muscle contraction, feeding, energy balance to tumorigenesis. Intriguingly, NmU is also emerging to play pro-inflammatory roles involving immune cell activation and cytokine release in a neuron-dependent or neuron-independent manner. The NmU-mediated inflammatory responses have already been observed in worm infection, sepsis, autoimmune arthritis and allergic animal models. In this review, we focus on the roles of NmU in immunity and inflammation by highlighting the interactions between NmU and immune cells, summarizing the signalling mechanism involved in their reactions and discussing its potential contributions to inflammatory diseases.
The neuromedin U peptide sequence is highly conserved between various species. Neuromedin U is involved in a variety of physiological processes. It exerts its effects via two neuromedin U receptors, NMUR1 and NMUR2. These receptors are characterized by a distinct, yet complementary, tissue distribution with NMUR1 mostly found in the periphery, while NMUR2 is most abundant in the central nervous system. The capability of the neuropeptide to reduce food intake in rodents triggered the design and synthesis of a broad range of modified peptide ligands. The purpose of these ligands is to develop novel therapeutics which could be beneficial in the treatment of obesity and diabetes. Most compounds are derived either from the full-length neuromedin U sequence or are based on the truncated orthologs of this neuropeptide. Only a few non-peptidic ligands were developed. This review provides an overview on various neuromedin U analogs and mimetics that have been reported to date.
BACKGROUND: The neuropeptide U (NMU) has been proven to elicit the release of mediators from mast cells (MCs) through its receptor NMUR1 in allergic inflammatory models. However, little is known about the correlations between NMU and MCs in human allergic rhinitis (AR). OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to investigate the expressions of NMU and NMUR1 in the tryptase  +  MCs and the peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) in human nasal mucosa with AR. METHODS: Specimens of nasal mucosa from patients with AR (n  =  10) and control patients without AR (n  =  8) were collected and soaked in frozen tissue liquid solution (OCT) in tum. Cryostat sections were prepared for immunofluorescence staining. Tryptase was used as a marker to detect mast cells and other tryptase  +  immune cells. The expression of NMU and NMUR1 was respectively determined by double staining using a confocal microscope. RESULTS: Neither NMU nor NMUR1 were detected in the tryptase  +  mast cells in the human nasal mucosa. To our surprise, both NMU and NMUR1 were co-expressed with tryptase in the PBLs within peripheral blood vessels in AR and controls. CONCLUSION: Our findings showed that NMU could not influence human nasal tryptase  +  mast cells directly through NMUR1 in AR. The co-expression of both NMU and NMUR1 with tryptase in the PBLs provided new insight into the potential roles of NMU and tryptase in the circulation PBLs, and the infiltrated PBLs may promote nasal allergic inflammation by producing tryptase and NMU.
More than 35 years have passed since the identification of neuromedin U (NMU). Dozens of publications have been devoted to its physiological role in the organism, which have provided insight into its occurrence in the body, its synthesis and mechanism of action at the cellular level. Two G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have been identified, with NMUR1 distributed mainly peripherally and NMUR2 predominantly centrally. Recognition of the role of NMU in the control of energy homeostasis of the body has greatly increased interest in this neuromedin. In 2005 a second, structurally related peptide, neuromedin S (NMS) was identified. The expression of NMS is more restricted, it is predominantly found in the central nervous system. In recent years, further peptides related to NMU and NMS have been identified. These are neuromedin U precursor related peptide (NURP) and neuromedin S precursor related peptide (NSRP), which also exert biological effects without acting via NMUR1, or NMUR2. This observation suggests the presence of another, as yet unrecognized receptor. Another unresolved issue within the NMU/NMS system is the differences in the effects of various NMU isoforms on diverse cell lines. It seems that development of highly specific NMUR1 and NMUR2 receptor antagonists would allow for a more detailed understanding of the mechanisms of action of NMU/NMS and related peptides in the body. They could form the basis for attempts to use such compounds in the treatment of disorders, for example, metabolic disorders, circadian rhythm, stress, etc.
BACKGROUND: Studies have revealed important roles for IL-17A in the development of acute lung injury (ALI) following sepsis. However, the mechanism underlying the regulation of lung IL-17A remains to be fully addressed. Recent studies suggested the effect of neuromedin U (NMU) on immune cell activation and the role of group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) in the modulation of IL-17A production. We aimed to gain in-depth insight into the mechanism underlying sepsis-induced lung IL-17A production, particularly, the role of NMU in mediating neuronal regulation of ILC2s and IL-17A-producing gammadelta T cells activation in sepsis. METHODS: Wild type mice were subjected to cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) to induce sepsis with or without intraperitoneal injection of NMU. The levels of ILC2s, gammadelta T cells, IL-17A, NMU and NMU receptor 1 (NMUR1) in the lung were then measured. In order to determine the role of NMU signaling in ILC2 activation and the role of ILC2-released IL-9 in ILC2-gammadelta T cell interaction, ILC2s were sorted, and the genes of nmur1 and il9 in the ILC2s were knocked down using CRISPR/Cas9. The genetically manipulated ILC2s were then co-cultured with lung gammadelta T cells, and the levels of IL-17A from co-culture systems were measured. RESULTS: In septic mice, the levels of NMU, IL-17A, ILC2s, and IL-17A-producing gammadelta T cells in the lung are significantly increased, and the expression of NMUR1 in ILC2s is increased as well. Exogenous NMU further augments these increases. The main source of IL-17A in response to CLP is gammadelta T cells, and lung nmur1 is specifically expressed in ILC2s. In vitro co-culture of ILC2s and gammadelta T cells leads to increased number of gammadelta T cells and higher production of IL-17A from gammadelta T cells, and these alterations are further augmented by septic treatment and exogenous NMU. Genetic knockdown of nmur1 or il9 in ILC2s attenuated the upregulation of gammadelta T cells and IL-17A production. CONCLUSION: In sepsis, NMU acting through NMUR1 in lung ILC2s initiates the ILC2 activation, which, in turn, promote IL-17A-producing gammadelta T cell expansion and secretion of IL-17A. ILC2-derived IL-9 plays an important role in mediating gammadelta T cell expansion and IL-17A production. This study explores a new mechanism underlying neuronal regulation of innate immunity in sepsis.
Pathological staging and histological grading systems are useful, but imperfect, predictors of recurrence in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Aberrant promoter methylation is the main type of epigenetic modification that plays a role in the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. To identify new potential prognostic markers, we investigated the promoter methylation status of five neuropeptide receptor genes. The methylation status of the target genes was compared with clinical characteristics in 278 cases; 72 hypopharyngeal cancers, 54 laryngeal cancers, 75 oropharyngeal cancers, and 77 oral cavity cancers were studied. We found that the NTSR1, NTSR2, GHSR, MLNR, and NMUR1 promoters were methylated in 47.8%, 46.8%, 54.3%, 39.2%, and 43.5% of the samples, respectively. GHSR and NMUR1 promoter methylation independently predicted recurrence in HNSCC. In patients with oropharyngeal cancer (n = 75), GHSR and NMUR1 promoter methylation significantly correlates with survival in surgically treated patients. We classified our patients as having a low, intermediate, or high-risk of death based on three factors: HPV status, and GHSR and NMUR1 promoter methylation. The disease-free survival (DFS) rates were 87.1%, 42.7%, and 17.0%, respectively. Combined data analysis of the methylation status of ten-eleven translocation (TET) family genes indicated a trend toward greater methylation indices as the number of TET methylation events increased. In the current study, we presented the relationship between the methylation status of the GHSR and NMUR1 genes and recurrence in HNSCC, specifically in risk classification of oropharyngeal carcinomas cases with HPV status.
BACKGROUND Rhinitis is the most common clinical manifestation of allergy, affecting more than 400 million people around the world. Rhinitis increases the risk of developing bronchial hyper-responsiveness and asthma. Previous studies have shown that rhinitis is closely related with the physiology, pathology, and pathogenesis of asthma. We analyzed co-expressed genes to explore the relationships between rhinitis and asthma and to find biomarkers of comorbid rhinitis and asthma. MATERIAL AND METHODS Asthma- and rhinitis-related differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by bioinformatic analysis of GSE104468 and GSE46171 datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. After assessment of Gene Ontology (GO) terms and pathway enrichment for DEGs, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was conducted via comprehensive target prediction and network analyses. We also evaluated co-expressed DEGs and corresponding predicted miRNAs involved in the developing process of rhinitis and asthma. RESULTS We identified 687 and 1001 DEGs in bronchial and nasal epithelia samples of asthma patients, respectively. For patients with rhinitis, we found 245 DEGs. The hub-genes of PAX6, NMU, NTS, NMUR1, PMCH, and KRT6A may be associated with rhinitis, while CPA3, CTSG, POSTN, CLCA1, HDC, and MUC5B may be involved in asthma. The co-expressed DEGs of BPIFA1, CCL26, CPA3, and CST1, together with corresponding predicted miRNAs (e.g., miR-195-5p and miR-125a-3p) were found to be significantly correlated with rhinitis and asthma. CONCLUSIONS Rhinitis and asthma are related, and there are significant correlations of BPIFA1, CCL26, CPA3, and CST1 genes with novel biomarkers involved in the comorbidity of rhinitis and asthma.
INTRODUCTION: This study aimed to elucidate mechanisms underlying moyamoya disease (MMD) pathogenesis and to identify potential novel biomarkers. We utilized gene co-expression networks to identify hub genes associated with the disease. METHODS: Twenty-one middle cerebral artery (MCA) samples from MMD patients and 11 MCA control samples were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset, GSE189993. To discover functional pathways and potential biomarkers, weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) was employed. The hub genes identified were re-assessed through differential gene expression analysis (DGEA) via DESeq2 for further reliability verification. Additional 4 samples from the superficial temporal arteries (STAs) from MMD patients were obtained from GSE141025, and a subgroup analysis stratified by arterial type (MCA vs. STA) DGEA was performed to assess if the hub genes associated with MMD are expressed significantly greater on the affected arteries compared to healthy ones in MMD. RESULTS: WGCNA revealed a predominant module encompassing 139 hub genes, predominantly associated with the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction (NLRI) pathway. Of those, 17 genes were validated as significantly differentially expressed. Neuromedin U receptor 1 (NMUR1) and thyrotropin-releasing hormone were 2 out of the 17 hub genes involved in the NLRI pathway (log fold change [logFC]: 1.150, p = 0.00028; logFC: 1.146, p = 0.00115, respectively). MMD-only subgroup analysis stratified by location showed that NMUR1 is significantly overexpressed in the MCA compared to the STA (logFC: 1.962; p = 0.00053) which further suggests its possible localized involvement in the progressive stenosis seen in the cerebral arteries in MMD. CONCLUSION: This is the first study to have performed WGCNA on samples directly affected by MMD. NMUR1 expression is well known to induce localized arterial smooth muscle constriction and, recently, type 2 inflammation which can predispose to arterial stenosis potentially advancing the symptoms and progression of MMD. Further validation and functional studies are necessary to understand the precise role of NMUR1 upregulation in MMD and its potential implications.
Neuromedin U (NMU) is a bioactive peptide produced in the gut and in the brain, with a role in multiple physiological processes. NMU acts by binding and activating two G protein coupled receptors (GPCR), the NMU receptor 1 (NMU-R1), which is predominantly expressed in the periphery, and the NMU receptor 2 (NMU-R2), mainly expressed in the central nervous system (CNS). In the brain, NMU and NMU-R2 are consistently present in the hypothalamus, commonly recognized as the main "feeding center". Considering its distribution pattern, NMU revealed to be an important neuropeptide involved in the regulation of food intake, with a powerful anorexigenic ability. This has been observed through direct administration of NMU and by studies using genetically modified animals, which revealed an obesity phenotype when the NMU gene is deleted. Thus, the development of NMU analogs or NMU-R2 agonists might represent a promising pharmacological strategy to treat obese individuals. Furthermore, NMU has been demonstrated to influence the non-homeostatic aspect of food intake, playing a potential role in binge eating behavior. This review aims to discuss and summarize the current literature linking the NMU system with obesity and binge eating behavior, focusing on the influence of NMU on food intake and the neuronal mechanisms underlying its anti-obesity properties. Pharmacological strategies to improve the pharmacokinetic profile of NMU will also be reported.
Osteoporosis is a disease of low bone mass that places individuals at enhanced risk for fracture, disability, and death. Osteoporosis rates are expected to rise significantly in the coming decades yet there are limited pharmacological treatment options, particularly for long-term management of this chronic condition. The drug development pipeline is relatively bereft of new strategies, causing an urgent and unmet need for developing new strategies and targets for treating osteoporosis. Here, we examine a lesser-studied bone remodeling pathway, Neuromedin U (NMU), which is expressed in the bone microenvironment along with its cognate receptors NMU receptor 1 (NMUR1) and 2 (NMUR2). We independently corroborate a prior report that global loss of NMU expression leads to high bone mass and test the hypothesis that NMU negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation. Consistent with this, in vitro studies reveal NMU represses osteoblastic differentiation of osteogenic precursors but, in contrast, promotes osteoblastic marker expression, proliferation and activity of osteoblast-like cells. Phospho-profiling arrays were used to detail differential signaling outcomes that may underlie the opposite responses of these cell types. Collectively, our findings indicate that NMU exerts cell-type-specific responses to regulate osteoblast differentiation and activity.
BACKGROUND: Numerous studies have identified that circular RNAs (circRNAs) can serve as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs) to regulate tumor progression. However, there are still a large number of circRNAs to be deciphered. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to reveal novel circRNAs and their potential role in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). METHODS: To unveil LUAD-related circRNAs, microRNA (miRNAs), and messenger RNA (mRNA) and elucidate their possible molecular mechanisms, we employed a strategy combining extensive data mining and bioinformatics methods. According to the results of bioinformatics workflow analysis, a novel circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network was constructed. RESULTS: Ten circRNAs with different expressions were acquired from four Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) microarray datasets. Seven Prognostic-related differential miRNAs of LUAD were gained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Simultaneously, the miRNA reaction components corresponding to the ten circRNAs were predicted. Two circRNA-miRNA interactions including two circRNAs (hsa_circ_0008234 and hsa_circ_0002360) and two miRNAs (hsa-miR-490-3p and hsa-miR-1293) were identified above. Then, target genes of the two miRNAs and differently expressed genes (DEGs) from TCGA on LUAD were collected. Three hub-genes (ADCY9, NMUR1, SYT1) were determined according to prognosis in patients with LUAD ulteriorly. CONCLUSIONS: hsa_circ_0008234/hsa-miR-490-3p/SYT1 and hsa_circ_0002360/hsa-miR-1293/ (ADCY9, NMUR1) networks were established, and identified molecules may be involved in pathogenesis and prognosis in patients with LUAD.
Type 2 immunity mediates the immune responses against parasites and allergic stimuli. Evidence from studies of cell lines and animals implies that neuromedin U (NmU) acts as a pro-inflammatory mediator of type 2 inflammation. However, the role of NmU in human type 2 immunity remains unclear. Here we investigated the expression of NmU in human blood and airways, and the expression of NmU receptors by human immune cells in blood and lung tissue. We detected human NmU (hNmU-25) in blood and airways with higher concentrations in the latter. NmU receptor 1 (NmUR1) was expressed by most human immune cells with higher levels in type 2 cells including type 2 T helpers, type 2 cytotoxic T cells, group-2 innate lymphoid cells and eosinophils, and was upregulated in lung-resident and activated type 2 cells. We also assessed the effects of NmU in these cells. hNmU-25 elicited type 2 cytokine production by type 2 lymphocytes and induced cell migration, including eosinophils. hNmU-25 also enhanced the type 2 immune response to other stimuli, particularly prostaglandin D(2). These results indicate that NmU could contribute to the pathogenic processes of type 2 immunity-mediated diseases in humans via its pro-inflammatory effects on type 2 lymphocytes and eosinophils.
Neuromedin U receptors (NMURs), including NMUR1 and NMUR2, are a group of G(q/11)-coupled G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). NMUR1 and NMUR2 play distinct, pleiotropic physiological functions in peripheral tissues and in the central nervous system (CNS), respectively, according to their distinct tissue distributions. These receptors are stimulated by two endogenous neuropeptides, neuromedin U and S (NMU and NMS) with similar binding affinities. NMURs have gathered attention as potential drug targets for obesity and inflammatory disorders. Specifically, selective agonists for NMUR2 in peripheral tissue show promising long-term anti-obesity effects with fewer CNS-related side effects. However, the mechanisms of peptide binding specificity and receptor activation remain elusive. Here, we report four cryo-electron microscopy structures of G(q) chimera-coupled NMUR1 and NMUR2 in complexes with NMU and NMS. These structures reveal the conserved overall peptide-binding mode and the mechanism of peptide selectivity for specific NMURs, as well as the common activation mechanism of the NMUR subfamily. Together, these findings provide insights into the molecular basis of the peptide recognition and offer an opportunity for the design of the selective drugs targeting NMURs.
Activated group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) play a crucial role in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-induced airway inflammation and allergy-like symptoms because of their ability to secrete large quantities of type 2 cytokines. Cytokines such as IL-33, IL-25, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin are activators of ILC2s. Besides, a regulatory effect of neurotransmitters on ILC2 activation has been reported recently. However, whether and how RSV infection induces neurotransmitter production in the lungs and regulates pulmonary ILC2 activation remains unclear. In this study, using a murine model established by intranasal infection with RSV, we found that acute RSV infection induced the production of a neurotransmitter, neuromedin U (NMU), in the lungs of RSV-infected mice and upregulated the expression of NMUR1 (neuromedin U receptor 1) on ILC2s. Moreover, in vivo administration of NMU exacerbated RSV-induced airway inflammation by promoting the proliferation and activation of pulmonary ILC2s via the NMUR1 pathway, which involved PI3K, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase, and NFAT signaling proteins. Furthermore, pulmonary neurons responded to the stimulation of RSV infection and secreted NMU in a Toll-like receptor 4- and Toll-like receptor 7-dependent manner. Collectively, our data suggest that NMU is a powerful neuropeptide to activate ILC2s, highlighting the critical regulatory effects of neurotransmitters on antiviral, inflammatory, and tissue homeostasis at the mucosal barrier during a viral respiratory infection.
