Neuromedin-U receptor 2; Receptor for the neuromedin-U and neuromedin-S neuropeptides. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
BACKGROUND: Gastric intestinal metaplasia (GIM) is an essential precancerous lesion. Although the reversal of GIM is challenging, it potentially brings a state-to-art strategy for gastric cancer therapeutics (GC). The lack of the appropriate in vitro model limits studies of GIM pathogenesis, which is the issue this work aims to address for further studies. METHOD: The air-liquid interface (ALI) model was adopted for the long-term culture of GIM cells in the present work. This study conducted Immunofluorescence (IF), quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), transcriptomic sequencing, and mucoproteomic sequencing (MS) techniques to identify the pathways for differential expressed genes (DEGs) enrichment among different groups, furthermore, to verify novel biomarkers of GIM cells. RESULT: Our study suggests that GIM-ALI model is analog to the innate GIM cells, which thus can be used for mucus collection and drug screening. We found genes MUC17, CDA, TRIM15, TBX3, FLVCR2, ONECUT2, ACY3, NMUR2, and MAL2 were highly expressed in GIM cells, while GLDN, SLC5A5, MAL, and MALAT1 showed down-regulated, which can be used as potential biomarkers for GIM cells. In parallel, these genes that highly expressed in GIM samples were mainly involved in cancer-related pathways, such as the MAPK signal pathway and oxidative phosphorylation signal pathway. CONCLUSION: The ALI model is validated for the first time for the in vitro study of GIM. GIM-ALI model is a novel in vitro model that can mimic the tissue micro-environment in GIM patients and further provide an avenue for studying the characteristics of GIM mucus. Our study identified new markers of GIM as well as pathways associated with GIM, which provides outstanding insight for exploring GIM pathogenesis and potentially other related conditions.
Neuromedin U (NMU) belongs to a family of multifunctional neuropeptides that modulate the activity of several neural networks of the brain. Acting via metabotropic receptor NMUR2, NMU plays a role in the regulation of multiple systems, including energy homeostasis, stress responses, circadian rhythms, and endocrine signaling. The involvement of NMU signaling in the central regulation of important neurophysiological processes and its disturbances is a potential target for pharmacological modulation. Number of preclinical studies have proven that both modified NMU analogues such as PASR8-NMU or F4R8-NMU and designed NMUR2 agonists, for example, CPN-116, CPN-124 exhibit a distinct pharmacological activity especially when delivered transnasally. Their application can potentially be useful in the more convenient and safe treatment of obesity, eating disorders, Alzheimer's disease-related memory impairment, alcohol addiction, and sleep disturbances. Accumulating findings suggest that pharmacomodulation of the central NMU signaling may be a promising strategy in the treatment of several neuropsychiatric disorders.
Obesity is now a public health concern. The leading cause of obesity is an energy imbalance between ingested and expended calories. The mechanisms of feeding behavior and energy metabolism are regulated by a complex of various kinds of molecules, including anorexigenic and orexigenic neuropeptides. One of these neuropeptides, neuromedin U (NMU), was isolated in the 1980s, and its specific receptors, NMUR1 and NMUR2, were defined in 2000. A series of subsequent studies has revealed many of the physiological roles of the NMU system, including in feeding behavior, energy expenditure, stress responses, circadian rhythmicity, and inflammation. Particularly over the past decades, many reports have indicated that the NMU system plays an essential and direct role in regulating body weight, feeding behavior, energy metabolism, and insulin secretion, which are tightly linked to obesity pathophysiology. Furthermore, another ligand of NMU receptors, NMS (neuromedin S), was identified in 2005. NMS has physiological functions similar to those of NMU. This review summarizes recent observations of the NMU system in relation to the pathophysiology of obesity in both the central nervous systems and the peripheral tissues.
Since the discovery of neuromedin U (NmU) from porcine spinal cord in 1985, this neuropeptide has been subsequently identified in many other species with multiple physiological and pathophysiological roles detected, ranging from smooth muscle contraction, feeding, energy balance to tumorigenesis. Intriguingly, NmU is also emerging to play pro-inflammatory roles involving immune cell activation and cytokine release in a neuron-dependent or neuron-independent manner. The NmU-mediated inflammatory responses have already been observed in worm infection, sepsis, autoimmune arthritis and allergic animal models. In this review, we focus on the roles of NmU in immunity and inflammation by highlighting the interactions between NmU and immune cells, summarizing the signalling mechanism involved in their reactions and discussing its potential contributions to inflammatory diseases.
More than 35 years have passed since the identification of neuromedin U (NMU). Dozens of publications have been devoted to its physiological role in the organism, which have provided insight into its occurrence in the body, its synthesis and mechanism of action at the cellular level. Two G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have been identified, with NMUR1 distributed mainly peripherally and NMUR2 predominantly centrally. Recognition of the role of NMU in the control of energy homeostasis of the body has greatly increased interest in this neuromedin. In 2005 a second, structurally related peptide, neuromedin S (NMS) was identified. The expression of NMS is more restricted, it is predominantly found in the central nervous system. In recent years, further peptides related to NMU and NMS have been identified. These are neuromedin U precursor related peptide (NURP) and neuromedin S precursor related peptide (NSRP), which also exert biological effects without acting via NMUR1, or NMUR2. This observation suggests the presence of another, as yet unrecognized receptor. Another unresolved issue within the NMU/NMS system is the differences in the effects of various NMU isoforms on diverse cell lines. It seems that development of highly specific NMUR1 and NMUR2 receptor antagonists would allow for a more detailed understanding of the mechanisms of action of NMU/NMS and related peptides in the body. They could form the basis for attempts to use such compounds in the treatment of disorders, for example, metabolic disorders, circadian rhythm, stress, etc.
The neuromedin U peptide sequence is highly conserved between various species. Neuromedin U is involved in a variety of physiological processes. It exerts its effects via two neuromedin U receptors, NMUR1 and NMUR2. These receptors are characterized by a distinct, yet complementary, tissue distribution with NMUR1 mostly found in the periphery, while NMUR2 is most abundant in the central nervous system. The capability of the neuropeptide to reduce food intake in rodents triggered the design and synthesis of a broad range of modified peptide ligands. The purpose of these ligands is to develop novel therapeutics which could be beneficial in the treatment of obesity and diabetes. Most compounds are derived either from the full-length neuromedin U sequence or are based on the truncated orthologs of this neuropeptide. Only a few non-peptidic ligands were developed. This review provides an overview on various neuromedin U analogs and mimetics that have been reported to date.
Neuromedin U receptors (NMURs), including NMUR1 and NMUR2, are a group of G(q/11)-coupled G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). NMUR1 and NMUR2 play distinct, pleiotropic physiological functions in peripheral tissues and in the central nervous system (CNS), respectively, according to their distinct tissue distributions. These receptors are stimulated by two endogenous neuropeptides, neuromedin U and S (NMU and NMS) with similar binding affinities. NMURs have gathered attention as potential drug targets for obesity and inflammatory disorders. Specifically, selective agonists for NMUR2 in peripheral tissue show promising long-term anti-obesity effects with fewer CNS-related side effects. However, the mechanisms of peptide binding specificity and receptor activation remain elusive. Here, we report four cryo-electron microscopy structures of G(q) chimera-coupled NMUR1 and NMUR2 in complexes with NMU and NMS. These structures reveal the conserved overall peptide-binding mode and the mechanism of peptide selectivity for specific NMURs, as well as the common activation mechanism of the NMUR subfamily. Together, these findings provide insights into the molecular basis of the peptide recognition and offer an opportunity for the design of the selective drugs targeting NMURs.
Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are two distinct diseases that are associated with chronic inflammation. They share common features in terms of their advanced stages and genetic factors. This study aimed to identify novel genes underlying both asthma and COPD using genome-wide association study (GWAS) to differentiate between the two diseases. We performed a GWAS of asthma and COPD in 7828 Koreans from three hospitals. In addition, we investigated genetic correlations. The UK Biobank dataset was used for the replication studies. We found that rs2961757, located near neuromedin U receptor 2 (NMUR2) on chromosome 5, was genome-wide significant ([Formula: see text] = 0.44, P-value(Asthma-COPD) = 3.41 x 10(-8)), and significant results were replicated with the UK Biobank data ([Formula: see text] = 0.04, P-value(Asthma-COPD) = 0.0431). A positive genetic correlation was observed between asthma and COPD (39.8% in the Korean dataset and 49.8% in the UK Biobank dataset). In this study, 40-45% of the genetic effects were common to asthma and COPD. Moreover, NMUR2 increases the risk of asthma development and suppresses COPD development. This indicates that NMUR2 allows for better differentiation of both diseases, which can facilitate tailored medical therapy.
Neuromedin U (NMU) is a bioactive peptide produced in the gut and in the brain, with a role in multiple physiological processes. NMU acts by binding and activating two G protein coupled receptors (GPCR), the NMU receptor 1 (NMU-R1), which is predominantly expressed in the periphery, and the NMU receptor 2 (NMU-R2), mainly expressed in the central nervous system (CNS). In the brain, NMU and NMU-R2 are consistently present in the hypothalamus, commonly recognized as the main "feeding center". Considering its distribution pattern, NMU revealed to be an important neuropeptide involved in the regulation of food intake, with a powerful anorexigenic ability. This has been observed through direct administration of NMU and by studies using genetically modified animals, which revealed an obesity phenotype when the NMU gene is deleted. Thus, the development of NMU analogs or NMU-R2 agonists might represent a promising pharmacological strategy to treat obese individuals. Furthermore, NMU has been demonstrated to influence the non-homeostatic aspect of food intake, playing a potential role in binge eating behavior. This review aims to discuss and summarize the current literature linking the NMU system with obesity and binge eating behavior, focusing on the influence of NMU on food intake and the neuronal mechanisms underlying its anti-obesity properties. Pharmacological strategies to improve the pharmacokinetic profile of NMU will also be reported.
Osteoporosis is a disease of low bone mass that places individuals at enhanced risk for fracture, disability, and death. Osteoporosis rates are expected to rise significantly in the coming decades yet there are limited pharmacological treatment options, particularly for long-term management of this chronic condition. The drug development pipeline is relatively bereft of new strategies, causing an urgent and unmet need for developing new strategies and targets for treating osteoporosis. Here, we examine a lesser-studied bone remodeling pathway, Neuromedin U (NMU), which is expressed in the bone microenvironment along with its cognate receptors NMU receptor 1 (NMUR1) and 2 (NMUR2). We independently corroborate a prior report that global loss of NMU expression leads to high bone mass and test the hypothesis that NMU negatively regulates osteoblast differentiation. Consistent with this, in vitro studies reveal NMU represses osteoblastic differentiation of osteogenic precursors but, in contrast, promotes osteoblastic marker expression, proliferation and activity of osteoblast-like cells. Phospho-profiling arrays were used to detail differential signaling outcomes that may underlie the opposite responses of these cell types. Collectively, our findings indicate that NMU exerts cell-type-specific responses to regulate osteoblast differentiation and activity.
Neuromedin U (NMU) is known to have potent actions on appetite and energy expenditure. Deletion of the NMU gene in mice leads to an obese phenotype, characterized by hyperphagia and decreased energy expenditure. Conversely, transgenic mice that overexpress proNMU exhibit reduced body weight and fat storage. Here, we show that central administration of NMU or the related peptide neuromedin S (NMS) dose-dependently decreases food intake, increases metabolic rate, and leads to significant weight loss in mice. The effects of NMU and NMS on both feeding and metabolism are almost completely lost in mice lacking the putative CNS receptor for NMU and NMS, NMUr2. However, NMUr2 knockout mice do not exhibit overt differences in body weight or energy expenditure compared with wild-type mice, suggesting that the dramatic phenotype of the NMU gene knockout mouse is not due simply to the loss of NMU/NMUr2 signaling. Putative proteolytic cleavage sites indicate that an additional peptide is produced from the NMU precursor protein, which is extremely well conserved between human, mouse, and rat. Here, we demonstrate that this peptide, proNMU(104-136), has a pronounced effect on energy balance in mice. Specifically, central administration of proNMU(104-136) causes a significant but transient ( approximately 4 h) increase in feeding, yet both food intake and body weight are decreased over the following 24 h. proNMU(104-136) administration also significantly increased metabolic rate. These results suggest that proNMU(104-136) is a novel modulator of energy balance and may contribute to the phenotype exhibited by NMU knockout mice.
Neuromedin U (NMU) is a gut-brain peptide, implicated in energy and glucose homeostasis via the peripherally expressed NMU receptor 1 (NMUR1) and the central NMUR2. We investigated the effects of a lipidated NMU analog on gastric emptying (GE), glucose homeostasis and food intake to evaluate the use of a NMU analog as drug candidate for treatment of obesity and diabetes. Finally mRNA expression of NMU and NMUR1 in the gut and NMUR2 in the hypothalamus was investigated using a novel chromogen-based in situ hybridization (ISH) assay. Effects on food intake (6 and 18 h post dosing) were addressed in both mice and rats. The effects on GE and glycaemic control were assessed in mice, immediately after the first dose and after seven days of bidaily (BID) dosing. The lipidated NMU analog exerted robust reductions in GE and food intake in mice and improved glycaemic control when measured immediately after the first dose. No effects were observed after seven days BID. In rats, the analog induced only a minor effect on food intake. NMU mRNA was detected in the enteric nervous system throughout the gut, whereas NMUR1 was confined to the lamina propria. NMUR2 was detected in the paraventricular (PVN) and arcuate nuclei (ARC) in mice, with a reduced expression in ARC in rats. In summary, the anorectic effect of the lipidated NMU is partly mediated by a decrease in gastric emptying which is subject to tachyphylaxis after continuous dosing. Susceptibility to NMU appears to be species specific.
Neuromedin U (NMU) mediates various physiological functions via NMUR1 and NMUR2 receptors. NMUR2 has been considered a promising treatment option for diabetes and obesity. Although NMU-8, a shorter peptide, has potent agonist activity for both receptors, it is metabolically unstable. Therefore, NMU-8 analogs modified with long-chain alkyl moieties via a linker were synthesized. An octadecanoyl analog (17) with amino acid substitutions [alphaMePhe(19), Nle(21), and Arg(Me)(24)] and a linker [Tra-gammaGlu-PEG(2)] dramatically increased NMUR2 selectivity, with retention of high agonist activity. Subcutaneous administration of 17 induced anorectic activity in C57BL/6J mice. Owing to its high metabolic stability, 17 would be useful in clarifying the physiological role and therapeutic application of NMU.
Neuromedin U (NMU) is a bioactive peptide that is involved in a variety of physiological functions. Two of its receptors, NMUR1 and NMUR2, have been identified and characterized in mammals. In this study, we performed cDNA cloning of chicken NMUR1 and NMUR2, and characterized their primary structure, biological activity, and expression patterns in chicken tissues. The chicken NMUR1 and NMUR2 cDNAs encoded 438 and 395 amino acid sequences, respectively. Chicken NMUR1 showed 54.8%-56.5% sequence identity with human, rat, and mouse NMUR1, and NMUR2 shared 67.3%-70.1% sequence identity with mammalian orthologs. Both chicken receptors have typical characteristics of G-protein-coupled receptors with seven transmembrane domains and the D/ERY motif. An increase in intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization was observed in HEK293 cells transfected with chicken NMUR1 or NMUR2 cDNA and treated with chicken or rat NMU. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that NMUR1 mRNA was preferentially expressed in the intestinal tissues such as the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, and colon/rectum, and brain regions such as the midbrain and optic lobe, and the ovary in adult hens. NMUR2 mRNA was exclusively expressed in the brain regions such as the cerebrum and midbrain. These results indicate that NMUR1 and NMUR2 mRNAs, which encode functional receptor proteins, are expressed in chicken tissues with different distribution patterns.
Neuromedin U (NMU) has been shown driving the progression of various tumor entities, including breast cancer. However, the expression pattern of NMU and its receptors in breast cancer tissues as well as systematic insight into mechanisms and downstream targets of the NMU-driven signaling pathways are still elusive. Here, NMU expression was found up-regulated in all breast cancer subtypes when compared to healthy breast tissue. Using an in silico dataset comprising 1,195 samples, high NMU expression was identified as an indicator of poor outcome in breast tumors showing strong NMUR2 expression. Next, the biological impact of NMU on breast cancer cells in relation to NMUR2 expression was analyzed. Ectopic NMU expression reduced colony growth while promoting a motile phenotype in NMUR2-positive SKBR3 but not NMUR2-negative Hs578T cells. To uncover signaling pathways and key molecules affected by NMU in SKBR3 cells, Affymetrix microarray analysis was applied. Forced NMU expression affected molecules involved in WNT receptor signaling among others. As such we demonstrated enhanced activation of the WNT/planar cell polarity (PCP) effector RAC1 and down-regulation of canonical WNT targets such as MYC. In summary, NMU might contribute to progression of NMUR2-positive breast cancer representing a potential druggable target for future personalized strategies.
Biomolecule-derived peptides are attractive research resources to develop drugs and elucidate the basic mechanisms of life phenomena. This review article focuses on two biomolecules called "neuromedin U (NMU)" and "myostatin" that are deeply involved in obesity and muscle weakness caused by modern lifestyles and aging. A structure-activity relationship (SAR) study based on a biomolecule reveals the structural features required for the biological activity and gives clues leading the drug discovery process. NMU activates two types of receptors (NMUR1 and NMUR2). NMU, which is an attractive candidate for treating obesity, displays a variety of physiological actions in addition to appetite suppression. The discovery of useful receptor-selective agonists helps in elucidating the detailed roles of the respective receptors for each action and in developing therapeutic drugs based on receptor function. Hence, SAR studies focused on the amidated C-terminal heptapeptide of NMU were carried out to obtain selective agonists. Consequently, the respective hexapeptidic NMUR1 and NMUR2 agonists CPN-267 and CPN-116 were discovered. Myostatin, an endogenous negative regulator of skeletal muscle mass, is a promising target for treating muscle atrophy disorders. Focused on the inactivation mechanism of mature myostatin by the myostatin precursor-derived prodomain, a core peptide (23-mer) for effective myostatin inhibition was identified from the mouse myostatin prodomain sequence. The SAR study based on this core peptide afforded a 25-fold more potent derivative (16-mer), which increased skeletal muscle mass and hindlimb grip strength. Therefore, this derivative could be a novel platform for a peptidic drug useful in the treatment of muscle atrophy.
BACKGROUND: Successful colorectal cancer (CRC) therapy often depends on the accurate identification of primary tumours with invasive potential. There is still a lack of identified pathological factors associated with disease recurrence that could help in making treatment decisions. Neuromedin U (NMU) is a secretory neuropeptide that was first isolated from the porcine spinal cord, and it has emerged as a novel factor involved in the tumorigenesis and/or metastasis of many types of cancers. Previously associated with processes leading to CRC cell invasiveness, NMU has the potential to be a marker of poor outcome, but it has not been extensively studied in CRC. METHODS: Data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were used to analyse NMU and NMU receptor (NMUR1 and NMUR2) expression in CRC tissues vs. normal tissues, and real-time PCR was used for NMU and NMU receptor expression analysis. NMU protein detection was performed by immunoblotting. Secreted NMU was immunoprecipitated from cell culture-conditioned media and analysed by immunoblotting and protein sequencing. DNA demethylation by 5-aza-CdR was used to analyse the regulation of NMUR1 and NMUR2 expression. NMU receptor activity was monitored by detecting calcium mobilisation in cells loaded with fluo-4, and ERK1/2 kinase activation was detected after treatment with NMU or receptor agonist. Cell migration and invasion were investigated using membrane filters. Integrin expression was evaluated by flow cytometry. RESULTS: The obtained data revealed elevated expression of NMU and NMUR2 in CRC tissue samples and variable expression in the analysed CRC cell lines. We have shown, for the first time, that NMUR2 activation induces signalling in CRC cells and that NMU increases the motility and invasiveness of NMUR2-positive CRC cells and increases prometastatic integrin receptor subunit expression. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show the ability of CRC cells to respond to NMU via activation of the NMUR2 receptor, which ultimately leads to a shift in the CRC phenotype towards a more invasive phenotype.
Neuromedin U (NMU), a highly conserved peptide in mammals, is involved in a wide variety of physiological processes, including impairment of pancreatic beta-cell function via induction of mitochondrial dysfunction and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, ultimately suppressing insulin secretion. NMU has two receptors, NMU receptor 1 (NMUR1) and NMUR2, both of which are G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Only NMUR1 is expressed in mouse islets and beta cell-derived MIN6-K8 cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying the insulinostatic action mediated by NMUR1 in beta cells have yet to be elucidated. In this study, we explored the molecular mechanism driving impairment of insulin secretion in beta cells by the NMU-NMUR1 axis. Pretreatment with the Galphai/o inhibitor Bordetella pertussis toxin (PTX), but not the Galphaq inhibitor YM254890, abolished NMU-induced suppression of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and calcium response in beta cells. Knockdown of Galphai2 and Galphao in beta cells counteracted NMU-induced suppression of insulin secretion and gene alterations related to mitochondrial fusion (Mfn1, Mfn2), fission (Fis1, Drp1), mitophagy (Pink1, Park2), mitochondrial dynamics (Pgc-1alpha, Nrf1, and Tfam), ER stress (Chop, Atp2a3, Ryr2, and Itpr2), intracellular ATP level, and mitochondrial membrane potential. NMU decreased forskolin-stimulated intracellular cAMP in both mouse and human islets. We concluded that NMUR1 coupled to PTX-sensitive Galphai2 and Galphao proteins in beta cells reduced intracellular Ca2+ influx and cAMP level, thereby causing beta-cell dysfunction and impairment. These results highlight a novel signaling mechanism of NMU and provide valuable insights into the further investigation of NMU functions in beta-cell biology.
