Neurogenic locus notch homolog protein 1; Functions as a receptor for membrane-bound ligands Jagged-1 (JAG1), Jagged-2 (JAG2) and Delta-1 (DLL1) to regulate cell-fate determination. Upon ligand activation through the released notch intracellular domain (NICD) it forms a transcriptional activator complex with RBPJ/RBPSUH and activates genes of the enhancer of split locus. Affects the implementation of differentiation, proliferation and apoptotic programs. Involved in angiogenesis; negatively regulates endothelial cell proliferation and migration and angiogenic sprouting. Involved in the [...] 
BACKGROUND: NOTCH1 pathogenic variants are implicated in multiple types of congenital heart defects including hypoplastic left heart syndrome, where the left ventricle is underdeveloped. It is unknown how NOTCH1 regulates human cardiac cell lineage determination and cardiomyocyte proliferation. In addition, mechanisms by which NOTCH1 pathogenic variants lead to ventricular hypoplasia in hypoplastic left heart syndrome remain elusive. METHODS: CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats)/Cas9 genome editing was utilized to delete NOTCH1 in human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cardiac differentiation was carried out by sequential modulation of WNT signaling, and NOTCH1 knockout and wild-type differentiating cells were collected at day 0, 2, 5, 10, 14, and 30 for single-cell RNA-seq. RESULTS: Human NOTCH1 knockout induced pluripotent stem cells are able to generate functional cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells, suggesting that NOTCH1 is not required for mesoderm differentiation and cardiovascular development in vitro. However, disruption of NOTCH1 blocks human ventricular-like cardiomyocyte differentiation but promotes atrial-like cardiomyocyte generation through shortening the action potential duration. NOTCH1 deficiency leads to defective proliferation of early human cardiomyocytes, and transcriptomic analysis indicates that pathways involved in cell cycle progression and mitosis are downregulated in NOTCH1 knockout cardiomyocytes. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis reveals abnormal cell lineage determination of cardiac mesoderm, which is manifested by the biased differentiation toward epicardial and second heart field progenitors at the expense of first heart field progenitors in NOTCH1 knockout cell populations. CONCLUSIONS: NOTCH1 is essential for human ventricular-like cardiomyocyte differentiation and proliferation through balancing cell fate determination of cardiac mesoderm and modulating cell cycle progression. Because first heart field progenitors primarily contribute to the left ventricle, we speculate that pathogenic NOTCH1 variants lead to biased differentiation of first heart field progenitors, blocked ventricular-like cardiomyocyte differentiation, and defective cardiomyocyte proliferation, which collaboratively contribute to left ventricular hypoplasia in hypoplastic left heart syndrome.
Recent interest in the control of bone metabolism has focused on a specialized subset of CD31(hi)endomucin(hi) vessels, which are reported to couple angiogenesis with osteogenesis. However, the underlying mechanisms that link these processes together remain largely undefined. Here we show that the zinc-finger transcription factor ZEB1 is predominantly expressed in CD31(hi)endomucin(hi) endothelium in human and mouse bone. Endothelial cell-specific deletion of ZEB1 in mice impairs CD31(hi)endomucin(hi) vessel formation in the bone, resulting in reduced osteogenesis. Mechanistically, ZEB1 deletion reduces histone acetylation on Dll4 and Notch1 promoters, thereby epigenetically suppressing Notch signaling, a critical pathway that controls bone angiogenesis and osteogenesis. ZEB1 expression in skeletal endothelium declines in osteoporotic mice and humans. Administration of Zeb1-packaged liposomes in osteoporotic mice restores impaired Notch activity in skeletal endothelium, thereby promoting angiogenesis-dependent osteogenesis and ameliorating bone loss. Pharmacological reversal of the low ZEB1/Notch signaling may exert therapeutic benefit in osteoporotic patients by promoting angiogenesis-dependent bone formation.
MYB-NFIB fusion and NOTCH1 mutation are common hallmark genetic events in salivary gland adenoid cystic carcinoma (SACC). However, abnormal expression of MYB and NOTCH1 is also observed in patients without MYB-NFIB fusion and NOTCH1 mutation. Here, we explore in-depth the molecular mechanisms of lung metastasis through single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and exome target capture sequencing in two SACC patients without MYB-NFIB fusion and NOTCH1 mutation. Twenty-five types of cells in primary and metastatic tissues were identified via Seurat clustering and categorized into four main stages ranging from near-normal to cancer-based on the abundance of each cell cluster in normal tissue. In this context, we identified the Notch signaling pathway enrichment in almost all cancer cells; RNA velocity, trajectory, and sub-clustering analyses were performed to deeply investigate cancer progenitor-like cell clusters in primary tumor-associated lung metastases, and signature genes of progenitor-like cells were enriched in the "MYC_TARGETS_V2" gene set. In vitro, we detected the NICD1-MYB-MYC complex by co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and incidentally identified retinoic acid (RA) as an endogenous antagonist of genes in the "MYC_TARGETS_V2" gene set. Following this, we confirmed that all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) suppresses the lung metastasis of SACC by correcting erroneous cell differentiation mainly caused by aberrant NOTCH1 or MYB expression. Bioinformatic, RNA-seq, and immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of primary tissues and metastatic lung tissues from patients with SACC suggested that RA system insufficiency partially promotes lung metastasis. These findings imply the value of the RA system in diagnosis and treatment.
Very rare cases of human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) harbor chromosomal translocations that involve NOTCH1, a gene encoding a transmembrane receptor that regulates normal T cell development. Here, we report that more than 50% of human T-ALLs, including tumors from all major molecular oncogenic subtypes, have activating mutations that involve the extracellular heterodimerization domain and/or the C-terminal PEST domain of NOTCH1. These findings greatly expand the role of activated NOTCH1 in the molecular pathogenesis of human T-ALL and provide a strong rationale for targeted therapies that interfere with NOTCH signaling.
Lymphatic capillaries develop discontinuous cell-cell junctions that permit the absorption of large macromolecules, chylomicrons, and fluid from the interstitium. While excessive vascular endothelial growth factor 2 (VEGFR2) signaling can remodel and seal these junctions, whether and how VEGFR3 can alter lymphatic junctions remains incompletely understood. Here, we use lymphatic-specific Flt4 knockout mice to investigate VEGFR3 signaling in lymphatic junctions. We show that loss of Flt4 prevents specialized button junction formation in multiple tissues and impairs interstitial absorption. Knockdown of FLT4 in human lymphatic endothelial cells results in impaired NOTCH1 expression and activation, and overexpression of the NOTCH1 intracellular domain in Flt4 knockout vessels rescues the formation of button junctions and absorption of interstitial molecules. Together, our data reveal a requirement for VEGFR3 and NOTCH1 signaling in the development of button junctions during postnatal development and may hold clinical relevance to lymphatic diseases with impaired VEGFR3 signaling.
Endothelial cells transduce mechanical forces from blood flow into intracellular signals required for vascular homeostasis. Here we show that endothelial NOTCH1 is responsive to shear stress, and is necessary for the maintenance of junctional integrity, cell elongation, and suppression of proliferation, phenotypes induced by laminar shear stress. NOTCH1 receptor localizes downstream of flow and canonical NOTCH signaling scales with the magnitude of fluid shear stress. Reduction of NOTCH1 destabilizes cellular junctions and triggers endothelial proliferation. NOTCH1 suppression results in changes in expression of genes involved in the regulation of intracellular calcium and proliferation, and preventing the increase of calcium signaling rescues the cell-cell junctional defects. Furthermore, loss of Notch1 in adult endothelium increases hypercholesterolemia-induced atherosclerosis in the descending aorta. We propose that NOTCH1 is atheroprotective and acts as a mechanosensor in adult arteries, where it integrates responses to laminar shear stress and regulates junctional integrity through modulation of calcium signaling.
Temozolomide (TMZ) serves as the principal chemotherapeutic agent for glioma; nonetheless, its therapeutic efficacy is compromised by the rapid emergence of drug resistance, the inadequate targeting of glioma cells, and significant systemic toxicity. ARV-825 may play a role in modulating drug resistance by degrading the BRD4 protein, thereby exerting anti-glioma effects. Therefore, to surmount TMZ resistance and achieve efficient and specific drug delivery, a dual-targeted glutathione (GSH)-responsive nanoparticle system (T+A@Glu-NP) is designed and synthesized for the co-delivery of ARV-825 and TMZ. As anticipated, T+A@Glu-NPs significantly enhanced penetration of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), facilitated drug uptake by glioma cells, and exhibited efficient accumulation in brain tissue. Additionally, T+A@Glu-NPs exhibited augmented efficacy against glioma both in vitro and in vivo through the induction of apoptosis, inhibition of proliferation, and cell cycle arrest. Furthermore, mechanistic exploration revealed that T+A@Glu-NPs degraded the BRD4 protein, leading to the downregulation of Notch1 gene transcription and the inhibition of the Notch1 signaling pathway, thereby augmenting the therapeutic efficacy of glioma chemotherapy. Taken together, the findings suggest that T+A@Glu-NPs represents a novel and promising therapeutic strategy for glioma chemotherapy.
NOTCH1 is a well-validated target in hematopoietic malignancy, with NOTCH1 activating mutations identified in more than 50% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias. Moreover, a recent report has identified NOTCH1 activating mutations in 12% of chronic lymphocytic leukemias. While the frequency of NOTCH1 mutations and the well-documented role of this protein in the pathogenesis and maintenance of T-ALL support targeting NOTCH1 as a therapeutic strategy, the critical role of this protein in normal cell-fate specification and differentiation lead to complexities in its successful targeting. In this review, we will discuss potential approaches to targeting NOTCH1 in hematopoietic malignancies, including inhibition of the enzymes involved in its activation, antibodies directed against either the receptor or its ligands, and direct interference with the NOTCH1 transcriptional complex. Moreover, we will discuss the challenges to each of these approaches as well as potential solutions to overcoming these difficulties.
The Notch signaling is a key molecular pathway that regulates cell fate and development. Aberrant Notch signaling can lead to carcinogenesis and progression of malignant tumors. However, current therapies targeting Notch pathway lack specificity and induce high toxicity. In this report, a tumor microenvironment-responsive and injectable hydrogel is designed to load plasmid DNA complexes as a cascade gene delivery system to achieve precise Notch-targeted gene therapy of colorectal cancer (CRC). The hydrogels are prepared through cross-linking between phenylboric acid groups containing poly(oligo(ethylene glycol)methacrylate) (POEGMA) and epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), used to load the complexes between plasmid DNA encoding short hairpin RNAs of Notch1 (shNotch1) and fluorinated polyamidoamine (PAMAM-F) (PAMAM-F/shNotch1). In response to low pH and H(2)O(2) in tumor microenvironment, the hydrogel can be dissociated and release the complexes for precise delivery of shNotch1 into tumor cells and inhibit Notch1 activity to suppress malignant biological behaviors of CRC. In the subcutaneous tumor model of CRC, PAMAM-F/shNotch1-loaded hydrogels can accurately attenuate Notch1 activity and significantly inhibit tumor growth without affecting Notch signal in adjacent normal tissues. Therefore, this therapeutic system can precisely inhibit Notch1 signal in CRC with high responsiveness and low toxicity, providing a promising Notch-targeted gene therapeutic for human malignancy.
Richter's syndrome (RS) is the development of an aggressive lymphoma in patients with a previous or concomitant diagnosis of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). The incidence rate for RS is  approximately 0.5% per year of observation. In the presence of clinical suspicious of RS, diagnosis of transformation and choice of the site of biopsy may take advantage of (18)FDG PET/CT. Molecular lesions of tumor suppression regulators (TP53), cell cycle (CDKN2A) and cell proliferation (NOTCH1, MYC) overall account for  approximately 90% of RS and may be responsible for its aggressive clinical phenotype. The prognosis of RS is generally highly unfavorable. However, the pattern of survival is not homogeneous and the clonal relationship between the CLL and the aggressive lymphoma clones is the most important prognostic factor. Rituximab-containing polychemotherapy represents the back-bone for induction treatment in RS. Younger patients who respond to induction therapy should be offered stem cell transplant to prolong survival.
Ischemic heart disease (IHD) is a prevalent cardiovascular disease characterized by the formation, progression and rupture of atherosclerotic plaque. The Notch signaling pathway is a key mechanism facilitating intercellular coordination. An increasing number of studies have revealed the significance of Notch signaling, particularly as regards Notch1. Of note, the existence of aberrant Notch1 signaling in IHD is universal, suggesting clinical significance. Thus, the present review summarizes the implications of Notch1 signaling in endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells and macrophages in association with the development of IHD. The present review also examined the effects of Notch1 signaling on various remodeling stages of IHD consisting of reendothelialization, neovascularization, and myocardial fibrosis. Moreover, the participation of Notch1 signaling in conventional reperfusion treatments and cardiac regeneration therapies is discussed. On the whole, the present review aims to outline Notch1 signaling as a novel target which may be used to enhance the treatment efficacy for patients with IHD.
BACKGROUND: Elucidation of the post-transcriptional modification has led to novel strategies to treat intractable tumors, especially glioblastoma (GBM). The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) mediates a reversible, stringent and stepwise post-translational modification which is closely associated with malignant processes of GBM. To this end, developing novel therapeutic approaches to target the UPS may contribute to the treatment of this disease. This study aimed to screen the vital and aberrantly regulated component of the UPS in GBM. Based on the molecular identification, functional characterization, and mechanism investigation, we sought to elaborate a novel therapeutic strategy to target this vital factor to combat GBM. METHODS: We combined glioma datasets and human patient samples to screen and identify aberrantly regulated E3 ubiquitin ligase. Multidimensional database analysis and molecular and functional experiments in vivo and in vitro were used to evaluate the roles of HECT, UBA and WWE domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase 1 (HUWE1) in GBM. dCas9 synergistic activation mediator system and recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) were used to endogenously overexpress full-length HUWE1 in vitro and in glioma orthotopic xenografts. RESULTS: Low expression of HUWE1 was closely associated with worse prognosis of GBM patients. The ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of N-Myc mediated by HUWE1, leading to the inactivation of downstream Delta-like 1 (DLL1)-NOTCH1 signaling pathways, inhibited the proliferation, invasion, and migration of GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. A rAAV dual-vector system for packaging and delivery of dCas9-VP64 was used to augment endogenous HUWE1 expression in vivo and showed an antitumor activity in glioma orthotopic xenografts. CONCLUSIONS: The E3 ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 acts through the N-Myc-DLL1-NOTCH1 signaling axis to suppress GBM progression. Antitumor activity of rAAV dual-vector delivering dCas9-HUWE1 system uncovers a promising therapeutic strategy for GBM.
OBJECTIVE: We tested the ability of Notch pathway receptors Notch1 and Notch2 to regulate stem and epithelial cell homoeostasis in mouse and human gastric antral tissue. DESIGN: Mice were treated with the pan-Notch inhibitor dibenzazepine (DBZ) or inhibitory antibodies targeting Notch1 and/or Notch2. Epithelial proliferation, apoptosis and cellular differentiation were measured by histological and molecular approaches. Organoids were established from mouse and human antral glands; growth and differentiation were measured after treatment with Notch inhibitors. RESULTS: Notch1 and Notch2 are the predominant Notch receptors expressed in mouse and human antral tissue and organoid cultures. Combined inhibition of Notch1 and Notch2 in adult mice led to decreased epithelial cell proliferation, including reduced proliferation of LGR5 stem cells, and increased apoptosis, similar to the response to global Notch inhibition with DBZ. Less pronounced effects were observed after inhibition of individual receptors. Notch pathway inhibition with DBZ or combined inhibition of Notch1 and Notch2 led to increased differentiation of all gastric antral lineages, with remodelling of cells to express secretory products normally associated with other regions of the GI tract, including intestine. Analysis of mouse and human organoids showed that Notch signalling through Notch1 and Notch2 is intrinsic to the epithelium and required for organoid growth. CONCLUSIONS: Notch signalling is required to maintain gastric antral stem cells. Notch1 and Notch2 are the primary Notch receptors regulating epithelial cell homoeostasis in mouse and human stomach.
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive leukemia that is most frequent in children and is characterized by the presence of few chromosomal rearrangements and 10 to 20 somatic mutations in protein-coding regions at diagnosis. The majority of T-ALL cases harbor activating mutations in NOTCH1 together with mutations in genes implicated in kinase signaling, transcriptional regulation, or protein translation. To obtain more insight in the level of clonal heterogeneity at diagnosis and during treatment, we used single-cell targeted DNA sequencing with the Tapestri platform. We designed a custom ALL panel and obtained accurate single-nucleotide variant and small insertion-deletion mutation calling for 305 amplicons covering 110 genes in about 4400 cells per sample and time point. A total of 108 188 cells were analyzed for 25 samples of 8 T-ALL patients. We typically observed a major clone at diagnosis (>35% of the cells) accompanied by several minor clones of which some were less than 1% of the total number of cells. Four patients had >2 NOTCH1 mutations, some of which present in minor clones, indicating a strong pressure to acquire NOTCH1 mutations in developing T-ALL cells. By analyzing longitudinal samples, we detected the presence and clonal nature of residual leukemic cells and clones with a minor presence at diagnosis that evolved to clinically relevant major clones at later disease stages. Therefore, single-cell DNA amplicon sequencing is a sensitive assay to detect clonal architecture and evolution in T-ALL.
The Notch signaling pathway is known to regulate stem cells and epithelial cell homeostasis in gastrointestinal tissues; however, Notch function in the corpus region of the stomach is poorly understood. In this study we examined the consequences of Notch inhibition and activation on cellular proliferation and differentiation and defined the specific Notch receptors functioning in the mouse and human corpus. Notch pathway activity was observed in the mouse corpus epithelium, and gene expression analysis revealed NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 to be the predominant Notch receptors in both mouse and human. Global Notch inhibition for 5 days reduced progenitor cell proliferation in the mouse corpus, as well as in organoids derived from mouse and human corpus tissue. Proliferation effects were mediated through both NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 receptors, as demonstrated by targeting each receptor alone or in combination with Notch receptor inhibitory antibodies. Analysis of differentiation by marker expression showed no change to the major cell lineages; however, there was a modest increase in the number of transitional cells coexpressing markers of mucous neck and chief cells. In contrast to reduced proliferation after pathway inhibition, Notch activation in the adult stomach resulted in increased proliferation coupled with reduced differentiation. These findings suggest that NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 signaling promotes progenitor cell proliferation in the mouse and human gastric corpus, which is consistent with previously defined roles for Notch in promoting stem and progenitor cell proliferation in the intestine and antral stomach. NEW & NOTEWORTHY: Here we demonstrate that the Notch signaling pathway is essential for proliferation of stem cells in the mouse and human gastric corpus. We identify NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 as the predominant Notch receptors expressed in both mouse and human corpus and show that both receptors are required for corpus stem cell proliferation. We show that chronic Notch activation in corpus stem cells induces hyperproliferation and tissue hypertrophy, suggesting that Notch may drive gastric tumorigenesis.
The Mastermind-like (MAML) proteins are transcriptional coactivators for Notch signaling, an evolutionarily conserved pathway that plays several key roles in development and in human disease. The MAML family contains MAML1, MAML2, and MAML3. More recently, MAML1 has been shown to function as a coactivator for the tumor suppressor p53, the MADS box transcription enhancer factor (MEF) 2C, and beta-catenin. In addition, MAML1 has been reported to interact with the histone acetyltransferase p300, and this interaction increases p300 activity. Furthermore, MAML1 binds to CDK8, which is a subunit of the Mediator complex. The function of MAML1 as a coactivator for diverse activators, and MAML1 interaction with broadly used coactivators, suggests that MAML1 might be a key molecule that connects various signaling pathways to regulate cellular processes in normal cells and in human disease.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The Dll4-Notch1 signalling pathway plays an important role in sprouting angiogenesis, vascular remodelling and arterial or venous specificity. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of Dll4-Notch1 signalling leads to excessive sprouting angiogenesis. However, transcriptional inhibitors of Dll4-Notch1 signalling have not been described. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We designed a new peptide targeting Notch signalling, referred to as TAT-ANK, and assessed its effects on angiogenesis. In vitro, tube formation and fibrin gel bead assay were carried out, using human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). In vivo, Matrigel plug angiogenesis assay, a developmental retinal model and tumour models in mice were used. The mechanisms underlying TAT-ANK activity were investigated by immunochemistry, western blotting, immunoprecipitation, RT-qPCR and luciferase reporter assays. KEY RESULTS: The amino acid residues 179-191 in the G-protein-coupled receptor-kinase-interacting protein-1 (GIT1-ankyrin domain) are crucial for GIT1 binding to the Notch transcription repressor, RBP-J. We designed the peptide TAT-ANK, based on residues 179-191 in GIT1. TAT-ANK significantly inhibited Dll4 expression and Notch 1 activation in HUVECs by competing with activated Notch1 to bind to RBP-J. The analyses of biological functions showed that TAT-ANK promoted angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo by inhibiting Dll4-Notch1 signalling. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: We synthesized and investigated the biological actions of TAT-ANK peptide, a new inhibitor of Notch signalling. This peptide will be of significant interest to research on Dll4-Notch1 signalling and to clinicians carrying out clinical trials using Notch signalling inhibitors. Furthermore, our findings will have important conceptual and therapeutic implications for angiogenesis-related diseases.
The Notch signaling pathway is an essential cell-cell interaction mechanism, which regulates processes such as cell proliferation, cell fate decisions, differentiation or stem cell maintenance. Pigmentation in mammals is provided by melanocytes, which are derived from the neural crest, and by the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), which is part of the optic cup and hence orginates from neuroectoderm. The importance of functional Notch signaling in melanocytes has been unveiled recently. Here, the pathway is essential for the maintenance of proper hair pigmentation. Deletion of Notch1 and Notch2 or RBP-Jkappa in the melanocyte lineage resulted in a gene dosage-dependent precocious hair graying, due to the elimination of melanoblasts and melanocyte stem cells. Expression data support the idea that Notch signaling might equally be involved in development of the RPE. Furthermore, recent analyses indicate a possible role of Notch signaling in the development of melanoma. In this review, we address the essential role of Notch signaling in the regeneration of the melanocyte population during hair follicle cycles, and discuss data supporting the implication of this signaling pathway in RPE development and melanoma.
The Notch signaling system links cellular fate to that of its neighbors, driving proliferation, apoptosis, and cell differentiation in metazoans, whereas dysfunction leads to debilitating developmental disorders and cancers. Other than a five-by-five domain complex, it is unclear how the 40 extracellular domains of the Notch1 receptor collectively engage the 19 domains of its canonical ligand, Jagged1, to activate Notch1 signaling. Here, using cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS), biophysical, and structural techniques on the full extracellular complex and targeted sites, we identify five distinct regions, two on Notch1 and three on Jagged1, that form an interaction network. The Notch1 membrane-proximal regulatory region individually binds to the established Notch1 epidermal growth factor (EGF) 8-EGF13 and Jagged1 C2-EGF3 activation sites as well as to two additional Jagged1 regions, EGF8-EGF11 and cysteine-rich domain. XL-MS and quantitative interaction experiments show that the three Notch1-binding sites on Jagged1 also engage intramolecularly. These interactions, together with Notch1 and Jagged1 ectodomain dimensions and flexibility, determined by small-angle X-ray scattering, support the formation of nonlinear architectures. Combined, the data suggest that critical Notch1 and Jagged1 regions are not distal but engage directly to control Notch1 signaling, thereby redefining the Notch1-Jagged1 activation mechanism and indicating routes for therapeutic applications.
The menin protein encoded by the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene is ubiquitously expressed and highly conserved evolutionarily. The combination of findings from current in vitro and in vivo studies has not yielded a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms of menin's tumor suppressor activity or the specific role for menin in endocrine tumorigenesis, although its diverse interactions suggest possible pivotal roles in transcriptional regulation, DNA processing and repair and cytoskeletal integrity. This manuscript summarizes recent research findings including studies of global gene expression in MEN1-associated neuroendocrine tumors and pivotal changes in intracellular signaling pathways associated with neuroendocrine tumorigenesis. Finally, the clinical applications provided by the understanding of the effects of MEN1 gene mutations on neuroendocrine tumor development in patients with this familial cancer syndrome are discussed.
