Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
The circadian clock coordinates daily rhythmicity of biochemical, physiologic, and behavioral functions in humans. Gene expression, cell division, and DNA repair are modulated by the clock, which gives rise to the hypothesis that clock dysfunction may predispose individuals to cancer. Although the results of many epidemiologic and animal studies are consistent with there being a role for the clock in the genesis and progression of tumors, available data are insufficient to conclude that clock disruption is generally carcinogenic. Similarly, studies have suggested a circadian time-dependent efficacy of chemotherapy, but clinical trials of chronochemotherapy have not demonstrated improved outcomes compared with conventional regimens. Future hypothesis-driven and discovery-oriented research should focus on specific interactions between clock components and carcinogenic mechanisms to realize the full clinical potential of the relationship between clocks and cancer.
Virtually every eukaryotic cell has an endogenous circadian clock and a biological sex. These cell-based clocks have been conceptualized as oscillators whose phase can be reset by internal signals such as hormones, and external cues such as light. The present review highlights the inter-relationship between circadian clocks and sex differences. In mammals, the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) serves as a master clock synchronizing the phase of clocks throughout the body. Gonadal steroid receptors are expressed in almost every site that receives direct SCN input. Here we review sex differences in the circadian timing system in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis (HPG), the hypothalamic-adrenal-pituitary (HPA) axis, and sleep-arousal systems. We also point to ways in which disruption of circadian rhythms within these systems differs in the sexes and is associated with dysfunction and disease. Understanding sex differentiated circadian timing systems can lead to improved treatment strategies for these conditions.
BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's diseases (PD) show deposits of improperly folded modified proteins. Protein expression mechanisms are involved since the early stages. Several studies evaluated epigenomics and proteomics profiles in these patients, with promising results. In general, they focused on early, specific, and minimally invasive biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of AD and PD. OBJECTIVES: This review aimed at summarizing results to find the most reliable evidence in the field. RESULTS: Among epigenomics studies, there is a focus on microRNAs (miRNAs) as candidate diagnostic biomarkers for AD or PD from blood samples like miR-342-3p, miR-107, miR-106a-5p, miR-106b- 5p, miR-195, and miR-19b. In addition, DNA methylation has been tested in a few works, obtaining significant differences in some genes (NCAPH2/LMF2 COASY, SPINT1, BDNFTREM1, TREM2, NPAS2, PDE4D), which could be useful for evaluating the disease progression as well as potential risk factors. Regarding proteomics, most of the studies were untargeted and used plasma or serum samples. In general, they highlighted the importance of coagulation, inflammation pathways, and oxidative stress. Among targeted studies, some proteins (phosphorylated tau, C reactive protein (CRP), interleukins, necrosis factors, transferrin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), and neurofilaments) showed different plasma levels in AD and PD patients in comparison with healthy participants. Finally, a few studies have identified specific-AD and PD epigenetic and proteomic biomarkers (ApoE and oxidized DJ-1) in comparison with other similar pathologies. CONCLUSION: In general, there is a common lack of clinical validation of these potential biomarkers because of which its use in clinical practice is still limited.
Regulation of glial activation and neuroinflammation are critical factors in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). YKL-40, a primarily astrocytic protein encoded by the gene Chi3l1, is a widely studied cerebrospinal fluid biomarker that increases with aging and early in AD. However, the function of Chi3l1/YKL-40 in AD is unknown. In a cohort of patients with AD, we observed that a variant in the human CHI3L1 gene, which results in decreased CSF YKL-40 expression, was associated with slower AD progression. At baseline, Chi3l1 deletion in mice had no effect on astrocyte activation while modestly promoting microglial activation. In a mouse APP/PS1 model of AD, Chi3l1 deletion decreased amyloid plaque burden and increased periplaque expression of the microglial lysosomal marker CD68, suggesting that Chi3l1 may suppress glial phagocytic activation and promote amyloid accumulation. Accordingly, Chi3l1 knockdown increased phagocytosis of zymosan particles and of beta-amyloid peptide in both astrocytes and microglia in vitro. We further observed that expression of Chi3l1 is regulated by the circadian clock, as deletion of the core clock proteins BMAL1 or CLOCK/NPAS2 strongly suppresses basal Chi3l1 expression, whereas deletion of the negative clock regulators PER1/PER2 increased Chi3l1 expression. Basal Chi3l1 mRNA was nonrhythmic because of a long mRNA half-life in astrocytes. However, inflammatory induction of Chi3l1 was gated by the clock. Our findings reveal Chi3l1/YKL-40 as a modulator of glial phagocytic activation and AD pathogenesis in both mice and humans and suggest that the astrocyte circadian clock regulates inflammatory Chi3l1 induction.
Prion diseases are transmissible, fatal neurodegenerative diseases that include scrapie and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in animals and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in human. The prion protein gene (PRNP) is the major genetic determinant of susceptibility, however, several studies now suggest that other genes are also important. Two recent genome wide association studies in human have identified four new loci of interest: ZBTB38-RASA2 in UK CJD cases and MTMR7 and NPAS2 in variant CJD. Complementary studies in mouse have used complex crosses to identify new modifiers such as Cpne8 and provided supporting evidence for previously implicated genes (Rarb and Stmn2). Expression profiling has identified new candidates, including Hspa13, which reduces incubation time in a transgenic model.
NPAS2, a circadian rhythm gene encoding the neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2), has received widespread attention because of its complex functions in cells and diverse roles in disease progression, especially tumorigenesis. NPAS2 binds with DNA at E-box sequences and forms heterodimers with another circadian protein, brain and muscle ARNT-like protein 1 (BMAL1). Nucleotide variations of the NPAS2 gene have been shown to influence the overall survival and risk of death of cancer patients, and differential expression of NPAS2 has been linked to patient outcomes in breast cancer, lung cancer, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and other diseases. Here, we review the latest advances in our understanding of NPAS2 with the aim of drawing attention to its potential clinical applications and prospects.
Background: Sleep disturbances are a common symptom of major depressive disorder (MDD). Sleep is highly regulated by circadian rhythms, controlled by circadian genes, that act through a series of feedback loops to regulate the sleep-wake cycle.Objectives: To the best of our knowledge, a systematic review regarding the core circadian genes and their role in MDD has not been published recently. Also, a review of these genes and their role in sleep disturbances in depressed individuals appears to have never been done. We decided to integrate both concepts into one comprehensive review.Method: The review was done using the appropriate search terms in the following search engines: OVID Medline, Embase, PsycINFO and Pubmed.Results: Based on the data reviewed, none of the circadian genes appear to be associated with MDD, but some are more promising than others. These genes are: CRY1, CRY2, PER2 and NPAS2. When investigating the role of circadian genes in sleep disturbances among individuals with MDD, the most promising candidate gene is TIMELESS. Although the results in this area are limited.Conclusion: Given the promising leads from this review, future studies should investigate circadian genes in sleep disturbances among the depressed population.
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa), one of the common malignant tumors, is the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in men. The circadian rhythm plays a critical role in disease. Circadian disturbances are often found in patients with tumors and enable to promote tumor development and accelerate its progression. Accumulating evidence suggests that the core clock gene NPAS2 (neuronal PAS domain-containing protein 2) has been implicated in tumors initiation and progression. However, there are few studies on the association between NPAS2 and prostate cancer. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the impact of NPAS2 on cell growth and glucose metabolism in prostate cancer. METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), immunohistochemical (IHC) staining, western blot, GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus) and CCLE (Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia) databases were used to analyze the expression of NPAS2 in human PCa tissues and various PCa cell lines. Cell proliferation was assessed using MTS, clonogenic assays, apoptotic analyses, and subcutaneous tumor formation experiments in nude mice. Glucose uptake, lactate production, cellular oxygen consumption rate and medium pH were measured to examine the effect of NPAS2 on glucose metabolism. The relation of NPAS2 and glycolytic genes was analyzed based on TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) database. RESULTS: Our data showed that NPAS2 expression in prostate cancer patient tissue was elevated compared with that in normal prostate tissue. NPAS2 knockdown inhibited cell proliferation and promoted cell apoptosis in vitro and suppressed tumor growth in a nude mouse model in vivo. NPAS2 knockdown led to glucose uptake and lactate production diminished, oxygen consumption rate and pH elevated. NPAS2 increased HIF-1A (hypoxia-inducible factor-1A) expression, leading to enhanced glycolytic metabolism. There was a positive correlation with the expression of NPAS2 and glycolytic genes, these genes were upregulated with overexpression of NPAS2 while knockdown of NPAS2 led to a lower level. CONCLUSION: NPAS2 is upregulated in prostate cancer and promotes cell survival by promoting glycolysis and inhibiting oxidative phosphorylation in PCa cells.
The endogenous and self-sustained circadian rhythm generated and maintained in suprachiasmatic nucleus and peripheral tissues can coordinate various molecular, biochemical and physiological processes in living organisms resulting in the adaptation to environmental cues, e.g. light. Multifactorial breast cancer etiology also involves circadian gene alterations, especially among individuals exposed to light at night. Indeed, shift work that causes circadian disruption has been classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as a probable human carcinogen, group 2A. Thus it seems extremely important to recognize specific susceptible gene variants among around 20 candidate circadian genes that may be linked with breast cancer etiology. The aim of this review was to evaluate recent data investigating a putative link between circadian gene polymorphisms and breast cancer risk. We summarize fifteen epidemiological studies, including five studies on shift work that have indicated BMAL1, BMAL2, CLOCK, NPAS2, CRY1, CRY2, PER1, PER3 and TIMELESS as a candidate breast cancer risk variants.
Chemotherapeutic agents, including cisplatin, have remained a cornerstone of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) treatment and continue to play an essential role in clinical practice, despite remarkable progress in therapeutic strategies. Hence, a thorough comprehension of the molecular mechanisms underlying chemotherapeutic agent resistance is paramount. Our investigation centered on the potential involvement of the NPAS2 gene in LUAD, which is highly expressed in tumors and its high expression has been associated with unfavorable overall survival rates in patients. Intriguingly, we observed that the depletion of NPAS2 in LUAD cells resulted in increased susceptibility to cisplatin treatment. Furthermore, mRNA sequencing analysis revealed that NPAS2 deficiency downregulated genes crucial to DNA repair. Additionally, NPAS2 depletion significantly impairs gammaH2AX accumulation, a pivotal component of the DNA damage response. Further investigation demonstrates that NPAS2 plays a crucial role in DNA double-strand breakage repair via homology-directed repair (HDR). Our inquiry into the molecular mechanisms underlying NPAS2 regulation of DDR revealed that it may enhance the stability of H2AX mRNA by binding to its mRNA, thereby upregulating the DNA damage repair pathway. In-vivo experiments further confirmed the crucial role of NPAS2 in modulating the effect of cisplatin in LUAD. Taken together, our findings suggest that NPAS2 binds to and enhances the stability of H2AX mRNA, thereby decreasing the sensitivity of tumor cells to chemotherapy by augmenting DNA damage repair.
Physiological processes such as the sleep-wake cycle, metabolism and hormone secretion are controlled by a circadian rhythm adapted to 24h day-night periodicity. This circadian synchronisation is in part controlled by ambient light decreasing melatonin secretion by the pineal gland and co-ordinated by the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus. Peripheral cell autonomous circadian clocks controlled by the suprachiasmatic nucleus, the master regulator, exist within every cell of the body and are comprised of at least twelve genes. These include the basic helix-loop-helix/PAS domain containing transcription factors; Clock, BMal1 and Npas2 which activate transcription of the periodic genes (Per1 and Per2) and cryptochrome genes (Cry1 and Cry2). Points of coupling exist between the cellular clock and the cell cycle. Cell cycle genes which are affected by the molecular circadian clock include c-Myc, Wee1, cyclin D and p21. Therefore the rhythm of the circadian clock and cancer are interlinked. Molecular examples exist including activation of Per2 leads to c-myc overexpression and an increased tumor incidence. Mice with mutations in Cryptochrome 1 and 2 are arrhythmic (lack a circadian rhythm) and arrhythmic mice have a faster rate of growth of implanted tumors. Epidemiological finding of relevance include 'The Nurses' Health Study' where it was established that women working rotational night shifts have an increased incidence of breast cancer. Compounds that affect circadian rhythm exist with attendant future therapeutic possibilities. These include casein kinase I inhibitors and a candidate small molecule KL001 that affects the degradation of cryptochrome. Theoretically the cell cycle and malignant disease may be targeted vicariously by selective alteration of the cellular molecular clock.
Deprivation of sleep (DS) and its effects on circadian rhythm gene expression are not well understood despite their influence on various physiological and psychological processes. This study aimed to elucidate the changes in the expression of circadian rhythm genes following a night of sleep and DS. Their correlation with sleep architecture and physical activity was also examined. The study included 81 participants who underwent polysomnography (PSG) and DS with actigraphy. Blood samples were collected after PSG and DS. Expression levels of brain and muscle ARNT-like 1 (BMAL1), circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK), neuronal PAS domain protein 2 (NPAS2), period 1 (PER1), cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) and nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group D member 1 (NR1D1) were analyzed using qRT-PCR. DS decreased the expression of CLOCK and BMAL1 while increasing PER1. PER1 expression correlated positively with total sleep time and non-rapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep duration and negatively with sleep latency, alpha, beta and delta waves in the O1A2 lead. Physical activity during DS showed positive correlations with CLOCK, BMAL1, and CRY1. The findings highlight the role of PER1 in modulating sleep patterns, suggesting potential targets for managing sleep-related disorders. Further research is essential to deepen the understanding of these relationships and their implications.
The circadian system temporally coordinates daily rhythms in feeding behaviour and energy metabolism. The objective of the present paper is to review the mechanisms that underlie circadian regulation of lipid metabolic pathways. Circadian rhythms in behaviour and physiology are generated by master clock neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). The SCN and its efferent targets in the hypothalamus integrate light and feeding signals to entrain behavioural rhythms as well as clock cells located in peripheral tissues, including the liver, adipose tissue and muscle. Circadian rhythms in gene expression are regulated at the cellular level by a molecular clock comprising a core set of clock genes/proteins. In peripheral tissues, hundreds of genes involved in lipid biosynthesis and fatty acid oxidation are rhythmically activated and repressed by clock proteins, hence providing a direct mechanism for circadian regulation of lipids. Disruption of clock gene function results in abnormal metabolic phenotypes and impaired lipid absorption, demonstrating that the circadian system is essential for normal energy metabolism. The composition and timing of meals influence diurnal regulation of metabolic pathways, with food intake during the usual rest phase associated with dysregulation of lipid metabolism. Recent studies using metabolomics and lipidomics platforms have shown that hundreds of lipid species are circadian-regulated in human plasma, including but not limited to fatty acids, TAG, glycerophospholipids, sterol lipids and sphingolipids. In future work, these lipid profiling approaches can be used to understand better the interaction between diet, mealtimes and circadian rhythms on lipid metabolism and risk for obesity and metabolic diseases.
Emerging evidences show that dysregulation of circadian genes is closely associated with tumorigenesis. However, whether circadian genes regulate the reprogramming of metabolism in tumor cells is largely unknown. Here, we showed that NPAS2, one of the core circadian molecules, significantly contributed to the reprogramming of glucose metabolism mainly through two mechanisms. On the one hand, NPAS2 upregulated the expression of glycolytic genes GLUT1, HK2, GPI, ALDOA, ENO2, PKM2 and MCT4. On the other hand, NPAS2 downregulated the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1alpha). Mechanistically, HIF-1alpha was found to be a direct transcriptional target of NPAS2, which mediated both the upregulation of glycolytic genes and downregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in HCC cells. In addition, we found that upregulation of NPAS2 expression was mainly due to the downregulation of miR-199b-5p. In vitro and in vivo assays further indicated that HIF-1alpha-mediated reprogramming of glucose metabolism played a critical role in NPAS2-regulated growth and metastasis of HCC cells. Our findings demonstrate that NPAS2 plays a critical role in glucose metabolism reprogramming, suggesting that NPAS2 may serve as a potential therapeutic target in HCC.
Circadian rhythms are present in most living organisms, and these rhythms are not just a consequence of the day/night fluctuation, but rather they are generated by endogenous biological clocks with a periodicity of about 24 h. In mammals, the master pacemaker of circadian rhythms is localized in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus. The SCN controls circadian rhythms in peripheral organs. The retina also contains circadian clocks which regulate many aspects of retinal physiology, independently of the SCN. Emerging experimental evidence indicates that the retinal circadian clocks also affect ocular health, and a few studies have now demonstrated that disruption of retinal clocks may contribute to the development of retinal diseases. Our study indicates that in mice lacking the clock gene Bmal1, photoreceptor viability during aging is significantly reduced. Bmal1 knockout mice at 8-9 months of age have 20-30% less nuclei in the outer nuclear layer. No differences were observed in the other retinal layers. Our study suggests that the retinal circadian clock is an important modulator of photoreceptor health.
Mood spectrum disorders (bipolar disorder, recurrent depressive disorder and seasonal affective disorder) are accompanied by circadian deregulations, which can occur during acute mood episodes as well as during euthymic periods, and are particularly common among bipolar patients in remission. This suggests that altered circadian rhythms may be biological markers of these disorders. Rhythm dysfunctions have been observed in mood disorder patients by using actigraphic measures and by assessing social metric rhythms, diurnal preferences and melatonin secretion. Since many of these markers are heritable and therefore driven by clock genes, these genes may represent susceptibility factors for mood spectrum disorders. Indeed, several genetic association studies have suggested that certain circadian gene variants play a role in susceptibility to these disorders. Such connections to circadian genes such as CLOCK, ARNTL1, NPAS2, PER3 and NR1D1 have been repeatedly demonstrated for bipolar disorders, and to a lesser extent for recurrent depressive disorders and seasonal affective disorders. The study of circadian phenotypes and circadian genes in mood spectrum disorders represents a major field of research that may yet reveal the pathophysiological determinants of these disorders.
BACKGROUND: The number of studies on the association between clock genes' polymorphisms and cancer susceptibility has increased over the last years but the results are often conflicting and no comprehensive overview and quantitative summary of the evidence in this field is available. RESULTS: Literature search identified 27 eligible studies comprising 96756 subjects (cases: 38231) and investigating 687 polymorphisms involving 14 clock genes. Overall, 1025 primary and subgroup meta-analyses on 366 gene variants were performed. Study distribution by tumor was as follows: breast cancer (n=15), prostate cancer (n=3), pancreatic cancer (n=2), non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (n=2), glioma (n=1), chronic lymphocytic leukemia (n=1), colorectal cancer (n=1), non-small cell lung cancer (n=1) and ovarian cancer (n=1).We identified 10 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly associated with cancer risk: NPAS2 rs10165970 (mixed and breast cancer shiftworkers), rs895520 (mixed), rs17024869 (breast) and rs7581886 (breast); CLOCK rs3749474 (breast) and rs11943456 (breast); RORA rs7164773 (breast and breast cancer postmenopausal), rs10519097 (breast); RORB rs7867494 (breast cancer postmenopausal), PER3 rs1012477 (breast cancer subgroups) and assessed the level of quality evidence to be intermediate. We also identified polymorphisms with lower quality statistically significant associations (n=30). CONCLUSIONS: Our work supports the hypothesis that genetic variation of clock genes might affect cancer risk. These findings also highlight the need for more efforts in this research field in order to fully establish the contribution of clock gene variants to the risk of developing cancer. METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the evidence on the association between clock genes' germline variants and the risk of developing cancer. To assess result credibility, summary evidence was graded according to the Venice criteria and false positive report probability (FPRP) was calculated to further validate result noteworthiness. Subgroup meta-analysis was also performed based on participant features and tumor type. The breast cancer subgroup was further stratified by work conditions, estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor status and menopausal status, conditions associated with the risk of breast cancer in different studies.
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by co-occurrence with affective disorders. Our study aims to investigate the association of circadian clock gene expressions, and the presence and severity of depressive symptoms in OSA patients. The study included 184 individuals, who underwent polysomnography (PSG) and had their peripheral blood collected in the evening before and the morning after the PSG. Patients were divided into two groups: the OSA (apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) > 5) and the control group (AHI < 5). RNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes. Expression levels of the selected genes (BMAL1, CLOCK, PER1, CRY1, NPAS2, and NR1D1) were assessed by qRT-PCR. Questionnaire data was collected in the morning (including the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), Chronotype Questionnaire (CQ), and Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)). The expression of all examined circadian clock genes in OSA patients was upregulated in the morning compared to the evening (except NPAS2). No differences were observed between OSA and control groups at either time point. Additionally, there was a positive correlation between the severity of depressive symptoms (assessed with MADRS) and morning expression of circadian genes in the group of OSA patients. Finally, in multivariable linear regression, ISI score (B = 0.750, p < 0.001), AM score of CQ (B = 0.416, p = 0.007), and morning PER1 gene expression (B = 4.310, p = 0.042) were found to be predictive factors for greater severity of depression symptoms in OSA patients. Dysregulated circadian clock gene expression in OSA patients is linked to depressive symptom severity, suggesting circadian disruption may underlie affective symptoms in OSA.
BACKGROUND: Heart failure (HF) is a syndrome with multiple clinical symptoms resulting from damage to the heart's structure and/or function with various pathogenic factors, which has developed as one of the most severe threats to human health. Approximately 13% of genes and about 8% of proteins contained in the heart are rhythmic, which could lead to HF if disrupted. Herein, we aimed to identify the circadian rhythms-related hub genes as potential biomarkers contributing to the identification and treatment of HF. METHODS: Expression data of ischemic and dilated cardiomyopathy samples with or without HF were collected from the GEO database. First, genes with differential expression in HF and healthy samples were identified, named as differentially expressed genes (DEGs), which were then intersected with circadian rhythms-related genes to identify circadian rhythms-related DEGs. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was established to screen hub genes. The performance of the hub genes to identify HF among healthy controls was assessed by referring to the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Additionally, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was run to further validate the hub genes depending on clinical human peripheral blood samples. RESULTS: A total of 10,163 DEGs were determined, composed of 4,615 up-regulated genes and 5,548 down-regulated genes in HF patients in comparison to healthy controls. By overlapping the circadian rhythms-related genes in the Circadian Gene DataBase (CGDB), 723 circadian rhythms-related DEGs were obtained, mainly enriched in regulating lipid metabolic process, circadian rhythm and AMPK signaling pathway. Eight hub genes were screened out through the PPI network. The ROC curve indicated the high accuracy of five hub genes with AUC > 0.7, which also showed high accuracy validated by the external validation dataset. Furthermore, according to the results of quantitative RT-PCR, the HF group showed significantly increased relative mRNA expression of CRY2 and BHLHE41 while the decreased ARNTL and NPAS2 in comparison to controls, indicating the four hub genes as potential biomarkers of HF. CONCLUSION: Our study validated that ARNTL, CRY2, BHLHE41 and NPAS2 could serve as potential biomarkers of circadian rhythm in HF. These results may provide a reference for employing novel markers or targets for the diagnosis and treatment of HF.
