Neuropeptides B/W receptor type 2; Interacts specifically with a number of opioid ligands. Receptor for neuropeptides B and W, which may be involved in neuroendocrine system regulation, food intake and the organization of other signals; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Neuropeptide B (NPB) modulates energy homeostasis and metabolism through activation of NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 in humans and NPBWR1 in rodents. Recently, we reported that NPB promotes adipogenesis in rat brown preadipocytes. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of NPB on proliferation and differentiation into mature adipocytes of white rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. We found the expression of NPBWR1 and NPB on mRNA and protein level in rat white preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. NPB increased expression of mRNA and protein production of adipogenic genes (PPARgamma, C/EBPbeta, CEBPalpha and FABP4) in rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells during the differentiation process. Furthermore, NPB stimulated lipid accumulation in rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. In addition, we found that NPB promotes phosphorylation of p38 kinase in rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. NPB failed to stimulate expression of proadipogenic genes in the presence of p38 inhibitor. NPB failed to modulate viability and proliferation of rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. Taken together, we report that NPB promotes differentiation of rodent preadipocytes via p38-dependent mechanism. NPB does not modulate viability and proliferation of rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells.
Neuropeptide B (NPB) is a peptide hormone that was initially described in 2002. In humans, the biological effects of NPB depend on the activation of two G protein-coupled receptors, NPBWR1 (GPR7) and NPBWR2 (GPR8), and, in rodents, NPBWR1. NPB and its receptors are expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) and in peripheral tissues. NPB is also present in the circulation. In the CNS, NPB modulates appetite, reproduction, pain, anxiety, and emotions. In the peripheral tissues, NPB controls secretion of adrenal hormones, pancreatic beta cells, and various functions of adipose tissue. Experimental downregulation of either NPB or NPBWR1 leads to adiposity. Here, we review the literature with regard to NPB-dependent control of metabolism and energy homeostasis.
BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disease in the elderly population. However, there are no reliable diagnostic biomarkers for PD, and the pathogenesis of PD still needs further study. The aim of the current study was to identify potential biomarkers and explore the pathogenesis of PD. METHODS: We conducted an integrative analysis of messenger RNA (mRNA), microRNA (miRNA), and long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) expression profiles of PD using data from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The GSE110720, GSE110719 and GSE133347 data sets were selected and analysed. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment and gene set variation analysis (GSVA) were performed for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) and competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) networks were constructed, and hub genes were identified. Meanwhile, the immune infiltration analysis of hub genes was analysed. Moreover, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were generated to verify the diagnostic value of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Finally, the genes with high area under the curve (AUC) values were verified by human samples. RESULTS: We identified 464 DEGs closely related to PD, including 154 mRNAs, 134 miRNAs, and 176 lncRNAs. The GO analyses indicated that changes in PD were mainly enriched in receptor ligand activity and cytokine receptor binding. The KEGG enrichment analysis showed that these DEGs were significantly involved in cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, signalling pathways regulating the pluripotency of stem cells and Th17 cell differentiation. GSVA suggested that growth factor binding, IL2-stat5 signalling, and IL6-jak-stat3 signalling were crucial in the development of PD. A total of five hub genes (NPBWR2, CXCL10, CXCL5, S1PR5, and GALR1) were selected via the PPI network. A ceRNA network of the CXCL5, CXCL10 and S1PR5 genes was constructed, and target genes of the three genes were screened. The immune infiltration analysis showed that there were significant differences in a variety of immune cells between the hub genes. The expression of DEGs was validated in clinical human samples by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The expression levels of hsa-miR6895-5p, hsa-miR6791-5p, hsa-miR518f-5p, hsa-miR455-3p and TEKT4P2 were decreased, while the levels of TPTE2P6 were increased in human samples. These findings are consistent with the bioinformatics analysis results. CONCLUSION: We found that the immune inflammatory response and immune cell regulation were involved in the pathogenesis of PD. Five hub genes involved in the immune infiltration biological processes of PD based on bioinformatics. We verified the DEGs with significant differences by qRT-PCR. These findings might provide new insight into the pathogenesis of PD and the development of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for PD.
Neuropeptide B (NPB) affects energy homeostasis and metabolism by binding and activating NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 in humans and pigs. Recently, we reported that NPB promotes the adipogenesis of rat white and brown preadipocytes as well as 3T3-L1 cells. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of NPB on the proliferation and differentiation of white porcine preadipocytes into mature adipocytes. We identified the presence of NPB, NPBWR1, and NPBWR2 on the mRNA and protein levels in porcine white preadipocytes. During the differentiation process, NPB increased the mRNA expression of PPARgamma, C/EBPbeta, C/EBPalpha, PPARgamma, and C/EBPbeta protein production in porcine preadipocytes. Furthermore, NPB stimulated lipid accumulation in porcine preadipocytes. Moreover, NPB promoted the phosphorylation of the p38 kinase in porcine preadipocytes, but failed to induce ERK1/2 phosphorylation. NPB failed to stimulate the expression of C/EBPbeta in the presence of the p38 inhibitor. Taken together, we report that NPB promotes the differentiation of porcine preadipocytes via a p38-dependent mechanism.
BACKGROUND: The neuropeptide B/W signalling system (NPB/W) has been identified in multiple body regions and is integral to several physiological processes, including the regulation of food intake and energy homeostasis. Recently, it has also been detected in human skin; however, its specific functions in this context remain to be thoroughly investigated. This study aims to identify the expression of neuropeptides B/W receptor 1 (NPBWR1) and neuropeptides B/W receptor 2 (NPBWR2) in human dermal fibroblasts of mesenchymal origin using genomic and proteomic techniques. We will also investigate the role of these receptors in cell proliferation and calcium signalling. METHODS: The mRNAs for NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 were detected using quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis and further validated by western blot and immunofluorescence analyses. Additionally, we synthesised ligands for these receptors, specifically hNPB (25-53) and hNPW (33-62), to investigate their effects on cell proliferation and intracellular calcium levels in human fibroblasts. RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that hNPW (33-62) has anti-proliferative effect on human dermal fibroblasts and concentration of 0.1-mumol/L can significantly decrease intracellular calcium levels (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: This finding suggests a potential role for the NPB/W signalling system in pathologies associated with impaired calcium handling, such as fibrosis. Furthermore, we observed that the proliferation of human fibroblasts was not affected by hNPB (25-53). Our findings could lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies for various skin conditions and improved wound healing.
Neuropeptides B and W (NPB and NPW) are regulatory peptides that act via two subtypes of G protein-coupled receptors, named GPR7 and GPR8. RT-PCR demonstrated the expression of these receptors in both zona glomerulosa and zona fasciculata-reticularis (ZF/R) cells of the human adrenal cortex. NPB and NPW did not affect aldosterone secretion from dispersed zona glomerulosa cells but enhanced cortisol production from ZF/R cells, NPB being more effective than NPW. NPB evoked sizable cAMP and inositol triphosphate responses from ZF/R cells, which were abrogated by the adenylate cyclase inhibitor SQ-22536 and the phospholipase C inhibitor U-73122, respectively. Cortisol response to NPB was lowered by either SQ-22536 and the protein kinase (PK) A inhibitor H-89 or U-73122 and the PKC inhibitor calphostin-C and abolished by the simultaneous exposure to H-89 and calphostin-C. NPW elicited only a rise in cAMP production from dispersed ZF/R cells, and its cortisol response was suppressed by both SQ-22536 and H-89. PreproNPB and preproNPW mRNAs were detected in human adrenal cortexes. We conclude that: 1) NPB and NPW exert a secretagogue action on human ZF/R cells, probably acting in an autocrine-paracrine manner; and 2) the effect of NPB is mediated by both the adenylate cyclase/PKA and the phospholipase C/PKC cascades, whereas that of NPW involves only the activation of the former signaling pathway.
Neuropeptides B and W (NPB and NPW) are endogenous ligands of two G protein-coupled receptors, named GPR7 and GPR8. GPR7 and GPR8 are expressed in the adrenal cortex, and there is evidence that NPB and NPW stimulate glucocorticoid secretion from human adrenocortical cells by activating protein kinase (PK) A and PKC signaling. To gain insight into the role of NPB and NPW in human adrenal functional regulation, we have investigated their effects on the secretion and growth of the human adrenocortical carcinoma-derived NCI-H295 cell line. NCI-H295 cells were found to express both GPR7 and GPR8 mRNAs, but neither NPB nor NPW (up to 10(-6) M) affected their secretory activity. In contrast, both peptides (from 10(-10) to 10(-6) M) enhanced the growth of NCI-H295 cells, by raising their proliferative activity and lowering their apoptotic deletion rate. NPB and NPW (10(-6) M) stimulated tyrosine kinase (TK) and mitogen-activated PK (MAPK) p42/p44 activities in NCI-H295 cells. Both these effects were blocked by the TK inhibitor tyrphostin-23, while the MAPK p42/p44 inhibitor PD-98059 annulled only MAPK p42/p44 activation. The growth-stimulating effect of 10(-6) M NPB and NPW were not affected by either the PKA and PKC inhibitors H-89 and calphostin-C or the MAPK p38 antagonist SB-293580, but were abolished by both tyrphostin-23 and PD-98059. Taken together, our findings allow us to conclude that GPR7 and GPR8 expressed in NCI-H295 cells: i) are, at variance with those present in normal human adrenocortical cells, uncoupled to PKA- and PKC-dependent cascades, thereby explaining the absence of any secretory response to NPB and NPW; and ii) are coupled to the TK-dependent MAPK p42/p44 signaling, whose activation mediates the proliferogenic and antiapoptotic effect of NPB and NPW.
The 2 structurally and functionally related peptides, neuropeptide B (NPB) and neuropeptide W (NPW), together with their receptor(s) (NPBWR1/NPBWR2) constitute the NPB/NPW system, which acts mainly on the central nervous system to regulate many physiological processes in mammals. However, little is known about this NPB/NPW system in nonmammalian vertebrates. In this study, the functionality and expression of this NPB/NPW system and its actions on the pituitary were investigated in chickens. The results showed that: 1) chicken NPB/NPW system comprises an NPB peptide of 28 amino acids (cNPB28), an NPW peptide of 23 or 30 amino acids (cNPW23/cNPW30), and their 2 receptors (cNPBWR1 and cNPBWR2), which are highly homologous to their human counterparts. 2) Using a pGL3-CRE-luciferase reporter system, we demonstrated that cNPBWR2 expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells can be potently activated by cNPW23 (not cNPB28), and its activation inhibits the intracellular cAMP signaling pathway, whereas cNPBWR1 shows no response to peptide treatment, suggesting a crucial role of cNPBWR2 in mediating cNPW/cNPB actions. 3) Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that cNPW and cNPB are widely expressed in chicken tissues, including hypothalamus, whereas cNPBWR1 and cNPBWR2 are mainly expressed in brain or pituitary. 4) In accordance with abundant cNPBWR2 expression in pituitary, cNPW23 could dose dependently inhibit GH and prolactin secretion induced by GHRH and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, respectively, in cultured chick pituitary cells, as monitored by Western blotting. Collectively, our data reveal a functional NPB/NPW system in birds and offer the first proof that NPW can act directly on pituitary to inhibit GH/prolactin secretion in vertebrates.
GPR7 and GPR8, orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) genes, expressed in the brain and periphery share highest sequence identity to each other and significant similarity with opioid and somatostatin receptors. To further our knowledge of GPR7's physiological function, we performed in situ hybridization analyses of rat brain to reveal specific patterns of expression in the brain. GPR7 mRNA was found to be discretely localized in areas of the amygdala, hippocampus, hypothalamus and cortex. We previously reported that GPR7 was highly conserved in both human and rodent orthologs while GPR8 was not found in the rodent [9]. We speculated that GPR8 originated after the divergence of the human and rodent. Using primers designed from human GPR8, we isolated lemur GPR8 and subsequently aligned human, monkey, and lemur GPR8 orthologs to design primers recognizing highly conserved regions of GPR8. Using these primers, orthologs of GPR7 and GPR8 were isolated by the PCR from rabbit, tree shrew, and flying lemur, as well as GPR7 in the rat. Subsequent analysis of the clones obtained demonstrated that both GPR7 and GPR8 sequences were highly conserved amongst the species studied, but a rodent GPR8 was not isolated. The absence of a GPR8 gene in the rodent suggests that GPR8 originated from gene duplication of GPR7 after the rodent line diverged from the rabbit, tree shrew, flying lemur, lemur, monkey and human lines. In addition, the taxonomic distribution of GPR8 is consistent with molecular studies grouping rabbits with primates, tree shrews and flying lemurs rather than with rodents.
GPR7 and GPR8 are two structurally related orphan G protein-coupled receptors, presenting high similarities with opioid and somatostatin receptors. Two peptides, L8 and L8C, derived from a larger precursor, were recently described as natural ligands for GPR8 (Mori, M., Shimomura, Y., Harada, M., Kurihara, M., Kitada, C., Asami, T., Matsumoto, Y., Adachi, Y., Watanabe, T., Sugo, T., and Abe, M. (December, 27, 2001) World Patent Cooperation Treaty, Patent Application WO 01/98494A1). L8 is a 23-amino acid peptide, whereas L8C is the same peptide with a C terminus extension of 7 amino acids, running through a dibasic motif of proteolytic processing. Using as a query the amino acid sequence of the L8 peptide, we have identified in DNA databases a human gene predicted to encode related peptides and its mouse ortholog. By analogy with L8 and L8C, two peptides, named L7 and L7C could result from the processing of a 125-amino acid human precursor through the alternative usage of a dibasic amino acid motif. The activity of these four peptides was investigated on GPR7 and GPR8. In binding assays, L7, L7C, L8, and L8C were found to bind with low nanomolar affinities to the GPR7 and GPR8 receptors expressed in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)-K1 cells. They inhibited forskolin-stimulated cAMP accumulation through a pertussis toxin-sensitive mechanism. The tissue distribution of prepro-L7 (ppL7) and prepro-L8 (ppL8) was investigated by reverse transcription-PCR. Abundant ppL7 transcripts were found throughout the brain as well as in spinal cord, spleen, testis, and placenta; ppL8 transcripts displayed a more restricted distribution in brain, with high levels in substantia nigra, but were more abundant in peripheral tissues. The ppL7 and ppL8 genes therefore encode the precursors of a class of peptide ligands, active on two receptor subtypes, GPR7 and GPR8. The distinct tissue distribution of the receptor and peptide precursors suggest that each ligand and receptor has partially overlapping but also specific roles in this signaling system.
The orphan G protein-coupled receptor 78 (GPR78) gene lies within a region of chromosome 4p where we have previously shown linkage to bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) in a large Scottish family. GPR78 was screened for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and a linkage disequilibrium map was constructed. Six tagging SNPs were selected and tested for association on a sample of 377 BPAD, 392 schizophrenia (SCZ) and 470 control individuals. Using standard chi(2) statistics and a backwards logistic regression approach to adjust for the effect of sex, SNP rs1282, located approximately 3 kb upstream of the coding region, was identified as a potentially important variant in SCZ (chi(2) P=0.044; LRT P=0.065). When the analysis was restricted to females, the strength of association increased to an uncorrected allele P-value of 0.015 (odds ratios (OR)=1.688, 95% confidence intervals (CI): 1.104-2.581) and uncorrected genotype P-value of 0.015 (OR=5.991, 95% CI: 1.545-23.232). Under the recessive model, the genotype P-value improved further to 0.005 (OR=5.618, 95% CI: 1.460-21.617) and remained significant after correcting for multiple testing (P=0.017). No single-marker association was detected in the SCZ males, in the BPAD individuals or with any other SNP. Haplotype analysis of the case-control samples revealed several global and individual haplotypes, with P-values <0.05, all but one of which contained SNP rs1282. After correcting for multiple testing, two haplotypes remained significant in both the female BPAD individuals (P=0.038 and 0.032) and in the full sample of affected female individuals (P=0.044 and 0.033). Our results provide preliminary evidence for the involvement of GPR78 in susceptibility to BPAD and SCZ in the Scottish population.
GPR7 and GPR8 are orphan G protein-coupled receptors that are highly similar to each other. These receptors are expressed predominantly in brain, suggesting roles in central nervous system function. We have purified an endogenous peptide ligand for GPR7 from bovine hypothalamus extracts. This peptide, termed neuropeptide B (NPB), has a C-6-brominated tryptophan residue at the N terminus. It binds and activates human GPR7 or GPR8 with median effective concentrations (EC(50)) of 0.23 nM and 15.8 nM, respectively. In situ hybridization shows distinct localizations of the prepro-NPB mRNA in mouse brain, i.e., in paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus, hippocampus, and several nuclei in midbrain and brainstem. Intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection of NPB in mice induces hyperphagia during the first 2 h, followed by hypophagia. Intracerebroventricular injection of NPB produces analgesia to s.c. formalin injection in rats. Through EST database searches, we identified a putative paralogous peptide. This peptide, termed neuropeptide W (NPW), also has an N-terminal tryptophan residue. Synthetic human NPW binds and activates human GPR7 or GPR8 with EC(50) values of 0.56 nM and 0.51 nM, respectively. The expression of NPW mRNA in mouse brain is confined to specific nuclei in midbrain and brainstem. These findings suggest diverse physiological functions of NPB and NPW in the central nervous system, acting as endogenous ligands on GPR7 andor GPR8.
