Neuropeptides B/W receptor type 1; Interacts specifically with a number of opioid ligands. Receptor for neuropeptides B and W, which may be involved in neuroendocrine system regulation, food intake and the organization of other signals. Has a higher affinity for neuropeptide B.
Neuropeptide B (NPB) is a peptide hormone that was initially described in 2002. In humans, the biological effects of NPB depend on the activation of two G protein-coupled receptors, NPBWR1 (GPR7) and NPBWR2 (GPR8), and, in rodents, NPBWR1. NPB and its receptors are expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) and in peripheral tissues. NPB is also present in the circulation. In the CNS, NPB modulates appetite, reproduction, pain, anxiety, and emotions. In the peripheral tissues, NPB controls secretion of adrenal hormones, pancreatic beta cells, and various functions of adipose tissue. Experimental downregulation of either NPB or NPBWR1 leads to adiposity. Here, we review the literature with regard to NPB-dependent control of metabolism and energy homeostasis.
Neuropeptide B (NPB) modulates energy homeostasis and metabolism through activation of NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 in humans and NPBWR1 in rodents. Recently, we reported that NPB promotes adipogenesis in rat brown preadipocytes. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of NPB on proliferation and differentiation into mature adipocytes of white rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. We found the expression of NPBWR1 and NPB on mRNA and protein level in rat white preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. NPB increased expression of mRNA and protein production of adipogenic genes (PPARgamma, C/EBPbeta, CEBPalpha and FABP4) in rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells during the differentiation process. Furthermore, NPB stimulated lipid accumulation in rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. In addition, we found that NPB promotes phosphorylation of p38 kinase in rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. NPB failed to stimulate expression of proadipogenic genes in the presence of p38 inhibitor. NPB failed to modulate viability and proliferation of rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells. Taken together, we report that NPB promotes differentiation of rodent preadipocytes via p38-dependent mechanism. NPB does not modulate viability and proliferation of rat preadipocytes and 3T3-L1 cells.
Neuropeptide B/W receptor 1 (NPBWR1), previously known as G-protein coupled receptor 7 (GPR7), is a class A G-protein coupled receptor implicated in the modulation of several neuroendocrine functions such as feeding behavior, energy homeostasis, epilepsy, and analgesia. In recent years, a few antagonists have been designed that bind to NPBWR1 with high affinity. However, the exact binding modes between the antagonists and the receptor are still unknown. Unraveling the key pharmacophoric features of the receptor will guide the development of novel compounds with increased potency for therapeutic use. Here, we studied the structural organization of NPBWR1 receptor and its antagonist binding modes through computational approaches. Based on the dynamics and energetic features of receptor-ligand interactions, we categorized the binding affinities of the antagonists for NPBWR1 and identified key residues responsible for ligand recognition by NPBWR1. Binding free energy calculations revealed that the residues Trp102(ECL1), Val113(3.29), Gln281(ECL3), and Ala274(6.58) were crucial for ligand interaction. The results of our study will be useful to understand the structure-function relationship of NPBWR1 that may assist future drug discovery initiatives.
The formation of new social interactions is vital for social animals, but the underlying neural mechanisms remain poorly understood. We identified CeA(Npbwr1) neurons, a population in central amygdala expressing neuropeptide B/W receptor-1 (NPBWR1), that play a critical role in these interactions. CeA(Npbwr1) neurons were activated during encounters with unfamiliar, but not with familiar, mice. Manipulations of CeA(Npbwr1) neurons showed that their excitation is essential for maintaining physical interactions with novel conspecifics. Activation of CeA(Npbwr1) neurons alleviated social deficits induced by chronic social defeat stress, suggesting therapeutic potential. Conversely, overexpression of human NPBWR1 in CeA(Npbwr1) neurons reduced activity of these neurons and impaired social interactions with unfamiliar mice. This effect was absent in a polymorphic variant of the human NPBWR1 gene (404A>T). These findings highlight how CeA(Npbwr1) neurons promote social novelty seeking and reveal a complex interplay between NPBWR1 genetic variations and social behavior.
Novel small molecule antagonists of NPBWR1 (GPR7) are herein reported. A high-throughput screening (HTS) of the Molecular Libraries-Small Molecule Repository library identified 5-chloro-4-(4-methoxyphenoxy)-2-(p-tolyl)pyridazin-3(2H)-one as a NPBWR1 hit antagonist with micromolar activity. Design, synthesis and structure-activity relationships study of the HTS-derived hit led to the identification of 5-chloro-2-(3,5-dimethylphenyl)-4-(4-methoxyphenoxy)pyridazin-3(2H)-one lead molecule with submicromolar antagonist activity at the target receptor and high selectivity against a panel of therapeutically relevant off-target proteins. This lead molecule may provide a pharmacological tool to clarify the molecular basis of the in vivo physiological function and therapeutic utility of NPBWR1 in diverse disease areas including inflammatory pain and eating disorders.
Neuropeptide B/W receptor-1 (NPBWR1) is expressed in discrete brain regions in rodents and humans, with particularly strong expression in the limbic system, including the central nucleus of the amygdala. Recently, Nagata-Kuroiwa et al. reported that Npbwr1(-/-) mice showed changes in social behavior, suggesting that NPBWR1 plays important roles in the emotional responses of social interactions.The human NPBWR1 gene has a single nucleotide polymorphism at nucleotide 404 (404A>T; SNP rs33977775). This polymorphism results in an amino acid change, Y135F. The results of an in vitro experiment demonstrated that this change alters receptor function. We investigated the effect of this variation on emotional responses to stimuli of showing human faces with four categories of emotional expressions (anger, fear, happiness, and neutral). Subjects' emotional levels on seeing these faces were rated on scales of hedonic valence, emotional arousal, and dominance (V-A-D). A significant genotype difference was observed in valence evaluation; the 404AT group perceived facial expressions more pleasantly than did the 404AA group, regardless of the category of facial expression. Statistical analysis of each combination of [V-A-D and facial expression] also showed that the 404AT group tended to feel less submissive to an angry face than did the 404AA group. Thus, a single nucleotide polymorphism of NPBWR1 seems to affect human behavior in a social context.
Manipulation of intake of serotonin precursor tryptophan has been exploited to rapidly induce and alleviate depression symptoms. While studies show that this latter effect is dependent on genetic vulnerability to depression, the effect of habitual tryptophan intake in the context of predisposing genetic factors has not been explored. Our aim was to investigate the effect of habitual tryptophan intake on mood symptoms and to determine the effect of risk variants on depression in those with high and low tryptophan intake in the whole genome and specifically in serotonin and kynurenine pathways. 63,277 individuals in the UK Biobank with data on depressive symptoms and tryptophan intake were included. We compared two subpopulations defined by their habitual diet of a low versus a high ratio of tryptophan to other large amino acids (TLR). A modest protective effect of high dietary TLR against depression was found. NPBWR1 among serotonin genes and POLI in kynurenine pathway genes were significantly associated with depression in the low but not in the high TLR group. Pathway-level analyses identified significant associations for both serotonin and kynurenine pathways only in the low TLR group. In addition, significant association was found in the low TLR group between depressive symptoms and biological process related to adult neurogenesis. Our findings demonstrate a markedly distinct genetic risk profile for depression in groups with low and high dietary TLR, with association with serotonin and kynurenine pathway variants only in case of habitual food intake leading to low TLR. Our results confirm the relevance of the serotonin hypothesis in understanding the neurobiological background of depression and highlight the importance of understanding its differential role in the context of environmental variables such as complexity of diet in influencing mental health, pointing towards emerging possibilities of personalised prevention and intervention in mood disorders in those who are genetically vulnerable.
Neuropeptide B (NPB) affects energy homeostasis and metabolism by binding and activating NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 in humans and pigs. Recently, we reported that NPB promotes the adipogenesis of rat white and brown preadipocytes as well as 3T3-L1 cells. In the present study, we evaluated the effects of NPB on the proliferation and differentiation of white porcine preadipocytes into mature adipocytes. We identified the presence of NPB, NPBWR1, and NPBWR2 on the mRNA and protein levels in porcine white preadipocytes. During the differentiation process, NPB increased the mRNA expression of PPARgamma, C/EBPbeta, C/EBPalpha, PPARgamma, and C/EBPbeta protein production in porcine preadipocytes. Furthermore, NPB stimulated lipid accumulation in porcine preadipocytes. Moreover, NPB promoted the phosphorylation of the p38 kinase in porcine preadipocytes, but failed to induce ERK1/2 phosphorylation. NPB failed to stimulate the expression of C/EBPbeta in the presence of the p38 inhibitor. Taken together, we report that NPB promotes the differentiation of porcine preadipocytes via a p38-dependent mechanism.
The synthesis and evaluation of small molecule antagonists of the G protein-coupled receptor NPBWR1 (GPR7) are reported for the first time. [4-(5-Chloropyridin-2-yl)piperazin-1-yl][(1S,2S,4R)-4-[(1R)-1-(4-methoxyphenyl)ethyl]amino-2-(thiophen-3-yl)cyclohexyl]methanone (1) emerged as a hit from a high-throughput screen. Examination of substituents that focused on replacing the 5-chloropyridine and 4-methoxybenzylamino groups of 1 led to the identification of compounds that exhibited subnanomolar potencies as low as 660pM (9k) in the functional assay and 200pM in the binding assay (9i).
In this Letter we report on the advances in our NPBWR1 antagonist program aimed at optimizing the 5-chloro-2-(3,5-dimethylphenyl)-4-(4-methoxyphenoxy)pyridazin-3(2H)-one lead molecule previously obtained from a high-throughput screening (HTS)-derived hit. Synthesis and structure-activity relationships (SAR) studies around the 3,5-dimethylphenyl and 4-methoxyphenyl regions resulted in the identification of a novel series of non-peptidic submicromolar NPBWR1 antagonists based on a 5-chloro-4-(4-alkoxyphenoxy)-2-(benzyl)pyridazin-3(2H)-one chemotype. Amongst them, 5-chloro-2-(9H-fluoren-9-yl)-4-(4-methoxyphenoxy)pyridazin-3(2H)-one 9h (CYM50769) inhibited NPW activation of NPBWR1 with a submicromolar IC(50), and displayed high selectivity against a broad array of off-targets with pharmaceutical relevance. Our medicinal chemistry study provides innovative non-peptidic selective NPBWR1 antagonists that may enable to clarify the biological role and therapeutic utility of the target receptor in the regulation of feeding behavior, pain, stress, and neuroendocrine function.
Immature spermatozoa undergo series of events in the epididymis to acquire motility and fertilizing ability. These events are a direct result of exposure to, and interaction with, the luminal environment created by the epididymal epithelium. The three conventional regions of the epididymis namely; caput, corpus and cauda have been identified to play specific roles in the epididymal maturation process of the spermatozoa; their respective roles have been associated with specific gene expression patterns that account for the composition of the luminal fluid that bathe the spermatozoa as they transit through the epididymal lumen and ensure their maturation. The identification of genes expressed in a region-specific manner provides valuable insight into the functional differences among the regions. Microarray technology has previously been employed in region-specific gene expression studies using the epididymis as a model in different species such as mouse, rat, boar and human. However, to characterize gene expression in the different regions of the epididymis, RNA-seq analysis was used in our study to examine gene expressions in the caput, corpus, and cauda of yak epididymis. Comparative transcriptomic analysis was performed between region pairs in the order; caput vs corpus, caput vs cauda and corpus vs cauda. DEGs among the various region pairs were detected and functional analysis were performed for the detected DEGs. Overall, the caput vs cauda epididymidis pair produced the highest number of DEGs (49.4%) while the corpus vs cauda pair produced the least number of DEGs (19.3%). The caput segment demonstrated relatively high expression of Sal1, LCN6, PTDS, DEFB109, DEFB 119, DEFB 123, SPAG11, PROC, CST3, ADAM28, KCNJ12 and SLC13A2; corpus epididymis demonstrated relatively high expression of MAN2B2, ELP, ZFYVE21, GLB1L, BMP4, DEFB125, PPP1R10, RIOX2, TKDP1, DEFB106A, NPBWR1 and SLC28A1; and the cauda epididymis, demonstrated relatively high expressions of MCT7, PAG4, OAS1, TGM3 and PRSS45. Gene Ontology results showed that DEGs in the caput vs corpus and corpus vs cauda pairs were mostly enriched in the cell/cell part GO term. On the other hand, DEGs in the caput vs cauda pair was were mostly enriched in the cellular process term. KEGG pathway annotation was also performed for DEGs among the various groups. AMPK signaling pathway, which is characterized by the ratio between cellular AMP and ATP and also determines cellular energy state, was selected from among the top five KEGG pathways for DEGs in the caput vs corpus pair. Our results showed that some down-regulated DEGs in the caput and corpus pair such as HN4a, eEF2K and CFTR were present and played significant roles in the AMPK signaling pathway. In the corpus vs cauda pair, our results showed that up-regulated DEGs such as XDH, TRMP2 and ENTPD were involved in the purine metabolism KEGG pathway, which was among top five KEGG pathways for DEGs in this pair. Pentose phosphate pathway functions in antioxidation to protect both the spermatozoa and epididymis from oxidative damage; it was among top five KEGG pathways for DEGs in the caput vs cauda pair. Our results also showed that down-regulated genes in the caput vs cauda pair such as TALDO1 was found to be involved in the Pentose phosphate pathway. The significance of the upregulated and downregulated genes on the pathways were elucidated. SAL1, which showed high expression in the caput, had previously not been demonstrated in the epididymis, needs further investigation to establish its unique role in the yak epididymis.
Decrease in food intake is commonly seen in the mammalian response to stress. Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) is a factor that modulates feeding behavior under these stressful conditions. We previously reported that neuropeptide B (NPB) exerts strong synergistic anorectic effects in mice when co-administered with CRF. Tissue distributions of neuropeptide B/W receptor-1 (NPBWR1) and NPB suggest that this neuropeptide system also plays a role in regulating emotion and stress responses. In this study, we examined whether the effects of NPB are altered by endogenous CRFergic tone. During the light period, NPB alone did not show any effect on feeding behavior when administered intracerebroventricularly in mice; however, NPB increased food intake when co-administered with astressin, a potent non-selective CRF receptor antagonist. On the other hand, during the dark period, administration of NPB resulted in a strong inhibition of feeding behavior. The effects were almost completely abolished when astressin was co-administered. Finally, after surgical stress, a semi-chronic stressor, NPB exerted potent anorectic effects on mice. In striking contrast, co-administration of astressin and NPB increased food intake under surgical stress conditions. These data suggest that the effects of NPB are greatly influenced by the endogenous CRFergic tone.
BACKGROUND: The neuropeptide B/W signalling system (NPB/W) has been identified in multiple body regions and is integral to several physiological processes, including the regulation of food intake and energy homeostasis. Recently, it has also been detected in human skin; however, its specific functions in this context remain to be thoroughly investigated. This study aims to identify the expression of neuropeptides B/W receptor 1 (NPBWR1) and neuropeptides B/W receptor 2 (NPBWR2) in human dermal fibroblasts of mesenchymal origin using genomic and proteomic techniques. We will also investigate the role of these receptors in cell proliferation and calcium signalling. METHODS: The mRNAs for NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 were detected using quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis and further validated by western blot and immunofluorescence analyses. Additionally, we synthesised ligands for these receptors, specifically hNPB (25-53) and hNPW (33-62), to investigate their effects on cell proliferation and intracellular calcium levels in human fibroblasts. RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that hNPW (33-62) has anti-proliferative effect on human dermal fibroblasts and concentration of 0.1-mumol/L can significantly decrease intracellular calcium levels (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: This finding suggests a potential role for the NPB/W signalling system in pathologies associated with impaired calcium handling, such as fibrosis. Furthermore, we observed that the proliferation of human fibroblasts was not affected by hNPB (25-53). Our findings could lead to the development of new therapeutic strategies for various skin conditions and improved wound healing.
The Beneficial Effects of Antenatal Magnesium clinical trial was conducted between 1997 and 2007, and demonstrated a significant reduction in cerebral palsy (CP) in preterm infants who were exposed to peripartum magnesium sulfate (MgSO4). However, the mechanism by which MgSO4 confers neuroprotection remains incompletely understood. Cord blood samples from this study were interrogated during an era when next-generation sequencing was not widely accessible and few gene expression differences or biomarkers were identified between treatment groups. Our goal was to use bulk RNA deep sequencing to identify differentially expressed genes comparing the following four groups: newborns who ultimately developed CP treated with MgSO4 or placebo, and controls (newborns who ultimately did not develop CP) treated with MgSO4 or placebo. Those who died after birth were excluded. We found that MgSO4 upregulated expression of SCN5A only in the control group, with no change in gene expression in cord blood of newborns who ultimately developed CP. Regardless of MgSO4 exposure, expression of NPBWR1 and FTO was upregulated in cord blood of newborns who ultimately developed CP compared with controls. These data support that MgSO4 may not exert its neuroprotective effect through changes in gene expression. Moreover, NPBWR1 and FTO may be useful as biomarkers and may suggest new mechanistic pathways to pursue in understanding the pathogenesis of CP. The small number of cases ultimately available for this secondary analysis, with male predominance and mild CP phenotype, is a limitation of the study. In addition, differentially expressed genes were not validated by qRT-PCR.
Neuropeptides B and W (NPB and NPW) are regulatory peptides that act via two subtypes of G protein-coupled receptors, named GPR7 and GPR8. RT-PCR demonstrated the expression of these receptors in both zona glomerulosa and zona fasciculata-reticularis (ZF/R) cells of the human adrenal cortex. NPB and NPW did not affect aldosterone secretion from dispersed zona glomerulosa cells but enhanced cortisol production from ZF/R cells, NPB being more effective than NPW. NPB evoked sizable cAMP and inositol triphosphate responses from ZF/R cells, which were abrogated by the adenylate cyclase inhibitor SQ-22536 and the phospholipase C inhibitor U-73122, respectively. Cortisol response to NPB was lowered by either SQ-22536 and the protein kinase (PK) A inhibitor H-89 or U-73122 and the PKC inhibitor calphostin-C and abolished by the simultaneous exposure to H-89 and calphostin-C. NPW elicited only a rise in cAMP production from dispersed ZF/R cells, and its cortisol response was suppressed by both SQ-22536 and H-89. PreproNPB and preproNPW mRNAs were detected in human adrenal cortexes. We conclude that: 1) NPB and NPW exert a secretagogue action on human ZF/R cells, probably acting in an autocrine-paracrine manner; and 2) the effect of NPB is mediated by both the adenylate cyclase/PKA and the phospholipase C/PKC cascades, whereas that of NPW involves only the activation of the former signaling pathway.
The habenula is a phylogenetically conserved brain structure in the epithalamus. It is a major node in the information flow between fronto-limbic brain regions and monoaminergic brainstem nuclei, and is thus anatomically and functionally ideally positioned to regulate emotional, motivational, and cognitive behaviors. Consequently, the habenula may be critically important in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders such as addiction and depression. Here we investigated the expression pattern of GPR151, a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), whose mRNA has been identified as highly and specifically enriched in habenular neurons by in situ hybridization and translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP). In the present immunohistochemical study we demonstrate a pronounced and highly specific expression of the GPR151 protein in the medial and lateral habenula of rodent brain. Specific expression was also seen in efferent habenular fibers projecting to the interpeduncular nucleus, the rostromedial tegmental area, the rhabdoid nucleus, the mesencephalic raphe nuclei, and the dorsal tegmental nucleus. Using confocal microscopy and quantitative colocalization analysis, we found that GPR151-expressing axons and terminals overlap with cholinergic, substance P-ergic, and glutamatergic markers. Virtually identical expression patterns were observed in rat, mouse, and zebrafish brains. Our data demonstrate that GPR151 is highly conserved, specific for a subdivision of the habenular neurocircuitry, and constitutes a promising novel target for psychiatric drug development.
Here, we report the discovery of a new class of NPBWR1 antagonists identified from a fragment-based screen. Compound 1 (cAMP IC(50) = 250 microM; LE = 0.29) emerged as an initial hit. Further optimization of 1 by SAR-by-catalogue and chemical modification produced 21a (cAMP IC(50) = 30 nM; LE = 0.39) with a 6700-fold increase in potency from fragment 1. Somewhat surprisingly, Schild analysis of compound 21a suggested that in vitro inhibition of NPW-mediated effects on upon cAMP accumulation were saturable, and that compound 21a dose-dependently increased [125I]-hNPW23 dissociation rate constants from NPBWR1 in kinetic binding studies. Collectively, these data are inconsistent with a classic surmountable, orthosteric mechanism of inhibition. The benzimidazole inhibitors reported herein may therefore represent a mechanistically differentiated class of compounds with which to form a better appreciation of the pharmacology and physiological roles of this central neuropeptide system.
HIV-1 Tat is a potent neurotoxic protein that is released by HIV-1 infected cells in the brain and perturbs neuronal homeostasis, causing a broad range of neurological disorders in people living with HIV-1. Furthermore, the effects of Tat have been addressed in numerous studies to investigate the molecular events associated with neuronal cells survival and death. Here, we discovered that exposure of rat primary neurons to Tat resulted in the up-regulation of an uncharacterized long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), LOC102549805 (lncRNA-U1). Our observations showed that increased expression of lncRNA-U1 in neurons disrupts bioenergetic pathways by dysregulating homeostasis of Ca(2+), mitigating mitochondrial oxygen reduction, and decreasing ATP production, all of which point mitochondrial impairment in neurons via the Tat-mediated lncRNA-U1 induction. These changes were associated with imbalances in autophagy and apoptosis pathways. Additionally, this study showed the ability of Tat to modulate expression of the neuropeptide B/W receptor 1 (NPBWR1) gene via up-regulation of lncRNA-U1. Collectively, our results identified Tat-mediated lncRNA-U1 upregulation resulting in disruption of neuronal homeostasis.
