NPC1-like intracellular cholesterol transporter 1; Plays a major role in cholesterol homeostasis. Is critical for the uptake of cholesterol across the plasma membrane of the intestinal enterocyte. Is the direct molecular target of ezetimibe, a drug that inhibits cholesterol absorption. Lack of activity leads to multiple lipid transport defects. The protein may have a function in the transport of multiple lipids and their homeostasis, and may play a critical role in regulating lipid metabolism. Acts as a negative regulator of NPC2 and down-regulates its expression and secretion by inhib [...] 
OBJECTIVE: Cholesterol is an important molecule in humans and both its excess and its deficiency cause disease. Most clinicians appreciate its role in stabilizing cellular plasma membranes but are unaware of its myriad other functions. METHODS: This review highlights cholesterol's newly recognized important roles in human physiology and pathophysiology. RESULTS: The basis for cholesterol's ubiquitous presence in eukaryote organisms is its three part structure involving hydrophilic, hydrophobic, and rigid domains. This structure permits cholesterol to regulate multiple cellular processes ranging from membrane fluidity and permeability to gene transcription. Cholesterol not only serves as a molecule of regulation itself, but also forms the backbone of all steroid hormones and vitamin D analogs. Cholesterol is responsible for growth and development throughout life and may be useful as an anticancer facilitator. Because humans have a limited ability to catabolize cholesterol, it readily accumulates in the body when an excess from the diet or a genetic abnormality occurs. This accumulation results in the foremost cause of death and disease (atherosclerosis) in the Western world. Identification of cholesterol's disease-producing capabilities dates back 5,000 years to the Tyrolean iceman and more recently to ancient mummies from many cultures throughout the world. In contrast, a deficiency of cholesterol in the circulation may result in an inability to distribute vitamins K and E to vital organs with serious consequences. CONCLUSION: Understanding the benefits and hazards of cholesterol in the clinical setting will improve the endocrinologist's ability to control diseases associated with this unique molecule. ABBREVIATIONS: CVD = cardiovascular disease; HDL = high-density lipoprotein; LDL = low-density lipoprotein; NPC1L1 = Niemann-Pick C-1-like-1 protein; U.S. = United States; USDA = U.S. Department of Agriculture.
BACKGROUND: Lipid metabolism plays an important role in viral infections. We aimed to assess the causal effect of lipid-lowering drugs (HMGCR inhibitiors, PCSK9 inhibitiors, and NPC1L1 inhibitior) on COVID-19 outcomes using two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) study. METHODS: We used two kinds of genetic instruments to proxy the exposure of lipid-lowering drugs, including expression quantitative trait loci of drugs target genes, and genetic variants within or nearby drugs target genes associated with low-density lipoprotein (LDL cholesterol from genome-wide association study). Summary-data-based MR (SMR) and inverse-variance-weighted MR (IVW-MR) were used to calculate the effect estimates. RESULTS: SMR analysis found that a higher expression of HMGCR was associated with a higher risk of COVID-19 hospitalization (odds ratio [OR] = 1.38, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.06-1.81). Similarly, IVW-MR analysis observed a positive association between HMGCR-mediated LDL cholesterol and COVID-19 hospitalization (OR = 1.32, 95% CI = 1.00-1.74). No consistent evidence from both analyses was found for other associations. CONCLUSIONS: This two-sample MR study suggested a potential causal relationship between HMGCR inhibition and the reduced risk of COVID-19 hospitalization. FUNDING: Start-up Fund for high-level talents of Fujian Medical University.
IMPORTANCE: Lipid pathways have been implicated in the pathogenesis of psoriasis, and some lipid-lowering drugs, such as statins, are hypothesized to have disease-modifying properties. However, large population-level studies are scarce, and causal interpretation of results from traditional observational designs is limited by confounding. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the causal association between genetically proxied lipid-lowering drugs and psoriasis risk. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This 2-sample mendelian randomization study was performed from August to October 2022 and included population-level genome-wide association studies of psoriasis in the UK Biobank and FinnGen studies and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) by the Global Lipids Genetics Consortium. The inverse variance-weighted method was used with pleiotropy robust methods and colocalization as sensitivity analyses. EXPOSURES: Genetically proxied inhibition of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMGCR, targeted by statins), Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1, targeted by ezetimibe), and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9, targeted by, eg, alirocumab), using LDL as the biomarker. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Risk of psoriasis. RESULTS: Data from 12 116 patients with psoriasis and approximately 1.3 million individuals with LDL measurement were analyzed. Genetically proxied PCSK9 inhibition was associated with reduced risk of psoriasis (odds ratio, 0.69 per standard deviation reduction in LDL; 95% CI, 0.55-0.88; P = .003), which was replicated in FinnGen (odds ratio, 0.71; 95% CI, 0.57-0.88; P = .002). Sensitivity analyses did not provide statistical evidence of bias from pleiotropy or genetic confounding. No robust association was found for HMGCR or NPC1L1 inhibition. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This mendelian randomization study suggests that PCSK9 is implicated in psoriasis pathogenesis, and its inhibition is associated with reduced psoriasis risk. These findings potentially pave the way for future studies that may allow personalized selection of lipid-lowering drugs for those at risk of psoriasis.
AIMS: Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ACVD) is a major cause of mortality and morbidity worldwide, and increased low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) play a critical role in development and progression of atherosclerosis. Here, we examined for the first time gut immunomodulatory effects of the microbiota-derived metabolite propionic acid (PA) on intestinal cholesterol metabolism. METHODS AND RESULTS: Using both human and animal model studies, we demonstrate that treatment with PA reduces blood total and LDL cholesterol levels. In apolipoprotein E-/- (Apoe-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD), PA reduced intestinal cholesterol absorption and aortic atherosclerotic lesion area. Further, PA increased regulatory T-cell numbers and interleukin (IL)-10 levels in the intestinal microenvironment, which in turn suppressed the expression of Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (Npc1l1), a major intestinal cholesterol transporter. Blockade of IL-10 receptor signalling attenuated the PA-related reduction in total and LDL cholesterol and augmented atherosclerotic lesion severity in the HFD-fed Apoe-/- mice. To translate these preclinical findings to humans, we conducted a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled human study (clinical trial no. NCT03590496). Oral supplementation with 500 mg of PA twice daily over the course of 8 weeks significantly reduced LDL [-15.9 mg/dL (-8.1%) vs. -1.6 mg/dL (-0.5%), P = 0.016], total [-19.6 mg/dL (-7.3%) vs. -5.3 mg/dL (-1.7%), P = 0.014] and non-high-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels [PA vs. placebo: -18.9 mg/dL (-9.1%) vs. -0.6 mg/dL (-0.5%), P = 0.002] in subjects with elevated baseline LDL cholesterol levels. CONCLUSION: Our findings reveal a novel immune-mediated pathway linking the gut microbiota-derived metabolite PA with intestinal Npc1l1 expression and cholesterol homeostasis. The results highlight the gut immune system as a potential therapeutic target to control dyslipidaemia that may introduce a new avenue for prevention of ACVDs.
Intestinal absorption is an important contributor to systemic cholesterol homeostasis. Niemann-Pick C1 Like 1 (NPC1L1) assists in the initial step of dietary cholesterol uptake, but how cholesterol moves downstream of NPC1L1 is unknown. We show that Aster-B and Aster-C are critical for nonvesicular cholesterol movement in enterocytes. Loss of NPC1L1 diminishes accessible plasma membrane (PM) cholesterol and abolishes Aster recruitment to the intestinal brush border. Enterocytes lacking Asters accumulate PM cholesterol and show endoplasmic reticulum cholesterol depletion. Aster-deficient mice have impaired cholesterol absorption and are protected against diet-induced hypercholesterolemia. Finally, the Aster pathway can be targeted with a small-molecule inhibitor to manipulate cholesterol uptake. These findings identify the Aster pathway as a physiologically important and pharmacologically tractable node in dietary lipid absorption.
Large-scale molecular profiling and genotyping provide a unique opportunity to systematically compare the genetically predicted effects of therapeutic targets on the human metabolome. We firstly constructed genetic risk scores for 8 drug targets on the basis that they primarily modify low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (HMGCR, PCKS9, and NPC1L1), high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol (CETP), or triglycerides (APOC3, ANGPTL3, ANGPTL4, and LPL). Conducting mendelian randomisation (MR) provided strong evidence of an effect of drug-based genetic scores on coronary artery disease (CAD) risk with the exception of ANGPTL3. We then systematically estimated the effects of each score on 249 metabolic traits derived using blood samples from an unprecedented sample size of up to 115,082 UK Biobank participants. Genetically predicted effects were generally consistent among drug targets, which were intended to modify the same lipoprotein lipid trait. For example, the linear fit for the MR estimates on all 249 metabolic traits for genetically predicted inhibition of LDL cholesterol lowering targets HMGCR and PCSK9 was r2 = 0.91. In contrast, comparisons between drug classes that were designed to modify discrete lipoprotein traits typically had very different effects on metabolic signatures (for instance, HMGCR versus each of the 4 triglyceride targets all had r2 < 0.02). Furthermore, we highlight this discrepancy for specific metabolic traits, for example, finding that LDL cholesterol lowering therapies typically had a weak effect on glycoprotein acetyls, a marker of inflammation, whereas triglyceride modifying therapies assessed provided evidence of a strong effect on lowering levels of this inflammatory biomarker. Our findings indicate that genetically predicted perturbations of these drug targets on the blood metabolome can drastically differ, despite largely consistent effects on risk of CAD, with potential implications for biomarkers in clinical development and measuring treatment response.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the causal role of lipid or apolipoprotein traits in intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) and determine the effect of lipid-lowering interventions on the disease. METHODS: Two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses were conducted to evaluate the associations of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglycerides (TG), apolipoprotein (Apo)B and ApoA1 levels with risks for ICH, and those of LDL-C- (HMGCR, PCSK9, and NPC1L1) and TG-lowering targets (LPL and APOC3) with ICH. RESULTS: Increased levels of ApoB was associated with a decreased risk of overall ICH (OR 0.623, 95% CI 0.413-0.940; p = 0.024) and lobar ICH (OR 0.579, 95% CI 0.342-0.979; p = 0.042). The inverse relationship remained stable in multivariable MR. In addition, elevated TGs showed a causal effect on lobar ICH in multivariable MR (OR 1.600, 95% CI 1.009-2.537; p = 0.046). The LDL-C-reducing genetic variation alleles at or near the HMGCR gene (mimicking the effect of statins) were predicted to increase the overall and deep ICH risk. Additionally, genetic variation at or near the APOC3 gene suggested that genetically reducing the activity of APOC3 (mimicking antisense anti-apoC3 agents) was predicted to decrease lobar ICH. INTERPRETATION: Genetically predicted elevated ApoB may have a protective effect on overall ICH and lobar ICH, whereas elevated TG was associated with a higher risk of lobar ICH conditional on LDL-C and ApoB. MR analysis supports the conclusion that statins may increase the risk of overall and deep ICH independent of their lipid-lowering effect. More specific lipid-lowering targets may end up being the future. ANN NEUROL 2022;92:390-399.
A high concentration of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) is a major risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Although LDL-C levels vary among humans and are heritable, the genetic factors affecting LDL-C are not fully characterized. We identified a rare frameshift variant in the LIMA1 (also known as EPLIN or SREBP3) gene from a Chinese family of Kazakh ethnicity with inherited low LDL-C and reduced cholesterol absorption. In a mouse model, LIMA1 was mainly expressed in the small intestine and localized on the brush border membrane. LIMA1 bridged NPC1L1, an essential protein for cholesterol absorption, to a transportation complex containing myosin Vb and facilitated cholesterol uptake. Similar to the human phenotype, Lima1-deficient mice displayed reduced cholesterol absorption and were resistant to diet-induced hypercholesterolemia. Through our study of both mice and humans, we identify LIMA1 as a key protein regulating intestinal cholesterol absorption.
Accumulating observational studies suggested that hypercholesterolemia is associated with vascular dementia (VaD); however, the causality between them remains unclear. Hence, the aim of this study is to infer causal associations of circulating lipid-related traits [including high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglyceride (TG), apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), and apolipoprotein B (apoB)] with VaD jointly using univariable MR (uvMR), multivariable MR (mvMR) and bidirectional two-sample MR methods. Then, the summary-data-based MR (SMR) and two-sample MR analysis were conducted to investigate the association of lipid-lowering drugs target genes expression (including HMGCR, PCSK9, NPC1L1, and APOB) and LDL-C level mediated by these target genes with VaD. The results of forward MR analyses found that genetically predicted HDL-C, LDL-C, TG, apoA-I, and apoB concentrations were not significantly associated with the risk of VaD (all p > 0.05). Notably, there was suggestive evidence for a causal effect of genetically predicted VaD on HDL-C via reverse MR analysis [odds ratio (OR), 0.997; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.994-0.999; p = 0.022]. On the contrary, the MR results showed no significant relationship between VaD with LDL-C, TG, apoA-I, and apoB. The results for the SMR method found that there was no evidence of association for expression of HMGCR, PCSK9, NPC1L1, and APOB gene with risk of VaD. Furthermore, the result of MR analysis provided evidence for the decreased LDL-C level mediated by gene HMGCR reduced the risk of VaD (OR, 18.381; 95% CI, 2.092-161.474; p = 0.009). Oppositely, none of the IVW methods indicated any causal effects for the other three genes. Using genetic data, this study provides evidence that the VaD risk may cause a reduction of HDL-C level. Additionally, the finding supports the hypothesis that lowering LDL-C levels using statins may be an effective prevention strategy for VaD risk, which requires clinical trials to confirm this result in the future.
PURPOSE: The relationship between dyslipidemia and female reproductive endocrine diseases has been increasingly studied. The use of lipid-lowering drugs in treating various related diseases, including coronary heart disease, may affect female reproductive endocrine diseases. Therefore, our study aims to investigate the effects of lipid-lowering drugs on female reproductive endocrine diseases and provide a basis for the appropriate selection of drugs. METHODS: In this study, we focused on three drug targets of statins, namely HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR) inhibitors, proprotein convertase kexin 9 (PCSK9) inhibitors, and Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1) inhibitors. To identify potential inhibitors for these targets, we collected single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with HMGCR, PCSK9, and NPC1L1 from published genome-wide association study statistics. Subsequently, we conducted a drug target Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to investigate the effects of these inhibitors on reproductive endocrine diseases mediated by low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels. Alongside coronary heart disease as a positive control, our main outcomes of interest included the risk of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), premature ovarian insufficiency (POI), premenstrual syndrome (PMS), abnormal uterine bleeding (including menorrhagia and oligomenorrhea), and infertility. RESULTS: PCSK9 inhibitors significantly increased the risk of infertility in patients (OR [95%CI] = 1.14 [1.06, 1.23], p<0.05). In contrast, HMGCR inhibitors significantly reduced the risk of menorrhagia in female patients (OR [95%CI] = 0.85 [0.75, 0.97], p<0.05), but had no statistical impact on patients with oligomenorrhea. CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that PCSK9 inhibitors may significantly increase the risk of infertility in patients. On the other hand, HMGCR inhibitors could potentially offer protection against menorrhagia in women. However, no effects of lipid-lowering drugs have been observed on other reproductive endocrine disorders, such as PCOS, POF, PMS and oligomenorrhea.
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PrCa) is the second most prevalent malignancy in men worldwide. Observational studies have linked the use of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) lowering therapies with reduced risk of PrCa, which may potentially be attributable to confounding factors. In this study, we performed a drug target Mendelian randomisation (MR) analysis to evaluate the association of genetically proxied inhibition of LDL-c-lowering drug targets on risk of PrCa. METHODS AND FINDINGS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with LDL-c (P < 5 x 10-8) from the Global Lipids Genetics Consortium genome-wide association study (GWAS) (N = 1,320,016) and located in and around the HMGCR, NPC1L1, and PCSK9 genes were used to proxy the therapeutic inhibition of these targets. Summary-level data regarding the risk of total, advanced, and early-onset PrCa were obtained from the PRACTICAL consortium. Validation analyses were performed using genetic instruments from an LDL-c GWAS conducted on male UK Biobank participants of European ancestry (N = 201,678), as well as instruments selected based on liver-derived gene expression and circulation plasma levels of targets. We also investigated whether putative mediators may play a role in findings for traits previously implicated in PrCa risk (i.e., lipoprotein a (Lp(a)), body mass index (BMI), and testosterone). Applying two-sample MR using the inverse-variance weighted approach provided strong evidence supporting an effect of genetically proxied inhibition of PCSK9 (equivalent to a standard deviation (SD) reduction in LDL-c) on lower risk of total PrCa (odds ratio (OR) = 0.85, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.76 to 0.96, P = 9.15 x 10-3) and early-onset PrCa (OR = 0.70, 95% CI = 0.52 to 0.95, P = 0.023). Genetically proxied HMGCR inhibition provided a similar central effect estimate on PrCa risk, although with a wider 95% CI (OR = 0.83, 95% CI = 0.62 to 1.13, P = 0.244), whereas genetically proxied NPC1L1 inhibition had an effect on higher PrCa risk with a 95% CI that likewise included the null (OR = 1.34, 95% CI = 0.87 to 2.04, P = 0.180). Analyses using male-stratified instruments provided consistent results. Secondary MR analyses supported a genetically proxied effect of liver-specific PCSK9 expression (OR = 0.90 per SD reduction in PCSK9 expression, 95% CI = 0.86 to 0.95, P = 5.50 x 10-5) and circulating plasma levels of PCSK9 (OR = 0.93 per SD reduction in PCSK9 protein levels, 95% CI = 0.87 to 0.997, P = 0.04) on PrCa risk. Colocalization analyses identified strong evidence (posterior probability (PPA) = 81.3%) of a shared genetic variant (rs553741) between liver-derived PCSK9 expression and PrCa risk, whereas weak evidence was found for HMGCR (PPA = 0.33%) and NPC1L1 expression (PPA = 0.38%). Moreover, genetically proxied PCSK9 inhibition was strongly associated with Lp(a) levels (Beta = -0.08, 95% CI = -0.12 to -0.05, P = 1.00 x 10-5), but not BMI or testosterone, indicating a possible role for Lp(a) in the biological mechanism underlying the association between PCSK9 and PrCa. Notably, we emphasise that our estimates are based on a lifelong exposure that makes direct comparisons with trial results challenging. CONCLUSIONS: Our study supports a strong association between genetically proxied inhibition of PCSK9 and a lower risk of total and early-onset PrCa, potentially through an alternative mechanism other than the on-target effect on LDL-c. Further evidence from clinical studies is needed to confirm this finding as well as the putative mediatory role of Lp(a).
The polytopic transmembrane protein, Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1), is enriched in the apical membrane of small intestine absorptive enterocytes where it mediates extracellular sterol transport across the brush border membrane. It is essential for intestinal sterol absorption and is the molecular target of ezetimibe, a potent cholesterol absorption inhibitor that lowers blood cholesterol in humans. NPC1L1 is also highly expressed in human liver. The hepatic function of NPC1L1 may be to limit excessive biliary cholesterol loss. NPC1L1-dependent sterol uptake seems to be a clathrin-mediated endocytic process and is regulated by cellular cholesterol content. Recently, NPC1L1 inhibition has been shown to have beneficial effects on components of the metabolic syndrome, such as obesity, insulin resistance, and fatty liver, in addition to atherosclerosis.
AIMS: The aims of the present study were to assess the effects of lipid-lowering drugs [HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors, and Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1 (NPC1L1) inhibitors] on novel subtypes of adult-onset diabetes through a Mendelian randomisation study. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We first inferred causal associations between lipid-related traits [including high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglycerides (TG), apolipoproteins A-I, and apolipoproteins B] and novel subtypes of adult-onset diabetes. The expression quantitative trait loci of drug target genes for three classes of lipid-lowering drugs, as well as genetic variants within or nearby drug target genes associated with LDL-C, were then utilised as proxies for the exposure of lipid-lowering drugs. Mendelian randomisation analysis was performed using summary data from genome-wide association studies of LDL-C, severe autoimmune diabetes, severe insulin-deficient diabetes (SIDD), severe insulin-resistant diabetes (SIRD), mild obesity-related diabetes (MOD), and mild age-related diabetes. RESULTS: There was an association between HMGCR-mediated LDL-C and the risk of SIRD [odds ratio (OR) = 0.305, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.129-0.723; p = 0.007], and there was an association of PCSK9-mediated LDL-C with the risk of SIDD (OR = 0.253, 95% CI = 0.120-0.532; p < 0.001) and MOD (OR = 0.345, 95% CI = 0.171-0.696; p = 0.003). Moreover, NPC1L1-mediated LDL-C (OR = 0.109, 95% CI = 0.019-0.613; p = 0.012) and the increased expression of NPC1L1 gene in blood (OR = 0.727, 95% CI = 0.541-0.977; p = 0.034) both showed a significant association with SIRD. These results were further confirmed by sensitivity analyses. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, the different lipid-lowering medications have a specific effect on the increased risk of different novel subtypes of adult-onset diabetes.
BACKGROUND: The effects of lipid-lowering drug targets on different ischemic stroke subtypes are not fully understood. We aimed to explore the mechanisms by which lipid-lowering drug targets differentially affect the risk of ischemic stroke subtypes and their underlying pathophysiology. METHODS: Using a 2-sample Mendelian randomization approach, we assessed the effects of genetically proxied low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) and 3 clinically approved LDL-lowering drugs (HMGCR [3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase], PCSK9 [proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9], and NPC1L1 [Niemann-Pick C1-Like 1]) on stroke subtypes and brain imaging biomarkers associated with small vessel stroke (SVS), including white matter hyperintensity volume and perivascular spaces. RESULTS: In genome-wide Mendelian randomization analyses, lower genetically predicted LDL-c was significantly associated with a reduced risk of any stroke, ischemic stroke, and large artery stroke, supporting previous findings. Significant associations between genetically predicted LDL-c and cardioembolic stroke, SVS, and biomarkers, perivascular space and white matter hyperintensity volume, were not identified in this study. In drug-target Mendelian randomization analysis, genetically proxied reduced LDL-c through NPC1L1 inhibition was associated with lower odds of perivascular space (odds ratio per 1-mg/dL decrease, 0.79 [95% CI, 0.67-0.93]) and with lower odds of SVS (odds ratio, 0.29 [95% CI, 0.10-0.85]). CONCLUSIONS: This study provides supporting evidence of a potentially protective effect of LDL-c lowering through NPC1L1 inhibition on perivascular space and SVS risk, highlighting novel therapeutic targets for SVS.
Our knowledge of the uptake and transport of dietary fat and fat-soluble vitamins has advanced considerably. Researchers have identified several new mechanisms by which lipids are taken up by enterocytes and packaged as chylomicrons for export into the lymphatic system or clarified the actions of mechanisms previously known to participate in these processes. Fatty acids are taken up by enterocytes involving protein-mediated as well as protein-independent processes. Net cholesterol uptake depends on the competing activities of NPC1L1, ABCG5, and ABCG8 present in the apical membrane. We have considerably more detailed information about the uptake of products of lipid hydrolysis, the active transport systems by which they reach the endoplasmic reticulum, the mechanisms by which they are resynthesized into neutral lipids and utilized within the endoplasmic reticulum to form lipoproteins, and the mechanisms by which lipoproteins are secreted from the basolateral side of the enterocyte. apoB and MTP are known to be central to the efficient assembly and secretion of lipoproteins. In recent studies, investigators found that cholesterol, phospholipids, and vitamin E can also be secreted from enterocytes as components of high-density apoB-free/apoAI-containing lipoproteins. Several of these advances will probably be investigated further for their potential as targets for the development of drugs that can suppress cholesterol absorption, thereby reducing the risk of hypercholesterolemia and cardiovascular disease.
BACKGROUND: Cholesterol, derived from two different sources of endogenous synthesis and diet, is essential for the growth and maintenance of mammalian cells. However, elevated level of serum cholesterol is among the associated risk factors for the coronary heart disease. Statins can reduce endogenous sterol synthesis by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase, whereas cholesterol absorption inhibitors, such as ezetimibe, can block cholesterol uptake from dietary sources by blocking Niemann- Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1). OBJECTIVE: The present review focuses on the main research progress of cholesterol absorption inhibitors, the structure of NPC1L1 and discovery of novel chemical entities by virtual screening. CONCLUSION: Studies on the structure-activity relationship reveal that azetidinone is important to maintain activity in azetidinone derivatives and the novel heterocyclic compounds with replacement of beta-lactam scaffold by oxazolidinone also show similar activity as ezetimibe. Moreover, virtual screening is a computer-aided molecular design tool to propose novel cholesterol absorption inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Despite the widespread use of statins, newer lipid-lowering drugs have been emerging. It remains unclear how the long-term use of novel lipid-lowering drugs affects the occurrence of cancers and age-related diseases. METHODS: A drug-target Mendelian randomization study was performed. Genetic variants of nine lipid-lowering drug-target genes (HMGCR, PCKS9, NPC1L1, LDLR, APOB, CETP, LPL, APOC3, and ANGPTL3) were extracted as exposures from the summary data of Global Lipids Genetics Consortium Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS). GWAS summary data of cancers and noncancerous diseases were used as outcomes. The inverse-variance weighted method was applied as the main statistical approach. Sensitivity tests were conducted to evaluate the robustness, pleiotropy, and heterogeneity of the results. RESULTS: In addition to marked effects on decreased risks of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases, genetically proxied lipid-lowering variants of PCKS9, CETP, LPL, LDLR, and APOC3 were associated with longer human lifespans (q<0.05). Lipid-lowering variants of ANGPTL3 and LDLR were associated with reduced risks of colorectal cancer, and ANGPTL3 was also associated with lower risks of gastric cancer (q<0.05). Lipid-lowering LPL variants were associated with decreased risks of hypertension, type 2 diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and bladder cancer (q<0.05). Lipid-lowering variants of PCKS9 and HMGCR were associated with decreased risks of osteoporosis (q<0.05). Lipid-lowering APOB variants were associated with a decreased risk of thyroid cancer (q<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides genetic evidence that newer nonstatin lipid-lowering agents have causal effects on decreased risks of several common cancers and cardiometabolic diseases. These data provide genetic insights into the potential benefits of newer nonstatin therapies.
Non-cholesterol sterols have been used as markers of cholesterol intestinal absorption and hepatic synthesis, leading to a better understanding of cholesterol homeostasis in humans. This review discusses the main noncholesterol sterols that are clinically useful, different methods to quantify the factors associated with blood concentration, and the potential role of non-cholesterol sterols in the diagnosis and treatment of different types of dyslipidemia. The main indication is the use of non-cholesterol sterols for the diagnosis of rare diseases associated with defects in cholesterol synthesis or anomalies in the absorption and/or elimination of phytosterols. However, other potential uses, including the diagnosis of certain hypercholesterolemias and the individualization of lipid-lowering therapies, are promising as they could help treat a wider population.
BACKGROUND: Cholesterol gallstone disease is a common disease. Reducing cholesterol burden is important to prevent/treat gallstone. In this study, we investigated the application of diosgenin (DG) to prevent the formation of gallstone in mice. METHODS: Adult male C57BL/6J mice were fed with the lithogenic diet (LD) only or LD supplemented with DG or ezetimibe for 8 weeks. Incidences of gallstone formation were documented. Intestine and liver tissues were collected to measure the lipid contents and expression of genes in cholesterol metabolism. Caco2 cells were treated with DG to monitor the regulation on cholesterol absorption and the transcriptional regulation of Npc1l1 gene. Changes of gut microbiota by DG was analyzed. Intraperitoneal injection of LPS on mice was performed to verify its effects on STAT3 activation and Npc1l1 expression in the small intestine. RESULTS: LD led to 100% formation of gallstones in mice. In comparison, dietary DG or ezetimibe supplementary completely prevents gallstones formation. DG inhibited intestinal cholesterol absorption in mice as well as in Caco2 cells by down-regulation of Npc1l1 expression. DG could directly inhibit phosphorylation of STAT3 and its transcriptional regulation of Npc1l1 expression. Furthermore, DG could modulate gut microbiota profiles and LPS mediated STAT3 activation and Npc1l1 expression. CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that dietary DG could inhibit intestinal cholesterol absorption through decreasing NPC1L1 expression to prevent cholesterol gallstone formation.
BACKGROUND: The causal associations of lipids and the drug target genes with atrial fibrillation (AF) risk remain obscure. We aimed to investigate the causal associations using genetic evidence. METHODS: Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses were conducted using summary-level genome-wide association studies (GWASs) in European and East Asian populations. Lipid profiles (low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglyceride, and lipoprotein[a]) and lipid-modifying drug target genes (3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9, NPC1-like intracellular cholesterol transporter 1, apolipoprotein C3, angiopoietin-like 3, and lipoprotein[a]) were used as exposures. AF was used as an outcome. The inverse variance weighted method was applied as the primary method. Summary-data-based Mendelian randomization analyses were performed for further validation using expression quantitative trait loci data. Mediation analyses were conducted to explore the indirect effect of coronary heart disease. RESULTS: In the European population, MR analyses demonstrated that elevated levels of lipoprotein(a) increased AF risk. Moreover, analyses focusing on drug targets revealed that the genetically proxied target gene LPA, which simulates the effects of drug intervention by reducing lipoprotein(a), exhibited an association with AF risk. This association was validated in independent datasets. There were no consistent and significant associations observed for other traits when analyzed in different datasets. This finding was also corroborated by Summary-data-based Mendelian randomization analyses between LPA and AF. Mediation analyses revealed that coronary heart disease plays a mediating role in this association. However, in the East Asian population, no statistically significant evidence was observed to support these associations. CONCLUSIONS: This study provided genetic evidence that Lp(a) may be a causal factor for AF and that LPA may represent a promising pharmacological target for preventing AF in the European population.
