Neuropeptide FF receptor 2; Receptor for NPAF (A-18-F-amide) and NPFF (F-8-F-amide) neuropeptides, also known as morphine-modulating peptides. Can also be activated by a variety of naturally occurring or synthetic FMRF-amide like ligands. This receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system.
Epigenetic mechanisms have been hypothesized to play a role in the etiology of major depressive disorder (MDD). In this study, we performed a meta-analysis between two case-control MDD cohorts to identify differentially methylated positions (DMPs) and differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in MDD. Using samples from two Cohorts (a total of 298 MDD cases and 63 controls with repeated samples, on average ~ 1.8 samples/subject), we performed an EWAS meta-analysis. Multiple cytosine-phosphate-guanine sites annotated to TNNT3 were associated with MDD reaching study-wide significance, including cg08337959 (p = 2.3 x 10(-11)). Among DMPs with association p values less than 0.0001, pathways from REACTOME such as Ras activation upon Ca(2+) influx through the NMDA receptor (p = 0.0001, p-adjusted = 0.05) and long-term potentiation (p = 0.0002, p-adjusted = 0.05) were enriched in this study. A total of 127 DMRs with Sidak-corrected p value < 0.05 were identified from the meta-analysis, including DMRs annotated to TNNT3 (chr11: 1948933 to 1949130 [6 probes], Sidak corrected P value = 4.32 x 10(-41)), S100A13 (chr1: 153599479 to 153600972 [22 probes], Sidak corrected P value = 5.32 x 10(-18)), NRXN1 (chr2: 50201413 to 50201505 [4 probes], Sidak corrected P value = 1.19 x 10(-11)), IL17RA (chr22: 17564750 to 17565149, Sidak corrected P value = 9.31 x 10(-8)), and NPFFR2 (chr4: 72897565 to 72898212, Sidak corrected P value = 8.19 x 10(-7)). Using 2 Cohorts of depression case-control samples, we identified DMPs and DMRs associated with MDD. The molecular pathways implicated by these data include mechanisms involved in neuronal synaptic plasticity, calcium signaling, and inflammation, consistent with reports from previous genetic and protein biomarker studies indicating that these mechanisms are involved in the neurobiology of depression.
Gonadotropin-inhibitory hormone (GnIH) is a neuropeptide inhibitor of gonadotropin secretion, which was first identified in the Japanese quail hypothalamus. GnIH peptides share a C-terminal LPXRFamide (X=L or Q) motif in most vertebrates. The receptor for GnIH (GnIHR) is the seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor 147 (GPR147) that inhibits cAMP production. GPR147 is also named neuropeptide FF (NPFF) receptor 1 (NPFFR1), because it also binds NPFF that has a C-terminal PQRFamide motif. To understand the evolutionary history of the GnIH system in the animal kingdom, we searched for receptors structurally similar to GnIHR in the genome of six mammals (human, mouse, rat, cattle, cat, and rabbit), five birds (pigeon, chicken, turkey, budgerigar, and zebra finch), one reptile (green anole), one amphibian (Western clawed flog), six fishes (zebrafish, Nile tilapia, Fugu, coelacanth, spotted gar, and lamprey), one hemichordate (acorn worm), one echinoderm (purple sea urchin), one mollusk (California sea hare), seven insects (pea aphid, African malaria mosquito, honey bee, buff-tailed bumblebee, fruit fly, jewel wasp, and red flour beetle), one cnidarian (hydra), and constructed phylogenetic trees by neighbor joining (NJ) and maximum likelihood (ML) methods. A multiple sequence alignment of the receptors showed highly conserved seven-transmembrane domains as well as disulfide bridge sites between the first and second extracellular loops, including the receptor of hydra. Both NJ and ML analyses grouped the receptors of vertebrates into NPFFR1 and NPFFR2 (GPR74), and the receptors of insects into the receptor for SIFamide peptides that share a C-terminal YRKPPFNGSIFamide motif. Although human, quail and zebrafish GnIHR (NPFFR1) were most structurally similar to SIFamide receptor of fruit fly in the Famide peptide (FMRFamide, neuropeptide F, short neuropeptide F, drosulfakinin, myosuppressin, SIFamide) receptor families, the amino acid sequences and the peptide coding regions of GnIH precursors were most similar to FMRFamide precursor of fruit fly in the precursors of Famide peptide families. Chromosome synteny analysis of the precursor genes of human, quail and zebrafish GnIH and fruit fly Famide peptides further identified conserved synteny in vertebrate GnIH and fruit fly FMRFa precursor genes as well as other Famide peptide precursor genes. These results suggest that GnIH and its receptor pair and SIFamide and its receptor pair may have diverged and co-evolved independently in vertebrates and insects, respectively, from their ancestral Famide peptide and its receptor pair, during diversification and evolution of deuterostomian and protostomian species.
Neuropeptide FF (NPFF) belongs to the RFamide peptide family. NPFF regulates a variety of physiological functions by binding to a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), NPFFR2. Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a leading cause of death among gynecological malignancies. The pathogenesis of EOC can be regulated by many local factors, including neuropeptides, through an autocrine/paracrine manner. However, to date, the expression and/or function of NPFF/NPFFR2 in EOC is undetermined. In this study, we show that the upregulation of NPFFR2 mRNA was associated with poor overall survival in EOC. The TaqMan probe-based RT-qPCR showed that NPFF and NPFFR2 were expressed in three human EOC cells, CaOV3, OVCAR3, and SKOV3. In comparison, NPFF and NPFFR2 expression levels were higher in SKOV3 cells than in CaOV3 or OVCAR3 cells. Treatment of SKOV3 cells with NPFF did not affect cell viability and proliferation but stimulated cell invasion. NPFF treatment upregulates matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) expression. Using the siRNA-mediated knockdown approach, we showed that the stimulatory effect of NPFF on MMP-9 expression was mediated by the NPFFR2. Our results also showed that ERK1/2 signaling was activated in SKOV3 cells in response to the NPFF treatment. In addition, blocking the activation of ERK1/2 signaling abolished the NPFF-induced MMP-9 expression and cell invasion. This study provides evidence that NPFF stimulates EOC cell invasion by upregulating MMP-9 expression through the NPFFR2-mediated ERK1/2 signaling pathway.
The kidney and brain play critical roles in the regulation of blood pressure. Neuropeptide FF (NPFF), originally isolated from the bovine brain, has been suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of hypertension. However, the roles of NPFF and its receptors, NPFF-R1 and NPFF-R2, in the regulation of blood pressure, via the kidney, are not known. In this study, we found that the transcripts and proteins of NPFF and its receptors, NPFF-R1 and NPFF-R2, were expressed in mouse and human renal proximal tubules (RPTs). In mouse RPT cells (RPTCs), NPFF, but not RF-amide-related peptide-2 (RFRP-2), decreased the forskolin-stimulated cAMP production in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. Furthermore, dopamine D1-like receptors colocalized and co-immunoprecipitated with NPFF-R1 and NPFF-R2 in human RPTCs. The increase in cAMP production in human RPTCs caused by fenoldopam, a D1-like receptor agonist, was attenuated by NPFF, indicating an antagonistic interaction between NPFF and D1-like receptors. The renal subcapsular infusion of NPFF in C57BL/6 mice decreased renal sodium excretion and increased blood pressure. The NPFF-mediated increase in blood pressure was prevented by RF-9, an antagonist of NPFF receptors. Taken together, our findings suggest that autocrine NPFF and its receptors in the kidney regulate blood pressure, but the mechanisms remain to be determined.
Neuropeptide FF (NPFF) and Neuropeptide VF (NPVF) are part of the extended RFamide peptide family characterized by their common arginine (R) and amidated phenylalanine (F)-motif at the carboxyl terminus. Both peptides signal through their respective high affinity G-protein coupled receptors, NPFFR2 and NPFFR1, but also show binding affinity for the other receptor due to their sequence similarity. NPFF and NPVF are highly conserved throughout evolution and can be found across the whole animal kingdom. Both have been implicated in a variety of biological mechanisms, including nociception, locomotion, reproduction, and response to pain and stress. However, more recently a new major functional role in the control of energy homeostasis has been discovered. In this article we will summarise the current knowledge on the distribution of NPFF, NPVF, and their receptors in central and peripheral tissues, as well as how this relates to the regulation of food intake and energy balance, which will help to better understand their role in these processes and thus might help finding treatments for impaired energy homeostasis disorders, such as obesity or anorexia.
The design of bifunctional compounds is a promising approach toward the development of strong analgesics with reduced side effects. We here report the optimization of the previously published lead peptide KGFF09, which contains opioid receptor agonist and neuropeptide FF receptor antagonist pharmacophores and is shown to induce potent antinociception and reduced side effects. We evaluated the novel hybrid peptides for their in vitro activity at MOP, NPFFR1, and NPFFR2 and selected four of them (DP08/14/32/50) for assessment of their acute antinociceptive activity in mice. We further selected DP32 and DP50 and observed that their antinociceptive activity is mostly peripherally mediated; they produced no respiratory depression, no hyperalgesia, significantly less tolerance, and strongly attenuated withdrawal syndrome, as compared to morphine and the recently FDA-approved TRV130. Overall, these data suggest that MOP agonist/NPFF receptor antagonist hybrids might represent an interesting strategy to develop novel analgesics with reduced side effects.
The endogenous neuropeptide FF (NPFF) and its two cognate G protein-coupled receptors, Neuropeptide FF Receptors 1 and 2 (NPFFR1 and NPFFR2), represent a relatively new target system for many therapeutic applications including pain regulation, modulation of opioid side effects, drug reward, anxiety, cardiovascular conditions, and other peripheral effects. Since the cloning of NPFFR1 and NPFFR2 in 2000, significant progress has been made to understand their pharmacological roles and interactions with other receptor systems, notably the opioid receptors. A variety of NPFFR ligands with different mechanisms of action (agonists or antagonists) have been discovered although with limited subtype selectivities. Differential pharmacological effects have been observed for many of these NPFFR ligands, depending on assays/models employed and routes of administration. In this Perspective, we highlight the therapeutic potentials, current knowledge gaps, and latest updates of the development of peptidic and small molecule NPFFR ligands as tool compounds and therapeutic candidates.
Neuropeptide FF (NPFF) is an endogenous octapeptide that was originally isolated from the bovine brain. It belongs to the RFamide family of peptides that has a wide range of physiological functions and pathophysiological effects. NPFF and its receptors, NPFFR1 and NPFFR2, abundantly expressed in rodent and human brains, participate in cardiovascular regulation. However, the expressions of NPFF and its receptors are not restricted within the central nervous system but are also found in peripheral organs, including the kidneys. Both NPFFR1 and NPFFR2 mainly couple to Galphai/o, which inhibits cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production. NPFF also weakly binds to other RFamide receptors and the Mas receptor. Relevant published articles were searched in PubMed, Google Scholar, Web of Science, and Scopus. Herein, we review evidence for the role of NPFF in the regulation of blood pressure, in the central nervous system, particularly within the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus and the brainstem, and the kidneys. NPFF is a potential target in the treatment of hypertension.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is an appetite hormone that acts centrally to control feeding behavior. The 5' and exon 2 regions of NPY2R, one of five NPY receptor genes, have been weakly and inconsistently implicated with obesity. With the ATG start site of the gene at the beginning of exon 2, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across intron 1 may show stronger associations with obesity than expected. Two 5' SNPs, three intron 1 SNPs, and one synonymous exon 2 SNP were genotyped on 2,985 white Utah subjects. Previously associated FTO, NPY, NPY1R, MC4R, PPARGC1A, OR7D4, and four NPFFR2 SNPs were also genotyped and related to BMI. One NPY2R 5' SNP (rs12649641, P = 0.008), an exon 2 SNP (rs2880415, P = 0.009), and an intron 1 SNP (rs17376826, P = 7 x 10(-6)) were each significantly associated with BMI. All three SNPs, plus FTO (rs9939609, P = 1.5 x 10(-6)) and two NPFFR2 SNPs (rs4129733, P = 3.7 x 10(-13) and rs11940196, 4.2 x 10(-10)) remained significant in a multiple regression additive model. Diplotypes using the estimated haplotypes of NPY2R, NPFFR2, and MC4R were significantly associated with BMI (P = 1.0 x 10(-10), 3.2 x 10(-8), and 1.1 x 10(-4), respectively). Haplotypes of NPY2R, NPFFR2, and MC4R, plus the FTO SNP, explained 9.6% of the BMI variance. SNP effect sizes per allele for the four genes ranged from 0.8 to 3.5 kg/m(2). We conclude that haplotypes containing the rs17376826 SNP in intron 1 of NPY2R have strong associations with BMI, some NPFFR2 haplotypes are strongly protective against or increase risk of obesity, and both NPY2R and NPFFR2 play important roles in obesity predisposition independent of FTO and MC4R.
Solea senegalensis is a flatfish belonging to the Soleidae family within the Pleuronectiformes order. It has a karyotype of 2n = 42 (FN = 60; 6M + 4 SM + 8 St + 24 T) and a XX/XY system. The first pair of metacentric chromosomes has been proposed as a proto sex-chromosome originated by a Robertsonian fusion between acrocentric chromosomes. In order to elucidate a possible evolutionary origin of this chromosome 1, studies of genomic synteny were carried out with eight fish species. A total of 88 genes annotated within of 14 BACs located in the chromosome 1 of S. senegalensis were used to elaborate syntenic maps. Six BACs (BAC5K5, BAC52C17, BAC53B20, BAC84K7, BAC56H24, and BAC48P7) were distributed in, at least, 5 chromosomes in the species studied, and a group of four genes from BAC53B20 (grsf1, rufy3, slc4a4 and npffr2) and genes from BAC48K7 (dmrt2, dmrt3, dmrt1, c9orf117, kank1 and fbp1) formed a conserved cluster in all species. The analysis of repetitive sequences showed that the number of retroelements and simple repeat per BAC showed its highest value in the subcentromeric region where 53B20, 16E16 and 48K7 BACs were localized. This region contains all the dmrt genes, which are associated with sex determination in some species. In addition, the presence of a satellite "chromosome Y" (motif length: 860 bp) was detected in this region. These findings allowed to trace an evolutionary trend for the large metacentric chromosome of S. senegalensis, throughout different rearrangements, which could be at an initial phase of differentiation as sex chromosome.
Neuropeptide FF (NPFF) is well-known for its roles in the central nervous system. Despite studies demonstrating that NPFF receptor 2 (NPFFR2) mRNA is highest in placenta, nothing is known about NPFF-NPFFR2 functions in placental development. Here, we investigated the effects of NPFF-NPFFR2 on expression of syncytial [human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) beta] and fusogenic [syncytin 1, syncytin 2, and glial cells missing 1 (GCM1)] genes in first trimester primary human cytotrophoblast cells. By analyzing two publicly available microarray data sets, we found that NPFF is consistently expressed throughout gestation whereas NPFFR2 increases in first trimester and is elevated in placenta samples from women with preeclampsia. Immunohistochemistry showed that NPFFR2, syncytin 1/2, and GCM1 each displayed unique patterns of expression among different trophoblast populations in first trimester placenta. Treatment of primary human cytotrophoblast cells with NPFF increased the mRNA and protein levels of hCG beta, syncytin 1, syncytin 2, and GCM1; and knockdown of NPFFR2 abolished these effects. Interestingly, GCM1 mediated NPFF-induced upregulation of syncytin 1 and syncytin 2, but not hCG beta, in primary human cytotrophoblasts. Our results demonstrate that NPFF acts via NPFFR2 to enhance production of hCG beta and promote GCM1-dependent expression of syncytin 1 and 2 in human cytotrophoblasts.
BACKGROUND: Preeclampsia (PE) is an idiopathic disorder of pregnancy. The exact cause of PE remains unknown. Emerging evidence indicates that the cause of PE is linked to genetic factors. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify the susceptibility genes for PE. METHODS: Nine families with severe PE were recruited. The whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed on each family, and Sanger sequencing was used to identify the potential pathogenic genetic variants. RESULTS: After a rigorous bioinformatics analysis, compound heterozygous variants in the NPFFR2 gene, NM_004885.2: c.601A > G, p.Met201Val and c.995C > T, p.Ala332Val were found in the No.4 pedigree. Bioinformatics analysis showed that these sites were highly conserved among several species and were predicted to be pathogenic variants according to multiple online mutational function prediction software packages. Due to the compound heterozygous variants of NPFFR2, more bonds are generated between mutant amino acids and spatial adjacent amino acids, which may lead to more stable active conformation of protein and not easy to be degraded. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated for the first time that compound heterozygous variants of the NPFFR2 gene might be potentially associated with severe PE, the results of this study provide clinicians and researchers with a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying severe PE in pregnant women.
The tetra-peptide FMRF-NH(2) is a cardioexcitatory peptide in the clam. Using the antibody against this peptide, FMRF-NH(2)-like immunoreactive material was detected in mammalian CNS. Subsequently, mammalian FMRF-NH(2) immunoreactive peptides were isolated from bovine brain and characterized to be FLFQPQRF-NH(2) (NPFF) and AGEGLSSPFWSLAAPQRF-NH(2) (NPAF). The genes encoding NPFF precursor proteins and NPFF receptors 1 and 2 are expressed in all vertebrate species examined to date and are highly conserved. Among many biological roles suggested for the NPFF system, the possible modulatory role of NPFF in nocicetion and opiate analgesia has been most widely investigated. Pharmacologically, NPFF-related peptides were found to exhibit analgesia and also potentiate the analgesic activity of opiates when administered intrathecally but attenuate the opiate induced analgesia when administered intracerebroventricularly. RF-NH(2) peptides including NPFF-related peptides were found to delay the rate of acid sensing ion channels (ASIC) desensitization resulting in enhancing acid gated currents, raising the possibility that NPFF also may have a pain modulatory role through ASIC. The genes for NPFF as well as NPFF-R2, preferred receptor for NPFF, are highly unevenly expressed in the rat CNS with the highest levels localized to the superficial layers of the dorsal spinal cord. These two genes are also present in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), though at low levels in normal rats. NPFF and NPFF-R2 mRNAs were found to be coordinately up-regulated in spinal cord and DRG of rats with peripheral inflammation. In addition, NPFF-R2 immunoreactivity in the primary afferents was increased by peripheral inflammation. The findings from the early studies on the analgesic and morphine modulating activities suggested a role for NPFF in pain modulation and this possibility is further supported by the distribution of NPFF and its receptor and the regulation of the NPFF system in vivo.
While anti-TNF therapies are effective against psoriasis, 30%-50% of patients do not show an adequate response to these drugs. Different candidate-gene pharmacogenetics studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms that may predict anti-TNF drugs response in psoriasis. Nevertheless, only one paper has undertaken a pharmacogenomic approach failing to find significant biomarkers of biological drug response along the whole genome. Furthermore, most of the pharmacogenetic candidate biomarkers identified previously have not been confirmed in a different cohort of patients. The objective of this study was to find biomarkers that could predict anti-TNF drugs response along the whole genome and validate biomarkers identified previously. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) was performed using the Human Omni Express-8 v1.2 Beadchips in 243 psoriasis patients treated with anti-TNF drugs. This study was multicentric and did not interfere with clinical practice. Associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and PASI75 (a 75% reduction with respect to baseline PASI) at 3 months were evaluated. Imputation was performed using SNPs with R(2)  > 0.7. There were two SNPs located in NPFFR2 that were close to the significant threshold of 5 x 10(-8) . These data suggest that NPFFR2 might be associated with anti-TNF drug response. However, further studies involving a larger cohort of patients are needed in order to confirm these results.
We identified eight candidate thinness predisposition variants from the Illumina HumanExome chip genotyped on members of pedigrees selected for either healthy thinness or severe obesity. For validation, we tested the candidates for association with healthy thinness in additional pedigree members while accounting for effects of obesity-associated genes: NPFFR2, NPY2R, FTO, and MC4R. Significance was obtained for the interaction of FTO rs9939609 with APOH missense variant rs52797880 (minor allele frequency 0.054). The thinness odds ratio was estimated as 2.15 (p < 0.05) for the combination of APOH heterozygote with the homozygote for the non-obesity FTO allele. Significance was not obtained for any other combination of a candidate variant with an obesity gene or for any of the eight candidates tested independently.
Restoring the control of food intake is the key to obesity management and prevention. The arcuate nucleus (ARC) of the hypothalamus is extensively being studied as a potential anti-obesity target. Animal studies showed that neuropeptide FF (NPFF) reduces food intake by its action in neuropeptide Y (NPY) neurons of the hypothalamic ARC, but the detailed mode of action observed in human neurons is missing, due to the lack of a human-neuron-based model for pharmacology testing. Here, we validated and utilized a human-neural-stem-cell-based (hNSC) model of ARC to test the effects of NPFF on cellular pathways and neuronal activity. We found that in the human neurons, decreased cAMP levels by NPFF resulted in a reduced rate of cytoplasmic calcium oscillations, indicating an inhibition of ARC NPY neurons. This suggests the therapeutic potential of NPFFR2 in obesity. In addition, we demonstrate the use of human-stem-cell-derived neurons in pharmacological applications and the potential of this model to address functional aspects of human hypothalamic neurons.
BACKGROUND: The body conformation traits of dairy cattle are closely related to their production performance and health. The present study aimed to identify gene variants associated with body conformation traits in Chinese Holstein cattle and provide marker loci for genomic selection in dairy cattle breeding. These findings could offer robust theoretical support for optimizing the health of dairy cattle and enhancing their production performance. RESULTS: This study involved 586 Chinese Holstein cattle and used the predicted transmitting abilities (PTAs) of 17 body conformation traits evaluated by the Council on Dairy Cattle Breeding in the USA as phenotypic values. These traits were categorized into body size traits, rump traits, feet/legs traits, udder traits, and dairy characteristic traits. On the basis of the genomic profiling results from the Genomic Profiler Bovine 100 K SNP chip, genotype data were quality controlled via PLINK software, and 586 individuals and 80,713 SNPs were retained for further analysis. Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) were conducted via GEMMA software, which employs both univariate linear mixed models (LMMs) and multivariate linear mixed models (mvLMMs). The Bonferroni method was used to determine the significance threshold, identifying gene variants significantly associated with body conformation traits in Chinese Holstein cattle. The single-trait GWAS identified 24 SNPs significantly associated with body conformation traits (P < 0.01), with annotation leading to the identification of 21 candidate genes. The multi-trait GWAS identified 54 SNPs, which were annotated to 57 candidate genes, including 39 new SNPs not identified in the single-trait GWAS. Additionally, 14 SNPs in the 86.84-87.41 Mb region of chromosome 6 were significantly associated with multiple traits, such as body size, udder, and dairy characteristics. Four genes-SLC4A4, GC, NPFFR2, and ADAMTS3-were annotated in this region. CONCLUSIONS: A total of 63 SNPs were identified as significantly associated with 17 body conformation traits in Chinese Holstein cattle through both single-trait and multi-trait GWAS analyses. Sixty-six candidate genes were annotated, with 12 genes identified by both methods, such as SLC4A4, GC, NPFFR2, and ADAMTS3, which are involved in pathways such as growth hormone synthesis and secretion, sphingolipid signaling, and dopaminergic synapse pathways. These findings provide potential genetic marker information related to body conformation traits for the breeding of Chinese Holstein cattle.
DNA methylation may mediate persistent changes in gene function following chronic stress. To examine this hypothesis, we evaluated African American subjects matched by age and sex, and stratified into four groups by post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) diagnosis and history of child abuse. Total Life Stress (TLS) was also assessed in all subjects. We evaluated DNA extracted from peripheral blood using the HumanMethylation27 BeadChip and analyzed both global and site-specific methylation. Methylation levels were examined for association with PTSD, child abuse history, and TLS using a linear mixed model adjusted for age, sex, and chip effects. Global methylation was increased in subjects with PTSD. CpG sites in five genes (TPR, CLEC9A, APC5, ANXA2, and TLR8) were differentially methylated in subjects with PTSD. Additionally, a CpG site in NPFFR2 was associated with TLS after adjustment for multiple testing. Notably, many of these genes have been previously associated with inflammation. Given these results and reports of immune dysregulation associated with trauma history, we compared plasma cytokine levels in these subjects and found IL4, IL2, and TNFalpha levels associated with PTSD, child abuse, and TLS. Together, these results suggest that psychosocial stress may alter global and gene-specific DNA methylation patterns potentially associated with peripheral immune dysregulation. Our results suggest the need for further research on the role of DNA methylation in stress-related illnesses.
BACKGROUND: Vitamin D deficiency is more common among African-ancestry individuals and may be associated with adverse health outcomes. Vitamin D binding protein (VDBP) regulates concentrations of biologically active vitamin D. OBJECTIVE: We conducted genome-wide association study (GWAS) of VDBP and 25-hydroxyvitamin D among African-ancestry individuals. METHODS: Data were collected from 2,602 African American adults from the Southern Community Cohort Study (SCCS) and 6,934 African- or Caribbean-ancestry adults from the UK Biobank. Serum VDBP concentrations were available only in the SCCS and were measured by using the Polyclonal Human VDBP ELISA kit. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations for both study samples were measured by using Diasorin Liason, a chemiluminescent immunoassay. Participants were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with genome-wide coverage by using Illumina or Affymetrix platforms. Fine-mapping analysis was performed by using forward stepwise linear regression models including all variants with P value < 5 x 10(-8) and within 250 kbps of a lead SNP. RESULTS: We identified 4 loci notably associated with VDBP concentrations in the SCCS population: rs7041 (per allele beta = 0.61 mug/mL, SE = 0.05, P = 1.4 x 10(-48)) and rs842998 (per allele beta = 0.39 mug/mL, SE = 0.03, P = 4.0 x 10(-31)) in GC, rs8427873 (per allele beta = 0.31 mug/mL, SE = 0.04, P = 3.0 x 10(-14)) near GC and rs11731496 (per allele beta = 0.21 mug/mL, SE = 0.03, P = 3.6 x 10(-11)) in between GC and NPFFR2. In conditional analyses, which included the above-mentioned SNPs, only rs7041 remained notable (P = 4.1 x 10(-21)). SNP rs4588 in GC was the only GWAS-identified SNP associated with 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentration. Among UK Biobank participants: per allele beta = -0.11 mug/mL, SE = 0.01, P = 1.5 x 10(-13); in the SCCS: per allele beta = -0.12 mug/mL, SE = 0.06, P = 2.8 x 10(-02)). rs7041 and rs4588 are functional SNPs that influence the binding affinity of VDBP to 25-hydroxyvitamin D. CONCLUSIONS: Our results were in line with previous studies conducted in European-ancestry populations, showing that GC, the gene that directly encodes for VDBP, would be important for VDBP and 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations. The current study extends our knowledge of the genetics of vitamin D in diverse populations.
