C-flanking peptide of NPY; NPY is implicated in the control of feeding and in secretion of gonadotrophin-release hormone; Belongs to the NPY family.
The nervous and immune systems are closely entwined to maintain the immune balance in health and disease. Here, we showed that LPS can activate suprarenal and celiac ganglia (SrG-CG) neurons and upregulate NPY expression in rats. Single-cell sequencing analysis revealed that knockdown of the NPY gene in SrG-CG altered the proliferation and activation of splenic lymphocytes. In a neuron and splenocyte coculture system and in vivo experiments, neuronal NPY in SrG-CG attenuated the splenic immune response. Notably, we demonstrated that neuronal NPF in Drosophila exerted a conservative immunomodulatory effect. Moreover, numerous SNPs in NPY and its receptors were significantly associated with human autoimmune diseases, which was further supported by the autoimmune disease patients and mouse model experiments. Together, we demonstrated that NPY is an ancient language for nervous-immune system crosstalk and might be utilized to alleviate inflammatory storms during infection and to modulate immune balance in autoimmune diseases.
Amylin is a peptide hormone that is mainly known to be produced by pancreatic beta-cells in response to a meal but amylin is also produced by brain cells in discrete brain areas albeit in a lesser amount. Amylin receptor (AMY) is composed of the calcitonin core-receptor (CTR) and one of the 3 receptor activity modifying protein (RAMP), thus forming AMY1-3; RAMP enhances amylin binding properties to the CTR. However, amylin receptor agonist such as salmon calcitonin is able to bind CTR alone. Peripheral amylin's main binding site is located in the area postrema (AP) which then propagate the signal to the nucleus of the solitary tract and lateral parabrachial nucleus (LPBN) and it is then transmitted to the forebrain areas such as central amygdala and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Amylin's activation of these different brain areas mediates eating and other metabolic pathways controlling energy expenditure and glucose homeostasis. Peripheral amylin can also bind in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus where it acts independently of the AP to activate POMC and NPY neurons. Amylin activation of NPY neurons has been shown to be transmitted to LPBN neurons to act on eating while amylin POMC signaling affects energy expenditure and locomotor activity. While a large amount of experiments have already been conducted, future studies will have to further investigate how amylin is taken up by forebrain areas and deepen our understanding of amylin action on peripheral metabolism.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a neuromodulator that is widely expressed throughout the central nervous system (CNS) and which is cosecreted with classic neurotransmitters including GABA and glutamate. There is a long history of research implicating a role for NPY in modulating neurobiological responses to alcohol (ethanol) as well as other drugs of abuse. Both ethanol exposure and withdrawal from chronic ethanol have been shown to produce changes in NPY and NPY receptor protein levels and mRNA expression in the CNS. Importantly, manipulations of NPY Y1 and Y2 receptor signaling have been shown to alter ethanol consumption and self-administration in a brain region-specific manner, with Y1 receptor activation and Y2 receptor blockade in regions of the extended amygdala promoting robust reductions of ethanol intake. Similar observations have been made in studies examining neurobiological responses to nicotine, psychostimulants, and opioids. When taken together with observations of potential genetic linkage between the NPY system and the human alcohol abuse disorders, NPY represents a promising target for treating problematic alcohol and drug use, and in protecting individuals from relapse during abstinence.
Ghrelin, des-acyl ghrelin and obestatin are derived from a common prohormone, preproghrelin by posttranslational processing, originating from endocrine cells in the stomach. Ghrelin exerts stimulatory effects on the motility of antrum and duodenum in both fed and fasted state of animals. On the other hand, des-acyl ghrelin exerts inhibitory effects on the motility of antrum but not on the motility of duodenum in the fasted state of animals. Obestatin exerts inhibitory effects on the motility of antrum and duodenum in the fed state but not in the fasted state of animals. NPY Y2 and Y4 receptors in the brain may mediate the action of ghrelin, CRF type 2 receptor in the brain may mediate the action of des-acyl ghrelin, whereas CRF type 1 and type 2 receptors in the brain may mediate the action of obestatin.
While anxiety disorders are the brain disorders with the highest prevalence and constitute a major burden for society, a considerable number of affected people are still treated insufficiently. Thus, in an attempt to identify potential new anxiolytic drug targets, neuropeptides have gained considerable attention in recent years. Compared to classical neurotransmitters they often have a regionally restricted distribution and may bind to several distinct receptor subtypes. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a highly conserved neuropeptide that is specifically concentrated in limbic brain areas and signals via at least 5 different G-protein-coupled receptors. It is involved in a variety of physiological processes including the modulation of emotional-affective behaviors. An anxiolytic and stress-reducing property of NPY is supported by many preclinical studies. Whether NPY may also interact with processing of learned fear and fear extinction is comparatively unknown. However, this has considerable relevance since pathological, inappropriate and generalized fear expression and impaired fear extinction are hallmarks of human post-traumatic stress disorder and a major reason for its treatment-resistance. Recent evidence from different laboratories emphasizes a fear-reducing role of NPY, predominantly mediated by exogenous NPY acting on Y1 receptors. Since a reduction of fear expression was also observed in Y1 receptor knockout mice, other Y receptors may be equally important. By acting on Y2 receptors, NPY promotes fear extinction and generates a long-term suppression of fear, two important preconditions that could support cognitive behavioral therapies in human patients. A similar effect has been demonstrated for the closely related pancreatic polypeptide (PP) when acting on Y4 receptors. Preliminary evidence suggests that NPY modulates fear in particular by activation of Y1 and Y2 receptors in the basolateral and central amygdala, respectively. In the basolateral amygdala, NPY signaling activates inhibitory G protein-coupled inwardly-rectifying potassium channels or suppresses hyperpolarization-induced I(h) currents in a Y1 receptor-dependent fashion, favoring a general suppression of neuronal activity. A more complex situation has been described for the central extended amygdala, where NPY reduces the frequency of inhibitory and excitatory postsynaptic currents. In particular the inhibition of long-range central amygdala output neurons may result in a Y2 receptor-dependent suppression of fear. The role of NPY in processes of learned fear and fear extinction is, however, only beginning to emerge, and multiple questions regarding the relevance of endogenous NPY and different receptor subtypes remain elusive. Y2 receptors may be of particular interest for future studies, since they are the most prominent Y receptor subtype in the human brain and thus among the most promising therapeutic drug targets when translating preclinical evidence to potential new therapies for human anxiety disorders.
The peptidic neuropeptide Y (NPY) has received great attention because it has been implicated in the regulation of several organ systems. In particular, NPY is involved in the regulatory loops that control food intake in the hypothalamus and appears also to be important for regulating the activity of neuroendocrine axes under poor metabolic conditions. Furthermore, NPY exerts vasoconstrictive action on the vasculature and potentiates the actions of many other vasoconstrictors. In addition, it was demonstrated to have trophic properties and could therefore contribute to cardiovascular remodeling. These various effects plus a number of others make NPY an attractive target for the potential treatment of human diseases, such as obesity, metabolic disorders, hypertension and heart failure.
Body energy reserves and metabolic state are relevant modifiers of puberty onset and fertility; forms of metabolic stress ranging from persistent energy insufficiency to morbid obesity are frequently linked to reproductive disorders. The mechanisms for such a close connection between energy balance and reproduction have been the subject of considerable attention; however, our understanding of the neurobiological basis for this phenomenon is still incomplete. In mid 1990s, the adipose-hormone, leptin, was proven as an essential signal for transmitting metabolic information onto the centers governing puberty and reproduction; yet, the ultimate mode of action of leptin on GnRH neurons has remained contentious for years. More recently, kisspeptins, a family of neuropeptides encoded by the Kiss1 gene, have emerged as conduits for the metabolic regulation of reproduction and putative effectors of leptin actions on GnRH neurons. This review recapitulates the experimental evidence obtained to date, mostly in laboratory rodents, supporting the function of kisspeptins in bridging energy balance and reproduction, with special emphasis on recent developments in this field, such as the recognition of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) and Crtc1 (Creb1-regulated transcription coactivator-1) as putative mediators for leptin regulation of Kiss1 expression, as well as the identification of other potential metabolic modulators of kisspeptin signaling, such as ghrelin, neuropeptide Y (NPY) and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH).
The adult skeleton is constantly renewed through bone remodeling. Four recent papers (Baldock et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2007; Lundberg et al., 2007; Sato et al., 2007) provide new insights into central and peripheral control of this remodeling sequence. Two of the studies add to our knowledge of the complex hypothalamic modulation of bone turnover mediated by NMU and NPY via the sympathetic nervous system, while the other two focus on the peripheral neural target, the osteoblast, and its regulation by neuropeptides and osteocalcin. These findings support a new paradigm concerning the regulation of bone remodeling and provide a foundation for novel approaches to preventing osteoporosis.
Islet function is regulated by a number of different signals. A main signal is generated by glucose, which stimulates insulin secretion and inhibits glucagon secretion. The glucose effects are modulated by many factors, including hormones, neurotransmitters and nutrients. Several of these factors signal through guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCR). Examples of islet GPCR are GPR40 and GPR119, which are GPCR with fatty acids as ligands, the receptors for the incretin hormones glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), the receptors for the islet hormones glucagon and somatostatin, the receptors for the classical neurotransmittors acetylcholine (ACh; M(3) muscarinic receptors) and noradrenaline (beta(2)- and alpha(2)-adrenoceptors) and for the neuropeptides pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP; PAC(1) and VPAC(2) receptors), cholecystokinin (CCK(A) receptors) and neuropeptide Y (NPY Y1 receptors). Other islet GPCR are the cannabinoid receptor (CB(1) receptors), the vasopressin receptors (V1(B) receptors) and the purinergic receptors (P(2Y) receptors). The islet GPCR couple mainly to adenylate cyclase and to phospholipase C (PLC). Since important pharmacological strategies for treatment of type 2 diabetes are stimulation of insulin secretion and inhibition of glucagon secretion, islet GPCR are potential drug targets. This review summarizes knowledge on islet GPCR.
Our understanding of the control of skeletal metabolism has undergone a dynamic shift in the last two decades, primarily driven by our understanding of energy metabolism. Evidence demonstrating that leptin not only influences bone cells directly, but that it also plays a pivotal role in controlling bone mass centrally, opened up an investigative process that has changed the way in which skeletal metabolism is now perceived. Other central regulators of bone metabolism have since been identified including neuropeptide Y (NPY), serotonin, endocannabinoids, cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART), adiponectin, melatonin and neuromedin U, controlling osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation, proliferation and function. The sympathetic nervous system was originally identified as the predominant efferent pathway mediating central signalling to control skeleton metabolism, in part regulated through circadian genes. More recent evidence points to a role of the parasympathetic nervous system in the control of skeletal metabolism either through muscarinic influence of sympathetic nerves in the brain or directly via nicotinic receptors on osteoclasts, thus providing evidence for broader autonomic skeletal regulation. Sensory innervation of bone has also received focus again widening our understanding of the complex neuronal regulation of bone mass. Whilst scientific advance in this field of bone metabolism has been rapid, progress is still required to understand how these model systems work in relation to the multiple confounders influencing skeletal metabolism, and the relative balance in these neuronal systems required for skeletal growth and development in childhood and maintaining skeletal integrity in adulthood.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is highly abundant in the brain and involved in various physiological processes related to food intake and anxiety, as well as human diseases such as obesity and cancer. However, the molecular details of the interactions between NPY and its receptors are poorly understood. Here, we report a cryo-electron microscopy structure of the NPY-bound neuropeptide Y1 receptor (Y(1)R) in complex with G(i1) protein. The NPY C-terminal segment forming the extended conformation binds deep into the Y(1)R transmembrane core, where the amidated C-terminal residue Y36 of NPY is located at the base of the ligand-binding pocket. Furthermore, the helical region and two N-terminal residues of NPY interact with Y(1)R extracellular loops, contributing to the high affinity of NPY for Y(1)R. The structural analysis of NPY-bound Y(1)R and mutagenesis studies provide molecular insights into the activation mechanism of Y(1)R upon NPY binding.
Since their establishment in 1981, RBL-2H3 cells have been widely used as a mast cell (MC) model. Their ability to be easily grown in culture in large amounts, their responsiveness to FcepsilonRI-mediated triggers and the fact that they can be genetically manipulated, have provided advantages over primary MCs, in particular for molecular studies relying on genetic screening. Furthermore, the ability to generate clones that stably express proteins of interest, for example, a human receptor, have marked the RBL cells as an attractive MC model for drug screening. Indeed, 3 RBL reporter cell lines (RS-ATL8, NFAT-DsRed, and NPY-mRFP) have been generated providing useful models for drug and allergen screening. Similarly, RBL cells stably expressing the human MrgprX2 receptor provide a unique paradigm for analyzing ligand interactions and signaling pathways of the unique human receptor. Finally, transient co-transfections of RBL cells allow functional genomic analyses of MC secretion by combining library screening with simultaneous expression of a reporter for exocytosis. RBL cells thus comprise powerful tools for the study of intracellular membrane trafficking and exocytosis and the detection of allergens, vaccine safety studies and diagnosis of allergic sensitization. Their recent uses as an investigative tool are reviewed here.
Ghrelin is a unique endogenous peptidic hormone regulating both hunger and adiposity. Many of the actions of ghrelin are modulated specifically by the central nervous system. A number of molecular events triggered via the activation of the ghrelin receptor (GHS-R1a), leading to increased levels of neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agoutirelated peptide (AgRP) and ultimately responsible for the orexigenic effect of ghrelin have been characterized. Moreover, the discovery of ghrelin O-acyltransferase (GOAT), the enzyme responsible for the octanoylation of ghrelin, provides a mechanism allowing specific targeting of the ghrelin/GHS-R1a system without affecting the role of des-acyl-ghrelin in other pathways involved in the regulation of energy balance. This review aims to summarize novel roles of ghrelin in energy balance, focusing particularly on both the newly identified neuronal pathways mediating the effects of ghrelin and on peripheral mechanisms leading to increased adiposity.
Resiliency to the adverse effects of extraordinary emotional trauma on the brain varies within the human population. Accordingly, some people cope better than others with traumatic stress. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a 36-amino-acid peptide transmitter abundantly expressed in forebrain limbic and brain stem areas that regulate stress and emotional behaviors. Studies largely in rodents demonstrate a role for NPY in promoting coping with stress. Moreover, accruing data from the genetic to the physiological implicate NPY as a potential 'resilience-to-stress' factor in humans. Here, we consolidate findings from preclinical and clinical studies of NPY that are of relevance to stress-associated syndromes, most prototypically posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Collectively, these data suggest that reduced central nervous system (CNS) NPY concentrations or function may be associated with PTSD. We also link specific symptoms of human PTSD with extant findings in the NPY field to reveal potential physiological contributions of the neuropeptide to the disorder. In pursuit of understanding the physiological basis and treatment of PTSD, the NPY system is an attractive target.
BACKGROUND: Most women with anovulatory infertility show polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), and androgen excess is known as a key factor involved in pathogenicity of PCOS. However, the mechanism of follicular developmental arrest in PCOS is not completely understood. The reproductive function of Neuropeptide Y (NPY) in the ovary during folliculogenesis was previously reported; NPY function in apoptosis and proliferation of granulosa cells (GCs) is follicular-stage dependent. The objective of this study was to investigate the role of NPY in ovarian follicular development and the pathogenesis of PCOS. METHODS: To simulate the PCOS phenotype using a rat model, 21-day old Sprague Dawley rats were implanted with dihydrotestosterone (DHT) capsule (83 microg/day) and euthanized after 28 days. mRNA and protein content of NPY and its receptors were assessed in GCs from DHT treated rats using RT-qPCR and Western blot, respectively. Proliferation and apoptosis of GCs was assessed using Ki67- and TUNEL assays. Finally, NPY levels were measured in human follicular fluid (FF) from matched PCOS and non-PCOS patients using ELISA. RESULTS: GCs from DHT treated rats (PCOS-GCs) contained significantly less NPY protein and Npy mRNA by 0.16- and 0.56-fold, respectively, and more NPY receptor type 2 and 5 protein by 2.21- and 3.17-fold, respectively, when compared to sham control. Addition of recombinant NPY to PCOS-GCs culture did not alter Ki67-positive but significantly decreased TUNEL-positive cells by 0.65-fold, but not to baseline levels. There was no significant difference in NPY levels in FF between PCOS and non-PCOS subjects. CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that DHT modulates expression of NPY and its receptors, NPY decreases DHT-induced GCs apoptosis. That alterations in NPY's function might be involved in follicular developmental failure of PCOS.
Neuropeptides are the largest group of chemical signals in the brain. More than 100 different neuropeptides modulate various brain functions and their dysregulation has been associated with neurological disorders. Neuropeptides are packed into dense core vesicles (DCVs), which fuse with the plasma membrane in a calcium-dependent manner. Here, we describe a novel high-throughput assay for DCV exocytosis using a chimera of Nanoluc luciferase and the DCV-cargo neuropeptide Y (NPY). The NPY-Nanoluc reporter colocalized with endogenous DCV markers in all neurons with little mislocalization to other cellular compartments. NPY-Nanoluc reported DCV exocytosis in both rodent and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived human neurons, with similar depolarization, Ca(2+), RAB3, and STXBP1/MUNC18 dependence as low-throughput assays. Moreover, NPY-Nanoluc accurately reported modulation of DCV exocytosis by known modulators diacylglycerol analog and Ca(2+) channel blocker and showed a higher assay sensitivity than a widely used single-cell low-throughput assay. Lastly, we showed that Nanoluc coupled to other secretory markers reports on constitutive secretion. In conclusion, the NPY-Nanoluc is a sensitive reporter of DCV exocytosis in mammalian neurons, suitable for pharmacological and genomic screening for DCV exocytosis genes and for mechanism-based treatments for central nervous system disorders.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a highly conserved neuropeptide with orexigenic actions in discrete hypothalamic nuclei that plays a role in regulating energy homeostasis. NPY signals via a family of high affinity receptors that mediate the widespread actions of NPY in all hypothalamic nuclei. These actions are also subject to tight, intricate regulation by numerous peripheral and central energy balance signals. The NPY system is embedded within a densely-redundant network designed to ensure stable energy homeostasis. This redundancy may underlie compensation for the loss of NPY or its receptors in germline knockouts, explaining why conventional knockouts of NPY or its receptors rarely yield a marked phenotypic change. We discuss insights into the hypothalamic role of NPY from studies of its physiological actions, responses to genetic manipulations and interactions with other energy balance signals. We conclude that numerous approaches must be employed to effectively study different aspects of NPY action.
Human neuropeptide Y (hNPY) is one of the most widely expressed neurotransmitters in the human central and peripheral nervous systems. It consists of 36 highly conserved amino acid residues, and was first isolated from the porcine hypothalamus in 1982. While it is the most recently discovered member of the pancreatic polypeptide family (which includes neuropeptide Y, gut-derived hormone peptide YY, and pancreatic polypeptide), NPY is the most abundant peptide found in the mammalian brain. In order to exert particular functions, NPY needs to bind to the NPY receptor to activate specific signaling pathways. NPY receptors belong to the class A or rhodopsin-like G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) family and signal via cell-surface receptors. By binding to GPCRs, NPY plays a crucial role in various biological processes, including cortical excitability, stress response, food intake, circadian rhythms, and cardiovascular function. Abnormal regulation of NPY is involved in the development of a wide range of diseases, including obesity, hypertension, atherosclerosis, epilepsy, metabolic disorders, and many cancers. Thus far, five receptors have been cloned from mammals (Y1, Y2, Y4, Y5, and y6), but only four of these (hY1, hY2, hY4, and hY5) are functional in humans. In this review, we summarize the structural characteristics of human NPY receptors and their role in metabolic diseases.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a potent hypothalamic orexigenic peptide. Within the hypothalamus, Npy is primarily expressed in the arcuate nucleus (ARC) and the dorsomedial hypothalamus (DMH). While the actions of ARC NPY in energy balance control have been well studied, a role for DMH NPY is still being unraveled. In contrast to ARC NPY that serves as one of downstream mediators of actions of leptin in maintaining energy homeostasis, DMH NPY is not under the control of leptin. Npy gene expression in the DMH is regulated by brain cholecystokinin (CCK) and other yet to be identified molecules. The findings of DMH NPY overexpression or induction in animals with increased energy demands and in certain rodent models of obesity implicate a role for DMH NPY in maintaining energy homeostasis. In support of this view, adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated overexpression of NPY in the DMH causes increases in food intake and body weight and exacerbates high-fat diet-induced hyperphagia and obesity. Knockdown of NPY in the DMH via AAV-mediated RNAi ameliorates hyperphagia, obesity and glucose intolerance of Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty rats in which DMH NPY overexpression has been proposed to play a causal role. NPY knockdown in the DMH also prevents high-fat diet-induced hyperphagia, obesity and impaired glucose homeostasis. A detailed examination of actions of DMH NPY reveals that DMH NPY specifically affects nocturnal meal size and produces an inhibitory action on within meal satiety signals. In addition, DMH NPY modulates energy expenditure likely through affecting brown adipocyte formation and thermogenic activity. Overall, the recent findings provide clear evidence demonstrating critical roles for DMH NPY in energy balance control, and also imply a potential role for DMH NPY in maintaining glucose homeostasis.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: An overview of recent developments documenting the neuropeptide Y (NPY) family's role in energy metabolism. Specifically focusing on site-specific functions of NPY and increasing evidence of peptide YY (PYY) as a weight loss therapeutic. RECENT FINDINGS: Studying the NPY family in hypothalamic nuclei, other than the arcuate and paraventricular nuclei, is a recent shift in metabolic research. NPY overexpression in the dorsomedial hypothalamus increases food intake whereas its ablation in this area reduces hyperphagia and obesity. Similarly, NPY exerts orexigenic effects in the ventromedial nucleus. However, specific arcuate Y2 receptor ablation leads to positive energy balance, suggesting the NPY family demonstrates location-specific functions. Peripherally, dual blockade of cannabinoid and NPY pathways has synergistic effects on weight loss, as does combined administration of PYY3-36 and oxyntomodulin in reducing food intake, perhaps due to the recently discovered role of PYY in mediating intestinal Gpr119 activity and controlling glucose tolerance. SUMMARY: Conditional Y receptor knockout models have provided deeper insights on NPY's functions according to location. Further study of PYY appears vital, due to recent evidence of its role in intestinal motility, with exercise positively influencing PYY levels.
