Neuropeptide Y receptor type 1; Receptor for neuropeptide Y and peptide YY. The rank order of affinity of this receptor for pancreatic polypeptides is NPY > [Pro-34] PYY, PYY and [Leu-31, Pro-34] NPY > NPY (2-36) > [Ile-31, Gln-34] PP and PYY (3-36) > PP > NPY free acid.
Neuropeptide Y targets the Y1 receptor (Y1) in the spinal dorsal horn (DH) to produce endogenous and exogenous analgesia. DH interneurons that express Y1 (Y1-INs; encoded by Npy1r) are necessary and sufficient for neuropathic hypersensitivity after peripheral nerve injury. However, as Y1-INs are heterogenous in composition in terms of morphology, neurophysiological characteristics, and gene expression, we hypothesized that a more precisely defined subpopulation mediates neuropathic hypersensitivity. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we found that Y1-INs segregate into 3 largely nonoverlapping subpopulations defined by the coexpression of Npy1r with gastrin-releasing peptide (Grp/Npy1r), neuropeptide FF (Npff/Npy1r), and cholecystokinin (Cck/Npy1r) in the superficial DH of mice, nonhuman primates, and humans. Next, we analyzed the functional significance of Grp/Npy1r, Npff/Npy1r, and Cck/Npy1r INs to neuropathic pain using a mouse model of peripheral nerve injury. We found that chemogenetic inhibition of Npff/Npy1r-INs did not change the behavioral signs of neuropathic pain. Further, inhibition of Y1-INs with an intrathecal Y1 agonist, [Leu31, Pro34]-NPY, reduced neuropathic hypersensitivity in mice with conditional deletion of Npy1r from CCK-INs and NPFF-INs but not from GRP-INs. We conclude that Grp/Npy1r-INs are conserved in higher order mammalian species and represent a promising and precise pharmacotherapeutic target for the treatment of neuropathic pain.
The identification of key genes in transcriptomic data constitutes a huge challenge. Our review of microarray reports revealed 88 genes whose transcription is consistently regulated by glucocorticoids (GCs), such as cortisol, corticosterone and dexamethasone, in the brain. Replicable transcriptomic data were combined with biochemical and physiological data to create an integrated view of the effects induced by GCs. The most frequently reported genes were Errfi1 and Ddit4. Their up-regulation was associated with the altered transcription of genes regulating growth factor and mTORC1 signaling (Gab1, Tsc22d3, Dusp1, Ndrg2, Ppp5c and Sesn1) and progression of the cell cycle (Ccnd1, Cdkn1a and Cables1). The GC-induced reprogramming of cell function involves changes in the mRNA level of genes responsible for the regulation of transcription (Klf9, Bcl6, Klf15, Tle3, Cxxc5, Litaf, Tle4, Jun, Sox4, Sox2, Sox9, Irf1, Sall2, Nfkbia and Id1) and the selective degradation of mRNA (Tob2). Other genes are involved in the regulation of metabolism (Gpd1, Aldoc and Pdk4), actin cytoskeleton (Myh2, Nedd9, Mical2, Rhou, Arl4d, Osbpl3, Arhgef3, Sdc4, Rdx, Wipf3, Chst1 and Hepacam), autophagy (Eva1a and Plekhf1), vesicular transport (Rhob, Ehd3, Vps37b and Scamp2), gap junctions (Gjb6), immune response (Tiparp, Mertk, Lyve1 and Il6r), signaling mediated by thyroid hormones (Thra and Sult1a1), calcium (Calm2), adrenaline/noradrenaline (Adcy9 and Adra1d), neuropeptide Y (Npy1r) and histamine (Hdc). GCs also affected genes involved in the synthesis of polyamines (Azin1) and taurine (Cdo1). The actions of GCs are restrained by feedback mechanisms depending on the transcription of Sgk1, Fkbp5 and Nr3c1. A side effect induced by GCs is increased production of reactive oxygen species. Available data show that the brain's response to GCs is part of an emergency mode characterized by inactivation of non-core activities, restrained inflammation, restriction of investments (growth), improved efficiency of energy production and the removal of unnecessary or malfunctioning cellular components to conserve energy and maintain nutrient supply during the stress response.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a powerful orexigenic factor in the brain. However, mice lacking NPY or NPY receptor Y1 (NPY1R) have minimal changes in basal food intake. In a study published in Nature, Zhu et al.(1) demystify this paradox and show that central and peripheral NPY have antipodal roles in energy homeostasis.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) signaling via limbic NPY1 and 2 receptors (NPY1R and NPY2R, respectively) is known to modulate binge-like ethanol consumption in rodents. However, the role of NPY signaling in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), which provides top-down modulation of the limbic system, is unknown. Here, we used "drinking-in-the-dark" (DID) procedures in C57BL/6J mice to address this gap in the literature. First, the impact of DID on NPY immunoreactivity (IR) was assessed in the mPFC. Next, the role of NPY1R and NPY2R signaling in the mPFC on ethanol consumption was evaluated through site-directed pharmacology. Chemogenetic inhibition of NPY1R+ neurons in the mPFC was performed to further evaluate the role of this population. To determine the potential role of NPY1R+ neurons projecting from the mPFC to the basolateral amygdala (BLA) this efferent population was selectively silenced. Three, 4-day cycles of DID reduced NPY IR in the mPFC. Intra-mPFC activation of NPY1R and antagonism of NPY2R resulted in decreased binge-like ethanol intake. Silencing of mPFC NPY1R+ neurons overall, and specifically NPY1R+ neurons projecting to the BLA, significantly reduced binge-like ethanol intake. We provide novel evidence that (1) binge-like ethanol intake reduces NPY levels in the mPFC; (2) activation of NPY1R or blockade of NPY2R reduces binge-like ethanol intake; and (3) chemogenetic inhibition of NPY1R+ neurons in the mPFC and NPY1R+ mPFC neurons projecting to the BLA blunts binge-like drinking. These observations provide the first direct evidence that NPY signaling in the mPFC modulates binge-like ethanol consumption.
BACKGROUND: Obesity is a complex condition that is affected by a variety of factors, including the environment, behavior, and genetics. However, the genetic mechanisms underlying obesity remains poorly elucidated. Therefore, our study aimed at identifying key genes for human obesity using bioinformatics analysis. METHODS: The microarray datasets of adipose tissue in humans were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. After the selection of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), we used Lasso regression and Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm to further identify the feature genes. Moreover, immune cell infiltration analysis, gene set variation analysis (GSVA), GeneCards database and transcriptional regulation analysis were conducted to study the potential mechanisms by which the feature genes may impact obesity. We utilized receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve to analysis the diagnostic efficacy of feature genes. Finally, we verified the feature genes in cell experiments and animal experiments. The statistical analyses in validation experiments were conducted using SPSS version 28.0, and the graph were generated using GraphPad Prism 9.0 software. The bioinformatics analyses were conducted using R language (version 4.2.2), with a significance threshold of p < 0.05 used. RESULTS: 199 DEGs were selected using Limma package, and subsequently, 5 feature genes (EGR2, NPY1R, GREM1, BMP3 and COL8A1) were selected through Lasso regression and SVM algorithm. Through various bioinformatics analyses, we found some signaling pathways by which feature genes influence obesity and also revealed the crucial role of these genes in the immune microenvironment, as well as their strong correlations with obesity-related genes. Additionally, ROC curve showed that all the feature genes had good predictive and diagnostic efficiency in obesity. Finally, after validation through in vitro experiments, EGR2, NPY1R and GREM1 were identified as the key genes. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified EGR2, GREM1 and NPY1R as the potential key genes and potential diagnostic biomarkers for obesity in humans. Moreover, EGR2 was discovered as a key gene for obesity in human adipose tissue for the first time, which may provide novel targets for diagnosing and treating obesity.
BACKGROUND: Gastric Cancer (GC) presents poor outcome, which is consequence of the high incidence of recurrence and metastasis at early stages. GC patients presenting recurrent or metastatic disease display a median life expectancy of only 8 months. The mechanisms underlying GC progression remain poorly understood. METHODS: We took advantage of public available GC datasets from TCGA using GEPIA, and identified the matched genes among the 100 genes most significantly associated with overall survival (OS) and disease free survival (DFS). Results were confirmed in ACRG cohort and in over 2000 GC cases obtained from several cohorts integrated using our own analysis pipeline. The Kaplan-Meier method and multivariate Cox regression analyses were used for prognostic significance and linear modelling and correlation analyses for association with clinic-pathological parameters and biological hallmarks. In vitro and in vivo functional studies were performed in GC cells with candidate genes and the related molecular pathways were studied by RNA sequencing. RESULTS: High expression of ANKRD6, ITIH3, SORCS3, NPY1R and CCDC178 individually and as a signature was associated with poor prognosis and recurrent disease in GC. Moreover, the expression of ANKRD6 and ITIH3 was significantly higher in metastasis and their levels associated to Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and stemness markers. In line with this, RNAseq analysis revealed genes involved in EMT differentially expressed in ANKRD6 silencing cells. Finally, ANKRD6 silencing in GC metastatic cells showed impairment in GC tumorigenic and metastatic traits in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified a novel signature involved in GC malignancy and prognosis, and revealed a novel pro-metastatic role of ANKRD6 in GC.
Neuropeptides are associated with childhood obesity and exploring their regulatory mechanisms may reveal new insights for novel treatments. Childhood obesity data were downloaded from the GEO database and were used to screen for differentially expressed neuropeptides in patients with obesity. NPY1R expression was significantly upregulated in children with obesity compared to children without obesity (p < 0.05). The GEO database was used to filter differentially expressed miRNAs in patients with obesity. And hsa-mir-4713 and hsa-mir-452 were found significantly downregulated in adipose tissue. The GEO, TRRUST, and TFacts databases were used to screen all transcription factors for differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The potential regulatory networks between the differentially expressed miRNAs, TFs, and neuropeptides were mapped. In the constructed NPY1R regulatory network, the transcription factors TCF4, HEY1, and GATA3 are significantly associated with NPY1R. TCF4 and HEY1 were positively correlated with NPY1R, while GATA3 was negatively correlated with NPY1R. In the clinical peripheral blood samples, NPY1R, TCF4, and HEY1 were significantly more expressed in the obesity and the obesity with fracture group compared to the control group, while there was no statistically significant difference between the obesity group and the obesity with fracture group in terms of expression. The expression of GATA3, miR-452, and miR-4713 was also significantly lower in the obesity and the obesity with fracture groups when compared to the NC group. Therefore, NPY1R, TCF4, HEY1, GATA3, miR-452, and miR-4713 may be risk factors for fracture in obese children. The potential NPY1R regulatory function was exerted by two pathways: positive regulation caused by TCF4 and HEY1 acting on miR-4713 and negative regulation via GATA3 acting on miR-452. Potential NPY1R-related targets for the treatment of childhood obesity were provided in this study.
G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) represent the largest superfamily of cell-surface proteins. However, the expression and function of majority of GPCRs remain unexplored in breast cancer (BC). We interrogated the expression and phosphorylation status of 398 non-sensory GPCRs using the landmark BC proteogenomics and phosphoproteomic dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Neuropeptide Y Receptor Y1 (NPY1R) gene and protein expression were significantly higher in Luminal A tumors versus other BC subtypes. The trend of NPY1R gene, protein, and phosphosite (NPY1R-S368s) expression was decreasing in the order of Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) subtypes. NPY1R gene expression increased in response to estrogen and reduced with endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) BC cells and xenograft models. Conversely, NPY1R expression decreased in ER+ BC cells resistant to endocrine therapies (estrogen deprivation, tamoxifen, and fulvestrant) in vitro and in vivo. NPY treatment reduced estradiol-stimulated cell growth, which was reversed by NPY1R antagonist (BIBP-3226) in ER+ BC cells. Higher NPY1R gene expression predicted better relapse-free survival and overall survival in ER+ BC. Our study demonstrates that NPY1R mediates the inhibitory action of NPY on estradiol-stimulated growth of ER+ BC cells, and its expression serves as a biomarker to predict endocrine sensitivity and survival in ER+ BC patients.
INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy in women with more than one in ten new cancer diagnoses each year. Synthetic products are a key source for the identification of new anticancer medicines and drug leads. OBJECTIVES: Imidazopyrazine is a highly favored skeleton for the design of new anticancer drugs. In silico designed derivatives were screened using computer aided drug design techniques and validated using MTT assay. METHODS: A template-based methodology was used in the current work to create novel Imidazopyrazine derivatives, targeting the NPY1R protein. Molecular docking, Diffusion docking, MD simulation, MM-GBSA and meta-dynamics techniques were followed. MTT assay was performed to validate the activity of principal compound. RESULTS: A docking score of -6.660 and MMGBSA value of -108.008 (+/-) 9.14 kcal/mol was obtained from the investigations conducted. In addition, molecular dynamics simulation was carried out for 500 ns, yielding a stable RMSD and value of 5.6 A, thus providing insights on the stability of the protein conformation on interaction with the principal compound. Furthermore, the in vivo validation studies conducted via MTT assay showed an IC(50) value of 73.45 (+/-) 0.45 mug /mL. CONCLUSION: The research has produced encouraging findings and can be applied as a model for precise enumerations in the future. It also encourages the study of novel synthetic compounds with potential anti-cancer properties.
OBJECTIVE: Obesity is linked to perturbations in energy balance mechanisms, including ghrelin and leptin actions at the hypothalamic circuitry of neuropeptide Y (NPY) and melanocortin. However, information about the regulation of this system in the periphery is still scarce. Our objective was to study the regulation of the NPY/melanocortin system in the adipose tissue (AT) and evaluate its therapeutic potential for obesity and type 2 diabetes. METHODS: The expression of the NPY/melanocortin receptors' levels was assessed in the visceral AT of individuals with obesity and altered metabolism. Protein levels of these receptors were evaluated in cultured adipocytes incubated with ghrelin (30 and 100 ng/mL) and leptin (1 and 10 nM) and in the AT of an animal model with a mutation in the leptin receptor (ZSF1 rat), to understand their regulation by leptin and ghrelin. The vertical sleeve gastrectomy animal model was used to evaluate the putative therapeutic potential of the NPY/melanocortin system. RESULTS: In this study, we unravelled that leptin (1 nM and 10 nM) selectively reduced the levels of NPY5R and MC3R but no other NPYR/MCRs in cultured adipocytes. In turn, acylated ghrelin (100 ng/mL) significantly increased NPY1R, but the inhibition of its receptor also abrogates MC3R levels. However, in the Lepr-deficient ZSF1 rat, both NPY5R and MC3R levels were reduced, along with other NPYRs and MCRs, suggesting that leptin resistance negatively affects NPY and melanocortin signalling. In human adipose tissue, we found a downregulation of genes encoding the NPY and melanocortin receptors in the visceral AT of individuals with obesity and insulin resistance, being correlated with genes regulating metabolic activity. Additionally, diabetic obese rats submitted to vertical sleeve gastrectomy showed increased levels of NPY, melanocortin, ghrelin, and leptin receptors in the AT, including MC3R, suggesting it may constitute a therapeutic target in obesity. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the AT NPY/melanocortin system, particularly the MC3R, may be involved in the neuroendocrine regulation of adipocyte metabolism. Altogether, our work shows MC3R is under the control of the ghrelin/leptin duo, is reduced in patients with obesity and prediabetes, and may constitute a therapeutic target in obesity.
Cardiac hypertrophy (CH) is a major risk factor for heart failure accompanied by maladaptive cardiac remodeling. The role and potential mechanism of neuropeptide Y (NPY) in CH are still unclear. We will explore the role and the mechanism of NPY inactivation (NPY-I) in CH caused by pressure overload. Abdominal aortic constriction (AAC) was used to induce CH model in rats. NPY or angiotensin II (Ang II) was used to trigger CH model in vitro in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes (NRVMs). We found that NPY was increased in the heart and plasma of hypertrophic rats. However, Ang II did not increase NPY expression in cardiomyocytes. NPY-I attenuated CH as decreasing CH-related markers (ANP, BNP and beta-MHC mRNA) level, reducing cell surface area, and restoring cardiac function. NPY inactivation increased miR-216b and decreased FoxO4 expression in CH heart. Moreover, NPY decreased miR-216b and increased FoxO4 expression in NRVMs which were reversed by NPY type 1 receptor (NPY1R) antagonist BIBO3304. MiR-216b mimic and FoxO4 siRNA (small interfering RNA) inhibited NPY/Ang II-induced myocardial hypertrophy in vitro. Meanwhile, BIBO3304 reversed the pro-hypertrophy effect of NPY in vitro. Collectively, NPY deficiency attenuated CH by NPY1R-miR-216b-FoxO4 axis. These findings suggested that NPY would be a potential therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of cardiac hypertrophy.
CONTEXT: Twin and family studies indicate a significant heritability of pubertal timing and more specifically of age at menarche (AAM). OBJECTIVE: Test the association of AAM with common variants of three candidate genes suspected to have a prominent role in reproductive physiology: leptin (LEP), neuropeptide Y receptor 1 (NPY1R) and GPR54. DESIGN AND METHODS: We selected the -2459 LEP, the rs7687423 NPY1R and thers350132 GPR54 variants as the more common coding or regulatory variants (minor allelic frequency >0.10) in these gene regions. To avoid stratification problems that can impair association studies, we used the Q-TDT method based on allele transmission to evaluate the relationship of these variants with AAM in 245 healthy women from 107 families of European ancestry. RESULTS: We found no association of AAM with any of the studied variants. CONCLUSIONS: Keeping in mind that common variants do not recapitulate the whole genetic variation in a given gene region, this study indicates that the studied LEP, NPY1R and GPR54 variants do not have a major influence upon pubertal timing in Caucasian women. Effects of these genetic loci on age at menarche can definitively be excluded only through determination of extended haplotypes in a larger cohort.
KEY POINTS: Arginine vasopressin (AVP) stimulates the release of enteroendocrine L-cell derived hormones glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) in vitro from mouse and human colons. This is mediated by the AVP receptor 1B, which is highly enriched in colonic L-cells and linked to the elevation of L-cell calcium and cAMP concentrations. By means of Ussing chambers, we show that AVP reduced colonic anion secretion, although this was blocked by a specific neuropeptide Y receptor Y1 receptor antagonist, suggesting that L-cell-released PYY acts locally on the epithelium to modulate fluid balance. In human serum samples, PYY concentrations were higher in samples with raised osmolality and copeptin (surrogate marker for AVP). These findings describe, for the first time, the role of L-cells in AVP regulated intestinal fluid secretion, potentially linking together hormonal control of blood volume and blood glucose levels, and thus adding to our understanding of the complex pathways involved in the gut hormonal response to different stimuli. ABSTRACT: Arginine vasopressin (AVP) regulates fluid balance and blood pressure via AVP receptor (AVPR)2 in the kidney and AVP receptor 1A in vascular smooth muscle. Its role in intestinal function has received less attention. We hypothesized that enteroendocrine L-cells producing glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) and peptide YY (PYY) may be a target of AVP and contribute to the control of fluid balance. Avpr1b expression was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR on flourescence-activated cell sorting-isolated L- and control cells and was enriched in colonic L-cells. AVP stimulated GLP-1 and PYY release from primary cultured murine and human colonic cells and was associated with elevated calcium and cAMP concentrations in L-cells as measured in cultures from GLU-Cre/ROSA26-GCaMP3 and GLU-Epac2camps mice. An antagonist of AVPR1B reduced AVP-triggered hormone secretion from murine and human cells. In Ussing chambers, basolaterally applied AVP reduced colonic anion secretion and this effect was blocked by a specific neuropeptide Y receptor Y1 (NPY1R) antagonist. In human serum, PYY concentrations were higher in samples with raised osmolality or copeptin (a surrogate marker for AVP). In conclusion, we propose that AVP activates L-cell AVPR1B, causing GLP-1 and PYY secretion. PYY in turn reduces colonic anion secretion via epithelial NPY1R. Our data suggest L-cells are active players in the hypothalamic control of intestinal fluid homeostasis, providing a potential link between the regulation of blood volume/pressure/osmolality and blood glucose.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers of the gastrointestinal tract and ranks third in cancer-related deaths worldwide. This study was conducted to identify novel biomarkers related to the pathogenesis of CRC based upon a bioinformatics analysis, and further verify the biomarkers in clinical tumor samples and CRC cell lines. METHODS: A series of bioinformatics analyses were performed using datasets from NCBI-GEO and constructed a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. This analysis enabled the identification of Hub genes, for which the mRNA expression and overall survival of CRC patients data distribution was explored in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) colon cancer and rectal cancer (COADREAD) database. Furthermore, the differential expression of HCAR3 and INLS5 was validated in clinical tumor samples by Real-time quantitative PCR analysis, western blotting analysis, and immunohistochemistry analysis. Finally, CRC cells over-expressing INSL5 were constructed and used for CCK8, cell cycle, and cell apoptosis validation assays in vitro. RESULTS: A total of 286 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened, including 64 genes with increased expression and 143 genes with decreased expression in 2 CRC database, from which 10 key genes were identified: CXCL1, HCAR3, CXCL6, CXCL8, CXCL2, CXCL5, PPY, SST, INSL5, and NPY1R. Among these genes, HCAR3 and INSL5 had not previously been explored and were further verified in vitro. CONCLUSIONS: HCAR3 expression was higher in CRC tissues and associated with better overall survival of CRC patients. INSL5 expression in normal tissue was higher than that in tumor tissue and its high expression was associated with a better prognosis for CRC. The overexpression of INSL5 significantly inhibited the proliferation and promoted the shearing of PARP of CRC cells. This integrated bioinformatics study presented 10 key hub genes associated with CRC. HCAR3 and INSL5 were expressed in tumor tissue and these were associated with poor survival and warrant further studies as potential therapeutic targets.
OBJECTIVES: Loss of functional beta-cell mass is a key factor contributing to poor glycemic control in advanced type 2 diabetes (T2D). We have previously reported that the inhibition of the neuropeptide Y1 receptor improves the islet transplantation outcome in type 1 diabetes (T1D). The aim of this study was to identify the pathophysiological role of the neuropeptide Y (NPY) system in human T2D and further evaluate the therapeutic potential of using the Y1 receptor antagonist BIBO3304 to improve beta-cell function and survival in T2D. METHODS: The gene expression of the NPY system in human islets from nondiabetic subjects and subjects with T2D was determined and correlated with the stimulation index. The glucose-lowering and beta-cell-protective effects of BIBO3304, a selective orally bioavailable Y1 receptor antagonist, in high-fat diet (HFD)/multiple low-dose streptozotocin (STZ)-induced and genetically obese (db/db) T2D mouse models were assessed. RESULTS: In this study, we identified a more than 2-fold increase in NPY1R and its ligand, NPY mRNA expression in human islets from subjects with T2D, which was significantly associated with reduced insulin secretion. Consistently, the pharmacological inhibition of Y1 receptors by BIBO3304 significantly protected beta cells from dysfunction and death under multiple diabetogenic conditions in islets. In a preclinical study, we demonstrated that the inhibition of Y1 receptors by BIBO3304 led to reduced adiposity and enhanced insulin action in the skeletal muscle. Importantly, the Y1 receptor antagonist BIBO3304 treatment also improved beta-cell function and preserved functional beta-cell mass, thereby resulting in better glycemic control in both HFD/multiple low-dose STZ-induced and db/db T2D mice. CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed a novel causal link between increased islet NPY-Y1 receptor gene expression and beta-cell dysfunction and failure in human T2D, contributing to the understanding of the pathophysiology of T2D. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that the inhibition of the Y1 receptor by BIBO3304 represents a potential beta-cell-protective therapy for improving functional beta-cell mass and glycemic control in T2D.
The prognosis of breast cancer (BC) in young women (BCYW) aged </=40 years tends to be poorer than that in older patients due to aggressive phenotypes, late diagnosis, distinct biologic, and poorly understood genomic features of BCYW. Considering the estimated predisposition of only approximately 15% of the BC population to BC-promoting genes, the underlying reasons for an increased occurrence of BCYW, at large, cannot be completely explained based on general risk factors for BC. This underscores the need for the development of next-generation of tissue- and body fluid-based prognostic and predictive biomarkers for BCYW. Here, we identified the genes associated with BCYW with a particular focus on the age, intrinsic BC subtypes, matched normal or normal breast tissues, and BC laterality. In young women with BC, we observed dysregulation of age-associated cancer-relevant gene sets in both cancer and normal breast tissues, sub-sets of which substantially affected the overall survival (OS) or relapse-free survival (RFS) of patients with BC and exhibited statically significant correlations with several gene modules associated with cellular processes such as the stroma, immune responses, mitotic progression, early response, and steroid responses. For example, high expression of COL1A2, COL5A2, COL5A1, NPY1R, and KIAA1644 mRNAs in the BC and normal breast tissues from young women correlated with a substantial reduction in the OS and RFS of BC patients with increased levels of these exemplified genes. Many of the genes upregulated in BCYW were overexpressed or underexpressed in normal breast tissues, which might provide clues regarding the potential involvement of such genes in the development of BC later in life. Many of BCYW-associated gene products were also found in the extracellular microvesicles/exosomes secreted from breast and other cancer cell-types as well as in body fluids such as urine, saliva, breast milk, and plasma, raising the possibility of using such approaches in the development of non-invasive, predictive and prognostic biomarkers. In conclusion, the findings of this study delineated the pathogenomics of BCYW, providing clues for future exploration of the potential predictive and prognostic importance of candidate BCYW molecules and research strategies as well as a rationale to undertake a prospective clinical study to examine some of testable hypotheses presented here. In addition, the results presented here provide a framework to bring out the importance of geographical disparities, to overcome the current bottlenecks in BCYW, and to make the next quantum leap for sporadic BCYW research and treatment.
The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is powerful for studying human G protein-coupled receptors as they can be coupled to its mating pathway. However, some receptors, including the mu opioid receptor, are non-functional, which may be due to the presence of the fungal sterol ergosterol instead of cholesterol. Here we engineer yeast to produce cholesterol and introduce diverse mu, delta, and kappa opioid receptors to create sensitive opioid biosensors that recapitulate agonist binding profiles and antagonist inhibition. Additionally, human mu opioid receptor variants, including those with clinical relevance, largely display expected phenotypes. By testing mu opioid receptor-based biosensors with systematically adjusted cholesterol biosynthetic intermediates, we relate sterol profiles to biosensor sensitivity. Finally, we apply sterol-modified backgrounds to other human receptors revealing sterol influence in SSTR5, 5-HTR4, FPR1, and NPY1R signaling. This work provides a platform for generating human G protein-coupled receptor-based biosensors, facilitating receptor deorphanization and high-throughput screening of receptors and effectors.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers, and its incidence is increasing worldwide. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) broadly expressed in the central and peripheral nervous system. It participates in multiple physiological and pathological processes through specific receptors. Evidences are accumulating that NPY is involved in development and progression in neuro- or endocrine-related cancers. However, little is known about the potential roles and underlying mechanisms of NPY receptors in HCC. In this study, we analyzed the expression of NPY receptors by real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and immunohistochemical staining. Correlation between NPY1R levels and clinicopathological characteristics, and survival of HCC patients were explored, respectively. Cell proliferation was researched by CCK-8 in vitro, and tumor growth was studied by nude mice xenografts in vivo. We found that mRNA and protein level of NPY receptor Y1 subtype (NPY1R) significantly decreased in HCC tissues. Low expression of NPY1R closely correlated with poor prognosis in HCC patients. Proliferation of HCC cells was significantly inhibited by recombinant NPY protein in vitro. This inhibitory effect could be blocked by selected NPY1R antagonist BIBP3226. Furthermore, overexpression of NPY1R could significantly inhibit HCC cell proliferation. Knockdown of NPY1R promoted cell multiplication in vitro and increased tumorigenicity and tumor growth in vivo. NPY1R was found to participate in the inhibition of cell proliferation via inactivating mitogen-activated protein kinase signal pathway in HCC cells. Collectively, NPY1R plays an inhibitory role in tumor growth and may be a promising therapeutic target for HCC.
Intermittent fasting (IMF) is associated with many health benefits in animals and humans. Yet, little is known if an IMF diet affects mood and cognitive processing. We have previously identified that IMF in diet-induced obese males increases norepinephrine and dopamine content in the hypothalamus and increases arcuate neuropeptide Y (NPY) gene expression more than in ad libitum control males. This suggests that IMF may improve cognition through activation of the hindbrain norepinephrine neuronal network and reverse the age-dependent decline in NPY expression. Less is known about the association between anxiety and IMF. Although, in humans, IMF during Ramadan may alleviate anxiety. Here, we address the impact of IMF on anxiety-like behavior using the open field test, hippocampal-dependent memory using the Y-maze and spatial object recognition, and hippocampal-independent memory using novel object recognition in middle-aged male and female (12 mo) and aged male and female (18 mo) mice. Using ELISA, we determined norepinephrine (NE) content in the dorsal hippocampus (DH) and prefrontal cortex (PFC). We also investigated gene expression in the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the lateral hypothalamus (LH), and the locus coeruleus (LC). In IMF-treated females at both ages, we observed an improvement in spatial navigation although an impairment in spatial object orientation. IMF-treated females (12 mo) had a reduction and IMF-treated males (12 mo) displayed an improvement in novel object recognition memory. IMF-treated females (18 mo) exhibited anxiolytic-like behavior and increased locomotion. In the DH, IMF-treated males (12 mo) had a greater amount of NE content and IMF-treated males (18 mo) had a reduction. In the ARC, IMF-treated males (12 mo) exhibited an increase in Agrp and Npy and a decrease in Adr1a. In the ARC, IMF-treated males (18 mo) exhibited an increase in Npy and a decrease in Adr1a; females had a trending decrease in Cart. In the LH at 12 months, IMF-treated males had a decrease in Npy5r, Adr1a, and Adr1b; both males and females had a reduction in Npy1r. In the LH, IMF-treated females (18 mo) had a decrease in Hcrt. In the LC at both ages, mice largely exhibited sex effects. Our findings indicate that IMF produces alterations in mood, cognition, DH NE content, and ARC, LH, and LC gene expression depending on sex and age.
Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy in female individuals worldwide. It constitutes about 38.8% of all malignant tumors among Egyptian female individuals. Neuropeptide Y1 receptor (NPY1R) is one of the most abundant peptides in the central and peripheral nervous systems of mammals. It has been found to promote proliferation, vascularization, and stimulate migration in several cell types and tissues and some types of tumor. This the first immunohistochemical study to evaluate the expression of NPY1R in BC and its correlation with clinicopathologic parameters and patient survival. This study included 92 patients with BC. Immunohistochemical staining for NPY1R was done on paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tissue sections. Statistically significant increases in NPY1R expression was seen in malignant (46/92; 50%) versus non-neoplastic tissue (12/29; 20.7%) (P<0.001). The receiver operating characteristic curve showed that NPY1R is a poor diagnostic test for BC (P<0.001, area under the curve=0.686) in breast tissue. Membranous was the most common pattern of positivity in carcinoma cases (24/46; 52.2%). Statistically significant associations were found between positive NPY1R expression and the presence of metastatic disease (P<0.001), clinical stage (P=0.0003), perineurial invasion (P=0.003), estrogen receptor expression (P=0.004), molecular subtype (P=0.015), Nottingham Prognostic Index risk group (P=0.04), radiotherapy treatment (P=0.01), hormonal treatment (P=0.015), and type of endocrine therapy (P=0.011). Although no significant association was detected between NPY1R-positive and NPY1R-negative cases regarding overall survival and progression-free survival, cases with non-nuclear (membranous+cytoplasmic) expression showed near significantly shorter survival (P=0.063). This study shows that NPY1R was identified in about 50% of malignant BC cases. Its expression correlates with some features of the aggressive disease being associated with metastasis, perineurial invasion, advanced stages, and poor Nottingham Prognostic Index. This suggests a potential prognostic role of NPY1R in BC. Non-nuclear expression of NPY1R seems to be more important in terms of prognosis of BC.
