Neuropeptide Y receptor Y4.
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP), a member of the neuropeptide Y (NPY) family of peptides, is a hormone secreted from the endocrine pancreas with established actions on appetite regulation. Thus, through activation of hypothalamic neuropeptide Y4 (NPY4R or Y4) receptors PP induces satiety in animals and humans, suggesting potential anti-obesity actions. In addition, despite being actively secreted from pancreatic islets and evidence of local Y4 receptor expression, PP mediated effects on the endocrine pancreas have not been fully elucidated. To date, it appears that PP possesses an acute insulinostatic effect, similar to the impact of other peptides from the NPY family. However, it is interesting that prolonged activation of pancreatic Y1 receptors leads to established benefits on beta-cell turnover, preservation of beta-cell identity and improved insulin secretory responsiveness. This may hint towards possible similar anti-diabetic actions of sustained Y4 receptor modulation, since the Y1 and Y4 receptors trigger comparable cell signalling pathways. In terms of exploiting the prospective therapeutic promise of PP, this is severely restricted by a short circulating half-life as is the case for many regulatory peptide hormones. It follows that long-acting, enzyme resistant, forms of PP will be required to determine viability of the Y4 receptor as an anti-obesity and -diabetes drug target. The current review aims to refocus interest on the biology of PP and highlight opportunities for therapeutic development.
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) is a major agonist for neuropeptide Y4 receptors (NPY4R). While NPY4R has been identified in various tissues, the cells on which it is expressed and its function in those cells has not been clearly delineated. Here we report that NPY4R is present in all somatostatin-containing cells of tissues that we tested, including pancreatic islets, duodenum, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. Its agonism by PP decreases somatostatin secretion from human islets. Mouse embryonic hippocampal (mHippo E18) cells expressed NPY4Rs and their activation by PP consistently decreased somatostatin secretion. Furthermore, central injection of PP in mice induced c-Fos immunoreactivity in somatostatin-containing cells in the hippocampus compared with PBS-injected mice. In sum, our results identify PP as a pivotal modulator of somatostatin secretion.
PURPOSE: Neuropeptide receptors are expressed in many malignancies. Effectors involved in the action mechanisms of HCRTR1, HCRTR2, NPY4R (PPYR1) may be related to breast cancer (BC). Genes encoding these receptors and PPY and PTPN11 genes were aimed to examine via bioinformatics tools in the BRCA cohort. To our knowledge, this is the first study in which these receptor genes and PP, which have not found much research in BC, are examined together with PTPN11 and analyzed comprehensively in large patient cohorts from public databases. METHODS: cBioPortal was used for gene alteration analyses, GeneMania for association analyses with other genes, Kaplan-Meier Plotter for Overall Survival (OS) and Relapse Free Survival (RFS) analyses, UALCAN for methylation analyses, TIMER2.0 for expression analyses, The Human Protein Atlas database for expression validations, TIMER for immune infiltration analyses, WEKA 3.8.6 for diagnostic classification performances of the genes based on Random Forest Classifier and Enrichr-KG for Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process (BP) and KEGG analysis. RESULTS: 19 (1.9 %) nucleotide changes were found in 996 cases. Missense mutation is most common. Decreased expression levels of the HCRTR1 gene were associated with shorter OS and RFS, but decreased expression levels of the PTPN11 gene were associated with longer OS and RFS. Decreased expression levels NPY4R (PPYR1) gene were associated with shorter RFS. Increased expression levels of HCRTR2 and PPY genes were associated with longer RFS. HCRTR1 and NPY4R (PPYR1) genes were statistically hypermethylated; conversely HCRTR2 and PPY genes were hypomethylated. There was no significant change in PTPN11 gene promoter methylation level. HCRTR1, NPY4R (PPYR1) and PTPN11 gene expressions were downregulated; conversely, HCRTR2 and PPY gene expressions upregulated. Weak correlations were observed between NPY4R (PPYR1) gene expression and CD4(+) T Cell, Neutrophil, Dendritic Cell and between PTPN11 gene expression and CD8(+) T Cell, Macrophage, Neutrophil, Dendritic Cell infiltrations. Area under the receiver operating characteristics curve values of the 10-fold cross-validation and by splitting the dataset in a ratio of 80:20 models were 0.930 and 0.963 respectively. HCRTR2 and HCRTR1 belong to regulation of cytosolic calcium ion concentration, cellular calcium ion homeostasis GO BPs. CONCLUSION: In BC patients, increases in HCRTR2 and PPY gene expressions could be considered as positive prognostic factors. Decreases in HCRTR1 and NPY4R (PPYR1) gene expressions could be considered as negative prognostic factors. Decreased expression of PTPN11 gene may have a positive prognostic factor. Changes in existing genes are likely to be both a biomarker and therapeutic target for BC. However, experimental and clinical studies are needed to elucidate the mechanisms underlying these neuropeptide receptors in terms of breast carcinogenesis.
Genomes exhibit large regions with segmental copy number variation, many of which include entire genes and are multiallelic. We have developed a computational method GeneToCN that counts the frequencies of gene-specific k-mers in FASTQ files and uses this information to infer copy number of the gene. We validated the copy number predictions for amylase genes (AMY1, AMY2A, AMY2B) using experimental data from digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) on 39 individuals and observed a strong correlation (R = 0.99) between GeneToCN predictions and experimentally determined copy numbers. An additional validation on FCGR3 genes showed a higher concordance for FCGR3A compared to two other methods, but reduced accuracy for FCGR3B. We further tested the method on three different genomic regions (SMN, NPY4R, and LPA Kringle IV-2 domain). Predicted copy number distributions of these genes in a set of 500 individuals from the Estonian Biobank were in good agreement with the previously published studies. In addition, we investigated the possibility to use GeneToCN on sequencing data generated by different technologies by comparing copy number predictions from Illumina, PacBio, and Oxford Nanopore data of the same sample. Despite the differences in variability of k-mer frequencies, all three sequencing technologies give similar predictions with GeneToCN.
BACKGROUND: Essential tremor (ET), one of the most common neurological disorders, has a phenotypically heterogeneous presentation characterized by bilateral kinetic tremor of the arms and, in some patients, tremor involving other body regions (e.g., head, voice). Genetic studies suggest that ET is genetically heterogeneous. METHODS: We analyzed whole genome sequence data (WGS) generated on 104 multi-generational white families with European ancestry affected by ET. Genome-wide parametric linkage and association scans were analyzed using adjusted logistic regression models through the application of the Pseudomarker software. To investigate the additional contribution of rare variants in familial ET, we also performed an aggregate variant non-parametric linkage (NPL) analysis using the collapsed haplotype method implemented in CHP-NPL software. FINDINGS: Parametric linkage analysis of common variants identified several loci with significant evidence of linkage (HLOD >/=3.6). Among the gene regions within the strongest ET linkage peaks were BTC (4q13.3, HLOD=4.53), N6AMT1 (21q21.3, HLOD=4.31), PCDH9 (13q21.32, HLOD=4.21), EYA1 (8q13.3, HLOD=4.04), RBFOX1 (16p13.3, HLOD=4.02), MAPT (17q21.31, HLOD=3.99) and SCARB2 (4q21.1, HLOD=3.65). CHP-NPL analysis identified fifteen additional genes with evidence of significant linkage (LOD >/=3.8). These genes include TUBB2A, VPS33B, STEAP1B, SPINK5, ZRANB1, TBC1D3C, PDPR, NPY4R, ETS2, ZNF736, SPATA21, ARL17A, PZP, BLK and CCDC94. In one ET family contributing to the linkage peak on chromosome 16p13.3, we identified a likely pathogenic heterozygous canonical splice acceptor variant in exon 2 of RBFOX1 (ENST00000547372; c.4-2A>G), that co-segregated with the ET phenotype in the family. INTERPRETATION: Linkage and association analyses of WGS identified several novel ET candidate genes, which are implicated in four major pathways that include 1) the epidermal growth factor receptor-phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha-AKT serine/threonine kinase 1 (EGFR-PI3K-AKT) and Mitogen-activated protein Kinase 1 (ERK) pathways, 2) Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA repair, 3) gamma-aminobutyric acid-ergic (GABAergic) system and 4) RNA binding and regulation of RNA processes. Our study provides evidence for a possible overlap in the genetic architecture of ET, neurological disease, cancer and aging. The genes and pathways identified can be prioritized in future genetic and functional studies. FUNDING: National Institutes of Health, NINDS, NS073872 (USA) and NIA AG058131(USA).
Multiple genetic studies have linked copy number variation (CNV) in different genes to body mass index (BMI) and obesity. A CNV on chromosome 10q11.22 has been associated with body weight. This CNV region spans NPY4R, the gene encoding the pancreatic polypeptide receptor Y4, which has been described as a satiety-stimulating receptor. We have investigated CNV of the NPY4R gene and analysed its relationship to BMI, waist circumference and self-reported dietary intake from 558 individuals (216 men and 342 women) representing a wide BMI range. The copy number for NPY4R ranged from 2 to 8 copies (average 4.6+/-0.8). Rather than the expected negative correlation, we observed a positive correlation between NPY4R copy number and BMI as well as waist circumference in women (Pearson's r = 0.267, p = 2.65x10-7 and r = 0.256, p = 8x10-7, respectively). Each additional copy of NPY4R correlated with 2.6 kg/m2 increase in BMI and 5.67 cm increase in waist circumference (p = 2.8x10-5 and p = 6.2x10-5, respectively) for women. For men, there was no statistically significant correlation between CNV and BMI. Our results suggest that NPY4R genetic variation influences body weight in women, but the exact role of this receptor appears to be more complex than previously proposed.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is a significant neuromodulator implicated in a multitude of physiological functions via activating NPY receptors which belong to seven transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). However, the detailed cellular expression of NPY receptors in retina has been scarcely investigated. In this study, the expression of the special NPY4R receptor in rat retina was assessed using Western blot analysis and immunofluorescent staining. The detailed cellular localization of NPY4R receptor was studied using double immunofluorescent staining and laser-scanning confocal microscopy. Our data demonstrated that NPY4R receptor was weakly expressed in the inner segment of outer photoreceptors and extensively expressed in the outer segment of S-opsin-positive blue cones, L/M-opsin-positive red/green cones and in the somata of CB-positive horizontal cells, GAD65-positive GABAnergic amacrine cells, ChAT-positive cholinergic amacrine cells, TH-positive dopaminergic CA1 amacrine cells and CA2 amacrine cells, PV-positive AII amacrine cells, Brn3a-positive conventional ganglion cells and melanopsin-containing ipRGCs. In addition, NPY4R receptor was diffusely distributed throughout the full thickness of the inner plexiform layer and outer plexiform layer. However, the outer segment of Rho4D2-positive rods, the somata of ChX10-positive bipolar cells and CRALBP-positive Muller glial cells seemed to lack immunoreactivity of NPY4R receptor. The new finding that multiple types of retinal cell express NPY4R receptor provides new neurobiological basis for the participation of NPY in the regulation of retinal functions through activating NPY4R receptor.
OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide copy number variation (CNV) analyses have associated the 10q11.22 CNV with obesity. As the NPY4R gene is the most interesting candidate gene in this region, it was hypothesized that both genetic and structural variation in NPY4R might be implicated in the pathogenesis of obesity. METHODS: In the first part of this study, 326 children and adolescents with obesity and 298 healthy lean individuals were screened for CNV in the NPY4R-containing chr.10q11.22 region. In the second part of this study, a mutation screen for variants in the NPY4R coding region was performed in 356 children and adolescents with obesity and 337 healthy lean adults. RESULTS: Our CNV analysis demonstrated a significantly higher frequency of NPY4R containing 10q11.22 CNV loss in the patient population (P = 0.0003), while CNV gain in this region was more prevalent in the control population (P = 0.031). Mutation analysis resulted in the identification of 15 rare non-synonymous heterozygous variants. For two variants that could only be identified in the patient population, receptor dysfunction and thus a pathogenic effect were demonstrated. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, these data support an essential role for genetic and structural variation within the NPY4R gene in the pathogenesis of obesity.
The thyroid hormone plays a vital role in the development and maturation of the nervous system not only during prenatal and perinatal age but also in adults. "Peripheral marker hypothesis" revealed that gene expression changes in some regions of the brain are reflected into the peripheral blood lymphocytes. The objective of the study was to investigate changes in the gene expression profile of neuropeptides and their receptors in patients with different forms of thyroid pathology. One hundred fifty-three patients with thyroid pathology were enrolled in the study. They were divided into three groups: group 1 included 16 patients with postoperative hypothyroidism, group 2 included 65 patients with hypothyroidism resulting from autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT), and group 3 included 72 patients with AIT and elevated levels of anti-thyroglobulin (anti-Tg) and anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) antibodies in the serum. We used a pathway-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) array (RT(2) Profiler PCR Array Human Neurotrophins & Receptors, QIAGEN, Germany) to identify and verify neuropeptides and receptors pathway-focused gene expression in 12 individuals that were randomly selected from each group using real-time PCR. Our research identified that patients with postoperative hypothyroidism had a considerably increased expression of NPY1R, NTSR1, and NPY4R. The patients with hypothyroidism caused by autoimmune thyroiditis had considerably lower expression of NTSR1, while the expression of NPY1R increased. The mRNA levels of NPY2R and PNOC increased in the patients with elevated levels of autoantibodies anti-Tg and anti-TPO in the serum, and mRNA levels of NPY1R and NTSR1 decreased in this group of patients.
PURPOSE: Diabetes mellitus is a common condition in the clinically obese. Bariatric surgery is one of the ways to put type 2 diabetes in remission. Recent findings propose the appetite-regulator peptide tyrosine tyrosine (PYY) as a therapeutic option for patients with type 2 diabetes. This novel gut hormone restores impaired insulin and glucagon secretion in pancreatic islets and is implicated in type 2 diabetes reversal after bariatric surgery. The current study elucidates the interactions between PYY and the NPY1R and NPY4R receptors using computational methods. METHODS: Protein structure prediction, molecular docking simulation, and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation were performed to elucidate the interactions of PYY with NPY1R and NPY4R. RESULTS: The predicted binding models of PYY-NPY receptors are in agreement with those described in the literature, although different interaction partners are presented for the C-terminal tail of PYY. Non-polar interactions are predicted to drive the formation of the protein complex. The calculated binding energies show that PYY has higher affinity for NPY4R (DeltaG(GBSA) = -65.08 and DeltaG(PBSA) = -87.62 kcal/mol) than for NPY1R (DeltaG(GBSA) = -23.11 and DeltaG(PBSA) = -50.56 kcal/mol). CONCLUSIONS: Based on the constructed models, the binding conformations obtained from docking and MD simulation for both the PYY-NPY1R and PYY-NPY4R complexes provide a detailed map of possible interactions. The calculated binding energies show a higher affinity of PYY for NPY4R. These findings may help to understand the mechanisms behind the improvement of diabetes following bariatric surgery.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) receptors mediate a variety of physiological responses including feeding and vasoconstriction. To investigate the evolutionary events that have generated this receptor family, we have sequenced and determined the chromosomal localizations of all five presently known mammalian NPY receptor subtype genes in the domestic pig, Sus scrofa (SSC). The orthologs of the Y(1) and Y(2) subtypes display high amino acid sequence identities between pig, human, and mouse (92%-94%), whereas the Y(4), Y(5), and y(6) subtypes display lower identities (76%-87%). The lower identity of Y(5) is due to high sequence divergence in the large third intracellular loop. The NPY1R, NPY2R, and NPY5R receptor genes were localized to SSC8, the NPY4R to SSC14, and NPY6R to SSC2. Our comparisons strongly suggest that the tight cluster of NPY1R, NPY2R, and NPY5R on human chromosome 4 (HSA4) represents the ancestral configuration, whereas the porcine cluster has been split by two inversions on SSC8. These 3 genes, along with adjacent genes from 14 other gene families, form a cluster on HSA4 with extensive similarities to a cluster on HSA5, where NPY6R and >13 other paralogs reside, as well as another large cluster on HSA10 that includes NPY4R. Thus, these gene families have expanded through large-scale duplications. The sequence comparisons show that the NPY receptor triplet NPY1R-NPY2R-NPY5R existed before these large-scale duplications.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to increase knowledge of genes associated with anorexia nervosa (AN) and their diagnostic offer, using a next generation sequencing (NGS) panel for the identification of genetic variants. The rationale underlying this test is that we first analyze the genes associated with syndromic forms of AN, then genes that were found to carry rare variants in AN patients who had undergone segregation analysis, and finally candidate genes intervening in the same molecular pathways or identified by GWAS or in mouse models. METHODS: We developed an NGS gene panel and used it to screen 68 Italian AN patients (63 females, 5 males). The panel included 162 genes. Family segregation study was conducted on available relatives of probands who reported significant genetic variants. RESULTS: In our analysis, we found potentially deleterious variants in 2 genes (PDE11A and SLC25A13) associated with syndromic forms of anorexia and predicted deleterious variants in the following 12 genes: CD36, CACNA1C, DRD4, EPHX2, ESR1, GRIN2A, GRIN3B, LRP2, NPY4R, PTGS2, PTPN22 and SGPP2. Furthermore, by Sanger sequencing of the promoter region of NNAT, we confirmed the involvement of this gene in the pathogenesis of AN. Family segregation studies further strengthened the possible causative role of CACNA1C, DRD4, GRIN2A, PTGS2, SGPP2, SLC25A13 and NNAT genes in AN etiology. CONCLUSION: The major finding of our study is the confirmation of the involvement of the NNAT gene in the pathogenesis of AN; furthermore, this study suggests that NGS-based testing can play an important role in the diagnostic evaluation of AN, excluding syndromic forms and increasing knowledge of the genetic etiology of AN. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level I, experimental study.
BACKGROUND: Copy number variation (CNV) plays an important role in human genetic diversity and has been associated with multiple complex disorders. Here we investigate a CNV on chromosome 10q11.22 that spans NPY4R, the gene for the appetite-regulating pancreatic polypeptide receptor Y4. This genomic region has been challenging to map due to multiple repeated elements and its precise organization has not yet been resolved. Previous studies using microarrays were interpreted to show that the most common copy number was 2 per genome. RESULTS: We have investigated 18 individuals from the 1000 Genomes project using the well-established method of read depth analysis and the new droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) method. We find that the most common copy number for NPY4R is 4. The estimated number of copies ranged from three to seven based on read depth analyses with Control-FREEC and CNVnator, and from four to seven based on ddPCR. We suggest that the difference between our results and those published previously can be explained by methodological differences such as reference gene choice, data normalization and method reliability. Three high-quality archaic human genomes (two Neanderthal and one Denisova) display four copies of the NPY4R gene indicating that a duplication occurred prior to the human-Neanderthal/Denisova split. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that ddPCR is a sensitive and reliable method for CNV determination, that it can be used for read depth calibration in CNV studies based on already available whole-genome sequencing data, and that further investigation of NPY4R copy number variation and its consequences are necessary due to the role of Y4 receptor in food intake regulation.
Neuropeptides are small proteinaceous molecules (3-100 amino acids) that are secreted by neurons and act on both neuronal and non-neuronal cells. Neuropeptide Y (NPY), a highly conserved and expressed neuropeptide in the central nervous system of mammals, plays a major role in stress response and resilience. Increasing evidence suggests that NPY and its receptors are altered in depression and suicide, pointing to their antidepressant-like nature. The objective of this study was to examine the role of NPY system in depression and suicidal behavior. Expression of NPY and its four receptors, NPY1R, NPY2R, NPY4R, and NPY5R was studied at the transcriptional and translational levels in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus regions of the postmortem brain of normal control (NC) (n = 24) and depressed suicide (DS) (n = 24) subjects. We observed a significant decrease in NPY mRNA and upregulation in NPY1R and NPY2R mRNA in both brain regions of DS subjects compared with NC subjects. We also observed a significant decrease in NPY protein expression in the PFC of subjects with DS. This study provides the first detailed evidence of alterations in the NPY system and the associated stress response in depression and suicidal behavior in humans. The outcomes of this study could be applied in the development of novel NPY system-targeted approaches for the treatment of depression.
Obesity has become a global health problem and therefore understanding of the mechanisms regulating hunger and satiety is of utmost importance for the development of new treatment strategies. The Y4 receptor, encoded by the NPY4R gene, and its ligand pancreatic polypeptide (PP) have been reported to mediate a satiety signal. Multiple genetic studies have reported an association between NPY4R copy number and body weight. The gene also displays several SNP variants, many of which lead to amino acid differences, making it interesting to study. We have investigated the functional properties of 12 naturally occurring amino acid sequence variants of the Y4 and interpret the results in relation to sequence conservation and our structural model of the human Y4 receptor protein. Three receptor variants, Cys201(ECL2)Tyr, Val271(6.41)Leu and Asn318(7.49)Asp, were found to completely lose functional response, measured as inositol phosphate turnover, while retaining membrane expression. They display high sequence conservation and have important roles in the receptor structure. For two receptor variants the potency of PP was significantly decreased, Cys34(NT)Ser (EC50 = 2.9 nM, p < .001) and Val135(3.46)Met (EC50 = 3.0 nM, p < .01), compared to wild-type Y4 (EC50 = 0.68 nM). Cys34 forms a disulphide bond with Cys298, linking the N-terminal part to ECL3. The Val135(3.46)Met variant has an amino acid replacement located in the TM3 helix, one helix turn above the highly conserved ERH motif. This position has influence on the network of residues involved in receptor activation and subsequent inactivation. Sequence conservation and the structural model are consistent with these results. The remaining seven positions had no significant effect on the receptor's functional response compared to wild-type Y4. These positions display more variation during evolution. Understanding of the interactions between the Y4 receptor and its native PP agonist and the effects of amino acid variation on its functional response will hopefully lead to future therapeutic possibilities.
Although cDNA microarray studies have examined gene expression in human and rodent adipose tissue, only one microarray study of adipose tissue from growing pigs has been reported. Total RNA was collected at slaughter from outer subcutaneous adipose tissue (OSQ) and middle subcutaneous adipose tissue (MSQ) from gilts at 90, 150, and 210 d (n=5 age(-1)). Dye labeled cDNA probes were hybridized to custom porcine microarrays (70-mer oligonucleotides). Gene expression of insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (IGFBPs), hormones, growth factors, neuropeptide Y (NPY) receptors (NPYRs) and other receptors in OSQ and MSQ changed little with age in growing pigs. Distinct patterns of relative gene expression were evident within NPYR and IGFBP family members in adipose tissue from growing pigs. Relative gene expression levels of NPY2R, NPY4R and angiopoietin 2 (ANG-2) distinguished OSQ and MSQ depots in growing pigs. We demonstrated, for the first time, the expression of IGFBP-7, IGFBP-5, NPY1R, NPY2R, NPY, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) genes in pig adipose tissue with microarray and RT-PCR assays. Furthermore, adipose tissue CTGF gene expression was upregulated while NPY and NPY2R gene expression were significantly down regulated by age. These studies demonstrate that expression of neuropeptides and neurotrophic factors in pig adipose tissue may be involved in regulation of leptin secretion. Many other regulatory factors were not influenced by age in growing pigs but may be influenced by location or depot.
