Mu-type opioid receptor; Receptor for endogenous opioids such as beta-endorphin and endomorphin. Receptor for natural and synthetic opioids including morphine, heroin, DAMGO, fentanyl, etorphine, buprenorphin and methadone. Agonist binding to the receptor induces coupling to an inactive GDP-bound heterotrimeric G-protein complex and subsequent exchange of GDP for GTP in the G-protein alpha subunit leading to dissociation of the G-protein complex with the free GTP-bound G-protein alpha and the G-protein beta-gamma dimer activating downstream cellular effectors. The agonist- and cell typ [...] 
N(6) -methyladenosine (m(6) A) is the most prevalent epigenetic modification on eukaryotic messenger RNAs. Recent studies have focused on elucidating the key role of m(6) A modification patterns in tumor progression. However, the relationship between m(6) A and transcriptional regulation remains elusive. Nanopore technology enables the quantification of m(6) A levels at each genomic site. In this study, a pair of tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues from clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) surgical samples were collected for Nanopore direct RNA sequencing. We identified 9644 genes displaying anomalous m(6) A modifications, with 5343 genes upregulated and 4301 genes downregulated. Among these, 5224 genes were regarded as dysregulated genes, encompassing abnormal regulation of both m(6) A modification and RNA expression. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis revealed an enrichment of these genes in pathways related to renal system progress and fatty acid metabolic progress. Furthermore, the chi(2) test demonstrated a significant association between the levels of m(6) A in dysregulated genes and their transcriptional expression levels. Additionally, we identified four obesity-associated genes (FTO, LEPR, ADIPOR2, and NPY5R) among the dysregulated genes. Further analyses using public databases revealed that these four genes were all related to the prognosis and diagnosis of ccRCC. This study introduced the novel approach of employing conjoint analysis of m(6) A modification and RNA expression based on Nanopore sequencing to explore potential disease-related genes. Our work demonstrates the feasibility of the application of Nanopore sequencing technology in RNA epigenetic regulation research and identifies new potential therapeutic targets for ccRCC.
OBJECTIVES: Apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1), a major component of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), is a protective factor against cardiovascular disease (CVD). A recent epidemiological study found an association between neuropeptide Y (NPY) gene polymorphism and serum HDL levels. However, the direct effect of NPY on ApoA1 expression remains unknown. This study was designed to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the NPY-mediated regulation of hepatic ApoA1. METHODS: Serum ApoA1, total cholesterol, and HDL-c and hepatic ApoA1 levels were measured after intraperitoneal administration of NPY or an NPY Y5 receptor (NPY5R) agonist in vivo. HepG2 and BRL-3A hepatocytes were treated in vitro with NPY in the presence or absence of NPY receptor antagonists, agonists, or signal transduction pathway inhibitors. Subsequently, the protein and mRNA expression of cellular and secreted ApoA1 were determined. RESULTS: NPY considerably upregulated hepatic ApoA1 expression and stimulated ApoA1 secretion, both in vivo and in vitro. NPY5R inhibition blocked NPY-induced upregulation of ApoA1 expression, and NPY5R activation stimulated ApoA1 expression and secretion in hepatocytes. Moreover, extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and protein kinase A (PKA) inhibition almost completely blocked the upregulation of ApoA1 expression and secretion induced by NPY5R. CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we demonstrated that NPY5R activation promotes hepatic ApoA1 synthesis and secretion through the ERK1/2 and PKA signal transduction pathways. Thus, NPY5R may be a potential therapeutic target for treating CVD by promoting cholesterol reverse transport.
Intermittent fasting (IMF) is associated with many health benefits in animals and humans. Yet, little is known if an IMF diet affects mood and cognitive processing. We have previously identified that IMF in diet-induced obese males increases norepinephrine and dopamine content in the hypothalamus and increases arcuate neuropeptide Y (NPY) gene expression more than in ad libitum control males. This suggests that IMF may improve cognition through activation of the hindbrain norepinephrine neuronal network and reverse the age-dependent decline in NPY expression. Less is known about the association between anxiety and IMF. Although, in humans, IMF during Ramadan may alleviate anxiety. Here, we address the impact of IMF on anxiety-like behavior using the open field test, hippocampal-dependent memory using the Y-maze and spatial object recognition, and hippocampal-independent memory using novel object recognition in middle-aged male and female (12 mo) and aged male and female (18 mo) mice. Using ELISA, we determined norepinephrine (NE) content in the dorsal hippocampus (DH) and prefrontal cortex (PFC). We also investigated gene expression in the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the lateral hypothalamus (LH), and the locus coeruleus (LC). In IMF-treated females at both ages, we observed an improvement in spatial navigation although an impairment in spatial object orientation. IMF-treated females (12 mo) had a reduction and IMF-treated males (12 mo) displayed an improvement in novel object recognition memory. IMF-treated females (18 mo) exhibited anxiolytic-like behavior and increased locomotion. In the DH, IMF-treated males (12 mo) had a greater amount of NE content and IMF-treated males (18 mo) had a reduction. In the ARC, IMF-treated males (12 mo) exhibited an increase in Agrp and Npy and a decrease in Adr1a. In the ARC, IMF-treated males (18 mo) exhibited an increase in Npy and a decrease in Adr1a; females had a trending decrease in Cart. In the LH at 12 months, IMF-treated males had a decrease in Npy5r, Adr1a, and Adr1b; both males and females had a reduction in Npy1r. In the LH, IMF-treated females (18 mo) had a decrease in Hcrt. In the LC at both ages, mice largely exhibited sex effects. Our findings indicate that IMF produces alterations in mood, cognition, DH NE content, and ARC, LH, and LC gene expression depending on sex and age.
OBJECTIVE: Obesity is linked to perturbations in energy balance mechanisms, including ghrelin and leptin actions at the hypothalamic circuitry of neuropeptide Y (NPY) and melanocortin. However, information about the regulation of this system in the periphery is still scarce. Our objective was to study the regulation of the NPY/melanocortin system in the adipose tissue (AT) and evaluate its therapeutic potential for obesity and type 2 diabetes. METHODS: The expression of the NPY/melanocortin receptors' levels was assessed in the visceral AT of individuals with obesity and altered metabolism. Protein levels of these receptors were evaluated in cultured adipocytes incubated with ghrelin (30 and 100 ng/mL) and leptin (1 and 10 nM) and in the AT of an animal model with a mutation in the leptin receptor (ZSF1 rat), to understand their regulation by leptin and ghrelin. The vertical sleeve gastrectomy animal model was used to evaluate the putative therapeutic potential of the NPY/melanocortin system. RESULTS: In this study, we unravelled that leptin (1 nM and 10 nM) selectively reduced the levels of NPY5R and MC3R but no other NPYR/MCRs in cultured adipocytes. In turn, acylated ghrelin (100 ng/mL) significantly increased NPY1R, but the inhibition of its receptor also abrogates MC3R levels. However, in the Lepr-deficient ZSF1 rat, both NPY5R and MC3R levels were reduced, along with other NPYRs and MCRs, suggesting that leptin resistance negatively affects NPY and melanocortin signalling. In human adipose tissue, we found a downregulation of genes encoding the NPY and melanocortin receptors in the visceral AT of individuals with obesity and insulin resistance, being correlated with genes regulating metabolic activity. Additionally, diabetic obese rats submitted to vertical sleeve gastrectomy showed increased levels of NPY, melanocortin, ghrelin, and leptin receptors in the AT, including MC3R, suggesting it may constitute a therapeutic target in obesity. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the AT NPY/melanocortin system, particularly the MC3R, may be involved in the neuroendocrine regulation of adipocyte metabolism. Altogether, our work shows MC3R is under the control of the ghrelin/leptin duo, is reduced in patients with obesity and prediabetes, and may constitute a therapeutic target in obesity.
BACKGROUND: Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is an abundant neurohormone in human breast carcinomas that acts on a class of G-protein coupled receptors, of which NPY1R and NPY5R are the most highly expressed. This abundance is exploited for cancer imaging, but there is interest in pharmacological inhibition of the NPYRs to interrogate their functional relevance in breast cancer. We previously reported that NPY1R and NPY5R mRNA abundance is increased by hypoxia inducible factors, which sensitizes these receptors to NPY stimulation leading to enhanced migration and proliferation. METHODS/RESULTS: Here, we measured the effects of NPY1R and NPY5R antagonists in normoxia and hypoxia on migration, proliferation, invasion, and signaling in 2D and 3D models of breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF7. Antagonizing NPY1R and/or NPY5R in hypoxia compared to normoxia more greatly reduced MAPK signaling, cell proliferation, cell migration and invasion, and spheroid growth and invasion. The estrogen receptor positive MCF7 cells were significantly less invasive in 3D spheres when NPY5R was specifically inhibited. There were some discrepancies in the responses of each cell line to the isoform-specific antagonists and oxygen availability, therefore further investigations are required to dissect the intricacies of NPYR signaling dynamics. In human breast tumor tissue, we show via immunofluorescence that NPY5R protein levels and colocalization with hypoxia correlate with advanced cancer, and NPY1R protein correlates with adverse outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Antagonizing the NPYRs has been implicated as a treatment for a wide variety of diseases. Therefore, these antagonists may aid in the development of novel cancer therapeutics and patient-based treatment plans.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether MK-0557, a highly selective, orally administered neuropeptide Y Y5 receptor antagonist, could limit weight regain after very-low-calorie diet (VLCD)-induced weight loss. RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: We enrolled 502 patients 18 to 65 years of age with a BMI of 30 to 43 kg/m2. Patients were placed on a VLCD (800 kcal/d liquid diet) for 6 weeks. Patients who lost>or=6% of initial body weight (n=359) were randomized to 52 weeks of 1 mg/d MK-0557 or placebo and maintained on a hypocaloric diet (300 kcal below weight maintenance requirements). RESULTS: In randomized patients, the VLCD was associated with an average weight loss of 9.1 kg. After 12 weeks of double-blind treatment, weight began to gradually increase for both placebo- and MK-0557-treated patients. The mean weight change (95% confidence interval) from baseline at the end of the VLCD to Week 52 was +3.1 (2.1, 4.0) and +1.5 (0.5, 2.4) kg for patients treated with placebo and MK-0557, respectively. The difference of 1.6 kg between the two groups was significant (p=0.014). Secondary endpoints, such as blood pressure, lipid profile, insulin, and leptin, as well as waist circumference and quality-of-life measurements, did not show significant differences between MK-0557 and placebo treatments. DISCUSSION: Although the difference in weight regain between placebo- and MK-0557-treated patients was statistically significant, the magnitude of the effect was small and not clinically meaningful. Antagonism of the neuropeptide Y Y5 receptor is not an efficacious treatment strategy for reducing weight regain after VLCD.
Behavioral and molecular characterization of cell-type-specific populations governing fear learning and behavior is a promising avenue for the rational identification of potential therapeutics for fear-related disorders. Examining cell-type-specific changes in neuronal translation following fear learning allows for targeted pharmacological intervention during fear extinction learning, mirroring possible treatment strategies in humans. Here we identify the central amygdala (CeA) Drd2-expressing population as a novel fear-supporting neuronal population that is molecularly distinct from other, previously identified, fear-supporting CeA populations. Sequencing of actively translating transcripts of Drd2 neurons using translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP) technology identifies mRNAs that are differentially regulated following fear learning. Differentially expressed transcripts with potentially targetable gene products include Npy5r, Rxrg, Adora2a, Sst5r, Fgf3, Erbb4, Fkbp14, Dlk1, and Ssh3. Direct pharmacological manipulation of NPY5R, RXR, and ADORA2A confirms the importance of this cell population and these cell-type-specific receptors in fear behavior. Furthermore, these findings validate the use of functionally identified specific cell populations to predict novel pharmacological targets for the modulation of emotional learning.
OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to find differential gene mutations, DNA methylation, and expression profiles among different categories of cervical cancer samples. METHODS: The study was based on freely available gene mutations, promoter methylation, and gene expression status of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cervical cancer samples and adjacent normal tissues in the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) portal. The association of CpG island methylation with gene expression was determined through negative correlation analysis. RESULTS: We identified that the ErbB signaling pathway and proteoglycans pathway was significantly associated with adenocarcinoma cervical cancers patients. In these pathways, missense mutation especially S310F in the ERBB2 gene as well as G12D and A146T in the KRAS gene were significantly associated with adenocarcinoma cases. Furthermore, a comparison of SCC cases with adjacent control tissues revealed differential hypermethylation of two CpG positions of the KAAG1 gene and differential downregulation of NPY1R and NPY5R genes in cervical squamous cell carcinoma compared to cervical adenocarcinoma cases and adjacent normal tissues. Specifically, the hypermethylation of the promoter region of the KAAG1 gene might be responsible for the carcinogenesis of cervical squamous cells exclusively and methylation marks can be reversible by the widely used drug, azacytidine. In contrast, adenocarcinoma cervical cancer cases may be treated with floxuridine which is successfully utilized for other tissue-specific adenocarcinoma cases. CONCLUSIONS: These results provide valuable insight into the differential molecular markers among the categories of cervical cancer, which helps our ability to classify these cancers and for targeted therapy.
OBJECTIVES: To identify genes contributing to variation in echocardiographic left ventricular mass and related traits using linkage and linkage disequilibrium analysis in sibships ascertained on hypertension. METHODS: The Hypertension Genetic Epidemiology Network (HyperGEN) Study of left ventricular hypertrophy characterized left ventricular mass, relative wall thickness (RWT), and aortic root diameter (ARD) with echocardiograms collected using a standardized protocol at four HyperGEN field centers. A high-throughput scanning fluorescence detector system genotyped 387 polymorphisms distributed throughout the genome. Linkage analyses were conducted once genotyping results became available for 885 siblings from 382 sibships. RESULTS: Although single logarithm of the odds (LOD) score peaks of 1.2 or more were found on chromosomes 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 17, and 21, we observed a broad band of peaks in both ethnic groups (white and black) on chromosome 4 and selected candidate genes (NPY1R, NPY2R, NPY5R, SFRP2, CPE, IL15, and EDNRA) from this region. Using cases and controls from extremes of the left ventricular mass index, RWT, and ARD distributions, we assessed associations with these phenotypes and haplotype-tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the candidates. Among blacks, SNPs in IL15, NPY2R, and NPY5R showed strong evidence for association (P < 0.005); all candidates except EDNRA showed suggestive association (P < 0.05). In whites, NPY2R, NPY5R, and SFRP2 SNPs offered suggestive evidence of association with one or more traits (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Genetic variation in NPY1R, NPY2R, NPY5R, CPE, IL15, and SFRP2, detected using linkage analysis in hypertensive siblings, was associated with left ventricular phenotypes in blacks and/or whites.
AIM: This study assesses whether genetic variants in stress-related genes are associated with prolonged abstinence from heroin in subjects that are not in long-term methadone treatment. METHODS: Frequencies of 117 polymorphisms in 30 genes were compared between subjects with history of heroin addiction, either without agonist treatment (n = 129) or in methadone maintenance treatment (n = 923). RESULTS: SNP rs1500 downstream of CRHBP and an interaction of SNPs rs10482672 (NR3C1) and rs4234955 (NPY1R/NPY5R) were significantly associated with prolonged abstinence without agonist treatment. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that variability in stress-related genes may contribute to the ability of certain subjects to remain in prolonged abstinence from heroin, possibly due to higher resilience to stress.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is an abundant neurohormone in the central and peripheral nervous system involved in feeding behavior, energy balance, nociception, and anxiety. Several NPY receptor (NPYR) subtypes display elevated expression in many cancers including in breast tumors where it is exploited for imaging and diagnosis. Here, we address how hypoxia, a common feature of the tumor microenvironment, influences the expression of the NPYRs. We show that NPY1R and NPY5R mRNA abundance is induced by hypoxia in a hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-dependent manner in breast cancer cell lines MCF7 and MDA-MB-231. We demonstrate that HIFs bind to several genomic regions upstream of the NPY1R and NPY5R transcription start sites. In addition, the MAPK/ERK pathway is activated more rapidly upon NPY5R stimulation in hypoxic cells compared with normoxic cells. This pathway requires insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) activity in normoxia, but not in hypoxic cells, which display resistance to the radiosensitizer and IGF1R inhibitor AG1024. Furthermore, hypoxic cells proliferate and migrate more when stimulated with NPY relative to normoxic cells and exhibit a more robust response to a Y5-specific agonist. Our data suggest that hypoxia-induced NPYRs render hypoxic cells more sensitive to NPY stimulation. Considering that breast tissue receives a constant supply of NPY, hypoxic breast tumors are the perfect storm for hyperactive NPYR. This study not only highlights a new relationship between the HIFs and NPYR expression and activity but may inform the use of chemotherapeutics targeting NPYRs and hypoxic cells.
Neuropeptides are small proteinaceous molecules (3-100 amino acids) that are secreted by neurons and act on both neuronal and non-neuronal cells. Neuropeptide Y (NPY), a highly conserved and expressed neuropeptide in the central nervous system of mammals, plays a major role in stress response and resilience. Increasing evidence suggests that NPY and its receptors are altered in depression and suicide, pointing to their antidepressant-like nature. The objective of this study was to examine the role of NPY system in depression and suicidal behavior. Expression of NPY and its four receptors, NPY1R, NPY2R, NPY4R, and NPY5R was studied at the transcriptional and translational levels in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus regions of the postmortem brain of normal control (NC) (n = 24) and depressed suicide (DS) (n = 24) subjects. We observed a significant decrease in NPY mRNA and upregulation in NPY1R and NPY2R mRNA in both brain regions of DS subjects compared with NC subjects. We also observed a significant decrease in NPY protein expression in the PFC of subjects with DS. This study provides the first detailed evidence of alterations in the NPY system and the associated stress response in depression and suicidal behavior in humans. The outcomes of this study could be applied in the development of novel NPY system-targeted approaches for the treatment of depression.
BACKGROUND: Autism is a pervasive developmental disorder characterized by a triad of deficits: qualitative impairments in social interactions, communication deficits, and repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior. Although autism is etiologically heterogeneous, family and twin studies have established a definite genetic basis. The inheritance of idiopathic autism is presumed to be complex, with many genes involved; environmental factors are also possibly contributory. The analysis of chromosome abnormalities associated with autism contributes greatly to the identification of autism candidate genes. CASE PRESENTATION: We describe a child with autistic disorder and an interstitial deletion on chromosome 4q. This child first presented at 12 months of age with developmental delay and minor dysmorphic features. At 4 years of age a diagnosis of Pervasive Developmental Disorder was made. At 11 years of age he met diagnostic criteria for autism. Cytogenetic studies revealed a chromosome 4q deletion. The karyotype was 46, XY del 4 (q31.3-q33). Here we report the clinical phenotype of the child and the molecular characterization of the deletion using molecular cytogenetic techniques and analysis of polymorphic markers. These studies revealed a 19 megabase deletion spanning 4q32 to 4q34. Analysis of existing polymorphic markers and new markers developed in this study revealed that the deletion arose on a paternally derived chromosome. To date 33 genes of known or inferred function are deleted as a consequence of the deletion. Among these are the AMPA 2 gene that encodes the glutamate receptor GluR2 sub-unit, GLRA3 and GLRB genes that encode glycine receptor subunits and neuropeptide Y receptor genes NPY1R and NPY5R. CONCLUSIONS: The deletion in this autistic subject serves to highlight specific autism candidate genes. He is hemizygous for AMPA 2, GLRA3, GLRB, NPY1R and NPY5R. GluR2 is the major determinant of AMPA receptor structure. Glutamate receptors maintain structural and functional plasticity of synapses. Neuropeptide Y and its receptors NPY1R and NPY5R play a role in hippocampal learning and memory. Glycine receptors are expressed in very early cortical development. Molecular cytogenetic studies and DNA sequence analysis in other patients with autism will be necessary to confirm that these genes are involved in autism.
The neuropeptide Y 5 receptor (NPY5R) plays an important role in the regulation of appetite and feeding behaviour in mammals by modulating the effect of the neurotransmitter neuropeptide Y. As single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation in the bovine NPY5R gene is likely to influence the expression and/or function of this gene, the objectives of this study were to identify SNPs in the bovine NPY5R gene and to predict their functional role in the expression and physico-chemical characteristics of the protein product. Nineteen novel SNPs were identified in a 2.1 kb genomic region of the NPY5R gene in a total of 419 beef cattle from 13 Bos taurus breeds and eight Bos indicus animals. Four of these SNPs were non-synonymous (Met --> Ile, Leu --> Phe, Pro --> Leu, Arg --> Stop codon), while 10 were synonymous. Of particular interest was one non-synonymous SNP (c.1090C>T) that introduced a stop codon in the third intracellular loop of the NPY5R molecule. This stop codon is predicted to create a truncated NPY5R molecule with different physico-chemical properties compared to the native NPY5R protein. A further four SNPs were located in the 5' untranslated region (UTR) and one in the 3'UTR. Two of the 5'UTR SNPs affected putative transcription factor binding sites (GATA binding factor and snRNA-activating protein complex). In conclusion, regulatory and functional SNPs were identified in the bovine NPY5R gene. These include SNPs which potentially modify transcription factor binding sites as well as SNPs that cause amino acid changes and premature termination of the NPY5R protein. Such polymorphisms are likely to play vital physiological roles in the neuropeptide Y mediated appetite, feed intake and energy homeostasis in cattle.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of neuropeptides and their receptors that play a role in cardiac homeostasis in the right atrium of nondiabetic and diabetic patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft surgery. BACKGROUND: The cardioactive neuropeptides and their receptors investigated in this study were Neuropeptide Y (NPY), and its receptors, NPY Receptor1 (NPY1R), NPY Receptor2 (NPY2R), NPY Receptor5 (NPY5R) and Substance P (SP) and its receptor, Neurokinin1R (NK1R). METHODS: The gene and protein expression of NPY, NPY1R, NPY2R, NPY5R, SP and NK1R from the atrial tissue of 10 nondiabetic and diabetic patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) was assessed by Q-RTPCR, immunohistochemistry, Western blot, and ELISA. RESULTS: Gene expression of NPY2R, NPY5R, preproTachykinin A (SP gene), and NK1R and their respective protein expression were significantly reduced whereas that of NPY and NPY1R were unchanged in the right atrium of diabetic patients compared to nondiabetic patients. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that the expression of neuropeptides and their receptors in the diabetic heart is significantly impaired, and may be the link between neuropathy and cardiac complications. Further studies are warranted to delineate pathophysiologic mechanisms associated with dysregulation of the cardiac neuropeptide system and the relationship to cardiac complications in diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: Central counter-regulatory mechanisms, including those related to the orexigenic hormone neuropeptide Y (NPY), may limit the weight loss observed with conventional pharmacological monotherapy. This study evaluated whether blockade of the NPY Y5 receptor (NPY5R) with the selective antagonist MK-0557 potentiates sibutramine and orlistat weight loss effects. RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Obese patients (497, BMI 30 to 43 kg/m2) were randomized to 1 of 5 treatment arms [placebo, n = 101; sibutramine 10 mg/d, n = 100; MK-0557 1 mg/d plus sibutramine 10 mg/d, n = 98; orlistat 120 mg TID, n = 99; MK-0557 1 mg/d plus orlistat 120 mg TID, n = 99] in conjunction with a hypocaloric diet for 24 weeks. The all-patients-treated population, imputing missing data using last observation carried forward, was used to assess weight loss from baseline. RESULTS: The study was completed by 71% of patients in placebo, 76% in sibutramine alone, 79% in MK-0557 + sibutramine, 69% in orlistat alone, and 76% in MK-0557 + orlistat groups. Least squares (LS) mean difference [95% confidence interval (CI)] in weight change from baseline between MK-0557 + sibutramine and sibutramine alone was -0.1 (-1.6, 1.4) kg (p = 0.892) and between MK-0557 + orlistat and orlistat alone was -0.9 (-2.4, 0.6) kg (p = 0.250). Sibutramine alone induced a LS mean weight loss of -5.9 (-6.9, -4.9) kg vs. -4.6 (-5.7, -3.6) kg for orlistat (p = 0.097). There were no serious drug-related adverse events and MK-0557 was well tolerated. DISCUSSION: Blockade of the NPY5R with the potent antagonist MK-0557 did not significantly increase the weight loss efficacy of either orlistat or sibutramine monotherapy.
STAT (Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription) transcription factors are constitutively activated in most hematopoietic cancers. We previously identified a target gene, LPP/miR-28 (LIM domain containing preferred translocation partner in lipoma), induced by constitutive activation of STAT5, but not by transient cytokine-activated STAT5. miR-28 exerts negative effects on thrombopoietin receptor signaling and platelet formation. Here, we demonstrate that, in transformed hematopoietic cells, STAT5 and p53 must be synergistically bound to chromatin for induction of LPP/miR-28 transcription. Genome-wide association studies show that both STAT5 and p53 are co-localized on the chromatin at 463 genomic positions in proximal promoters. Chromatin binding of p53 is dependent on persistent STAT5 activation at these proximal promoters. The transcriptional activity of selected promoters bound by STAT5 and p53 was significantly changed upon STAT5 or p53 inhibition. Abnormal expression of several STAT5-p53 target genes (LEP, ATP5J, GTF2A2, VEGFC, NPY1R and NPY5R) is frequently detected in platelets of myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) patients, but not in platelets from healthy controls. In conclusion, persistently active STAT5 can recruit normal p53, like in the case of MPN cells, but also p53 mutants, such as p53 M133K in human erythroleukemia cells, leading to pathologic gene expression that differs from canonical STAT5 or p53 transcriptional programs.
Panic disorder (PD) is a moderately heritable anxiety disorder whose pathogenesis is not well understood. Due to the lack of power in previous association studies, genes that are truly associated with PD might not be detected. In this study, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in two independent data sets using the Affymetrix Mapping 500K Array or Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0. We obtained imputed genotypes for each GWAS and performed a meta-analysis of two GWAS data sets (718 cases and 1717 controls). For follow-up, 12 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were tested in 329 cases and 861 controls. Gene ontology enrichment and candidate gene analyses were conducted using the GWAS or meta-analysis results. We also applied the polygenic score analysis to our two GWAS samples to test the hypothesis of polygenic components contributing to PD. Although genome-wide significant SNPs were not detected in either of the GWAS nor the meta-analysis, suggestive associations were observed in several loci such as BDKRB2 (P=1.3 x 10(-5), odds ratio=1.31). Among previous candidate genes, supportive evidence for association of NPY5R with PD was obtained (gene-wise corrected P=6.4 x 10(-4)). Polygenic scores calculated from weakly associated SNPs (P<0.3 and 0.4) in the discovery sample were significantly associated with PD status in the target sample in both directions (sample I to sample II and vice versa) (P<0.05). Our findings suggest that large sets of common variants of small effects collectively account for risk of PD.
