Nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group I member 2; Nuclear receptor that binds and is activated by variety of endogenous and xenobiotic compounds. Transcription factor that activates the transcription of multiple genes involved in the metabolism and secretion of potentially harmful xenobiotics, drugs and endogenous compounds. Activated by the antibiotic rifampicin and various plant metabolites, such as hyperforin, guggulipid, colupulone, and isoflavones. Response to specific ligands is species-specific. Activated by naturally occurring steroids, such as pregnenolone and progesterone. Binds [...] 
Traditionally, xenobiotic receptors are known for their role in chemical sensing and detoxification, as receptor activation regulates the expression of various key enzymes and receptors. However, recent studies have highlighted that xenobiotic receptors also play a key role in the regulation of lipid metabolism and therefore function also as metabolic sensors. Since dyslipidemia is a major risk factor for various cardiometabolic diseases, like atherosclerosis and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, it is of major importance to understand the molecular mechanisms that are regulated by xenobiotic receptors. In this review, three major xenobiotic receptors will be discussed, being the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), pregnane X receptor (PXR) and the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR). Specifically, this review will focus on recent insights into the metabolic functions of these receptors, especially in the field of lipid metabolism and the associated dyslipidemia.
BACKGROUND: The protein Solute carrier family 27 member 4 (SLC27A4) is crucial for fatty acid synthesis and beta-oxidation, but its role in hepatic steatosis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) progression is not fully understood. METHODS: Mice with AAV-mediated overexpression of Slc27a4 in liver and hepatocytes-specific deletion of Slc27a4 were fed a standard chow diet, a high-fat diet (HFD), or a methionine and choline-deficient diet (MCD). Serum and liver tissues were collected and analyzed by biochemical assay, histology, lipidomic analysis, RNA-seq analysis, qPCR, western blot and immunofluorescence. RESULTS: This study found elevated expression of SLC27A4 in individuals with NAFLD and OAPA-treated MPHs cells, leading to increased lipid accumulation and diet-induced liver steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis. Conversely, hepatocyte-specific deletion of Slc27a4 improved the development of both NAFLD and NASH. SLC27A4 overexpression resulted in increased hepatic pregnane X receptor (PXR) expression and accumulation of phosphatidylcholine (PC), which activates PXR signaling and inducing SLC27A4 expression. PXR overexpression hinders the protective impact of Slc27a4 deletion on lipid accumulation and inflammation, whereas its deficiency in mice reduces the effect of Slc27a4 overexpression on NAFLD development. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that SLC27A4 plays a critical role of lipid accumulation and inflammation, and is implicated in the development of NAFLD progression, rendering it potentially actionable target for NAFLD treatment.
Endotoxemia-related acute liver injury has a poor prognosis and high mortality, and macrophage polarization plays a central role in the pathological process. Pregnane X receptor (PXR) serves as a nuclear receptor and xenosensor, safeguarding the liver from toxic stimuli. However, the effect and underlying mechanism of PXR activation on endotoxemic liver injury remain largely unknown. Here, the expression of PXR is reported in human and murine macrophages, and PXR activation modified immunotypes of macrophages. Moreover, PXR activation significantly attenuated endotoxemic liver injury and promoted macrophage M2 polarization. Macrophage depletion by GdCl(3) confirmed the essential of macrophages in the beneficial effects observed with PXR activation. The role of PXR in macrophages is further validated using AAV8-F4/80-Pxr shRNA-treated mice; the PXR-mediated hepatoprotection is impaired, and M2 polarization enhancement is blunted. Additionally, treatment with PXR agonists inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced M1 polarization and favored M2 polarization in BMDM, Raw264.7, and THP-1 cells. Further analyses revealed an interaction between PXR and p-STAT6 in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, blocking Pxr or Stat6 abolished the PXR-induced polarization shift. Collectively, macrophage PXR activation attenuated endotoxin-induced liver injury and regulated macrophage polarization through the STAT6 signaling pathway, which provided a potential therapeutic target for managing endotoxemic liver injury.
Nuclear receptors (NRs) are widely expressed transcription factors that bind small, lipophilic compounds and regulate diverse biological processes. In the small intestine, NRs are known to act as sensors that control transcriptional responses to endogenous and exogenous signals, yet their downstream effects have not been characterized extensively. Here, we investigate the activation of six different NRs individually in human intestinal organoids using small molecules agonists. We observe changes in key enterocyte functions such as lipid, glucose, and amino acid absorption, the regulation of electrolyte balance, and drug metabolism. Our findings reinforce PXR, LXR, FXR, and PPARalpha as regulators of lipid absorption. Furthermore, known hepatic effects of AHR and VDR activation were recapitulated in the human small intestine. Finally, we identify unique target genes for intestinal PXR activation (ERG28, TMEM97, and TM7SF2), LXR activation (RAB6B), and VDR activation (CA12). This study provides an unbiased and comprehensive transcriptomic description of individual NR pathways in the human small intestine. By gaining a deeper understanding of the effects of individual NRs, we might better harness their pharmacological and therapeutic potential.
Anti-tuberculosis drug-induced hepatotoxicity (ATDH) is a serious adverse drug reaction. Conflicting results have been obtained regarding the associations of nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group I member 2 (NR1I2) gene polymorphisms on susceptibility to ATDH. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate the associations using a systematic review/meta-analysis approach. PubMed, Medline, Cochrane Library, Web of Science and SinoMed databases were searched for all eligible studies from inception to June 10, 2020. Pooled adjusted odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were employed to evaluate the strength of the association between the NR1I2 polymorphisms and the risk of ATDH. Subgroup analysis was performed by region of origin, and meta-regression were performed to detect potential sources of heterogeneity. A total of five case-control studies involving 572 cases and 1867 controls were identified. Fourteen SNPs in the NR1I2 gene have been reported, and the most heavily studied SNPs were rs3814055 and rs7643645. The pooled estimates did not exhibit any significant associations between SNPs rs3814055 and rs7643645 and the risk of ATDH (rs3814055: dominant model, OR = 1.00, 95% CI: 0.82-1.22, P = 1.00; recessive model, OR = 1.17, 95% CI: 0.76-1.78, P = .48; rs7643645: dominant model, OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 0.64-1.68, P = .89; recessive model, OR = 0.98, 95% CI: 0.65-1.49, P = .93). Subgroup analysis obtained similar negative results in Chinese patients, and the diagnostic criteria of ATDH may be the source of heterogeneity. Based on the meta-analysis described in this report, we did not observe any association between NR1I2 gene polymorphisms and ATDH susceptibility. However, this conclusion should be interpreted with caution due to the low number of studies and the relatively small sample size.
Deoxynivalenol (DON) is a prevalent toxin causing severe liver damage through hepatocellular oxidative stress. However, the underlying mechanisms and effective therapeutic approaches remain unknown. Here, the unique role of the xenobiotic metabolism factor pregnane X receptor (PXR) in mediating DON-induced hepatocellular oxidative stress is investigated. Treatment with the PXR agonist 3-indole-propionic acid (IPA) alleviates DON-induced oxidative stress and liver injury both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, it is discovered for the first time that PXR agonist IPA directly transactivates the m(6)A demethylase FTO expression, leading to site-specific demethylation and decreased abundance of YTHDC1-bound Malat1 lncRNA at single-nucleotide resolution. The diminished m(6)A modification of Malat1 lncRNA reduces its stability and augments antioxidant pathways governed by NRF2, consequently mitigating DON-induced liver injury. Furthermore, Malat1 knockout mice exhibit decreased DON-induced liver injury, emphasizing the role of Malat1 lncRNA in oxidative stress. Collectively, the findings establish that PXR-mediated m(6)A-dependent Malat1 lncRNA expression determines hepatocyte oxidative stress via m(6)A demethylase FTO, providing valuable insights into the potential mechanisms underlying DON-induced liver injury and offers potential therapeutic strategies for its treatment.
Bone homeostasis is maintained by osteoclast-mediated bone resorption and osteoblast-mediated bone formation. A dramatic decrease in estrogen levels in postmenopausal women leads to osteoclast overactivation, impaired bone homeostasis, and subsequent bone loss. Changes in the gut microbiome affect bone mineral density. However, the role of the gut microbiome in estrogen deficiency-induced bone loss and its underlying mechanism remain unknown. In this study, we found that the abundance of Clostridium sporogenes (C. spor.) and its derived metabolite, indole propionic acid (IPA), were decreased in ovariectomized (OVX) mice. In vitro assays suggested that IPA suppressed osteoclast differentiation and function. At the molecular level, IPA suppressed receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Beta ligand (RANKL)-induced pregnane X receptor (PXR) ubiquitination and degradation, leading to increased binding of remaining PXR with P65. In vivo daily IPA administration or repeated C. spor. colonization protected against OVX-induced bone loss. To protect live bacteria from the harsh gastric environment and delay the emptying of orally administered C. spor. from the intestine, a C. spor.-encapsulated silk fibroin (SF) hydrogel system was developed, which achieved bone protection in OVX mice comparable to that achieved with repeated germ transplantation or daily IPA administration. Overall, we found that gut C. spor.-derived IPA was involved in estrogen deficiency-induced osteoclast overactivation by regulating the PXR/P65 complex. The C. spor.-encapsulated SF hydrogel system is a promising tool for combating postmenopausal osteoporosis without the disadvantages of repeated germ transplantation.
Atherosclerosis is a major global health concern. The central modifiable risk factors and causative agents of the disease are high total and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol. To reduce morbidity and mortality, a thorough understanding of the factors that influence an individual's cholesterol status during the decades when the arteria-narrowing arteriosclerotic plaques are forming is critical. Several drugs are known to increase cholesterol levels; however, the mechanisms are poorly understood. Activation of pregnane X receptor (PXR), the major regulator of drug metabolism and molecular mediator of clinically significant drug-drug interactions, has been shown to induce hypercholesterolemia. As a major sensor of the chemical environment, PXR may in part mediate hypercholesterolemic effects of drug treatment. This review compiles the current knowledge of PXR in cholesterol homeostasis and discusses the role of PXR in drug-induced hypercholesterolemia.
NR1I2 (PXR) and NR1I3 (CAR) are nuclear receptors that are classified as xenoreceptors. Upon activation by various xenobiotics, including marketed drugs, they regulate the transcription level of major drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters and facilitate the elimination of xenobiotics from the body. The modulation of the activity of these two xenoreceptors by various ligands is a major source of pharmacokinetic variability of environmental origin. NR1I2 and NR1I3 genetic polymorphisms can affect the pharmacokinetics and therapeutic response to many drugs, such as irinotecan, tacrolimus and atazanavir. This review provides an overview of NR1I2 and NR1I3 pharmacogenetic studies in various therapeutic fields (oncology, immunomodulation and infectiology) and discusses the implementation of NR1I2 and NR1I3 genetic polymorphism testing in the clinical routine.
Pregnane X receptor (PXR, NR1I2) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR, NR1I3) are members of the nuclear receptor superfamily that mainly act as ligand-activated transcription factors. Their functions have long been associated with the regulation of drug metabolism and disposition, and it is now well established that they are implicated in physiological and pathological conditions. Considerable efforts have been made to understand the regulation of their activity by their cognate ligand; however, additional regulatory mechanisms, among which the regulation of their expression, modulate their pleiotropic effects. This review summarizes the current knowledge on CAR and PXR expression during development and adult life; tissue distribution; spatial, temporal, and metabolic regulations; as well as in pathological situations, including chronic diseases and cancers. The expression of CAR and PXR is modulated by complex regulatory mechanisms that involve the interplay of transcription factors and also post-transcriptional and epigenetic modifications. Moreover, many environmental stimuli affect CAR and PXR expression through mechanisms that have not been elucidated.
Pregnane X receptor (PXR, NR1I2), a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, is a crucial regulator of nutrient metabolism and metabolic detoxification such as metabolic syndrome, xenobiotic metabolism, inflammatory responses, glucose, cholesterol and lipid metabolism, and endocrine homeostasis. Notably, much experimental and clinical evidence show that PXR senses xenobiotics and triggers the detoxification response to prevent diseases such as diabetes, obesity, intestinal inflammatory diseases and liver fibrosis. In this review we summarize recent advances on remarkable metabolic and regulatory versatility of PXR, and we emphasizes its role and potential implication as an effective modulator of self-detoxification in animals and humans.
Over the past 20 years, the ability of the xenobiotic receptors to coordinate an array of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in response to endogenous and exogenous stimuli has been extensively characterized and well documented. The constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and the pregnane X receptor (PXR) are the xenobiotic receptors that have received the most attention since they regulate the expression of numerous proteins important to drug metabolism and clearance and formulate a central defensive mechanism to protect the body against xenobiotic challenges. However, accumulating evidence has shown that these xenobiotic sensors also control many cellular processes outside of their traditional realms of xenobiotic metabolism and disposition, including physiologic and/or pathophysiologic responses in energy homeostasis, cell proliferation, inflammation, tissue injury and repair, immune response, and cancer development. This review will highlight recent advances in studying the noncanonical functions of xenobiotic receptors with a particular focus placed on the roles of CAR and PXR in energy homeostasis and cancer development.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Inconsistent results regarding an association between polymorphisms within the Homo sapiens nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group I member 2 (NR1I2) gene and susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have been reported. A systematic review and meta-analysis was thus undertaken to determine whether NR1I2 gene polymorphisms are associated with an increased risk of IBD. METHODS: Article retrieval was performed using on-line databases, such as PubMed, Embase, CENTRAL, and WOS. After extracting eligible data, Mantel-Haenszel statistics were applied to calculate the odds radio (OR), 95% confidence interval (95% CI) and P value under a random or fixed-effects model. RESULTS: A total of seven articles with 4410 IBD subjects and 4028 controls were included. Compared with the control group, no significant increase in IBD susceptibility was observed for the -25385C/T (OR=0.92, 95% CI=0.78 approximately 1.07, P=0.259), -24381A/C (OR=0.96, 95% CI=0.87 approximately 1.06, P=0.378), +8055C/T (OR=1.06, 95% CI=0.97 approximately 1.15, P=0.186), or +7635A/G (OR=0.96, 95% CI=0.87 approximately 1.05, P=0.348) polymorphisms within the NR1I2 gene under the allele model. CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis failed to demonstrate an association between -25385C/T, -24381A/C, +8055C/T, or +7635A/G polymorphisms within the NR1I2 gene and overall IBD risk. A larger sample size is needed to validate our conclusion.
Pregnane X receptor (PXR) is a nuclear receptor considered to be a master xenobiotic receptor that coordinately regulates the expression of genes encoding drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters to essentially detoxify and eliminate xenobiotics and endotoxins from the body. In the past several years, the function of PXR in the regulation of xenobiotic metabolism has been extensively studied, and the role of PXR as a xenobiotic sensor has been well established. It is now clear, however, that PXR plays many other roles in addition to its xenobiotic-sensing function. For instance, recent studies have discovered previously unidentified roles of PXR in inflammatory response, cell proliferation, and cell migration. PXR also contributes to the dysregulation of these processes in diseases states. These recent discoveries of the role of PXR in the physiologic and pathophysiologic conditions of other cellular processes provides the possibility of novel targets for drug discovery. This review highlights areas of PXR regulation that require further clarification and summarizes the recent progress in our understanding of the nonxenobiotic functions of PXR that can be explored for relevant therapeutic applications.
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a life-threatening condition, but effective medications to prevent its progression and rupture are currently lacking. The nuclear receptor pregnane-X-receptor (PXR) plays a crucial role in vascular homeostasis. However, the role of PXR in AAA development remains unknown. We first detected the PXR expression in human and murine AAA tissues by RT-qPCR and Western blot. To investigate the potential role of PXR in the development of AAA, we used adeno-associated virus-mediated overexpression of PXR and pharmacological activation of PXR by ginkgolide A (GA) in mouse AAA models induced by both angiotensin II (AngII) and calcium phosphate [Ca(3)(PO(4))(2)]. The underlying mechanism was further explored using RNA-sequencing and molecular biological analyses. We found a significant decrease in both mRNA and protein levels of PXR in both human and murine aortic smooth muscle cells from AAA tissues, accompanied with phenotypic switching of vascular smooth muscle cell and increased oxidative stress. PXR overexpression in abdominal aortas and GA treatment successfully suppressed AAA formation in both mouse AAA models. RNA-sequencing data revealed that PXR activation inhibited gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor subunit alpha3 (GABRA3) expression. Additional mechanistic studies identified that PXR suppressed AAA through mitigating GABRA3-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and subsequent phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Interestingly, p-JNK was found to induce ubiquitin-proteasome degradation of PXR. In summary, our data unveiled, for the first time, the protective role of PXR against AAA pathogenesis by inhibiting oxidative stress. These findings suggested PXR as a promising therapeutic target for AAA.
Functional analysis has broadened our understanding of the physiological roles of the two related nuclear receptors pregnane X receptor (PXR; NR1I2) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR; NR1I3). Initial research focused on the role of these two receptors in xenobiotic detoxification and, more recently, additional functional roles for CAR have been identified. Specifically, CAR activity has been shown to ameliorate the effects of hyperbilirubinemia, caloric restriction and toxic bile acids. Thus, the physiological role of CAR has broadened to include responses to metabolic and nutritional stress. These data highlight potential new opportunities in targeting CAR for drug discovery.
Nuclear receptors are ligand-activated transcription factors that can often be useful drug targets. Unfortunately, ligand promiscuity leads to two-thirds of receptors remaining clinically untargeted. PXR is a nuclear receptor that can be activated by diverse compounds to elevate metabolism, negatively impacting drug efficacy and safety. This presents a barrier to drug development because compounds designed to target other proteins must avoid PXR activation while retaining potency for the desired target. This problem could be avoided by using PXR antagonists, but these compounds are rare, and their molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we report structurally related PXR-selective agonists and antagonists and their corresponding co-crystal structures to describe mechanisms of antagonism and selectivity. Structural and computational approaches show that antagonists induce PXR conformational changes incompatible with transcriptional coactivator recruitment. These results guide the design of compounds with predictable agonist/antagonist activities and bolster efforts to generate antagonists to prevent PXR activation interfering with other drugs.
This snapshot reviews the current state of knowledge on genetic variants of nuclear receptors (NRs) involved in regulating various aspects of liver metabolism. Interindividual differences in responses to diet and other 'in-' and environmental stressors can be caused by variants in components of the NR regulatory gene network. We recapitulate recent evidence for the application of NRs in genetic diagnosis of monogenic liver disease. Genetic analysis of multifactorial liver diseases, such as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and diabetes mellitus, pinpoints key players in disease predisposition and progression. In particular, NR1H4 variants have been associated with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and gallstone disease. Other examples include studies of NR1I2 and NR1I3 polymorphisms in patients with drug-induced liver injury and NR5A2 variation in cholangiocarcinoma. Associations of NR gene variants have been identified in patients with dyslipidemia and other metabolic syndrome-associated traits by genome-wide studies. Evidence from these analyses confirms a role for NR variation in common diseases, linking regulatory networks to complex and variable phenotypes. These new insights into the impact of NR variants offer perspectives for their future use in diagnosis and treatment of common diseases.
Pregnane X receptor (PXR) has been reported to regulate glycolipid metabolism. The dysfunction of intestinal barrier contributes to metabolic disorders. However, the role of intestinal PXR in metabolic diseases remains largely unknown. Here, we show that activation of PXR by tributyl citrate (TBC), an intestinal-selective PXR agonist, improves high fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity. The metabolic benefit of intestinal PXR activation is associated with upregulation of beta-1,3 galactosyltransferase 5 (B3galt5). Our results reveal that B3galt5 mainly expresses in the intestine and is a direct PXR transcriptional target. B3galt5 knockout exacerbates HFD-induced obesity, insulin resistance and inflammation. Mechanistically, B3galt5 is essential to maintain the integrity of intestinal mucus barrier. B3galt5 ablation impairs the O-glycosylation of mucin2, destabilizes the mucus layer, and increases intestinal permeability. Furthermore, B3galt5 deficiency abolishes the beneficial effect of intestinal PXR activation on metabolic disorders. Our results suggest the intestinal-selective PXR activation regulates B3galt5 expression and maintains metabolic homeostasis, making it a potential therapeutic strategy in obesity.
Drug-induced liver injury (DILI), especially acetaminophen overdose, is the leading cause of acute liver failure. Pregnane X receptor (PXR) is a nuclear receptor and the master regulator of drug metabolism. Aberrant activation of PXR plays a pathogenic role in the acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. Here, we aimed to examine the S-nitrosylation of PXR (SNO-PXR) in response to acetaminophen. We found that PXR was S-nitrosylated in hepatocytes and the mouse livers after exposure to acetaminophen or S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO). Mass spectrometry and site-directed mutagenesis identified the cysteine 307 as the primary residue for S-nitrosylation (SNO) modification. In hepatocytes, SNO suppressed both agonist-induced (rifampicin and SR12813) and constitutively active PXR (VP-PXR, a human PXR fused to the minimal transactivator domain of the herpes virus transcription factor VP16) activations. Furthermore, in acetaminophen-overdosed mouse livers, PXR protein was decreased at the centrilobular regions overlapping with increased SNO. In PXR-/- mice, replenishing the livers with the SNO-deficient PXR significantly aggravated hepatic necrosis, increased HMGB1 release, and exacerbated liver injury and inflammation. Particularly, we demonstrated that S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) inhibitor N6022 promoted hepatoprotection by increasing the levels of SNO-PXR. In conclusion, PXR is posttranslationally modified by SNO in hepatocytes in response to acetaminophen. This modification mitigated the acetaminophen-induced PXR hyperactivity. It may serve as a target for therapeutical intervention.
