Nuclear receptor subfamily 6 group A member 1; Orphan nuclear receptor. Binds to a response element containing the sequence 5'-TCAAGGTCA-3'. May be involved in the regulation of gene expression in germ cell development during gametogenesis (By similarity).
Histone lysine lactylation (Kla) plays a vital role in the tumorigenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Hence, we focused on Kla-specific genes to select novel therapeutic targets. Differentially expressed Kla-specific genes (DEKlaGs) were identified from TCGA with the cut-off criteria |log(2)(FlodChange (FC))| > 2, p-value < 0.05, following investigating the prognostic value. The correlation between lactate accumulation and prognostic DEKlaGs expression was further investigated. On the other hand, we explored the roles of Kla activation in the immune microenvironment, immunotherapy, and drug resistance. We conducted gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to predict the pathways influenced by Kla. The predictive power of Cox model was further identified in ICGC and GEO databases. A total of 129 DEKlaGs were identified, and 32 molecules might be potential prognostic biomarkers. A Cox model including ARHGEF37, MTFR2, NR6A1, NT5DC2, OSBP2, RNASEH2A, SFN, and UNC119B was constructed, which suggested unfavorable overall survival in high-risk score group, and risk score could serve as an indicator for large tumor size, poor pathological grade and advanced stage. NR6A1, OSBP2 and UNC119B could inhibit NK cell as well as TIL cell infiltration, and impair Type-I and II IFN responses in HCC, thereby contributing to unsatisfactory prognosis and immunotherapy resistance. OSBP2 and UNC119B were identified to be related to chemotherapy resistance. GSEA showed that WNT, MTOR, MAPK and NOTCH signaling pathways were activated, indicating that these pathways might play a crucial role during the Kla process. On the other hand, we showed that NR6A1 and OSBP2 were overexpressed in GEO. OSBP2 and UNC119B contributed to poor survival and advanced stage in ICGC. In summary, histone Kla was related to HCC prognosis and might serve as an independent biomarker. NR6A1, OSBP2 and UNC119B were associated with the prognosis, immunotherapy, and chemotherapy resistance, suggesting that NR6A1, OSBP2 and UNC119B might be novel candidate therapeutic targets for HCC.
Breast-cancer is heterogeneous and consists of various groups with different biological characteristics. Innovative pharmacological approaches accounting for this heterogeneity are needed. The forty eight human Nuclear-Hormone-Receptors are ligand-dependent transcription-factors and are classified into Endocrine-Receptors, Adopted-Orphan-Receptors (Lipid-sensors and Enigmatic-Orphans) and Orphan-receptors. Nuclear-Receptors represent ideal targets for the design/synthesis of pharmacological ligands. We provide an overview of the literature available on the expression and potential role played by Lipid-sensors, Enigmatic-Orphans and Orphan-Receptors in breast-cancer. The data are complemented by an analysis of the expression levels of each selected Nuclear-Receptor in the PAM50 breast-cancer groups, following re-elaboration of the data publicly available. The major aim is to support the idea that some of the Nuclear-Receptors represent largely unexploited therapeutic-targets in breast-cancer treatment/chemo-prevention. On the basis of our analysis, we conclude that the Lipid-Sensors, NR1C3, NR1H2 and NR1H3 are likely to be onco-suppressors in breast-cancer. The Enigmatic-Orphans, NR1F1 NR2A1 and NR3B3 as well as the Orphan-Receptors, NR0B1, NR0B2, NR1D1, NR2F1, NR2F2 and NR4A3 exert a similar action. These Nuclear-Receptors represent candidates for the development of therapeutic strategies aimed at increasing their expression or activating them in tumor cells. The group of Nuclear-Receptors endowed with potential oncogenic properties consists of the Lipid-Sensors, NR1C2 and NR1I2, the Enigmatic-Orphans, NR1F3, NR3B1 and NR5A2, as well as the Orphan-Receptors, NR2E1, NR2E3 and NR6A1. These oncogenic Nuclear-Receptors should be targeted with selective antagonists, reverse-agonists or agents/strategies capable of reducing their expression in breast-cancer cells.
NEW FINDINGS: What is the central question of this study? Does hsa_circ_001653 influence the development of gastric cancer (GC) and if so how? What is the main finding and its importance? Bioinformatics analysis revealed the presence of differentially expressed hsa_circ_001653 in GC and adjacent normal tissues, and this was strongly related to the pathology of patients with GC. Knockdown of hsa_circ_001653 suppressed the proliferation, invasion and migration of GC cells, while inducing cell apoptosis via miR-377-mediated NR6A1 inhibition. The effect of hsa_circ_001653 and miR-377 on tumour growth in GC was further confirmed in vivo. ABSTRACT: Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the leading causes of human mortality through malignant tumours. Circular RNAs (circRNAs) have been identified as binding to microRNAs (miRNAs) to modulate the progression of tumours. This study explores the role of hsa_circ_001653, a newly identified circRNA, in the development of GC. hsa_circ_001653 expression was measured in 86 paired normal and tumour tissues surgically resected from GC patients. Cross-talk between hsa_circ_001653 and microRNA-377 (miR-377)/nuclear receptor subfamily 6, group A, member 1 (NR6A1) was assessed using bioinformatics analysis, dual-luciferase reporter assay, Ago2 immunoprecipitation and western blot analysis. A series of functional experiments were carried out to elucidate the role of hsa_circ_001653 in GC cell proliferation, invasion, migration and apoptosis, and its underlying molecular mechanisms. Nude mice were inoculated with GC cells for in vivo analysis. hsa_circ_001653 was found to be an up-regulated circRNA in GC tissues and cells. Down-regulation of hsa_circ_001653 inhibited GC cell proliferation, migration and invasion, while stimulating cell apoptosis. hsa_circ_001653 was found to bind to miR-377, which targeted NR6A1 and repressed its expression. Inhibition of miR-377 and overexpression of NR6A1 restored the proliferation, migration and invasion in GC cells lacking hsa_circ_001653. Furthermore, inhibition of hsa_circ_001653 attenuated tumour growth in nude mice inoculated with GC cells. Collectively, the demonstration that hsa_circ_001653 exerts its anticancer effects by regulating the miR-377-NR6A1 axis increases our understanding of gastric cancer pathophysiology. The findings uncover new potential therapeutic targets for GC.
GCNF (NR6A1) is essential for embryonic development. GCNF belongs to the nuclear receptor (NR) gene family, it is distantly related to other NRs and is the only member of subfamily 6. As the ligand for GCNF has not been identified, GCNF is designated an orphan nuclear receptor. GCNF has been found to be a transcriptional repressor, through specific binding to DR0 response elements, which is found in the Oct4 proximal promoter for example. GCNF is expressed widely in early mouse embryos, and later in the developing nervous system. GCNF knockout mouse embryos die around E10.5. GCNF is required for the restriction of Oct4 expression to primordial germ cells after gastrulation. GCNF is expressed in ES/EC cells and during their differentiation, and has been reported to be required for pluripotency gene repression during retinoic acid (RA)-induced mES cell differentiation. GCNF can interact with DNA methylation proteins, and is suggested to recruit DNA methylation complexes to repress and silence Oct4 expression. Nuclear receptor regulation in embryonic development is a complex process, as different nuclear receptors have overlapping and distinct functions. In-depth exploration of GCNF function and mechanism of action will help to comprehensively understand the nuclear receptor regulation in embryonic development.
Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) migration is implicated in atherosclerosis and restenosis. Nuclear receptor subfamily 6, group A, member 1 (NR6A1) is involved in regulating embryonic stem cell differentiation, reproduction, neuronal differentiation. Functional cooperation between cAMP response element modulator tau (CREMtau) and NR6A1 can direct gene expression in cells. cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) plays a key role in VSMC migration. In this study, we sought to determine whether CREB involved in NR6A1-modulated VSMC migration. VSMCs treated with platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) displayed reduced mRNA and protein levels of NR6A1. Adenovirus-mediated expression of NR6A1 (Ad-NR6A1) could inhibit PDGF-BB- and serum-induced VSMC migration. The mRNA and protein expressions of secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) were down-regulated by NR6A1 overexpression. SPP1 promoter reporter activity was repressed by NR6A1. NR6A1 was found to physically couple with nuclear actin and the large subunit of RNA polymerase II. Furthermore, we showed that CREB interacted with NR6A1 in VSMCs. NR6A1 overexpression repressed cAMP response element (CRE) activity. ChIP assay revealed that NR6A1 bind to SPP1 promoter. Luciferase reporter assay showed that NR6A1 regulated SPP1 promoter activity via a putative CRE site. Adenovirus mediated local NR6A1 gene transfer attenuated stenosis after balloon-induced arterial injury in Sprague-Dawley rats. Taken together, this study provided experimental evidence that NR6A1 modulated SPP1 expression via its binding with CREB protein in VSMCs. We also revealed a NR6A1-CREB-SPP1 axis that serves as a regulatory mechanism for atherosclerosis and restenosis.
PURPOSE: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a particularly challenging subtype of breast cancer, with a poorer prognosis compared to other subtypes. Unfortunately, unlike luminal-type cancers, there is no validated biomarker to predict the prognosis of patients with early-stage TNBC. Accurate biomarkers are needed to establish effective therapeutic strategies. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we analyzed gene expression profiles of tumor samples from 184 TNBC patients (training cohort, n=76; validation cohort, n=108) using RNA sequencing. RESULTS: By combining weighted gene expression, we identified a 10-gene signature (DGKH, GADD45B, KLF7, LYST, NR6A1, PYCARD, ROBO1, SLC22A20P, SLC24A3, and SLC45A4) that stratified patients by risk score with high sensitivity (92.31%), specificity (92.06%), and accuracy (92.11%) for invasive disease-free survival. The 10-gene signature was validated in a separate institution cohort and supported by meta-analysis for biological relevance to well-known driving pathways in TNBC. Furthermore, the 10-gene signature was the only independent factor for invasive disease-free survival in multivariate analysis when compared to other potential biomarkers of TNBC molecular subtypes and T-cell receptor beta diversity. 10-gene signature also further categorized patients classified as molecular subtypes according to risk scores. CONCLUSION: Our novel findings may help address the prognostic challenges in TNBC and the 10-gene signature could serve as a novel biomarker for risk-based patient care.
Germ cell nuclear factor (GCNF) is an orphan nuclear receptor for which a ligand has yet to be identified. However, we do know that GCNF binds to a novel response element as a homodimer and regulates expression of genes, such as the protamines, through this element. In the absence of a ligand, GCNF is a transcriptional repressor that interacts with co-repressors. During embryonic development, GCNF is expressed between the gastrula and neurula stages. Loss of GCNF causes embryonic lethality, disrupts normal somitogenesis, as well as neural tube and axis formation, suggesting that GCNF is a critical factor for normal embryonic development. In adult vertebrates, GCNF expression is predominantly found in the germ cells of gonads. GCNF expression in germ cells suggests that understanding its function in adults will yield greater insight into the regulation of gametogenesis, leading to new contraceptive targets.
The hypocretin (also known as orexin) neuropeptide system coordinates the regulation of various physiological processes. A reduction in Nr6a1 expression was observed in hypocretin neuron-ablated transgenic mice. To show that prepro-hypocretin transcription is functionally modulated by NR6A1, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis, double-immunostaining, a luciferase reporter assay, and an in utero electroporation study. ChIP analysis showed that endogenous NR6A1 binds to a putative NR6A1-binding site. Double-immunostaining indicated almost all hypocretin neurons were positive for NR6A1 immunoreactivity. NR6A1 overexpression in SH-SY5Y cells modulated hypocretin promoter activity, an effect that was countered by lacking a putative NR6A1-binding site. Electroporation with Nr6a1 in the foetal hypothalamus promoted hypocretin transcription as compared to GFP-electroporation. These experiments confirmed that NR6A1 works as a regulator for hypocretin transcription.
BACKGROUND: Clinical phenotypes of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) vary greatly even among patients with the same gene mutations. This variability is largely regulated by unidentified modifier loci. The purpose of the study is to identify modifier genes for cardiac fibrosis-a major phenotype of HCM-using the BXD family, a murine cohort. METHODS: The relative severity of cardiac fibrosis was estimated by quantitation of cardiac collagen volume fraction (CCVF) across 66 members of the BXD family. Quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping for cardiac fibrosis was done using GeneNetwork. Candidate modifier loci and genes associated with fibrosis were prioritized based on an explicit scoring system. Networks of correlation between fibrosis and cardiac transcriptomes were evaluated to generate causal models of disease susceptibility. RESULTS: CCVF levels varied greatly within this family. Interval mapping identified a significant CCVF-related QTL on chromosome (Chr) 2 in males, and a significant QTL on Chr 4 Mb in females. The scoring system highlighted two strong candidate genes in the Chr 2 locus-Nek6 and Nr6a1. Both genes are highly expressed in the heart. Cardiac Nek6 mRNA levels are significantly correlated with CCVF. Nipsnap3b and Fktn are lead candidate genes for the Chr 4 locus, and both are also highly expressed in heart. Cardiac Nipsnap3b gene expression correlates well with CCVF. CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that candidate modifier genes of cardiac fibrosis phenotype in HCM are different in males and females. Nek6 and Nr6a1 are strong candidates in males, while Nipsnap3b and Fktn are top candidates in females.
The nuclear orphan receptors for which endogenous ligands have not been identified include nuclear receptor (NR)0B1 (adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on chromosome X gene), NR0B2 (small heterodimer partner), NR1D1/2 (Rev-Erbalpha/beta), NR2C1 (testicular receptor 2), NR2C2 (testicular receptor 4), NR2E1 (tailless), NR2E3 (photoreceptor-specific NR [PNR]), NR2F1 chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor 1 (COUP-TFI), NR2F2 (COUP-TFII), NR2F6 (v-erbA-related protein), NR4A1 (Nur77), NR4A2 (Nurr1), NR4A3 (Nor1), and NR6A1 (GCNF). These receptors play essential roles in development, cellular homeostasis, and disease including cancer where over- or underexpression of some receptors has prognostic significance for patient survival. Results of receptor knockdown or overexpression in vivo and in cancer cell lines demonstrate that orphan receptors exhibit tumor-specific pro-oncogenic or tumor suppressor-like activity. For example, COUP-TFII expression is both a positive (ovarian) and negative (prostate and breast) prognostic factor for cancer patients; in contrast, the prognostic activity of adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on chromosome X gene for the same tumors is the inverse of COUP-TFII. Functional studies show that Nur77 is tumor suppressor like in acute leukemia, whereas silencing Nur77 in pancreatic, colon, lung, lymphoma, melanoma, cervical, ovarian, gastric, and some breast cancer cell lines induces one or more of several responses including growth inhibition and decreased survival, migration, and invasion. Although endogenous ligands for the orphan receptors have not been identified, there is increasing evidence that different structural classes of compounds activate, inactivate, and directly bind several orphan receptors. Thus, the screening and development of selective orphan receptor modulators will have important clinical applications as novel mechanism-based agents for treating cancer patients overexpressing one or more orphan receptors and also for combined drug therapies.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as the cessation of ovarian function under the age of 40 years and is characterized by amenorrhea, hypoestrogenism, and elevated serum gonadotropin concentrations. POF affects 1% of all women and occurs in approximately 0.1% before the age of 30 years. To date, mutations associated with POF have been identified in a small number of genes, including those encoding inhibin alpha (INHA), the FSH receptor and the LH/chorio gonadotrophin receptor. Germ cell specific genes such as Gdf9, Bmp15, and Rfpl4 may also play important roles in human oogenesis. Transcription factors that regulate oocyte gene expression in animal models and include Nobox, Taf4b, Figla, Lhx8, Sohlh1 and Sohlh2 are likely to be key mediators of fertility in humans. In this review, after summarizing the general background on human POF, we focus on insights gained from the animal models with regards to mammalian folliculogenesis. Studies in animal models provide new candidate genes for ovarian failure in humans.
Orphan nuclear receptors such as germ cell nuclear factor (GCNF), steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) and liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1), are emerging as important ovarian factors in regulating female reproduction. Within the ovary, GCNF (NR6A1) expression is restricted to the oocyte, while SF-1 (NR5A1) is expressed only in the somatic cells, such as granulosa, thecal and luteal cells, and interstitial cells. LRH-1 (NR5A2), an orphan receptor closely related to SF-1, is expressed only in the granulosa cells of the follicles and luteal cells within the ovary. Recent studies using conditional knockout strategies to bypass the embryonic lethality of GCNF and SF-1 null mice have uncovered important roles of GCNF and SF-1 in the oocyte and granulosa cells, respectively. In this review, we will summarize the major findings of GCNF and SF-1 in the ovary from the studies of conditional GCNF and SF-1 knockout mice. The potential role of LRH-1 in the ovary is also briefly discussed. Understanding the ovarian functions of these orphan nuclear receptors may lead to the development of new agents for regulation of female fertility and new medicines for the treatment of female idiopathic infertility, premature ovarian failure, polycystic ovarian syndrome and ovarian cancer.
BACKGROUND: This study aims to elucidate the microRNA (miRNA)-messenger RNA (mRNA)-transcription factors (TFs) network relevant to diabetic nephropathy (DN). METHODS: To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying DN, we conducted an extensive analysis using a Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, specifically GSE51784, GSE30528, GSE30529 and GSE1009. RNA samples from 66 subjects were analysed to identify differentially expressed mRNAs (DEGs) and microRNAs (DEMs) between individuals with DN and healthy controls. The data underwent preprocessing, followed by Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) to unveil enriched pathways. Additionally, we constructed protein-protein interaction networks and subnetworks of modules to identify key molecular players. RESULTS: A total of 163 DEMs and 188 DEGs were identified among the four datasets. Furthermore, we identified 37 hub genes with high connectivity and four TFs, namely E1A Binding Protein P300 (EP300), SP100 Nuclear Antigen (SP100), Nuclear Receptor Subfamily 6 Group A Member 1 (NR6A1) and Jun Dimerization Protein 2 (JDP2), which may play crucial roles in the molecular pathogenesis of DN. Additionally, we constructed a co-regulatory network involving miRNAs, mRNAs and TFs, revealing potential involvement of pathways such as the Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signalling pathway, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B (Akt) signalling pathway and metabolic pathways in the pathogenesis of DN. Finally, using a docking model, we established drug-gene interactions involving key genes in the network, providing potential insights into therapeutic options. CONCLUSIONS: This study explores a gene regulation network of miRNA-mRNA-TFs, identifying potential molecular targets in the aetiology of DN. It also suggests potential targets for genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis for DN.
Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are a diverse group of neoplasms that are derived from dysfunctional fetal germ cells and can also present in extragonadal sites. The genetic drivers underlying malignant transformation of TGCTs have not been fully elucidated so far. The aim of the present study is to clarify the functional role and regulatory mechanism of miR-196a-5p in TGCTs. We demonstrated that miR-196a-5p was downregulated in TGCTs. It can inhibit the proliferation, migration, and invasion of testicular tumor cell lines including NT-2 and NCCIT through targeting the NR6A1 gene, which we proved its role in promotion of cell proliferation and repression of cellular junction and aggregation. Mechanistically, NR6A1 inhibited E-cadherin through binding with DR0 sites in the CDH1 gene promoter and recruiting methyltransferases Dnmt1. Further, NR6A1 promoted neuronal marker protein MAP2 expression in RA-induced neurodifferentiation of NT-2 cells and testicular tumor xenografts. Clinical histopathologically, NR6A1 was positively correlated with MAP2, and negatively correlated with E-cadherin in TGCTs. These findings revealed that the miR-196a-5p represses cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and tumor neurogenesis by inhibition of NR6A1/E-cadherin signaling axis, which may be a potential target for diagnosis and therapy of TGCTs.
BACKGROUND: Lipogenesis is required for the optimal growth of many types of cancer cells, it is shown to control the biosynthesis of the lipid bilayer membrane during rapid proliferation and metastasis, provides cancer cells with signaling lipid molecules to support cancer development and make cancer cells more resistant to oxidative stress-induced cell death. Though multiple lipogenic enzymes have been identified to mediate this metabolic change, how the expression of these lipogenic enzymes are transcriptionally regulated remains unclear. METHODS: Gain- and loss-of-function experiments were conducted to assess the role of transcriptional repressor, nuclear receptor sub-family 6, group A, member 1 (NR6A1) in HepG2 cells. RT-qPCR method was performed to investigate target gene of NR6A1. Western blot was employed to determine the mechanisms by which NR6A1 regulates lipid accumulation in HepG2 cells. RESULTS: We provide evidence that NR6A1 is a novel regulator of lipid metabolism in HepG2 cells. NR6A1 knockdown can increase lipid accumulation as well as insulin-induced proliferation and migration of HepG2 cells. The lipogenic effect correlated well with the expression of lipogenic genes, including fatty acid synthase (FAS), diglyceride acyltransferase-2 (DGAT2), malic enzyme 1 (ME1), microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK). NR6A1 knockdown also increased the expression of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1a), the rate-limiting enzyme in fatty acid oxidation. Furthermore, NR6A1 knockdown induced lipid accumulation through mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), but not mTORC2. Moreover, siRNA-mediated knockdown of NR6A1 increased expression of insulin receptor (INSR) and potentitated insulin-induced phosphorylation of mTOR and AKT partly via miR-205-5p in HepG2 cells. CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide important new insights into the role of NR6A1 in the lipogenesis in HepG2 cells. .
Oleanolic acid (OA) is a pentacyclic triterpenoid compound extracted from olea europaeal, a traditional Chinese medicine herb. OA has been used in the clinic as a hepatoprotective medicine in China since 1970s. In our previous study, we observed that OA could ameliorate hyperlipidemia in animal models. In the present study, we conducted a small-scale clinical trial to evaluate the hypolipidemia effect of OA in hyperlipidemic patients. Hyperlipidemic patients were administrated with OA for four weeks (4 tablets once, three times a day). The blood samples of the patients were collected before and after OA treatment. The biological parameters were measured. Furthermore, three patients' blood samples were studied with DNA microarray. After OA administration, the TC, TG, and HDLC levels in serum decreased significantly. DNA microarray analysis results showed that the expressions of 21 mRNAs were significantly changed after OA treatment. Bioinformatics analysis showed 17 mRNAs were up-regulated and 4 mRNAs were down-regulated significantly after OA treatment. Five mRNAs (CACNA1B, FCN, STEAP3, AMPH, and NR6A1) were selected to validate the expression levels by qRT-PCR. Therefore, OA administration differentially regulated the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism. The data showed a clinical evidence that OA could improve hyperlipidemia and also unveiled a new insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the pharmacological effect of OA on hyperlipidemia.
Orphan nuclear receptors are members of the nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors for which ligands and functions have not been identified. Since the cloning of the original orphans, ligands have been identified for several orphan receptors that heterodimerize with the retinoid X receptor and are no longer classified as orphan receptors. Considering the central role that nuclear receptors play in differentiation, development, metabolic regulation, homeostasis and disease, it is crucial that we understand the roles of the remaining orphans. However, the identification of ligands for those orphans that form homodimers has proven more difficult. Thus, to gain greater insight into the functions of orphan receptors, gene targeting has been used to knock out these factors and study mouse development in their absence. Here we will review the progress made in understanding the roles of the orphans GCNF and the COUP-TFs with the use of gene knockouts.
The orphan receptor germ cell nuclear factor (GCNF) is a member of the superfamily of nuclear receptors. During embryogenesis GCNF expression is restricted to the developing nervous system, whereas in the adult the receptor is also expressed during specific stages in maturing germ cells of the ovary and testis. Therefore GCNF may participate in the regulation of neurogenesis and reproductive functions. Binding of GCNF to the consensus element TCA[AG(G/T)TCA]2 (conRE), to the direct repeat DNA element AGGTCAAGGTCA (DR0), and to extended half-sites such as TCAAGGTCA (XRE) has been demonstrated, but no natural GCNF target gene has been identified. However, due to an overlapping temporal expression pattern and the presence of DR0-type elements in their promoter regions, the protamine 1 and 2 genes have been proposed as potential candidates for a regulation by GCNF. Since GCNF binds as a homodimer to all three elements (conRE, DR0, and XRE) the receptor exhibits an exceptional property within the nuclear receptor superfamily. Homodimeric binding of GCNF to extended half-sites requires the presence of a novel dimerization motif located in the putative helix 3 of the GCNF ligand-binding domain (LBD). Since neither potential ligands nor heterodimerization partners or cofactors for GCNF have been identified, little is known about the mechanisms by which the receptor controls transcriptional processes. Due to the lack of a conserved transcriptional activation function 2 core motif (AF-2 AD core) in the helix 12 region of the GCNF LBD, it has been suggested that GCNF functions as a repressor of transcription. In addition, recent data suggest that the helix 12 region displays functions distinct from those in other nuclear receptors and is involved in the control of DNA binding. Together, these reports indicate that GCNF exhibits novel properties distinct from other members of the nuclear receptor superfamily.
Autochthonous pig breeds are usually reared in extensive or semi-extensive production systems that might facilitate contact with wild boars and, thus, reciprocal genetic exchanges. In this study, we analysed variants in the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) gene (which cause different coat colour phenotypes) and in the nuclear receptor subfamily 6 group A member 1 (NR6A1) gene (associated with increased vertebral number) in 712 pigs of 12 local pig breeds raised in Italy (Apulo-Calabrese, Casertana, Cinta Senese, Mora Romagnola, Nero Siciliano and Sarda) and south-eastern European countries (Krskopolje from Slovenia, Black Slavonian and Turopolje from Croatia, Mangalitsa and Moravka from Serbia and East Balkan Swine from Bulgaria) and compared the data with the genetic variability at these loci investigated in 229 wild boars from populations spread in the same macro-geographic areas. None of the autochthonous pig breeds or wild boar populations were fixed for one allele at both loci. Domestic and wild-type alleles at these two genes were present in both domestic and wild populations. Findings of the distribution of MC1R alleles might be useful for tracing back the complex genetic history of autochthonous breeds. Altogether, these results indirectly demonstrate that bidirectional introgression of wild and domestic alleles is derived and affected by the human and naturally driven evolutionary forces that are shaping the Sus scrofa genome: autochthonous breeds are experiencing a sort of 'de-domestication' process, and wild resources are challenged by a 'domestication' drift. Both need to be further investigated and managed.
