Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that plays an essential role as cell surface receptor for neuregulins. Binds to neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and is activated by it; ligand-binding increases phosphorylation on tyrosine residues and promotes its association with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. May also be activated by CSPG5. Involved in the regulation of myeloid cell differentiation.
Brown fat activates uncoupled respiration in response to cold temperature and contributes to systemic metabolic homeostasis. To date, the metabolic action of brown fat has been primarily attributed to its role in fuel oxidation and uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1)-mediated thermogenesis. Whether brown fat engages other tissues through secreted factors remains largely unexplored. Here we show that neuregulin 4 (Nrg4), a member of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family of extracellular ligands, is highly expressed in adipose tissues, enriched in brown fat and markedly increased during brown adipocyte differentiation. Adipose tissue Nrg4 expression was reduced in rodent and human obesity. Gain- and loss-of-function studies in mice demonstrated that Nrg4 protects against diet-induced insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis through attenuating hepatic lipogenic signaling. Mechanistically, Nrg4 activates ErbB3 and ErbB4 signaling in hepatocytes and negatively regulates de novo lipogenesis mediated by LXR and SREBP1c in a cell-autonomous manner. These results establish Nrg4 as a brown fat-enriched endocrine factor with therapeutic potential for the treatment of obesity-associated disorders, including type 2 diabetes and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
Adipocytes in dermis are considered to be important participants in skin repair and regeneration, but the role of subcutaneous white adipose tissue (sWAT) in skin repair is poorly understood. Here, we revealed the dynamic changes of sWAT during wound healing process. Lineage-tracing mouse studies revealed that sWAT would enter into the large wound bed and participate in the formation of granulation tissue. Moreover, sWAT undergoes beiging after skin injury. Inhibition of sWAT beiging by genetically silencing PRDM16, a key regulator to beiging, hindered wound healing process. The transcriptomics results suggested that beige adipocytes in sWAT abundantly express neuregulin 4 (NRG4), which regulated macrophage polarization and the function of myofibroblasts. In diabetic wounds, the beiging of sWAT was significantly suppressed. Thus, adipocytes from sWAT regulate multiple aspects of repair and may be therapeutic for inflammatory diseases and defective wound healing associated with aging and diabetes.
Obese individuals are at high risk for developing type 2 diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The aim of this review was to analyze the scientific literature and databases to reveal the fundamental role of neuregulin 4 (NRG4) and its receptors in the development of obesity-associated metabolic disorders. This review demonstrates that NRG4 and its receptors are promising therapeutic targets for the treatment of socially significant obesity-associated pathologies. The review contains nine chapters. Information on the structure of ERBB4 and NRG4 splice isoforms and subsequent activation of downstream targets is presented. The tissue-specific features of the NRG4 and ERBB4 genes and protein production are also highlighted. The role of NRG4 and ERBB3/4 in the pathophysiological mechanisms of the development of metabolic disorders in obesity is discussed in detail. The final chapter of the review is devoted to the miRNA-dependent regulation of NRG4 and ERBB4. Recent studies have shown that several miRNAs regulate ERBB4 expression, but no information was found on the interaction of NRG4 with miRNAs. We now demonstrate the putative relationships between NRG4 and let-7a-5p, let-7c-5p, miR-423-5p, miR-93-5p, miR-23a-3p, and miR-15b-5p for the first time. In addition, we found SNP mutations affecting the interaction of NRG4 and ERBB4 with miRNA in these genes as well as in miRNAs. In summary, this review provides a detailed and comprehensive overview of the role of NRG4 in obesity-associated metabolic disorders. The review summarizes all current studies on this topic and opens perspectives for future research.
Neuregulin 4 (NRG4) is a kind of protein containing epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains, mainly expressed and secreted by brown adipocytes. It specifically activates EGF receptor ErbB4 (v-erb-b2 avian erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 4) to stimulate cell proliferation, inhibit apoptosis and improve energy metabolism of cells. Increasing evidence has shown that NRG4 plays an important role in epithelial cell-related diseases, cardiovascular diseases, tumors and glycolipid metabolic diseases, and therefore it could be a potential therapeutic target of some diseases.
Neuregulin-4 (Nrg4) is a newly discovered adipokine that is synthesized in many tissues and plays an important role in modulating systemic energy metabolism and in the development of metabolic disorders. However, little is known about the relationship between Nrg4 and coronary artery disease (CAD). In this study, we investigated the association between Nrg4 and the presence and severity of CAD.We enrolled 73 patients diagnosed by coronary angiography (CAG) as having CAD and 32 controls. The CAD group was divided into two subgroups according to their SYNTAX score. Plasma levels of Nrg4 were measured in all participants and compared among different groups. The relationship between Nrg4 and CAD was analyzed. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was conducted to evaluate the usefulness Nrg4 in assessing the presence and severity of CAD.Nrg4 levels were negatively associated with the SYNTAX score (r = -0.401, P = 0.000). The patients with a higher SYNTAX score had significantly lower Nrg4 levels as compared with the low SYNTAX score subgroup and the controls (P < 0.05). The Nrg4 levels of the low SYNTAX score subgroup were much lower than controls (P < 0.05). Furthermore, an association between Nrg4 and CAD (odds ratio, 0.279; 95% confidence interval, 0.088-0.882) was observed. Nrg4 had 43.8% sensitivity and 96.9% specificity for identifying CAD, and 73.1% sensitivity and 87.3% specificity for identifying patients who had severe coronary artery lesions.Nrg4 levels were found to be inversely associated with the presence and severity of CAD.
BACKGROUND: Neuregulin 4 (Nrg4) is a novel adipocytokine that has been proposed to play a role in modulating energy metabolism and pathogeneses of atherosclerosis. However, no published research is available about the mechanisms underlying the anti-atherosclerotic effect of Nrg4. Regarding the close link between adipocytokines and the immune system, we wonder whether there is a relation between Nrg4 and athero-protective cytokines. The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between serum Nrg4 levels and type 2 cytokines in Iranian patients with coronary artery disease (CAD). METHODS: In this case-control study, 125 CAD patients were compared to 55 healthy controls. The serum concentrations of Nrg4, IL-5, IL-9, and IL-13 were measured using ELISA. The associations of circulating Nrg4 and IL-5, IL-9, IL-13 were assessed using linear regression analyses. RESULTS: Serum concentration of IL-9 was significantly higher in patients compared to the healthy controls (317.9+/-139 versus 228.3+/-99.1, P= <0.0001). IL-13 and Nrg4 were significantly lower in patients compared to the healthy controls (4.3+/-3.7 versus 6.1+/-3.9, P=0.01 and 0.5 versus 1.3, P=0.001 respectively). Multiple linear regression analyses revealed that IL-9 was negatively correlated with Nrg4 (beta= -0.3, P=0.009). CONCLUSION: Our study, for the first time, provides the clinical evidence revealing that circulating Nrg4 concentrations are inversely correlated with IL-9 in Iranian patients with CAD, suggesting that the protective role of Nrg4 on atherosclerosis may be, in part, mediated by the proatherogenic cytokine, IL-9.
PURPOSE: The neuregulin (NRG) 1, 2, and 3 genes undergo extensive alternative mRNA splicing, which results in variants that show structural and functional diversity. The aims of this study were to establish whether the fourth member of this family, NRG4, is expressed in prostate cancer, if it is alternatively spliced and whether any functional differences between the variants could be observed. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The expression of NRG4 was determined using immunohistochemical staining of 40 cases of primary prostate cancer. Bioinformatic analysis and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) using NRG4 isotype-specific primers on a panel of normal and prostate cancer cell lines were used to identify alternatively spliced NRG4 variants. Expression of these variants was determined using isotype-specific antibodies. Transfection into Cos-7 cells of two of these green fluorescent protein-tagged variants allowed analysis of their subcellular location. Four of the variants were chemically synthesized and tested for their ability to activate the ErbB4 receptor. RESULTS: NRG4 was variably expressed in the cytoplasm in the majority of prostate cancer cases, and in a subset of cases in the membrane, high levels were associated with advanced disease stage. Four novel NRG4 splice variants (NRGA2, NRG4 B1-3) were characterized, where each seemed to have a different subcellular location and were also expressed in the cytoplasm of the prostate tumors. NRG4 B3 was also present in endothelial cells. In transfected cells, the A type variant (NRG4 A1) was localized to the membrane, whereas the B type variant (NRG4 B1), which lacks the predicted transmembrane region, had an intracellular localization. Only the variants with an intact epidermal growth factor-like domain activated ErbB4 signaling. CONCLUSION: NRG4 overexpression is associated with advanced-stage prostate cancer. The alternative splice variants may have different roles in cell signaling, some acting as classic receptor ligands and some with as-yet unknown functions.
BACKGROUND: Neuregulin 4 (Nrg4), a novel adipokine enriched in brown adipose tissue has been observed to negatively regulate de novo hepatic lipogenesis and limit nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) progression to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in rodents. However, the role of Nrg4 in human NAFLD remains unclear to date. We analysed Nrg4 plasma levels and its association with liver disease severity together with the transcriptional profile of the Nrg4 pathway in liver and visceral adipose tissue (VAT) of NAFLD patients. METHODS: Plasma Nrg4 levels were measured in 65 NAFLD patients and 43 healthy controls (HC). Hepatic steatosis and fibrosis were diagnosed and quantified with chemical shift MRI and transient elastography respectively. Furthermore, blood lipid levels, HOMA-IR and systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IFN-gamma) were analysed. Microarray analyses to assess differences in the Nrg4 and its receptor family ErbB pathway in liver and VAT from an independent patient group with biopsy proven NAFL (simple steatosis) (n = 4), NASH (n = 5) and normal liver (n = 6) were performed. RESULTS: Plasma Nrg4 levels were not significantly different between NAFLD patients and HC (p = 0.622). Furthermore, plasma Nrg4 levels did not correlate with the hepatic fat fraction (r = -0.028, p = 0.829) and were not significantly different between NAFLD patients with or without hepatic fibrosis (p = 0.087). Finally, the expression profile of 82 genes related to the Nrg4-ErbB pathway in liver and VAT was not significantly different between NAFL, NASH or obese controls. CONCLUSION: Our study does not support a role for Nrg4 in the pathophysiology of human NAFLD.
There is an urgent need to pinpoint novel targets for drug discovery in the context of chronic kidney disease (CKD), and the proteome represents a significant pool of potential therapeutic targets. To address this, we performed proteome-wide analyses using Mendelian randomization (MR) and colocalization techniques to uncover potential targets for CKD. We extracted summary-level data from the ARIC study, focusing on 7213 European American (EA) individuals and 4657 plasma proteins. To broaden our analysis, we incorporated genetic association data from Icelandic cohorts, thereby enhancing our investigation into the correlations with chronic kidney disease (CKD), creatinine-based estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFRcrea), and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). We utilized genetic association data from the GWAS Catalog, including CKD (765,348, 625,219 European ancestry and 140,129 non-European ancestry), eGFRcrea (1,004,040, European ancestry), and eGFR (567,460, European ancestry). Employing MR analysis, we estimated the associations between proteins and CKD risk. Additionally, we conducted colocalization analysis to evaluate the existence of shared causal variants between the identified proteins and CKD. We detected notable correlations between levels predicted based on genetics of three circulating proteins and CKD, eGFRcrea, and eGFR. Notably, our colocalization analysis provided robust evidence supporting these associations. Specifically, genetically predicted levels of Transcription elongation factor A protein 2 (TCEA2) and Neuregulin-4 (NRG4) exhibited an inverse relationship with CKD risk, while Glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR) showed an increased risk of CKD. Furthermore, our colocalization analysis also supported the associations of TCEA2, NRG4, and GCKR with the risk of eGFRcrea and eGFR.
In recent years, brown adipose tissue (BAT) has been recognized not only as a main site of non-shivering thermogenesis in mammals, but also as an endocrine organ. BAT secretes a myriad of regulatory factors. These so-called batokines exert local autocrine and paracrine effects, as well as endocrine actions targeting tissues and organs at a distance. The endocrine batokines include peptide factors, such as fibroblast growth factor-21 (FGF21), neuregulin-4 (NRG4), phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP), interleukin-6, adiponectin and myostatin, and also lipids (lipokines; e.g., 12,13-dihydroxy-9Z-octadecenoic acid [12,13-diHOME]) and miRNAs (e.g., miR-99b). The liver, heart, and skeletal muscle are the most commonly reported targets of batokines. In response to BAT thermogenic activation, batokines such as NRG4 and PLTP are released and act to reduce hepatic steatosis and improve insulin sensitivity. Stress-induced interleukin-6-mediated signaling from BAT to liver favors hepatic glucose production through enhanced gluconeogenesis. Batokines may act on liver to induce the secretion of regulatory hepatokines (e.g. FGF21 and bile acids in response to miR-99b and PLTP, respectively), thereby resulting in a systemic expansion of BAT-originating signals. Batokines also target extrahepatic tissues: FGF21 and 12,13-diHOME are cardioprotective, whereas BAT-secreted myostatin and 12,13-diHOME influence skeletal muscle development and performance. Further research is needed to ascertain in humans the role of batokines, which have been identified mostly in experimental models. The endocrine role of BAT may explain the association between active BAT and a healthy metabolism in the human system, which is characterized by small amounts of BAT and a likely moderate BAT-mediated energy expenditure.
BACKGROUND: Neuregulin4 (Nrg4) is a novel adipokine expressed in adipose tissues, enriched in brown adipose tissue, and able to improve whole-body metabolism in rodent, thus having the potential to treat obesity-associated disorders such as diabetes. However, the association between serum Nrg4 levels and diabetes risk in human remains unclear. This study was designed to examine circulating Nrg4 levels in subjects with different glucose tolerance status. METHODS: Age-, sex-, and body mass index-matched subjects (n = 310: 83 normal glucose tolerance [NGT], 129 prediabetes, and 96 diabetes) from the Risk Evaluation of Cancers in Chinese Diabetic Individuals: A Longitudinal study (Reaction study) were included. Serum Nrg4 was measured via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Basic anthropometric parameters, fasting plasma glucose and 2-hours postload plasma glucose, hemoglobin A(1c) , and serum lipid profile were also measured. RESULTS: The serum Nrg4 levels were higher in patients with diabetes than those with NGT and prediabetes (diabetes: 396.8[65.9, 709.4], NGT: 80.1[0, 554.1], prediabetes: 168.0[32.9, 463.9] pg/mL [median (interquartile range), both P < 0.05]). The Nrg4 concentration was correlated with fasting plasma glucose. When the top versus bottom quartiles of serum Nrg4 concentrations were compared with adjustment for age and sex, an odds ratio of 3.005 was observed in diabetes prevalence, which persisted after adjusting other potential confounding variables. Other nonglucose parameters as body mass index; waist, hip, and neck circumferences; alanine aminotransferase; triglyceride; high-density lipoprotein; uric acid; and estimated glomerular filtration rate were also correlated with serum Nrg4 (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The circulating Nrg4 level is elevated in the prediabetic and diabetic patients compared to control and is an independent risk factor associated with diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as glucose intolerance detected during pregnancy. GDM is increasing worldwide and is associated with adverse maternal and fetal outcomes. Neuregulin 4 (NGR4) is epidermal growth factor like signaling molecule. It plays an important role in cell to cell communication furthermore recent studies indicate that NRG4 may work as a novel adipokine with a possible role in maintaining energy and metabolic homeostasis. The aim of the present study was to assess serum NRG4 levels along with several metabolic parameters in patients diagnosed with gestational diabetic mellitus. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this prospective cross-sectional study, the study group was composed of 63 women with GDM and 64 healthy pregnant women matched for age, body mass index (BMI) and gestational age. Blood samples were collected at the 24-28th gestational weeks. Serum NRG4, total cholesterol, high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), triglycerides, glucose levels during 75-gr OGTT, fasting insulin, glycosylated hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and creatinine levels were measured. Homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) values were calculated. RESULTS: Serum NRG4 values were significantly elevated in the GDM group compared to the control group (p < .001). Multivariate linear regression analyzes revealed that BMI (beta = 0.910, p < .001), glucose 2-h OGTT (beta = 0.866, p < .001) and HOMA-IR (beta = 0.222, p < .001) independently and positively predicted NRG4 levels. CONCLUSIONS: Serum NRG4 levels were associated with metabolic parameters of GDM. The present study can be considered to be a guide for future studies to clarify the pathophysiology of NGR4 in GDM patients.
Neuregulin 4 (Nrg4), an adipose tissue-enriched endocrine factor, participates in adipocyte-to-hepatocyte communication, eliciting beneficial metabolic effects in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). We evaluate the physiological roles of NRG4 in humans and unravel the role of NRG4 variants in the pathogenesis of NAFLD and related metabolic disorders. We identified two rare missense mutations-p.R44H and p.E47Q-in the NRG4 EGF-like domain by whole-exome sequencing in 224 severely obese subjects and exome genotyping in 2,388 subjects from the Shanghai Obesity Study. The overexpression animal models showed that wild-type (WT) Nrg4 could attenuate high-fat diet-induced hepatic lipogenesis and improve energy metabolism. Nrg4 E47Q enhanced the protective effect, whereas Nrg4 R44H lost this function. Unlike Nrg4 R44H, Nrg4 E47Q activated the phosphorylation of ErbB4 and negatively regulated de novo lipogenesis through the ErbB4-STAT5-SREBP-1C pathway. The surface plasmon resonance experiments revealed a higher affinity of E47Q Nrg4 than WT to bind ErbB4, while R44H showed no binding. In conclusion, the study suggests that genetic variations in NRG4 could produce mutant proteins with aberrant functions and that impaired or enhanced Nrg4 function could be either a risk factor or a protective factor for NAFLD and associated metabolic disorders.
The neuregulins (NRGs) are cell-cell signaling proteins that are ligands for receptor tyrosine kinases of the ErbB family. The neuregulin family of genes has four members: NRG1, NRG2, NRG3, and NRG4. Relatively little is known about the biological functions of the NRG2, 3, and 4 proteins, and they are considered in this review only briefly. The NRG1 proteins play essential roles in the nervous system, heart, and breast. There is also evidence for involvement of NRG signaling in the development and function of several other organ systems, and in human disease, including the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and breast cancer. There are many NRG1 isoforms, raising the question "Why so many neuregulins?" Study of mice with targeted mutations ("knockout mice") has demonstrated that isoforms differing in their N-terminal region or in their epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domain differ in their in vivo functions. These differences in function might arise because of differences in expression pattern or might reflect differences in intrinsic biological characteristics. While differences in expression pattern certainly contribute to the observed differences in in vivo functions, there are also marked differences in intrinsic characteristics that may tailor isoforms for specific signaling requirements, a theme that will be emphasized in this review.
Neuregulin 4 (Nrg4), a novel brown fat-enriched hormone, plays a key role in the modulation of glucose and lipid metabolism and energy balance. Recent data have demonstrated that the expression of Nrg4 is substantially down-regulated in mouse and human obesity, making its regulatory aspect intriguing. Because of the close relationship between Nrg4, obesity, and associated metabolic diseases, this systematic review aimed to assess the association of Nrg4 with obesity and related metabolic disturbances, emphasizing its possible mechanisms of action in these disorders. We searched PubMed/Medline, ScienceDirect, Scopus, EMBASE, ProQuest, and Google Scholar up until June 2019. The evidence reviewed here indicates that Nrg4 may contribute to the prevention of obesity and related metabolic complications by elevating brown adipose tissue activity, increasing the expression of thermogenic markers, decreasing the expression of lipogenic/adipogenic genes, exacerbating white adipose tissue browning, increasing the number of brite/beige adipocytes, promoting hepatic fat oxidation and ketogenesis, inducing neurite outgrowth, enhancing blood vessels in adipose tissue, increasing the circulatory levels of healthy adipokines, and improving glucose homeostasis. Thus, Nrg4 appears to be a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of obesity and associated metabolic complications. However, prospective cohort studies are warranted to confirm these outcomes.
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is closely associated with an increased risk of death. Nrg4, a novel adipocytokine, has negative correlations with indicators of metabolic syndrome. Here, we investigated whether circulating Nrg4 associates with the prevalence of ACS. In this case-control study, a total of 257 subjects (144 patients with ACS and 56 patients diagnosed with stable angina pectoris (SAP)) compared to 57 healthy controls. Serum Nrg4 and hs-CRP concentrations were determined by ELISA. The associations of circulating Nrg4 with other clinical parameters were also analyzed. Serum levels of Nrg4 were lower in patients compared to the control subjects (0.7 +/- 0.53 ng/mL versus 1.1 +/- 0.9 ng/mL, P = 0.018). There was a significant association between higher Nrg4 level and lower risk of ACS (OR = 0.15; 95%CI = 0.02-0.9; P = 0.046), but not with SAP. This association was independent of potential confounders including traditional cardiovascular risk factors. The distribution of patients with no, 1, 2 and 3 vessel stenosis was significantly different in Nrg4 quartiles. Patients in the lower quartile of Nrg4 were more likely to experience 3 vessel diseases. Serum levels of Nrg4 correlated negatively with HDL-cholesterol in ACS patients. Decreased serum levels of Nrg4 might be an independent risk factor for ACS.
INTRODUCTION: Neuregulin 4 (Nrg4) was proven as a brown fat-enriched secreted factor that can regulate glucose and lipid metabolism. However, the association between circulating Nrg4 levels and diabetes mellitus (DM) in human remains unclear. We conducted a meta-analysis to investigate association of circulating Nrg4 with DM. METHODS: Observational studies comparing circulating Nrg4 levels in diabetes patients and health controls were included. Circulating Nrg4, correlation coefficients of clinical indices and circulating Nrg4 were pooled by meta-analysis. RESULTS: Seven studies were included. The pooled results indicated there were no significant difference in the circulating Nrg4 between diabetes patients and controls (SMD = 0.18, 95%CI = -0.06 to 0.42, P = 0.143). However, diabetes patients had higher circulating Nrg4 than their controls in cross-sectional studies (SMD = 0.55, 95%CI = 0.36 to 0.73, P<0.001). None of the renal function and metabolic syndrome markers were correlated with circulating Nrg4, whereas the HbA1c and BMI were positively correlated (rs = 0.09, 95%CI = 0.03 to 0.16, P = 0.005; rs = 0.20, 95%CI = 0.07 to 0.34, P = 0.003; respectively). CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested circulating Nrg4 may play a role in in the development of DM in cross-sectional studies and circulating Nrg4 might be associated with imbalance in glucose metabolism and obesity.
Paracrine and juxtacrine signaling via proteins expressed on the cell surface are an integral part of metazoan biology. More than one-half billion years ago epidermal growth factor (EGF) and its cognate receptor formed a functional binding partnership, which has been conserved through evolution in essentially all eubilaterate members of the animal kingdom. Early chordates spawned offspring of these seminal genes to begin the creation of new gene families and an expanded cell-cell signaling network, which included the Neuregulin (NRG) ligands and the erbB receptors. First appearance of ancestral NRG, represented in a NRG4-like gene in the lancelet Branchiostoma floridae, appears to have: 1) occurred in the common chordate ancestor prior to the divergence of lancelets (amphioxus), and; 2) antedated the formation of the receptor gene family. Orthologues of NRG1 and multiple erbB receptors found in the sea lamprey Petromyzon marinus suggest that several key events, which were required to expand and diversify these gene families, occurred in the common ancestor of agnathostomes and jawed vertebrates. These important inventions surely played major roles in the acquisition of multiple apomorphic features of the emerging vertebrate lineage.
Cardiac remodeling refers to the abnormal changes in cardiac structure and function caused by various pathological conditions. It is an inevitable pathological process in the occurrence and development of heart failure and is related to a variety of cardiovascular diseases. Inflammation and apoptosis are critical pathological processes involved in cardiac remodeling. Neuregulin 4 (Nrg 4) is an adipokine produced primarily by brown adipose tissue that may play a protective role in a variety of inflammatory diseases. The aim of this study was to investigate whether Nrg4 can delay the progression of cardiac remodeling by regulating AMPK/NF-kappaB pathway, inhibiting inflammation and apoptosis. In our study, we established a model of cardiac remodeling in mice after 14 days of isoproterenol (ISO) intervention, and then gave Nrg4 treatment for another 4 weeks. The cardiac function, the degree of myocardial hypertrophy and myocardial fibrosis of the mice were observed. At the same time, the levels of apoptosis-related proteins (Bax,Bcl-2,Caspase-3), IL-6,IL-Ibeta and TNF-alpha, as well as the activation level of AMPK/NF-kappaB signaling pathway were evaluated.Nrg4 alleviated ISO-induced cardiac dysfunction, cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in mice. Nrg4 also attenuated ISO-induced apoptosis and reduces levels of inflammatory factors to protect ISO-induced myocardial damage. At the same time, the effect of Nrg4 on AMPK/NF-kappaB pathway was measured in vivo and in vitro. The administration of an AMPK inhibitor was found to reverse the anti-hypertrophy, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptotic effects of Nrg4. Our findings suggest that Nrg4 may play a protective role in cardiac remodeling by inhibiting inflammation and apoptosis via AMPK/NF-kappaB pathway.
BACKGROUND: Neuregulin 4 (Nrg4) is a brown adipose tissue-derived adipokine that greatly affects systemic metabolism and improves metabolic derangements. Although abnormal circulating levels of Nrg4 are common in obesity, it remains elusive whether low or elevated levels of this batokine are associated with the onset of metabolic diseases. AIM: To assess Nrg4 levels and its role as a feasible biomarker to predict the severity of obesity, gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), and cardiovascular diseases (CVD). METHODS: A search for relevant studies was performed systematically using prominent search engines, including PubMed, Google Scholar, and Embase, by following PRISMA guidelines. RESULTS: Ample clinical evidence reported low serum/plasma levels of Nrg4 in obesity and these were inversely proportional to the indices of metabolic syndrome, including body mass index, waist circumference, triglycerides, fasting plasma glucose, and homoeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance as well as high-sensitivity C-reactive protein. Low circulating Nrg4 levels may aid in the prediction of morbid obesity, and subsequent GDM, T2DM, NAFLD, and CVD. CONCLUSION: Current clinical evidence emphasizes that the circulating levels of Nrg4 are decreased in morbid obesity, and it also highlights that Nrg4 May serve as a potential prognostic biomarker for obesity-related metabolic diseases.
