BDNF/NT-3 growth factors receptor; Receptor tyrosine kinase involved in the development and the maturation of the central and the peripheral nervous systems through regulation of neuron survival, proliferation, migration, differentiation, and synapse formation and plasticity (By similarity). Receptor for BDNF/brain-derived neurotrophic factor and NTF4/neurotrophin-4. Alternatively can also bind NTF3/neurotrophin-3 which is less efficient in activating the receptor but regulates neuron survival through NTRK2. Upon ligand- binding, undergoes homodimerization, autophosphorylation and acti [...] 
NTRK gene fusions involving either NTRK1, NTRK2 or NTRK3 (encoding the neurotrophin receptors TRKA, TRKB and TRKC, respectively) are oncogenic drivers of various adult and paediatric tumour types. These fusions can be detected in the clinic using a variety of methods, including tumour DNA and RNA sequencing and plasma cell-free DNA profiling. The treatment of patients with NTRK fusion-positive cancers with a first-generation TRK inhibitor, such as larotrectinib or entrectinib, is associated with high response rates (>75%), regardless of tumour histology. First-generation TRK inhibitors are well tolerated by most patients, with toxicity profiles characterized by occasional off-tumour, on-target adverse events (attributable to TRK inhibition in non-malignant tissues). Despite durable disease control in many patients, advanced-stage NTRK fusion-positive cancers eventually become refractory to TRK inhibition; resistance can be mediated by the acquisition of NTRK kinase domain mutations. Fortunately, certain resistance mutations can be overcome by second-generation TRK inhibitors, including LOXO-195 and TPX-0005 that are being explored in clinical trials. In this Review, we discuss the biology of NTRK fusions, strategies to target these drivers in the treatment-naive and acquired-resistance disease settings, and the unique safety profile of TRK inhibitors.
Due to the efficacy of tropomyosin receptor kinase (TRK) inhibitor therapy and the recent Food and Drug Administration approval of larotrectinib, it is now clinically important to accurately and efficiently identify patients with neurotrophic TRK (NTRK) fusion-driven cancer. These oncogenic fusions occur when the kinase domain of NTRK1, NTRK2 or NTRK3 fuse with any of a number of N-terminal partners. NTRK fusions are characteristic of a few rare types of cancer, such as secretory carcinoma of the breast or salivary gland and infantile fibrosarcoma, but they are also infrequently seen in some common cancers, such as melanoma, glioma and carcinomas of the thyroid, lung and colon. There are multiple methods for identifying NTRK fusions, including pan-TRK immunohistochemistry, fluorescence in situ hybridisation and sequencing methods, and the advantages and drawbacks of each are reviewed here. While testing algorithms will obviously depend on availability of various testing modalities and economic considerations for each individual laboratory, we propose triaging specimens based on histology and other molecular findings to most efficiently identify tumours harbouring these treatable oncogenic fusions.
Obesity is a complex multifactorial disorder with genetic and environmental factors. There is an increase in the worldwide prevalence of obesity in both developed and developing countries. The development of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and next-generation sequencing (NGS) has increased the discovery of genetic associations and awareness of monogenic and polygenic causes of obesity. The genetics of obesity could be classified into syndromic and non-syndromic obesity. Prader-Willi, fragile X, Bardet-Biedl, Cohen, and Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO) syndromes are examples of syndromic obesity, which are associated with developmental delay and early onset obesity. Non-syndromic obesity could be monogenic, polygenic, or chromosomal in origin. Monogenic obesity is caused by variants of single genes while polygenic obesity includes several genes with the involvement of members of gene families. New advances in genetic testing have led to the identification of obesity-related genes. Leptin (LEP), the leptin receptor (LEPR), proopiomelanocortin (POMC), prohormone convertase 1 (PCSK1), the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), single-minded homolog 1 (SIM1), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and the neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type 2 gene (NTRK2) have been reported as causative genes for obesity. NGS is now in use and emerging as a useful tool to search for candidate genes for obesity in clinical settings.
RATIONALE: POSTN (Periostin) is an ECM (extracellular matrix) protein involved in tissue remodeling in response to injury and a contributing factor in tumorigenesis, suggesting that POSTN plays a role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension (PH). OBJECTIVE: We aimed to gain insight into the mechanistic contribution of POSTN in experimental mouse models of PH and correlate these findings with PH in humans. METHODS AND RESULTS: We used genetic epistasis approaches in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (hPAECs), human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, and experimental mouse models of PH (Sugen 5416/hypoxia or chronic hypoxia) to discern the role of POSTN and its relationship to HIF (hypoxia-inducible factor)-1alpha signaling. We found that POSTN expression was correlated with the extent of PH in mouse models and in humans. Decreasing POSTN improved hemodynamic and cardiac responses in PH mice, blunted the release of growth factors and HIF-1alpha, and reversed the downregulated BMPR (bone morphogenetic protein receptor)-2 expression in hPAECs from patients with PH, whereas increasing POSTIN had the opposite effects and induced a hyperproliferative and promigratory phenotype in both hPAECs and human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. Overexpression of POSTN-induced activation of HIFs and increased the production of ET (endothelin)-1 and VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) in hPAECs. SiRNA-mediated knockdown of HIF-1alpha abolished the proangiogenic effect of POSTN. Blockade of TrkB (tyrosine kinase receptor B) attenuated the effect of POSTN on HIF-1alpha expression, while inhibition of HIF-1alpha reduced the expression of POSTN and TrkB. These results suggest that hPAECs produce POSTN via a HIF-1alpha-dependent mechanism. CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals that POSTN expression is increased in human and animal models of PH and fosters PH development via a positive feedback loop between HIF-1alpha and POSTN during hypoxia. We propose that manipulating POSTIN expression may be an efficacious therapeutic target in the treatment of PH. Our results also suggest that POSTN may serve as a biomarker to estimate the severity of PH.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a leading cause of women's infertility without effective treatment. Here we show that intravenous injection of Ab4B19, an agonistic antibody for the BDNF receptor TrkB, penetrates into ovarian follicles, activates TrkB signaling, and promotes ovary development. In both natural aging and cyclophosphamide-induced POF models, treatment with Ab4B19 completely reverses the reduction of pre-antral and antral follicles, and normalizes gonadal hormone. Ab4B19 also attenuates gonadotoxicity and inhibits apoptosis in cyclophosphamide-induced POF ovaries. Further, treatment with Ab4B19, but not BDNF, restores the number and quality of oocytes and enhances fertility. In human, BDNF levels are high in granulosa cells and TrkB levels increase in oocytes as they mature. Moreover, BDNF expression is down-regulated in follicles of aged women, and Ab4B19 activates TrkB signaling in human ovary tissue ex vivo. These results identify TrkB as a potential target for POF with differentiated mechanisms, and confirms superiority of TrkB activating antibody over BDNF as therapeutic agents.
Targeted inhibitors of neurotropic tyrosine kinases are highly effective in selected patients with gene fusions involving NTRK1, NTRK2, or NTRK3. These fusions are consistently detected in rare cancer types (e.g., secretory breast carcinoma and congenital infantile fibrosarcoma), but the occurrence of NTRK fusions in common cancers and their relationship to other therapy biomarkers are largely unexplored. Tissue samples from 11,502 patients were analyzed for 53 gene fusions and sequencing of 592 genes, along with an immunohistochemical evaluation of TrkA/B/C and PD-L1. Thirty-one cases (0.27% of the entire cohort) had NTRK fusions. The most common fusions were ETV6:NTRK3 (n = 10) and TPM3:NTRK1 (n = 6). Gliomas had the highest number of NTRK fusions (14/982, 1.4%), most commonly involving NTRK2 (n = 9). Seventeen non-glioma cases with NTRK fusions included carcinomas of the lungs, thyroid, breast, cervix, colon, nasal cavity, cancer of unknown primary and soft tissue sarcomas. Strong and uniform Trk expression detected with a pan-Trk immunohistochemistry characterized 7/8 NTRK1 fusion cases and 8/9 NTRK2 fusion cases, while NTRK3 fused cases were positive in 6/11 (55%) of cases. 29% of NTRK fusion cases had no other pathogenic genomic alteration. PD-L1 expression was observed in 23% of NTRK fused cases while high tumor DNA microsatellite instability was detected in two cases. We confirm the rarity of NTRK genes fusions outside the brain malignancies. NTRK inhibitors alone or combined with immune checkpoint inhibitors may be a therapeutic option for a substantial proportion of these patients. Strategies for detection of the NTRK fusion-driven cancers may include immunohistochemistry, but gene fusion detection remains the most reliable tool.
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) is a group of conditions characterized by the co-occurrence of epilepsy and intellectual disability (ID), typically with developmental plateauing or regression associated with frequent epileptiform activity. The cause of DEE remains unknown in the majority of cases. We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) in 197 individuals with unexplained DEE and pharmaco-resistant seizures and in their unaffected parents. We focused our attention on de novo mutations (DNMs) and identified candidate genes containing such variants. We sought to identify additional subjects with DNMs in these genes by performing targeted sequencing in another series of individuals with DEE and by mining various sequencing datasets. We also performed meta-analyses to document enrichment of DNMs in candidate genes by leveraging our WGS dataset with those of several DEE and ID series. By combining these strategies, we were able to provide a causal link between DEE and the following genes: NTRK2, GABRB2, CLTC, DHDDS, NUS1, RAB11A, GABBR2, and SNAP25. Overall, we established a molecular diagnosis in 63/197 (32%) individuals in our WGS series. The main cause of DEE in these individuals was de novo point mutations (53/63 solved cases), followed by inherited mutations (6/63 solved cases) and de novo CNVs (4/63 solved cases). De novo missense variants explained a larger proportion of individuals in our series than in other series that were primarily ascertained because of ID. Moreover, these DNMs were more frequently recurrent than those identified in ID series. These observations indicate that the genetic landscape of DEE might be different from that of ID without epilepsy.
Pilocytic astrocytoma, the most common childhood brain tumor, is typically associated with mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway alterations. Surgically inaccessible midline tumors are therapeutically challenging, showing sustained tendency for progression and often becoming a chronic disease with substantial morbidities. Here we describe whole-genome sequencing of 96 pilocytic astrocytomas, with matched RNA sequencing (n = 73), conducted by the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) PedBrain Tumor Project. We identified recurrent activating mutations in FGFR1 and PTPN11 and new NTRK2 fusion genes in non-cerebellar tumors. New BRAF-activating changes were also observed. MAPK pathway alterations affected all tumors analyzed, with no other significant mutations identified, indicating that pilocytic astrocytoma is predominantly a single-pathway disease. Notably, we identified the same FGFR1 mutations in a subset of H3F3A-mutated pediatric glioblastoma with additional alterations in the NF1 gene. Our findings thus identify new potential therapeutic targets in distinct subsets of pilocytic astrocytoma and childhood glioblastoma.
Alveolar epithelial regeneration is essential for recovery from devastating lung diseases. This process occurs when type II alveolar pneumocytes (AT2 cells) proliferate and transdifferentiate into type I alveolar pneumocytes (AT1 cells). We used genome-wide analysis of chromatin accessibility and gene expression following acute lung injury to elucidate repair mechanisms. AT2 chromatin accessibility changed substantially following injury to reveal STAT3 binding motifs adjacent to genes that regulate essential regenerative pathways. Single-cell transcriptome analysis identified brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) as a STAT3 target gene with newly accessible chromatin in a unique population of regenerating AT2 cells. Furthermore, the BDNF receptor tropomyosin receptor kinase B (TrkB) was enriched on mesenchymal alveolar niche cells (MANCs). Loss or blockade of AT2-specific Stat3, Bdnf or mesenchyme-specific TrkB compromised repair and reduced Fgf7 expression by niche cells. A TrkB agonist improved outcomes in vivo following lung injury. These data highlight the biological and therapeutic importance of the STAT3-BDNF-TrkB axis in orchestrating alveolar epithelial regeneration.
BDNF/TrkB neurotrophic signaling regulates neuronal development, differentiation, and survival, and deficient BDNF/TrkB activity underlies neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, exactly how BDNF/TrkB participates in AD pathology remains unclear. Here, we show that deprivation of BDNF/TrkB increases inflammatory cytokines and activates the JAK2/STAT3 pathway, resulting in the upregulation of transcription factor C/EBPbeta. This, in turn, results in increased expression of delta-secretase, leading to both APP and Tau fragmentation by delta-secretase and neuronal loss, which can be blocked by expression of STAT3 Y705F, knockdown of C/EBPbeta, or the delta-secretase enzymatic-dead C189S mutant. Inhibition of this pathological cascade can also rescue impaired synaptic plasticity and cognitive dysfunctions. Importantly, reduction in BDNF/TrkB neurotrophic signaling is inversely coupled with an increase in JAK2/STAT3, C/EBPbeta, and delta-secretase escalation in human AD brains. Therefore, our findings provide a mechanistic link between BDNF/TrkB reduction, C/EBPbeta upregulation, delta-secretase activity, and Abeta and Tau alterations in murine brains.
Anxiety disorders are common, complex psychiatric disorders with twin heritabilities of 30-60%. We conducted a genome-wide association study of Lifetime Anxiety Disorder (n(case) = 25 453, n(control) = 58 113) and an additional analysis of Current Anxiety Symptoms (n(case) = 19 012, n(control) = 58 113). The liability scale common variant heritability estimate for Lifetime Anxiety Disorder was 26%, and for Current Anxiety Symptoms was 31%. Five novel genome-wide significant loci were identified including an intergenic region on chromosome 9 that has previously been associated with neuroticism, and a locus overlapping the BDNF receptor gene, NTRK2. Anxiety showed significant positive genetic correlations with depression and insomnia as well as coronary artery disease, mirroring findings from epidemiological studies. We conclude that common genetic variation accounts for a substantive proportion of the genetic architecture underlying anxiety.
OBJECTIVE: Sepsis-associated encephalopathy (SAE) is a severe and common complication of sepsis and can induce cognitive dysfunction and apoptosis of neurons and neuroinflammation. Emodin has been confirmed to have anti-inflammatory effects. Thus, we sought to investigate the role of Emodin in SAE. METHODS: The cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) method was used for the establishment of SAE in mice model. For treatment of Emodin, intraperitoneal injection of 20 mg/kg Emodin was performed before the surgery. The Morris water maze and open field tests were carried for measurement of cognitive dysfunction. Hematoxylin and eosin staining was for histological analysis of hippocampus. Cell apoptosis of hippocampus neurons was measured by TUNEL staining. Pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines in hippocampus tissue homogenate were evaluated by ELISA. BDNF/TrkB signaling-related proteins (TrkB, p-TrkB, and BDNF), autophagy-related proteins (LC3 II/I and Beclin-1), and apoptosis-related proteins (Bax, Bcl-2, and cleaved caspase-3) were detected by Western blotting. RESULTS: Emodin significantly inhibited apoptosis and induced autophagy in hippocampal neurons of CLP-treated mice. In addition, Emodin significantly ameliorated CLP-induced cognitive dysfunction and pathological injury in mice. Meanwhile, Emodin notably inhibited CLP-induced inflammatory responses in mice via upregulation of BDNF/TrkB signaling, while the effect of Emodin was partially reversed in the presence of K252a (BDNF/TrkB signaling inhibitor). CONCLUSION: Emodin significantly inhibited the progression of SAE via mediation of BDNF/TrkB signaling. Thus, Emodin might serve as a new agent for SAE treatment.
Progressive lung fibrosis is associated with poorly understood aging-related endothelial cell dysfunction. To gain insight into endothelial cell alterations in lung fibrosis we performed single cell RNA-sequencing of bleomycin-injured lungs from young and aged mice. Analysis reveals activated cell states enriched for hypoxia, glycolysis and YAP/TAZ activity in ACKR1+ venous and TrkB+ capillary endothelial cells. Endothelial cell activation is prevalent in lungs of aged mice and can also be detected in human fibrotic lungs. Longitudinal single cell RNA-sequencing combined with lineage tracing demonstrate that endothelial activation resolves in young mouse lungs but persists in aged ones, indicating a failure of the aged vasculature to return to quiescence. Genes associated with activated lung endothelial cells states in vivo can be induced in vitro by activating YAP/TAZ. YAP/TAZ also cooperate with BDNF, a TrkB ligand that is reduced in fibrotic lungs, to promote capillary morphogenesis. These findings offer insights into aging-related lung endothelial cell dysfunction that may contribute to defective lung injury repair and persistent fibrosis.
High-grade astrocytoma with piloid features (HGAP) is a recently recognized glioma type whose classification is dependent on its global epigenetic signature. HGAP is characterized by alterations in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, often co-occurring with CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion and/or ATRX mutation. Experience with HGAP is limited and to better understand this tumor type, we evaluated an expanded cohort of patients (n = 144) with these tumors, as defined by DNA methylation array testing, with a subset additionally evaluated by next-generation sequencing (NGS). Among evaluable cases, we confirmed the high prevalence CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion, and/or ATRX mutations/loss in this tumor type, along with a subset showing NF1 alterations. Five of 93 (5.4%) cases sequenced harbored TP53 mutations and RNA fusion analysis identified a single tumor containing an NTRK2 gene fusion, neither of which have been previously reported in HGAP. Clustering analysis revealed the presence of three distinct HGAP subtypes (or groups = g) based on whole-genome DNA methylation patterns, which we provisionally designated as gNF1 (n = 18), g1 (n = 72), and g2 (n = 54) (median ages 43.5 years, 47 years, and 32 years, respectively). Subtype gNF1 is notable for enrichment with patients with Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (33.3%, p = 0.0008), confinement to the posterior fossa, hypermethylation in the NF1 enhancer region, a trend towards decreased progression-free survival (p = 0.0579), RNA processing pathway dysregulation, and elevated non-neoplastic glia and neuron cell content (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.0001, respectively). Overall, our expanded cohort broadens the genetic, epigenetic, and clinical phenotype of HGAP and provides evidence for distinct epigenetic subtypes in this tumor type.
Fibrinogen (Fg)-containing plaques are associated with memory loss during various inflammatory neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, stroke, and traumatic brain injury. However, mechanisms of its action in neurovascular unit are not clear. As Fg is a high molecular weight blood protein and cannot translocate far from the vessel after extravasation, we hypothesized that it may interact with astrocytes first causing their activation. Cultured mouse cortical astrocytes were treated with Fg in the presence or absence of function-blocking anti-mouse intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) antibody, or with medium alone (control). Expressions of ICAM-1 and tyrosine receptor kinase B (TrkB) as markers of astrocyte activation, and phosphorylation of TrkB (pTrkB) were assessed. Fg dose-dependently increased activation of astrocytes defined by their shape change, retraction of processes, and enhanced expressions of ICAM-1 and TrkB, and increased pTrkB. Blocking of ICAM-1 function ameliorated these Fg effects. Data suggest that Fg interacts with astrocytes causing overexpression of ICAM-1 and TrkB, and TrkB phosphorylation, and thus, astrocyte activation. Since TrkB is known to be involved in neurodegeneration, interaction of Fg with astrocytes and the resultant activation of TrkB can be a possible mechanism involved in memory reduction, which were observed in previous studies and were associated with formation of complexes of Fg deposited in extravascular space with proteins such as Amyloid beta or prion, the proteins involved in development of dementia.
Antidepressant drugs promote neuronal plasticity, and activation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) signaling through its receptor neuronal receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (NTRK2 or TRKB) is among the critical steps in this process. These mechanisms are shared by typical slow-acting antidepressants, fast-acting ketamine, and psychedelic compounds, although the cellular targets of each drug differ. In this opinion article, we propose that some of these antidepressants may directly bind to TRKB and allosterically potentiate BDNF signaling, among other possible effects. TRKB activation in parvalbumin-containing interneurons disinhibits cortical networks and reactivates a juvenile-like plasticity window. Subsequent rewiring of aberrant networks, coupled with environmental stimuli, may underlie its clinical antidepressant effects. The end-to-end hypothesis proposed may stimulate the search for new treatment strategies.
The neurotrophic receptor tyrosine kinase (NTRK) family of genes, including NTRK1, NTRK2, and NTRK3, encodes membrane-bound receptors that normally regulate cell survival and differentiation upon binding of growth factors. Not surprisingly, mutations in these genes are known to contribute to the growth of a diverse number of cancers. With the recent FDA approval of two first-generation tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for adult and pediatric patients with solid tumors harboring NTRK gene fusions, much of the literature has focused on the biology behind these types of NTRK abnormalities; however, point mutations can also contribute to oncogenesis or resistance to TKI therapy, albeit at a lower frequency than fusions. This review focuses on NTRK gene mutations that are associated with resistance to directed therapies, mutations detected in the primary setting that confer increased oncogenic activity, and evidence that suggests that some of these variants may be treated using specific targeted therapies. Finally, this review focuses on the detection of point mutations, including the utility of cell-free DNA (cfDNA) for monitoring the acquisition of resistance mutations.
Pharmacogenomic studies of antidepressant treatment-emergent suicidal events in depressed patients report associations with polymorphisms in genes involved in transcription (CREB1), neuroprotection (BDNF and NTRK2), glutamatergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission (GRIA3, GRIK2 and ADRA2A), the stress and inflammatory responses (FKBP5 and IL28RA), and the synthesis of glycoproteins (PAPLN). Nearly all of the reported events in these studies were modest one-time increases in suicidal ideation. In 3231 unique subjects across six studies, 424 (13.1%) patients showed increases in suicidal ideation, eight (0.25%) attempted suicide and four (0.12%) completed suicide. Systems related to most of these genes have also been implicated in studies of suicidal behavior irrespective of treatment. Future pharmacogenomic studies should target events that are clinically significant, related clinical phenotypes of response and medication side effects, and biological pathways that are involved in these outcomes in order to improve treatment approaches.
Fusions involving the Neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase (NTRK) gene family (NTRK1, NTRK2 and NTRK3) are targetable oncogenic alterations that are found in a diverse range of tumours. There is an increasing demand to identify tumours which harbour these fusions to enable treatment with selective tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as larotrectinib and entrectinib. NTRK fusions occur in a wide range of tumours including rare tumours such as infantile fibrosarcoma and secretory carcinomas of the salivary gland and breast, as well as at low frequencies in more common tumours including melanoma, colorectal, thyroid and lung carcinomas. Identifying NTRK fusions is a challenging task given the different genetic mechanisms underlying NTRK fusions, their varying frequency across different tumour types, complicated by other factors such as tissue availability, optimal detection methods, accessibility and costs of testing methods. Pathologists play a key role in navigating through these complexities by determining optimal approaches to NTRK testing which has important therapeutic and prognostic implications. This review provides an overview of tumours harbouring NTRK fusions, the importance of identifying these fusions, available testing methods including advantages and limitations, and generalised and tumour-specific approaches to testing.
TrkB (neuronal receptor tyrosine kinase-2, NTRK2) is the receptor for brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and is a critical regulator of activity-dependent neuronal plasticity. The past few years have witnessed an increasing understanding of the structure and function of TrkB, including its transmembrane domain (TMD). TrkB interacts with membrane cholesterol, which bidirectionally regulates TrkB signaling. Additionally, TrkB has recently been recognized as a binding target of antidepressant drugs. A variety of different antidepressants, including typical and rapid-acting antidepressants, as well as psychedelic compounds, act as allosteric potentiators of BDNF signaling through TrkB. This suggests that TrkB is the common target of different antidepressant compounds. Although more research is needed, current knowledge suggests that TrkB is a promising target for further drug development.
