Neurotensin receptor type 1; G-protein coupled receptor for the tridecapeptide neurotensin (NTS). Signaling is effected via G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. Signaling leads to the activation of downstream MAP kinases and protects cells against apoptosis.
Small molecule neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) agonists have been pursued for more than 40 years as potential therapeutics for psychiatric disorders, including drug addiction. Clinical development of NTSR1 agonists has, however, been precluded by their severe side effects. NTSR1, a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), signals through the canonical activation of G proteins and engages beta-arrestins to mediate distinct cellular signaling events. Here, we characterize the allosteric NTSR1 modulator SBI-553. This small molecule not only acts as a beta-arrestin-biased agonist but also extends profound beta-arrestin bias to the endogenous ligand by selectively antagonizing G protein signaling. SBI-553 shows efficacy in animal models of psychostimulant abuse, including cocaine self-administration, without the side effects characteristic of balanced NTSR1 agonism. These findings indicate that NTSR1 G protein and beta-arrestin activation produce discrete and separable physiological effects, thus providing a strategy to develop safer GPCR-targeting therapeutics with more directed pharmacological action.
As a neuropeptide, neurotensin (NTS) is widely expressed in central and peripheral nervous system, which is mainly mediated byneurotensin receptor1 (NTSR1) to activate the related downstream signaling pathways. After summarized the function and mechanism of NTS/NTSR1 in various malignant tumors, we found that NTS/NTSR1 played essential roles during tumor initiation and development. NTS/NTSR1 regulates tumor initiation, proliferation, apoptosis, metastasis and differentiation mainly through three pathways, including IP3/Ca2+ /PKC/MAPKs pathway, MMPs/EGFR/MAPKs (PI3K/Akt) pathway, or Rho-GTPsaes and non-receptor tyrosine kinase pathway. Besides, NTS/NTSR1 is also regulated by some upstream pathways and some traditional Chinese medicine preparations and traditional Chinese medicine therapies. In this article, we summarized the function of NTS/NTSR1 and its mechanisms, and discussed the prospective in its application to clinical diagnosis and drugs targeting.
Introduction: Neurotensin is a gut-brain peptide hormone, a 13 amino acid neuropeptide found in the central nervous system and in the GI tract. The neurotensinergic system is implicated in various physiological and pathological processes related to neuropsychiatric and metabolic machineries, cancer growth, food, and drug intake. NT mediates its functions through its two G protein-coupled receptors: neurotensin receptor 1 (NTS1/NTSR1) and neurotensin receptor 2 (NTS2/NTSR2). Over the past decade, the role of NTS3/NTSR3/sortilin has also gained importance in human pathologies. Several approaches have appeared dealing with the discovery of compounds able to modulate the functions of this neuropeptide through its receptors for therapeutic gain.Areas covered: The article provides an overview of over four decades of research and details the drug discovery approaches and patented strategies targeting NTSR in the past decade.Expert opinion: Neurotensin is an important neurotransmitter that enables crosstalk with various neurotransmitter and neuroendocrine systems. While significant efforts have been made that have led to selective agonists and antagonists with promising in vitro and in vivo activities, the therapeutic potential of compounds targeting the neurotensinergic system is still to be fully harnessed for successful clinical translation of compounds for the treatment of several pathologies.
Neurotensin (NTS) is a neuropeptide neurotransmitter expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Many studies over the years have revealed a number of roles for this neuropeptide in body temperature regulation, feeding, analgesia, ethanol sensitivity, psychosis, substance use, and pain. This review provides a general survey of the role of neurotensin with a focus on modalities that we believe to be particularly relevant to the study of reward. We focus on NTS signaling in the ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, lateral hypothalamus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and central amygdala. Studies on the role of NTS outside of the ventral tegmental area are still in their relative infancy, yet they reveal a complex role for neurotensinergic signaling in reward-related behaviors that merits further study. This article is part of the special issue on 'Neuropeptides'.
NTSR1 abnormal expression by cancer cells makes it a strategic target for antitumoral therapies, such as compounds that use NTSR1 binding probes to deliver cytotoxic agents to tumor cells. Success of these therapies relies on NTSR1 protein availability and accessibility; therefore, understanding the protein's biology is crucial. We studied NTSR1 protein in exogenously and endogenously expressing non-tumoral and tumoral cells. We found NTSR1 to be expressed as three distinct protein forms: the NTSR1-high form, a glycosylated protein; the NTSR1-low form, a N-terminally cleaved and de-glycosylated protein; and the NTSR1-LP protein with the MW size predicted by its NTSR1 amino acid sequence. We show that the NTSR1-high form is cleaved by MMPs to generate the NTSR1-low form, a process that is promoted by the Neurotensin (NTS) ligand. In addition, NTS induced the internalization of plasma membrane localized NTSR1 and degradation of NTSR1-low form via the proteasome. Importantly, we found NTSR1-low form to be the most abundant form in the tumoral cells and in PDAC Patient Derived Xenograft, demonstrating its physiopathological relevance. Altogether, our work provides important technical and experimental tools as well as new crucial insights into NTSR1 protein biology that are required to develop clinically relevant NTSR1 targeting anti-tumoral therapies.
Neurotensin (NTS) is a peptide discovered in 1973, which has been studied in many fields and mainly in oncology for its action in tumor growth and proliferation. In this review of the literature, we wanted to focus on its involvement in reproductive functions. NTS participates in an autocrine manner in the mechanisms of ovulation via NTS receptor 3 (NTSR3), present in granulosa cells. Spermatozoa express only its receptors, whereas in the female reproductive system (endometrial and tube epithelia and granulosa cells), we find both NTS secretion and the expression of its receptors. It consistently enhances the acrosome reaction of spermatozoa in mammals in a paracrine manner via its interaction with NTSR1 and NTSR2. Furthermore, previous results on embryonic quality and development are discordant. NTS appears to be involved in the key stages of fertilization and could improve the results of in vitro fertilization, especially through its effect on the acrosomal reaction.
The midcycle luteinizing hormone (LH) surge initiates a cascade of events within the ovarian follicle which culminates in ovulation. Only mural granulosa cells and theca cells express large numbers of LH receptors, and LH-stimulated paracrine mediators communicate the ovulatory signal within the follicle. Recent reports identified the neuropeptide neurotensin (NTS) as a product of granulosa cells. Here, we demonstrate that granulosa cells were the primary site of NTS expression in macaque ovulatory follicles. Granulosa cell NTS mRNA and protein increased after human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) administration, which substitutes for the LH surge. To identify ovulatory actions of NTS, a NTS-neutralizing antibody was injected into preovulatory macaque follicles. hCG administration immediately followed, and ovaries were removed 48 hours later to evaluate ovulatory events. Follicles injected with control IgG ovulated normally. In contrast, 75% of NTS antibody-injected follicles failed to ovulate, containing oocytes trapped within unruptured, hemorrhagic follicles. Serum progesterone was unchanged. Of the three NTS receptors, SORT1 was highly expressed in follicular granulosa, theca, and endothelial cells; NTSR1 and NTSR2 were expressed at lower levels. Excessive blood cells in NTS antibody-injected follicles indicated vascular anomalies, so the response of monkey ovarian endothelial cells to NTS was evaluated in vitro. NTS stimulated endothelial cell migration and capillary sprout formation, consistent with a role for NTS in vascular remodeling associated with ovulation. In summary, we identified NTS as a possible paracrine mediator of ovulation. Further investigation of the NTS synthesis/response pathway may lead to improved treatments for infertility and novel targets for contraception.
Arrestin proteins bind to active, phosphorylated G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), thereby preventing G-protein coupling, triggering receptor internalization and affecting various downstream signalling pathways(1,2). Although there is a wealth of structural information detailing the interactions between GPCRs and G proteins, less is known about how arrestins engage GPCRs. Here we report a cryo-electron microscopy structure of full-length human neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) in complex with truncated human beta-arrestin 1 (betaarr1(DeltaCT)). We find that phosphorylation of NTSR1 is critical for the formation of a stable complex with betaarr1(DeltaCT), and identify phosphorylated sites in both the third intracellular loop and the C terminus that may promote this interaction. In addition, we observe a phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate molecule forming a bridge between the membrane side of NTSR1 transmembrane segments 1 and 4 and the C-lobe of arrestin. Compared with a structure of a rhodopsin-arrestin-1 complex, in our structure arrestin is rotated by approximately 85 degrees  relative to the receptor. These findings highlight both conserved aspects and plasticity among arrestin-receptor interactions.
Initially, NEUROTENSIN (NTS) has been shown to play physiological and biological functions as a neuro-transmitter/modulator in the central nervous system and as an endocrine factor in the periphery, through its binding to two kinds of receptors: NTSR1 and 2 (G protein-coupled receptors) and NTSR3/sortilin (a vacuolar protein-sorting 10-domain receptor). NTS also plays oncogenic roles in many types of cancer, including digestive cancers. In tumor tissues, NTS and NTSR1 expression is higher than in healthy ones and is associated with poor prognosis. NTS and NTRS1 promote cancer progression and play key functions in metastatic processes; they modulate several signaling pathways and they contribute to changes in the tumor microenvironment. Conversely, NTRS2 involvement in digestive cancers is poorly understood. Discovered for mediating NTS biological effects, sortilin recently emerged as a promising target as its expression was found to be increased in various types of cancers. Because it can be secreted, a soluble form of sortilin (sSortilin) appears as a new serum biomarker which, on the basis of recent studies, promises to be useful in both the diagnosis and tumor progression monitoring. More precisely, it appears that soluble sortilin can be associated with other receptors like TRKB. These associations occur in exosomes and trigger the aggressiveness of cancers like glioblastoma, leading to the concept of a possible composite theranostic biomarker. This review summarizes the oncogenic roles of the NTS signaling pathways in digestive cancers and discusses their emergence as promising early diagnostic and/or prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets.
Our laboratory has previously reported a strategy of employing cysteine cathepsin (CC) inhibitors as adduct forming, trapping agents to extend the tumor residence time of neurotensin receptor subtype 1 (NTSR1)-targeted radiopharmaceuticals. As a follow-up, we herein report a small library of CC trapping agent (CCTA)-incorporated, NTSR1-targeted conjugates with structural modifications that reduce the number of charged functional groups for both the CCTA and the peptide targeting sequence. These modifications were pursued to reduce the renal uptake and increase the translational potential of the CCTA-incorporated, NTSR1-targeted agents as radiotherapeutics. The biological performance of these constructs was examined using a battery of in vitro and in vivo studies employing the NTSR1-positive HT-29 human colon cancer cell line as our model. In vitro studies confirmed the ability of these constructs to target the NTSR1 and efficiently form intracellular adducts with cysteine proteases. Biodistribution studies using an HT-29 xenograft mouse model revealed that truncation (removal of Lys(6)-Pro(7)) of the NTSR1-targeted peptide ((177)Lu-NE2a) had the greatest (3.7-fold) effect at lowering renal recognition/uptake relative to our previously reported construct. Other charge-reducing modifications to the CCTA resulted in unexpected increases in renal uptake. All of the constructs demonstrated similar levels of in vivo NTSR1-positive tumor targeting with the highest tumor residualization resulting from the construct containing the zwitterionic CCTA ((177)Lu-NE2a). In vivo adduct formation of the conjugates was confirmed using autoradiographic SDS-PAGE analysis.
Our aim was to identify DNA methylation changes associated with the growth pattern and invasiveness of colorectal cancers (CRCs). Comparison of the methylation statuses of large (>/= 20 mm in diameter along the colonic surface) noninvasive tumors (NTs) and small (<20 mm in diameter along the colonic surface) invasive tumors (ITs) using CpG island microarray analysis showed neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) to be hypermethylated in large NTs. Quantitative bisulfite pyrosequencing revealed that NTSR1 is frequently methylated in colorectal tumors, with large NTs exhibiting the highest methylation levels. The higher NTSR1 methylation levels were associated with better prognoses. By contrast, NTSR1 copy number gains were most frequent among small ITs. Methylation of NTSR1 was associated with the gene's silencing in CRC cell lines, whereas ectopic expression of NTSR1 promoted proliferation and invasion by CRC cells. Analysis of primary tumors composed of adenomatous and malignant portions revealed that NTSR1 is frequently methylated in the adenomatous portion, while methylation levels are generally lower in the cancerous portions. These results suggest that NTSR1 methylation is associated with lateral and noninvasive growth of colorectal tumors, while low levels of methylation may contribute to the malignant potential through activation of NTSR1. Our data also indicate that NTSR1 methylation may be a prognostic biomarker in CRC.
Neurotensin (NTS) plays important roles in neurotransmission and neuromodulation in the nervous system. NTS exerts its effects mainly by binding to the neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) and receptor 2 (NTSR2) that belong to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. While studies on NTS and NTSR have been conducted mainly in mammalian systems, little is known about this ligand-receptor pair in nonmammalian species. Using a basic local alignment search tool combined with our previous identification of bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus NTSR1 and NTSR2, we can define the evolutionary lineage of NTS and NTSR in vertebrates. Fish may have only one NTSR, which is orthologous to amphibian and mammalian NTSR1. Amphibian and mammalian species have two lineages of NTSR1 and NTSR2 subfamilies. While amphibian and mammalian NTSRs have overall structural similarity within the given subfamilies, they exhibit different pharmacological features and signal transduction pathways. This review will discuss the phylogenetic history of the G protein-coupled NTSRs, the structural features that may influence their pharmacological properties and signal transduction mechanisms, and the molecular interactions between NTSR1 and NTSR2 in vertebrates.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Glioblastoma is the most common and aggressive brain tumor and carries a poor prognosis. Previously, we found that neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) contributes to glioma progression, but the underlying mechanisms of NTSR1 in glioblastoma invasion remain to be clarified. The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular mechanisms of NTSR1 in glioblastoma invasion. METHODS: Cell migration and invasion were evaluated using wound-healing and transwell assays. Cell proliferation was detected using CCK-8. The expression of NTSR1, Jun, and suppressor of cytokine signaling 6 (SOCS6) was detected using western blotting. The expression of miR-494 was detected by Quantitative real-time PCR. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was performed to examine the interaction between Jun and miR-494 promoter. Dual-luciferase reporter assay and western blotting were performed to identify the direct regulation of SOCS6 by miR-494. An orthotopic xenograft mouse model was conducted to assess tumor growth and invasion. RESULTS: NTSR1 knockdown attenuated the invasion of glioblastoma cells. Jun was positively regulated by NTSR1, which promoted miR-494 expression through binding to miR-494 promoter. SOCS6 was confirmed as a direct target of miR-494, thus, NTSR1-induced miR-494 upregulation resulted in SOCS6 downregulation. Both miR-494 and SOCS6 were involved in the NTSR1-induced invasion of glioblastoma cells. In vivo, tumor invasion and growth were inhibited by NTSR1 knockdown, but were restored with miR-494 overexpression. CONCLUSION: NTSR1 knockdown inhibited glioblastoma invasion via the Jun/miR-494/SOCS6 axis.
Neutrophils and their production of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) significantly contribute to neuroinflammation and brain damage after intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH). Although Akebia saponin D (ASD) demonstrates strong anti-inflammatory activities and blood-brain barrier permeability, its role in regulating NETs formation and neuroinflammation following ICH is uncharted. Our research focused on unraveling the influence of ASD on neuroinflammation mediated by NETs and the mechanisms involved. We found that increased levels of peripheral blood neutrophils post-ICH are correlated with worse prognostic outcomes. Through network pharmacology, we identified ASD as a promising therapeutic target for ICH. ASD administration significantly improved neurobehavioral performance and decreased NETs production in neutrophils. Furthermore, ASD was shown to upregulate the membrane protein NTSR1 and activate the cAMP signaling pathway, confirmed through transcriptome sequencing, western blot, and immunofluorescence. Interestingly, the NTSR1 inhibitor SR48692 significantly nullified ASD's anti-NETs effects and dampened cAMP pathway activation. Mechanistically, suppression of PKAc via H89 negated ASD's anti-NETs effects but did not affect NTSR1. Our study suggests that ASD may reduce NETs formation and neuroinflammation, potentially involving the NTSR1/PKAc/PAD4 pathway post-ICH, underlining the potential of ASD in mitigating neuroinflammation through its anti-NETs properties.
BACKGROUND: siRNAs have a high potential for silencing critical molecular pathways that are pathogenic. Nevertheless, their clinical application has been limited by a lack of effective and safe nanotechnology-based delivery system that allows a controlled and safe transfection to cytosol of targeted cells without the associated adverse effects. Our group recently reported a very effective and safe hybrid nanoparticle delivery system composing human IgG and poloxamer-188 for siRNA delivery to cancer cells. However, these nanoparticles need to be optimized in terms of particle size, loading capacity and encapsulation efficiency. In the present study, we explored the effects of certain production parameters on particle size, loading capacity and encapsulation efficiency. Further, to make these nanoparticles more specific in their delivery of siRNA, we conjugated anti-NTSR1-mAb to the surface of these nanoparticles to target NTSR1-overexpressing cancer cells. The mechanism of siRNA release from these antiNTSR1-mAb functionalized nanoparticles was also elucidated. RESULTS: It was demonstrated that the concentration of human IgG in the starting nanoprecipitation medium and the rotation speed of the magnetic stirrer influenced the encapsulation efficiency, loading capacity and the size of the nanoparticles produced. We also successfully transformed these nanoparticles into actively targeted nanoparticles by functionalizing with anti-NTSR1-mAb to specifically target NTSR1-overexpressing cancer cells, hence able to avoid undesired accumulation in normal cells. The mechanism of siRNA release from these nanoparticles was elucidated to be by Fickian diffusion. Using flow cytometry and fluorescence microscopy, we were able to confirm the active involvement of NTSR1 in the uptake of these anti-NTSR1-mAb functionalized hybrid nanoparticles by lung adenocarcinoma cells. CONCLUSIONS: This hybrid nanoparticle delivery system can be used as a platform technology for intracellular delivery of siRNAs to NTSR1-overexpressing tumor cells.
OBJECTIVE: This work aimed to explore the effect of NTSR1 on oncogenesis and the potential clinical role of gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC). METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to assay NTSR1 and EGFR/HER2 expression. NTSR1 and MET were disrupted using shRNA. The role of 19 genes related to cancer phenotype signaling pathways was explored. The expression of genes was verified by Western blotting or quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The interactions among genes were analyzed by STRING. RESULTS: There was a significant positive correlation between the expression of NTSR1 and EGFR/HER2. The proliferation and invasion rate of MKN-45 cells was significantly reduced by the NTSR1 shRNA. The expression of MET and EGFR/HER2 was downregulated by the NTSR1 shRNA. NTSR1 modulated the invasion ability of gastric cancer cells via MET. NTSR1 interacted with MET via PIK3CA. Combined knockout of NTSR1 and MET further reduced the PIK3CA mRNA level and the invasion ability of MKN-45 cells. CONCLUSIONS: NTSR1 plays an important role in the occurrence, invasion, and metastasis of GAC in a manner involving several other genes, such as MET and EGFR/HER2. Therefore, NTSR1 constitutes a potential therapeutic target for GAC via synthetic lethality, and assessment of NTSR1 signaling may be necessary when performing tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy.
Despite the impressive results obtained with immunotherapy in several cancer types, a significant fraction of patients remains unresponsive to these treatments. In colorectal cancer (CRC), B-RafV600 mutations have been identified in 8-15% of the patients. In this work we interrogated a public dataset to explore the surfaceome of these tumors and found that several genes, such as GP2, CLDN18, AQP5, TM4SF4, NTSR1, VNN1, and CD109, were upregulated. By performing gene set enrichment analysis, we also identified a striking upregulation of genes (CD74, LAG3, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DRB5, HLA-DMA, HLA-DMB, HLA-DPB1, HLA-DRA, HLA-DOA, FCGR2B, HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1, and HLA-DPA1) associated with antigen processing and presentation via MHC class II. Likewise, we found a strong correlation between PD1 and PD(L)1 expression and the presence of genes encoding for proteins involved in antigen presentation such as CD74, HLA-DPA1, and LAG3. Furthermore, a similar association was observed for the presence of dendritic cells and macrophages. Finally, a low but positive relationship was observed between tumor mutational burden and neoantigen load. Our findings support the idea that a therapeutic strategy based on the targeting of PD(L)1 together with other receptors also involved in immuno-modulation, such as LAG3, could help to improve current treatments against BRAF-mutated CRC tumors.
The genetic and neural basis of working memory (WM) has been extensively studied. Many dopamine (DA) related genes, including the NTSR1 gene (a DA modulator gene), have been reported to be associated with WM performance. The NTSR1 protein is predominantly expressed in the cerebral cortex and the hippocampus, the latter of which is closely involved in WM processing based on both lesion and fMRI studies. Thus far, however, no study has examined the joint effects of NTSR1 gene polymorphism and hippocampal morphology on WM performance. Participants of the current study were 330 healthy Chinese college students. WM performance was measured with a 2-back WM paradigm. Structural MRI data were acquired and then analyzed using an automated procedure with atlas-based FreeSurfer segmentation software (v 4.5.0) package. Linear regression analyses were conducted with a NTSR1 C/T polymorphism which was previously reported to be associated with WM (rs4334545), hippocampal volume, and their interaction as predictors of WM performance, with gender and intracranial volume (ICV) as covariates. Results showed a significant interaction between NTSR1 genotype and hippocampal volume (p<.05 for both the left and right hippocampi). Further analysis showed that the correlation between hippocampal volume and WM scores was significant for carriers of the NTSR1 T-allele (p<.05 for both hippocampi), but not for CC homozygotes. These results indicate that the association between hippocampal structure and WM performance was modulated by variation in the NTSR1 gene, and suggest that further studies of brain-behavior associations should take genetic background information into account.
PURPOSE: Accumulating evidence suggests that neurotensin (NTS) and neurotensin receptors (NTSRs) play key roles in lung cancer progression by triggering multiple oncogenic signaling pathways. This study aims to develop Cu-labeled neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1)-targeting agents with the potential for both imaging and therapeutic applications. METHOD: A series of neurotensin receptor antagonists (NRAs) with variable propylamine (PA) linker length and different chelators were synthesized, including [(64)Cu]Cu-CB-TE2A-iPA-NRA ([(64)Cu]Cu-4a-c, i = 1, 2, 3), [(64)Cu]Cu-NOTA-2PA-NRA ([(64)Cu]Cu-4d), [(64)Cu]Cu-DOTA-2PA-NRA ([(64)Cu]Cu-4e, also known as [(64)Cu]Cu-3BP-227), and [(64)Cu]Cu-DOTA-VS-2PA-NRA ([(64)Cu]Cu-4f). The series of small animal PET/CT were conducted in H1299 lung cancer model. The expression profile of NTSR1 was also confirmed by IHC using patient tissue samples. RESULTS: For most of the compounds studied, PET/CT showed prominent tumor uptake and high tumor-to-background contrast, but the tumor retention was strongly influenced by the chelators used. For previously reported 4e, [(64)Cu]Cu-labeled derivative showed initial high tumor uptake accompanied by rapid tumor washout at 24 h. The newly developed [(64)Cu]Cu-4d and [(64)Cu]Cu-4f demonstrated good tumor uptake and tumor-to-background contrast at early time points, but were less promising in tumor retention. In contrast, our lead compound [(64)Cu]Cu-4b demonstrated 9.57 +/- 1.35, 9.44 +/- 2.38 and 9.72 +/- 4.89%ID/g tumor uptake at 4, 24, and 48 h p.i., respectively. Moderate liver uptake (11.97 +/- 3.85, 9.80 +/- 3.63, and 7.72 +/- 4.68%ID/g at 4, 24, and 48 h p.i.) was observed with low uptake in most other organs. The PA linker was found to have a significant effect on drug distribution. Compared to [(64)Cu]Cu-4b, [(64)Cu]Cu-4a had a lower background, including a greatly reduced liver uptake, while the tumor uptake was only moderately reduced. Meanwhile, [(64)Cu]Cu-4c showed increased uptake in both the tumor and the liver. The clinical relevance of NTSR1 was also demonstrated by the elevated tumor expression in patient tissue samples. CONCLUSIONS: Through the side-by-side comparison, [(64)Cu]Cu-4b was identified as the lead agent for further evaluation based on its high and sustained tumor uptake and moderate liver uptake. It can not only be used to efficiently detect NTSR1 expression in lung cancer (for diagnosis, patient screening, and treatment monitoring), but also has the great potential to treat NTSR-positive lesions once chelating to the beta emitter (67)Cu.
The neurotensin receptor NTSR1 binds the peptide agonist neurotensin (NTS) and signals preferentially via the Gq protein. Recently, Grisshammer and co-workers reported the crystal structure of a thermostable mutant NTSR1-GW5 with NTS bound. Understanding how the mutations thermostabilize the structure would allow efficient design of thermostable mutant GPCRs for protein purification, and subsequent biophysical studies. Using microsecond scale molecular dynamics simulations (4 mus) of the thermostable mutant NTSR1-GW5 and wild type NTSR1, we have elucidated the structural and energetic factors that affect the thermostability and dynamics of NTSR1. The thermostable mutant NTSR1-GW5 is found to be less flexible and less dynamic than the wild type NTSR1. The point mutations confer thermostability by improving the interhelical hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic packing, and receptor interactions with the lipid bilayer, especially in the intracellular regions. During MD, NTSR1-GW5 becomes more hydrated compared to wild type NTSR1, with tight hydrogen bonded water clusters within the transmembrane core of the receptor, thus providing evidence that water plays an important role in improving helical packing in the thermostable mutant. Our studies provide valuable insights into the stability and functioning of NTSR1 that will be useful in future design of thermostable mutants of other peptide GPCRs.
