Neurotensin receptor type 2; Receptor for the tridecapeptide neurotensin. It is associated with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system.
The lymphatic vasculature plays important roles in the physiology of the organs in which it resides, though a clear mechanistic understanding of how this crosstalk is mediated is lacking. Here, we performed single-cell transcriptional profiling of human and mouse adipose tissue and found that lymphatic endothelial cells highly express neurotensin (NTS/Nts). Nts expression is reduced by cold and norepinephrine in an alpha-adrenergic-dependent manner, suggesting a role in adipose thermogenesis. Indeed, NTS treatment of brown adipose tissue explants reduced expression of thermogenic genes. Furthermore, adenoviral-mediated overexpression and knockdown or knockout of NTS in vivo reduced and enhanced cold tolerance, respectively, an effect that is mediated by NTSR2 and ERK signaling. Inhibition of NTSR2 promoted energy expenditure and improved metabolic function in obese mice. These data establish a link between adipose tissue lymphatics and adipocytes with potential therapeutic implications.
Neurotensin (NTS) and its receptors (NTSRs) have long been the subject of study and have shown to have a vital function in a variety of systems. They are specifically implicated in the development of tumors and have both oncogenic and anti-apoptotic effects. Neurotensin receptor 2 (NTSR2), like NTSR1, belongs to the G protein-coupled receptor family and has been linked to analgesia, mental disorders, and hematological cancers. However, several research reports have revealed that it exists in numerous different systems. As a result, it seems to be an extremely promising therapeutic target for a variety of diseases. As NTSR2 is particularly prevalent in the brain and has different distribution and developmental characteristics from NTSR1, it may play a specific role in the nervous system. The present review summarizes the expression and function of NTSR2 in different systems, to highlight its potential as a diagnostic tool or therapeutic target.
Neurotensin (NTS) is a neuropeptide neurotransmitter expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Many studies over the years have revealed a number of roles for this neuropeptide in body temperature regulation, feeding, analgesia, ethanol sensitivity, psychosis, substance use, and pain. This review provides a general survey of the role of neurotensin with a focus on modalities that we believe to be particularly relevant to the study of reward. We focus on NTS signaling in the ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, lateral hypothalamus, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, and central amygdala. Studies on the role of NTS outside of the ventral tegmental area are still in their relative infancy, yet they reveal a complex role for neurotensinergic signaling in reward-related behaviors that merits further study. This article is part of the special issue on 'Neuropeptides'.
Introduction: Neurotensin is a gut-brain peptide hormone, a 13 amino acid neuropeptide found in the central nervous system and in the GI tract. The neurotensinergic system is implicated in various physiological and pathological processes related to neuropsychiatric and metabolic machineries, cancer growth, food, and drug intake. NT mediates its functions through its two G protein-coupled receptors: neurotensin receptor 1 (NTS1/NTSR1) and neurotensin receptor 2 (NTS2/NTSR2). Over the past decade, the role of NTS3/NTSR3/sortilin has also gained importance in human pathologies. Several approaches have appeared dealing with the discovery of compounds able to modulate the functions of this neuropeptide through its receptors for therapeutic gain.Areas covered: The article provides an overview of over four decades of research and details the drug discovery approaches and patented strategies targeting NTSR in the past decade.Expert opinion: Neurotensin is an important neurotransmitter that enables crosstalk with various neurotransmitter and neuroendocrine systems. While significant efforts have been made that have led to selective agonists and antagonists with promising in vitro and in vivo activities, the therapeutic potential of compounds targeting the neurotensinergic system is still to be fully harnessed for successful clinical translation of compounds for the treatment of several pathologies.
Neurotensin (NTS) is a peptide discovered in 1973, which has been studied in many fields and mainly in oncology for its action in tumor growth and proliferation. In this review of the literature, we wanted to focus on its involvement in reproductive functions. NTS participates in an autocrine manner in the mechanisms of ovulation via NTS receptor 3 (NTSR3), present in granulosa cells. Spermatozoa express only its receptors, whereas in the female reproductive system (endometrial and tube epithelia and granulosa cells), we find both NTS secretion and the expression of its receptors. It consistently enhances the acrosome reaction of spermatozoa in mammals in a paracrine manner via its interaction with NTSR1 and NTSR2. Furthermore, previous results on embryonic quality and development are discordant. NTS appears to be involved in the key stages of fertilization and could improve the results of in vitro fertilization, especially through its effect on the acrosomal reaction.
The midcycle luteinizing hormone (LH) surge initiates a cascade of events within the ovarian follicle which culminates in ovulation. Only mural granulosa cells and theca cells express large numbers of LH receptors, and LH-stimulated paracrine mediators communicate the ovulatory signal within the follicle. Recent reports identified the neuropeptide neurotensin (NTS) as a product of granulosa cells. Here, we demonstrate that granulosa cells were the primary site of NTS expression in macaque ovulatory follicles. Granulosa cell NTS mRNA and protein increased after human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) administration, which substitutes for the LH surge. To identify ovulatory actions of NTS, a NTS-neutralizing antibody was injected into preovulatory macaque follicles. hCG administration immediately followed, and ovaries were removed 48 hours later to evaluate ovulatory events. Follicles injected with control IgG ovulated normally. In contrast, 75% of NTS antibody-injected follicles failed to ovulate, containing oocytes trapped within unruptured, hemorrhagic follicles. Serum progesterone was unchanged. Of the three NTS receptors, SORT1 was highly expressed in follicular granulosa, theca, and endothelial cells; NTSR1 and NTSR2 were expressed at lower levels. Excessive blood cells in NTS antibody-injected follicles indicated vascular anomalies, so the response of monkey ovarian endothelial cells to NTS was evaluated in vitro. NTS stimulated endothelial cell migration and capillary sprout formation, consistent with a role for NTS in vascular remodeling associated with ovulation. In summary, we identified NTS as a possible paracrine mediator of ovulation. Further investigation of the NTS synthesis/response pathway may lead to improved treatments for infertility and novel targets for contraception.
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) cells are resistant to apoptosis, and consequently accumulate to the detriment of normal B cells and patient immunity. Because current therapies fail to eradicate these apoptosis-resistant cells, it is essential to identify alternative survival pathways as novel targets for anticancer therapies. Overexpression of cell-surface G protein-coupled receptors drives cell transformation, and thus plays a critical role in malignancies. In this study, we identified neurotensin receptor 2 (NTSR2) as an essential driver of apoptosis resistance in B-CLL. NTSR2 was highly expressed in B-CLL cells, whereas expression of its natural ligand, neurotensin (NTS), was minimal in both B-CLL cells and patient plasma. Surprisingly, NTSR2 remained in a constitutively active phosphorylated state, caused not by a mutation-induced gain-of-function but rather by an interaction with the oncogenic tyrosine kinase receptor TrkB. Functional and biochemical characterization revealed that the NTSR2-TrkB interaction acts as a conditional oncogenic driver requiring the TrkB ligand brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), which unlike NTS is highly expressed in B-CLL cells. Together, NTSR2, TrkB and BDNF induce autocrine and/or paracrine survival pathways that are independent of mutation status and indolent or progressive disease course. The NTSR2-TrkB interaction activates survival signaling pathways, including the Src and AKT kinase pathways, as well as expression of the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL. When NTSR2 was downregulated, TrkB failed to protect B-CLL cells from a drastic decrease in viability via typical apoptotic cell death, reflected by DNA fragmentation and Annexin V presentation. Together, our findings demonstrate that the NTSR2-TrkB interaction plays a crucial role in B-CLL cell survival, suggesting that inhibition of NTSR2 represents a promising targeted strategy for treating B-CLL malignancy.
Neurotensin (NT) is a 13-amino acid neuropeptide widely distributed in the CNS that has been involved in the pathophysiology of many neural and psychiatric disorders. There are three known neurotensin receptors (NTSRs), which mediate multiple actions, and form the neurotensinergic system in conjunction with NT. NTSR1 is the main mediator of NT, displaying effects in both the CNS and the periphery, while NTSR2 is mainly expressed in the brain and NTSR3 has a broader expression pattern. In this review, we bring together up-to-date studies showing an involvement of the neurotensinergic system in different aspects of the stress response and the main stress-related disorders, such as depression and anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and its associated symptoms, such as fear memory and maternal separation, ethanol addiction, and substance abuse. Emphasis is put on gene, mRNA, and protein alterations of NT and NTSRs, as well as behavioral and pharmacological studies, leading to evidence-based suggestions on the implicated regulating mechanisms as well as their therapeutic exploitation. Stress responses and anxiety involve mainly NTSR1, but also NTSR2 and NTSR3. NTSR1 and NTSR3 are primarily implicated in depression, while NTSR2 and secondarily NTSR1 in PTSD. NTSR1 is interrelated with substance and drug abuse and NTSR2 with fear memory, while all NTSRs seem to be implicated in ethanol consumption. Some of the actions of NT and NTSRs in these pathological settings may be driven through interactions between NT and corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF) in their regulatory contribution, as well as by NT's pro-inflammatory mediating actions.
Current therapies that target the B-cell receptor pathway or the inhibition of anti-apoptotic proteins do not prevent the progressive forms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), have low long-term efficacy and are subject to therapeutic resistance. Deciphering the mechanisms of leukemic cell survival and searching for new specific targets therefore remain major challenges to improve the management of this disease. It was evidenced that NTSR2 (neurotensin receptor 2), through the recruitment of TRKB (tropomyosin related kinase B), induces survival pathways in leukemic B cells. We have investigated the therapeutic potential of this protein complex as a new target. The binding domain of NTSR2 and TRKB was identified and a peptide targeting the latter was designed. The peptide binds TRKB and efficiently decreases the interaction of the two proteins. It is also effectively internalized by CLL-B cells in which it notably affects Src family kinase signaling and anti-apoptotic proteins levels. It demonstrated a cytotoxic effect both in vitro on the MEC-1 cell line and ex vivo on a cohort of 30 CLL patients. Altogether, these results underline the therapeutic potential of the NTSR2/TRKB protein complex as a target in CLL and open new perspectives for the development of targeted therapies.
Neurotensin (NTS) plays important roles in neurotransmission and neuromodulation in the nervous system. NTS exerts its effects mainly by binding to the neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) and receptor 2 (NTSR2) that belong to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. While studies on NTS and NTSR have been conducted mainly in mammalian systems, little is known about this ligand-receptor pair in nonmammalian species. Using a basic local alignment search tool combined with our previous identification of bullfrog Lithobates catesbeianus NTSR1 and NTSR2, we can define the evolutionary lineage of NTS and NTSR in vertebrates. Fish may have only one NTSR, which is orthologous to amphibian and mammalian NTSR1. Amphibian and mammalian species have two lineages of NTSR1 and NTSR2 subfamilies. While amphibian and mammalian NTSRs have overall structural similarity within the given subfamilies, they exhibit different pharmacological features and signal transduction pathways. This review will discuss the phylogenetic history of the G protein-coupled NTSRs, the structural features that may influence their pharmacological properties and signal transduction mechanisms, and the molecular interactions between NTSR1 and NTSR2 in vertebrates.
Neurotensin, a neuropeptide growth factor, and its two specific neurotensin receptors, NTSR1 and NTSR2, were shown to be expressed by human B cell lines. Another NTSR, sortilin, which is common to neurotensin and neurotrophins, was also detected as we have previously described. Neurotensin was functional in B cell lines; it induced their proliferation and inhibited apoptosis induced by serum deprivation or Fas activation. Quantitative study of gene expression in two malignant B cell diseases showed that NTSR2 was overexpressed, NTSR1 decreased, and neurotensin was unexpressed in B cell leukemia patient's cells, as compared with healthy B cells. However, these expressions did not significantly change in large diffuse B cell lymphoma lymph nodes compared with benign ones. This study points out that neurotensin and its two specific receptors are expressed in human B lymphocytes. Such expressions were not described, and their relationship in B cell diseases, especially in chronic B cell leukemia, needs to be considered further in regard to these findings.
Neurotensin (NTS) is a secretory peptide produced by lymphatic endothelial cells. Our previous study revealed that NTS suppressed the activity of brown adipose tissue via interactions with NTSR2. In the current study, we found that the depletion of Ntsr2 in white adipocytes upregulated food intake, while the local treatment of NTS suppressed food intake. Our mechanistic study revealed that suppression of NTS-NTSR2 signaling enhanced the phosphorylation of ceramide synthetase 2, increased the abundance of its products ceramides C20-C24, and downregulated the production of GDF15 in white adipose tissues, which was responsible for the elevation of food intake. We discovered a potential causal and positive correlation between serum C20-C24 ceramide levels and human food intake in four populations with different ages and ethnic backgrounds. Together, our study shows that NTS-NTSR2 signaling in white adipocytes can regulate food intake via its direct control of lipid metabolism and production of GDF15. The ceramides C20-C24 are key factors regulating food intake in mammals.
BACKGROUND: Genes involved in Tourette syndrome (TS) remain largely unknown. We aimed to identify genetic factors contributing to TS in a French cohort of 120 individuals using a combination of hypothesis-driven and exome-sequencing approaches. METHODS: We first sequenced exons of SLITRK1-6 and HDC in the TS cohort and subsequently sequenced the exome of 12 individuals harboring rare variants in these genes to find additional rare variants contributing to the disorder under the hypothesis of oligogenic inheritance. We further screened three candidate genes (OPRK1, PCDH10, and NTSR2) preferentially expressed in the basal ganglia, and three additional genes involved in neurotensin and opioid signaling (OPRM1, NTS, and NTSR1), and compared variant frequencies in TS patients and 788 matched control individuals. We also investigated the impact of altering the expression of Oprk1 in zebrafish. RESULTS: Thirteen ultrarare missense variants of SLITRK1-6 and HDC were identified in 12 patients. Exome sequencing in these patients revealed rare possibly deleterious variants in 3,041 genes, 54 of which were preferentially expressed in the basal ganglia. Comparison of variant frequencies altering selected candidate genes in TS and control individuals revealed an excess of potentially disrupting variants in OPRK1, encoding the opioid kappa receptor, in TS patients. Accordingly, we show that downregulation of the Oprk1 orthologue in zebrafish induces a hyperkinetic phenotype in early development. DISCUSSION: These results support a heterogeneous and complex genetic etiology of TS, possibly involving rare variants altering the opioid pathway in some individuals, which could represent a novel therapeutic target in this disorder.
Neurotensin (NTS), localized predominantly to the small bowel, stimulates the growth of a variety of cancers, including neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), mainly through its interaction with the high-affinity NTS receptor 1 (NTSR1). Here, we observed increased expression of NTSR1 in almost all tested clinical NET samples, but not in normal tissues. Through RT-PCR analysis, we found that the expression of NTSR1 and NTSR2 was either variable (NTSR1) or absent (NTSR2) in human NET cell lines. In contrast, NTSR3 and NTS were expressed in all NET cells. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a demethylating agent, increased levels of NTSR1 and NTSR2 suggesting that DNA methylation contributes to NTSR1/2 expression patterns, which was confirmed by methylation analyses. In addition, we found that knockdown of NTSR1 decreased proliferation, expression levels of growth-related proteins, and anchorage-independent growth of BON human carcinoid cells. Moreover, stable silencing of NTSR1 suppressed BON cell growth, adhesion, migration and invasion. Our results show that high expression of NTSR1 is found in clinical NETs and that promoter methylation is an important mechanism controlling the differential expression of NTSR1 and silencing of NTSR2 in NET cells. Furthermore, knockdown of NTSR1 in BON cells suppressed oncogenic functions suggesting that NTSR1 contributes to NET tumorigenesis.
Alexander disease is a rare and generally fatal disorder of the CNS, originally classified among the leukodystrophies because of the prominent myelin deficits found in young patients. The most common form of this disease affects infants, who often have profound mental retardation and a variety of developmental delays, but later onset forms also occur, sometimes with little or no white matter pathology at all. The pathological hallmark of Alexander disease is the inclusion body, known as Rosenthal fiber, within the cell bodies and processes of astrocytes. Recent genetic studies identified heterozygous missense mutations in glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), the major intermediate filament protein in astrocytes, as the cause of nearly all cases of Alexander disease. These studies have transformed our view of this disorder and opened new directions for investigation and clinical practice, particularly with respect to diagnosis. Mechanisms by which expression of mutant forms of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) lead to the pleiotropic manifestations of disease (afflicting cell types beyond the ones expressing the mutant gene) are slowly coming into focus. Ideas are beginning to emerge that suggest several compelling therapeutic targets for interventions that might slow or arrest the evolution of the disease. This review will outline the rationale for pursuing these strategies, and highlight some of the critical issues that must be addressed in the planning of future clinical trials.
Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) with neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) is a lethal disease for which effective therapies are urgently needed. The mechanism underlying development of CRPC with NED, however, remains largely uncharacterized. In this study, we explored and characterized the functional role of neurotensin (NTS) in cell line and animal models of CRPC with NED. NTS was acutely induced by androgen deprivation in animal models of prostate cancer (PCa) and activated downstream signaling leading to NED through activation of neurotensin receptor 1 (NTSR1) and neurotensin receptor 3 (NTSR3), but not neurotensin receptor 2 (NTSR2). Our findings also revealed the existence of a CK8(+)/CK14(+) subpopulation in the LNCaP cell line that expresses high levels of both NTSR1 and NTSR3, and displays an enhanced susceptibility to develop neuroendocrine-like phenotypes upon treatment with NTS. More importantly, NTSR1 pathway inhibition prevented the development of NED and castration resistance in vivo. We propose a novel role of NTS in the development of CRPC with NED, and a possible strategy to prevent the onset of NED by targeting the NTS signaling pathway.
Neuropathic pain is a major incurable clinical problem resulting from peripheral nerve trauma or disease. A central mechanism is the reduced expression of the potassium chloride cotransporter 2 (KCC2) in dorsal horn neurons induced by brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), causing neuronal disinhibition within spinal nociceptive pathways. Here, we demonstrate how neurotensin receptor 2 (NTSR2) signaling impairs BDNF-induced spinal KCC2 down-regulation, showing how these two pathways converge to control the abnormal sensory response following peripheral nerve injury. We establish how sortilin regulates this convergence by scavenging neurotensin from binding to NTSR2, thus modulating its inhibitory effect on BDNF-mediated mechanical allodynia. Using sortilin-deficient mice or receptor inhibition by antibodies or a small-molecule antagonist, we lastly demonstrate that we are able to fully block BDNF-induced pain and alleviate injury-induced neuropathic pain, validating sortilin as a clinically relevant target.
The luteinizing hormone (LH) surge induces paracrine mediators within the ovarian follicle that promote ovulation. The present study explores neurotensin (NTS), a neuropeptide, as a potential ovulatory mediator in the mouse ovary. Ovaries and granulosa cells (GCs) were collected from immature 23-day-old pregnant mare serum gonadotropin primed mice before (0 h) and after administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; an LH analog) across the periovulatory period (4, 8, 12, and 24 h). In response to hCG, Nts expression rapidly increased 250-fold at 4 h, remained elevated until 8 h, and decreased until 24 h. Expression of Nts receptors for Ntsr1 remained unchanged across the periovulatory period, Ntsr2 was undetectable, whereas Sort1 expression (also called Ntsr3) gradually decreased in both the ovary and GCs after hCG administration. To better understand Nts regulation, inhibitors of the LH/CG signaling pathways were utilized. Our data revealed that hCG regulated Nts expression through the protein kinase A (PKA) and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) signaling pathways. Additionally, epidermal-like-growth factor (EGF) receptor signaling also mediated Nts induction in GCs. To elucidate the role of NTS in the ovulatory process, we used a Nts silencing approach (si-Nts) followed by RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq). RNA-seq analysis of GCs collected after hCG with or without si-Nts identified and qPCR confirmed Ell2, Rsad2, Vps37a, and Smtnl2 as genes downstream of Nts. In summary, these findings demonstrate that hCG induces Nts and that Nts expression is mediated by PKA, p38MAPK, and EGF receptor signaling pathways. Additionally, NTS regulates several novel genes that could potentially impact the ovulatory process.
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), also known as classical mitogen-activated protein kinase, plays critical roles in cell regulation. ERK is activated through phosphorylation by a cascade of protein kinases including MEK. Various ligands activate the MEK/ERK pathway through receptor-dependent cell signaling. In cultured cells, many ligands such as growth factors, hormones, cytokines and vasoactive peptides elicit transient activation of MEK/ERK, often peaking at ~10 min after the cell treatment. Here, we describe a novel biological event, in which ligand-mediated cell signaling results in the dephosphorylation of MEK/ERK. Neuromedin N and neurotensin, peptides derived from the same precursor polypeptide, elicit cell signaling through the neurotensin receptors. In cultured human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs), but not in human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (PAECs), we found that both neuromedin N and neurotensin promoted the dephosphorylation of ERK and MEK. Human PASMCs were found to express neurotensin receptor (NTR)-1, -2 and -3, while human PAECs only express NTR3. Neuromedin N-mediated dephosphorylation was suppressed by small chemical inhibitors of protein phosphatase 1/2A and peptidyl-prolyl isomerase. Transmission electron microscopy showed the formation of endocytic vesicles in response to neuromedin N treatment, and dephosphorylation did not occur when sorting nexin 9, a critical regulator of the endocytic vesicle formation, was knocked down. We conclude that neuromedin N and neurotensin elicit a unique dephosphorylation signaling in the MEK/ERK pathway that is regulated by endocytosis. Considering the pathophysiological importance of the MEK/ERK pathway, this discovery of the dephosphorylation mechanism should advance the field of cell signaling.
