2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, mitochondrial; 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (E1) component of the 2- oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, which mediates the decarboxylation of alpha-ketoglutarate. The 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex catalyzes the overall conversion of 2- oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA and CO(2). The 2- oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex is mainly active in the mitochondrion. A fraction of the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex also localizes in the nucleus and is required for lysine succinylation of histones: associates with KAT2A on chromatin and provides succinyl-C [...] 
Mitophagy is a vital form of autophagy for selective removal of dysfunctional or redundant mitochondria. Accumulating evidence implicates elimination of dysfunctional mitochondria as a powerful means employed by autophagy to keep the immune system in check. The process of mitophagy may restrict inflammatory cytokine secretion and directly regulate mitochondrial antigen presentation and immune cell homeostasis. In this review, we describe distinctive pathways of mammalian mitophagy and highlight recent advances relevant to its function in immunity. In addition, we further discuss the direct and indirect evidence linking mitophagy to inflammation and autoimmunity underlying the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases including inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC).Abbreviations: AICD: activation induced cell death; AIM2: absent in melanoma 2; ALPL/HOPS: alkaline phosphatase, biomineralization associated; AMA: anti-mitochondrial antibodies; AMFR: autocrine motility factor receptor; ATG: autophagy-related; BCL2L13: BCL2 like 13; BNIP3: BCL2 interacting protein 3; BNIP3L/NIX: BCL2 interacting protein 3 like; CALCOCO2/NDP52: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2; CARD: caspase recruitment domain containing; CASP1: caspase 1; CD: Crohn disease; CGAS: cyclic GMP-AMP synthase; CXCL1: C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1; DEN: diethylnitrosamine; DLAT/PDC-E2: dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase; DNM1L/Drp1: dynamin 1 like; ESCRT: endosomal sorting complexes required for transport; FKBP8: FKBP prolyl isomerase 8; FUNDC1: Fun14 domain containing 1; GABARAP: GABA type A receptor-associated protein; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1; HPIV3: human parainfluenza virus type 3; IBD: inflammatory bowel diseases; IEC: intestinal epithelial cell; IFN: interferon; IL1B/IL-1beta: interleukin 1 beta; iNK: invariant natural killer; IRGM: immunity related GTPase M; LIR: LC3-interacting region; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; LRRK2: leucine rich repeat kinase 2; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MARCH5: membrane associated ring-CH-type finger 5; MAVS: mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein; MDV: mitochondria-derived vesicle; MFN1: mitofusin 1; MHC: major histocompatibility complex; MIF: macrophage migration inhibitory factor; mtAP: mitochondrial antigen presentation; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; mtROS: mitochondrial ROS; MUL1: mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1; NBR1: NBR1 autophagy cargo receptor; NFKB/NF-kB: nuclear factor kappa B subunit; NK: natural killer; NLR: NOD-like receptor; NLRC4: NLR family CARD domain containing 4; NLRP3: NLR family pyrin domain containing 3; OGDH: oxoglutarate dehydrogenase; OMM: outer mitochondrial membrane; OPTN: optineurin; ox: oxidized; PARK7: Parkinsonism associated deglycase; PBC: primary biliary cirrhosis; PEX13: peroxisomal biogenesis factor 13; PHB/PHB1: prohibitin; PHB2: prohibitin 2; PIK3C3/VPS34: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PINK1: PTEN induced kinase 1; PLEKHM1: pleckstrin homology and RUN domain containing M1; PRKN/PARK2: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase; RAB: member RAS oncogene family; RHEB: Ras homolog: mTORC1 binding; RIPK2: receptor interacting serine/threonine kinase 2; RLR: DDX58/RIG-I like receptor; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SBD: small bile ducts; SLC2A1/GLUT1: solute carrier family 2 member 1; SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus; SMURF1: SMAD specific E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TAX1BP1: Tax1 binding protein 1; TCR: T cell receptor; TFAM: transcription factor A: mitochondrial; Th17: T helper 17; TLR9: toll like receptor 9; TMEM173/STING: transmembrane protein 173; TNF/TNF-alpha: tumor necrosis factor; Ub: ubiquitin; UC: ulcerative colitis; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; WIPI: WD repeat domain: phosphoinositide interacting; ZFYVE1/DFCP1: zinc finger FYVE-type containing 1.
AIMS: Aortic aneurysm and dissection (AAD) are high-risk cardiovascular diseases with no effective cure. Macrophages play an important role in the development of AAD. As succinate triggers inflammatory changes in macrophages, we investigated the significance of succinate in the pathogenesis of AAD and its clinical relevance. METHODS AND RESULTS: We used untargeted metabolomics and mass spectrometry to determine plasma succinate concentrations in 40 and 1665 individuals of the discovery and validation cohorts, respectively. Three different murine AAD models were used to determine the role of succinate in AAD development. We further examined the role of oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) and its transcription factor cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive element-binding protein 1 (CREB) in the context of macrophage-mediated inflammation and established p38alphaMKOApoe-/- mice. Succinate was the most upregulated metabolite in the discovery cohort; this was confirmed in the validation cohort. Plasma succinate concentrations were higher in patients with AAD compared with those in healthy controls, patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI), and patients with pulmonary embolism (PE). Moreover, succinate administration aggravated angiotensin II-induced AAD and vascular inflammation in mice. In contrast, knockdown of OGDH reduced the expression of inflammatory factors in macrophages. The conditional deletion of p38alpha decreased CREB phosphorylation, OGDH expression, and succinate concentrations. Conditional deletion of p38alpha in macrophages reduced angiotensin II-induced AAD. CONCLUSION: Plasma succinate concentrations allow to distinguish patients with AAD from both healthy controls and patients with AMI or PE. Succinate concentrations are regulated by the p38alpha-CREB-OGDH axis in macrophages.
Host cell metabolism can be modulated by viral infection, affecting viral survival or clearance. Yet the cellular metabolism rewiring mediated by the N (6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) modification in interactions between virus and host remains largely unknown. Here we report that in response to viral infection, host cells impair the enzymatic activity of the RNA m(6)A demethylase ALKBH5. This behavior increases the m(6)A methylation on alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) messenger RNA (mRNA) to reduce its mRNA stability and protein expression. Reduced OGDH decreases the production of the metabolite itaconate that is required for viral replication. With reduced OGDH and itaconate production in vivo, Alkbh5-deficient mice display innate immune response-independent resistance to viral exposure. Our findings reveal that m(6)A RNA modification-mediated down-regulation of the OGDH-itaconate pathway reprograms cellular metabolism to inhibit viral replication, proposing potential targets for controlling viral infection.
Glioblastoma (GBM) remains an incurable disease, requiring more effective therapies. Through interrogation of publicly available CRISPR and RNAi library screens, we identified the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) gene, which encodes an enzyme that is part of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, as essential for GBM growth. Moreover, by combining transcriptome and metabolite screening analyses, we discovered that loss of function of OGDH by the clinically validated drug compound CPI-613 was synthetically lethal with Bcl-xL inhibition (genetically and through the clinically validated BH3 mimetic, ABT263) in patient-derived xenografts as well neurosphere GBM cultures. CPI-613-mediated energy deprivation drove an integrated stress response with an upregulation of the BH3-only domain protein, Noxa, in an ATF4-dependent manner, as demonstrated by genetic loss-of-function experiments. Consistently, silencing of Noxa attenuated cell death induced by CPI-613 in model systems of GBM. In patient-derived xenograft models of GBM in mice, the combination treatment of ABT263 and CPI-613 suppressed tumor growth and extended animal survival more potently than each compound on its own. Therefore, combined inhibition of Bcl-xL along with disruption of the TCA cycle might be a treatment strategy for GBM.
N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) RNA modification controls numerous cellular processes. To what extent these post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms play a role in hematopoiesis has not been fully elucidated. We here show that the m(6)A demethylase alkB homolog 5 (ALKBH5) controls mitochondrial ATP production and modulates hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) fitness in an m(6)A-dependent manner. Loss of ALKBH5 results in increased RNA methylation and instability of oxoglutarate-dehydrogenase (Ogdh) messenger RNA and reduction of OGDH protein levels. Limited OGDH availability slows the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle with accumulation of alpha-ketoglutarate (alpha-KG) and conversion of alpha-KG into L-2-hydroxyglutarate (L-2-HG). L-2-HG inhibits energy production in both murine and human hematopoietic cells in vitro. Impaired mitochondrial energy production confers competitive disadvantage to HSPCs and limits clonogenicity of Mll-AF9-induced leukemia. Our study uncovers a mechanism whereby the RNA m(6)A demethylase ALKBH5 regulates the stability of metabolic enzyme transcripts, thereby controlling energy metabolism in hematopoiesis and leukemia.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent metabolic deregulation are commonly observed in cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). When mitochondrial function is impaired, reductive glutamine metabolism is a major cellular carbon source for de novo lipogenesis to support cancer cell growth. The underlying regulators of reductively metabolized glutamine in mitochondrial dysfunction are not completely understood in tumorigenesis. METHODS: We systematically investigated the role of oxoglutarate dehydrogenase-like (OGDHL), one of the rate-limiting components of the key mitochondrial multi-enzyme OGDH complex (OGDHC), in the regulation of lipid metabolism in hepatoma cells and mouse xenograft models. RESULTS: Lower expression of OGDHL was associated with advanced tumor stage, significantly worse survival and more frequent tumor recurrence in 3 independent cohorts totaling 681 postoperative HCC patients. Promoter hypermethylation and DNA copy deletion of OGDHL were independently correlated with reduced OGDHL expression in HCC specimens. Additionally, OGDHL overexpression significantly inhibited the growth of hepatoma cells in mouse xenografts, while knockdown of OGDHL promoted proliferation of hepatoma cells. Mechanistically, OGDHL downregulation upregulated the alpha-ketoglutarate (alphaKG):citrate ratio by reducing OGDHC activity, which subsequently drove reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived alphaKG via retrograde tricarboxylic acid cycling in hepatoma cells. Notably, silencing of OGDHL activated the mTORC1 signaling pathway in an alphaKG-dependent manner, inducing transcription of enzymes with key roles in de novo lipogenesis. Meanwhile, metabolic reprogramming in OGDHL-negative hepatoma cells provided an abundant supply of NADPH and glutathione to support the cellular antioxidant system. The reduction of reductive glutamine metabolism through OGDHL overexpression or glutaminase inhibitors sensitized tumor cells to sorafenib, a molecular-targeted therapy for HCC. CONCLUSION: Our findings established that silencing of OGDHL contributed to HCC development and survival by regulating glutamine metabolic pathways. OGDHL is a promising prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for HCC. LAY SUMMARY: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent tumors worldwide and is correlated with a high mortality rate. In patients with HCC, lower expression of the enzyme OGDHL is significantly associated with worse survival. Herein, we show that silencing of OGDHL induces lipogenesis and influences the chemosensitization effect of sorafenib in liver cancer cells by reprogramming glutamine metabolism. OGDHL is a promising prognostic biomarker and potential therapeutic target in OGDHL-negative liver cancer.
Ferredoxins are a family of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster proteins that serve as essential electron donors in numerous cellular processes that are conserved through evolution. The promiscuous nature of ferredoxins as electron donors enables them to participate in many metabolic processes including steroid, heme, vitamin D, and Fe-S cluster biosynthesis in different organisms. However, the unique natural function(s) of each of the two human ferredoxins (FDX1 and FDX2) are still poorly characterized. We recently reported that FDX1 is both a crucial regulator of copper ionophore-induced cell death and serves as an upstream regulator of cellular protein lipoylation, a mitochondrial lipid-based post-translational modification naturally occurring on four mitochondrial enzymes that are crucial for TCA cycle function. Here we show that FDX1 directly regulates protein lipoylation by binding the lipoyl synthase (LIAS) enzyme promoting its functional binding to the lipoyl carrier protein GCSH and not through indirect regulation of cellular Fe-S cluster biosynthesis. Metabolite profiling revealed that the predominant cellular metabolic outcome of FDX1 loss of function is manifested through the regulation of the four lipoylation-dependent enzymes ultimately resulting in loss of cellular respiration and sensitivity to mild glucose starvation. Transcriptional profiling established that FDX1 loss-of-function results in the induction of both compensatory metabolism-related genes and the integrated stress response, consistent with our findings that FDX1 loss-of-function is conditionally lethal. Together, our findings establish that FDX1 directly engages with LIAS, promoting its role in cellular protein lipoylation, a process essential in maintaining cell viability under low glucose conditions.
The scope and variety of the metabolic intermediates from the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle that are engaged in epigenetic regulation of the chromatin function in the nucleus raise an outstanding question about how timely and precise supply/consumption of these metabolites is achieved in the nucleus. We report here the identification of a nonclassical TCA cycle in the nucleus (nTCA cycle). We found that all the TCA cycle-associated enzymes including citrate synthase (CS), aconitase 2 (ACO2), isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 (IDH3), oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH), succinyl-CoA synthetase (SCS), fumarate hydratase (FH), and malate dehydrogenase 2 (MDH2), except for succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), a component of electron transport chain for generating ATP, exist in the nucleus. We showed that these nuclear enzymes catalyze an incomplete TCA cycle similar to that found in cyanobacteria. We propose that the nTCA cycle is implemented mainly to generate/consume metabolic intermediates, not for energy production. We demonstrated that the nTCA cycle is intrinsically linked to chromatin dynamics and transcription regulation. Together, our study uncovers the existence of a nonclassical TCA cycle in the nucleus that links the metabolic pathway to epigenetic regulation.
BACKGROUND: Biallelic variants in OGDHL, encoding part of the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, have been associated with highly heterogeneous neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders. However, the validity of this association remains to be confirmed. A second OGDHL patient cohort was recruited to carefully assess the gene-disease relationship. METHODS: Using an unbiased genotype-first approach, we screened large, multiethnic aggregated sequencing datasets worldwide for biallelic OGDHL variants. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to generate zebrafish knockouts of ogdhl, ogdh paralogs, and dhtkd1 to investigate functional relationships and impact during development. Functional complementation with patient variant transcripts was conducted to systematically assess protein functionality as a readout for pathogenicity. RESULTS: A cohort of 14 individuals from 12 unrelated families exhibited highly variable clinical phenotypes, with the majority of them presenting at least one additional variant, potentially accounting for a blended phenotype and complicating phenotypic understanding. We also uncovered extreme clinical heterogeneity and high allele frequencies, occasionally incompatible with a fully penetrant recessive disorder. Human cDNA of previously described and new variants were tested in an ogdhl zebrafish knockout model, adding functional evidence for variant reclassification. We disclosed evidence of hypomorphic alleles as well as a loss-of-function variant without deleterious effects in zebrafish variant testing also showing discordant familial segregation, challenging the relationship of OGDHL as a conventional Mendelian gene. Going further, we uncovered evidence for a complex compensatory relationship among OGDH, OGDHL, and DHTKD1 isoenzymes that are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders and exhibit complex transcriptional compensation patterns with partial functional redundancy. CONCLUSIONS: Based on the results of genetic, clinical, and functional studies, we formed three hypotheses in which to frame observations: biallelic OGDHL variants lead to a highly variable monogenic disorder, variants in OGDHL are following a complex pattern of inheritance, or they may not be causative at all. Our study further highlights the continuing challenges of assessing the validity of reported disease-gene associations and effects of variants identified in these genes. This is particularly more complicated in making genetic diagnoses based on identification of variants in genes presenting a highly heterogenous phenotype such as "OGDHL-related disorders".
Oxoglutarate dehydrogenase-like (OGDHL) is considered to be the isoenzyme of oxyglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) in the OGDH complex, which degrades glucose and glutamate. OGDHL was reported to reprogram glutamine metabolism to suppress HCC progression in an enzyme-activity-dependent manner. However, the potential subcellular localization and non-canonical function of OGDHL is poorly understood. We investigated the expression of OGDHL and its effect on HCC progression. By employing a variety of molecular biology techniques, we revealed the underlying mechanism of OGDHL-induced DNA damage in HCC cells in vitro and in vivo. AAV loaded with OGDHL exerts therapeutic effect on mouse HCC and prolongs survival time. OGDHL induces DNA damage in HCC cells in vitro and in vivo. We also observed that OGDHL possesses nuclear localization in HCC cells and OGDHL-induced DNA damage was independent of its enzymatic activity. Mechanistically, it was demonstrated that OGDHL binds to CDK4 in the nucleus to inhibit the phosphorylation of CDK4 by CAK, which in turn attenuates E2F1 signaling. Inhibition of E2F1 signaling downregulates pyrimidine and purine synthesis, thereby inducing DNA damage through dNTP depletion. We clarified the nuclear localization of OGDHL and its non-canonical function to induce DNA damage, which demonstrated that OGDHL may serve as a select potential therapeutic target for HCC.
Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of cancer. However, genetic alterations in metabolism-related genes are largely unknown. The aim of this study was to identify whether somatic mutations in OGDH, PPAT and PCCA genes known to be involved in amino acid or nucleotide metabolism are mutated in gastric cancer (GC) and colorectal cancer (CRC). By public database search, we identified that OGDH, PPAT and PCCA genes harbor mononucleotide repeats that may serve as mutation targets in cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI). We analyzed the repeats for the presence of the mutations in 90 GCs and 141 CRCs using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and samples of 10 patients with shifted bands were sequenced. We found frameshift mutations of OGDH (3 cases), PCCA (5 cases) and PPAT (2 cases) in the cancers. These mutations were exclusively detected in MSI-high (MSI-H), and not in MSI-low or MSI-stable (MSI-L/MSS) cancers. We also analyzed 16 CRCs for the presence of intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) and found that one CRC harbored regional ITH for OGDH frameshift mutation showing very rare frequency of OGDH mutation ITH in colorectal cancer tissues. Our data indicate that amino acid/nucleotide metabolism-related genes OGDH, PPAT and PCCA acquire somatic mutations in MSH-H GCs and CRCs and that mutational ITH may occur in at least some of these tumors. Collectively, our results may extend our insight into the involvement of amino acid/nucleotide metabolism in the pathogenesis of cancer for, in particular, MSI-H GCs and CRCs.
Oncometabolites, such as D/L-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG), have directly been implicated in carcinogenesis; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we showed that the levels of the L-enantiomer of 2HG (L2HG) were specifically increased in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues and cell lines compared with the D-enantiomer of 2HG (D2HG). In addition, L2HG increased the expression of ATF4 and its target genes by activating the mTOR pathway, which subsequently provided amino acids and improved the survival of CRC cells under serum deprivation. Downregulating the expression of L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (L2HGDH) and oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) increased L2HG levels in CRC, thereby activating mTOR-ATF4 signaling. Furthermore, L2HGDH overexpression reduced L2HG-mediated mTOR-ATF4 signaling under hypoxia, whereas L2HGDH knockdown promoted tumor growth and amino acid metabolism in vivo. Together, these results indicate that L2HG ameliorates nutritional stress by activating the mTOR-ATF4 axis and thus could be a potential therapeutic target for CRC.
2-Oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) is a rate-limiting enzyme in the mitochondrial TCA cycle, encoded by the OGDH gene. alpha-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) deficiency was previously reported in association with developmental delay, hypotonia, and movement disorders and metabolic decompensation, with no genetic data provided. Using whole exome sequencing, we identified two individuals carrying a homozygous missense variant c.959A>G (p.N320S) in the OGDH gene. These individuals presented with global developmental delay, elevated lactate, ataxia and seizure. Fibroblast analysis and modeling of the mutation in Drosophila were used to evaluate pathogenicity of the variant. Skin fibroblasts from subject # 2 showed a decrease in both OGDH protein and enzyme activity. Transfection of human OGDH cDNA in HEK293 cells carrying p.N320S also produced significantly lower protein levels compared to those with wild-type cDNA. Loss of Drosophila Ogdh (dOgdh) caused early developmental lethality, rescued by expressing wild-type dOgdh (dOgdh(WT) ) or human OGDH (OGDH(WT) ) cDNA. In contrast, expression to the mutant OGDH (OGDH(N320S) ) or dOgdh carrying homologous mutations to human OGDH p.N320S variant (dOgdh(N324S) ) failed to rescue lethality of dOgdh null mutants. Knockdown of dOgdh in the nervous system resulted in locomotion defects which were rescued by dOgdh(WT) expression but not by dOgdh(N324S) expression. Collectively, the results indicate that c.959A>G variant in OGDH leads to an amino acid change (p.N320S) causing a severe loss of OGDH protein function. Our study establishes in the first time a genetic link between an OGDH gene mutation and OGDH deficiency.
Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can self-renew infinitely and differentiate into the cell types of all lineages of our body, holding great promise for investigating early human embryo development and providing functional cells for disease treatment. For the full application of hESCs, it is necessary to elucidate how hESCs maintain their identity. Recent studies have shown that glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration are linked to pluripotency states. However, the function of mitochondrial respiration in hESCs has not been fully understood. Herein, we report that the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production rate is comparable between mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis, suggesting an important contribution of mitochondrial respiration to ATP production in conventionally cultured hESCs. To investigate the function of mitochondrial respiration, we silence OGDH expression in hESCs by the inducible CRISPRi method, and find that OGDH knockdown (KD) results in disrupted TCA (tricarboxylic acid) cycle, and diminished mitochondrial respiration activity and total ATP level. Moreover, OGDH KD leads to hESC death and aberrant transcriptional program. Interestingly, blockage of the electron transport chain (ETC) by small molecule inhibitors gives rise to the phenotype similar to that observed in OGDH deficient hESCs. Therefore, genetic and pharmacological perturbations of the mitochondrial respiration impair identity of hESCs. Collectively, our study highlights the pivotal role of the mitochondrial respiration activity for the stemness maintenance of primed hESCs, and unveils OGDH as a key regulator for the proper production of ATP and TCA cycle metabolites in primed hESCs.
SIRT5 has a wide range of functions in different cellular processes such as glycolysis, TCA cycle and antioxidant defense, which mediates lysine desuccinylation, deglutarylation and demalonylation. Recent evidences have implicated that SIRT5 is a potential suppressor of gastric cancer (GC). However, the underlying mechanism of SIRT5 in gastric cancer is still unclear. Here, we show that SIRT5 expression is significantly decreased in human GC tissues. Functional analysis demonstrates that SIRT5 inhibits cell growth in vitro and in vivo, arrests the cell cycle in G1/S transition, and suppresses migration and invasion of GC cells via regulating epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that there is the direct interaction between SIRT5 and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH), and desuccinylation of OGDH by SIRT5 inhibits the activity of OGDH complex. Further studies of the relationship between SIRT5 and OGDH show OGDH inhibition by succinyl phosphonate (SP) or siRNA suppresses the increase in cell growth and migration induced by SIRT5 deletion. Moreover, SIRT5 decreases mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsim), ATP products and increases the ROS levels and NADP/NADPH ratio in GC cells through the inhibition of OGDH complex activity. Therefore, SIRT5 suppresses GC cell growth and migration through desuccinylating OGDH and inhibiting OGDH complex activity to disturb mitochondrial functions and redox status.
PURPOSE: This study aimed to establish the genetic cause of a novel autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by global developmental delay, movement disorder, and metabolic abnormalities. METHODS: We performed a detailed clinical characterization of 4 unrelated individuals from consanguineous families with a neurodevelopmental disorder. We used exome sequencing or targeted-exome sequencing, cosegregation, in silico protein modeling, and functional analyses of variants in HEK293 cells and Drosophila melanogaster, as well as in proband-derived fibroblast cells. RESULTS: In the 4 individuals, we identified 3 novel homozygous variants in oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) (NM_002541.3), which encodes a subunit of the tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. In silico homology modeling predicts that c.566C>T:p.(Pro189Leu) and c.890C>A:p.(Ser297Tyr) variants interfere with the structure and function of OGDH. Fibroblasts from individual 1 showed that the p.(Ser297Tyr) variant led to a higher degradation rate of the OGDH protein. OGDH protein with p.(Pro189Leu) or p.(Ser297Tyr) variants in HEK293 cells showed significantly lower levels than the wild-type protein. Furthermore, we showed that expression of Drosophila Ogdh (dOgdh) carrying variants homologous to p.(Pro189Leu) or p.(Ser297Tyr), failed to rescue developmental lethality caused by loss of dOgdh. SpliceAI, a variant splice predictor, predicted that the c.935G>A:p.(Arg312Lys)/p.(Phe264_Arg312del) variant impacts splicing, which was confirmed through a mini-gene assay in HEK293 cells. CONCLUSION: We established that biallelic variants in OGDH cause a neurodevelopmental disorder with metabolic and movement abnormalities.
BACKGROUND: Glycometabolism and lipid metabolism are critical in cancer metabolic reprogramming. The primary aim of this study was to develop a prognostic model incorporating glycometabolism and lipid metabolism-related genes (GLRGs) for accurate prognosis assessment in patients with endometrial carcinoma (EC). METHODS: Data on gene expression and clinical details were obtained from publicly accessible databases. GLRGs were obtained from the Genecards database. Through nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) clustering, molecular groupings with various GLRG expression patterns were identified. LASSO Cox regression analysis was employed to create a prognostic model. Use rich algorithms such as GSEA, GSVA, xCELL ssGSEA, EPIC,CIBERSORT, MCPcounter, ESTIMATE, TIMER, TIDE, and Oncoppredict to analyze functional pathway characteristics of the forecast signal, immune status, anti-tumor therapy, etc. The expression was assessed using Western blot and quantitative real-time PCR techniques. A total of 113 algorithm combinations were combined to screen out the most significant GLRGs in the signature for in vitro experimental verification, such as colony formation, EdU cell proliferation, wound healing, apoptosis, and Transwell assays. RESULTS: A total of 714 GLRGs were found, and 227 of them were identified as prognostic-related genes. And ten GLRGs (AUP1, ESR1, ERLIN2, ASS1, OGDH, BCKDHB, SLC16A1, HK2, LPCAT1 and PGR-AS1) were identified to construct the prognostic model of patients with EC. Based on GLRGs, the risk model's prognosis and independent prognostic value were established. The signature of GLRGs exhibited a robust correlation with the infiltration of immune cells and the sensitivity to drugs. In cytological experiments, we selected HK2 as candidate gene to verify its value in the occurrence and development of EC. Western blot and qRT-PCR revealed that HK2 was substantially expressed in EC cells. According to in vitro experiments, HK2 knockdown can increase EC cell apoptosis while suppressing EC cell migration, invasion, and proliferation. CONCLUSION: The GLRGs signature constructed in this study demonstrated significant prognostic value for patients with endometrial carcinoma, thereby providing valuable guidance for treatment decisions.
Eradication of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is therapeutically challenging; many patients succumb to AML despite initially responding to conventional treatments. Here, we showed that the imipridone ONC213 elicits potent antileukemia activity in a subset of AML cell lines and primary patient samples, particularly in leukemia stem cells, while producing negligible toxicity in normal hematopoietic cells. ONC213 suppressed mitochondrial respiration and elevated alpha-ketoglutarate by suppressing alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (alphaKGDH) activity. Deletion of OGDH, which encodes alphaKGDH, suppressed AML fitness and impaired oxidative phosphorylation, highlighting the key role for alphaKGDH inhibition in ONC213-induced death. ONC213 treatment induced a unique mitochondrial stress response and suppressed de novo protein synthesis in AML cells. Additionally, ONC213 reduced the translation of MCL1, which contributed to ONC213-induced apoptosis. Importantly, a patient-derived xenograft from a relapsed AML patient was sensitive to ONC213 in vivo. Collectively, these findings support further development of ONC213 for treating AML. SIGNIFICANCE: In AML cells, ONC213 suppresses alphaKGDH, which induces a unique mitochondrial stress response, and reduces MCL1 to decrease oxidative phosphorylation and elicit potent antileukemia activity. See related commentary by Boet and Sarry, p. 950.
Activated p53 can promote apoptosis or cell cycle arrest. Differences in energy metabolism can influence cell fate in response to activated p53. Nutlin-3a is a preclinical drug and small molecule activator of p53. Alpha-ketoglutarate (alphaKG) levels were reduced in cells sensitive to Nutlin-3a-induced apoptosis and increased in cells resistant to this apoptosis. Add-back of a cell-permeable alphaKG analog (DMKG) rescued cells from apoptosis in response to Nutlin-3a. OGDH is a component of the alphaKGDH complex that converts alphaKG to succinate. OGDH knockdown increased endogenous alphaKG levels and also rescued cells from Nutlin-3a-induced apoptosis. We previously showed reduced autophagy and ATG gene expression contributes to Nutlin-3a-induced apoptosis. DMKG and OGDH knockdown restored autophagy and ATG gene expression in Nutlin-3a-treated cells. These studies indicate alphaKG levels, regulated by p53 and OGDH, determine autophagy and apoptosis in response to Nutlin-3a.
