Long-wave-sensitive opsin 1; Visual pigments are the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision. They consist of an apoprotein, opsin, covalently linked to cis-retinal.
X-linked retinopathies represent a significant proportion of monogenic retinal disease. They include progressive and stationary conditions, with and without syndromic features. Many are X-linked recessive, but several exhibit a phenotype in female carriers, which can help establish diagnosis and yield insights into disease mechanisms. The presence of affected carriers can misleadingly suggest autosomal dominant inheritance. Some disorders (such as RPGR-associated retinopathy) show diverse phenotypes from variants in the same gene and also highlight limitations of current genetic sequencing methods. X-linked disease frequently arises from loss of function, implying potential for benefit from gene replacement strategies. We review X-inactivation and X-linked inheritance, and explore burden of disease attributable to X-linked genes in our clinically and genetically characterised retinal disease cohort, finding correlation between gene transcript length and numbers of families. We list relevant genes and discuss key clinical features, disease mechanisms, carrier phenotypes and novel experimental therapies. We consider in detail the following: RPGR (associated with retinitis pigmentosa, cone and cone-rod dystrophy), RP2 (retinitis pigmentosa), CHM (choroideremia), RS1 (X-linked retinoschisis), NYX (complete congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB)), CACNA1F (incomplete CSNB), OPN1LW/OPN1MW (blue cone monochromacy, Bornholm eye disease, cone dystrophy), GPR143 (ocular albinism), COL4A5 (Alport syndrome), and NDP (Norrie disease and X-linked familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR)). We use a recently published transcriptome analysis to explore expression by cell-type and discuss insights from electrophysiology. In the final section, we present an algorithm for genes to consider in diagnosing males with non-syndromic X-linked retinopathy, summarise current experimental therapeutic approaches, and consider questions for future research.
Inherited retinal diseases (IRD) are a leading cause of blindness in the working age population and in children. The scope of this review is to familiarise clinicians and scientists with the current landscape of molecular genetics, clinical phenotype, retinal imaging and therapeutic prospects/completed trials in IRD. Herein we present in a comprehensive and concise manner: (i) macular dystrophies (Stargardt disease (ABCA4), X-linked retinoschisis (RS1), Best disease (BEST1), PRPH2-associated pattern dystrophy, Sorsby fundus dystrophy (TIMP3), and autosomal dominant drusen (EFEMP1)), (ii) cone and cone-rod dystrophies (GUCA1A, PRPH2, ABCA4, KCNV2 and RPGR), (iii) predominant rod or rod-cone dystrophies (retinitis pigmentosa, enhanced S-Cone syndrome (NR2E3), Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy (CYP4V2)), (iv) Leber congenital amaurosis/early-onset severe retinal dystrophy (GUCY2D, CEP290, CRB1, RDH12, RPE65, TULP1, AIPL1 and NMNAT1), (v) cone dysfunction syndromes (achromatopsia (CNGA3, CNGB3, PDE6C, PDE6H, GNAT2, ATF6), X-linked cone dysfunction with myopia and dichromacy (Bornholm Eye disease; OPN1LW/OPN1MW array), oligocone trichromacy, and blue-cone monochromatism (OPN1LW/OPN1MW array)). Whilst we use the aforementioned classical phenotypic groupings, a key feature of IRD is that it is characterised by tremendous heterogeneity and variable expressivity, with several of the above genes associated with a range of phenotypes.
BACKGROUNDS: Unilateral high myopia (uHM), commonly observed in patients with retinal diseases or only with high myopia, is frequently associated with amblyopia with poor prognosis. This study aims to reveal the clinical and genetic spectrum of uHM in a large Chinese cohort. METHODS: A total of 75 probands with simplex uHM were included in our Pediatric and Genetic Eye Clinic. Patients with significant posterior anomalies other than myopic fundus changes were excluded. Variants were detected by exome sequencing and then analyzed through multiple-step bioinformatic and co-segregation analysis and finally confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Genetic findings were correlated with associated clinical data for analysis. RESULTS: Among the 75 probands with a mean age of 6.21 +/- 4.70 years at the presentation, myopic fundus of C1 and C2 was observed in 73 (97.3%) probands. Surprisingly, specific peripheral changes were identified in 63 eyes involving 36 (48.0%) probands after extensive examination, including peripheral retinal avascular zone (74.6%, 47/63 eyes), neovascularization (54.0%), fluorescein leakage (31.7%), peripheral pigmentary changes (31.7%), and others. Exome sequencing identified 21 potential pathogenic variants of 13 genes in 20 of 75 (26.7%) probands, including genes for Stickler syndrome (COL11A1 and COL2A1; 6/20), FEVR (FZD4, LRP5, and TSPAN12; 5/20), and others (FBN1, GPR179, ZEB2, PAX6, GPR143, OPN1LW, FRMD7, and CACNA1F; 9/20). For the peripheral retinal changes in the 20 probands, variants in Stickler syndrome-related genes were predominantly associated with retinal pigmentary changes, lattice degeneration, and retinal avascular region, while variants in genes related to FEVR were mainly associated with the avascular zone, neovascularization, and fluorescein leakage. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic defects were identified in about one-fourth of simplex uHM patients in which significant consequences may be hidden under a classic myopic fundus in up to half. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic genetic study on simplex uHM to date. In addition to routine care of strabismus and amblyopia, careful examination of the peripheral retina and genetic screening is warranted for patients with uHM in order to identify signs of risk for retinal detachment and other complications and provide meaningful genetic counseling.
Light absorption by photopigment molecules expressed in the photoreceptors in the retina is the first step in seeing. Two types of photoreceptors in the human retina are responsible for image formation: rods, and cones. Except at very low light levels when rods are active, all vision is based on cones. Cones mediate high acuity vision and color vision. Furthermore, they are critically important in the visual feedback mechanism that regulates refractive development of the eye during childhood. The human retina contains a mosaic of three cone types, short-wavelength (S), long-wavelength (L), and middle-wavelength (M) sensitive; however, the vast majority (~94%) are L and M cones. The OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes, located on the X-chromosome at Xq28, encode the protein component of the light-sensitive photopigments expressed in the L and M cones. Diverse haplotypes of exon 3 of the OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes arose thru unequal recombination mechanisms that have intermixed the genes. A subset of the haplotypes causes exon 3- skipping during pre-messenger RNA splicing and are associated with vision disorders. Here, we review the mechanism by which splicing defects in these genes cause vision disorders.
Background: Bornholm eye disease (BED) is a rare X-linked cone dysfunction disorder with high myopia, amblyopia, and color vision defects.Materials and methods: Visual and ocular outcomes in a family where two of five siblings had molecularly confirmed BED are reported. Ophthalmological assessments included best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), color vision test, and optical coherence tomography (OCT). Medical records, electroretinography (ERG), and genetic analyses were re-evaluated.Results: Two male siblings had confirmed BED with myopia and protanopia. The younger brother had high myopia, subnormal BCVA, and ocular fundi that showed tilted discs, crescent shaped peripapillary atrophy, and visible choroidal vessels. OCT confirmed retinal and choroidal atrophy. The older brother was lightly myopic with normal/subnormal BCVA and subtle findings in the fundi. Both brothers had abnormal ERG recordings with a decreased cone response. They also had a structurally intact OPN1LW/OPN1MW gene cluster. The OPN1LW gene was shown to carry a deleterious variant combination in exon 3 known to result in mis-splicing of opsin mRNA and acknowledged as LIAVA amino acid delineation (Leu153-Ile171-Ala174-Val178-Ala180), while the OPN1MW gene exon 3 showed a non-pathogenic variant combination (MVVVA). Another normal-sighted brother carried another wildtype variant combination (LVAIS) in exon 3 of the OPN1LW gene.Conclusions: The two affected brothers demonstrated a large variability in their phenotypes even though the genotypes were identical. They presented a disease-associated haplotype in exon 3 of OPN1LW that has been described as the molecular cause of BED.
PURPOSE: Specific haplotypes (LVAVA, LIVVA, and LIAVA) formed by five polymorphisms (p.L153M, p.V171I, p.A174V, p.I178V, and p.S180A in exon 3 of OPN1LW) that cause partial or complete exon skipping have been reported as unique genetic causes of high myopia with or without colorblindness. This study aimed to identify the contribution of OPN1LW to early-onset high myopia (eoHM) and the molecular basis underlying eoHM with or without colorblindness. METHODS: Comparative analysis of exome sequencing data was conducted for 1226 families with eoHM and 9304 families with other eye conditions. OPN1LW variants detected by targeted or whole exome sequencing were confirmed by long-range amplification and Sanger sequencing, together with segregation analysis. The clinical data were thoroughly analyzed. RESULTS: Unique haplotypes and truncation variants in OPN1LW were detected exclusively in 68 of 1226 families with eoHM but in none of the 9304 families with other visual diseases (P = 1.63 x 10-63). Four classes of variants were identified: haplotypes causing partial splicing defects in OPN1LW (LVAVA or LIVVA in 31 families), LVAVA in OPN1LW-OPN1MW hybrid gene (in 3 families), LIAVA in OPN1LW (in 29 families), and truncations in OPN1LW (in 5 families). The first class causes partial loss of red photopigments, whereas the latter three result in complete loss of red photopigments. This is different from the replacement of red with green owing to unequal re-arrangement causing red-green colorblindness alone. Of the 68 families, 42 affected male patients (31 families) with the first class of variants (LVAVA or LIVVA in OPN1LW) had eoHM alone, whereas 37 male patients with the latter 3 classes had eoHM with protanopia. Adaptive optics retinal imaging demonstrated reduced cone regularity and density in men with eoHM caused by OPN1LW variants compared to those patients with eoHM and without OPN1LW variants. CONCLUSION: Based on the 68 families with unique variants in OPN1LW, our study provides firm evidence that the two different phenotypes (eoHM with or without colorblindness) are caused by two different classes of variants (partial splicing-effect haplotypes or complete splicing-effect haplotypes/truncation variants, respectively). The contribution of OPN1LW to eoHM (isolated and syndromic) was characterized by OPN1LW variants found in 5.5% (68/1226) of the eoHM families, making it the second most common cause of monogenic eoHM alone (2.4%) and a frequent cause of syndromic monogenic eoHM with colorblindness. Such haplotypes, in which each individual variant alone is considered a benign polymorphism, are potential candidates for other hereditary diseases with causes of missing genetic defects.
PURPOSE: To report novel pathogenic variants of X-linked genes in five Chinese families with early-onset high myopia (eoHM) by using whole-exome sequencing and analyzing the phenotypic features. METHODS: 5 probands with X-linked recessive related eoHM were collected in Ningxia Eye Hospital from January 2021 to June 2022. The probands and their family members received comprehensive ophthalmic examinations,and DNA was abstracted from patients and family members. Whole-exome sequencing was performed on probands to screen the causative variants, and all suspected pathogenic variants were determined by Sanger sequencing and co-segregation analysis was performed on available family members. The pathogenicity of novel variants was predicted using silico analysis and evaluated according to ACMG guidelines. RT-qPCR was used to detect differences in the relative mRNAs expression of candidate gene in mRNAs available with the proband and family members in the pedigree 2. The relationship between genetic variants and clinical features was analyzed. RESULTS: All probands were male, and all pedigrees conformed to an X-linked recessive inheritance pattern. They were diagnosed with high myopia at their first visits between 4 and 7 years old. Spherical equivalent ranged between - 6.00D and - 11.00D.The five novel hemizygous variants were found in the probands, containing frameshift deletion variant c.797_801del (p.Val266Alafs*75) of OPN1LW gene in the pedigree 1, nonsense variant c.513G > A (p.Trp171Ter)of RP2 gene in the pedigree 2, missense variant c.98G > T (p.Cys33Phe) of GPR143 gene in the pedigree 3, frameshift deletion variant c.1876_1877del (p.Met626Valfs*22) of FRMD7 gene in the pedigree 4 and inframe deletion variant c.670_ 675del (p.Glu192_ Glu193del) of HMGB3 gene in the pedigree 5. All variants were classified as pathogenic or likely pathogenic by the interpretation principles of HGMD sequence variants and ACMG guidelines. In family 2, RT-qPCR showed that the mRNA expression of RP2 gene was lower in the proband than in other normal family members, indicating that such variant caused an effect on gene function at the mRNA expression level. Further clinical examination showed that pedigrees 1, 2, 3, and 4 were diagnosed as X-linked recessive hereditary eye disease with early-onset high myopia, including quiescent cone dysfunction, retinitis pigmentosa, ocular albinism, and idiopathic congenital nystagmus respectively. The pedigree 5 had eoHM in the right eye and ptosis in both eyes. CONCLUSION: In this paper,we are the first to report five novel hemizygous variants in OPN1LW, RP2, GPR143, FRMD7, HMGB3 genes are associated with eoHM. Our study extends the genotypic spectrums for eoHM and better assists ophthalmologists in assessing, diagnosing, and conducting genetic screening for eoHM.
PURPOSE: In Bornholm eye disease, a defect in the splicing of transcripts from a variant OPN1LW opsin gene leads to a depletion in spliced transcript levels and, consequently, a reduction in photopigment in photoreceptors expressing the variant gene. METHODS: Myopic and age-matched control subjects were drawn from the Western Australian Pregnancy Cohort (Raine) Study and the Norfolk Island Eye Study groups. The OPN1LW opsin gene was amplified using long-range PCR methodology and was fully sequenced. Expression of variant opsins was evaluated using quantitative PCR (qPCR). RNA secondary structure changes arising from identified variants were predicted by modeling. RESULTS: Forty-two nucleotide sites were found to vary across the 111 subjects studied. Of these, 15 had not been previously reported, with three present only in myopic individuals. Expression of these variants in transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK293T) cells demonstrated that splicing efficiencies were not affected. However, gene transcripts from two of the three variants were significantly depleted. RNA secondary structure modeling predicted that these single nucleotide changes could affect RNA stability. CONCLUSIONS: None of the variants identified in myopic individuals appeared to alter the efficiency of transcript splicing. However, two resulted in a significant reduction in the number of spliced and unspliced transcripts, indicating an overall reduction in steady-state transcript stability. Such a change would be expected to result in a reduced amount of photopigment, and this may be a contributing factor in the development of myopia.
Nearsightedness (myopia) is a global health problem of staggering proportions that has driven the hunt for environmental and genetic risk factors in hopes of gaining insight into the underlying mechanism and providing new avenues of intervention. Myopia is the dominant risk factor for leading causes of blindness, including myopic maculopathy and retinal detachment. The fundamental defect in myopia-an excessively elongated eyeball-causes blurry distance vision that is correctable with lenses or surgery, but the risk of blindness remains. Haplotypes of the long-wavelength and middle-wavelength cone opsin genes (OPN1LW and OPN1MW, respectively) that exhibit profound exon-3 skipping during pre-messenger RNA splicing are associated with high myopia. Cone photoreceptors expressing these haplotypes are nearly devoid of photopigment. Conversely, cones in the same retina that express non-skipping haplotypes are relatively full of photopigment. We hypothesized that abnormal contrast signals arising from adjacent cones differing in photopigment content stimulate axial elongation, and spectacles that reduce contrast may significantly slow myopia progression. We tested for an association between spherical equivalent refraction and OPN1LW haplotype in males of European ancestry as determined by long-distance PCR and Sanger sequencing and identified OPN1LW exon 3 haplotypes that increase the risk of common myopia. We also evaluated the effects of contrast-reducing spectacles lenses on myopia progression in children. The work presented here provides new insight into the cause and prevention of myopia progression.
BACKGROUND: Color vision deficiencies are a group of vision disorders, characterized by abnormal color discrimination. They include red-green color blindness, yellow-blue color blindness and achromatopsia, among others. The deficiencies are caused by mutations in the genes coding for various components of retinal cones. Gene therapy is rising as a promising therapeutic modality. The purpose of this review article is to explore the available literature on gene therapy in the different forms of color vision deficiencies. METHODS: A thorough literature review was performed on PubMed using the keywords: color vision deficiencies, gene therapy, achromatopsia and the various genes responsible for this condition (OPN1LW, OPN1MW, ATF6, CNGA3, CNGB3, GNAT2, PDE6H, and PDE6C). RESULTS: Various adenovirus vectors have been deployed to test the efficacy of gene therapy for achromatopsia in animals and humans. Gene therapy trials in humans and animals targeting mutations in CNGA3 have been performed, demonstrating an improvement in electroretinogram (ERG)-investigated cone cell functionality. Similar outcomes have been reported for experimental studies on other genes (CNGB3, GNAT2, M- and L-opsin). It has also been reported that delivering the genes via intravitreal rather than subretinal injections could be safer. There are currently 3 ongoing human clinical trials for the treatment of achromatopsia due to mutations in CNGB3 and CNGA3. CONCLUSION: Experimental studies and clinical trials generally showed improvement in ERG-investigated cone cell functionality and visually elicited behavior. Gene therapy is a promising novel therapeutic modality in color vision deficiencies.
In today's globalized society, ophthalmologists can examine people of different ethnicities regardless of where they live. The frequency of disease-causing genes varies according to a patient's ethnic background. We explain genetic findings for Japanese patients with inherited eye diseases. Ocular genetics has made great advances over the past 30 years. For example, detecting mutations at nucleotide position 11778 in mitochondrial DNA was useful in the genetic diagnosis of Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON). I evaluated the genotype-phenotype relationship in cases of corneal dystrophy and inherited retinal dystrophy (IRD). I identified the entire exon sequence of the eyes shut homolog (EYS) gene in patients with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (RP). EYS gene mutations are the most frequent cause of autosomal recessive RP. RPGRIP1 may be a common causative gene with early-onset severe retinal dystrophy, including Leber congenital amaurosis. However, some genes have complex structures that are difficult to analyze, including the OPN1LW/OPN1MW gene cluster in blue cone monochromacy and the IKBKG/NEMO genes in incontinentia pigmenti. This review will also present two cases with uniparental disomy, a case of IRD with double mutations, and a case with RP complicated with LHON-like neuropathy. Precise understanding of the effects of genetic variants may reveal differences in the clinical characteristics of patients with the same variant. When starting genome medicine, accurately diagnosing the patient, making accurate prediction, determining the genetic pattern, and providing genetic counseling are important. Above all, that both the doctors and patients understand genetic diseases correctly is important.
AIMS: To elucidate genetic background of early-onset high myopia (eoHM) and characteristics of ARR3-associated MYP26. METHODS: Variants in 14 genes reported to contribute to eoHM, including ARR3, were selected from exome sequencing data set and classified into different categories following American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines based on in silico prediction, associated phenotypes, confirmation and cosegregation analysis. The available clinical data of individuals were summarised. RESULTS: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants in three of 14 genes were identified in 52 of 928 families with eoHM, including 29 in ARR3, 22 in OPN1LW and 1 in LRPAP1. For ARR3, 24 pathogenic variants (16 truncation and 8 missense) were identified in 66 women and 12 men, in whom 64 women and 4 men had eoHM by X-linked female-limited inheritance. Refraction ranged from -5.00 to -28.75 diopter (-12.58+/-4.83). Mild-to-moderately reduced cone responses were recorded in 76.9% (10/13) of patients with electroretinogram recordings. Most patients (75.9%, 41/54) had mild myopic fundus changes (C0 to C1). Genotype-phenotype analysis suggested that the myopic retinopathy degree was correlated with age and the variant's nature. Peripheral retinal degeneration was observed in 38.5% (5/13) patients using wide-field examinations. CONCLUSION: This study reveals ARR3 as the most frequently implicated gene for Mendelian eoHM. Truncations and highly scored missense variants in ARR3 are pathogenic. Myopia due to ARR3 mutations is transmitted in X-linked female-limited inheritance, manifests with mild cone impairment and slowly progresses to pathologic myopia. Identification of the most common cause for Mendelian eoHM provides a valuable starting point into the molecular mechanism of myopia.
PURPOSE: MYP1 is a locus for X-linked syndromic and nonsyndromic high myopia. Recently, unique haplotypes in OPN1LW were found to be responsible for X-linked syndromic high myopia mapped to MYP1. The current study is to test if such variants in OPN1LW are also responsible for X-linked nonsyndromic high myopia mapped to MYP1. METHODS: The proband of the family previously mapped to MYP1 was initially analyzed using whole-exome sequencing and whole-genome sequencing. Additional probands with early-onset high myopia were analyzed using whole-exome sequencing. Variants in OPN1LW were selected and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Long-range and second PCR were used to determine the haplotype and the first gene of the red-green gene array. Candidate variants were further validated in family members and controls. RESULTS: The unique LVAVA haplotype in OPN1LW was detected in the family with X-linked nonsyndromic high myopia mapped to MYP1. In addition, this haplotype and a novel frameshift mutation (c.617_620dup, p.Phe208Argfs*51) in OPN1LW were detected in two other families with X-linked high myopia. The unique haplotype cosegregated with high myopia in the two families, with a maximum LOD score of 3.34 and 2.31 at theta = 0. OPN1LW with the variants in these families was the first gene in the red-green gene array and was not present in 247 male controls. Reevaluation of the clinical data in both families with the unique haplotype suggested nonsyndromic high myopia. CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms the findings that unique variants in OPN1LW are responsible for both syndromic and nonsyndromic X-linked high myopia mapped to MYP1.
Certain combinations of common variants in exon 3 of OPN1LW and OPN1MW, the genes encoding the apo-protein of the long- and middle-wavelength sensitive cone photoreceptor visual pigments in humans, induce splicing defects and have been associated with dyschromatopsia and cone dysfunction syndromes. Here we report the identification of a novel exon 3 haplotype, G-C-G-A-T-T-G-G (referring to nucleotide variants at cDNA positions c.453, c.457, c.465, c.511, c.513, c.521, c.532, and c.538) deduced to encode a pigment with the amino acid residues L-I-V-V-A at positions p.153, p.171, p.174, p.178, and p.180, in OPN1LW or OPN1MW or both in a series of seven patients from four families with cone dysfunction. Applying minigene assays for all observed exon 3 haplotypes in the patients, we demonstrated that the novel exon 3 haplotype L-I-V-V-A induces a strong but incomplete splicing defect with 3-5% of residual correctly spliced transcripts. Minigene splicing outcomes were similar in HEK293 cells and the human retinoblastoma cell line WERI-Rb1, the latter retaining a cone photoreceptor expression profile including endogenous OPN1LW and OPN1MW gene expression. Patients carrying the novel L-I-V-V-A haplotype presented with a mild form of Blue Cone Monochromacy or Bornholm Eye Disease-like phenotype with reduced visual acuity, reduced cone electroretinography responses, red-green color vision defects, and frequently with severe myopia.
PURPOSE: Blue cone monochromacy (BCM) is an X-linked retinopathy due to mutations in the OPN1LW/OPN1MW gene cluster. Symptoms include reduced visual acuity and disturbed color vision. We studied BCM color vision to determine outcome measures for future clinical trials. METHODS: Patients with BCM and normal-vision participants were examined with Farnsworth-Munsell (FM) arrangement tests and the Color Assessment and Diagnosis (CAD) test. A retrospective case series in 36 patients with BCM (ages 6-70) was performed with the FM D-15 test. A subset of six patients also had Roth-28 Hue and CAD tests. RESULTS: All patients with BCM had abnormal results for D-15, Roth-28, and CAD tests. With D-15, there was protan-deutan confusion and no bimodal tendency. Roth-28 results reinforced that finding. There was symmetry in color vision metrics between the two eyes and coherence between sessions with the arrangement tests and CAD. Severe abnormalities in red-green sensitivity with CAD were expected. Unexpected were different levels of yellow-blue results with two patterns of abnormal thresholds: moderate elevation in two younger patients and severe elevation in four patients >/=35 years. Coefficients of repeatability and intersession means were tabulated for all test modalities. CONCLUSIONS: Given understanding of advantages, disadvantages, and complexities of interpretation of results, both an arrangement test and CAD should be useful monitors of color vision through a clinical trial in BCM. TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: Our pilot studies in BCM of arrangement and CAD tests indicated both were clinically feasible and interpretable in the context of this cone gene disease.
Trichromatic color vision in humans results from the combination of red, green, and blue photopigment opsins. Although color vision genes have been the targets of active molecular and psychophysical research on color vision abnormalities, little is known about patterns of normal genetic variation in these genes among global human populations. The current study presents nucleotide sequence analyses and tests of neutrality for a 5.5-kb region of the X-linked long-wave "red" opsin gene (OPN1LW) in 236 individuals from ethnically diverse human populations. Our analysis of the recombination landscape across OPN1LW reveals an unusual haplotype structure associated with amino acid replacement variation in exon 3 that is consistent with gene conversion. Compared with the absence of OPN1LW amino acid replacement fixation since divergence from chimpanzee, the human population exhibits a significant excess of high-frequency OPN1LW replacements. Our results suggest that subtle changes in L-cone opsin wavelength absorption may have been adaptive during human evolution.
PURPOSE: The Ishihara pseudoisochromatic (PIC) plate test is the most used test for identifying red-green colour-deficient individuals, but it is not known how the Ishihara results compare with that of genetics testing. Here, the outcome of genotype analysis of OPN1LW and OPN1MW was compared with that of the Ishihara (24-plate ed., 1964) and the Hardy-Rand-Rittler (4th ed. 2002) PIC plate tests. METHODS: Healthy participants with normal habitual visual acuity (n = 454, 16-24 years; 193 males; logMAR </= 0.00) gave saliva samples for opsin gene analysis and performed the two PIC plate tests as part of a cross-sectional study. The criteria for failing the PIC tests were according to manufacturers' instructions. DNA was extracted and used in genotyping assays of OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes from each participant using the Agena MassArray genotyping system. RESULTS: Ten male (5.2%) and 3 (1.1%) female participants were identified as red-green colour deficient based on PIC tests alone. The combination of MassArray and PIC test results identified 10.4% of male and 0.8% of female participants to be colour deficient (males: 0.5% protan and 9.9% deutan; females: 0.8% deutan). Hardy-Weinberg calculations based on male frequencies from combining the MassArray and the PIC test results gave female frequency estimates of colour deficiency and carriers closely matching measured frequencies. CONCLUSIONS: MassArray identified twice as many colour-deficient males as identified from PIC tests alone. Combining results from MassArray and the PIC tests proves to be more reliable than any single test at correctly identifying red-green colour-deficient individuals and carriers.
One important role of epigenetic regulation is controlling gene expression in development and homeostasis. However, little is known about epigenetics' role in regulating opsin expression. Cell cultures (HEK 293, Y79, and WERI) producing different levels of opsins were treated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dc) and/or sodium butyrate (SB) or suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) for 72 h. Global DNA methylation, site-specific methylation, and expressions of opsins were measured by LUMA assay, bisulfite pyrosequencing, and qPCR, respectively. Mouse retinal explants from wild-type P0/P1 pups were ex vivo cultured with/without 5-Aza-dc or SAHA for 6 days. The morphology of explants, DNA methylation, and expressions of opsins was examined. The drugs induced global DNA hypomethylation or increased histone acetylation in cells, including DNA hypomethylation of rhodopsin (RHO) and L-opsin (OPN1LW) and a concomitant increase in their expression. Further upregulation of RHO and/or OPN1LW in HEK 293 or WERI cells was observed with 5-Aza-dc and either SB or SAHA combination treatment. Mouse retinal explants developed normally but had drug-dependent differential DNA methylation and expression patterns of opsins. DNA methylation and histone acetylation directly regulate opsin expression both in vitro and ex vivo. The ability to manipulate opsin expression using epigenetic modifiers enables further study into the role of epigenetics in eye development and disease.
