Short-wave-sensitive opsin 1; Visual pigments are the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision. They consist of an apoprotein, opsin, covalently linked to cis-retinal (Probable). Required for the maintenance of cone outer segment organization in the ventral retina, but not essential for the maintenance of functioning cone photoreceptors (By similarity). Involved in ensuring correct abundance and localization of retinal membrane proteins (By similarity). May increase spectral sensitivity in dim light (By similarity); Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Opsin subfamily.
Blue cone monochromacy (BCM) is a congenital vision disorder affecting both middle-wavelength (M) and long-wavelength (L) cone photoreceptors of the human retina. BCM results from abolished expression of green and red light-sensitive visual pigments expressed in M- and L-cones, respectively. Previously, we showed that gene augmentation therapy to deliver either human L- or M-opsin rescues dorsal M-opsin dominant cone photoreceptors structurally and functionally in treated M-opsin knockout (Opn1mw(-/-)) mice. Although Opn1mw(-/-) mice represent a disease model for BCM patients with deletion mutations, at the cellular level, dorsal cones of Opn1mw(-/-) mice still express low levels of S-opsin, which are different from L- and M-cones of BCM patients carrying a congenital opsin deletion. To determine whether BCM cones lacking complete opsin expression from birth would benefit from AAV-mediated gene therapy, we evaluated the outcome of gene therapy, and determined the therapeutic window and longevity of rescue in a mouse model lacking both M- and S-opsin (Opn1mw(-/-)/Opn1sw(-/-)). Our data show that cones of Opn1mw(-/-)/Opn1sw(-/-) mice are viable at younger ages but undergo rapid degeneration. AAV-mediated expression of human L-opsin promoted cone outer segment regeneration and rescued cone-mediated function when mice were injected subretinally at 2 months of age or younger. Cone-mediated function and visually guided behavior were maintained for at least 8 months post-treatment. However, when mice were treated at 5 and 7 months of age, the chance and effectiveness of rescue was significantly reduced, although cones were still present in the retina. Crossing Opn1mw(-/-)/Opn1sw(-/-) mice with proteasomal activity reporter mice (Ub(G76V)-GFP) did not reveal GFP accumulation in Opn1mw(-/-)/Opn1sw(-/-) cones eliminating impaired degradation of ubiquitinated proteins as stress factor contributing to cone loss. Our results demonstrate that AAV-mediated gene augmentation therapy can rescue cone structure and function in a mouse model with a congenital opsin deletion, but also emphasize the importance that early intervention is crucial for successful therapy.
Epidermal melanocytes sense solar light via the opsin-coupled signaling pathway which is involved in a range of biological functions, including regulating pigmentation, proliferation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. However, it remains unclear whether there are genetic variants within these opsins that affect opsin protein structure and function, and further melanocyte biological behaviors. Here, we examined single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) of five opsin (RGR, OPN1SW, OPN2, OPN4, and OPN5) genes in MM (malignant melanoma; n = 76) and MN (melanocytic nevi; n = 157), using next-generation sequencing. The effects of these pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) on opsin structure and function were further investigated using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, dynamic cross-correlation (DCC), and site-directed mutagenesis. In total, 107 SNV variants were identified. Of these variants, 14 nonsynonymous SNVs (nsSNVs) of opsin genes were detected, including three mutations in the RGR gene, three mutations in the OPN1SW gene, two mutations in the OPN2 gene, and six mutations in the OPN4 gene. The effect of these missense mutations on opsin function was then assessed using eight prediction tools to estimate the potential impact of an amino acid substitution. The impact of each nsSNV was investigated using MD simulations and DCC analysis. Furthermore, we performed in vitro fluorescence calcium imaging to assess the functional properties of nsSNV proteins using a site-directed mutagenesis method. Taken together, these results revealed that p.A103V (RGR), p.T167I (RGR), p.G141S (OPN1SW), p.R144C (OPN1SW), and p.S231F (OPN4) had more deleterious effects on protein structure and function among the 14 nsSNVs. Opsin gene alterations showed the low frequency of missense mutations in melanocytic tumors, and although rare, some mutations in these opsin genes disrupt the canonical function of opsin. Our findings provide new insight into the role of opsin variants in the loss of function.
Mouse cone photoreceptors, like those of most mammals including humans, express cone opsins derived from two ancient families: S-opsin (gene Opn1sw) and M-opsin (gene Opn1mw). Most C57Bl/6 mouse cones co-express both opsins, but in dorso-ventral counter-gradients, with M-opsin dominant in the dorsal retina and S-opsin in the ventral retina, and S-opsin 4-fold greater overall. We created a mouse lacking S-opsin expression by the insertion of a Neomycin selection cassette between the third and fourth exons of the Opn1sw gene (Opn1sw(Neo/Neo)). In strong contrast to published results characterizing mice lacking rhodopsin (Rho(-)/(-)) in which retinal rods undergo cell death by 2.5 months, cones of the Opn1sw(Neo/Neo) mouse remain viable for at least 1.5 yrs, even though many ventral cones do not form outer segments, as revealed by high resolution immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy. Suction pipette recordings revealed that functional ventral cones of the Opn1sw(Neo/Neo) mouse not only phototransduce light with normal kinetics, but are more sensitive to mid-wavelength light than their WT counterparts. Quantitative Western blot analysis revealed the basis of the heightened sensitivity to be increased M-opsin expression. Because S- and M-opsin transcripts must compete for the same translational machinery in cones where they are co-expressed, elimination of S-opsin mRNA in ventral Opn1sw(Neo/Neo) cones likely increases M-opsin expression by relieving competition for translational machinery, revealing an important consequence of eliminating a dominant transcript. Overall, our results reveal a striking capacity for cone photoreceptors to function with much reduced opsin expression, and to remain viable in the absence of an outer segment.
PURPOSE: We have previously reported clinical features of two siblings, a sister with complete achromatopsia (ACHM) and a brother with incomplete ACHM, in a consanguineous Japanese family. With the current study, we intended to identify a disease-causing mutation in the siblings and to investigate why the phenotypes of the siblings differed. METHODS: We performed a comprehensive ophthalmic examination for each sibling and parent. Whole-exome and Sanger sequencing were performed on genomic DNA. Molecular modeling was analyzed in an in silico study. RESULTS: The ophthalmic examination revealed severe macular atrophy in the older female sibling at 30 years of age and mild macular atrophy in the brother at 26 years of age. The genetic analysis identified a novel homozygous PDE6C mutation (p.E591K) as the disease-causing allele in the siblings. Each parent was heterozygous for the mutation. Molecular modeling showed that the mutation could cause a conformational change in the PDE6C protein and result in reduced phosphodiesterase activity. We also identified an OPN1SW mutation (p.G79R), which is associated with congenital tritan deficiencies, in the sister and the father but not in the brother. CONCLUSIONS: A novel homozygous PDE6C mutation was identified as the cause of ACHM. In addition, we identified an OPN1SW mutation in the sibling with complete ACHM, which might explain the difference in phenotype (complete versus incomplete ACHM) between the siblings.
Five mutations in the S-cone-opsin gene (OPN1SW) that give rise to different single amino-acid substitutions (L56P, G79R, S214P, P264S, R283Q) are known to be associated with tritan color-vision deficiency. Here we report a sixth OPN1SW mutation (T190I) and the associated color vision phenotype. S-opsin genotyping and clinical evaluation of color vision were performed on affected and unaffected family members and normal controls. Chromatic contrast was tested at different levels of retinal illuminance. Affected family members were heterozygous for a nucleotide change that substituted the amino acid isoleucine (I) in place of threonine (T) that is normally present at position 190 of the S-opsin. The mutation is in extracellular loop II (EII). The association between making tritan errors and having the T190I mutant S opsin was strong (p>0.0001: Fisher's exact test). The performance of subjects with the T190I mutation was significantly different from that of normal trichromats along the tritan vector under all conditions tested (Mann-Whitney U: p<0.05), but not along the protan or deutan vectors. Individuals with the T190I S-opsin mutation behaved as mild tritans at 12.3-92.3Td, but as tritanopes at 1.2-9.2Td, for both light-adapted and dark-adapted conditions. The results are consistent with the mutant opsin causing abnormal S-cone function.
Debate on the adaptive origins of primates has long focused on the functional ecology of the primate visual system. For example, it is hypothesized that variable expression of short- (SWS1) and middle-to-long-wavelength sensitive (M/LWS) opsins, which confer color vision, can be used to infer ancestral activity patterns and therefore selective ecological pressures. A problem with this approach is that opsin gene variation is incompletely known in the grandorder Euarchonta, that is, the orders Scandentia (treeshrews), Dermoptera (colugos), and Primates. The ancestral state of primate color vision is therefore uncertain. Here, we report on the genes (OPN1SW and OPN1LW) that encode SWS1 and M/LWS opsins in seven species of treeshrew, including the sole nocturnal scandentian Ptilocercus lowii. In addition, we examined the opsin genes of the Central American woolly opossum (Caluromys derbianus), an enduring ecological analogue in the debate on primate origins. Our results indicate: 1) retention of ultraviolet (UV) visual sensitivity in C. derbianus and a shift from UV to blue spectral sensitivities at the base of Euarchonta; 2) ancient pseudogenization of OPN1SW in the ancestors of P. lowii, but a signature of purifying selection in those of C. derbianus; and, 3) the absence of OPN1LW polymorphism among diurnal treeshrews. These findings suggest functional variation in the color vision of nocturnal mammals and a distinctive visual ecology of early primates, perhaps one that demanded greater spatial resolution under light levels that could support cone-mediated color discrimination.
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the most common complication of diabetes. Proliferative DR (PDR) is a more advanced stage of DR, which can cause severe impaired vision and even blindness. However, the precise pathological mechanisms of PDR remain unknown. DNA methylation serves an important role in the initiation and progression of numerous types of disease including PDR. The purpose of this study was to identify the aberrantly methylated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) as potential therapeutic targets of PDR. The gene expression microarray dataset GSE60436 and the methylation profiling microarray dataset GSE57362 were used to determine the aberrantly methylated DEGs in PDR, utilizing normal retinas as controls and fibrovascular membranes (FVMs) in patients with PDR as PDR samples. The functional term and signaling pathway enrichment analysis of the selected genes were subsequently performed. In addition, protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed to determine the hub genes, and the network of transcriptional factor (TF) and target hub genes was also analyzed. In total, 132 hypomethylated genes were found to be upregulated, whereas 172 hypermethylated genes were discovered to be downregulated in PDR. The hypomethylated upregulated genes were found to be enriched in the pathways, such as "cell-substrate adhesion", "adherens junction", "cell adhesion molecule binding" and "extracellular matrix receptor interactions". Meanwhile, the hypermethylated downregulated genes were enriched in the pathways, such as "visual perception", "presynapse" and the "synaptic vesicle cycle". Based on the PPI analysis, a total of eight hub genes were identified: CTGF, SERPINH1, LOX, RBP3, OTX2, RPE65, OPN1SW and NRL. It was hypothesized that the aberrant methylation of these genes might be related to the possible pathophysiology of PDR. An important transcriptional factor, TFDP1, was discovered to share the closest interactions with the hub genes from the gene-TF network. In conclusion, the present study identified an association among DNA methylation and gene expression in PDR using bioinformatics analysis, and identified the hub genes which might be potential methylation-based diagnosis and treatment targets for PDR in the near future.
An arginine to cysteine substitution at amino acid position 203 (C203R) is the most common missense mutation in human cone opsin. Linked to color blindness and blue cone monochromacy (BCM), C203 is involved in a crucial disulfide bond required for proper folding. It has previously been postulated that expression of mutant C203R cone opsin exerts a toxic effect on cone photoreceptors, similar to some well-characterized missense mutations in rhodopsin that lead to protein misfolding. In this study, we generated and characterized a BCM mouse model carrying the equivalent C203R mutation (Opn1mwC198R Opn1sw-/-) to investigate the disease mechanism and develop a gene therapy approach for this disorder. Untreated Opn1mwC198R Opn1sw-/- cones phenocopied affected cones in human patients with the equivalent mutation, exhibiting shortened or absent cone outer segments and loss of function. We determined that gene augmentation targeting cones specifically yielded robust rescue of cone function and structure when Opn1mwC198R Opn1sw-/- mice were treated at early ages. Importantly, treated cones displayed elaborated outer segments and replenished expression of crucial cone phototransduction proteins. Interestingly, we were unable to detect OPN1MWC198R mutant opsin at any age. We believe this is the first proof-of-concept study exploring the efficacy of gene therapy in BCM associated with a C203R mutation.
Color vision requires the expression of opsin photopigments with different wavelength sensitivities in retinal cone photoreceptors. The basic color visual system of mammals is dichromatic, involving differential expression in the cone population of two opsins with sensitivity to short (S, blue) or medium (M, green) wavelengths. However, little is known of the factors that directly activate these opsin genes and thereby contribute to the S or M opsin identity of the cone. We report that the orphan nuclear receptor RORbeta (retinoid-related orphan receptor beta) activates the S opsin gene (Opn1sw) through binding sites upstream of the gene. RORbeta lacks a known physiological ligand and activates the Opn1sw promoter modestly alone but strongly in synergy with the retinal cone-rod homeobox factor (CRX), suggesting a cooperative means of enhancing RORbeta activity. Comparison of wild-type and mutant lacZ reporter transgenes showed that the RORbeta-binding sites in Opn1sw are required for expression in mouse retina. RORbeta-deficient mice fail to induce S opsin appropriately during postnatal cone development. Photoreceptors in these mice also lack outer segments, indicating additional functions for RORbeta in photoreceptor morphological maturation. The results identify Opn1sw as a target gene for RORbeta and suggest a key role for RORbeta in regulating opsin expression in the color visual system.
Here we present evidence implicating disrupted RNA splicing as a potential cause of inherited tritan color vision. Initially we tested 51 subjects for color vision deficiencies. One made significant tritan errors; the others were classified as normal trichromats. The putative tritan subject was the only one of the 51 subjects found to be heterozygous for an OPN1SW gene mutation that disrupts RNA splicing in an in vitro assay. In order to gather further support for the role of the splicing mutation in tritan color vision, the putative tritan subject's mother and sister were examined. They also made tritan errors and had the same OPN1SW gene mutation.
We previously identified a homozygous G178R mutation in human ASRGL1 (hASRGL1) through whole-exome analysis responsible for early onset retinal degeneration (RD) in patients with cone-rod dystrophy. The mutant G178R ASRGL1 expressed in Cos-7 cells showed altered localization, while the mutant ASRGL1 in E. coli lacked the autocatalytic activity needed to generate the active protein. To evaluate the effect of impaired ASRGL1 function on the retina in vivo, we generated a mouse model with c.578_579insAGAAA (NM_001083926.2) mutation (Asrgl1(mut/mut)) through the CRISPR/Cas9 methodology. The expression of ASGRL1 and its asparaginase activity were undetectable in the retina of Asrgl1(mut/mut) mice. The ophthalmic evaluation of Asrgl1(mut/mut) mice showed a significant and progressive decrease in scotopic electroretinographic (ERG) response observed at an early age of 3 months followed by a decrease in photopic response around 5 months compared with age-matched wildtype mice. Immunostaining and RT-PCR analyses with rod and cone cell markers revealed a loss of cone outer segments and a significant decrease in the expression of Rhodopsin, Opn1sw, and Opn1mw at 3 months in Asrgl1(mut/mut) mice compared with age-matched wildtype mice. Importantly, the retinal phenotype of Asrgl1(mut/mut) mice is consistent with the phenotype observed in patients harboring the G178R mutation in ASRGL1 confirming a critical role of ASRGL1 in the retina and the contribution of ASRGL1 mutations in retinal degeneration.
Many studies have demonstrated that epigenetic mechanisms are important in the regulation of gene expression during embryogenesis, gametogenesis, and other forms of tissue-specific gene regulation. We sought to explore the possible role of epigenetics, specifically DNA methylation, in the establishment and maintenance of cell type-restricted gene expression in the retina. To assess the relationship between DNA methylation status and expression level of retinal genes, bisulfite sequence analysis of the 1000 bp region around the transcription start sites (TSS) of representative rod and cone photoreceptor-specific genes and gene expression analysis were performed in the WERI and Y79 human retinoblastoma cell lines. Next, the homologous genes in mouse were bisulfite sequenced in the retina and in non-expressing tissues. Finally, bisulfite sequencing was performed on isolated photoreceptor and non-photoreceptor retinal cells isolated by laser capture microdissection. Differential methylation of rhodopsin (RHO), retinal binding protein 3 (RBP3, IRBP) cone opsin, short-wave-sensitive (OPN1SW), cone opsin, middle-wave-sensitive (OPN1MW), and cone opsin, long-wave-sensitive (OPN1LW) was found in the retinoblastoma cell lines that inversely correlated with gene expression levels. Similarly, we found tissue-specific hypomethylation of the promoter region of Rho and Rbp3 in mouse retina as compared to non-expressing tissues, and also observed hypomethylation of retinal-expressed microRNAs. The Rho and Rbp3 promoter regions were unmethylated in expressing photoreceptor cells and methylated in non-expressing, non-photoreceptor cells from the inner nuclear layer. A third regional hypomethylation pattern of photoreceptor-specific genes was seen in a subpopulation of non-expressing photoreceptors (Rho in cones from the Nrl -/- mouse and Opn1sw in rods). These results demonstrate that a number of photoreceptor-specific genes have cell-specific differential DNA methylation that correlates inversely with their expression level. Furthermore, these cell-specific patterns suggest that DNA methylation may play an important role in modulating photoreceptor gene expression in the developing mammalian retina.
Although loss of short-wavelength-sensitive (SWS) cones and dichromatic color vision in mammals has traditionally been linked to a nocturnal lifestyle, recent studies have identified variation in selective pressure for the maintenance of the OPN1SW opsin gene (and thus, potentially dichromacy) among nocturnal mammalian lineages. These studies hypothesize that purifying selection to retain SWS cones may be associated with a selective advantage for nocturnal color vision under certain ecological conditions. In this study, we explore the effect of nocturnal light environment on OPN1SW opsin gene evolution in a diverse sample of nocturnal lemurs (106 individuals, 19 species, and 5 genera). Using both phylogenetic and population genetic approaches, we test whether species from closed canopy rainforests, which are impoverished in short-wavelength light, have experienced relaxed selection compared with species from open canopy forests. We identify clear signatures of differential selection on OPN1SW by habitat type. Our results suggest that open canopy species generally experience strong purifying selection to maintain SWS cones. In contrast, closed canopy species experience weaker purifying selection or a relaxation of selection on OPN1SW. We also found evidence of nonfunctional OPN1SW genes in all Phaner species and in Cheirogaleus medius, implying at least three independent losses of SWS cones in cheirogaleids. Our results suggest that the evolution of color vision in nocturnal lemurs has been influenced by nocturnal light environment.
BACKGROUND: Panel-based targeted exome sequencing was applied to identify the pathogenic variants and genetic characteristics of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) in two Chinese families, and to gain a deeper understanding of the relationship between clinical manifestations and genotypes. METHODS: A total of 17 subjects, comprising two probands (total patients: four subjects) and their family member, were recruited in this study. All subjects underwent comprehensive ophthalmic examinations and clinical evaluations, and the complete history and medical records were collected according to the standard procedures. All participants were screened using the multigene panel test (Target_Eye_792_V2 chip), and Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the candidate variants. RESULTS: Among these two families, a total of three novel mutations in the EYS gene were identified in patients, including a homozygous frameshift mutation c.9252_9253insT detected in two patients in one family, and the compound heterozygous splicesite mutation c.5644+2T>C and frameshift mutation c.1920_1923delTGAG detected in two patients in the another family. All patients in both families had early onset of night blindness and poor visual acuity, and with typical posterior capsule opacification. The mutation co-segregated within all recruited individuals. In addition, one patient with compound heterozygous mutations was found to have typical blue-blindness symptoms and detected a previously reported disease-causing mutation c.235G>A in OPN1SW gene, which caused blue blindness manifestations and was first discovered in patient combined with RP causative genes. CONCLUSIONS: Panel-based targeted exome sequencing was used to identify three novel variants of RP causative gene, and we also detected a known pathogenic variants of blue-blindness causative genes in two patients. Our finding will provide a powerful basis for genetic counseling and enhance our current understanding of the genetics factors for RP families.
BACKGROUND: Visual perception is initiated in the photoreceptor cells of the retina via the phototransduction system. This system has shown marked evolution during mammalian divergence in such complex attributes as activation time and recovery time. We have performed a molecular evolutionary analysis of proteins involved in mammalian phototransduction in order to unravel how the action of natural selection has been distributed throughout the system to evolve such traits. RESULTS: We found selective pressures to be non-randomly distributed according to both a simple protein classification scheme and a protein-interaction network representation of the signaling pathway. Proteins which are topologically central in the signaling pathway, such as the G proteins, as well as retinoid cycle chaperones and proteins involved in photoreceptor cell-type determination, were found to be more constrained in their evolution. Proteins peripheral to the pathway, such as ion channels and exchangers, as well as the retinoid cycle enzymes, have experienced a relaxation of selective pressures. Furthermore, signals of positive selection were detected in two genes: the short-wave (blue) opsin (OPN1SW) in hominids and the rod-specific Na+/ Ca2+, K+ ion exchanger (SLC24A1) in rodents. CONCLUSIONS: The functions of the proteins involved in phototransduction and the topology of the interactions between them have imposed non-random constraints on their evolution. Thus, in shaping or conserving system-level phototransduction traits, natural selection has targeted the underlying proteins in a concerted manner.
HIV retinopathy is the most common non-infectious complication in the eyes of HIV-positive individuals. Oncotic lesions in the retinal nerve fiber layer, referred to as cotton wool spots (CWS), and intraretinal (IR) hemorrhages are frequently observed but are not unique to this pathology. HIV-positive patients have impaired color vision and contrast sensitivity, which worsens with age. Evidence of inner-retinal lesions and damage have been documented ophthalmoscopically, however their long term structural effect has not been investigated. It has been hypothesized that they may be partially responsible for loss of visual function and visual field. In this study we utilized clinical data, retinal imaging and transcriptomics approaches to comprehensively interrogate non-infectious HIV retinopathy. The methods employed encompassed clinical examinations, fundus photography, indirect ophthalmoscopy, Farmsworth-Munsell 100 hue discrimination testing and Illumina BeadChip analyses. Here we show that changes in the outer retina, specifically in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and photoreceptor outer segments (POS) contribute to vision changes in non-infectious HIV retinopathy. We find that in HIV-positive retinae there is an induction of rhodopsin and other transcripts (including PDE6A, PDE6B, PDE6G, CNGA1, CNGB1, CRX, NRL) involved in visual transduction, as well as structural components of the rod photoreceptors (ABCA4 and ROM1). This is consistent with an increased rate of renewal of rod outer segments induced via increased phagocytosis by HIV-infected RPE previously reported in culture. Cone-specific transcripts (OPN1SW, OPN1LW, PDE6C, PDE6H and GRK7) are uniformly downregulated in HIV positive retina, likely due to a partial loss of cone photoreceptors. Active cotton wool spots and intraretinal hemorrhages (IRH) may not affect photoreceptors directly and the interaction of photoreceptors with the aging RPE may be the key to the progressive vision changes in HIV-positive patients.
We used expression quantitative trait locus mapping in the laboratory rat (Rattus norvegicus) to gain a broad perspective of gene regulation in the mammalian eye and to identify genetic variation relevant to human eye disease. Of >31,000 gene probes represented on an Affymetrix expression microarray, 18,976 exhibited sufficient signal for reliable analysis and at least 2-fold variation in expression among 120 F(2) rats generated from an SR/JrHsd x SHRSP intercross. Genome-wide linkage analysis with 399 genetic markers revealed significant linkage with at least one marker for 1,300 probes (alpha = 0.001; estimated empirical false discovery rate = 2%). Both contiguous and noncontiguous loci were found to be important in regulating mammalian eye gene expression. We investigated one locus of each type in greater detail and identified putative transcription-altering variations in both cases. We found an inserted cREL binding sequence in the 5' flanking sequence of the Abca4 gene associated with an increased expression level of that gene, and we found a mutation of the gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor beta2 associated with a decreased expression level of the gene encoding short-wavelength sensitive opsin (Opn1sw). In addition to these positional studies, we performed a pairwise analysis of gene expression to identify genes that are regulated in a coordinated manner and used this approach to validate two previously undescribed genes involved in the human disease Bardet-Biedl syndrome. These data and analytical approaches can be used to facilitate the discovery of additional genes and regulatory elements involved in human eye disease.
PURPOSE: To determine whether the human Muller cell line Moorfields/Institute of Ophthalmology-Muller 1 (MIO-M1) expresses opsins. METHODS: The gene expression of opsins was determined by reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR). The presence of opsin proteins was determined by western blotting and immunocytochemistry. The light sensitivity of the cells was examined with imaging experiments using the calcium-sensitive dye Fluo-4. RESULTS: MIO-M1 cells express glial (glutamine synthase [GLUL], vimentin [VIM], glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP], cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein [RLBP1], glial high-affinity glutamate transporter [SLCA1], aquaporin-4 [AQP4], inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir4.1 [Kir4.1]), neuronal (Thy-1 cell surface antigen [THY1], heavy neurofilament polypeptide [NEFH], microtubule-associated protein 2 [MAP2], neurogenic differentiation 1 [NEUROD1], neuronal nuclei [NEUN]), and neural progenitor markers (Nestin [NES], paired-type homeobox transcription factor [PAX6], neurogenic locus notch homolog 1 [NOTCH1]). The cells contain mRNA for the following opsins: blue opsin (OPN1SW), rhodopsin (OPN2), panopsin (OPN3), melanopsin (OPN4), neuropsin (OPN5), and peropsin (RRH), as well as for the transducins (guanine nucleotide binding protein [GNAZ], alpha transducing activity polypeptide 1 [GNAT1], alpha transducing activity polypeptide 2 [GNAT2]). The presence of blue opsin and melanopsin was confirmed with immunocytochemistry and western blotting. The immunoreactivity and mRNA of red-green opsin were found in some but not all cultures, while the immunoreactivity for rhodopsin was absent in all cultures investigated. Repetitive stimulation with 480 nm light evoked slow and fast transient calcium responses in the majority of cells investigated, while irradiation with 600 nm light was ineffective. CONCLUSIONS: The human Muller cell line MIO-M1 expresses opsins. This suggests immortalized Muller cells could be used as a cellular source to produce human opsins for their potential application as therapeutic agents in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
Recent successes in the stem cell field have identified some of the key chemical and biological cues which drive photoreceptor derivation from human embryonic stem cells (hESC) and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC); however, the efficiency of this process is variable. We have designed a three-step photoreceptor differentiation protocol combining previously published methods that direct the differentiation of hESC and hiPSC toward a retinal lineage, which we further modified with additional supplements selected on the basis of reports from the eye field and retinal development. We report that hESC and hiPSC differentiating under our regimen over a 60 day period sequentially acquire markers associated with neural, retinal field, retinal pigmented epithelium and photoreceptor cells, including mature photoreceptor markers OPN1SW and RHODOPSIN with a higher efficiency than previously reported. In addition, we report the ability of hESC and hiPSC cultures to generate neural and retinal phenotypes under minimal culture conditions, which may be linked to their ability to endogenously upregulate the expression of a range of factors important for retinal cell type specification. However, cultures that were differentiated with full supplementation under our photoreceptor-induction regimen achieve this within a significantly shorter time frame and show a substantial increase in the expression of photoreceptor-specific markers in comparison to cultures differentiated under minimal conditions. Interestingly, cultures supplemented only with B27 and/or N2 displayed comparable differentiation efficiency to those under full supplementation, indicating a key role for B27 and N2 during the differentiation process. Furthermore, our data highlight an important role for Dkk1 and Noggin in enhancing the differentiation of hESC and hiPSC toward retinal progenitor cells and photoreceptor precursors during the early stages of differentiation, while suggesting that further maturation of these cells into photoreceptors may not require additional factors and can ensue under minimal culture conditions.
PURPOSE: To present a detailed, reliable long range-PCR and sequencing (LR-PCR-Seq) procedure to identify human opsin gene sequences for variations in the long wavelength-sensitive (OPN1LW), medium wavelength-sensitive (OPN1MW), short wavelength-sensitive (OPN1SW), and rhodopsin (RHO) genes. METHODS: Color vision was assessed for nine subjects using the Farnsworth-Munsell 100 hue test, Ishihara pseudoisochromatic plates, and the Rabin cone-contrast threshold procedure (ColorDX, Konan Medical). The color vision phenotypes were normal trichromacy (n = 3), potential tetrachromacy (n = 3), dichromacy (n = 2), and unexplained low color vision (n = 1). DNA was isolated from blood or saliva and LR-PCR amplified into individual products: OPN1LW (4,045 bp), OPN1MW (4,045 bp), OPN1SW (3,326 bp), and RHO (6,715 bp). Each product was sequenced using specific internal primer sets. Analysis was performed with Mutation Surveyor software. RESULTS: The LR-PCR-Seq technique identified known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in OPN1LW and OPN1MW gene codons (180, 230, 233, 277, and 285), as well as those for lesser studied codons (174, 178, 236, 274, 279, 298 and 309) in the OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes. Additionally, six SNP variants in the OPN1MW and OPN1LW genes not previously reported in the NCBI dbSNP database were identified. An unreported poly-T region within intron 5(c.36+126) of the rhodopsin gene was also found, and analysis showed it to be highly conserved in mammalian species. CONCLUSIONS: This LR-PCR-Seq procedure (single PCR reaction per gene followed by sequencing) can identify exonic and intronic SNP variants in OPN1LW, OPN1MW, OPN1SW, and rhodopsin genes. There is no need for restriction enzyme digestion or multiple PCR steps that can introduce errors. Future studies will combine the LR-PCR-Seq with perceptual behavior measures, allowing for accurate correlations between opsin genotypes, retinal photopigment phenotypes, and color perception behaviors.
