Opsin-3; May play a role in encephalic photoreception; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Opsin subfamily.
Because sunlight is essential for human survival, we have developed complex mechanisms for detecting and responding to light stimuli. The eyes and skin are major organs for sensing light and express several light-sensitive opsin receptors. These opsins mediate cellular responses to spectrally-distinct wavelengths of visible and ultraviolet light. How the eyes mediate visual phototransduction is well understood, but less is known about how the skin detects light. Both human and murine skin express a wide array of opsins, with one of the most highly expressed being the functionally elusive opsin 3 (OPN3). In this review we explore light reception, opsin expression and signaling in skin cells; we compile data elucidating potential functions for human OPN3 in skin, with emphasis on recent studies investigating OPN3 regulation of melanin within epidermal melanocytes.
Objective: To investigate the potential relationship between opsins and photobiomodulation. Background: Opsins and other photoreceptors occur in all phyla and are important in light-activated signaling and organism homeostasis. In addition to the visual opsin systems of the retina (OPN1 and OPN2), there are several non-visual opsins found throughout the body tissues, including encephalopsin/panopsin (OPN3), melanopsin (OPN4), and neuropsin (OPN5), as well as other structures that have light-sensitive properties, such as enzymes, ion channels, particularly those located in cell membranes, lysosomes, and neuronal structures such as the nodes of Ranvier. The influence of these structures on exposure to light, including self-generated light within the body (autofluorescence), on circadian oscillators, and circadian and ultradian rhythms have become increasingly reported. The visual and non-visual phototransduction cascade originating from opsins and other structures has potential significant mechanistic effects on tissues and health. Methods: A PubMed and Google Scholar search was made using the search terms "photobiomodulation", "light", "neuron", "opsins", "neuropsin", "melanopsin", "encephalopsin", "rhodopsin", and "chromophore". Results: This review was examined the influence of neuropsin (also known as kallikrein 8), encephalopsin, and melanopsin specifically on ion channel function, and more broadly on the central and peripheral nervous systems. The relationship between opsins 3, 4, and 5 and photobiomodulation mechanisms was evaluated, along with a proposed role of photobiomodulation through opsins and light-sensitive organelles as potential alleviators of symptoms and accelerators of beneficial regenerative processes. The potential clinical implications of this in musculoskeletal conditions, wounds, and in the symptomatic management of neurodegenerative disease was also examined. Conclusions: Systematic research into the pleotropic therapeutic role of photobiomodulation, mediated through its action on opsins and other light-sensitive organelles may assist in the future execution of safe, low-risk precision medicine for a variety of chronic and complex disease conditions, and for health maintenance in aging.
BACKGROUND: OPN3 upregulation associated with metastasis was recently described in two subtypes of lung cancers. And OPN3 identified in light-independent functions in epidermal melanocytes has already shown promise. However, in malignant melanocytic tissues, the expression and characterization of OPN3 remain uncharacterized. OBJECTIVES: We investigated the clinico-histopathologic features in relation to OPN3 expression of acral lentiginous melanoma (ALM), which is a rare cutaneous melanoma subtype and not associated with prior sunlight exposure. METHODS: In all, 84 samples of junctional melanocytic nevi (JMN, n = 12), primary ALMs (n = 39) and inguinal lymph node metastasis (ILNM, n = 23) from ALMs were evaluated for the immunohistochemical expression of OPN3. OPN3 messenger RNA and protein level were further determined in melanocytic tumors using quantitative real-time PCR, multiimmunofluorescence and Western blot assays. We also estimated the associations OPN3 expression between clinicopathological features and prognosis. RESULTS: ILNMs, in contrast to JMN and ALMs, had higher OPN3 expression scores (p < .001) by immunohistochemistry analysis. High OPN3 score was associated with presence of ulceration, increased Breslow depth and Clark level (p = .025, p = .042, and p = .012, respectively). Furthermore, a remarkable difference (p = .037) of patient overall survival was found when comparing the OPN3 expression of immunohistochemical score between equal to or larger than 100 and below 100 groups. Also, Cox regression models showed that high OPN3 scores were associated with worse melanoma survival. CONCLUSION: High OPN3 expression is significantly associated with ALMs and metastatic phenotype as well as a poor prognosis.
Advances have been made in defining the mechanisms for the control of allergic airway inflammation in response to inhaled antigens. Several genes, including ADAM33, DPP10, PHF11, GPRA, TIM-1, PDE4D, OPN3, and ORMDL3, have been implicated in the pathogenesis and susceptibility to atopy and asthma. Growing evidence associates asthma with a systemic propensity for allergic T-helper type 2 cytokines. Disordered coagulation and fibrinolysis also exacerbate asthma symptoms. Balance among functionally distinct dendritic cell subsets contributes to the outcome of T-cell-mediated immunity. Allergen-specific T-regulatory cells play a pivotal role in the development of tolerance to allergens and immune suppression. The major emphasis on immunotherapy for asthma during the past decade has been to direct the immune response to a type 1 response, or immune tolerance. In this review, we discuss the current information on the pathogenesis of allergic airway inflammation and potential immunotherapy, which could be beneficial in the treatment of airway inflammation, allergy, and asthma.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are core switches connecting excellular survival or death signals with cellular signaling pathways in a context-dependent manner. Opsin 3 (OPN3) belongs to the GPCR superfamily. However, whether OPN3 can control the survival or death of human melanocytes is not known. Here, we try to investigate the inherent function of OPN3 on the survival of melanocytes. Our results demonstrate that OPN3 knockdown by RNAi-OPN3 in human epidermal melanocytes leads to cell apoptosis. The downregulation of OPN3 markedly reduces intracellular calcium levels and decreases phosphorylation of BAD. Attenuated BAD phosphorylation and elevated BAD protein level alter mitochondria membrane permeability, which trigger activation of BAX and inhibition of BCL-2 and raf-1. Activated BAX results in the release of cytochrome c and the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. Cytochrome c complexes associate with caspase 9, forming a postmitochondrial apoptosome that activate effector caspases including caspase 3 and caspase 7. The release of apoptotic molecules eventually promotes the occurrence of apoptosis. In conclusion, we hereby are the first to prove that OPN3 is a key signal responsible for cell survival through a calcium-dependent G protein-coupled signaling and mitochondrial pathway.
We live on a planet that is bathed in daily and seasonal sunlight cycles. In this context, terrestrial life forms have evolved mechanisms that directly harness light energy (plants) or decode light information for adaptive advantage. In animals, the main light sensors are a family of G protein-coupled receptors called opsins. Opsin function is best described for the visual sense. However, most animals also use opsins for extraocular light sensing for seasonal behavior and camouflage. While it has long been believed that mammals do not have an extraocular light sensing capacity, recent evidence suggests otherwise. Notably, encephalopsin (OPN3) and neuropsin (OPN5) are both known to mediate extraocular light sensing in mice. Examples of this mediation include photoentrainment of circadian clocks in skin (by OPN5) and acute light-dependent regulation of metabolic pathways (by OPN3 and OPN5). This review summarizes current findings in the expanding field of extraocular photoreception and their relevance for human physiology.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Visible light has beneficial effects on cutaneous wound healing, but the role of potential photoreceptors in human skin is unknown. In addition, inconsistency in the parameters of blue and red light-based therapies for skin conditions makes interpretation difficult. Red light can activate cytochrome c oxidase and has been proposed as a wound healing therapy. UV-blue light can activate Opsin 1-SW, Opsin 2, Opsin 3, Opsin 4, and Opsin 5 receptors, triggering biological responses, but their role in human skin physiology is unclear. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Localization of Opsins was analyzed in situ in human skin derived from face and abdomen by immunohistochemistry. An ex vivo human skin wound healing model was established and expression of Opsins confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The rate of wound closure was quantitated after irradiation with blue and red light and mRNA was extracted from the regenerating epithelial tongue by laser micro-dissection to detect changes in Opsin 3 (OPN3) expression. Retention of the expression of Opsins in primary cultures of human epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts was confirmed by qRT-PCR and immunocytochemistry. Modulation of metabolic activity by visible light was studied. Furthermore, migration in a scratch-wound assay, DNA synthesis and differentiation of epidermal keratinocytes was established following irradiation with blue light. A role for OPN3 in keratinocytes was investigated by gene silencing. RESULTS: Opsin receptors (OPN1-SW, 3 and 5) were similarly localized in the epidermis of human facial and abdominal skin in situ. Corresponding expression was confirmed in the regenerating epithelial tongue of ex vivo wounds after 2 days in culture, and irradiation with blue light stimulated wound closure, with a corresponding increase in OPN3 expression. Expression of Opsins was retained in primary cultures of epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts. Both blue and red light stimulated the metabolic activity of cultured keratinocytes. Low levels of blue light reduced DNA synthesis and stimulated differentiation of keratinocytes. While low levels of blue light did not alter keratinocyte migration in a scratch wound assay, higher levels inhibited migration. Gene silencing of OPN3 in keratinocytes was effective (87% reduction). The rate of DNA synthesis in OPN3 knockdown keratinocytes did not change following irradiation with blue light, however, the level of differentiation was decreased. CONCLUSIONS: Opsins are expressed in the epidermis and dermis of human skin and in the newly regenerating epidermis following wounding. An increase in OPN3 expression in the epithelial tongue may be a potential mechanism for the stimulation of wound closure by blue light. Since keratinocytes and fibroblasts retain their expression of Opsins in culture, they provide a good model to investigate the mechanism of blue light in wound healing responses. Knockdown of OPN3 led to a reduction in early differentiation of keratinocytes following irradiation with blue light, suggesting OPN3 is required for restoration of the barrier function. Understanding the function and relationship of different photoreceptors and their response to specific light parameters will lead to the development of reliable light-based therapies for cutaneous wound healing. Lasers Surg. Med. (c) 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
BACKGROUND: Lung adenocarcinoma is the most common pathological lung cancer and an important cause of cancer-related death. Metastasis is a major underlying reason for poor prognosis of lung adenocarcinoma. Opsin3 (OPN3), a member of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein-coupled receptor superfamily, has been identified to affect the apoptosis of hepatoma cells by modulating the phosphorylation of Akt and Bcl2/Bax. However, the expression and role of OPN3 in lung adenocarcinoma remains unclear. METHODS: Opsin3 expression in lung adenocarcinoma tissues was detected by western blot, qPCR, and immunohistochemistry. Changes in cell migration and invasion ability resulting from the change of OPN3 expression level were detected by wound healing and transwell migration assays. Changes in the markers of epithelial-mesenchymal transformation were detected by western blot and qPCR. RESULTS: Opsin3 expression in lung adenocarcinoma tissues was higher than that in normal lung tissues. Patients with high expression of OPN3 had lower survival rates. Owing to overexpression of OPN3, the HCC827 cells showed enhanced invasion and migration ability in vitro. Upon decreasing the expression of OPN3, the invasion and migration ability of the A549 cells decreased. CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated for the first time that OPN3 gene enhanced the metastasis in lung adenocarcinoma, and its overexpression promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition. KEY POINTS: A significant finding of the study was that OPN3 acted an oncogene in promoting lung adenocarcinoma metastasis. Our study complemented the research on the expression and function of OPN3 in lung adenocarcinoma.
It is unclear whether normal human skin tissue or abnormal scarring are photoreceptive. Therefore, this study investigated photosensitivity in normal skin tissue and hypertrophic scars. The expression of opsins, which are photoreceptor proteins, in normal dermal fibroblasts (NDFs) and hypertrophic scar fibroblasts (HSFs) was examined. After exposure to blue light (BL), changes in the expression levels of alphaSMA and clock-related genes, specifically PER2 and BMAL1, were examined in both fibroblast types. Opsins were expressed in both fibroblast types, with OPN3 exhibiting the highest expression levels. After peripheral circadian rhythm disruption, BL induced rhythm formation in NDFs. In contrast, although HSFs showed changes in clock-related gene expression levels, no distinct rhythm formation was observed. The expression level of alphaSMA was significantly higher in HSFs and decreased to the same level as that in NDFs upon BL exposure. When OPN3 knocked-down HSFs were exposed to BL, the reduction in alphaSMA expression was inhibited. This study showed that BL exposure directly triggers peripheral circadian synchronization in NDFs but not in HSFs. OPN3-mediated BL exposure inhibited HSFs. Although the current results did not elucidate the relationship between peripheral circadian rhythms and hypertrophic scars, they show that BL can be applied for the prevention and treatment of hypertrophic scars and keloids.
Opsin-3 (OPN3) is a potential key regulator of human melanocyte melanogenesis. How OPN3-mediated regulation of melanocyte melanogenesis is triggered is largely unclear. TGFbeta can inhibit the growth of human melanocytes and reduce melanin synthesis in melanocytes. However, whether TGFbeta2 can modulate pigmentation in normal human primary melanocytes through OPN3 is entirely unknown. In this study, we constructed a coculture model with human epidermal melanocytes and keratinocytes. OPN3, tyrosinase (TYR), tyrosinase-related protein (TRP)-1, and TRP-2 expression and TYR activity were detected to be higher in cocultured cells than in monocultured cells. Moreover, elevated levels of TGFbeta2 were detected in the culture supernatant of melanocytes cocultured with keratinocytes. OPN3 inhibition in melanocytes decreased TYR, TRP-1, and TRP-2 expression and downregulated TYR activity. Our findings indicate that TGFbeta2 upregulates TYR activity and TRP-1 and TRP-2 expression in human melanocytes through OPN3 and downstream calcium-dependent G-protein coupled signaling pathways to induce melanogenesis. Interestingly, treatment with the TGFbeta2 receptor inhibitor LY2109761 (10 muM) did not inhibit TGFbeta2-induced melanocyte melanogenesis though OPN3. Collectively, our data suggest that TGFbeta2 upregulates TYR activity through OPN3 through a TGFbeta2 receptor-independent and calcium-dependent G-protein coupled signaling pathway.
BACKGROUND: Emerging cell- or tissue-based evidence has demonstrated that opsin 3 (OPN3) mediates a variety of pathological processes affecting tumorigenesis, clinical prognosis, and treatment resistance in some cancers. However, a comprehensive analysis of OPN3 across human cancers is unavailable. Therefore, a pancancer analysis of OPN3 expression was performed and its potential oncogenic roles were explored. METHODS: The expression and characterization of OPN3 were evaluated among 33 tumour types using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset. Additionally, the OPN3 RNA level and overall survival (OS) in relation to its expression level in 33 cancer types were estimated. Based on the analysis above, 347 samples from 5 types of tumours were collected and detected for the protein expression of OPN3 by immunohistochemical assay. Furthermore, the biological role of OPN3 in cancers was evaluated via gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). RESULTS: The OPN3 expression level was heterogeneous across cancers, yet a remarkable difference existed between OPN3 expression and patient overall survival among the 7 types of these 33 cancers. Consistently, a high immunohistochemical score of OPN3 was significantly associated with a poor prognosis among patients with 5 types of tumours. Additionally, OPN3 expression was involved in cancer-associated fibroblast infiltration in 5 types of tumours, and promoter hypomethylation of OPN3 was observed in 3 tumour types. Additionally, OPN3 protein phosphorylation sites of Tyr140 and Ser380 were identified via posttranscriptional modification analysis, suggesting the potential function of Tyr140 and Ser380 phosphorylation in tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the enrichment analysis was mainly concentrated in C7orf70, C7orf25 and the "ribosome" pathway by GSEA in 5 types of cancers, indicating that OPN3 might affect tumorigenesis and progression by regulating gene expression and ribosome biogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: High expression of OPN3 was significantly associated with a poor clinical prognosis in five types of cancers. Its molecular function was closely associated with the ribosomal pathway.
Tooth agenesis is one of the most frequent congenital abnormalities found in the maxillofacial region. Oligodontia, a severe form of tooth agenesis, occurs as an isolated anomaly or as a syndromic feature. We performed whole exome sequencing analyses to identify causative mutation in a Japanese family with three affected individuals with non-syndromic oligodontia. After variant filtering procedures and validation by Sanger sequencing, we identified one missense mutation (c.668 C > T, p.Gly223Asp) in OPN3 at 1q43, encoding a photosensitive G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) expressed in various tissues including brain, liver, and adipose. This mutation was predicted to be pathogenic in silico and was not found in the public databases. We further examined 48 genetically unrelated cases by targeted sequencing of the OPN3 gene region and found one additional missense variant in this gene (c.768 C > T, p.Met256Ile) that was also predicted to be pathogenic. Localization of OPN3 protein by immunohistochemical analysis using mouse embryo revealed its specific expression in the tooth gems from bud to bell stages and their surrounding tissues. These results indicated that OPN3 was involved in non-syndromic oligodontia, which has made an anchoring point for clinical application including DNA diagnostics.
Mammalian opsin 3 (OPN3) is a member of the opsin family of G-protein-coupled receptors with ambiguous light sensitivity. OPN3 was first identified in the brain (and named encephalopsin) and subsequently found to be expressed in other tissues. In adipocytes, OPN3 is necessary for light responses that modulate lipolysis and glucose uptake, while OPN3 in human skin melanocytes regulates pigmentation in a light-independent manner. Despite its initial discovery in the brain, OPN3 functional mechanisms in the brain remain elusive. Here, we investigated the molecular mechanism of OPN3 function in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus. We show that Opn3 is coexpressed with the melanocortin 4 receptor (Mc4r) in a population of PVN neurons, where it negatively regulates MC4R-mediated cAMP signaling in a specific and Galpha(i/o)-dependent manner. Under baseline conditions, OPN3 via Galpha(i/o) potentiates the activity of the inward rectifying Kir7.1 channel, previously shown to be closed in response to agonist-mediated activation of MC4R in a Galpha(s)-independent manner. In mice, we found that Opn3 in Mc4r-expressing neurons regulates food consumption. Our results reveal the first mechanistic insight into OPN3 function in the hypothalamus, uncovering a unique mechanism by which OPN3 functions to potentiate Kir7.1 activity and negatively regulate MC4R-mediated cAMP signaling, thereby promoting food intake.
OPN3, as a member of the opsin family, has various nonlight-dependent functions. Congenital melanocytic nevus (CMN) is a skin lesion with dark pigmentation that appears at birth and can be initiated by the BRAF(V600E) mutation in melanocytes. However, the role of OPN3 in BRAF(V600E) CMN cell melanogenesis has never been reported. In this study, we show that OPN3 acts as a negative regulator of melanin production by modulating BRAF(V600E) signaling in BRAF(V600E) CMN cells. Knocking down OPN3 expression can inhibit the BRAF(V600E)/extracellular signal‒regulated kinase signaling pathway and upregulate the expression of microcephaly-related transcription factors, tyrosinase, and TRP1 and TRP2, thus increasing melanin levels in BRAF(V600E) CMN cells. More remarkably, OPN3 and BRAF(V600E) were found to form a physical complex. Furthermore, a three-dimensional nevus model was used to further prove the negative regulatory effect of OPN3 on BRAF(V600E) CMN cell melanogenesis. Our study reveals a mechanism for OPN3-mediated melanogenesis in BRAF(V600E) CMN cells, and these results may lead to a more personalized and economically viable approach to treating BRAF(V600E) CMN.
Cervical squamous cell carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma (CESC) tumorigenesis involves a combination of multiple genetic alteration processes. Constructing a survival-associated competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network and a multi-mRNA-based prognostic signature model can help us better understand the complexity and genetic characteristics of CESC. In this study, the RNA-seq data and clinical information of CESC patients were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Differentially expressed mRNAs, lncRNAs and miRNAs were identified with the edgeR R package. A four-mRNA prognostic signature was developed by multivariate Cox regression analysis. Kaplan-Meier survival with the log-rank tests was performed to assess survival rates. The relationships between overall survival (OS) and clinical parameters were evaluated by Cox regression analysis. A survival-associated ceRNA network was constructed with the multiMiR package and miRcode database. Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) analysis and gene ontology analyses were used to identify the functional role of the ceRNA network in the prognosis of CESC. A total of 298 differentially expressed mRNAs, 8 miRNAs, and 29 lncRNAs were significantly associated with the prognosis of CESC. A prognostic signature model based on 4 mRNAs (OPN3, DAAM2, HENMT1, and CAVIN3) was developed, and the prognostic ability of this signature was indicated by the AUC of 0.726. Patients in the high-risk group exhibited significantly worse OS. The KEGG pathways, TGF-beta and Cell adhesion molecules, were significantly enriched. In this study, a CESC-associated ceRNA network was constructed, and a multi-mRNA-based prognostic model for CESC was developed based on the ceRNA network, providing a new perspective for cancer pathogenesis research.
BACKGROUND: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) is the most common type of thyroid malignancy, with a rising incidence. Traditional treatments, such as thyroidectomy and radiotherapy, often lead to significant side effects, including impaired thyroid function. Therefore, there is an urgent need for non-invasive therapeutic approaches. This study aims to explore the potential of photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT), a non-invasive treatment using specific wavelengths of light, in the management of PTC. METHODS: We investigated the effects of blue light PBMT on PTC cells, focusing on the Retinal-OPSIN 3 (OPN3) complex's role in mediating cellular responses. Blue light exposure was applied to PTC cells, and subsequent changes in cellular proliferation, cell cycle progression, and protein expression were analyzed. Statistical tests, including one-way ANOVA and t-tests, were used to evaluate the significance of the findings. RESULTS: Blue light exposure led to the dissociation of 11-cis-retinal from OPN3, resulting in the accumulation of all-trans retinal. This accumulation disrupted cellular proliferation pathways and induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in PTC cells. The Retinal-OPN3 complex was found to be a key mediator in these processes, demonstrating that thyroid cells can respond to specific light wavelengths and utilize their photoreceptive potential for therapeutic purposes. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that PBMT, through the modulation of the Retinal-OPN3 complex, offers a promising non-invasive approach for treating PTC. This study highlights the therapeutic potential of light signal transduction in non-ocular tissues and opens new avenues for non-invasive cancer therapies.
Opsin 3 (OPN3), a member of the light-sensitive, retinal-dependent opsin family, is widely expressed in a variety of human tissues and plays a multitude of light-dependent and light-independent roles. We recently identified five missense variants of OPN3, including p. I51T, p. V134A, p. V183I, p. M256I and p. C331Y, in human melanocytic tumours. However, it remains unclear how these OPN3 variants affect OPN3 protein structure and function. Herein, we conducted structural and functional studies of these variant proteins in OPN3 by molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations. Moreover, we performed in vitro fluorescence calcium imaging to assess the functional properties of five single-nucleotide variant (SNV) proteins using a site-directed mutagenesis method. Notably, the p. I51T variant was not able to effectively dock with 11-cis-retinal. Additionally, in vitro, the p. I51T SNVs failed to induce any detectable changes in intracellular Ca(2+) concentration at room temperature. Taken together, these results reveal that five SNVs in the OPN3 gene have deleterious effects on protein structure and function, suggesting that these mutations, especially the p. I51T variant, significantly disrupt the canonical function of the OPN3 protein. Our findings provide new insight into the role of OPN3 variants in the loss of protein function.
Opn3/TMT opsins belong to one of the opsin groups with vertebrate visual and non-visual opsins, and are widely distributed in eyes, brains and other internal organs in various vertebrates and invertebrates. Vertebrate Opn3/TMT opsins are further classified into four groups on the basis of their amino acid identities. However, there is limited information about molecular properties of these groups, due to the difficulty in preparing the recombinant proteins. Here, we successfully expressed recombinant proteins of TMT1 and TMT2 opsins of medaka fish (Oryzias latipes) in cultured cells and characterized their molecular properties. Spectroscopic and biochemical studies demonstrated that TMT1 and TMT2 opsins functioned as blue light-sensitive Gi/Go-coupled receptors, but exhibited spectral properties and photo-convertibility of the active state different from each other. TMT1 opsin forms a visible light-absorbing active state containing all-trans-retinal, which can be photo-converted to 7-cis- and 9-cis-retinal states in addition to the original 11-cis-retinal state. In contrast, the active state of TMT2 opsin is a UV light-absorbing state having all-trans-retinal and does not photo-convert to any other state, including the original 11-cis-retinal state. Thus, TMT opsins are diversified so as to form a different type of active state, which may be responsible for their different functions.
BACKGROUND: To compare the expression levels of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) and messenger RNA (mRNA) in pre-receptive endometrium between patients with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)and normal ovulation undergoing in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer (IVF-ET). METHODS: Endometrial tissues were collected with endometrial vacuum curette in pre-receptive phase (3 days after oocytes retrieval) from PCOS and control groups. LncRNAs and mRNAs of endometrium were identified via RNA sequencing and alignments. A subset of 9 differentially expressed lncRNAs and 11 mRNAs were validated by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction(qRT-PCR)in 22 PCOS patients and 18 ovulation patients. The function of mRNAs with differential expression patterns were explored using Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). RESULTS: We found out 687 up-regulated and 680 down-regulated mRNAs, as well as 345 up-regulated and 63 down-regulated lncRNAs in the PCOS patients in contrast to normal ovulation patients. qRT-PCR was used to detect the expression of 11 mRNAs, and validated that the expression of these 6 mRNAs CXCR4, RABL6, OPN3, SYBU, IDH1, NOP10 were significantly elevated among PCOS patients, and the expression of ZEB1 was significantly decreased. qRT-PCR was performed to detect the expression of 9 lncRNAs, and validated that the expression of these 7 lncRNAs IDH1-AS1, PCAT14, FTX, DANCR, PRKCQ-AS1, SNHG8, TPT1-AS1 were significantly enhanced among PCOS patients. Bioinformatics analysis showed that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) involved KEGG pathway were tyrosine metabolism, PI3K-Akt pathway, metabolic pathway, Jak-STAT pathway, pyruvate metabolism, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, oxidative phosphorylation and proteasome. The up-regulation of GO classification was involved in ATP metabolic process, oxidative phosphorylation, RNA catabolic process, and down-regulation of GO classification was response to corticosteroid, steroid hormone, and T cell activation. CONCLUSION: Our results determined the characteristics and expression profile of endometrial lncRNAs and mRNAs in PCOS patients in pre-receptive phase, which is the day 3 after oocytes retrival. The possible pathways and related genes of endometrial receptivity disorders were found, and those lncRNAs may be developed as a predictive biomarker of endometrium in pre-receptive phase.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cancer worldwide, causing over 0.5 million deaths per year, with approximately half of these in China. Chemotherapy is the optimal treatment for patients with advanced HCC, although chemoresistance has become a significant obstacle to successful anti-cancer therapy. The expression of opsin3 (OPN3), also called encephalopsin or panopsin, is lower in 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)-resistant Bel7402(5-FU) cells compared to 5-FU-sensitive Bel7402 cells. To explore the role of OPN3 in 5-FU resistance, OPN3 overexpressing (Bel7402(5-FU)-OPN3) and knockdown (Bel7402-RNAi-OPN3) cell lines were generated. Bel7402(5-FU)-OPN3 cells were more sensitive to 5-FU treatment than controls, while OPN3 knockdown resulted in a significant increase in 5-FU resistance. This result was replicated in a second HCC cell line, HepG2. Further investigation of the mechanism revealed that decreased OPN3 levels in Bel7402(5-FU) cells activated the anti-apoptotic pathway through increasing phospho-Akt and the Bcl2/Bax ratio, while overexpression of OPN3 inactivated this pathway. Taken together, these results suggest that OPN3 depletion is involved in 5-FU resistance, and that therapeutic strategies targeting OPN3 may improve HCC sensitivity to chemotherapy.
