Melanopsin; Photoreceptor required for regulation of circadian rhythm. Contributes to pupillar reflex and other non-image forming responses to light. May be able to isomerize covalently bound all-trans retinal back to 11-cis retinal (By similarity); Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Opsin subfamily.
The choroid embedded in between retina and sclera is essential for retinal photoreceptor nourishment, but is also a source of growth factors in the process of emmetropization that converts retinal visual signals into scleral growth signals. Still, the exact control mechanisms behind those functions are enigmatic while circadian rhythms are involved. These rhythms are attributed to daylight influences that are melanopsin (OPN4) driven. Recently, OPN4-mRNA has been detected in the choroid, and while its origin is unknown we here seek to identify the underlying structures using morphological methods. Human and chicken choroids were prepared for single- and double-immunohistochemistry of OPN4, vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP), substance P (SP), CD68, and alpha-smooth muscle actin (ASMA). For documentation, light-, fluorescence-, and confocal laser scanning microscopy was applied. Retinal controls proved the reliability of the OPN4 antibody in both species. In humans, OPN4 immunoreactivity (OPN4-IR) was detected in nerve fibers of the choroid and adjacent ciliary nerve fibers. OPN4+ choroidal nerve fibers lacked VIP, but were co-localized with SP. OPN4-immunoreactivity was further detected in VIP+/SP + intrinsic choroidal neurons, in a hitherto unclassified CD68-negative choroidal cell population thus not representing macrophages, as well as in a subset of choroidal melanocytes. In chicken, choroidal nerve fibers were OPN4+, and further OPN4-IR was detected in clustered suprachoroidal structures that were not co-localized with ASMA and therefore do not represent non-vascular smooth-muscle cells. In the choroidal stroma, numerous cells displayed OPN4-IR, the majority of which was VIP-, while a few of those co-localized with VIP and were therefore classified as avian intrinsic choroidal neurons. OPN4-immunoreactivity was absent in choroidal blood vessels of both species. In summary, OPN4-IR was detected in both species in nerve fibers and cells, some of which could be identified (ICN, melanocytes in human), while others could not be classified yet. Nevertheless, the OPN4+ structures described here might be involved in developmental, light-, thermally-driven or nociceptive mechanisms, as known from other systems, but with respect to choroidal control this needs to be proven in upcoming studies.
Melanopsin, the photosensory pigment of specialized mammalian retinal ganglion cells, is involved in various non-image forming tasks such as pupillary light reflex, circadian entrainment and irradiance detection. Melanopsin genes have been detected in all vertebrate classes and are resolved in two lineages, Opn4m and Opn4x. In addition, two splice variants have been found in several species leading to a short (OPN4-S) and a long (OPN4-L) isoform, mainly differing in the length of the C terminus. Since its discovery in Xenopus laevis in 1998, this novel photopigment has received tremendous interest, but has been very refractory to the many attempts to unravel its photochemical and structural properties. Largely, some insight has been collected in its downstream signaling. Due to its low natural abundance most molecular data have been gathered via recombinant expression in heterologous hosts. A variety of expression hosts has been utilized, but to date only a restricted set of to some extent conflicting data has become available, which we here aim to put into perspective. We first briefly recall the most popular hosts and solubilization and purification approaches reported for GPCRs. Subsequently, a critical overview is presented of the outcome of the various host systems employed for recombinant expression of melanopsins, categorized by host type. These data finally are compiled in a general conclusion, and followed by a critical assessment and potential future directions.
Objective: To investigate the potential relationship between opsins and photobiomodulation. Background: Opsins and other photoreceptors occur in all phyla and are important in light-activated signaling and organism homeostasis. In addition to the visual opsin systems of the retina (OPN1 and OPN2), there are several non-visual opsins found throughout the body tissues, including encephalopsin/panopsin (OPN3), melanopsin (OPN4), and neuropsin (OPN5), as well as other structures that have light-sensitive properties, such as enzymes, ion channels, particularly those located in cell membranes, lysosomes, and neuronal structures such as the nodes of Ranvier. The influence of these structures on exposure to light, including self-generated light within the body (autofluorescence), on circadian oscillators, and circadian and ultradian rhythms have become increasingly reported. The visual and non-visual phototransduction cascade originating from opsins and other structures has potential significant mechanistic effects on tissues and health. Methods: A PubMed and Google Scholar search was made using the search terms "photobiomodulation", "light", "neuron", "opsins", "neuropsin", "melanopsin", "encephalopsin", "rhodopsin", and "chromophore". Results: This review was examined the influence of neuropsin (also known as kallikrein 8), encephalopsin, and melanopsin specifically on ion channel function, and more broadly on the central and peripheral nervous systems. The relationship between opsins 3, 4, and 5 and photobiomodulation mechanisms was evaluated, along with a proposed role of photobiomodulation through opsins and light-sensitive organelles as potential alleviators of symptoms and accelerators of beneficial regenerative processes. The potential clinical implications of this in musculoskeletal conditions, wounds, and in the symptomatic management of neurodegenerative disease was also examined. Conclusions: Systematic research into the pleotropic therapeutic role of photobiomodulation, mediated through its action on opsins and other light-sensitive organelles may assist in the future execution of safe, low-risk precision medicine for a variety of chronic and complex disease conditions, and for health maintenance in aging.
The search for new therapeutical targets for cutaneous melanoma and other cancers is an ongoing task. We expanded this knowledge by evaluating whether opsins, light- and thermo-sensing proteins, could display tumor-modulatory effects on melanoma cancer. Using different experimental approaches, we show that melanoma cell proliferation is slower in the absence of Opn4, compared to Opn4(WT) due to an impaired cell cycle progression and reduced melanocyte inducing transcription factor (Mitf) expression. In vivo tumor progression of Opn4(KO) cells is remarkably reduced due to slower proliferation, and higher immune system response in Opn4(KO) tumors. Using pharmacological assays, we demonstrate that guanylyl cyclase activity is impaired in Opn4(KO) cells. Evaluation of Tumor Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database confirms our experimental data as reduced MITF and OPN4 expression in human melanoma correlates with slower cell cycle progression and presence of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME). Proteomic analyses of tumor bulk show that the reduced growth of Opn4(KO) tumors is associated with reduced Mitf signaling, higher translation of G2/M proteins, and impaired guanylyl cyclase activity. Conversely, in Opn4(WT) tumors increased small GTPase and an immune-suppressive TME are found. Such evidence points to OPN4 as an oncogene in melanoma, which could be pharmacologically targeted.
Photoreception is essential for the development of the visual system, shaping vision's first synapse to cortical development. Here, we find that the lighting environment controls developmental rod apoptosis via Opn4-expressing intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs). Using genetics, sensory environment manipulations, and computational approaches, we establish a pathway where light-dependent glutamate released from ipRGCs is detected via a transiently expressed glutamate receptor (Grik3) on rod precursors within the inner retina. Communication between these cells is mediated by hybrid neurites on ipRGCs that sense light before eye opening. These structures span the ipRGC-rod precursor distance over development and contain the machinery for photoreception (Opn4) and neurotransmitter release (Vglut2 & Syp). Assessment of the human gestational retina identifies conserved hallmarks of an ipRGC-to-rod axis, including displaced rod precursors, transient GRIK3 expression, and ipRGCs with deep-projecting neurites. This analysis defines an adaptive retrograde pathway linking the sensory environment to rod precursors via ipRGCs prior to eye opening.
Melanopsin (OPN4) is a photosensitive pigment originally found in a subtype of retinal ganglion cells and is a 7-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR). Several previous reports showed that ectopic expression of OPN4 can be used as an optogenetic tool to control neural and cellular activities in various tissues. Compared with other optogenetic pigments, OPN4 is more sensitive to light, shows long-lasting activation, and can also control intracellular Ca(2+) dynamics. Here, we review how the ectopic expression of OPN4 enables the control of neural and cellular activities in vivo. In the retina, the ectopic expression of melanopsin in retinal ganglion cells successfully restored the vision of blind mice. It has also been reported that ectopic expression of melanopsin in orexin/hypocretin neurons enabled control of wakefulness in mice by blue light. In addition to neural activity, the ectopic expression of OPN4 has been reported to enable circuit control of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) to enhance blood-glucose homeostasis in mice. We discuss the possibility of optogenetic control of other systems through the ectopic expression of OPN4.
Melanopsin (Opn4), a ubiquitously expressed photoreceptor in all classes of vertebrates, is crucial for both visual and non-visual signaling. Opn4 supports visual functions of the eye by sensing radiance levels and discriminating contrast and brightness. Non-image-forming functions of Opn4 not only regulate circadian behavior, but also control growth and development processes of the retina. It is unclear how a single photoreceptor could govern such a diverse range of physiological functions; a role in genetic hardwiring could be one explanation, but molecular and mechanistic evidence is lacking. In addition to its role in canonical G(q) pathway activation, here we demonstrate that Opn4 efficiently activates G(i) heterotrimers and signals through the G protein betagamma. Compared with the low levels of G(i) pathway activation observed for several G(q)-coupled receptors, the robust Galpha(i) and Gbetagamma signaling of Opn4 led to both generation of PIP(3) and directional migration of RAW264.7 macrophages. We propose that the ability of Opn4 to signal through Galpha(i) and Gbetagamma subunits is a major contributor to its functional diversity.
Over the past two decades there have been significant advances in our understanding of both the anatomy and function of the melanopsin system. It has become clear that rather than acting as a simple irradiance detector the melanopsin system is in fact far more complicated. The range of behavioural systems known to be influenced by melanopsin activity is increasing with time, and it is now clear that melanopsin contributes not only to multiple non-image forming systems but also has a role in visual pathways. How melanopsin is capable of driving so many different behaviours is unclear, but recent evidence suggests that the answer may lie in the diversity of melanopsin light responses and the functional specialisation of photosensitive retinal ganglion cell (pRGC) subtypes. In this review, we shall overview the current understanding of the melanopsin system, and evaluate the evidence for the hypothesis that individual pRGC subtypes not only perform specific roles, but are functionally specialised to do so. We conclude that while, currently, the available data somewhat support this hypothesis, we currently lack the necessary detail to fully understand how the functional diversity of pRGC subtypes correlates with different behavioural responses, and ultimately why such complexity is required within the melanopsin system. What we are lacking is a cohesive understanding of how light responses differ between the pRGC subtypes (based not only on anatomical classification but also based on their site of innervation); how these diverse light responses are generated, and most importantly how these responses relate to the physiological functions they underpin.
In addition to rods and cones, the mammalian eye contains a third class of photoreceptor, the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cell (ipRGC). ipRGCs are heterogeneous irradiance-encoding neurons that primarily project to non-visual areas of the brain. Characteristics of ipRGC light responses differ significantly from those of rod and cone responses, including depolarization to light, slow on- and off-latencies, and relatively low light sensitivity. All ipRGCs use melanopsin (Opn4) as their photopigment. Melanopsin resembles invertebrate rhabdomeric photopigments more than vertebrate ciliary pigments and uses a G(q) signaling pathway, in contrast to the G(t) pathway used by rods and cones. ipRGCs can recycle chromophore in the absence of the retinal pigment epithelium and are highly resistant to vitamin A depletion. This suggests that melanopsin employs a bistable sequential photon absorption mechanism typical of rhabdomeric opsins.
Until now, melanopsin (OPN4) - a specialized photopigment being responsive especially to blue light wavelengths - has not been found in the human brain at protein level outside the retina. More specifically, OPN4 has only been found in about 2% of retinal ganglion cells (i.e. in intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells), and in a subtype of retinal cone-cells. Given that Allen Institute for Brain Science has described a wide distribution of OPN4 mRNA in two human brains, we aimed to investigate whether OPN4 is present in the human brain also at protein level. Western blotting and immunohistochemistry, as well as immunoelectron microscopy, were used to analyse the existence and distribution of OPN4 protein in 18 investigated areas of the human brain in samples obtained in forensic autopsies from 10 male subjects (54 +/- 3.5 years). OPN4 protein expression was found in all subjects, and, furthermore, in 5 out of 10 subjects in all investigated brain areas localized in membranous compartments and cytoplasmic vesicles of neurons. To our opinion, the wide distribution of OPN4 in central areas of the human brain evokes a question whether ambient light has important straight targets in the human brain outside the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT). Further studies are, however, needed to investigate the putative physiological phototransductive actions of inborn OPN4 protein outside the RHT in the human brain.
Both vertebrates and invertebrates respond to light by utilising a wide-ranging array of photosensory systems, with diverse photoreceptor organs expressing a characteristic photopigment, itself consisting of an opsin apoprotein linked to a light-sensitive retinoid chromophore based on vitamin A. In the eye, the pigments expressed in both cone and rod photoreceptors have been studied in great depth and mediate contrast perception, measurement of the spectral composition of environmental light, and thus classical image forming vision. By contrast, the molecular basis for non-visual and extraocular photoreception is far less understood; however, two photopigment genes have become the focus of much study, the vertebrate ancient (va) opsin and melanopsin (opn4). In this review, we discuss the history of discovery for each gene, as well as focusing on the evolution, expression profile, functional role and broader physiological significance of each photopigment. Recently, it has been suggested independently by Arendt et al. and Lamb that an ancestral opsin bifurcated in early metazoans and evolved into two quite different photopigments, one expressed in rhabdomeric photoreceptors and the other in ciliary photoreceptors. This interpretation of the evolution of the metazoan eye has provided a powerful framework for understanding photobiological organization. Their proposal, however, does not encompass all current experimental observations that would be consistent with what we term a central "Evolution of Photosensory Opsins with Common Heredity (EPOCH)" hypothesis to explain the complexity of animal photosensory systems. Clearly, many opsin genes (e.g. va opsin) simply do not fit neatly within this scheme. Thus, the review concludes with a discussion of these anomalies and their context regarding the phylogeny of photoreceptor and photopigment development.
We recently determined that the excitatory manipulation of Qrfp-expressing neurons in the preoptic area of the hypothalamus (quiescence-inducing neurons [Q neurons]) induced a hibernation-like hypothermic/hypometabolic state (QIH) in mice. To control the QIH with a higher time resolution, we develop an optogenetic method using modified human opsin4 (OPN4; also known as melanopsin), a G protein-coupled-receptor-type blue-light photoreceptor. C-terminally truncated OPN4 (OPN4dC) stably and reproducibly induces QIH for at least 24 h by illumination with low-power light (3 muW, 473 nm laser) with high temporal resolution. The high sensitivity of OPN4dC allows us to transcranially stimulate Q neurons with blue-light-emitting diodes and non-invasively induce the QIH. OPN4dC-mediated QIH recapitulates the kinetics of the physiological changes observed in natural hibernation, revealing that Q neurons concurrently contribute to thermoregulation and cardiovascular function. This optogenetic method may facilitate identification of the neural mechanisms underlying long-term dormancy states such as sleep, daily torpor, and hibernation.
PURPOSE: The post-illumination pupil response (PIPR) has been quantified using four metrics, but the spectral sensitivity of only one is known; here we determine the other three. To optimize the human PIPR measurement, we determine the protocol producing the largest PIPR, the duration of the PIPR, and the metric(s) with the lowest coefficient of variation. METHODS: The consensual pupil light reflex (PLR) was measured with a Maxwellian view pupillometer. Experiment 1: Spectral sensitivity of four PIPR metrics (plateau, 6 seconds, area under curve early and late recovery) was determined from a criterion PIPR to a 1-second pulse and fitted with vitamin A1 nomogram (lambda(max) = 482 nm). Experiment 2: The PLR was measured as a function of three stimulus durations (1 second, 10 seconds, 30 seconds), five irradiances spanning low to high melanopsin excitation levels (retinal irradiance: 9.8-14.8 log quanta.cm(-2).s(-1)), and two wavelengths, one with high (465 nm) and one with low (637 nm) melanopsin excitation. Intra- and interindividual coefficients of variation (CV) were calculated. RESULTS: The melanopsin (opn4) photopigment nomogram adequately describes the spectral sensitivity of all four PIPR metrics. The PIPR amplitude was largest with 1-second short-wavelength pulses (>/= 12.8 log quanta.cm(-2).s(-1)). The plateau and 6-second PIPR showed the least intra- and interindividual CV (</= 0.2). The maximum duration of the sustained PIPR was 83.0 +/- 48.0 seconds (mean +/- SD) for 1-second pulses and 180.1 +/- 106.2 seconds for 30-second pulses (465 nm; 14.8 log quanta.cm(-2).s(-1)). CONCLUSIONS: All current PIPR metrics provide a direct measure of the intrinsic melanopsin photoresponse. To measure progressive changes in melanopsin function in disease, we recommend that the PIPR be measured using short-duration pulses (e.g., </= 1 second) with high melanopsin excitation and analyzed with plateau and/or 6-second metrics. Our PIPR duration data provide a baseline for the selection of interstimulus intervals between consecutive pupil testing sequences.
Among osteopontin splice variants (OPN-SV), the expression profile of osteopontin-4 (OPN4) and osteopontin-5 (OPN5) has not been addressed in distinct cancer types. We herein aimed to investigate their expression in several cancer cell lines, besides comparing it in relation to the three previously described OPN-SV: OPNa, OPNb and OPNc. Total RNA from cancer cell lines, including prostate (PC3 and DU145), ovarian (A2780), breast (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231), colorectal (Caco-2, HT-29 and HCT-116), thyroid (TT, TPC1 and 8505c) and lung (A549 and NCI-H460) was extracted, followed by cDNA synthesis. OPN-SV transcript analysis by RT-PCR or RT-qPCR were performed using OPN-SV specific oligonucleotides and gapdh and actin transcripts were used as housekeeping controls. OPN4 and OPN5 transcripts displayed co-expression in most tested cell lines. OPN4 was found expressed in similar or higher levels in relation to OPN5. Moreover, in most tested cell lines, OPN4 is also expressed in similar levels to OPNa or OPNb. The expression of OPN5 is also generally variable in relation to the other OPN-SV, but expressed in similar or higher levels in relation to OPNc, depending on each tested cell line. OPN4 and OPN5 seem to be co-expressed in several tumor types and OPN4 is one of the most overexpressed OPN-SV in distinct tumor cell lines. Once both OPN4 and OPN5 are differentially expressed and also evidence tumor-specific expression patterns, we hypothesize that similarly to the other OPN-SV, they also possibly contribute to key aspects of tumor progression, what should be further functionally investigated in distinct tumor models.
The human skin has previously been described to be affected by light; however, the underlying mechanism remains unknown. OPN4 (melanopsin) expression was first identified in the skin of amphibians; however, whether it is also expressed and functioned in the human skin has not yet been identified. Here, we show that OPN4 was expressed in the human skin tissue and cultures of isolated keratinocytes, melanocytes and fibroblasts. Additionally, Ca(2+) influx in vitro and ex vivo and phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 in human fibroblasts were observed by stimulation of blue light irradiation. Notably, our findings showed that this Ca(2+) influx and phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 are promoted in an intensity-dependent manner, indicating that the light signal is converted to an intracellular signal via OPN4 in the human skin. Overall, in this study we showed that the human skin functions as a photoreceptor by demonstrating that in human skin, the photoreceptive protein was expressed, and photoreception was conducted via photoreceptive protein.
The mammalian skin has a photosensitive system comprised by several opsins, including rhodopsin (OPN2) and melanopsin (OPN4). Recently, our group showed that UVA (4.4 kJ/m(2)) leads to immediate pigment darkening (IPD) in murine normal and malignant melanocytes. We show the role of OPN2 and OPN4 as UVA sensors: UVA-induced IPD was fully abolished when OPN4 was pharmacologically inhibited by AA9253 or when OPN2 and OPN4 were knocked down by siRNA in both cell lines. Our data, however, demonstrate that phospholipase C/protein kinase C pathway, a classical OPN4 pathway, is not involved in UVA-induced IPD in either cell line. Nonetheless, in both cell types we have shown that: a) intracellular calcium signal is necessary for UVA-induced IPD; b) the involvement of CaMK II, whose inhibition, abolished the UVA-induced IPD; c) the role of CAMK II/NOS/sGC/cGMP pathway in the process since inhibition of either NOS or sGC abolished the UVA-induced IPD. Taken altogether, we show that OPN2 and OPN4 participate in IPD induced by UVA in murine normal and malignant melanocytes through a conserved common pathway. Interestingly, upon knockdown of OPN2 or OPN4, the UVA-driven IPD is completely lost, which suggests that both opsins are required and cooperatively signal in murine both cell lines. The participation of OPN2 and OPN4 system in UVA radiation-induced response, if proven to take place in human skin, may represent an interesting pharmacological target for the treatment of depigmentary disorders and skin-related cancer.
Melanopsin confers photosensitivity to a subset of retinal ganglion cells and is responsible for many non-image-forming tasks, like the detection of light for circadian entrainment. Recently, two melanopsin genes, Opn4m and Opn4x, were described in non-mammalian vertebrates. However, only one form, Opn4m, has been described in the mammals, although studies to date have been limited to the placentals and have not included the marsupials. We report here the isolation and characterization of an Opn4 gene from an Australian marsupial, the fat-tailed dunnart (Sminthopsis crassicaudata), and present evidence which suggests that the Opn4x gene was lost before the placental/marsupial split. In situ hybridization shows that the expression of Opn4 in the dunnart eye is restricted to a subset of ganglion cells, a pattern previously reported for rodents and primates. These Opn4-positive cells are randomly distributed across the dunnart retina. We also undertook a comparative analysis with the South American marsupial, the grey short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica), and two placental mammals, mouse and human. This approach reveals that the two marsupials show a higher sequence identity than that seen between rodents and primates, despite separating at approximately the same point in time, some 65-85 Myr ago.
