Opsin-5; Opsin 5.
Myopia has become a major public health concern, particularly across much of Asia. It has been shown in multiple studies that outdoor activity has a protective effect on myopia. Recent reports have shown that short-wavelength visible violet light is the component of sunlight that appears to play an important role in preventing myopia progression in mice, chicks, and humans. The mechanism underlying this effect has not been understood. Here, we show that violet light prevents lens defocus-induced myopia in mice. This violet light effect was dependent on both time of day and retinal expression of the violet light sensitive atypical opsin, neuropsin (OPN5). These findings identify Opn5-expressing retinal ganglion cells as crucial for emmetropization in mice and suggest a strategy for myopia prevention in humans.
Neuropsin is a brain-expressed extracellular matrix serine protease that governs synaptic plasticity through activity-induced proteolytic cleavage of synaptic proteins. Its substrates comprise several molecules central to structural synaptic plasticity, and studies in rodents have documented its role in cognition and the behavioral and neurobiological response to stress. Intriguingly, differential usage of KLK8 (neuropsin gene) splice forms in the fetal and adult brain has only been reported in humans, suggesting that neuropsin may serve a specialized role in human neurodevelopment. Through systematic interrogation of large-scale genetic data, we review KLK8 regulation in the context of mental health and provide a summary of clinical and preclinical evidence supporting a role for neuropsin in the pathogenesis of mental illness.
The ability to detect and adapt to different levels of ambient light is critical for animal survival. Light detection is the basis of vision, but light also regulates eye development and drives several non-image-forming functions, including synchronizing circadian rhythms to the daily light/dark cycle, restricting pupils in response to changes in light intensity, and modulating mood in response to light. Until the early 2000s, these functions were thought to be solely mediated by ocular photoreceptors. However, neuropsin (OPN5), a UV-sensitive opsin, has been receiving growing attention, as new methods have revealed previously unappreciated functions of OPN5. In fact, OPN5-mediated extraocular and deep-brain photoreception have recently been described for the first time in mammals. This review aims to synthesize current knowledge of the properties and functions of OPN5 across vertebrates.
We live on a planet that is bathed in daily and seasonal sunlight cycles. In this context, terrestrial life forms have evolved mechanisms that directly harness light energy (plants) or decode light information for adaptive advantage. In animals, the main light sensors are a family of G protein-coupled receptors called opsins. Opsin function is best described for the visual sense. However, most animals also use opsins for extraocular light sensing for seasonal behavior and camouflage. While it has long been believed that mammals do not have an extraocular light sensing capacity, recent evidence suggests otherwise. Notably, encephalopsin (OPN3) and neuropsin (OPN5) are both known to mediate extraocular light sensing in mice. Examples of this mediation include photoentrainment of circadian clocks in skin (by OPN5) and acute light-dependent regulation of metabolic pathways (by OPN3 and OPN5). This review summarizes current findings in the expanding field of extraocular photoreception and their relevance for human physiology.
Objective: To investigate the potential relationship between opsins and photobiomodulation. Background: Opsins and other photoreceptors occur in all phyla and are important in light-activated signaling and organism homeostasis. In addition to the visual opsin systems of the retina (OPN1 and OPN2), there are several non-visual opsins found throughout the body tissues, including encephalopsin/panopsin (OPN3), melanopsin (OPN4), and neuropsin (OPN5), as well as other structures that have light-sensitive properties, such as enzymes, ion channels, particularly those located in cell membranes, lysosomes, and neuronal structures such as the nodes of Ranvier. The influence of these structures on exposure to light, including self-generated light within the body (autofluorescence), on circadian oscillators, and circadian and ultradian rhythms have become increasingly reported. The visual and non-visual phototransduction cascade originating from opsins and other structures has potential significant mechanistic effects on tissues and health. Methods: A PubMed and Google Scholar search was made using the search terms "photobiomodulation", "light", "neuron", "opsins", "neuropsin", "melanopsin", "encephalopsin", "rhodopsin", and "chromophore". Results: This review was examined the influence of neuropsin (also known as kallikrein 8), encephalopsin, and melanopsin specifically on ion channel function, and more broadly on the central and peripheral nervous systems. The relationship between opsins 3, 4, and 5 and photobiomodulation mechanisms was evaluated, along with a proposed role of photobiomodulation through opsins and light-sensitive organelles as potential alleviators of symptoms and accelerators of beneficial regenerative processes. The potential clinical implications of this in musculoskeletal conditions, wounds, and in the symptomatic management of neurodegenerative disease was also examined. Conclusions: Systematic research into the pleotropic therapeutic role of photobiomodulation, mediated through its action on opsins and other light-sensitive organelles may assist in the future execution of safe, low-risk precision medicine for a variety of chronic and complex disease conditions, and for health maintenance in aging.
A variety of animal species utilize the ultraviolet (UV) component of sunlight as their environmental cues, whereas physiological roles of UV photoreception in mammals, especially in human beings, remain open questions. Here we report that mouse neuropsin (OPN5) encoded by the Opn5 gene exhibited an absorption maximum (lambdamax) at 380 nm when reconstituted with 11-cis-retinal. Upon UV-light illumination, OPN5 was converted to a blue-absorbing photoproduct (lambdamax 470 nm), which was stable in the dark and reverted to the UV-absorbing state by the subsequent orange light illumination, indicating its bistable nature. Human OPN5 also had an absorption maximum at 380 nm with spectral properties similar to mouse OPN5, revealing that OPN5 is the first and hitherto unknown human opsin with peak sensitivity in the UV region. OPN5 was capable of activating heterotrimeric G protein Gi in a UV-dependent manner. Immuno-blotting analyses of mouse tissue extracts identified the retina, the brain and, unexpectedly, the outer ears as the major sites of OPN5 expression. In the tissue sections of mice, OPN5 immuno-reactivities were detected in a subset of non-rod/non-cone retinal neurons as well as in the epidermal and muscle cells of the outer ears. Most of these OPN5-immuno-reactivities in mice were co-localized with positive signals for the alpha-subunit of Gi. These results demonstrate the first example of UV photoreceptor in human beings and strongly suggest that OPN5 triggers a UV-sensitive Gi-mediated signaling pathway in the mammalian tissues.
Among osteopontin splice variants (OPN-SV), the expression profile of osteopontin-4 (OPN4) and osteopontin-5 (OPN5) has not been addressed in distinct cancer types. We herein aimed to investigate their expression in several cancer cell lines, besides comparing it in relation to the three previously described OPN-SV: OPNa, OPNb and OPNc. Total RNA from cancer cell lines, including prostate (PC3 and DU145), ovarian (A2780), breast (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231), colorectal (Caco-2, HT-29 and HCT-116), thyroid (TT, TPC1 and 8505c) and lung (A549 and NCI-H460) was extracted, followed by cDNA synthesis. OPN-SV transcript analysis by RT-PCR or RT-qPCR were performed using OPN-SV specific oligonucleotides and gapdh and actin transcripts were used as housekeeping controls. OPN4 and OPN5 transcripts displayed co-expression in most tested cell lines. OPN4 was found expressed in similar or higher levels in relation to OPN5. Moreover, in most tested cell lines, OPN4 is also expressed in similar levels to OPNa or OPNb. The expression of OPN5 is also generally variable in relation to the other OPN-SV, but expressed in similar or higher levels in relation to OPNc, depending on each tested cell line. OPN4 and OPN5 seem to be co-expressed in several tumor types and OPN4 is one of the most overexpressed OPN-SV in distinct tumor cell lines. Once both OPN4 and OPN5 are differentially expressed and also evidence tumor-specific expression patterns, we hypothesize that similarly to the other OPN-SV, they also possibly contribute to key aspects of tumor progression, what should be further functionally investigated in distinct tumor models.
Epidermal melanocytes sense solar light via the opsin-coupled signaling pathway which is involved in a range of biological functions, including regulating pigmentation, proliferation, apoptosis, and tumorigenesis. However, it remains unclear whether there are genetic variants within these opsins that affect opsin protein structure and function, and further melanocyte biological behaviors. Here, we examined single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) of five opsin (RGR, OPN1SW, OPN2, OPN4, and OPN5) genes in MM (malignant melanoma; n = 76) and MN (melanocytic nevi; n = 157), using next-generation sequencing. The effects of these pathogenic single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) on opsin structure and function were further investigated using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, dynamic cross-correlation (DCC), and site-directed mutagenesis. In total, 107 SNV variants were identified. Of these variants, 14 nonsynonymous SNVs (nsSNVs) of opsin genes were detected, including three mutations in the RGR gene, three mutations in the OPN1SW gene, two mutations in the OPN2 gene, and six mutations in the OPN4 gene. The effect of these missense mutations on opsin function was then assessed using eight prediction tools to estimate the potential impact of an amino acid substitution. The impact of each nsSNV was investigated using MD simulations and DCC analysis. Furthermore, we performed in vitro fluorescence calcium imaging to assess the functional properties of nsSNV proteins using a site-directed mutagenesis method. Taken together, these results revealed that p.A103V (RGR), p.T167I (RGR), p.G141S (OPN1SW), p.R144C (OPN1SW), and p.S231F (OPN4) had more deleterious effects on protein structure and function among the 14 nsSNVs. Opsin gene alterations showed the low frequency of missense mutations in melanocytic tumors, and although rare, some mutations in these opsin genes disrupt the canonical function of opsin. Our findings provide new insight into the role of opsin variants in the loss of function.
Human skin is constantly exposed to solar light containing visible and ultraviolet radiation (UVR), a powerful skin carcinogen. UVR elicits cellular responses in epidermal cells via several mechanisms: direct absorption of short-wavelength UVR photons by DNA, oxidative damage caused by long-wavelength UVR, and, as we recently demonstrated, via a retinal-dependent G protein-coupled signaling pathway. Because the human epidermis is exposed to a wide range of light wavelengths, we investigated whether opsins, light-activated receptors that mediate photoreception in the eye, are expressed in epidermal skin to potentially serve as photosensors. Here we show that four opsins-OPN1-SW, OPN2, OPN3 and OPN5-are expressed in the two major human epidermal cell types, melanocytes and keratinocytes, and the mRNA expression profile of these opsins does not change in response to physiological UVR doses. We detected two OPN3 splice variants present in similar amounts in both cell types and three OPN5 splice isoforms, two of which encode truncated proteins. Notably, OPN2 and OPN3 mRNA were significantly more abundant than other opsins and encoded full-length proteins. Our results demonstrate that opsins are expressed in epidermal skin cells and suggest that they might initiate light-induced signaling pathways, possibly contributing to UVR phototransduction.
We have cloned and characterised the expression of a new opsin gene, neuropsin (Opn5), in mice and humans. Neuropsin comprises seven exons on mouse chromosome 17. Its deduced protein sequence suggests a polypeptide of 377 amino acids in mice (354 in humans), with many structural features common to all opsins, including a lysine in the seventh transmembrane domain required to form a Schiff base link with retinaldehyde. Neuropsin shares 25-30% amino acid identity with all known opsins, making it the founding member of a new opsin family. It is expressed in the eye, brain, testis and spinal cord.
Osteopontin (OPN) is a multifunctional glycoprotein that physiologically interacts with different types of integrins. It is considered to be a possible prognostic biomarker in certain tumor types; however, various splicing isoforms exist, which have not been investigated in melanoma. We aimed to define the relative expression pattern of five OPN isoforms and clarify the prognostic significance of the splice variants in melanoma. We also aimed to investigate the expression pattern of eight integrins in the same tumors. Gene expression analyses revealed that the relative expression of OPNa, OPNb, and OPNc is significantly higher in metastatic tumors compared to primary lesions (p < 0.01), whereas the expression of OPN4 and OPN5 was low in both. The more aggressive nodular melanomas had higher expression levels compared to the superficial spreading subtype (p </= 0.05). The relative expression of the eight tested integrins was low, with only the expression of ITGB3 being detectable in nodular melanoma (Median(log2) = 1.274). A positive correlation was found between Breslow thickness and the expression of OPNc variant, whereby thicker tumors (>4 mm) had significantly higher expression (p </= 0.05). The Breslow thickness was negatively correlated with the expression of OPN4, and similarly with ITGA2. OPNc also exhibited significant positive correlation with the presence of metastasis. Our data show that high expression of OPNa, OPNb, and especially OPNc and low expression of OPN4 and ITGA2 are associated with an advanced stage of tumor progression and poor prognosis in melanoma.
Opn5 is one of the recently identified opsin groups that is responsible for nonvisual photoreception in animals. We previously showed that a chicken homolog of mammalian Opn5 (Opn5m) is a Gi-coupled UV sensor having molecular properties typical of bistable pigments. Here we demonstrated that mammalian Opn5m evolved to be a more specialized photosensor by losing one of the characteristics of bistable pigments, direct binding of all-trans-retinal. We first confirmed that Opn5m proteins in zebrafish, Xenopus tropicalis, mouse, and human are also UV-sensitive pigments. Then we found that only mammalian Opn5m proteins lack the ability to directly bind all-trans-retinal. Mutational analysis showed that these characteristics were acquired by a single amino acid replacement at position 168. By comparing the expression patterns of Opn5m between mammals and chicken, we found that, like chicken Opn5m, mammalian Opn5m was localized in the ganglion cell layer and inner nuclear layer of the retina. However, the mouse and primate (common marmoset) opsins were distributed not in the posterior hypothalamus (including the region along the third ventricle) where chicken Opn5m is localized, but in the preoptic hypothalamus. Interestingly, RPE65, an essential enzyme for forming 11-cis-retinal in the visual cycle is expressed near the preoptic hypothalamus of the mouse and common marmoset brain but not near the region of the chicken brain where chicken Opn5m is expressed. Therefore, mammalian Opn5m may work exclusively as a short wavelength sensor in the brain as well as in the retina with the assistance of an 11-cis-retinal-supplying system.
Animals have evolved light-sensitive G protein-coupled receptors, known as opsins, to detect coherent and ambient light for visual and nonvisual functions. These opsins have evolved to satisfy the particular lighting niches of the organisms that express them. While many unique patterns of evolution have been identified in mammals for rod and cone opsins, far less is known about the atypical mammalian opsins. Using genomic data from over 400 mammalian species from 22 orders, unique patterns of evolution for each mammalian opsins were identified, including photoisomerases, RGR-opsin (RGR) and peropsin (RRH), as well as atypical opsins, encephalopsin (OPN3), melanopsin (OPN4), and neuropsin (OPN5). The results demonstrate that OPN5 and rhodopsin show extreme conservation across all mammalian lineages. The cone opsins, SWS1 and LWS, and the nonvisual opsins, OPN3 and RRH, demonstrate a moderate degree of sequence conservation relative to other opsins, with some instances of lineage-specific gene loss. Finally, the photoisomerase, RGR, and the best-studied atypical opsin, OPN4, have high sequence diversity within mammals. These conservation patterns are maintained in human populations. Importantly, all mammalian opsins retain key amino acid residues important for conjugation to retinal-based chromophores, permitting light sensitivity. These patterns of evolution are discussed along with known functions of each atypical opsin, such as in circadian or metabolic physiology, to provide insight into the observed patterns of evolutionary constraint.
Opn5 (neuropsin) belongs to an independent group separated from the other six groups in the phylogenetic tree of opsins, for which little information of absorption characteristics and molecular properties of the members is available. Here we show that the chicken Opn5 (cOpn5m) is a UV-sensitive bistable pigment that couples with Gi subtype of G protein. The recombinant expression of cOpn5m in HEK 293s cells followed by the addition of 11-cis- and all-trans-retinal produced UV light-absorbing and visible light-absorbing forms, respectively. These forms were interconvertible by UV and visible light irradiations, respectively, indicating that cOpn5m is a bistable pigment. The absorption maxima of these forms were estimated to be 360 and 474 nm, respectively. The GTPgammaS binding assay clearly showed that the visible light-absorbing form having all-trans-retinal activates Gi type of G protein, whereas no Gt or Gq activation ability was observed. Immunohistochemical studies using an antibody against cOpn5m clearly showed that this pigment is localized within some types of amacrine cells and some cells in the ganglion cell layer of the retinas, the vast majority of cells in the pineal gland and serotonin-positive cells in the paraventricular organ. Because cOpn5m is the only UV-sensitive opsin among the opsins found so far in chicken, this study provides the molecular basis for UV reception in chicken.
PURPOSE: To determine whether the human Muller cell line Moorfields/Institute of Ophthalmology-Muller 1 (MIO-M1) expresses opsins. METHODS: The gene expression of opsins was determined by reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR). The presence of opsin proteins was determined by western blotting and immunocytochemistry. The light sensitivity of the cells was examined with imaging experiments using the calcium-sensitive dye Fluo-4. RESULTS: MIO-M1 cells express glial (glutamine synthase [GLUL], vimentin [VIM], glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP], cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein [RLBP1], glial high-affinity glutamate transporter [SLCA1], aquaporin-4 [AQP4], inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir4.1 [Kir4.1]), neuronal (Thy-1 cell surface antigen [THY1], heavy neurofilament polypeptide [NEFH], microtubule-associated protein 2 [MAP2], neurogenic differentiation 1 [NEUROD1], neuronal nuclei [NEUN]), and neural progenitor markers (Nestin [NES], paired-type homeobox transcription factor [PAX6], neurogenic locus notch homolog 1 [NOTCH1]). The cells contain mRNA for the following opsins: blue opsin (OPN1SW), rhodopsin (OPN2), panopsin (OPN3), melanopsin (OPN4), neuropsin (OPN5), and peropsin (RRH), as well as for the transducins (guanine nucleotide binding protein [GNAZ], alpha transducing activity polypeptide 1 [GNAT1], alpha transducing activity polypeptide 2 [GNAT2]). The presence of blue opsin and melanopsin was confirmed with immunocytochemistry and western blotting. The immunoreactivity and mRNA of red-green opsin were found in some but not all cultures, while the immunoreactivity for rhodopsin was absent in all cultures investigated. Repetitive stimulation with 480 nm light evoked slow and fast transient calcium responses in the majority of cells investigated, while irradiation with 600 nm light was ineffective. CONCLUSIONS: The human Muller cell line MIO-M1 expresses opsins. This suggests immortalized Muller cells could be used as a cellular source to produce human opsins for their potential application as therapeutic agents in patients with retinitis pigmentosa.
Molecular imaging is a powerful tool for investigating intracellular signalling, but it is difficult to acquire conventional fluorescence imaging from photoreceptive cells. Here we demonstrated that human opsin5 (OPN5) photoreceptor mediates light-induced Ca(2+) response in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) and mouse neuroblastoma (Neuro2a) cell lines using a luminescence imaging system with a fluorescent indicator and a newly synthesized bioluminescent indicator. Weak light fluorescence and bioluminescence imaging revealed rapid and transient light-stimulated Ca(2+) release from thapsigargin-sensitive Ca(2+) stores, whereas long-lasting Ca(2+) elevation was observed using a conventional fluorescence imaging system. Bioluminescence imaging also demonstrated that OPN5 activation in HEK293 cells induced a decrease in pertussis toxin-sensitive cAMP, confirming previous reports. In addition, ultraviolet radiation induced the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases when OPN5 was stimulated in Neuro2a cells. These findings suggest that the combination of these imaging approaches may provide a new means to investigate the physiological characteristics of photoreceptors.
The vertebrate retina is known to contain three classes of photoreceptor cells: cones and rods responsible for vision, and intrinsically photoresponsive retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) involved in diverse non-visual functions such as photic entrainment of daily rhythms and pupillary light responses. In this paper we investigated the potential intrinsic photoresponsiveness of the rat RGC line, RGC-5, by testing for the presence of visual and non-visual opsins and assessing expression of the immediate-early gene protein c-Fos and changes in intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization in response to brief light pulses. Cultured RGC-5 cells express a number of photopigment mRNAs such as retinal G protein coupled receptor (RGR), encephalopsin/panopsin (Opn3), neuropsin (Opn5) and cone opsin (Opn1mw) but not melanopsin (Opn4) or rhodopsin. Opn5 immunoreactivity was observed in RGC-5 cells and in the inner retina of rat, mainly localized in the ganglion cell layer (GCL). Furthermore, white light pulses of different intensities and durations elicited changes both in intracellular Ca(2+) levels and in the induction of c-Fos protein in RGC-5 cell cultures. The results demonstrate that RGC-5 cells expressing diverse putative functional photopigments display intrinsic photosensitivity which accounts for the photic induction of c-Fos protein and changes in intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization. The presence of Opn5 in the GCL of the rat retina suggests the existence of a novel type of photoreceptor cell.
Osteopontin (OPN) is a secreted integrin-binding protein that plays a role in inflammation, cellular viability, cell adhesion and migration, cancer development, and diabetes through different mechanisms. The splice variants of OPN can play essential roles in cancer development, progression, and metastasis formation; however, limited data are available about the role of OPN isoforms in human malignant melanoma. Our goal was to define the gene expression patterns of five OPN variants (OPN4, OPN5, OPNa, OPNb, and OPNc), integrin, and CD44 receptor genes in primary and metastatic melanoma-originated cell lines (n = 19), and to explore the association of the expression patterns with clinicopathological parameters. We evaluated the invasive property of the cell lines and investigated the potential association between the invasion and gene expression of OPN isoforms. We found a significant rise in the expression of OPNc in the invasive cell lines compared to the noninvasive cells and detected significantly higher expression of the OPN splice variants in melanoma cell lines originating from more advanced stages tumors than cell lines originating from early-stage melanomas. The correlation analysis revealed that all five OPN variants positively correlated with ITGB3 and ITGA9, whereas OPN5 positively correlated with ITGB1, ITGAV, ITGA6, and CD44. OPN can activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling through binding to alpha9beta1 integrin, promoting melanoma tumor cell migration. It is possible that such associations between OPN splice variants and integrin receptors may play a role in melanoma progression. In conclusion, our findings suggest that high expression of OPNc correlates with the invasive behavior of melanoma cells.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Visible light has beneficial effects on cutaneous wound healing, but the role of potential photoreceptors in human skin is unknown. In addition, inconsistency in the parameters of blue and red light-based therapies for skin conditions makes interpretation difficult. Red light can activate cytochrome c oxidase and has been proposed as a wound healing therapy. UV-blue light can activate Opsin 1-SW, Opsin 2, Opsin 3, Opsin 4, and Opsin 5 receptors, triggering biological responses, but their role in human skin physiology is unclear. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Localization of Opsins was analyzed in situ in human skin derived from face and abdomen by immunohistochemistry. An ex vivo human skin wound healing model was established and expression of Opsins confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The rate of wound closure was quantitated after irradiation with blue and red light and mRNA was extracted from the regenerating epithelial tongue by laser micro-dissection to detect changes in Opsin 3 (OPN3) expression. Retention of the expression of Opsins in primary cultures of human epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts was confirmed by qRT-PCR and immunocytochemistry. Modulation of metabolic activity by visible light was studied. Furthermore, migration in a scratch-wound assay, DNA synthesis and differentiation of epidermal keratinocytes was established following irradiation with blue light. A role for OPN3 in keratinocytes was investigated by gene silencing. RESULTS: Opsin receptors (OPN1-SW, 3 and 5) were similarly localized in the epidermis of human facial and abdominal skin in situ. Corresponding expression was confirmed in the regenerating epithelial tongue of ex vivo wounds after 2 days in culture, and irradiation with blue light stimulated wound closure, with a corresponding increase in OPN3 expression. Expression of Opsins was retained in primary cultures of epidermal keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts. Both blue and red light stimulated the metabolic activity of cultured keratinocytes. Low levels of blue light reduced DNA synthesis and stimulated differentiation of keratinocytes. While low levels of blue light did not alter keratinocyte migration in a scratch wound assay, higher levels inhibited migration. Gene silencing of OPN3 in keratinocytes was effective (87% reduction). The rate of DNA synthesis in OPN3 knockdown keratinocytes did not change following irradiation with blue light, however, the level of differentiation was decreased. CONCLUSIONS: Opsins are expressed in the epidermis and dermis of human skin and in the newly regenerating epidermis following wounding. An increase in OPN3 expression in the epithelial tongue may be a potential mechanism for the stimulation of wound closure by blue light. Since keratinocytes and fibroblasts retain their expression of Opsins in culture, they provide a good model to investigate the mechanism of blue light in wound healing responses. Knockdown of OPN3 led to a reduction in early differentiation of keratinocytes following irradiation with blue light, suggesting OPN3 is required for restoration of the barrier function. Understanding the function and relationship of different photoreceptors and their response to specific light parameters will lead to the development of reliable light-based therapies for cutaneous wound healing. Lasers Surg. Med. (c) 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
The study evaluated whether SPP1/osteopontin (OPN) splice variants are differentially expressed in nonmelanoma skin cancer compared to normal skin. The absolute number of mRNA molecules of OPN-a predominated in normal skin and nonmelanoma skin cancer compared to OPN-b, OPN-c, and OPN-5. However, mRNAs of OPN-a, OPN-b, and OPN-c were expressed in higher levels in cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (cSCCs) and basal cell carcinomas relative to normal skin. Additionally, OPN-5 expression was higher than OPN-b and OPN-c, and OPN-c, in normal skin and nonmelanoma skin cancer, respectively. Furthermore, we identified four OPN-5 splice variants, which were cloned and analyzed for protein expression.
