Delta-type opioid receptor; G-protein coupled receptor that functions as receptor for endogenous enkephalins and for a subset of other opioids. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling leads to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity. Inhibits neurotransmitter release by reducing calcium ion currents and increasing potassium ion conductance. Plays a role in the perception of pain and in opiate-mediated analgesia.  [...] 
The OPRD1 gene encodes the delta-opioid receptor, which has multiple functions including regulating reward pathways. The gene contains more than 2,000 verified genetic variants but only 2 currently have evidence for specific functions: rs1042114 disrupts maturation of the receptor and rs569356 affects OPRD1 expression. These polymorphisms and others in the gene have been found to be associated with human diseases. The most reproducible data are associations between opioid addiction and three variants in intron 1 (rs2236861, rs2236857, and rs3766951), which have been described in a number of independent populations. Several publications also point toward an association between anorexia and a haplotype block containing rs569356 and rs533123. Unfortunately the mechanisms underlying these two effects are currently unknown. In contrast, rs1042114 has been linked to Alzheimer's disease through an increasingly well-defined mechanism by which the variant allele reduces production of the beta-amyloid plaques associated with the disease. Additional studies of OPRD1 variants are necessary to replicate current findings and to delineate the functional roles of relevant polymorphisms.
Psychopathy is an extreme form of antisocial behavior, with about 1% prevalence in the general population, and 10-30% among incarcerated criminal offenders. Although the heritability of severe antisocial behavior is up to 50%, the genetic background is unclear. The underlying molecular mechanisms have remained unknown but several previous studies suggest that abnormal glucose metabolism and opioidergic neurotransmission contribute to violent offending and psychopathy. Here we show using iPSC-derived cortical neurons and astrocytes from six incarcerated extremely antisocial and violent offenders, three nonpsychopathic individuals with substance abuse, and six healthy controls that there are robust alterations in the expression of several genes and immune response-related molecular pathways which were specific for psychopathy. In neurons, psychopathy was associated with marked upregulation of RPL10P9 and ZNF132, and downregulation of CDH5 and OPRD1. In astrocytes, RPL10P9 and MT-RNR2 were upregulated. Expression of aforementioned genes explained 30-92% of the variance of psychopathic symptoms. The gene expression findings were confirmed with qPCR. These genes may be relevant to the lack of empathy and emotional callousness seen in psychopathy, since several studies have linked these genes to autism and social interaction.
Opioid use disorder (OUD) affects millions of people worldwide and the risk of developing the disorder has a significant genetic component according to twin and family studies. Identification of the genetic variants underlying this inherited risk has focused on two different methods: candidate gene studies and genome-wide association studies (GWAS). The most studied candidate genes have included the mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1), the delta-opioid receptor (OPRD1), the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2), and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Variants in these genes have been associated with relatively small, but reproducible, effects on OUD risk. More recently, GWAS have identified potential associations with variants in KCNG2, KCNC1, CNIH3, APBB2, and RGMA. In total the genetic associations identified so far explain only a small portion of OUD risk. GWAS of OUD is still in the early stages when compared to studies of other psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, which have found many relevant variants with small effect sizes only after large meta-analyses. Substantial increases in cohort sizes will likely be necessary in the OUD field to achieve similar results. In addition, it will be important for future studies of OUD to incorporate rare variants, epigenetics, and gene x environment interactions into models in order to better explain the observed heritability.
AMBRA1 autophagy and beclin 1 regulator 1; ATG14 autophagy related 14; ATG5 autophagy related 5; ATG7 autophagy related 7; BECN1 beclin 1; BECN2 beclin 2; CC coiled-coil; CQ chloroquine CNR1/CB1R cannabinoid receptor 1 DAPI 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; dCCD delete CCD; DRD2/D2R dopamine receptor D2 GPRASP1/GASP1 G protein-coupled receptor associated sorting protein 1 GPCR G-protein coupled receptor; ITC isothermal titration calorimetry; IP immunoprecipitation; KD knockdown; KO knockout; MAP1LC3/LC3 microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; NRBF2 nuclear receptor binding factor 2; OPRD1/DOR opioid receptor delta 1 PIK3C3/VPS34 phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PIK3R4/VPS15 phosphoinositide-3-kinase regulatory subunit 4; PtdIns3K class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PtdIns3P phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; RUBCN rubicon autophagy regulator; SQSTM1/p62 sequestosome 1; UVRAG UV radiation resistance associated; VPS vacuolar protein sorting; WT wild type.
Chronic alcohol consumption may alter mRNA methylation and expression levels of genes related to addiction and reward in the brain, potentially contributing to alcohol tolerance and dependence. Neuron-like (SH-SY5Y) and non-neuronal (SW620) cells were utilized as models to examine chronic intermittent ethanol (CIE) exposure-induced global m6A RNA methylation changes, as well as m6A mRNA methylation changes around the stop codon of three opioid receptor genes (OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1), which are known to regulate pain, reward, and addiction behaviours. CIE exposure for three weeks significantly increased global RNA methylation levels in both SH-SY5Y (t = 3.98, P = 0.007) and SW620 (t = 2.24, P = 0.067) cells. However, a 3-week CIE exposure resulted in hypomethylation around mRNA stop codon regions of OPRM1 and OPRD1 in both cell lines [OPRM1((SH-SY5Y)): t = -5.05, P = 0.0005; OPRM1((SW620)): t = -3.19, P = 0.013; OPRD1((SH-SY5Y)): t = -13.43, P < 0.00001; OPRD1((SW620)): t = -4.00, P = 0.003]. Additionally, mRNA expression levels of OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1 were downregulated (corresponding to mRNA hypomethylation) in both SH-SY5Y and SW620 cells after a 3-week CIE exposure. The present study demonstrated that chronic ethanol exposure altered global RNA methylation levels, as well as mRNA methylation and expression levels of opioid receptor genes in both neuron-like and non-neuronal cells. Our findings suggest a potential epitranscriptomic mechanism by which chronic alcohol consumption remodels the expression of reward-related and alcohol responsive genes in the brain, thus increasing the risk of alcohol use disorder development.Abbreviations: OPRM1: the mu-opioid receptor; OPRD1: the delta-opioid receptor; OPRK1: the kappa-opioid receptor; CIE: chronic intermittent ethanol exposure; CIE+WD: chronic intermittent ethanol exposure followed by a 24-hr withdrawal; SH-SY5Y: human neuroblastoma cell Line; SW620: human colon carcinoma cell line; RT-qPCR: reverse transcription followed by quantitative polymerase reaction; MazF-RT-qPCR: MazF digestion followed by RT-qPCR.
Aberrant DNA methylation has been observed in the patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), a common neurodegenerative disorder in the elderly. OPRD1 encodes the delta opioid receptor, a member of the opioid family of G-protein-coupled receptors. In the current study, we compare the DNA methylation levels of OPRD1 promoter CpG sites (CpG1, CpG2, and CpG3) between 51 AD cases and 63 controls using the bisulfite pyrosequencing technology. Our results show that significantly higher CpG3 methylation is found in AD cases than controls. Significant associations are found between several biochemical parameters (including HDL-C and ALP) and CpG3 methylation. Subsequent luciferase reporter gene assay shows that DNA fragment containing the three OPRD1 promoter CpGs is able to regulate gene expression. In summary, our results suggest that OPRD1 promoter hypermethylation is associated with the risk of AD.
BACKGROUND: Pain clinicians have always been challenged by the variability of response to pain treatment. Differences in the degree of pain stimulation and pain sensitivity, weight and age differences, prior opioid use and tolerance, as well as the differences in bioavailability of various opioid formulations have been cited as causes for the wide variability in analgesia seen with opioids. Genetics may explain the variability of responses and help to predict more effective (or less dangerous) medication choices and doses. Genetics may also help to predict the response to specific opioids and antidepressants. OBJECTIVES: In this review article, we discuss the genetic influence of nociception, analgesia, and hyoanalgesia. The CYP450 enzymes involved in the metabolism and activity of opioids and adjuvant analgesics are genetically controlled, as are the opioid receptors and a variety of brain chemistries. METHODS: This article discusses the specific pain implications of genetic variations in CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, CYP3A7, OPRM1, OPRK1, OPRD1, COMT, GABA, UGT, MC1R, GCH1, ABCB1, P-glycoprotein, 5HTR1A, 5HTR2A, MTHFR, CACNA2D2, and 5-HTTLPR. RESULTS: Recent research findings suggest the relationship between genetic predisposition and clinical behavior, including the risk of opioid misuse and addiction. While urine drug testing may hint at genetic issues regarding opioid metabolism, cheek swab DNA testing has become economically viable, and we review the current and future genetic pain issues that may influence the decisions that pain clinicians make every day. CONCLUSION: Genetic testing may explain and predict many of the clinical responses seen with opioids and adjuvant medications, and may help the clinician identify those patients at genetic risk of opioid misuse and addiction.
Buprenorphine is an effective treatment for opioid dependence; however, it demonstrates individual variability in efficacy. Pharmacogenomics may explain this drug response variability and could allow for tailored therapy on an individual basis. The Food and Drug Administration and the Clinical Pharmacogenomics Implementation Consortium have guidelines on pharmacogenomic testing for some opioids (e.g., codeine); however, no guidelines exist for the partial opioid agonist buprenorphine. Pharmacogenomic testing targets for buprenorphine include pharmacodynamic genes like the mu-opioid receptor (MOP receptor) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), as well as the pharmacokinetic genes like the CYP enzymes. In this review we identified genotypes in patients with opioid addiction receiving buprenorphine that may result in altered therapeutic dosing and increased rate of relapse. The OPRM1 A118G single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP rs1799971) gene variant encoding the N40D MOP receptor has been associated with variable efficacy and response to treatment in both adult and neonatal patients receiving buprenorphine for treatment of opioid withdrawal. An SNP associated with rs678849 of OPRD1, coding for the delta opioid receptor, was associated with opioid relapse as indicated by opioid positive urine drug screens; there was also sex specific SNP identified at rs581111 and rs529520 in the European American population. COMT variability, particularly in rs4680, has been associated with length of stay and need for opioid treatment in patients with neonatal abstinence syndrome. Variations of the pharmacokinetic gene for CYP3A4 showed that the ultrarapid metabolizer phenotype required higher doses of buprenorphine. Genotyping of patients may allow us to appropriately tailor buprenorphine therapy to individual patients and lead to improved patient outcomes; however, further research on the pharmacogenomics of buprenorphine is needed.
Opioid addiction is a complex phenomenon with genetic, social, and other components. Due to such complexity, it is difficult to interpret the outcome of clinical studies, and thus, mutations found in individuals with these addictions are still not indisputably classified as opioid addiction-causing variants. Here, we computationally investigated two such mutations, A6V and N40D, found in the mu opioid receptor gene OPRM1. The mutations are located in the extracellular domain of the corresponding protein, which is important to the hetero-dimerization of OPRM1 with the delta opioid receptor protein (OPRD1). The hetero-dimerization of OPRD1-OPRM1 affects the signaling pathways activated by opioids and natural peptides and, thus, could be considered a factor contributing to addiction. In this study, we built four 3D structures of molecular pathways, including the G-protein signaling pathway and the beta-arrestin signaling pathway of the heterodimer of OPRD1-OPRM1. We also analyzed the effect of mutations of A6V and N40D on the stability of individual OPRM1/OPRD1 molecules and the OPRD1-OPRM1 heterodimer with the goal of inferring their plausible linkage with opioid addiction. It was found that both mutations slightly destabilize OPRM1/OPRD1 monomers and weaken their association. Since hetero-dimerization is a key step for signaling processes, it is anticipated that both mutations may be causing increased addiction risk.
Opioid use disorder (OUD) is a chronic and relapsing brain disease that results in significant mortality worldwide. Genetic factors are estimated to contribute to 40%-60% of the liability, with polymorphisms of opioid receptor genes implicated in this disorder. However, the mechanisms underlying these associations are not yet fully understood. In the present study, we first examined the methylation levels in the promoter region of the OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1 genes in 111 healthy controls (HCs) and 120 patients with OUD, and genotyped three tag SNPs in these genes. Correlations between these SNPs and the methylation levels of the CpG sites and expression levels of the genes were analyzed. After identifying the mQTLs and eQTLs, we determined the associations between the mQTLs/eQTLs and susceptibility to and characteristics of OUD in 930 HCs and 801 patients with OUD. Our results demonstrated that SNPs rs1799971 in the OPRM1 gene and rs4654327 in the OPRD1 gene were both mQTLs and eQTLs. We observed unique correlations between mQTLs and methylation levels of several CpG sites in the OUD group compared to the HC group. Interestingly, both the two mQTLs and eQTLs were associated with the susceptibility to OUD. In conclusion, we suppose that mQTLs and eQTLs in genes may underlie the associations between certain risk genetic polymorphisms and OUD. These mQTLs and eQTLs could potentially serve as promising biomarkers for better management of opioid misuse.
Two commonly prescribed treatments for opioid addiction are methadone and buprenorphine. Although these drugs show some efficacy in treating opioid dependence, treatment response varies among individuals. It is likely that genetic factors have a role in determining treatment outcome. This study analyses the pharmacogenetic association of six polymorphisms in OPRD1, the gene encoding the delta-opioid receptor, on treatment outcome in 582 opioid addicted European Americans randomized to either methadone or buprenorphine/naloxone (Suboxone) over the course of a 24-week open-label clinical trial. Treatment outcome was assessed as the number of missed or opioid-positive urine drug screens over the 24 weeks. In the total sample, no single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in OPRD1 were significantly associated with treatment outcome in either treatment arm. However, sex-specific analyses revealed two intronic SNPs (rs581111 and rs529520) that predicted treatment outcome in females treated with buprenorphine. Females with the AA or AG genotypes at rs581111 had significantly worse outcomes than those with the GG genotype when treated with buprenorphine (P=0.03, relative risk (RR)=1.67, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.06-2.1). For rs529520, females with the AA genotype had a significantly worse outcome than those with the CC genotype when (P=0.006, RR=2.15, 95% CI 1.3-2.29). No significant associations were detected in males. These findings suggest that rs581111 and rs52920 may be useful when considering treatment options for female opioid addicts, however, confirmation in an independent sample is warranted.
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is the fastest growing non-infectious disease worldwide. Impaired insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells is a hallmark of T2D, but the mechanisms behind this defect are insufficiently characterized. Integrating multiple layers of biomedical information, such as different Omics, may allow more accurate understanding of complex diseases such as T2D. Our aim was to explore and use Machine Learning to integrate multiple sources of biological/molecular information (multiOmics), in our case RNA-sequening, DNA methylation, SNP and phenotypic data from islet donors with T2D and non-diabetic controls. We exploited Machine Learning to perform multiOmics integration of DNA methylation, expression, SNPs, and phenotypes from pancreatic islets of 110 individuals, with ~ 30% being T2D cases. DNA methylation was analyzed using Infinium MethylationEPIC array, expression was analyzed using RNA-sequencing, and SNPs were analyzed using HumanOmniExpress arrays. Supervised linear multiOmics integration via DIABLO based on Partial Least Squares (PLS) achieved an accuracy of 91 +/- 15% of T2D prediction with an area under the curve of 0.96 +/- 0.08 on the test dataset after cross-validation. Biomarkers identified by this multiOmics integration, including SACS and TXNIP DNA methylation, OPRD1 and RHOT1 expression and a SNP annotated to ANO1, provide novel insights into the interplay between different biological mechanisms contributing to T2D. This Machine Learning approach of multiOmics cross-sectional data from human pancreatic islets achieved a promising accuracy of T2D prediction, which may potentially find broad applications in clinical diagnostics. In addition, it delivered novel candidate biomarkers for T2D and links between them across the different Omics.
Genes encoding the opioid receptors (OPRM1, OPRD1 and OPRK1) are obvious candidates for involvement in risk for heroin dependence. Prior association studies commonly had samples of modest size, included limited single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) coverage of these genes and yielded inconsistent results. Participants for the current investigation included 1459 heroin-dependent cases ascertained from maintenance clinics in New South Wales, Australia, 1495 unrelated individuals selected from an Australian sample of twins and siblings as not meeting DSM-IV criteria for lifetime alcohol or illicit drug dependence (non-dependent controls) and 531 controls ascertained from economically disadvantaged neighborhoods in proximity to the maintenance clinics. A total of 136 OPRM1, OPRD1 and OPRK1 SNPs were genotyped in this sample. After controlling for admixture with principal components analysis, our comparison of cases to non-dependent controls found four OPRD1 SNPs in fairly high linkage disequilibrium for which adjusted P values remained significant (e.g. rs2236857; OR 1.25; P=2.95x10(-4) ) replicating a previously reported association. A post hoc analysis revealed that the two SNP (rs2236857 and rs581111) GA haplotype in OPRD1 is associated with greater risk (OR 1.68; P=1.41x10(-5) ). No OPRM1 or OPRK1 SNPs reached more than nominal significance. Comparisons of cases to neighborhood controls reached only nominal significance. Our results replicate a prior report providing strong evidence implicating OPRD1 SNPs and, in particular, the two SNP (rs2236857 and rs581111) GA haplotype in liability for heroin dependence. Support was not found for similar association involving either OPRM1 or OPRK1 SNPs.
This study aimed to determine the effects of nine OPRM1, OPRD1 and OPRK1 polymorphisms on plasma BUP and norbuprenorphine (norBUP) concentrations and various treatment responses in a sample of 122 patients receiving BUP/naloxone. Plasma concentrations of BUP and norBUP were detected by LC-MS/MS. PCR-RFLP method was used to genotype polymorphisms. OPRD1 rs569356 GG had significantly lower plasma norBUP concentration (p = 0.018), dose- (p = 0.049) and dose/kg-normalized norBUP values (p = 0.036) compared with AA. Craving and withdrawal symptoms were significantly higher in OPRD1 rs569356 AG+GG relative to AA. There was a statistically significant difference between the OPRD1 rs678849 genotypes in the intensity of anxiety (13.5 for CT+TT and 7.5 for TT). OPRM1 rs648893 TT (18.8 +/- 10.8) was significantly different to CC+CT (14.82 +/- 11.3; p = 0.049) in view of the intensity of depression. This current study provides the first data on a prominent effect of the OPRD1 rs569356 variation on BUP pharmacology due to its metabolite norBUP.
Patient phenotypes in pharmacological pain treatment varies between individuals, which could be partly assigned to their genotypes regarding the targets of classical analgesics (OPRM1, PTGS2) or associated signalling pathways (KCNJ6). Translational and genetic research have identified new targets, for which new analgesics are being developed. This addresses voltage-gated sodium, calcium and potassium channels, for which SCN9A, CACNA1B, KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, respectively, are primary gene candidates because they code for the subunits of the respective channels targeted by analgesics currently in clinical development. Mutations in voltage gated transient receptor potential (TRPV) channels are known from genetic pain research and may modulate the effects of analgesics under development targeting TRPV1 or TRPV3. To this add ligand-gated ion channels including nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, ionotropic glutamate-gated receptors and ATP-gated purinergic P2X receptors with most important subunits coded by CHRNA4, GRIN2B and P2RX7. Among G protein coupled receptors, delta-opioid receptors (coded by OPRD1), cannabinoid receptors (CNR1 and CNR2), metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR5 coded by GRM5), bradykinin B(1) (BDKRB1) and 5-HT(1A) (HTR1A) receptors are targeted by new analgesic substances. Finally, nerve growth factor (NGFB), its tyrosine kinase receptor (NTRK1) and the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) have become targets of interest. For most of these genes, functional variants have been associated with neuro-psychiatric disorders and not yet with analgesia. However, research on the genetic modulation of pain has already identified variants in these genes, relative to pain, which may facilitate the pharmacogenetic assessments of new analgesics. The increased number of candidate pharmacogenetic modulators of analgesic actions may open opportunities for the broader clinical implementation of genotyping information.
Eleven single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning OPRD1 were examined in 1063 European Americans (EAs) (620 cases with substance dependence (SD), including 557 with alcohol dependence (AD), 225 with cocaine dependence (CD) and 111 with opioid dependence (OD), and 443 controls). Nominally significant associations (P<0.05) of five SNPs with SD were observed; only the association of the non-synonymous variant G80T with OD remained significant after correction for multiple testing using SNPSpD. Haplotype analyses with six tag SNPs indicated that a specific haplotype GCAACT, which harbors G80T G-allele and C921T C-allele, was significantly associated with AD (chi(2)=14.82, degrees of freedom (d.f.)=1, P<0.001), CD (chi(2)=9.19, d.f.=1, P=0.002) and OD (chi(2)=20.68, d.f.=1, P<0.001). Logistic regression analyses, with sex and age being considered, demonstrated that this haplotype had a risk effect on AD (P=0.03, beta=1.86, odds ratio (OR)=6.43) and especially on OD (P<0.001, beta=3.92, OR=50.57). Moreover, seven SNPs covering OPRK1 were examined in the majority of the above subjects (390 cases, including 327 AD, 177 CD and 97 OD subjects, and 358 controls). Although no significant differences in allele, genotype or haplotype frequency distributions were seen between cases and controls, a specific OPRK1 haplotype, GGCTTCT, was significantly associated with AD (chi(2)=8.12, d.f.=1, P=0.004). Logistic regression analyses also revealed its risk effect on AD (P=0.009, beta=1.06, OR=2.90). Population stratification artifact was not observed in the sample. Taken together, our findings supported a positive association between OPRD1 variants and SD, and a positive haplotypic association between OPRK1 and AD in EAs.
Primary afferents are responsible for transmitting signals produced by noxious stimuli from the periphery to the spinal cord. Mu and delta opioid receptors (MOP and DOP) have analgesic properties and are highly expressed in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons. In humans, spinal DOP is almost exclusively located on central terminals of DRG neurons, whereas in rodents, it is expressed both on presynaptic terminals and spinal neurons. In this study, we aimed to assess the distribution of MOP and DOP in the DRGs of mice and rats. Using in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence, we visualized MOP and DOP mRNA together with various neuronal markers. In rats and mice, we show that both receptors are expressed, albeit to different extents, in all types of neurons, namely, large and medium myelinated neurons (NF200-positive), small nonpeptidergic (IB4- or P2X3R-positive) and peptidergic C fibres (Tac1-positive). Overall, DOP mRNA was found to be mainly expressed in large and medium myelinated neurons, whereas MOP mRNA was mainly found in C fibres. The distribution of MOP and DOP, however, slightly differs between rats and mice, with a higher proportion of small nonpeptidergic C fibres expressing DOP mRNA in mice than in rats. We further found that neither morphine nor inflammation affected the distribution of the receptor mRNA. Because of their location, our results confirm that MOP and DOP have the potential to alleviate similar types of pain and that this effect could slightly differ between species.
Functional genetics has identified drug targets for metabolic disorders. Opioid use impacts metabolic homeostasis, although mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we explore the OPRD1 gene (encoding delta opioid receptor, DOP) to understand its impact on type 2 diabetes. Large-scale sequencing of OPRD1 and in vitro analysis reveal that loss-of-function variants are associated with higher adiposity and lower hyperglycemia risk, whereas gain-of-function variants are associated with lower adiposity and higher type 2 diabetes risk. These findings align with studies of opium addicts. OPRD1 is expressed in human islets and beta cells, with decreased expression under type 2 diabetes conditions. DOP inhibition by an antagonist enhances insulin secretion from human beta cells and islets. RNA-sequencing identifies pathways regulated by DOP antagonism, including nerve growth factor, circadian clock, and nuclear receptor pathways. Our study highlights DOP as a key player between opioids and metabolic homeostasis, suggesting its potential as a therapeutic target for type 2 diabetes.
Exposure to stress not only increases the vulnerability to heroin dependence (HD) but also provokes relapse. The etiology of HD and the role of life stress remain unclear, but prior studies suggested that both genetic and environmental factors are important. Opioid related genes, including OPRM1, OPRD1, OPRK1, and POMC, are obvious candidates for HD. Therefore, this study was conducted to explore whether the genetic polymorphisms of the candidates could affect vulnerability to HD and response to life stress in patients with HD. Ten polymorphisms of the opioid related genes were analyzed in 801 patients and 530 controls. The Life Event Questionnaire was used to assess the perspective and response to life stress in the past year. The genotype distribution and allelic frequency analyses showed that the minor C allele of rs2234918 in OPRD1 is over-represented in the HD group (P = .006 and P = .002, respectively). This finding was further confirmed by logistic regression analysis, showing that C allele carriers have a 1.42 times greater risk for HD compared to T/T homozygotes. A subgroup of 421 patients and 135 controls were eligible for life stress assessment. Patients with HD have a higher occurrence of negative events (No), negative events score (Ns), and average negative event score (Na) than those of controls (all P < .001), but there was no difference regarding positive recent events between the two groups. Gene-stress assessment in the HD group showed that T/T homozygotes of OPRD1 rs2236857 have more severe stress than C allele carriers (Ns, P = .004 and Na, P = .047). Our results indicate that the OPRD1 gene may not only play a role in the pathogenesis of HD but also affect the response to life stress among patients with HD in our Han Chinese population. Patients with the risk genotype may need additional psychosocial intervention for relapse prevention.
BACKGROUND: The functional mechanism is unknown for many genetic variants associated with substance use disorder phenotypes. Rs678849, an intronic variant in the delta-opioid receptor gene (OPRD1), has been found to predict regional brain volume, addiction risk, and the efficacy of buprenorphine/naloxone in treating opioid use disorder. The variant has also been implicated as an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) for several genes. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to identify functional differences between the two alleles of rs678849 in vitro. We hypothesized that the two alleles of rs678849 would have different effects on transcriptional activity due to differential interactions with transcription factors. METHODS: 15bp regions containing the C or T alleles of rs678849 were cloned into luciferase constructs and transfected into BE(2)C neuroblastoma cells to test the effect on transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using nuclear lysates from BE(2)C cell or human postmortem medial prefrontal cortex were used to identify proteins that differentially bound the two alleles. RESULTS: At 24 hours post-transfection, the C allele construct had significantly lower luciferase expression than the T allele construct and empty vector control (ANOVA p < .001). Proteomic analysis and supershift assays identified XRCC6 as a transcription factor specifically binding the C allele, whereas hnRNP D0 was found to specifically bind the T allele. CONCLUSION: These functional differences between the C and T alleles may help explain the psychiatric and neurological phenotype differences predicted by rs678849 genotype and the potential role of the variant as an eQTL.
