Mu-type opioid receptor; Receptor for endogenous opioids such as beta-endorphin and endomorphin. Receptor for natural and synthetic opioids including morphine, heroin, DAMGO, fentanyl, etorphine, buprenorphin and methadone. Agonist binding to the receptor induces coupling to an inactive GDP-bound heterotrimeric G-protein complex and subsequent exchange of GDP for GTP in the G-protein alpha subunit leading to dissociation of the G-protein complex with the free GTP-bound G-protein alpha and the G-protein beta-gamma dimer activating downstream cellular effectors. The agonist- and cell typ [...] 
Opioid analgesics are the standards of care for the treatment of moderate to severe nociceptive pain, particularly in the setting of cancer and surgery. Their analgesic properties mainly emanate from stimulation of the mu receptors, which are encoded by the OPRM1 gene. Hepatic metabolism represents the major route of elimination, which, for some opioids, namely codeine and tramadol, is necessary for their bioactivation into more potent analgesics. The highly polymorphic nature of the genes coding for phase I and phase II enzymes (pharmacokinetics genes) that are involved in the metabolism and bioactivation of opioids suggests a potential interindividual variation in their disposition and, most likely, response. In fact, such an association has been substantiated in several pharmacokinetic studies described in this review, in which drug exposure and/or metabolism differed significantly based on the presence of polymorphisms in these pharmacokinetics genes. Furthermore, in some studies, the observed variability in drug exposure translated into differences in the incidence of opioid-related adverse effects, particularly nausea, vomiting, constipation, and respiratory depression. Although the influence of polymorphisms in pharmacokinetics genes, as well as pharmacodynamics genes (OPRM1 and COMT) on response to opioids has been a subject of intense research, the results have been somehow conflicting, with some evidence insinuating for a potential role for OPRM1. The Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium guidelines provide CYP2D6-guided therapeutic recommendations to individualize treatment with tramadol and codeine. However, implementation guidelines for other opioids, which are more commonly used in real-world settings for pain management, are currently lacking. Hence, further studies are warranted to bridge this gap in our knowledge base and ultimately ascertain the role of pharmacogenetic markers as predictors of response to opioid analgesics.
Pharmacogenetic research has the potential to explain the variation in treatment efficacy within patient populations. Understanding the interaction between genetic variation and medications may provide a method for matching patients to the most effective therapeutic options and improving overall patient outcomes. The OPRM1 gene has been a target of interest in a large number of pharmacogenetic studies due to its genetic and structural variation, as well as the role of opioid receptors in a variety of disorders. The mu-opioid receptor (MOR), encoded by OPRM1, naturally regulates the analgesic response to pain and also controls the rewarding effects of many drugs of abuse, including opioids, nicotine, and alcohol. Genetic variants in OPRM1, particularly the non-synonymous polymorphism A118G, have been repeatedly associated with the efficacy of treatments for pain and various types of dependence. This review focuses on the current understanding of the pharmacogenetic impact of OPRM1, primarily with regard to the treatment of pain and addiction.
Opioid misuse, addiction, and associated overdose deaths remain global public health crises. Despite the tremendous need for pharmacological treatments, current options are limited in number, use, and effectiveness. Fundamental leaps forward in our understanding of the biology driving opioid addiction are needed to guide development of more effective medication-assisted therapies. This Review focuses on the omics-identified biological features associated with opioid addiction. Recent GWAS have begun to identify robust genetic associations, including variants in OPRM1, FURIN, and the gene cluster SCAI/PPP6C/RABEPK. An increasing number of omics studies of postmortem human brain tissue examining biological features (e.g., histone modification and gene expression) across different brain regions have identified broad gene dysregulation associated with overdose death among opioid misusers. Drawn together by meta-analysis and multi-omic systems biology, and informed by model organism studies, key biological pathways enriched for opioid addiction-associated genes are emerging, which include specific receptors (e.g., GABAB receptors, GPCR, and Trk) linked to signaling pathways (e.g., Trk, ERK/MAPK, orexin) that are associated with synaptic plasticity and neuronal signaling. Studies leveraging the agnostic discovery power of omics and placing it within the context of functional neurobiology will propel us toward much-needed, field-changing breakthroughs, including identification of actionable targets for drug development to treat this devastating brain disease.
Postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) remains one of the most common adverse effects of anesthesia, affecting up to 80% of high-risk patients within 24 hours after surgery. Patient-related factors, surgical procedure, and perioperative medications such as opioids determine a patient's risk for PONV. To prevent and manage PONV, ondansetron, a 5-hydroxytryptamine type 3 (5-HT(3)) receptor antagonist, is frequently administered. Ondansetron is metabolized predominantly by hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP2D6) enzymes, encoded by the CYP2D6 gene, whereas most of the effects of opioids are exerted at the opioid mu-1 receptor, encoded by the OPRM1 gene. Genetic polymorphisms of the CYP2D6 and OPRM1 genes may have a role in interindividual variation in the occurrence of PONV. Specifically, the occurrence of the G-allele produced by the OPRM1 A118G appears to be protective against PONV, whereas CYP2D6 ultrarapid metabolism increases the risk for PONV. The Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium guidelines provide CYP2D6-guided therapeutic recommendations for ondansetron. However, further studies are needed to investigate the role of genetic polymorphism in the occurrence of PONV and response to antiemetics.
Previous studies of neuronal survival have primarily focused on identifying intrinsic mechanisms controlling the process. This study explored how intercellular communication contributes to retinal ganglion cell (RGC) survival following optic nerve crush based on single-cell RNA-seq analysis. We observed transcriptomic changes in retinal cells in response to the injury, with astrocytes and Muller glia having the most interactions with RGCs. By comparing RGC subclasses characterized by distinct resilience to cell death, we found that the high-survival RGCs tend to have more ligand-receptor interactions with neighboring cells. We identified 47 interactions stronger in high-survival RGCs, likely mediating neuroprotective effects. We validated one identified target, the mu-opioid receptor (Oprm1), to be neuroprotective in three retinal injury models. Although the endogenous Oprm1 is preferentially expressed in intrinsically photosensitive RGCs, its neuroprotective effect can be transferred to other subclasses by pan-RGC overexpression of Oprm1. Lastly, manipulating the Oprm1 activity improved visual functions in mice.
Opioid use disorder (OUD) affects millions of people worldwide and the risk of developing the disorder has a significant genetic component according to twin and family studies. Identification of the genetic variants underlying this inherited risk has focused on two different methods: candidate gene studies and genome-wide association studies (GWAS). The most studied candidate genes have included the mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1), the delta-opioid receptor (OPRD1), the dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2), and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Variants in these genes have been associated with relatively small, but reproducible, effects on OUD risk. More recently, GWAS have identified potential associations with variants in KCNG2, KCNC1, CNIH3, APBB2, and RGMA. In total the genetic associations identified so far explain only a small portion of OUD risk. GWAS of OUD is still in the early stages when compared to studies of other psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, which have found many relevant variants with small effect sizes only after large meta-analyses. Substantial increases in cohort sizes will likely be necessary in the OUD field to achieve similar results. In addition, it will be important for future studies of OUD to incorporate rare variants, epigenetics, and gene x environment interactions into models in order to better explain the observed heritability.
BACKGROUND: A major challenge for effective pharmacotherapy in pain management is to provide the drug best suited to the patient's innate characteristics. OBJECTIVE: The article illustrates pharmacogenetic principles to optimize treatments for patients and increase the likelihood of pain relief without dependence. Genetic variances are particularly relevant to opioid drugs used in pain control, and can now be harvested for predictive clinical decision support. STUDY DESIGN: Clinically actionable polymorphisms in CYP2D6 (cytochrome p450 2D6) and OPRM1 (mu 1 opioid receptor), the most important gene coding, respectively, for a metabolizing enzyme and receptor for opioids are reviewed, and functional effects described. METHODS: Risk of dysfunction is calculated from the frequency of the alleles with null function for CYP2D6, and from the low function polymorphism for OPRM1. Integration of genetic variability was performed for 9 combinatorial scenarios for CYP2D6 and OPRM1. Each combination was quantified in frequency and classified for clinical impact. A rational and pharmacological basis for personalized pain management based on pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic modeling is extracted from the frequency of the combinations. RESULTS: Patients can be classified in 3 broad risk categories for opioid side effects and dependence. Patients at high-risk with dysfunctional CYP2D6 or OPRM1 account for ~14% of the population and are best managed with non-opioids. Patients at medium risk with subnormal CYP2D6 or OPRM1 account for ~48% of the population and can be managed with dose monitoring. Patients at low risk with functional CYP2D6 and OPRM1 account for ~38% of the population and should be availed to opioid therapy. LIMITATIONS: Heuristic clinical decision support considerations are not validated yet by deployment in large clinical practices. Environmental modifiers such as other drugs and dietary supplements interact with innate characteristics to modify the genetic predictions. CONCLUSION: Through clinical decision support interpreting the genotyping data, drug choices and doses can then be tailored to provide safe and effective therapy for individual patients. This precision affords personalized medicine to be practiced in pain treatment. Genetic factors could help determine why some patients seem more vulnerable than others to opioid side effects and dependence. KEY WORDS: Pain management, opioids, CYP2D6, OPRM1, clinical decision support, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, pharmacogenetics, combinatorial genotypes.
The OPRM1 gene encodes the micro-opioid receptor, which is the primary site of action of most opioids. Several studies and three meta-analyses have examined a possible link between the exonic OPRM1 A118G (rs1799971) polymorphism and opioid dependence; however, results have been inconclusive. Therefore, a systematic review and meta-analysis have been carried out to examine whether this polymorphism is associated with opioid dependence. Thirteen studies (n = 9385), comprising 4601 opioid dependents and 4784 controls, which evaluated association of the OPRM1 rs1799971 polymorphism with susceptibility to opioids, were included in this study. Our meta-analysis showed significant association between this polymorphism and susceptibility to opioid dependence in overall studies under a codominant model, as well as susceptibility to opioid dependence or heroin dependence in Asians under an autosomal dominant model. The nonsynonymous OPRM1 rs1799971 might be a risk factor for addiction to opioids or heroin in an Asian population.
The wide range of patient responses to surgical pain, opioids, and anesthetic agents has puzzled anesthesiologists for many years. Much of the variation has been attributed to differences in patient size, technique, or prior drug use. However, recent genetic testing has revealed exciting clues into the basis for these variances, allowing us to start to predict which patients may have difficulties and start to select medications more rationally. In this manuscript, we discuss genetics and pain perception, genetic predisposition to pain, drug metabolism interactions, ethnogenetics, opioid metabolism, opioid receptors, genetic-related peri-anesthetic toxicity, as well as a clinical approach and a discussion regarding the future of genetic testing and anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Although a number of studies have investigated the association of the OPRM1 A118G polymorphism with pain response, a consensus has not yet been reached. METHODS: The authors searched PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library to identify gene-association studies that explored the impact of the OPRM1 A118G polymorphism on postoperative opioid requirements through July 2013. Two evaluators independently reviewed and selected articles on the basis of prespecified selection criteria. The authors primarily investigated the standardized mean difference (SMD) of required amounts of opioids between AA homozygotes and G-allele carriers. The authors also performed subgroup analyses for race, opioid use, and type of surgery. Potential bias was assessed using the Egger's test with a trim and fill procedure. RESULTS: Three hundred forty-six articles were retrieved from databases, and 18 studies involving 4,607 participants were included in the final analyses. In a random-effect meta-analysis, G-allele carriers required a higher mean opioid dose than AA homozygotes (SMD, -0.18; P = 0.003). Although there was no evidence of publication bias, heterogeneity was present among studies (I(2) = 66.8%). In the subgroup meta-analyses, significance remained robust in Asian patients (SMD, -0.21; P = 0.001), morphine users (SMD, -0.29; P <0.001), and patients who received surgery for a viscus (SMD, -0.20; P = 0.008). CONCLUSIONS: The OPRM1 A118G polymorphism was associated with interindividual variability in postoperative response to opioids. In a subpopulation, identifying OPRM1 A118G polymorphism may provide valuable information regarding the individual analgesic doses that are required to achieve satisfactory pain control.
Increased physician prescribing of opioids to treat chronic nonprogressive pain has been accompanied by an increase in opioid addiction. Twin studies of opioid addiction are consistent with an inherited component of risk, approximately 50%. Several genome-wide association study (GWAS) reports indicate that genetic risk for opioid addiction is conveyed by many alleles of small effect (odds ratios <1.5). These reports have detected alleles in potassium-ion-channel genes (KCNC1 and KCNG2) and in a glutamate receptor auxiliary protein (CNIH3). Additionally, a variant at the micro-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1), which regulates OPRM1 expression appears promising. In pharmacogenetics of opioid addictions, methadone dose may be regulated by variants in cytochrome P450 2B6 (CYP2B6), a methadone-metabolizing enzyme, and by a locus 300 kb 5' to OPRM1. A delta-opioid-receptor gene single-nucleotide polymorphism may predict treatment response to methadone versus buprenorphine. To achieve better progress, larger sample sizes are needed for GWAS research, including controls with chronic opioid exposure, but no addiction. Large clinical trials comparing effective pharmacotherapies for opioid addiction (naltrexone, methadone, and buprenorphine) are needed for pharmacogenetic progress.
BACKGROUND: Adequate opioid prescribing is critical for therapeutic success of pain management. Despite the widespread use of opioids, optimized opioid therapy remains unresolved with risk of accidental lethal overdosing. With the emergence of accumulating evidence linking genetic variation to opioid response, pharmacogenetic based treatment recommendations have been proposed. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this review is to evaluate pharmacogenetic evidence and provide an overview on genes involved in the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of opioids. METHODS: For this review, a systematic literature search of published articles was used in PubMed(R), with no language restriction and between the time period of January 2000 to December 2020. We reviewed randomized clinical studies, study cohorts and case reports that investigated the influence of genetic variants on selected opioid pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. In addition, we reviewed current CPIC clinical recommendations for pharmacogenetic testing. RESULTS: Results of this review indicate consistent evidence supporting the association between selected genetic variants of CYP2D6 for opioid metabolism. CPIC guidelines include recommendations that indicate the avoidance of tramadol use, in addition to codeine, in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers and ultrarapid metabolizers, and to monitor intermediate metabolizers for less-than-optimal response. While there is consistent evidence for OPRM1 suggesting increased postoperative morphine dosing requirements in A118G G-allele carriers, the clinical relevance remains limited. CONCLUSION: There is emerging evidence of clinical relevance of CYP2D6 and, to a lesser extent, OPRM1 polymorphism in personalized opioid drug dosing. As a result, first clinics have started to implement pharmacogenetic guidelines for CYP2D6 and codeine.
There is significant variability in individual responses to opioid drugs, which is likely to have a significant genetic component. A number of non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the coding regions of the mu-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) have been postulated to contribute to this variability. Although many studies have investigated the clinical influences of these mu-opioid receptor variants, the outcomes are reported in the context of thousands of other genes and environmental factors, and we are no closer to being able to predict individual response to opioids based on genotype. Investigation of how mu-opioid receptor SNPs affect their expression, coupling to second messengers, desensitization and regulation is necessary to understand how subtle changes in receptor structure can impact individual responses to opioids. To date, the few functional studies that have investigated the consequences of SNPs on the signalling profile of the mu-opioid receptor in vitro have shown that the common N40D variant has altered functional responses to some opioids, while other, rarer, variants display altered signalling or agonist-dependent regulation. Here, we review the data available on the effects of mu-opioid receptor polymorphisms on receptor function, expression and regulation in vitro, and discuss the limitations of the studies to date. Whether or not mu-opioid receptor SNPs contribute to individual variability in opioid responses remains an open question, in large part because we have relatively little good data about how the amino acid changes affect mu-opioid receptor function. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Opioids: New Pathways to Functional Selectivity. To view the other articles in this section visit http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/bph.2015.172.issue-2.
Body mass and fat intake are multifactorial traits that have genetic and environmental components. The gene with the greatest effect on body mass is FTO (fat mass and obesity-associated), but several studies have shown that the effect of FTO (and of other genes) on body mass can be modified by the intake of nutrients. The so-called gene-environment interactions may also be important for the effectiveness of weight-loss strategies. Food choices, and thus fat intake, depend to some extent on individual preferences. The most important biological component of food preference is taste, and the role of fat sensitivity in fat intake has recently been pointed out. Relatively few studies have analysed the genetic components of fat intake or fatty acid sensitivity in terms of their relation to obesity. It has been proposed that decreased oral fatty acid sensitivity leads to increased fat intake and thus increased body mass. One of the genes that affect fatty acid sensitivity is CD36 (cluster of differentiation 36). However, little is known so far about the genetic component of fat sensing. We performed a literature review to identify the state of knowledge regarding the genetics of fat intake and its relation to body-mass determination, and to identify the priorities for further investigations.
BACKGROUND: Postsurgical pain is a key component of surgical recovery. However, the genetic drivers of postsurgical pain remain unclear. A broad review and meta-analyses of variants of interest will help investigators understand the potential effects of genetic variation. METHODS: This article is a systematic review of genetic variants associated with postsurgical pain in humans, assessing association with postsurgical pain scores and opioid use in both acute (0 to 48 h postoperatively) and chronic (at least 3 months postoperatively) settings. PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials were searched from 2000 to 2022 for studies using search terms related to genetic variants and postsurgical pain in humans. English-language studies in adult patients examining associations of one or more genetic variants with postsurgical pain were included. The primary outcome was association of genetic variants with either acute or chronic postsurgical pain. Pain was measured by patient-reported pain score or analgesic or opioid consumption. RESULTS: A total of 163 studies were included, evaluating 129 unique genes and 594 unique genetic variants. Many of the reported significant associations fail to be replicated in other studies. Meta-analyses were performed for seven variants for which there was sufficient data (OPRM1 rs1799971; COMT rs4680, rs4818, rs4633, and rs6269; and ABCB1 rs1045642 and rs2032582). Only two variants were associated with small differences in postsurgical pain: OPRM1 rs1799971 (for acute postsurgical opioid use standard mean difference = 0.25; 95% CI, 0.16 to 0.35; cohort size, 8,227; acute postsurgical pain score standard mean difference = 0.20; 95% CI, 0.09 to 0.31; cohort size, 4,619) and COMT rs4680 (chronic postsurgical pain score standard mean difference = 0.26; 95% CI, 0.08 to 0.44; cohort size, 1,726). CONCLUSIONS: Despite much published data, only two alleles have a small association with postsurgical pain. Small sample sizes, potential confounding variables, and inconsistent findings underscore the need to examine larger cohorts with consistent outcome measures.
The opioid epidemic is at the epicenter of the drug crisis, resulting in an inconceivable number of overdose deaths and exorbitant associated medical costs that have crippled many communities across the socioeconomic spectrum in the United States. Classic medications for the treatment of opioid use disorder predominantly target the opioid system and thus have been underutilized, in part due to their own potential for abuse and heavy regulatory burden for patients and clinicians. Opioid antagonists are now evolving in their use, not only to prevent acute overdoses but as extended-use treatment options. Strategies that target specific genetic and epigenetic factors, along with novel nonopioid medications, hold promise as future therapeutic interventions for opioid abuse. Success in increasing the treatment options in the clinical toolbox will, hopefully, help to end the historical pattern of recurring opioid epidemics. [AJP at 175: Remembering Our Past As We Envision Our Future Drug Addiction in Relation to Problems of Adolescence Zimmering and colleagues wrote in the midst of an opiate epidemic among young people that "only the human being, or rather certain types of human beings, will return to the enslaving, self-destructive habit." (Am J Psychiatry 1952; 109:272-278 )].
The chemical structures of morphine and its metabolites are closely related to the clinical effects of drugs (analgesia and side-effects) and to their capability to cross the Blood Brain Barrier (BBB). Morphine-6-glucuronide (M6G) and Morphine-3-glucuronide (M3G) are both highly hydrophilic, but only M6G can penetrate the BBB; accordingly, M6G is considered a more attractive analgesic than the parent drug and the M3G. Several hypotheses have been made to explain these differences. In this review we will discuss recent advances in the field, considering brain disposition of M6G, UDP-glucoronosyltransferases (UGT) involved in morphine metabolism, UGT interindividual variability and transport proteins.
Chronic alcohol consumption may alter mRNA methylation and expression levels of genes related to addiction and reward in the brain, potentially contributing to alcohol tolerance and dependence. Neuron-like (SH-SY5Y) and non-neuronal (SW620) cells were utilized as models to examine chronic intermittent ethanol (CIE) exposure-induced global m6A RNA methylation changes, as well as m6A mRNA methylation changes around the stop codon of three opioid receptor genes (OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1), which are known to regulate pain, reward, and addiction behaviours. CIE exposure for three weeks significantly increased global RNA methylation levels in both SH-SY5Y (t = 3.98, P = 0.007) and SW620 (t = 2.24, P = 0.067) cells. However, a 3-week CIE exposure resulted in hypomethylation around mRNA stop codon regions of OPRM1 and OPRD1 in both cell lines [OPRM1((SH-SY5Y)): t = -5.05, P = 0.0005; OPRM1((SW620)): t = -3.19, P = 0.013; OPRD1((SH-SY5Y)): t = -13.43, P < 0.00001; OPRD1((SW620)): t = -4.00, P = 0.003]. Additionally, mRNA expression levels of OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1 were downregulated (corresponding to mRNA hypomethylation) in both SH-SY5Y and SW620 cells after a 3-week CIE exposure. The present study demonstrated that chronic ethanol exposure altered global RNA methylation levels, as well as mRNA methylation and expression levels of opioid receptor genes in both neuron-like and non-neuronal cells. Our findings suggest a potential epitranscriptomic mechanism by which chronic alcohol consumption remodels the expression of reward-related and alcohol responsive genes in the brain, thus increasing the risk of alcohol use disorder development.Abbreviations: OPRM1: the mu-opioid receptor; OPRD1: the delta-opioid receptor; OPRK1: the kappa-opioid receptor; CIE: chronic intermittent ethanol exposure; CIE+WD: chronic intermittent ethanol exposure followed by a 24-hr withdrawal; SH-SY5Y: human neuroblastoma cell Line; SW620: human colon carcinoma cell line; RT-qPCR: reverse transcription followed by quantitative polymerase reaction; MazF-RT-qPCR: MazF digestion followed by RT-qPCR.
Background: Chronic shoulder pain/disability is a well-recognized side effect of treatment for breast cancer, with  approximately 40% of patients experiencing this, despite receiving pain management. To manage acute and chronic pain, several opioids are commonly prescribed. Pharmacogenomics have implicated genes within the opioid signaling pathway, including ABCB1 and OPRM1, to contribute to an individual's variable response to opioids. Aim: To evaluate ABCB1 (rs1045642 G>A, rs1128503 G>A) and OPRM1 (rs1799971 A>G, rs540825 T>A) single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in chronic shoulder pain/disability in BCS. Materials & methods: TaqMan(TM) assays were used to genotype ABCB1 and OPRM1 SNPs within the BCS (N = 252) cohort. The Shoulder Pain and Disability Index was used to evaluate pain and disability features associated with shoulder pathologies. Participants end scores for each feature (pain, disability and combined [pain and disability]) were categorized into no-low (>30%) and moderate-high (>/=30%) scores. Statistical analysis was applied, and significance was accepted at p < 0.05. Results: Of participants, 27.0, 19.0 and 22.0% reported moderate-high pain, disability and combined (pain and disability) scores, respectively. ABCB1:rs1045642-(A/A) genotype was significantly associated with disability (p = 0.028: no-low [14.9%] vs mod-high [4.3%]) and combined (pain and disability) (p = 0.011: no-low [15.9%] vs mod-high [5.7%]). The ABCB1:rs1045642-(A) allele was significantly associated with disability (p = 0.015: no-low [37.9%] vs mod-high [23.9%]) and combined (pain and disability) (p = 0.003: no-low [38.5%] vs mod-high [23.6%]). The inferred ABCB1 (rs1045642 G>A - rs1128503 G>A): A-G (p = 0.029; odds ratio [OR]: 0.0; 95% CI: 0.0-0.0) and the OPRM1 (rs1799971 A>G - rs540825 T>A): G-T (p = 0.019; OR: 0.33; 95% CI: 0.14-0.75) haplotypes were associated with disability and pain, respectively. Gene-gene interactions showed the ABCB1 (rs1045642 G>A) - OPRM1 (rs540825 T>A) combinations, (A-T) (p = 0.019; OR: 0.62; 95% CI: 0.33-1.16) and (G-A) (p = 0.021; OR: 1.57; 95% CI: 0.30-3.10) were associated with disability. Conclusion: The study implicated ABCB1 with shoulder pain and disability; and haplotype analyses identified specific genetic intervals within ABCB1 and OPRM1 to associate with chronic shoulder pain and disability. Evidence suggests that potentially gene-gene interactions between ABCB1 and OPRM1 contribute to chronic shoulder pain and disability experienced in this SA cohort.
Despite the opioid epidemic, up to 86% of patients experience moderate to severe pain after major surgery. Although several factors influence the amount of pain patients experience postoperatively, studies have identified genetic variations that influence pain perception and response to pain medications. The purpose of this article is to examine evidence of the genetic differences that affect patients' responses to medications frequently used in postoperative pain management. Genes of interest associated with postoperative pain management include the opioid micro1 receptor (OPRM1), cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, catechol O-methyl transferase (COMT) enzyme, and adenosine triphosphate-binding cascade (ABCB1) transporter. There is moderate evidence linking the OPRM1 sequence variation and response to morphine in the postoperative period. Besides activity at the OPRM1 receptor, analgesic efficacy and adverse effects of pain medications also depend on their rate of metabolism by CYP enzymes. CYP2D6 enzymes metabolize codeine and tramadol. Codeine and tramadol are not recommended in CYP2D6 poor metabolizers and ultrarapid metabolizers and are contraindicated in children and breastfeeding mothers. Similarly, caution must be exercised when using nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in CYP2C9 intermediate metabolizers and poor metabolizers. Large-scale studies are needed to develop genotype-guided therapeutic guidelines for most medications used in postoperative pain management.
