Oxytocin receptor; Receptor for oxytocin. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Vasopressin/oxytocin receptor subfamily.
The many facets of the oxytocin (OXT) system of the brain and periphery elicited nearly 25,000 publications since 1930 (see FIGURE 1 , as listed in PubMed), which revealed central roles for OXT and its receptor (OXTR) in reproduction, and social and emotional behaviors in animal and human studies focusing on mental and physical health and disease. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of OXT expression and release, expression and binding of the OXTR in brain and periphery, OXTR-coupled signaling cascades, and their involvement in behavioral outcomes to assemble a comprehensive picture of the central and peripheral OXT system. Traditionally known for its role in milk let-down and uterine contraction during labor, OXT also has implications in physiological, and also behavioral, aspects of reproduction, such as sexual and maternal behaviors and pair bonding, but also anxiety, trust, sociability, food intake, or even drug abuse. The many facets of OXT are, on a molecular basis, brought about by a single receptor. The OXTR, a 7-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor capable of binding to either Galpha(i) or Galpha(q) proteins, activates a set of signaling cascades, such as the MAPK, PKC, PLC, or CaMK pathways, which converge on transcription factors like CREB or MEF-2. The cellular response to OXT includes regulation of neurite outgrowth, cellular viability, and increased survival. OXTergic projections in the brain represent anxiety and stress-regulating circuits connecting the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, amygdala, bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, or the medial prefrontal cortex. Which OXT-induced patterns finally alter the behavior of an animal or a human being is still poorly understood, and studying those OXTR-coupled signaling cascades is one initial step toward a better understanding of the molecular background of those behavioral effects.
As one of the most common psychiatric disorders, depression has been a major public health problem. Growing evidence suggests that epigenetic modification is essential in biological processes of depression. Recently, DNA methylation has been regarded as a potential link between environment and depression. In this review, we reviewed current studies of the association between DNA methylation and depression. The association between DNA methylation of seven genes, including BDNF, SLC6A4, NR3C1, 5-HTR (1A, 2A, and 3A), FKBP5, MAO-A and OXTR, and depression were reviewed in this study. Most studies showed BDNF and NR3C1 gene methylation levels were correlated with depression while the connection of SLC6A4 and depression was conflicting. Although evidence provided insights to epigenetic processes in depression, the findings were inconsistent. Therefore, longitudinal studies in animal models and in patients with depression are needed to further investigate the diagnostic predictive value of DNA methylation reliably.
Clinical efficacy of intranasal administration of oxytocin is increasingly explored in autism spectrum disorder, but to date, the biological effects of chronic administration regimes on endogenous oxytocinergic function are largely unknown. Here exploratory biological assessments from a completed randomized, placebo-controlled trial showed that children with autism (n = 79, 16 females) receiving intranasal oxytocin for four weeks (12 IU, twice daily) displayed significantly higher salivary oxytocin levels 24 hours after the last oxytocin nasal spray administration, but no longer at a four-week follow up session. Regarding salivary oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) epigenetics (DNA-methylation), oxytocin-induced reductions in OXTR DNA-methylation were observed, suggesting a facilitation of oxytocin receptor expression in the oxytocin compared to the placebo group. Notably, heightened oxytocin levels post-treatment were significantly associated with reduced OXTR DNA-methylation and improved feelings of secure attachment. These findings indicate that four weeks of chronic oxytocin administration stimulated the endogenous oxytocinergic system in children with autism.
Oxytocin has been linked to many domains within the realm of "social cognition." For example, research has shown that oxytocin affects trusting behavior, cooperation, as well as the perception and processing of facial expressions. Furthermore, oxytocin increases empathy and seems to exert differential effects on in-group versus out-group preferences. However, there are some conflicting results that point towards a modulatory effect of oxytocin, depending on a variety of contextual and within-subject factors. Research about the underlying mechanisms (e.g., neural circuits and genetics) indicates that the modulation of amygdala activity by oxytocin is elementary for the understanding of social cognitive processes. As regards genetics, several variants of the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) have been extensively studied in relation to social cognition. Taken together, oxytocin is an important modulator of social cognitive processes, although substantially more research is needed in order to understand the complexity of oxytocinergic effects on social perception, cognition, and interpersonal behavior.
This study systematically reviewed available evidence regarding associations between polymorphisms of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) gene and socio-emotional and behavioral functioning in children and adolescents. The search yielded 69 articles, which were grouped into nine categories: depression, anxiety, and internalizing symptoms, alcohol abuse, borderline personality disorder, conduct disorder symptoms or diagnosis, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, early childhood attachment and behavior, pro-social skills, and resilience. Direct and/or gene x environment interactions were identified in over half of the studies. ASD and conduct disorder (including callous unemotional traits) were the diagnoses that were most studied and for which there was the strongest evidence of direct links with OXTR polymorphisms. In most studies identifying gene x environment interactions, the candidate OXTR polymorphism was rs53576. Results suggest that OXTR polymorphisms are associated with social, emotional or behavioural functioning in children and adolescents. The mixed findings do, however, highlight the need for further research.
The oxytocin receptor (OXTR), encoded by the OXTR gene, is responsible for the signal transduction after binding its ligand, oxytocin. Although this signaling is primarily involved in controlling maternal behavior, it was demonstrated that OXTR also plays a role in the development of the nervous system. Therefore, it is not a surprise that both the ligand and the receptor are involved in the modulation of behaviors, especially those related to sexual, social, and stress-induced activities. As in the case of every regulatory system, any disturbances in the structures or functions of oxytocin and OXTR may lead to the development or modulation of various diseases related to the regulated functions, which in this case include either mental problems (autism, depression, schizophrenia, obsessive-compulsive disorders) or those related to the functioning of reproductive organs (endometriosis, uterine adenomyosis, premature birth). Nevertheless, OXTR abnormalities are also connected to other diseases, including cancer, cardiac disorders, osteoporosis, and obesity. Recent reports indicated that the changes in the levels of OXTR and the formation of its aggregates may influence the course of some inherited metabolic diseases, such as mucopolysaccharidoses. In this review, the involvement of OXTR dysfunctions and OXTR polymorphisms in the development of different diseases is summarized and discussed. The analysis of published results led us to suggest that changes in OXTR expression and OXTR abundance and activity are not specific to individual diseases, but rather they influence processes (mostly related to behavioral changes) that might modulate the course of various disorders. Moreover, a possible explanation of the discrepancies in the published results of effects of the OXTR gene polymorphisms and methylation on different diseases is proposed.
The oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR) has been studied as a risk factor for autism spectrum disorder (ASD) owing to converging evidence from multiple levels of analysis that oxytocin (OXT) has an important role in the regulation of affiliative behavior and social bonding in both nonhuman mammals and humans. Inconsistency in the effect sizes of the OXTR variants included in association studies render it unclear whether OXTR is truly associated with ASD, and, if so, which OXTR single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are associated. Thus, a meta-analytic review of extant studies is needed to determine whether OXTR shows association with ASD, and to elucidate which specific SNPs have a significant effect on ASD. The current meta-analysis of 16 OXTR SNPs included 3941 individuals with ASD from 11 independent samples, although analyses of each individual SNP included a subset of this total. We found significant associations between ASD and the SNPs rs7632287, rs237887, rs2268491 and rs2254298. OXTR was also significantly associated with ASD in a gene-based test. The current meta-analysis is the largest and most comprehensive investigation of the association of OXTR with ASD and the findings suggest directions for future studies of the etiology of ASD.
Oxytocin plays an important role in the modulation of social behavior in both typical and atypical contexts. Also, the quality of early parental care sets the foundation for long-term psychosocial development. Here, we review studies that investigated how oxytocin receptor (OXTR) interacts with early parental care experiences to influence the development of psychiatric disorders. Using Pubmed, Scopus and PsycInfo databases, we utilized the keyword "OXTR" before subsequently searching for specific OXTR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), generating a list of 598 studies in total. The papers were catalogued in a database and filtered for gene-environment interaction, psychiatric disorders and involvement of parental care. In particular, rs53576 and rs2254298 were found to be significantly involved in gene-environment interactions that modulated risk for psychopathology and the following psychiatric disorders: disruptive behavior, depression, anxiety, eating disorder and borderline personality disorder. These results illustrate the importance of OXTR in mediating the impact of parental care on the emergence of psychopathology.
Here, we review the functional roles of cyclic ADP-ribose and CD38, a transmembrane protein with ADP-ribosyl cyclase activity, in mouse social behavior via the regulation of oxytocin (OXT) release, an essential component of social cognition. Herein we describe data detailing the molecular mechanism of CD38-dependent OXT secretion in CD38 knockout mice. We also review studies that used OXT, OXT receptor (OXTR), or CD38 knockout mice. Additionally, we compare the behavioral impairments that occur in these knockout mice in relation to the OXT system and CD38. This review also examines autism spectrum disorder (ASD), which is characterized by social and communication impairments, in relation to defects in the OXT system. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human CD38 gene are possible risk factors for ASD via inhibition of OXT function. Further analysis of CD38 in relation to the OXT system may provide a better understanding of the neuroendocrinological roles of OXT and CD38 in the hypothalamus and of the pathophysiology of ASD. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Oxytocin, Vasopressin, and Social Behavior.
Oxytocin (OXT) signaling through the OXT receptor plays a significant role in a variety of physiological processes throughout the lifespan. OXT's effects depend on the tissue distribution of the receptor. This tissue specificity is dynamic and changes across development, and also varies with sex, experience, and species. The purpose of this review is to highlight these themes with examples from several life stages and several species. Important knowledge gaps will also be emphasized. Understanding the effective sites of action for OXT via its receptor will help refine hypotheses about the roles of this important neuropeptide in the experience-dependent development and expression of species-typical social behavior. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Develop Neurobiol 77: 143-157, 2017.
Oxytocin and the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) play an important role in a large variety of social behaviors. The oxytocinergic system interacts with environmental cues and is highly dependent on interindividual factors. Deficits in this system have been linked to mental disorders associated with social impairments, such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This review focuses on the modulation of social behavior by alterations in two domains of the oxytocinergic system. We discuss genetic and epigenetic regulatory mechanisms and alterations in these mechanisms that were found to have clinical implications for ASD. We propose possible explanations how these alterations affect the biological pathways underlying the aberrant social behavior and point out avenues for future research. We advocate the need for integration studies that combine multiple measures covering a broad range of social behaviors and link these to genetic and epigenetic profiles.
Empathy is essential for navigating complex social environments. Prior work has shown associations between rs53576, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) located in the oxytocin receptor gene (OXTR), and generalized empathy. We undertook a systematic review and meta-analysis to assess the effects of rs53576 on subdomains of empathy, specifically cognitive empathy (CE) and affective empathy (AE), in healthy adults. Twenty cohorts of 8933 participants aged 18-98 were identified, including data from the Sydney Memory and Ageing Study, a cohort of older community adults. Meta-analyses found G homozygotes had greater generalized empathic abilities only in young to middle-aged adults. While meta-analyses of empathy subdomains yielded no significant overall effects, there were differential effects based on ethnicity. G homozygotes were associated with greater CE abilities in Asian cohorts (standardized mean difference; SMD: 0.09 [2.8.10(-3)-0.18]), and greater AE performance in European cohorts [SMD: 0.12 (0.04-0.21)]. The current literature highlights a need for further work that distinguishes between genetic and ethnocultural effects and explores effects of advanced age on this relationship.
Oxytocin has various effects ranging from promoting labor in pregnant women to alleviating stress. Recently, we reported the hair growth-promoting effects of oxytocin in hair follicle organoids. However, its clinical application faces challenges such as rapid degradation in vivo and poor permeability due to its large molecular weight. Therefore, in this study, we investigated the effects of the oxytocin receptor (OXTR) agonists WAY267464 and LIT001 as alternatives to oxytocin on hair growth. Human dermal papilla (DP) cells were cultured in WAY267464 or LIT001-supplemented medium. The addition of WAY267464 and LIT001 increased the expression of hair growth-related genes in DP cells. We tested the hair growth-promoting effects of WAY267464 and LIT001 using hair follicle organoids in vitro and found that they significantly promoted hair follicle sprouting. Thus, our findings indicate that WAY267464 and LIT001 are potential hair growth agents and may encourage further research on the development of novel hair growth agents targeting OXTR in patients with alopecia.
DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic modification in the human genome; pivotal in development, genomic imprinting, X inactivation, chromosome stability, gene expression and methylation aberrations are involved in an array of human diseases. Methylation at promoters is associated with transcriptional repression, whereas gene body methylation is generally associated with gene expression. Extrinsic factors such as age, diets and lifestyle affect DNA methylation which consequently alters gene expression. Stress, anxiety, depression, life satisfaction, emotion among numerous other psychological factors also modify DNA methylation patterns. This correlation is frequently investigated in four candidate genes; NR3C1, SLC6A4, BDNF and OXTR, since regulation of these genes directly impact responses to social situations, stress, threats, behaviour and neural functions. Such studies underpin the hypothesis that DNA methylation is involved in deviant human behaviour, psychological and psychiatric conditions. These candidate genes may be targeted in future to assess the correlation between methylation, social experiences and long-term behavioural phenotypes in humans; and may potentially serve as biomarkers for therapeutic intervention.
The maintenance of myometrial quiescence and initiation of contractility, which lead to parturition at term and preterm, involve a shifting equilibrium between anti-inflammatory and proinflammatory signalling pathways. Progesterone (P4), acting through the progesterone receptor (PR), has an essential and multifaceted role in the maintenance of myometrial quiescence. This effect of P4-PR signalling is mediated, in part, by its anti-inflammatory actions and capacity to repress the expression of genes that encode proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1 and IL-6, and contraction-associated proteins, such as OXTR, GJA1 and PTGS2. By contrast, increased expression of genes that ultimately lead to parturition is mediated by enhanced inflammatory and estradiol-17beta (E2) and estrogen receptor alpha signalling, which reduce PR function, thus further intensifying the inflammatory response. To obtain a more complete understanding of the molecular events that underlie the transition of the pregnant myometrium from a refractory to a contractile state, the roles of microRNAs, their targets, and their transcriptional and hormonal regulation have been investigated. This article reviews the actions of the miR-200 family and their P4-regulated targets-the transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and STAT5B-in the pregnant myometrium, as well as the role of miR-199a-3p and miR-214 and their mutual target PTGS2. The central role of ZEB1 as the mediator of the opposing actions of P4 and E2 on myometrial contractility will be highlighted.
OBJECTIVE: Evaluate effects of intranasal oxytocin (IN-OT) and OXTR genotype on resting state functional connectivity in the human brain. METHODS: We searched research databases for peer-reviewed empirical studies. Of 71 unique citations, 18 articles (13 IN-OT, five OXTR) met full inclusion criteria. RESULTS: Two studies examined effects on large-scale networks; most examined acute effects on amygdala connectivity with other social and affective regions. OXTR studies identified three polymorphisms (rs2254298, rs2268498, rs53576) having allele- and sex-dependent effects on prefrontal functional connectivity, and additive effects of OXTR risk alleles on reward circuitry. Age, sex, early life stress, and psychopathology emerged as potential moderators of both IN-OT and OXTR effects. DISCUSSION: IN-OT appears to modulate resting state functional connectivity in a manner similar to its effects on task fMRI, consistent with hypothesized models of IN-OT. However, conclusions are limited by the narrow range of neuroanatomical seed regions, and methodological and experimental design heterogeneity. Future studies should take into account individual differences. Findings may provide insight into mechanisms through which IN-OT impacts human behavior.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable neurodevelopmental disorders characterized by impaired social interactions, communication deficits, and repetitive behavior. Although the mechanisms underlying its etiology and manifestations are poorly understood, several lines of evidence from rodent and human studies suggest involvement of the evolutionarily highly-conserved oxytocin (OXT) and arginine-vasopressin (AVP), as these neuropeptides modulate various aspects of mammalian social behavior. As far as we know, there is no comprehensive review of the roles of the OXT and AVP systems in the development of ASD from the genetic aspect. In this review, we summarize the current knowledge regarding associations between ASD and single-nucleotide variants of the human OXT-AVP pathway genes OXT, AVP, AVP receptor 1a (AVPR1a), OXT receptor (OXTR), the oxytocinase/vasopressinase (LNPEP), and ADP-ribosyl cyclase (CD38).
Oxytocin (OXT) and its receptor (OXTR) are encoded by OXT and OXTR, respectively. Variable methylation of these genes has been linked to variability in sociability and neuroendophenotypes. Here we examine whether OXTR or OXT methylation in blood predicts concentrations of OXT in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (n = 166) and social behavior (n = 207) in socially-housed female rhesus macaques. We report a similarity between human and rhesus CpG sites for OXT and OXTR and a putative negative association between methylation of two OXTR CpG units with aggressive behavior (both P = 0.003), though this finding does not survive the most stringent correction for multiple comparison testing. We did not detect a statistically significant association between methylation of any CpG sites and CSF OXT concentrations, either. Because none of the tested associations survived statistical corrections, if there is any relationship between blood-derived methylation of these genes and the behavioral and physiological outcomes measured here, the effect size is too small to be detected reliably with this sample size. These results do not support the hypothesis that blood methylation of OXT or OXTR is robustly associated with CSF OXT concentration or social behavior in rhesus. It is possible, though, that methylation of these loci in the brain or in cheek epithelia may be associated with central OXT release and behavior. Finally, we consider the limitations of this exploratory study in the context of statistical power.
Oxytocin (Oxt) is a nine amino acid peptide important in energy regulation and is essential to stress-related disorders. Specifically, low Oxt levels are associated with obesity in human subjects and diet-induced or genetically modified animal models. The striking evidence that Oxt is linked to energy regulation is that Oxt- and oxytocin receptor (Oxtr)-deficient mice show a phenotype characterized by late onset obesity. Oxt-/- or Oxtr-/- develop weight gain without increasing food intake, suggesting that a lack of Oxt reduce metabolic rate. Oxt is differentially expressed in skeletal muscle exerting a protective effect toward the slow-twitch muscle after cold stress challenge in mice. We hypothesized that Oxt potentiates the slow-twitch muscle as it does with the uterus, triggering "the oxytonic contractions". Physiologically, this is important to augment muscle strength in fight/flight response and is consistent with the augmented energetic need at time of labor and for the protection of the offspring when Oxt secretion spikes. The normophagic obesity of Oxt-/- or Oxtr-/- mice could have been caused by decreased skeletal muscle tonicity which drove the metabolic phenotype. In this review, we summarized our findings together with the recent literature on this fascinating subjects in a "new oxytonic perspective" over the physicology of Oxt.
The origin of the Oxytocin/Vasopressin system dates back about 600 million years. Oxytocin (Oxt) together with Vasopressin (VP) regulate a diversity of physiological functions that are important for osmoregulation, reproduction, metabolism, and social behavior. Oxt/VP-like peptides have been identified in several invertebrate species and they are functionally related across the entire animal kingdom. Functional conservation enables future exploitation of invertebrate models to study Oxt's functions not related to pregnancy and the basic mechanisms of central Oxt/VP signaling. Specifically, Oxt is well known for its effects on uteri contractility and milk ejection as well as on metabolism and energy homeostasis. Moreover, the striking evidence that Oxt is linked to energy regulation is that Oxt- and Oxytocin receptor (Oxtr)-deficient mice show late onset obesity. Interestingly Oxt(-/-) or Oxtr(-/-) mice develop weight gain without increasing food intake, suggesting that a lack of Oxt reduce metabolic rate. Oxt is expressed in a diversity of skeletal muscle phenotypes and regulates thermogenesis and bone mass. Oxt may increases skeletal muscle tonicity and/or increases body temperature. In this review, the author compared the three most recent theories on the effects of Oxt on body composition.
