P2Y purinoceptor 13; Receptor for ADP. Coupled to G(i)-proteins. May play a role in hematopoiesis and the immune system.
The pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis (UC) is unclear, while genetic factors have been confirmed to play an important role in its development. P2RY13 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCRs), which are involved in the pathogenesis of inflammation and immune disorders. According to GEO database analysis, we first observed that the expression of P2Y13 was increased in UC patients. Therefore, we sought to determine the role of P2Y13 in the development of colitis. Our data showed that P2RY13 was highly expressed in the inflamed intestinal tissues of UC patients. In mice, pharmacological antagonism of P2Y13 can significantly attenuate the intestinal mucosal barrier disruption. In LPS-induced NCM460 cell, knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of P2RY13 increased the expression of intestinal tight junction protein and reduced apoptosis. In addition, we found that the effect of P2Y13 on colitis is related to the activation of the IL-6/STAT3 pathway. Activation of P2Y13 increases IL-6 expression and promotes STAT3 phosphorylation and nuclear transport. Deletion of the STAT3 gene in the intestinal epithelial cells of mice significantly mitigated the exacerbation of colitis due to P2Y13 activation. Thus, P2Y13 can aggravate intestinal mucosal barrier destruction by activating the IL-6/STAT3 pathway. P2Y13 might be a potential drug target for UC.
The neutrophils exhibit both anti-tumor and pro-tumor effects in cancers. The correlation between neutrophils and tumor development in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is still uncertain, possibly due to a lack of specific neutrophil infiltration evaluation methods. In this study, we identified 30 hub genes that were significantly associated with neutrophil infiltration in LUAD through data mining, survival analysis, and multiple tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TICs) analysis, including TIMER, CIBERSORT, QUANTISEQ, XCELL, and MCPCOUNTER. Consensus clustering analysis showed that these 30 hub genes were correlated with clinical features in LUAD. We further developed a neutrophil scoring system based on these hub genes. The neutrophil score was significantly correlated with prognosis and tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) in LUAD. It was also positively associated with PD-L1 expression and negatively associated with tumor mutational burden (TMB). When combined with the neutrophil score, the predictive capacity of PD-L1 and TMB for prognosis was significantly improved. Thus, the 30 hub genes might play an essential role in the interaction of neutrophils and LUAD, and the neutrophil scoring system might effectually assess the infiltration of neutrophils. Furthermore, we verified the expression of these 30 genes in the LUAD tumor tissues collected from our department. We further found that overexpressed TNFAIP6 and TLR6 and downregulated P2RY13, SCARF1, DPEP2, PRAM1, CYP27A1, CFP, GPX3, and NCF1 in LUAD tissue might be potentially associated with neutrophils pro-tumor effects. The following in vitro experiments demonstrated that TNFAIP6 and TLR6 were significantly overexpressed, and P2RY13 and CYP27A1 were significantly downregulated in LUAD cell lines, compared to BEAS-2B cells. Knocking down TNFAIP6 in A549 and PC9 resulted in the upregulation of FAS, CCL3, and ICAM-1, and the downregulation of CCL2, CXCR4, and VEGF-A in neutrophils when co-culturing with the conditioned medium (CM) from LUAD cells. Knocking down TNFAIP6 in LUAD also led to an elevated early apoptosis rate of neutrophils. Therefore, overexpressed TNFAIP6 in LUAD cancer cells might lead to neutrophils "N2" polarization, which exhibited pro-tumor effects. Further research based on the genes identified in this pilot study might shed light on neutrophils' effects on LUAD in the future.
PURPOSE: This study aims to identify key genes regulating tumor infiltrating plasma cells (PC) and provide new insights for innovative immunotherapy. METHODS: Key genes related to PC were identified using machine learning in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) patients. A prognostic model called PC scores was developed using TCGA data and validated with GEO cohorts. We assessed the molecular background, immune features, and drug sensitivity of the high PC scores group. Real-time PCR was utilized to assess the expression of hub genes in both localized LUAD patients and LUAD cell lines. RESULTS: We constructed PC scores based on seventeen PC-related hub genes (ELOVL6, MFI2, FURIN, DOK1, ERO1LB, CLEC7A, ZNF431, KIAA1324, NUCB2, TXNDC11, ICAM3, CR2, CLIC6, CARNS1, P2RY13, KLF15, and SLC24A4). Higher age, TNM stage, and PC scores independently predicted shorter overall survival. The AUC value of PC scores for one year, three years, and five years of overall survival were 0.713, 0.716, and 0.690, separately. The nomogram model that integrated age, stage, and PC scores showed significantly higher predictive value than stage alone (P < 0.01). High PC scores group exhibited an immune suppressing microenvironment with lower B, CD8 + T, CD4 + T, and dendritic cell infiltration. Docetaxel, gefitinib, and erlotinib had lower IC50 in high PC groups (P < 0.001). After validation through the local cohort and in vitro experiments, we ultimately confirmed three key potential targets: MFI2, KLF15, and CLEC7A. CONCLUSION: We proposed a prediction mode which can effectively identify high-risk LUAD patients and found three novel genes closely correlated with PC tumor infiltration.
BACKGROUND: The recent re-emergence of the monkeypox (mpox) epidemic in nonendemic regions has raised concerns regarding a potential global outbreak. The mpox virus (MPV) is a smallpox-like virus belonging to the genus Orthopoxvirus (family: Poxviridae). Although studies suggest that MPV infection suppresses the Toll-like receptor-3- and tumor necrosis factor-alpha-related signaling pathways, whether MPV regulates other immune-related pathways remains unclear. METHODS: In this study, two distinct temporal patterns were used for establishing an MPV-infected human immortal epithelial cancer cell line (HeLa). These two durations 2 and 12 h of incubation were selected to identify the coregulated genes and pathways affected by MPV infection. RESULTS: The use of the Gene Ontology framework, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genome database, and MetaCore software yielded valuable insights. Specifically, various pathways were found to be enriched in HeLa cells infected with MPV for 2 and 12 h. These pathways included Notch, CD40, CD95, hypoxia-inducible factor-1-alpha, interleukin (IL)- 1, IL-6, phosphoinositide 3-kinase, nuclear factor-kappaB, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and oxidative stress-induced signalling pathways. Clusters and pathways of metabolism and viral replication cycles were significantly associated with the 2-hour infection group. This association was identified based on the regulation of genes such as HSPG2, RHPN2, MYL1, ASPHD2, CA9, VIPR1, SNX12, MGC2752, SLC25A1, PEX19, and AREG. Furthermore, clusters and pathways related to immunity and cell movement were found to be associated with the 12-hour infection group. This association was identified based on the regulation of genes such as C1orf21, C19orf48, HRK, IL8, GULP1, SCAND2, ATP5C1, FEZ1, SGSH, TACC2, CYP4X1, MMP1, CPB1, P2RY13, WDR27, PRPF4, and ENDOD1. CONCLUSIONS: This study can improve our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the pathophysiology and post-infection sequelae of mpox. Our findings provide valuable insights into the various modes of MPV infection.
Nucleotides can contribute to the survival of different glial and neuronal models at the nervous system via activation of purinergic P2X and P2Y receptors. Their activation counteracts different proapoptotic events, such as excitotoxicity, mitochondrial impairment, oxidative stress and DNA damage, which concur to elicit cell loss in different processes of neurodegeneration and brain injury. Thus, it is frequent to find that different neuroprotective mediators converge in the activation of the same intracellular survival pathways to protect cells from death. The present review focuses on the role of P2Y(1) and P2Y(13) metabotropic receptors, and P2X7 ionotropic receptors to regulate the balance between survival and apoptosis. In particular, we analyze the intracellular pathways involved in the signaling of these nucleotide receptors to elicit survival, including calcium/PLC, PI3K/Akt/GSK3, MAPK cascades, and the expression of antioxidant and antiapoptotic genes. This review emphasizes the novel contribution of nucleotide receptors to maintain cell homeostasis through the regulation of MAP kinases and phosphatases. Unraveling the different roles found for nucleotide receptors in different models and cellular contexts may be crucial to delineate future therapeutic applications based on targeting nucleotide receptors for neuroprotection.
BACKGROUND: Machado-Joseph disease (or spinocerebellar ataxia type 3) is a late-onset polyglutamine neurodegenerative disorder caused by a mutation in the ATXN3 gene, which encodes for the ubiquitously expressed protein ataxin-3. Previous studies on cell and animal models have suggested that mutated ataxin-3 is involved in transcriptional dysregulation. Starting with a whole-transcriptome profiling of peripheral blood samples from patients and controls, we aimed to confirm abnormal expression profiles in Machado-Joseph disease and to identify promising up-regulated genes as potential candidate biomarkers of disease status. METHODS: The Illumina Human V4-HT12 array was used to measure transcriptome-wide gene expression in peripheral blood samples from 12 patients and 12 controls. Technical validation and validation in an independent set of samples were performed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). RESULTS: Based on the results from the microarray, twenty six genes, found to be up-regulated in patients, were selected for technical validation by quantitative real-time PCR (validation rate of 81% for the up-regulation trend). Fourteen of these were further tested in an independent set of 42 patients and 35 controls; 10 genes maintained the up-regulation trend (FCGR3B, CSR2RA, CLC, TNFSF14, SLA, P2RY13, FPR2, SELPLG, YIPF6, and GPR96); FCGR3B, P2RY13, and SELPLG were significantly up-regulated in patients when compared with controls. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the hypothesis that mutated ataxin-3 is associated with transcription dysregulation, detectable in peripheral blood cells. Furthermore, this is the first report suggesting a pool of up-regulated genes in Machado-Joseph disease that may have the potential to be used for fine phenotyping of this disease. (c) 2015 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
Mutations in the Membrane-type frizzled related protein (Mfrp) gene results in an early-onset retinal degeneration associated with retinitis pigmentosa, microphthalmia, optic disc drusen and foveal schisis. In the current study, a previously characterized mouse model of human retinal degeneration carrying homozygous c.498_499insC mutations in Mfrp (Mfrp(KI/KI)) was used. Patients carrying this mutation have retinal degeneration at an early age. The model demonstrates subretinal deposits and develops early-onset photoreceptor degeneration. We observed large subretinal deposits in Mfrp(KI/KI) mice which were strongly CD68 positive and co-localized with autofluorescent spots. Single cell RNA sequencing of Mfrp(KI/KI) mice retinal microglia showed a significantly higher number of pan-macrophage marker Iba-1 and F4/80 positive cells with increased expression of activation marker (CD68) and lowered microglial homeostatic markers (TMEM119, P2ry13, P2ry13, Siglech) compared with wild type mice confirming microglial activation as observed in retinal immunostaining showing microglia activation in subretinal region. Trajectory analysis identified a small cluster of microglial cells with activation transcriptomic signatures that could represent a subretinal microglia population in Mfrp(KI/KI) mice expressing higher levels of APOE. We validated these findings using immunofluorescence staining of retinal cryosections and found a significantly higher number of subretinal Iba-1/ApoE positive microglia in Mfrp(KI/KI) mice with some subretinal microglia also expressing lowered levels of microglial homeostatic marker TMEM119, confirming microglial origin. In summary, we confirm that Mfrp(KI/KI) mice carrying the c.498_499insC mutation had a significantly higher population of activated microglia in their retina with distinct subsets of subretinal microglia. Further, studies are required to confirm whether the association of increased subretinal microglia in MfrpKI/KI mice are causal in degeneration.
Excessive lipolysis in white adipose tissue (WAT) leads to insulin resistance (IR) and ectopic fat accumulation in insulin-sensitive tissues. However, the impact of Gi-coupled receptors in restraining adipocyte lipolysis through inhibition of cAMP production remained poorly elucidated. Given that the Gi-coupled P2Y13 receptor (P2Y13-R) is a purinergic receptor expressed in WAT, we investigated its role in adipocyte lipolysis and its effect on IR and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD). In humans, mRNA expression of P2Y13-R in WAT was negatively correlated to adipocyte lipolysis. In mice, adipocytes lacking P2Y13-R displayed higher intracellular cAMP levels, indicating impaired Gi signaling. Consistently, the absence of P2Y13-R was linked to increased lipolysis in adipocytes and WAT explants via hormone-sensitive lipase activation. Metabolic studies indicated that mice lacking P2Y13-R showed a greater susceptibility to diet-induced IR, systemic inflammation, and MASLD compared with their wild-type counterparts. Assays conducted on precision-cut liver slices exposed to WAT conditioned medium and on liver-specific P2Y13-R-knockdown mice suggested that P2Y13-R activity in WAT protects from hepatic steatosis, independently of liver P2Y13-R expression. In conclusion, our findings support the idea that targeting adipose P2Y13-R activity may represent a pharmacological strategy to prevent obesity-associated disorders, including type 2 diabetes and MASLD.
The distribution of nucleotide P2Y receptors across different tissues suggests that they fulfil key roles in a number of physiological and pathological conditions. P2Y(13) is one of the latest P2Y receptors identified, a novel member of the Gi-coupled P2Y receptor subfamily that responds to ADP, together with P2Y(12) and P2Y(14). Pharmacological studies drew attention to this new ADP receptor, with a pharmacology that overlaps that of P2Y(12) receptors but with unique features and roles. The P2RY12-14 genes all reside on human chromosome 3 at 3q25.1 and their strong sequence homology supports their evolutionary origin through gene duplication. Polymorphisms of P2Y(13) receptors have been reported in different human populations, yet their consequences remain unknown. The P2Y(13) receptor is versatile in its signalling, extending beyond the canonical signalling of a Gi-coupled receptor. Not only can it couple to different G proteins (Gs/Gq) but the P2Y(13) receptor can also trigger several intracellular pathways related to the activation of MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases) and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/glycogen synthase kinase 3 axis. Moreover, the availability of P2Y(13) receptor knockout mice has highlighted the specific functions in which it is involved, mainly in the regulation of cholesterol and glucose metabolism, bone homeostasis and aspects of central nervous system function like pain transmission and neuroprotection. This review summarizes our current understanding of this elusive receptor, not only at the pharmacological and molecular level but also, in terms of its signalling properties and specific functions, helping to clarify the involvement of P2Y(13) receptors in pathological situations.
Relapses driven by chemoresistant leukemic cell populations are the main cause of mortality for patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Here, we show that the ectonucleotidase CD39 (ENTPD1) is upregulated in cytarabine-resistant leukemic cells from both AML cell lines and patient samples in vivo and in vitro. CD39 cell-surface expression and activity is increased in patients with AML upon chemotherapy compared with diagnosis, and enrichment in CD39-expressing blasts is a marker of adverse prognosis in the clinics. High CD39 activity promotes cytarabine resistance by enhancing mitochondrial activity and biogenesis through activation of a cAMP-mediated adaptive mitochondrial stress response. Finally, genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of CD39 ecto-ATPase activity blocks the mitochondrial reprogramming triggered by cytarabine treatment and markedly enhances its cytotoxicity in AML cells in vitro and in vivo. Together, these results reveal CD39 as a new residual disease marker and a promising therapeutic target to improve chemotherapy response in AML. SIGNIFICANCE: Extracellular ATP and CD39-P2RY13-cAMP-OxPHOS axis are key regulators of cytarabine resistance, offering a new promising therapeutic strategy in AML.This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1426.
We previously identified a subgroup of schizophrenia cases (~40 %) with heightened inflammation in the neurogenic subependymal zone (SEZ) (North et al., 2021b). This schizophrenia subgroup had changes indicating reduced microglial activity, increased peripheral immune cells, increased stem cell dormancy/quiescence and reduced neuronal precursor cells. The present follow-up study aimed to replicate and extend those novel findings in an independent post-mortem cohort of schizophrenia cases and controls from Australia. RNA was extracted from SEZ tissue from 20 controls and 22 schizophrenia cases from the New South Wales Brain Tissue Resource Centre, and gene expression analysis was performed. Cluster analysis of inflammation markers (IL1B, IL1R1, SERPINA3 and CXCL8) revealed a high-inflammation schizophrenia subgroup comprising 52 % of cases, which was a significantly greater proportion than the 17 % of high-inflammation controls. Consistent with our previous report (North et al., 2021b), those with high-inflammation and schizophrenia had unchanged mRNA expression of markers for steady-state and activated microglia (IBA1, HEXB, CD68), decreased expression of phagocytic microglia markers (P2RY12, P2RY13), but increased expression of markers for macrophages (CD163), monocytes (CD14), natural killer cells (FCGR3A), and the adhesion molecule ICAM1. Similarly, the high-inflammation schizophrenia subgroup emulated increased quiescent stem cell marker (GFAPD) and decreased neuronal progenitor (DLX6-AS1) and immature neuron marker (DCX) mRNA expression; but also revealed a novel increase in a marker of immature astrocytes (VIM). Replicating primary results in an independent cohort demonstrates that inflammatory subgroups in the SEZ in schizophrenia are reliable, robust and enhance understanding of neuropathological heterogeneity when studying schizophrenia.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are critical sensors affecting the state of eukaryotic cells. To get systematic insight into the GPCRome of microglia, we analyzed publicly available RNA-sequencing data of bulk and single cells obtained from human and mouse brains. We identified 17 rhodopsin and adhesion family GPCRs robustly expressed in microglia from human brains, including the homeostasis-associated genes CX3CR1, GPR34, GPR183, P2RY12, P2RY13, and ADGRG1. Expression of these microglial core genes was lost upon culture of isolated cells ex vivo but could be acquired by human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived microglial precursors transplanted into mouse brains. CXCR4 and PTGER4 were higher expressed in subcortical white matter compared to cortical grey matter microglia, and ADGRG1 was downregulated in microglia obtained from normal-appearing white and grey matter tissue of multiple sclerosis (MS) brains. Single-cell RNA sequencing of microglia from active lesions, obtained early during MS, revealed downregulation of homeostasis-associated GPCR genes and upregulation of CXCR4 expression in a small subset of MS-associated lesional microglia. Functional presence of low levels of CXCR4 on human microglia was confirmed using flow cytometry and transwell migration towards SDF-1. Microglia abundantly expressed the GPCR down-stream signaling mediator genes GNAI2 (alpha(i2)), GNAS (alpha(s)), and GNA13 (alpha(13)), the latter particularly in white matter. Drugs against several microglia GPCRs are available to target microglia in brain diseases. In conclusion, transcriptome profiling allowed us to identify expression of GPCRs that may contribute to brain (patho)physiology and have diagnostic and therapeutic potential in human microglia.
Ovarian cancer represents one of the most malignant gynecological tumors. Despite recent advances in treatment, ovarian cancer remains to be highly susceptible to metastasis. However, information concerning genome-wide gene expression profiles is limited to develop a metastasis-specific gene signature in ovarian cancer. In this work, we try to identify changes in gene expression profile that underlie ovarian cancer metastasis. The dataset GSE73168 deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database was processed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between primary tumor and metastatic tumor samples. The weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) was conducted for modules related to ovarian cancer metastasis. Modular genes associated with ovarian cancer metastasis were summarized for the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were plotted to estimate the superiority of candidate genes in detecting ovarian cancer metastasis. The WGCNA yielded 25 co-expression network modules in the dataset GSE73168, and highly correlated genes with ovarian cancer metastasis were identified in the blue module. Twenty-two genes demonstrated differential expression between primary tumor and metastatic tumor samples, and two downregulated genes (P2RY13 and NKX6-1) and three upregulated genes (CD36, LOC57399 and RP11-587D21.4) of these 22 DEGs was also shown to correlate with ovarian cancer metastasis in the blue module. The area under the ROC curve verified these five DEGs as metastasis-specific genes for ovarian cancer. These results show P2RY13, NKX6-1, CD36, LOC57399 and RP11-587D21.4 serve as metastasis-specific genes for ovarian cancer.
BACKGROUND: Both obesity (OB) and periodontitis (PD) are chronic non-communicable diseases, and numerous epidemiological studies have demonstrated the association between these two diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms that could explain the association between OB and PD are largely unclear. This study aims to investigate the common gene signatures and biological pathways in OB and PD through bioinformatics analysis of publicly available transcriptome datasets. METHODS: The RNA expression profile datasets of OB (GSE104815) and PD (GSE106090) were used as training data, and GSE152991 and GSE16134 as validation data. After screening for differentially expressed genes (DEGs) shared by OB and PD, gene enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction, GeneMANIA analysis, immune infiltration analysis and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) were performed. In addition, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were used to assess the predictive accuracy of the hub gene. Finally, we constructed the hub gene-associated TF-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network. RESULTS: We identified a total of 147 DEGs shared by OB and PD (38 down-regulated and 109 up-regulated). Functional analysis showed that these genes were mainly enriched in immune-related pathways such as B cell receptor signalling, leukocyte migration and cellular defence responses. 14 hub genes (FGR, MNDA, NCF2, FYB1, EVI2B, LY86, IGSF6, CTSS, CXCR4, LCK, FCN1, CXCL2, P2RY13, MMP7) showed high sensitivity and specificity in the ROC curve analysis. The results of immune infiltration analysis showed that immune cells such as macrophages, activated CD4 T cells and immune B cells were present at high infiltration levels in both OB and PD samples.The results of GeneMANIA analysis and GSEA analysis suggested that five key genes (FGR, LCK, FYB1, LY86 and P2RY13) may be strongly associated with macrophages. Finally, we constructed a TF-miRNA-mRNA regulatory network consisting of 233 transcription factors (TFs), 8 miRNAs and 14 mRNAs based on the validated information obtained from the database. CONCLUSIONS: Five key genes (FGR, LCK, FYB1, LY86, P2RY13) may be important biomarkers of OB and PD. These genes may play an important role in the pathogenesis of OB and PD by affecting macrophage activity and participating in immune regulation and inflammatory responses.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a chronic glomerular disease associated with podocyte injury which is named after the pathologic features of the kidney. The aim of this study is to decode the key changes in gene expression and regulatory network involved in the formation of FSGS. Integrated network analysis included Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between FSGS patients and healthy donors. Bioinformatics analysis was used to identify the roles of the DEGs and included the development of protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks, Gene Ontology (GO), and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses, and the key modules were assured. The expression levels of DEGs were validated using the additional dataset. Eventually, transcription factors and ceRNA networks were established to illuminate the regulatory relationships in the formation of FSGS. 1130 DEGs including 475 upregulated genes and 655 downregulated genes with functional enrichment analysis were determined. Further analysis uncovered that the validated hub genes were defined as candidate genes, including Complement C3a Receptor 1 (C3AR1), C-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 1(CCR1), C-X3-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 1 (CX3CL1), Melatonin Receptor 1A (MTNR1A), and Purinergic Receptor P2Y13 (P2RY13). More importantly, we identified transcription factors and mRNA-miRNA-lncRNA regulatory networks associated with the candidate genes. The candidate genes and regulatory networks discovered in this study can help to comprehend the molecular mechanism of FSGS and supply potential targets for the diagnosis and therapy of FSGS.
Rationale: The alarmins IL-33 and HMGB1 (high mobility group box 1) contribute to type 2 inflammation and asthma pathogenesis. Objectives: To determine whether P2Y(13)-R (P2Y(13) receptor), a purinergic GPCR (G protein-coupled receptor) and risk allele for asthma, regulates the release of IL-33 and HMGB1. Methods: Bronchial biopsy specimens were obtained from healthy subjects and subjects with asthma. Primary human airway epithelial cells (AECs), primary mouse AECs, or C57Bl/6 mice were inoculated with various aeroallergens or respiratory viruses, and the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic translocation and release of alarmins was measured by using immunohistochemistry and an ELISA. The role of P2Y(13)-R in AEC function and in the onset, progression, and exacerbation of experimental asthma was assessed by using pharmacological antagonists and mice with P2Y(13)-R gene deletion. Measurements and Main Results: Aeroallergen exposure induced the extracellular release of ADP and ATP, nucleotides that activate P2Y(13)-R. ATP, ADP, and aeroallergen (house dust mite, cockroach, or Alternaria antigen) or virus exposure induced the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic translocation and subsequent release of IL-33 and HMGB1, and this response was ablated by genetic deletion or pharmacological antagonism of P2Y13. In mice, prophylactic or therapeutic P2Y(13)-R blockade attenuated asthma onset and, critically, ablated the severity of a rhinovirus-associated exacerbation in a high-fidelity experimental model of chronic asthma. Moreover, P2Y(13)-R antagonism derepressed antiviral immunity, increasing IFN-lambda production and decreasing viral copies in the lung. Conclusions: We identify P2Y(13)-R as a novel gatekeeper of the nuclear alarmins IL-33 and HMGB1 and demonstrate that the targeting of this GPCR via genetic deletion or treatment with a small-molecule antagonist protects against the onset and exacerbations of experimental asthma.
The composition and relative abundances of immune cells in the tumor microenvironment are key factors affecting the progression of lung adenocarcinomas (LUADs) and the efficacy of immunotherapy. Using the cancer gene expression dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) program, we scored stromal and immune cells for tumor purity prediction by CIBERSORT and ESTMATE. Differential expression analysis was employed to identify 374 genes between the high-score group and the low-score group, which were utilized to conduct Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) and Cox regression analysis were performed on the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) to identify four key tumor microenvironment (TME) -related genes (CCR2, CCR4, P2RY12, and P2RY13). The expression levels of the four DEGs differed significantly among LUAD patients of different ages, genders, and TNM stages. We found that the infiltration of resting memory CD4+ T cells, memory B cells, and M0 macrophages into the TME was co-regulated by these four DEGs. These four genes were closely related to the prognosis of LUAD and affected the infiltration of immune cells into the TME, which had predictive prognostic value in LUAD.
OBJECTIVE: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most significant cardiovascular risk factors, playing vital roles in various cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis (AS). This study attempted to explore key biomarkers for predicting AS in patients with PCOS and to investigate the role of immune cell infiltration in this process. METHODS: We downloaded the expression matrix of AS (GSE100927, GSE28829) and PCOS (GSE54248) from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Differential expression analysis and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) were used to identify PCOS-related genes in AS. Functional enrichment analysis was employed to reveal underlying mechanisms. Then, Protein-protein interaction (PPI) and three machine learning algorithms were used to screen the hub genes, including the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO), Support Vector Machine-Recursive Feature Elimination (SVM-RFE), and Random Forest (RF). Moreover, the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, calibration curve, and decision curve analysis (DCA) were applied to evaluate the diagnostic value of the nomogram model. Finally, we performed immune cell infiltration and single-gene GSEA. RESULTS: A total of 41 genes were identified as PCOS-related genes in AS, with functional analysis indicating that the potential pathogenesis lies in inflammatory and immune responses. Furthermore, we identified two hub genes (MMP9 and P2RY13) by three machine learning algorithms. The nomogram model based on MMP9 and P2RY13 can be used as a new diagnostic model to differentiate AS in PCOS women (AUC＞0.9). The calibration curves and DCA curves demonstrated the excellent discriminative ability and clinical practicality of this nomogram. Finally, immune infiltration analysis revealed the disorder of immunocytes in AS. The two gene expressions were negatively correlated with Monocyte and Macrophages M1, while positively correlated with Macrophages M0. Single gene GSEA analysis suggested that the MMP9 and P2RY13 might be involved in the metabolism and inflammation responses. CONCLUSION: We identified MMP9 and P2RY13 as the biomarkers and developed a new nomogram for early diagnosing AS based on them in PCOS patients. Our findings may provide new insights into the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment targets of PCOS-associated AS.
Tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TICs) can serve as an important indicator to evaluate the prognosis and therapeutic response in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). The identification of mutated genes that can affect the abundance of TICs and prognosis has practical implications. In the presented study, tumor microenvironment (TME) scoring was performed by the ESTIMATE scoring system on 598 RNA transcripts selected from the TCGA database to determine the proportions of immune cells and stromal cells. The infiltration difference of TICs in LUAD samples was obtained by CIBERSORT. The 'immuneeconv' R software package, which integrates six latest algorithms, including TIMER, xCell, MCP-counter, CIBERSORT, EPIC and quanTIseq were used to verify the correlation between purinergic receptor P2Y13 (P2RY13) and immune cells. Based on RNA sequencing analysis of the Lewis lung cancer-bearing model in C57BL/6 mice and immunohistochemistry (IHC) of human LUAD tissues, the expression of P2RY13 and associated pathways were verified. It was shown that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) obtained by interactive analysis based on Immunescore and Stromalscore were significantly enriched in immune-related pathways. The expression of P2RY13 was significantly associated with prognosis and clinicopathological characteristics of LUAD patients. More importantly, this gene played an important role in maintaining the immune dominant environment and changing the regulation of TICs. P2RY13 expression was positively correlated with the infiltration of dendritic cells (DCs) in various of tumor tissues as validated by the PanglaoDB scRNA-seq database. Therefore, P2RY13 is expected to be a potential biomarker for predicting TME and the prognosis of LUAD after verification.
Numerous epidemiologic studies revealed that high-density lipoprotein (HDL) is an important risk factor for coronary heart disease. There are several well-documented HDL functions such as reversed cholesterol transport, inhibition of inflammation, or inhibition of platelet activation that may account for the atheroprotective effects of this lipoprotein. Mechanistically, these functions are carried out by a direct interaction of HDL particle or its components with receptors localized on the cell surface followed by generation of intracellular signals. Several HDL-associated receptor ligands such as apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) or sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) have been identified in addition to HDL holoparticles, which interact with surface receptors such as ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1); S1P receptor types 1, 2, and 3 (S1P1, S1P2, and S1P3); or scavenger receptor type I (SR-BI) and activate intracellular signaling cascades encompassing kinases, phospholipases, trimeric and small G-proteins, and cytoskeletal proteins such as actin or junctional protein such as connexin43. In addition, depletion of plasma cell cholesterol mediated by ABCA1, ATP-binding cassette transporter G1 (ABCG1), or SR-BI was demonstrated to indirectly inhibit signaling over proinflammatory or proliferation-stimulating receptors such as Toll-like or growth factor receptors. The present review summarizes the current knowledge regarding the HDL-induced signal transduction and its relevance to athero- and cardioprotective effects as well as other physiological effects exerted by HDL.
