cGMP-specific 3',5'-cyclic phosphodiesterase; Plays a role in signal transduction by regulating the intracellular concentration of cyclic nucleotides. This phosphodiesterase catalyzes the specific hydrolysis of cGMP to 5'-GMP. Specifically regulates nitric-oxide- generated cGMP.
BACKGROUND: Diabetic Nephropathy (DN) is one of the microvascular complications of diabetes. The potential targets of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors for the treatment of DN need to be explored. METHODS: The GSE96804 and GSE1009 datasets, 729 RAAS inhibitors-related targets and 6,039 DN-related genes were derived from the public database and overlapped with the differentially expressed genes (DN vs. normal) in GSE96804 to obtain the candidate targets. Next, key targets were screened via the Mendelian randomization analysis and expression analysis. The diagnostic nomogram was constructed and assessed in GSE96804. Additionally, enrichment analysis was conducted and a 'core active ingredient-key target-disease pathway' network was established. Finally, molecular docking was performed. RESULTS: In total, 60 candidate targets were derived, in which CTSC and PDE5A were screened as the key targets and had a causal association with DN as the protective factors (P < 0.05, OR < 1). Further, a nomogram exhibited pretty prediction efficiency. It is indicated that Benadryl hydrochloride might play a role in the DN by affecting the pathways of 'cytokine cytokine receptor interaction', etc. targeting the CTSC. Moreover, PDE5A might be involved in 'ECM receptor interaction', etc. for the effect of NSAID, captopril, chlordiazepoxide on DN. Molecular docking analysis showed a good binding ability of benadryl hydrochloride and CTSC, NSAID and PDE5A. PTGS2, ITGA4, and ANPEP are causally associated with acute kidney injury. CONCLUSION: CTSC and PDE5A were identified as key targets for RAAS inhibitors in the treatment of DN, which might provide some clinical significance in helping to diagnose and treat DN. Among the targets of RAAS inhibitors, PTGS2, ITGA4 and ANPEP have a causal relationship with acute kidney injury, which is worthy of further clinical research.
BACKGROUND: Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) have been associated with psychiatric disorders in observational studies; however, the causality of associations remains unestablished. METHODS: Specifically, cyclic nucleotide PDEs were collected from genome-wide association studies (GWASs), including PDEs obtained by hydrolyzing both cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) (PDE1A, PDE2A, and PDE3A), specific to cGMP (PDE5A, PDE6D, and PDE9A) and cAMP (PDE4D and PDE7A). We performed a bidirectional two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to investigate the relationship between PDEs and nine psychiatric disorders. The inverse-variance-weighted (IVW) method, MR-Egger, and weighted median were used to estimate causal effects. The Cochran's Q test, MR-Egger intercept test, MR Steiger test, leave-one-out analyses, funnel plot, and MR pleiotropy residual sum and outlier (MR-PRESSO) were used for sensitivity analyses. RESULTS: The PDEs specific to cAMP were associated with higher-odds psychiatric disorders. For example, PDE4D and schizophrenia (SCZ) (odds ratios (OR) = 1.0531, P(IVW) = 0.0414), as well as major depressive disorder (MDD) (OR = 1.0329, P(IVW) = 0.0011). Similarly, PDE7A was associated with higher odds of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (OR = 1.0861, P(IVW) = 0.0038). Exploring specific PDE subtypes and increase intracellular cAMP levels can inform the development of targeted interventions. We also observed PDEs (which hydrolyzes both cAMP and cGMP) was associated with psychiatric disorders [OR of PDE1A was 1.0836 for autism spectrum disorder; OR of PDE2A was 0.8968 for Tourette syndrome (TS) and 0.9449 for SCZ; and OR of PDE3A was 0.9796 for MDD; P < 0.05]. Furthermore, psychiatric disorders also had some causal effects on PDEs [obsessive-compulsive disorder on increased PDE6D and decreased PDE2A and PDE4D; anorexia nervosa on decreased PDE9A]. The results of MR were found to be robust using multiple sensitivity analysis. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, potential causal relationships between plasma PDE proteins and psychiatric disorders were established. Exploring other PDE subtypes not included in this study could provide a more comprehensive understanding of the role of PDEs in psychiatric disorders. The development of specific medications targeting PDE subtypes may be a promising therapeutic approach for treating psychiatric disorders.
Vardenafil hydrochloride is a potent and highly selective inhibitor of phosphodiesterase Type 5 that increases blood flow to the penis during sexual stimulation and helps restore the ability to achieve and sustain an erection in men with erectile dysfunction. Vardenafil was developed specifically to be an effective and safe oral medication for the treatment of erectile dysfunction, with potential advances over existing therapies. This review summarises key findings during the rapid and aggressive development of this compound, from in vitro assays to Phase III trials with both broad and special populations. Emphasis is placed on the presentation of data that demonstrates the clinical effectiveness and safety of this agent which is anticipated to be available in 2003.
Protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22) is a protein tyrosine phosphatase that negatively regulates T-cell signaling. However, whether it is expressed and functions in platelets remains unknown. Here we investigated the expression and role of PTPN22 in platelet function. We reported PTPN22 expression in both human and mouse platelets. Using PTPN22-/- mice, we showed that PTPN22 deficiency significantly shortened tail-bleeding time and accelerated arterial thrombus formation without affecting venous thrombosis and the coagulation factors VIII and IX. Consistently, PTPN22-deficient platelets exhibited enhanced platelet aggregation, granule secretion, calcium mobilization, lamellipodia formation, spreading, and clot retraction. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis revealed the significant difference of phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A) phosphorylation in PTPN22-deficient platelets compared with wild-type platelets after collagen-related peptide stimulation, which was confirmed by increased PDE5A phosphorylation (Ser92) in collagen-related peptide-treated PTPN22-deficient platelets, concomitant with reduced level and vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein phosphorylation (Ser157/239). In addition, PTPN22 interacted with phosphorylated PDE5A (Ser92) and dephosphorylated it in activated platelets. Moreover, purified PTPN22 but not the mutant form (C227S) possesses intrinsic serine phosphatase activity. Furthermore, inhibition of PTPN22 enhanced human platelet aggregation, spreading, clot retraction, and increased PDE5A phosphorylation (Ser92). In conclusion, our study shows a novel role of PTPN22 in platelet function and arterial thrombosis, identifying new potential targets for future prevention of thrombotic or cardiovascular diseases.
black triangle Tadalafil is a selective phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor that is effective in men with mild-to-severe erectile dysfunction (ED), including those with diabetes mellitus. black triangle The improvement in the erectile function domain score on the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF) and the percentage of sexual intercourse attempts marked by successful vaginal penetration and completion was significantly greater with on-demand (not more than once daily) tadalafil 10 or 20 mg than placebo in trials of 12 weeks' duration. Improvement in scores on other domains of the IIEF and the percentage of positive responses to a Global Assessment Question measuring erection improvement were also significantly greater with on-demand tadalafil than placebo. black triangle The adverse events associated with tadalafil were generally mild to moderate and decreased in frequency with continued administration. The most commonly reported adverse events were headache and dyspepsia. The incidence of cardiovascular adverse events was not significantly different in tadalafil or placebo recipients.
Phosphodiesterases are a diverse family of enzymes that hydrolyse cyclic nucleotides and thus play a key role in regulating intracellular levels of the second messengers cAMP and cGMP, and hence cell function. Theophylline and papaverine have historically been used therapeutically and are known to be weak inhibitors of PDE, but to what extent this contributed toward their clinical efficacy was poorly defined. However, the discovery of 11 isoenzyme families and our increased understanding of their function at the cell and molecular level provides an impetus for the development of isoenzyme selective inhibitors for the treatment of various diseases. This review focuses on the development of PDE3 inhibitors for congestive heart failure, PDE4 inhibitors for inflammatory airways disease and most successfully, PDE5 inhibitors for erectile dysfunction.
Acute lung injury (ALI) and its most severe form, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), cause severe endothelial dysfunction in the lung, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is elevated in ARDS. We found that the levels of a VEGF-regulated microRNA, microRNA-1 (miR-1), were reduced in the lung endothelium after acute injury. Pulmonary endothelial cell-specific (EC-specific) overexpression of miR-1 protected the lung against cell death and barrier dysfunction in both murine and human models and increased the survival of mice after pneumonia-induced ALI. miR-1 had an intrinsic protective effect in pulmonary and other types of ECs; it inhibited apoptosis and necroptosis pathways and decreased capillary leak by protecting adherens and tight junctions. Comparative gene expression analysis and RISC recruitment assays identified miR-1 targets in the context of injury, including phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A), angiopoietin-2 (ANGPT2), CNKSR family member 3 (CNKSR3), and TNF-alpha-induced protein 2 (TNFAIP2). We validated miR-1-mediated regulation of ANGPT2 in both mouse and human ECs and found that in a 119-patient pneumonia cohort, miR-1 correlated inversely with ANGPT2. These findings illustrate a previously unknown role of miR-1 as a cytoprotective orchestrator of endothelial responses to acute injury with prognostic and therapeutic potential.
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs)-RNA networks have contributed to cancer development. Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are considered as protein recruiters; nevertheless, the patterns of circRNA-protein interactions in colorectal cancer (CRC) are still lacking. Processing bodies (PBs) formed through liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) are membrane-less organelles (MLOs) consisting of RBPs and RNA. Previous evidence suggests a connection between PBs dynamics and cancer progression. Despite the increasingly acknowledged crucial role of RBPs and RNA in the accumulation and maintenance of MLOs, there remains a lack of specific research on the interactions between PBs-related RBPs and circRNAs in CRC. Herein, we identify that MEX-3 RNA binding family member A (MEX3A), frequently upregulated in CRC tissues, predicts poorer patient survival. Elevated MEX3A accelerates malignance and inhibits autophagy of CRC cells. Importantly, MEX3A undergoes intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs)-dependent LLPS in the cytoplasm. Specifically, circMPP6 acts as a scaffold to facilitate the interaction between MEX3A and PBs proteins. The MEX3A/circMPP6 complex modulates PBs dynamic and promotes UPF-mediated phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A) mRNA degradation, consequently leading to the aggressive properties of CRC cells. Clinically, CRC patients exhibiting high MEX3A expression and low PDE5A expression have the poorest overall survival. Our findings reveal a collaboration between MEX3A and circMPP6 in the regulation of mRNA decay through triggering the PBs aggregation, which provides prognostic markers and/or therapeutic targets for CRC.
The nitric oxide (NO)-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-protein kinase G (PKG) pathway plays a critical role in skeletal homeostasis. Preclinical data using NO and its donors and genetically modified mice demonstrated that NO was required in bone remodeling and partly mediated the anabolic effects of mechanical stimuli and estrogen. However, the off-target effects and tachyphylaxis of NO limit its long-term use, and previous clinical trials using organic nitrates for osteoporosis have been disappointing. Among the other components in the downstream pathway, targeting cGMP-specific phosphodiesterase to promote the NO-cGMP-PKG signal is a viable option. There are growing in vitro and in vivo data that, among many other PDE families, PDE5A is highly expressed in skeletal tissue, and inhibiting PDE5A using currently available PDE5A inhibitors might increase the osteoanabolic signal and protect the skeleton. These preclinical data open the possibility of repurposing PDE5A inhibitors for treating osteoporosis. Further research is needed to address the primary target bone cell of PDE5A inhibition, the contribution of direct and indirect effects of PDE5A inhibition, and the pathophysiological changes in skeletal PDE5A expression in aging and hypogonadal animal models.
Melanoma is a skin cancer notorious for its metastatic potential. As an initial step of the metastatic cascade, melanoma cells part from the primary tumour and invade the surrounding tissue, which is crucial for their dissemination and the formation of distant secondary tumours. Over the last two decades, our understanding of both, general and melanoma specific mechanisms of invasion has significantly improved, but to date no efficient therapeutic strategy tackling the invasive properties of melanoma cells has reached the clinic. In this review, we assess the major contributions towards the understanding of the molecular biology of melanoma cell invasion with a focus on melanoma specific traits. These traits are based on the neural crest origin of melanoma cells and explain their intrinsic invasive nature. A particular emphasis is given not only to lineage specific signalling mediated by TGFbeta, and noncanonical and canonical WNT signalling, but also to the role of PDE5A and RHO-GTPases in modulating modes of melanoma cell invasion. We discuss existing caveats in the current understanding of the metastatic properties of melanoma cells, as well as the relevance of the 'phenotype switch' model and 'co-operativity' between different phenotypes in heterogeneous tumours. At the centre of these phenotypes is the lineage commitment factor microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, one of the most crucial regulators of the balance between de-differentiation (neural crest specific gene expression) and differentiation (melanocyte specific gene expression) that defines invasive and noninvasive melanoma cell phenotypes. Finally, we provide insight into the current evidence linking resistance to targeted therapies to invasive properties of melanoma cells.
Nitric oxide (NO), carbon monoxide (CO), and hydrogen sulfide (H(2)S) are three endogenously produced gases with important functions in the vasculature, immune defense, and inflammation. It is increasingly apparent that, far from working in isolation, these three exert many effects by modulating each other's activity. Each gas is produced by three enzymes, which have some tissue specificities and can also be non-enzymatically produced by redox reactions of various substrates. Both NO and CO share similar properties, such as activating soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) to increase cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels. At the same time, H(2)S both inhibits phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A), an enzyme that metabolizes sGC and exerts redox regulation on sGC. The role of NO, CO, and H(2)S in the setting of cancer has been quite perplexing, as there is evidence for both tumor-promoting and pro-inflammatory effects and anti-tumor and anti-inflammatory activities. Each gasotransmitter has been found to have dual effects on different aspects of cancer biology, including cancer cell proliferation and apoptosis, invasion and metastasis, angiogenesis, and immunomodulation. These seemingly contradictory actions may relate to each gas having a dual effect dependent on its local flux. In this review, we discuss the major roles of NO, CO, and H(2)S in the context of cancer, with an effort to highlight the dual nature of each gas in different events occurring during cancer progression.
According to the latest cancer research data, there are a significant number of new cancer cases and a substantial mortality rate each year. Although a substantial number of clinical patients are treated with existing cancer drugs each year, the efficacy is unsatisfactory. The incidence is still high and the effectiveness of most cancer drugs remains unsatisfactory. Therefore, we evaluated the human proteins for their causal relationship to for cancer risk and therefore also their potential as drug targets. We used summary tumors data from the FinnGen and cis protein quantitative trait loci (cis-pQTL) data from a genome-wide association study, and employed Mendelian randomization (MR) to explore the association between potential drug targets and nine tumors, including breast, colorectal, lung, liver, bladder, prostate, kidney, head and neck, pancreatic caners. Furthermore, we conducted MR analysis on external cohort. Moreover, Bidirectional MR, Steiger filtering, and colocalization were employed to validate the main results. The DrugBank database was used to discover potential drugs of tumors. Under the threshold of False discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05, results showed that S100A16 was protective protein and S100A14 was risk protein for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive (HER-positive) breast cancer, phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A) was risk protein for colorectal cancer, and melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) was protective protein for non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC). And there was no reverse causal association between them. Colocalization analysis showed that S100A14 (PP.H4.abf = 0.920) and S100A16 (PP.H4.abf = 0.932) shared causal variation with HER-positive breast cancer, and PDE5A (PP.H4.abf = 0.857) shared causal variation with colorectal cancer (CRC). The MR results of all pQTL of PDE5A and MIA were consistent with main results. In addition, the MR results of MIA and external outcome cohort were consistent with main results. In this study, genetic predictions indicate that circulating S100 calcium binding protein A14 (S100A14) and S100 calcium binding protein A16 (S100A16) are associated with increase and decrease in the risk of HER-positive breast cancer, respectively. Circulating PDE5A is associated with increased risk of CRC, while circulating MIA is associated with decreased risk of NSCLC. These findings suggest that four proteins may serve as biomarkers for cancer prevention and as potential drug targets that could be expected for approval.
Sexual difficulties are common in patients with neurological disorders, and different domains of sexual function-desire, arousal, orgasm, and ejaculation-can be affected. Advances in the past 7 years in structural and functional neuroimaging have contributed to a greater understanding of the neural pathways involved in the regulation of sexual functions in health and disease, and this increased knowledge might help with development of future therapeutic strategies. A comprehensive assessment of patients includes history taking-covering the different domains of dysfunction, and primary, secondary, and tertiary contributory factors-as well as clinical examination in select patients (ie, patients for whom an associated non-neurological cause for sexual dysfunction is suspected). Investigations, such as assessment of associated cardiovascular risk factors, might also be indicated in specific situations. PDE5A inhibitors and intracavernosal injections of the prostaglandin alprostadil are effective for treating erectile dysfunction; however, options for managing other domains of sexual dysfunction in men and women remain poor. Research into different domains of sexual dysfunction is likely to lead to additional therapeutic strategies in the future.
In the past ten years, several chromosomal loci have been identified by genome-wide association studies to influence the risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) and its risk factors. The GUCY1A3 gene encoding the alpha(1) subunit of the soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) resides at one of these loci and has been strongly associated with blood pressure and CAD risk. More recently, further genes in the pathway encoding the endothelial nitric oxide synthase, the phosphodiesterases 3A and 5A, and the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor I-associated protein (IRAG), i.e., NOS3, PDE3A, PDE5A, and MRVI1, respectively, were likewise identified as CAD risk genes. In this review, we highlight the genetic findings linking variants in NO-cGMP signaling and cardiovascular disease, discuss the potential underlying mechanisms which might propagate the development of atherosclerosis, and speculate about therapeutic implications.
The clinical properties (efficacy and safety profile) of a medicine are related not only to its mode of action, but also to its selectivity for its target (usually a receptor or enzyme) and are also influenced by its pharmacokinetic properties (absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination). The growing number of phosphodiesterase inhibitors that are selective for phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) represent a promising new class of compounds that are useful for the treatment of erectile dysfunction and perhaps other disorders. Some of the basic pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic parameters that describe drug action are discussed with regard to the new PDE5 inhibitors. Central topics reviewed are the concentration that produces a given in vitro response, or potency (IC50), maximum plasma concentration (Cmax), time to Cmax (Tmax), half-life (t 1/2), area under the curve (AUC), bioavailability, onset and duration of action, and the balance to achieve optimum safety and efficacy. To illustrate these concepts, a group of inhibitors with varying selectivities and potencies for PDE5 (theophylline, IBMX, zaprinast, sildenafil, tadalafil and vardenafil) are discussed. Each drug has its own set of unique pharmacological characteristics based on its specific molecular structure, enzyme inhibition profile and pharmacokinetic properties. Each PDE5 inhibitor has a distinct selectivity that contributes to its safety profile. As with all new drugs, and especially those in a new class, careful evaluation will be necessary to ensure the optimal use of the PDE5 inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Metabolic reprogramming provides a new perspective for understanding cancer. The targeting of dysregulated metabolic pathways may help to reprogram the immune status of the tumor microenvironment (TME), thereby increasing the effectiveness of immune checkpoint therapy. Colorectal cancer (CRC), especially colon adenocarcinoma (COAD), is associated with poor patient survival. The aim of the present study was to identify novel pathways involved in the development and prognosis of COAD, and to explore whether these pathways could be used as targets to improve the efficacy of immunotherapy. METHODS: Metabolism-related differentially expressed genes (MRDEGs) between tumor and normal tissues were identified using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset, together with metabolism-related prognostic genes (MRPGs). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was performed separately for the MRDEGs and MRPGs. Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) was also performed to explore the role of purine metabolism in COAD tumorigenesis. Consensus clustering of purine metabolism genes with the overall survival (OS) of patients and with anti-tumor immunity was also performed. Pearson correlation analysis was used to identify potential targets that correlated strongly with the expression of immune checkpoints. RESULTS: A 6-gene signature that had independent prognostic significance for COAD was identified, together with a predictive model for risk stratification and prognosis. The most significantly enriched pathway amongst MRDEGs and MRPGs was purine metabolism. Differentially expressed purine metabolism genes could divide patients into two clusters with distinct prognosis and anti-tumor immunity. Further analysis suggested that purine metabolism was involved in anti-tumor immunity. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed the importance of metabolism-related pathways and in particular purine metabolism in the tumorigenesis, prognosis and anti-tumor immunity of COAD. We identified a 6-gene prognostic signature comprised of EPHX2, GPX3, PTGDS, NAT2, ACOX1 and CPT2. In addition, four potential immune-metabolic checkpoints (GUCY1A1, GUCY1B1, PDE1A and PDE5A) were identified, which could be used to improve the efficacy of immunotherapy in COAD.
Xanthelasma palpebrarum (XP) is the most common form of cutaneous xanthoma, with a prevalence of 1.1%~4.4% in the population. However, the cause of XP remains largely unknown. In the present study, we used Mendelian randomization to assess the genetic association between plasma lipids, metabolic traits, and circulating protein with XP, leveraging summary statistics from large genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Genetically predicted plasma cholesterol and LDL-C, but not HDL-C or triglyceride, were significantly associated with XP. Metabolic traits, including BMI, fasting glucose, type 2 diabetes, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, were not significantly associated with XP. Furthermore, we found genetically predicted 12 circulating proteins were associated with XP, including FN1, NTM, FCN2, GOLM1, ICAM5, PDE5A, C5, CLEC11A, CXCL1, CCL2, CCL11, CCL13. In conclusion, this study identified plasma cholesterol, LDL-C, and 12 circulating proteins to be putative causal factors for XP, highlighting the role of plasma cholesterol and inflammatory response in XP development.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) causes heart failure and sudden death. Epigenetics is crucial in cardiomyopathy susceptibility and progression; however, the relationship between epigenetics, particularly DNA methylation, and DCM remains unknown. Therefore, this study identified aberrantly methylated differentially expressed genes (DEGs) associated with DCM using bioinformatics analysis and characterized their clinical utility in DCM. DNA methylation expression profiles and transcriptome data from public datasets of human DCM and healthy control cardiac tissues were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus public datasets. Then an epigenome-wide association study was performed. DEGs were identified in both DCM and healthy control cardiac tissues. In total, 3,353 cytosine-guanine dinucleotide sites annotated to 2,818 mRNAs were identified, and 479 DCM-related genes were identified. Subsequently, core genes were screened using logistic, least absolute shrinkage and selection operator, random forest, and support vector machine analyses. The overlapping of these genes resulted in DEGs with abnormal methylation patterns. Cross-tabulation analysis identified 8 DEGs with abnormal methylation. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction confirmed the expression of aberrantly methylated DEGs in mice. In DCM murine cardiac tissues, the expressions of SLC16A9, SNCA, PDE5A, FNDC1, and HTRA1 were higher compared to normal murine cardiac tissues. Moreover, logistic regression model associated with aberrantly methylated DEGs was developed to evaluate the diagnostic value, and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was 0.949, indicating that the diagnostic model could reliably distinguish DCM from non-DCM samples. In summary, our study identified 5 DEGs through integrated bioinformatic analysis and in vivo experiments, which could serve as potential targets for further comprehensive investigation.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is associated with aberrant pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cell (PASMC) function and vascular remodeling. MiR-30d plays an important role in the pathogenesis of several cardiovascular disorders. However, the function of miR-30d in PAH progression remained unknown. Our study shows that circulating miR-30d level is significantly reduced in the plasma from PAH patients. In miR-30d transgenic (TG) rats, overexpressing miR-30d attenuates monocrotaline (MCT)-induced pulmonary hypertension (PH) and pulmonary vascular remodeling. Increasing miR-30d also inhibits platelet-derived growth factor-bb (PDGF-bb)-induced proliferation and migration of human PASMC. Metadherin (MTDH) and phosphodiesterase 5A (PDE5A) are identified as direct target genes of miR-30d. Meanwhile, nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) acts as a positive upstream regulator of miR-30d. Using miR-30d knockout (KO) rats treated with sildenafil, a PDE5A inhibitor that is used in clinical PAH therapies, it is further found that suppressing miR-30d partially attenuates the beneficial effect of sildenafil against MCT-induced PH and vascular remodeling. The present study shows a protective effect of miR-30d against PAH and pulmonary vascular remodeling through targeting MTDH and PDE5A and reveals that miR-30d modulates the beneficial effect of sildenafil in treating PAH. MiR-30d should be a prospective target to treat PAH and pulmonary vascular remodeling.
Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a highly prevalent and often undertreated condition. It may be a symptom of underlying, chronic illness and can have a negative impact on quality of life, psychosocial health, and relationships. The aging of the population, as well as the introduction of new treatment options, such as sildenafil, has led to increased public awareness of this disorder. New oral therapeutic agents are on the horizon. This article provides an overview of the physiology of erection, the pathophysiology of ED, and modern patient evaluation. Management options, including traditional therapeutic approaches as well as the new generation of oral agents, are also presented.
