Platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for PDGFA, PDGFB and PDGFC and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival and chemotaxis. Depending on the context, promotes or inhibits cell proliferation and cell migration. Plays an important role in the differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Required for normal skeleton development and cephalic closure during embryonic development. Required for normal development of the mucosa lining the gastrointes [...] 
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), also referred to as BCR-ABL1-like ALL, is a high-risk subset with a gene expression profile that shares significant overlap with that of Ph-positive (Ph(+)) ALL and is suggestive of activated kinase signaling. Although Ph(+) ALL is defined by BCR-ABL1 fusion, Ph-like ALL cases contain a variety of genomic alterations that activate kinase and cytokine receptor signaling. These alterations can be grouped into major subclasses that include ABL-class fusions involving ABL1, ABL2, CSF1R, and PDGFRB that phenocopy BCR-ABL1 and alterations of CRLF2, JAK2, and EPOR that activate JAK/STAT signaling. Additional genomic alterations in Ph-like ALL activate other kinases, including BLNK, DGKH, FGFR1, IL2RB, LYN, NTRK3, PDGFRA, PTK2B, TYK2, and the RAS signaling pathway. Recent studies have helped to define the genomic landscape of Ph-like ALL and how it varies across the age spectrum, associated clinical features and outcomes, and genetic risk factors. Preclinical studies and anecdotal reports show that targeted inhibitors of relevant signaling pathways are active in specific Ph-like ALL subsets, and precision medicine trials have been initiated for this high-risk ALL subset.
Brown adipose tissue can expend large amounts of energy, and therefore increasing its size or activity is a promising therapeutic approach to combat metabolic disease. In humans, major deposits of brown fat cells are found intimately associated with large blood vessels, corresponding to perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT). However, the cellular origins of PVAT are poorly understood. Here, we determine the identity of perivascular adipocyte progenitors in mice and humans. In mice, thoracic PVAT develops from a fibroblastic lineage, consisting of progenitor cells (Pdgfra(+), Ly6a(+) and Pparg(-)) and preadipocytes (Pdgfra(+), Ly6a(+) and Pparg(+)), which share transcriptional similarity with analogous cell types in white adipose tissue. Interestingly, the aortic adventitia of adult animals contains a population of adipogenic smooth muscle cells (Myh11(+), Pdgfra(-) and Pparg(+)) that contribute to perivascular adipocyte formation. Similarly, human PVAT contains presumptive fibroblastic and smooth muscle-like adipocyte progenitor cells, as revealed by single-nucleus RNA sequencing. Together, these studies define distinct populations of progenitor cells for thermogenic PVAT, providing a foundation for developing strategies to augment brown fat activity.
Gain-of-function IDH mutations are initiating events that define major clinical and prognostic classes of gliomas. Mutant IDH protein produces a new onco-metabolite, 2-hydroxyglutarate, which interferes with iron-dependent hydroxylases, including the TET family of 5'-methylcytosine hydroxylases. TET enzymes catalyse a key step in the removal of DNA methylation. IDH mutant gliomas thus manifest a CpG island methylator phenotype (G-CIMP), although the functional importance of this altered epigenetic state remains unclear. Here we show that human IDH mutant gliomas exhibit hypermethylation at cohesin and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF)-binding sites, compromising binding of this methylation-sensitive insulator protein. Reduced CTCF binding is associated with loss of insulation between topological domains and aberrant gene activation. We specifically demonstrate that loss of CTCF at a domain boundary permits a constitutive enhancer to interact aberrantly with the receptor tyrosine kinase gene PDGFRA, a prominent glioma oncogene. Treatment of IDH mutant gliomaspheres with a demethylating agent partially restores insulator function and downregulates PDGFRA. Conversely, CRISPR-mediated disruption of the CTCF motif in IDH wild-type gliomaspheres upregulates PDGFRA and increases proliferation. Our study suggests that IDH mutations promote gliomagenesis by disrupting chromosomal topology and allowing aberrant regulatory interactions that induce oncogene expression.
Avapritinib (AYVAKIT) is a potent and selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor of platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) and KIT activation loop mutants. It is being developed by Blueprint Medicines for the treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST), solid tumours and systemic mastocytosis. Avapritinib is approved in the USA for PDGFRA exon 18 (including D842V) mutant GIST and is undergoing regulatory assessment in the USA as a 4th-line treatment for GIST. Avapritinib is also undergoing regulatory assessment in the EU for PDGFRA D842V mutant GIST. This article summarizes the milestones in the development of avapritinib leading to this first approval for the treatment of adults with unresectable or metastatic GIST harbouring a PDGFRA exon 18 mutation, including PDGFRA D842V mutations. Clinical development of avapritinib is also underway for the treatment of systemic mastocytosis and late-stage solid tumours in several countries.
Platelet-derived growth subunit A (PDGFA) plays critical roles in development of glioblastoma (GBM) with substantial evidence from TCGA database analyses and in vivo mouse models. So far, only platelet-derived growth receptor alpha (PDGFRA) has been identified as receptor for PDGFA. However, PDGFA and PDGFRA are categorized into different molecular subtypes of GBM in TCGA_GBM database. Our data herein further showed that activity or expression deficiency of PDGFRA did not effectively block PDGFA activity. Therefore, PDGFRA might be not necessary for PDGFA function.To profile proteins involved in PDGFA function, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and Mass Spectrum (MS) and delineated the network of PDGFA-associated proteins for the first time. Unexpectedly, the data showed that EPHA2 could be temporally activated by PDGFA even without activation of PDGFRA and AKT. Furthermore, MS, Co-IP, in vitro binding thermodynamics, and proximity ligation assay consistently proved the interaction of EPHA2 and PDGFA. In addition, we observed that high expression of EPHA2 leaded to upregulation of PDGF signaling targets in TCGA_GBM database and clinical GBM samples. Co-upregulation of PDGFRA and EPHA2 leaded to worse patient prognosis and poorer therapeutic effects than other contexts, which might arise from expression elevation of genes related with malignant molecular subtypes and invasive growth. Due to PDGFA-induced EPHA2 activation, blocking PDGFRA by inhibitor could not effectively suppress proliferation of GBM cells, but simultaneous inhibition of both EPHA2 and PDGFRA showed synergetic inhibitory effects on GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, our study provided new insights on PDGFA function and revealed EPHA2 as a potential receptor of PDGFA. EPHA2 might contribute to PDGFA signaling transduction in combination with PDGFRA and mediate the resistance of GBM cells to PDGFRA inhibitor. Therefore, combination of inhibitors targeting PDGFRA and EHA2 represented a promising therapeutic strategy for GBM treatment.
Severe lung injury causes airway basal stem cells to migrate and outcompete alveolar stem cells, resulting in dysplastic repair. We found that this "stem cell collision" generates an injury-induced tissue niche containing keratin 5(+) epithelial cells and plastic Pdgfra(+) mesenchymal cells. Single-cell analysis revealed that the injury-induced niche is governed by mesenchymal proliferation and Notch signaling, which suppressed Wnt/Fgf signaling in the injured niche. Conversely, loss of Notch signaling rewired alveolar signaling patterns to promote functional regeneration and gas exchange. Signaling patterns in injury-induced niches can differentiate fibrotic from degenerative human lung diseases through altering the direction of Wnt/Fgf signaling. Thus, we have identified an injury-induced niche in the lung with the ability to discriminate human lung disease phenotypes.
AIMS: Specific fibroblast markers and in-depth heterogeneity analysis are currently lacking, hindering functional studies in cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). Here, we established cell-type markers and heterogeneity in murine and human arteries and studied the adventitial fibroblast response to CVD and its risk factors hypercholesterolaemia and ageing. METHODS AND RESULTS: Murine aorta single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis of adventitial mesenchymal cells identified fibroblast-specific markers. Immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry validated platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) and dipeptidase 1 (DPEP1) across human and murine aorta, carotid, and femoral arteries, whereas traditional markers such as the cluster of differentiation (CD)90 and vimentin also marked transgelin+ vascular smooth muscle cells. Next, pseudotime analysis showed multiple fibroblast clusters differentiating along trajectories. Three trajectories, marked by CD55 (Cd55+), Cxcl chemokine 14 (Cxcl14+), and lysyl oxidase (Lox+), were reproduced in an independent RNA-seq dataset. Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed divergent functional profiles of the three trajectories, related to vascular development, antigen presentation, and/or collagen fibril organization, respectively. Trajectory-specific genes included significantly more genes with known genome-wide associations (GWAS) to CVD than expected by chance, implying a role in CVD. Indeed, differential regulation of fibroblast clusters by CVD risk factors was shown in the adventitia of aged C57BL/6J mice, and mildly hypercholesterolaemic LDLR KO mice on chow by flow cytometry. The expansion of collagen-related CXCL14+ and LOX+ fibroblasts in aged and hypercholesterolaemic aortic adventitia, respectively, coincided with increased adventitial collagen. Immunohistochemistry, bulk, and single-cell transcriptomics of human carotid and aorta specimens emphasized translational value as CD55+, CXCL14+ and LOX+ fibroblasts were observed in healthy and atherosclerotic specimens. Also, trajectory-specific gene sets are differentially correlated with human atherosclerotic plaque traits. CONCLUSION: We provide two adventitial fibroblast-specific markers, PDGFRA and DPEP1, and demonstrate fibroblast heterogeneity in health and CVD in humans and mice. Biological relevance is evident from the regulation of fibroblast clusters by age and hypercholesterolaemia in vivo, associations with human atherosclerotic plaque traits, and enrichment of genes with a GWAS for CVD.
Stromal cells support epithelial cell and immune cell homeostasis and play an important role in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) pathogenesis. Here, we quantify the stromal response to inflammation in pediatric IBD and reveal subset-specific inflammatory responses across colon segments and intestinal layers. Using data from a murine dynamic gut injury model and human ex vivo transcriptomic, protein and spatial analyses, we report that PDGFRA(+)CD142(-)(/low) fibroblasts and monocytes/macrophages co-localize in the intestine. In primary human fibroblast-monocyte co-cultures, intestinal PDGFRA(+)CD142(-)(/low) fibroblasts foster monocyte transition to CCR2(+)CD206(+) macrophages through granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Monocyte-derived CCR2(+)CD206(+) cells from co-cultures have a phenotype similar to intestinal CCR2(+)CD206(+) macrophages from newly diagnosed pediatric IBD patients, with high levels of PD-L1 and low levels of GM-CSF receptor. The study describes subset-specific changes in stromal responses to inflammation and suggests that the intestinal stroma guides intestinal macrophage differentiation.
Gliomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors with evolving classification based on genotype. Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation is an early event in the formation of some diffuse gliomas, and is the best understood mechanism of their epigenetic dysregulation. Glioblastoma may evolve from lower-grade lesions with IDH mutations, or arise independently from copy number changes in platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN). Several molecular subtypes of glioblastoma arise from a common proneural precursor with a tendency toward transition to a mesenchymal subtype. Following oncogenic transformation, gliomas escape growth arrest through a distinct step of aberrant telomere reverse transcriptase (TERT) expression, or mutations in either alpha thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome (ATRX) or death-domain associated protein (DAXX) genes. Metabolic reprogramming allows gliomas to thrive in harsh microenvironments such as hypoxia, acidity, and nutrient depletion, which contribute to tumor initiation, maintenance, and treatment resistance.
Numerous recent studies using single cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcriptomics have shown the vast cell heterogeneity, including epithelial, immune, and stromal cells, present in the normal human stomach and at different stages of gastric carcinogenesis. Fibroblasts within the metaplastic and dysplastic mucosal stroma represent key contributors to the carcinogenic microenvironment in the stomach. The heterogeneity of fibroblast populations is present in the normal stomach, but plasticity within these populations underlies their alterations in association with both metaplasia and dysplasia. In this review, we summarize and discuss efforts over the past several years to study the fibroblast components in human stomach from normal to metaplasia, dysplasia, and cancer. In the stomach, myofibroblast populations increase during late phase carcinogenesis and are a source of matrix proteins. PDGFRA-expressing telocyte-like cells are present in normal stomach and expand during metaplasia and dysplasia in close proximity with epithelial lineages, likely providing support for both normal and metaplastic progenitor niches. The alterations in fibroblast transcriptional signatures across the stomach carcinogenesis process indicate that fibroblast populations are likely as plastic as epithelial populations during the evolution of carcinogenesis.
Hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES) encompass a group of disorders defined by sustained peripheral blood hypereosinophilia >1500/mm(3) and evidence of eosinophilia-associated organ impairment. Approximately 10% of HES patients may harbor a cryptic deletion on chromosome 4 leading to formation of the FIP1L1-PDGFRA (F/P) fusion gene; these patients are diagnosed as F/P-mutated myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia (MLN-eo). Areas covered: This review discusses the results of IM treatment in HES depending on mutation status. The literature on IM therapy in HES by searching PubMed for the terms 'imatinib mesylate', 'hypereosinophilic syndromes' and 'FIP1L1-PDGFRA' has been reviewed. The author's publications as well as his own experience in the field of HES treatment remain a significant contribution to this work. Expert commentary: Imatinib mesylate, a first generation tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has revolutionized the therapeutic approach to patients with hypereosinophilic syndromes and detectable F/P fusion gene. The response to IM in F/P-mutated MLN-eo is universal with minimal side effects. IM at 100mg per day induces complete molecular remission and even lower doses can be efficient to maintain durable response. Some patients may remain in continued remission after IM discontinuation. Resistance to IM is associated with dismal prognosis. IM is less effective in F/P-unmutated HES with short-lived response.
INTRODUCTION: Approximately 90% of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are driven by activating mutations in receptor tyrosine-kinases KIT or PDGFRA. Despite the outstanding results of first-line imatinib in advanced GIST, resistance ultimately occurs mainly through secondary mutations in KIT/PDGFRA. Other tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) with a broader spectrum of activity against these mutations are approved after imatinib failure. However, response rates and progression-free survival are drastically lower compared to imatinib. Notably, imatinib also triggers early tolerance adaptation mechanisms, which precede the occurrence of secondary mutations. AREAS COVERED: In this review, we outline the current landscape of KIT inhibitors, discuss the novel agents, and present additional biological pathways that may be therapeutically exploitable. EXPERT OPINION: The development of broad-spectrum and highly selective TKIs able to induce a sustained KIT/PDGFRA inhibition is the pillar of preclinical and clinical investigation in GIST. However, it is now recognized that the situation is more intricate, with various factors interacting with KIT and PDGFRA, playing a crucial role in the response and resistance to treatments. Future strategies in the management of advanced GIST should integrate driver inhibition with the blockade of other molecules to enhance cell death and establish enduring responses in patients.
The diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) is generally straightforward using a combination of histologic evaluation and pertinent immunohistochemical staining with CD117/kit and DOG-1 (discovered on GIST) antibodies. However, this tumor can be challenging in cases with an unusual morphology, in limited biopsies, for those in uncommon sites, post-treatment, and when other neoplasms express CD117/kit and DOG-1, thereby mimicking GIST. Finding epithelioid GISTs in the stomach in younger patients should prompt testing for succinate dehydrogenase (SHD)-deficiency using immunohistochemical staining for subunit B (SDHB). However, SDH-deficient GISTs can also arise in older patients, or as part of the Carney triad or Carney-Stratakis syndrome. GISTs with PDGFRA mutations can also prove difficult if they lack kit expression. It is also important to consider morphologic and immunophenotypic changes associated with treatment, including the potential absence of kit expression, particularly in GISTs that have metastasized. Therefore, obtaining clinical information regarding prior therapy with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) is crucial.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The current article revisits the most recent advances that occurred in the field of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) therapeutics. RECENT FINDINGS: GIST is driven by the oncogenic activation of KIT or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine kinases, and agents targeting these receptors lead to substantial benefit throughout the entire course of the disease. Two new drugs were approved in 2020. On one hand, ripretinib obtained the regulatory approval for the treatment of GIST patients after progression to all standard treatments. On the other hand, avapritinib became the first agent ever displaying activity in GIST driven by the multiresistant PDGFRA D842V mutation. The addition of both drugs to GIST therapeutics constitutes a remarkable milestone, particularly considering that the last agent approved was back in 2012. Similarly, the recent identification of neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase (NTRK) fusions in a subset of KIT/PDGFRA wild-type GISTs led to an open window for tailored treatment using specific NTRK inhibitors. Finally, multiple efforts have been made toward the clinical implementation of circulating tumor DNA evaluation to guide clinical decisions in GIST. SUMMARY: GIST has been consolidated over the years as a paradigmatic model in personalized medicine for the successful development of novel therapeutic strategies through targeted inhibition of oncogenic drivers.
Radiation-induced high-grade gliomas (RIGs) are an incurable late complication of cranial radiation therapy. We performed DNA methylation profiling, RNA-seq, and DNA sequencing on 32 RIG tumors and an in vitro drug screen in two RIG cell lines. We report that based on DNA methylation, RIGs cluster primarily with the pediatric receptor tyrosine kinase I high-grade glioma subtype. Common copy-number alterations include Chromosome (Ch.) 1p loss/1q gain, and Ch. 13q and Ch. 14q loss; focal alterations include PDGFRA and CDK4 gain and CDKN2A and BCOR loss. Transcriptomically, RIGs comprise a stem-like subgroup with lesser mutation burden and Ch. 1p loss and a pro-inflammatory subgroup with greater mutation burden and depleted DNA repair gene expression. Chromothripsis in several RIG samples is associated with extrachromosomal circular DNA-mediated amplification of PDGFRA and CDK4. Drug screening suggests microtubule inhibitors/stabilizers, DNA-damaging agents, MEK inhibition, and, in the inflammatory subgroup, proteasome inhibitors, as potentially effective therapies.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent tumor of the central nervous system, and its heterogeneity is a challenge in treatment. This study examined tumoral heterogeneity involving PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR gene amplification (GA) in 4q12 and its association with clinical parameters. Specimens from 22 GBM cases with GA for the 4q12 amplicon detected by FISH were investigated for homogeneous or heterogeneous coamplification patterns, diffuse or focal distribution of cells harboring GA throughout tumor sections, and pattern of clustering of fluorescence signals. Sixteen cases had homogenously amplification for all three genes (45.5%), for PDGFRA and KDR (22.7%), or only for PDGFRA (4.6%); six cases had heterogeneous GA patterns, with subpopulations including GA for all three genes and for two genes - PDGFRA and KDR (13.6%), or GA for all three and for only one gene - PDGFRA (9.1%) or KIT (4.6%). In 6 tumors (27.3%), GA was observed in focal tumor areas, while in the remaining 16 tumors (72.7%) it was diffusely distributed throughout the pathological specimen. Amplification was universally expressed as double minutes and homogenously stained regions. Coamplification of all three genes PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR, age >/= 60 years, and total tumor resection were statistically associated with poor prognosis. FISH proved effective for detailed interpretation of molecular heterogeneity. The study uncovered an even more diverse range of amplification patterns involving the 4q12 oncogenes in GBM than previously described, thus highlighting a complex tumoral heterogeneity to be considered when devising more effective therapies.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article reviews and discusses the current literature on how molecular subtyping of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) impacts decision-making in clinical practice. RECENT FINDINGS: Genotyping has not yet been used for prognostication of localized GIST. Recent findings indicate that mutations in platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) and stem cell growth factor receptor (KIT) exon 11 duplication mutations are associated with a favorable prognosis. Subgroup analyses of randomized trials provide first evidence on how genotyping predicts clinical benefit in the adjuvant setting. In the palliative setting, genotyping should be performed for dose selection but may also be relevant in patients who are intolerant to imatinib. For patients whose tumors harbor the notoriously resistant D842V PDGFRA mutations, novel inhibitors have entered clinical trials, which may end the therapeutic deadlock. Several novel targets have been identified that are currently being investigated in GIST, including inhibitors against fibroblast growth factor receptor, hepatocyte growth factor receptor, mitogen-activated protein, and phosphoinositide 3-kinase. Preliminary clinical data suggest that predictive markers will be needed to define sensitive molecular subgroups. SUMMARY: Genotyping should be an integral part of clinical management of GIST as it aids in prognostication, prediction of efficacy, and selection of drugs and dosing. Genotyping reduces the risk of both unnecessary adjuvant treatment as well as undertreatment and overtreatment in the palliative setting.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is the most common human sarcoma and usually results from a sporadic mutation in KIT or, less frequently, platelet-derived growth factor alpha (PDGFRA). Rarely, a germline mutation in the KIT, PDGFRA, succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), or neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) gene is responsible for GIST. These tumors are found in the stomach (PDGFRA and SDH), small bowel (NF1), or a combination of both (KIT). There is a need to improve care for these patients regarding genetic testing, screening, and surveillance. Since most GISTs due to a germline mutation do not respond to tyrosine kinase inhibitors, the role of surgery is critical, especially when considering germline gastric GIST. However, in contrast to the established recommendation for prophylactic total gastrectomy in cadherin 1 (CDH1) mutation carriers once they reach adulthood, there are no formal guidelines as to the timing or extent of surgical resection for patients who are either carriers of a germline GIST mutation causing gastric GIST or have already developed gastric GIST(s). Surgeons must balance treating what is often multicentric, yet initially indolent disease with the chance of cure and the complications associated with total gastrectomy. Here, we consider the major issues in performing surgery in patients with germline GIST and illustrate the principles with a previously unreported patient harboring a germline KIT 579 deletion.
BACKGROUND: Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are molecularly heterogeneous mesenchymal cells that interact with malignant cells and immune cells and confer anti- and protumorigenic functions. Prior in situ profiling studies of human CAFs have largely relied on scoring single markers, thus presenting a limited view of their molecular complexity. Our objective was to study the complex spatial tumor microenvironment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with multiple CAF biomarkers, identify novel CAF subsets, and explore their associations with patient outcome. METHODS: Multiplex fluorescence immunohistochemistry was employed to spatially profile the CAF landscape in 2 population-based NSCLC cohorts (n = 636) using antibodies against 4 fibroblast markers: platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (PDGFRA) and -beta (PDGFRB), fibroblast activation protein (FAP), and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alphaSMA). The CAF subsets were analyzed for their correlations with mutations, immune characteristics, and clinical variables as well as overall survival. RESULTS: Two CAF subsets, CAF7 (PDGFRA-/PDGFRB+/FAP+/alphaSMA+) and CAF13 (PDGFRA+/PDGFRB+/FAP-/alphaSMA+), showed statistically significant but opposite associations with tumor histology, driver mutations (tumor protein p53 [TP53] and epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR]), immune features (programmed death-ligand 1 and CD163), and prognosis. In patients with early stage tumors (pathological tumor-node-metastasis IA-IB), CAF7 and CAF13 acted as independent prognostic factors. CONCLUSIONS: Multimarker-defined CAF subsets were identified through high-content spatial profiling. The robust associations of CAFs with driver mutations, immune features, and outcome suggest CAFs as essential factors in NSCLC progression and warrant further studies to explore their potential as biomarkers or therapeutic targets. This study also highlights multiplex fluorescence immunohistochemistry-based CAF profiling as a powerful tool for the discovery of clinically relevant CAF subsets.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) were originally thought to harbor either KIT or platelet-derived growth factor receptor A (PDGFRA) mutations only. However, more recent discoveries have highlighted additional, less common oncogenic driver mutations including NF1, BRAF, and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) mutations. Genotyping GISTs has become more important since not all genotypes respond equally to FDA-approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors. GIST is a paradigm for personalized cancer therapy. Recent studies demonstrate how immunohistochemistry can be used both to diagnose GIST and to screen for specific mutations. DOG1 is particularly useful in the diagnosis of KIT-negative GIST, including tumors with PDGFRA mutations, which can also potentially be identified by immunohistochemistry for PDGFRA. SDHB immunohistochemistry is useful in characterizing GISTs with SDHA-D mutations, whereas SDHA immunohistochemistry is able to identify SDHA mutant GISTs.
