Platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for homodimeric PDGFB and PDGFD and for heterodimers formed by PDGFA and PDGFB, and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, chemotaxis and migration. Plays an essential role in blood vessel development by promoting proliferation, migration and recruitment of pericytes and smooth muscle cells to endothelial cells. Plays a role in the migration of vascular smooth muscle cells and the formation of neointima at v [...] 
This review addresses changes and updates in eosinophilic disorders under the International Consensus Classification (ICC). The previous category of myeloid/lymphoid neoplasm with eosinophilia (M/LN-eo) and a specific gene rearrangement is changed to M/LN-eo with tyrosine kinase gene fusions to reflect the underlying genetic lesions. Two new members, M/LN-eo with ETV6::ABL1 fusion and M/LN-eo with various FLT3 fusions, have been added to the category; and M/LN-eo with PCM1::JAK2 and its genetic variants ETV6::JAK2 and BCR::JAK2 are recognized as a formal entity from their former provisional status. The updated understanding of the clinical and molecular genetic features of PDGFRA, PDGFRB and FGFR1 neoplasms is summarized. Clear guidance as to how to distinguish these fusion gene-associated disorders from the overlapping entities of Ph-like B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), de novo T-ALL, and systemic mastocytosis is provided. Bone marrow morphology now constitutes one of the diagnostic criteria of chronic eosinophilic leukemia, NOS (CEL, NOS), and idiopathic hypereosinophilia/hypereosinophilic syndrome (HE/HES), facilitating the separation of a true myeloid neoplasm with characteristic eosinophilic proliferation from those of unknown etiology and not attributable to a myeloid neoplasm.
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) comprises  approximately 10% to 15% of childhood ALL cases, many of which respond exquisitely to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), for example, imatinib in PDGFRB-rearranged ALL. However, some cases developed drug resistance to TKIs and the mechanisms are poorly understood. In this study, we identified a novel PDGFRB fusion gene, namely AGGF1-PDGFRB, and functionally characterized its oncogenic potential in vitro. Further genomic profiling of longitudinally collected samples during treatment revealed the emergence of a mutation, PDGFRB(C843G) , which directly conferred resistance to all generations of ABL TKIs, including imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, and ponatinib. PDGFRB-mutant leukemia cells are highly sensitive to multitarget kinase inhibitor CHZ868, suggesting potential therapeutic options for some patients resistant to ABL TKIs. In summary, we describe a complex clonal evolution pattern in Ph-like ALL and identified a novel PDGFRB point mutation that drives leukemia relapse after ABL TKI treatment.
INTRODUCTION: Myofibromatosis is a distinctive mesenchymal disorder occurring predominantly in childhood, which on microscopy shows peripheral light areas of spindle cells and central cellular areas of primitive oval to spindle cells arranged around hemagiopercytomatous vessels. PDFGRB mutations in the familial and multifocal sporadic forms and SRF-RELA fusions in the cellular variants have been identified. The index case is being presented to discuss the clinico-pathological features, differential diagnosis, and management of the lesion. CASE PRESENTATION: An 11-year-old male presented with an infraorbital mass of 3 months duration. The mass was excised and microscopy revealed the morphological features of myofibroma with tram-track SMA immunopositivity. Nodular fasciitis and fibromatosis were the differentials considered. CONCLUSION: The SRF-RELA gene fusion may represent a subset that in the future may be used to differentiate these myofibromas/myopericytomas from the ACTB-GLI fusion myopericytomas, and PDGFRB may be used to perhaps separate out familial myofibromas from other myofibromas.
To investigate the pathogenesis of a congenital form of hepatic fibrosis, human hepatic organoids were engineered to express the most common causative mutation for Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease (ARPKD). Here we show that these hepatic organoids develop the key features of ARPKD liver pathology (abnormal bile ducts and fibrosis) in only 21 days. The ARPKD mutation increases collagen abundance and thick collagen fiber production in hepatic organoids, which mirrors ARPKD liver tissue pathology. Transcriptomic and other analyses indicate that the ARPKD mutation generates cholangiocytes with increased TGFbeta pathway activation, which are actively involved stimulating myofibroblasts to form collagen fibers. There is also an expansion of collagen-producing myofibroblasts with markedly increased PDGFRB protein expression and an activated STAT3 signaling pathway. Moreover, the transcriptome of ARPKD organoid myofibroblasts resemble those present in commonly occurring forms of liver fibrosis. PDGFRB pathway involvement was confirmed by the anti-fibrotic effect observed when ARPKD organoids were treated with PDGFRB inhibitors. Besides providing insight into the pathogenesis of congenital (and possibly acquired) forms of liver fibrosis, ARPKD organoids could also be used to test the anti-fibrotic efficacy of potential anti-fibrotic therapies.
Telocytes (TCs), a novel peculiar interstitial cell found in many tissues and organs, play pivotal roles in maintaining tissue homeostasis and regulating tissue and organ development and immune surveillance. In recent years, the existence of TCs in liver has been confirmed. In this chapter, we evaluate the role of TCs on promoting liver regeneration and the therapeutic effects on liver fibrosis.
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) are key actors in modulating the progression of many solid tumors such as breast cancer (BC). Herein, we identify an integrin alpha11/PDGFRbeta+ CAF subset displaying tumor-promoting features in BC. In the preclinical MMTV-PyMT mouse model, integrin alpha11-deficiency led to a drastic reduction of tumor progression and metastasis. A clear association between integrin alpha11 and PDGFRbeta was found at both transcriptional and histological levels in BC specimens. High stromal integrin alpha11/PDGFRbeta expression was associated with high grades and poorer clinical outcome in human BC patients. Functional assays using five CAF subpopulations (one murine, four human) revealed that integrin alpha11 promotes CAF invasion and CAF-induced tumor cell invasion upon PDGF-BB stimulation. Mechanistically, integrin alpha11 pro-invasive activity relies on its ability to interact with PDGFRbeta in a ligand-dependent manner and to promote its downstream JNK activation, leading to the production of tenascin C, a pro-invasive matricellular protein. Pharmacological inhibition of PDGFRbeta and JNK impaired tumor cell invasion induced by integrin alpha11-positive CAFs. Collectively, our study uncovers an integrin alpha11-positive subset of pro-tumoral CAFs that exploits PDGFRbeta/JNK signalling axis to promote tumor invasiveness in BC.
The discovery of therapeutically relevant mutations involving platelet-derived growth factor receptors alpha and beta (PDGFRA and PDGFRB) changed the way we evaluate and treat patients with clonal eosinophilia. Despite our improved understanding of the pathobiology of clonal eosinophilia, more than 50% of patients are diagnosed with idiopathic disease, 10% to 20% with a clonal myeloid disorder, and the remainder with a lymphocytic variant. The World Health Organization classification of tumors recognized the importance of a semi-molecular classification of eosinophilic myeloid disorders and divided them into two major subgroups: (1) myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia and abnormalities of PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1); and (2) chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not otherwise specified. A key challenge remains the identification of tyrosine kinase responsive molecular lesions in patients in whom the pathogenesis of clonal eosinophilia remains unclear.
Molecular diagnostics has generated substantial dividends in dissecting the genetic basis of myeloid neoplasms with eosinophilia. The family of diseases generated by dysregulated fusion tyrosine kinase (TK) genes is recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO) category, "Myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia and rearrangement of PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1, or with PCM1-JAK2" In addition to myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), these patients can present with myelodysplastic syndrome/MPN, as well as de novo or secondary mixed-phenotype leukemias or lymphomas. Eosinophilia is a common, but not invariable, feature of these diseases. The natural history of PDGFRA- and PDGFRB-rearranged neoplasms has been dramatically altered by imatinib. In contrast, patients with FGFR1 and JAK2 fusion TK genes exhibit a more aggressive course and variable sensitivity to current TK inhibitors, and in most cases, long-term disease-free survival may only be achievable with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Similar poor prognosis outcomes may be observed with rearrangements of FLT3 or ABL1 (eg, both of which commonly partner with ETV6), and further investigation is needed to validate their inclusion in the current WHO-defined group of eosinophilia-associated TK fusion-driven neoplasms. The diagnosis chronic eosinophilic leukemia, not otherwise specified (CEL, NOS) is assigned to patients with MPN with eosinophilia and nonspecific cytogenetic/molecular abnormalities and/or increased myeloblasts. Myeloid mutation panels have identified somatic variants in patients with a provisional diagnosis of hypereosinophilia of undetermined significance, reclassifying some of these cases as eosinophilia-associated neoplasms. Looking forward, one of the many challenges will be how to use the results of molecular profiling to guide prognosis and selection of actionable therapeutic targets.
Stable atherosclerotic plaques are characterized by a thick, extracellular matrix-rich fibrous cap populated by protective ACTA2(+) myofibroblast (MF)-like cells, assumed to be almost exclusively derived from smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Herein, we show that in murine and human lesions, 20% to 40% of ACTA2(+) fibrous cap cells, respectively, are derived from non-SMC sources, including endothelial cells (ECs) or macrophages that have undergone an endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndoMT) or a macrophage-to-mesenchymal transition (MMT). In addition, we show that SMC-specific knockout of the Pdgfrb gene, which encodes platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRbeta), in Apoe(-/-) mice fed a Western diet for 18 weeks resulted in brachiocephalic artery lesions nearly devoid of SMCs but with no changes in lesion size, remodelling or indices of stability, including the percentage of ACTA2(+) fibrous cap cells. However, prolonged Western diet feeding of SMC Pdgfrb-knockout mice resulted in reduced indices of stability, indicating that EndoMT- and MMT-derived MFs cannot compensate indefinitely for loss of SMC-derived MFs. Using single-cell and bulk RNA-sequencing analyses of the brachiocephalic artery region and in vitro models, we provide evidence that SMC-to-MF transitions are induced by PDGF and transforming growth factor-beta and dependent on aerobic glycolysis, while EndoMT is induced by interleukin-1beta and transforming growth factor-beta. Together, we provide evidence that the ACTA2(+) fibrous cap originates from a tapestry of cell types, which transition to an MF-like state through distinct signalling pathways that are either dependent on or associated with extensive metabolic reprogramming.
Bone marrow mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) are a heterogeneous population that can self-renew and generate stroma, cartilage, fat, and bone. Although a significant progress has been made toward recognizing about the phenotypic characteristics of MSCs, the true identity and properties of MSCs in bone marrow remain unclear. Here, we report the expression landscape of human fetal BM nucleated cells (BMNCs) based on the single-cell transcriptomic analysis. Unexpectedly, while the common cell surface markers such as CD146, CD271, and PDGFRa used for isolating MSCs were not detected, LIFR(+)PDGFRB(+) were identified to be specific markers of MSCs as the early progenitors. In vivo transplantation demonstrated that LIFR(+)PDGFRB(+)CD45(-)CD31(-)CD235a(-) MSCs could form bone tissues and reconstitute the hematopoietic microenvironment (HME) effectively in vivo. Interestingly, we also identified a subpopulation of bone unipotent progenitor expressing TM4SF1(+)CD44(+)CD73(+)CD45(-)CD31(-)CD235a(-), which had osteogenic potentials, but could not reconstitute HME. MSCs expressed a set of different transcription factors at the different stages of human fetal bone marrow, indicating that the stemness properties of MSCs might change during development. Moreover, transcriptional characteristics of cultured MSCs were significantly changed compared with freshly isolated primary MSCs. Our cellular profiling provides a general landscape of heterogeneity, development, hierarchy, microenvironment of the human fetal BM-derived stem cells at single-cell resolution.
PURPOSE: The overall survival rate for metastatic osteosarcoma hovers around 20%. Responses to second-line chemotherapy, targeted therapies, and immunotherapies have demonstrated limited efficacy in metastatic osteosarcoma. Our objective is to validate differentially expressed genes and signaling pathways between non-metastatic and metastatic osteosarcoma, employing single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and additional functional investigations. We aim to enhance comprehension of metastatic mechanisms and potentially unveil a therapeutic target. METHODS: scRNA-seq was performed on two primary osteosarcoma lesions (1 non-metastatic and 1 metastatic). Seurat package facilitated dimensionality reduction and cluster identification. Copy number variation (CNV) was predicted using InferCNV. CellChat characterized ligand-receptor-based intercellular communication networks. Differentially expressed genes underwent GO function enrichment analysis and GSEA. Validation was achieved through the GSE152048 dataset, which identified PDGFD-PDGFRB as a common ligand-receptor pair with significant contribution. Immunohistochemistry assessed PDGFD and PDGFRB expression, while multicolor immunofluorescence and flow cytometry provided insight into spatial relationships and the tumor immune microenvironment. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis compared metastasis-free survival and overall survival between high and low levels of PDGFD and PDGFRB. Manipulation of PDGFD expression in primary osteosarcoma cells examined invasion abilities and related markers. RESULTS: Ten clusters encompassing osteoblasts, osteoclasts, osteocytes, fibroblasts, pericytes, endothelial cells, myeloid cells, T cells, B cells, and proliferating cells were identified. Osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and osteocytes exhibited heightened CNV levels. Ligand-receptor-based communication networks exposed significant fibroblast crosstalk with other cell types, and the PDGF signaling pathway was activated in non-metastatic osteosarcoma primary lesion. These results were corroborated by the GSE152048 dataset, confirming the prominence of PDGFD-PDGFRB as a common ligand-receptor pair. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated considerably greater PDGFD expression in non-metastatic osteosarcoma tissues and organoids, correlating with extended metastasis-free and overall survival. PDGFRB expression showed no significant variation between non-metastatic and metastatic osteosarcoma, nor strong correlations with survival times. Multicolor immunofluorescence suggested co-localization of PDGFD with PDGFRB. Flow cytometry unveiled a highly immunosuppressive microenvironment in metastatic osteosarcoma. Manipulating PDGFD expression demonstrated altered invasive abilities and marker expressions in primary osteosarcoma cells from both non-metastatic and metastatic lesions. CONCLUSIONS: scRNA-seq illuminated the activation of the PDGF signaling pathway in primary lesion of non-metastatic osteosarcoma. PDGFD displayed an inhibitory effect on osteosarcoma metastasis, likely through the suppression of the EMT signaling pathway.
Cardiac fibroblasts produce the extracellular matrix (ECM) scaffold within which the various cellular components of the heart are organized. As well as providing structural support, it is becoming evident that the quality and quantity of ECM is a key factor for determining cardiac cell behavior during development and in pathological contexts such as heart failure involving fibrosis. Cardiac fibroblasts have long remained a poorly characterized cardiac lineage. Well characterized markers are now paving the way for a better understanding of the roles of these cells in various developmental and disease contexts. Notably, the relevance of processes including endothelial-tomesenchymal transition and the recruitment of circulating fibroblast progenitors in heart failure has been challenged. This review describes the latest findings on cardiac fibroblast markers and developmental origins, and discusses their importance in myocardial remodeling. Effective modulation of cardiac fibroblast activity would likely contribute to successful treatment of various cardiac disorders.
Alveolar development and repair require tight spatiotemporal regulation of numerous signalling pathways that are influenced by chemical and mechanical stimuli. Mesenchymal cells play key roles in numerous developmental processes. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFbeta) is essential for alveologenesis and lung repair, and the G protein alpha subunits Galphaq and Galpha11 (Galphaq/11) transmit mechanical and chemical signals to activate TGFbeta in epithelial cells. To understand the role of mesenchymal Galphaq/11 in lung development, we generated constitutive (Pdgfrb-Cre+/-;Gnaqfl/fl;Gna11-/-) and inducible (Pdgfrb-Cre/ERT2+/-;Gnaqfl/fl;Gna11-/-) mesenchymal Galphaq/11 deleted mice. Mice with constitutive Galphaq/11 gene deletion exhibited abnormal alveolar development, with suppressed myofibroblast differentiation, altered mesenchymal cell synthetic function, and reduced lung TGFbeta2 deposition, as well as kidney abnormalities. Tamoxifen-induced mesenchymal Galphaq/11 gene deletion in adult mice resulted in emphysema associated with reduced TGFbeta2 and elastin deposition. Cyclical mechanical stretch-induced TGFbeta activation required Galphaq/11 signalling and serine protease activity, but was independent of integrins, suggesting an isoform-specific role for TGFbeta2 in this model. These data highlight a previously undescribed mechanism of cyclical stretch-induced Galphaq/11-dependent TGFbeta2 signalling in mesenchymal cells, which is imperative for normal alveologenesis and maintenance of lung homeostasis.
Bilateral accumulation of calcium in the brain, most commonly in the basal ganglia, but also in the cerebellum, thalamus, and brainstem can be inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and is then referred to as primary familial brain calcifications (PFBC). Clinical manifestations include a spectrum of movement disorders and neuropsychiatric abnormalities. In the past 2 years, 3 genes have been identified to cause PFBC, (ie, SLC20A2, PDGFRB, and PDGFB). SCL20A2 encodes the Type III sodium-dependent inorganic phosphate (Pi) transporter 2 (PiT2) and, when mutated, uptake of Pi is severely impaired likely causing buildup of calcium phosphate. The second identified cause of PFBC is mutations in PDGFRB, which codes for platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGF-Rbeta). Interestingly, the third PFBC gene is PDGFB that encodes the ligand of PDGF-Rbeta, which is secreted during angiogenesis to recruit pericytes, thereby implying impairment of the blood-brain barrier as a disease mechanism of PFBC.
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by microangiopathy, excessive fibrosis, and the presence of circulating autoantibodies to several cellular and extracellular components. The role of autoimmunity in generating the clinical and pathologic phenotypes in SSc has been long debated and is still matter of controversy. Distinct specificities of antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) are selectively detected in SSc patients and are associated with unique disease manifestations, but do not have a proven pathogenic role. A new group of autoantibodies reactive with cell surface receptors have been identified in SSc patients. They have been shown to directly activate pathways that may contribute to tissue and vascular damage. As such, they are proposed to have a role as agonistic autoantibodies in SSc. According to Koch's third postulate, the autoantibodies in question should cause disease when introduced into a healthy subject. Therefore, our review will focus on those autoantibodies for which agonistic activity has already been demonstrated not only in vitro, but, at least partly, also in vivo. These include the antibodies anti-endothelial cells (AECA), anti-Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor (PDGFR), anti-Angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) and anti-endothelin-1 type A receptor (ETaR). In this review, we will discuss also a class of antagonistic autoantibodies, the anti-muscarinic-3 receptor (M3R) antibodies, since they seem to fulfill the aforementioned requirements.
AIMS: We sought to identify and optimise a universally available histological marker for pericytes in the human brain. Such a marker could be a useful tool for researchers. Further, identifying a gene expressed relatively specifically in human pericytes could provide new insights into the biological functions of this fascinating cell type. METHODS: We analysed single-cell RNA expression profiles derived from different human and mouse brain regions using a high-throughput and low-cost single-cell transcriptome sequencing method called EasySci. Through this analysis, we were able to identify specific gene markers for pericytes, some of which had not been previously characterised. We then used commercially (and therefore universally) available antibodies to immunolabel the pericyte-specific gene products in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human brains and also performed immunoblots to determine whether appropriately sized proteins were recognised. RESULTS: In the EasySci data sets, highly pericyte-enriched expression was notable for SLC6A12 and SLC19A1. Antibodies against these proteins recognised bands of approximately the correct size in immunoblots of human brain extracts. Following optimisation of the immunohistochemical technique, staining for both antibodies was strongly positive in small blood vessels and was far more effective than a PDGFRB antibody at staining pericyte-like cells in FFPE human brain sections. In an exploratory sample of other human organs (kidney, lung, liver, muscle), immunohistochemistry did not show the same pericyte-like pattern of staining. CONCLUSIONS: The SLC6A12 antibody was well suited for labelling pericytes in human FFPE brain sections, based on the combined results of single-cell RNA-seq analyses, immunoblots and immunohistochemical studies.
BACKGROUND: The fusiform aneurysm is a nonsaccular dilatation affecting the entire vessel wall over a short distance. Although PDGFRB somatic variants have been identified in fusiform intracranial aneurysms, the molecular and cellular mechanisms driving fusiform intracranial aneurysms due to PDGFRB somatic variants remain poorly understood. METHODS: In this study, single-cell sequencing and immunofluorescence were employed to investigate the phenotypic changes in smooth muscle cells within fusiform intracranial aneurysms. Whole-exome sequencing revealed the presence of PDGFRB gene mutations in fusiform intracranial aneurysms. Subsequent immunoprecipitation experiments further explored the functional alterations of these mutated PDGFRB proteins. For the common c.1684 mutation site of PDGFRbeta, we established mutant smooth muscle cell lines and zebrafish models. These models allowed us to simulate the effects of PDGFRB mutations. We explored the major downstream cellular pathways affected by PDGFRB(Y562D) mutations and evaluated the potential therapeutic effects of Ruxolitinib. RESULTS: Single-cell sequencing of two fusiform intracranial aneurysms sample revealed downregulated smooth muscle cell markers and overexpression of inflammation-related markers in vascular smooth muscle cells, which was validated by immunofluorescence staining, indicating smooth muscle cell phenotype modulation is involved in fusiform aneurysm. Whole-exome sequencing was performed on seven intracranial aneurysms (six fusiform and one saccular) and PDGFRB somatic mutations were detected in four fusiform aneurysms. Laser microdissection and Sanger sequencing results indicated that the PDGFRB mutations were present in smooth muscle layer. For the c.1684 (chr5: 149505131) site mutation reported many times, further cell experiments showed that PDGFRB(Y562D) mutations promoted inflammatory-related vascular smooth muscle cell phenotype and JAK-STAT pathway played a crucial role in the process. Notably, transfection of PDGFRB(Y562D) in zebrafish embryos resulted in cerebral vascular anomalies. Ruxolitinib, the JAK inhibitor, could reversed the smooth muscle cells phenotype modulation in vitro and inhibit the vascular anomalies in zebrafish induced by PDGFRB mutation. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that PDGFRB somatic variants played a role in regulating smooth muscle cells phenotype modulation in fusiform aneurysms and offered a potential therapeutic option for fusiform aneurysms.
Patients with Philadelphia chromosome-like acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (Ph-like ALL) often face a grim prognosis, with PDGFRB gene fusions being commonly detected in this subgroup. Our study has unveiled a newfound fusion gene, TERF2::PDGFRB, and we have found that patients carrying this fusion gene exhibit sensitivity to dasatinib. Ba/F3 cells harbouring the TERF2::PDGFRB fusion display IL-3-independent cell proliferation through activation of the p-PDGFRB and p-STAT5 signalling pathways. These cells exhibit reduced apoptosis and demonstrate sensitivity to imatinib in vitro. When transfused into mice, Ba/F3 cells with the TERF2::PDGFRB fusion gene induce tumorigenesis and a shortened lifespan in cell-derived graft models, but this outcome can be improved with imatinib treatment. In summary, we have identified the novel TERF2::PDGFRB fusion gene, which exhibits oncogenic potential both in vitro and in vivo, making it a potential therapeutic target for tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs).
Pericytes are perivascular cells along capillaries that are critical for the development of a functional vascular bed in the central nervous system and other organs. Pericyte functions in the adult brain are less well understood. Pericytes have been suggested to mediate functional hyperemia at the capillary level, regulate the blood-brain barrier and to give rise to scar tissue after spinal cord injury. Furthermore, pericyte loss has been suggested to precede cognitive decline in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease. Despite this observation, there is no convincing causality between pericyte loss and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. However, recent loss-of-function mutations in PDGFB and PDGFRB genes have implicated pericytes as the principle cell type affected in primary familiar brain calcification (PFBC), a neuropsychiatric disorder with dominant inheritance. Here we review the role of the PDGFB/PDGFRB signaling pathway in pericyte development and briefly discuss homeostatic functions of pericytes in the brain. We provide an overview of recent studies with mouse models of PFBC and discuss suggested pathogenic mechanisms for PFBC with special reference to pericytes.
Smooth muscle cell (SMC) phenotypic modulation, primarily driven by PDGFRbeta signaling, is implicated in occlusive cardiovascular diseases. However, the promotive and restrictive regulation mechanism of PDGFRbeta and the role of protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 14 (PTPN14) in neointimal hyperplasia remain unclear. Our study observes a marked upregulation of PTPN14 in SMCs during neointimal hyperplasia. PTPN14 overexpression exacerbates neointimal hyperplasia in a phosphatase activity-dependent manner, while SMC-specific deficiency of PTPN14 mitigates this process in mice. RNA-seq indicates that PTPN14 deficiency inhibits PDGFRbeta signaling-induced SMC phenotypic modulation. Moreover, PTPN14 interacts with intracellular region of PDGFRbeta and mediates its dephosphorylation on Y692 site. Phosphorylation of PDGFRbeta(Y692) negatively regulates PDGFRbeta signaling activation. The levels of both PTPN14 and phospho-PDGFRbeta(Y692) are correlated with the degree of stenosis in human coronary arteries. Our findings suggest that PTPN14 serves as a critical modulator of SMCs, promoting neointimal hyperplasia. PDGFRbeta(Y692), dephosphorylated by PTPN14, acts as a self-inhibitory site for controlling PDGFRbeta activation.
