Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2; Protein tyrosine kinase that is part of several cell surface receptor complexes, but that apparently needs a coreceptor for ligand binding. Essential component of a neuregulin-receptor complex, although neuregulins do not interact with it alone. GP30 is a potential ligand for this receptor. Regulates outgrowth and stabilization of peripheral microtubules (MTs). Upon ERBB2 activation, the MEMO1-RHOA-DIAPH1 signaling pathway elicits the phosphorylation and thus the inhibition of GSK3B at cell membrane. This prevents the phosphorylation of APC and  [...] 
PURPOSE: To describe our experience with a large cohort (411 patients from 288 families) of various forms of skeletal dysplasia who were molecularly characterized. METHODS: Detailed phenotyping and next-generation sequencing (panel and exome). RESULTS: Our analysis revealed 224 pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants (54 (24%) of which are novel) in 123 genes with established or tentative links to skeletal dysplasia. In addition, we propose 5 genes as candidate disease genes with suggestive biological links (WNT3A, SUCO, RIN1, DIP2C, and PAN2). Phenotypically, we note that our cohort spans 36 established phenotypic categories by the International Skeletal Dysplasia Nosology, as well as 18 novel skeletal dysplasia phenotypes that could not be classified under these categories, e.g., the novel C3orf17-related skeletal dysplasia. We also describe novel phenotypic aspects of well-known disease genes, e.g., PGAP3-related Toriello-Carey syndrome-like phenotype. We note a strong founder effect for many genes in our cohort, which allowed us to calculate a minimum disease burden for the autosomal recessive forms of skeletal dysplasia in our population (7.16E-04), which is much higher than the global average. CONCLUSION: By expanding the phenotypic, allelic, and locus heterogeneity of skeletal dysplasia in humans, we hope our study will improve the diagnostic rate of patients with these conditions.
Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are one group among the disorders of glycosylation. The latter comprise defects associated with hypoglycosylation but also defects with hyperglycosylation. Genetic diseases with hypoglycosylation can be divided in primary congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) and in genetic diseases causing secondary hypoglycosylation. This review covers the human CDG highlights from the last 3 years (2014-2016) following a summary of the actual status of CDG. It expands on 23 novel CDG namely defects in SLC39A8, CAD, NANS, PGM3, SSR4, POGLUT1, NUS1, GANAB, PIGY, PIGW, PIGC, PIGG, PGAP1, PGAP3, VPS13B, CCDC115, TMEM199, ATP6AP1, ATP6V1A, ATP6V1E1, TRAPPC11, XYLT1 and XYLT2. Besides, it discusses novel phenotypes of known CDG (DHDDS-CDG, ALG9-CDG, EXT2-CDG, PIGA-CDG, PIGN-CDG), the elucidation of putative glycosyltransferase disorders as O-mannosylglycan synthesis disorders (TMEM5-CDG, ISPD-CDG, FKTN-CDG, FKRP-CDG), a novel CDG mechanism, advances in diagnosis, pathogenesis, treatment and finally an updated list of the 104 known CDG.
BACKGROUND: Two important questions regarding the genetics of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are 1. Which germline genetic variants influence the incidence of this cancer; and 2. Whether PDAC causally predisposes to associated non-malignant phenotypes, such as type 2 diabetes (T2D) and venous thromboembolism (VTE). METHODS: In this study of 8803 patients with PDAC and 67,523 controls, we first performed a large-scale transcriptome-wide association study to investigate the association between genetically determined gene expression in normal pancreas tissue and PDAC risk. Secondly, we used Mendelian Randomization (MR) to analyse the causal relationships among PDAC, T2D (74,124 cases and 824,006 controls) and VTE (30,234 cases and 172,122 controls). FINDINGS: Sixteen genes showed an association with PDAC risk (FDR <0.10), including six genes not yet reported for PDAC risk (PPIP5K2, TFR2, HNF4G, LRRC10B, PRC1 and FBXL20) and ten previously reported genes (INHBA, SMC2, ABO, PDX1, MTMR6, ACOT2, PGAP3, STARD3, GSDMB, ADAM33). MR provided support for a causal effect of PDAC on T2D using genetic instruments in the HNF4G and PDX1 loci, and unidirectional causality of VTE on PDAC involving the ABO locus (OR 2.12, P < 1e(-7)). No evidence of a causal effect of PDAC on VTE was found. INTERPRETATION: These analyses identified candidate susceptibility genes and disease relationships for PDAC that warrant further investigation. HNF4G and PDX1 may induce PDAC-associated diabetes, whereas ABO may induce the causative effect of VTE on PDAC. FUNDING: National Institutes of Health (USA).
Biallelic pathogenic variants in PGAP3 cause a rare glycosylphosphatidyl-inositol biogenesis disorder, PGAP3-CDG. This multisystem condition presents with a predominantly neurological phenotype, including developmental delay, intellectual disability, seizures, and hyperphosphatemia. Here, we summarized the phenotype of sixty-five individuals including six unreported individuals from our CDG natural history study with a confirmed PGAP3-CDG diagnosis. Common additional features found in this disorder included brain malformations, behavioral abnormalities, cleft palate, and characteristic facial features. This report aims to review the genetic and metabolic findings and characterize the disease's phenotype while highlighting the necessary clinical approach to improve the management of this rare CDG.
Chromosome 17q12-21 remains the most highly replicated and significant asthma locus. Genotypes in the core region defined by the first genome-wide association study correlate with expression of 2 genes, ORM1-like 3 (ORMDL3) and gasdermin B (GSDMB), making these prime candidate asthma genes, although recent studies have implicated gasdermin A (GSDMA) distal to and post-GPI attachment to proteins 3 (PGAP3) proximal to the core region as independent loci. We review 10 years of studies on the 17q12-21 locus and suggest that genotype-specific risks for asthma at the proximal and distal loci are not specific to early-onset asthma and mediated by PGAP3, ORMDL3, and/or GSDMA expression. We propose that the weak and inconsistent associations of 17q single nucleotide polymorphisms with asthma in African Americans is due to the high frequency of some 17q alleles, the breakdown of linkage disequilibrium on African-derived chromosomes, and possibly different early-life asthma endotypes in these children. Finally, the inconsistent association between asthma and gene expression levels in blood or lung cells from older children and adults suggests that genotype effects may mediate asthma risk or protection during critical developmental windows and/or in response to relevant exposures in early life. Thus studies of young children and ethnically diverse populations are required to fully understand the relationship between genotype and asthma phenotype and the gene regulatory architecture at this locus.
The locus at 17q12 erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2) has been heavily amplificated and overexpressed in gastric cancer (GC), but it remains to be elucidated about the clinical significance of the co-amplification and co-overexpression of PGAP3 gene located around ERBB2 in GC. The profile of PGAP3 and ERBB2 in four GC cell lines and tissue microarrays containing 418 primary GC tissues was assessed to investigate the co-overexpression and clinical significance of the co-amplified genes, and to evaluate the impact of the co-amplified genes on the malignancy of GC. Co-amplification of PGAP3 and ERBB2 accompanied with co-overexpression was observed in a haploid chromosome 17 of NCI-N87 cells with double minutes (DMs). PGAP3 and ERBB2 were overexpressed and positively correlated in 418 GC patients. Co-overexpression of the PGAP3 and ERBB2 was correlated with T stage, TNM stage, tumour size, intestinal histological type and poor survival proportion in 141 GC patients. In vitro, knockdown of the endogenous PGAP3 or ERBB2 decreased cell proliferation and invasion, increased G1 phase accumulation and induced apoptosis in NCI-N87 cells. Furthermore, combined silencing of PGAP3 and ERBB2 showed an additive effect on resisting proliferation of NCI-N87 cells compared with targeting ERBB2 or PGAP3 alone. Taken together, the co-overexpression of PGAP3 and ERBB2 may be crucial due to its significant correlation with clinicopathological factors of GC. Haploid gain of PGAP3 co-amplified with ERBB2 is sufficient to facilitate the malignancy and progression of GC cells in a synergistic way.
Glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) are linked to many cell-surface proteins, anchor these proteins in the membrane, and are well characterized. However, GPIs that exist in the free form on the mammalian cell surface remain largely unexplored. To investigate free GPIs in cultured cell lines and mouse tissues, here we used the T5-4E10 mAb (T5 mAb), which recognizes unlinked GPIs having an N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) side chain linked to the first mannose at the nonreducing terminus. We detected free GPIs bearing the GalNAc side chain on the surface of Neuro2a and CHO, but not of HEK293, K562, and C2C12 cells. Furthermore, free GPIs were present in mouse pons, medulla oblongata, spinal cord, testis, epididymis, and kidney. Using a panel of Chinese hamster ovary cells defective in both GPI-transamidase and GPI remodeling pathway, we demonstrate that free GPIs follow the same structural remodeling pathway during passage from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane as do protein-linked GPI. Specifically, free GPIs underwent post-GPI attachment to protein 1 (PGAP1)-mediated inositol deacylation, PGAP5-mediated removal of the ethanolamine phosphate from the second mannose, and PGAP3- and PGAP2-mediated fatty acid remodeling. Moreover, T5 mAb recognized free GPIs even if the inositol-linked acyl chain or ethanolamine-phosphate side chain linked to the second mannose is not removed. In contrast, addition of a fourth mannose by phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor biosynthesis class Z (PIGZ) inhibited T5 mAb-mediated detection of free GPIs. Our results indicate that free GPIs are normal components of the plasma membrane in some tissues and further characterize free GPIs in mammalian cells.
BACKGROUND: Gastric and esophageal cancers are malignant diseases with rising importance in Western countries. To improve oncologic outcome after surgery, it is essential to understand the relevance of germline mutations. The aim of the study was to identify and distinguish clinically relevant single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). PATIENTS AND METHODS: In total, 190 patients with curative oncological resections of gastric and distal esophageal adenocarcinomas at Heidelberg University Hospital were eligible for this study. Outcome differences were determined for each SNP by analysis of clinical variables, survival, and mRNA expression levels. RESULTS: Significant survival differences were found on univariate analysis for usual prognostic variables (such as pTNM) and for six SNPs. On multivariate survival analysis, the SNPs rs12268840 (intron variant of MGMT, p = 0.045) and rs9972882 (intron variant of STARD3 and eQTL of PGAP3, p = 0.030) were independent and significant survival predictors along with R status and pT/pN category. Group TT of rs12268840 had the highest rate of second primary carcinoma (30.4%, p = 0.0003), lowest expression of MGMT based on cis-eQTL analysis in normal gastroesophageal tissue (p = 1.99 x 10(-17)), and worst oncologic outcome. Group AA of rs9972882 had the highest rate of distant metastases pM1 (42.9%, p = 0.0117), highest expression of PGAP3 (p = 1.29 x 10(-15)), and worst oncologic outcome. CONCLUSIONS: Two intron variant SNPs of MGMT and STARD3 were identified that were significant survival predictors and may influence tumor biology. The data indicate that DNA methylation (MGMT) and malfunction of GPI anchoring (PGAP3) are distinct mechanisms that are relevant for tumor progression and relapse.
Pancreatic cancer is among the most well-characterized cancer types, yet a large proportion of the heritability of pancreatic cancer risk remains unclear. Here, we performed a large transcriptome-wide association study to systematically investigate associations between genetically predicted gene expression in normal pancreas tissue and pancreatic cancer risk. Using data from 305 subjects of mostly European descent in the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project, we built comprehensive genetic models to predict normal pancreas tissue gene expression, modifying the UTMOST (unified test for molecular signatures). These prediction models were applied to the genetic data of 8,275 pancreatic cancer cases and 6,723 controls of European ancestry. Thirteen genes showed an association of genetically predicted expression with pancreatic cancer risk at an FDR </= 0.05, including seven previously reported genes (INHBA, SMC2, ABO, PDX1, RCCD1, CFDP1, and PGAP3) and six novel genes not yet reported for pancreatic cancer risk [6q27: SFT2D1 OR (95% confidence interval (CI), 1.54 (1.25-1.89); 13q12.13: MTMR6 OR (95% CI), 0.78 (0.70-0.88); 14q24.3: ACOT2 OR (95% CI), 1.35 (1.17-1.56); 17q12: STARD3 OR (95% CI), 6.49 (2.96-14.27); 17q21.1: GSDMB OR (95% CI), 1.94 (1.45-2.58); and 20p13: ADAM33 OR (95% CI): 1.41 (1.20-1.66)]. The associations for 10 of these genes (SFT2D1, MTMR6, ACOT2, STARD3, GSDMB, ADAM33, SMC2, RCCD1, CFDP1, and PGAP3) remained statistically significant even after adjusting for risk SNPs identified in previous genome-wide association study. Collectively, this analysis identified novel candidate susceptibility genes for pancreatic cancer that warrant further investigation. SIGNIFICANCE: A transcriptome-wide association analysis identified seven previously reported and six novel candidate susceptibility genes for pancreatic cancer risk.
BACKGROUND: Although 20 pancreatic cancer susceptibility loci have been identified through genome-wide association studies in individuals of European ancestry, much of its heritability remains unexplained and the genes responsible largely unknown. METHODS: To discover novel pancreatic cancer risk loci and possible causal genes, we performed a pancreatic cancer transcriptome-wide association study in Europeans using three approaches: FUSION, MetaXcan, and Summary-MulTiXcan. We integrated genome-wide association studies summary statistics from 9040 pancreatic cancer cases and 12 496 controls, with gene expression prediction models built using transcriptome data from histologically normal pancreatic tissue samples (NCI Laboratory of Translational Genomics [n = 95] and Genotype-Tissue Expression v7 [n = 174] datasets) and data from 48 different tissues (Genotype-Tissue Expression v7, n = 74-421 samples). RESULTS: We identified 25 genes whose genetically predicted expression was statistically significantly associated with pancreatic cancer risk (false discovery rate < .05), including 14 candidate genes at 11 novel loci (1p36.12: CELA3B; 9q31.1: SMC2, SMC2-AS1; 10q23.31: RP11-80H5.9; 12q13.13: SMUG1; 14q32.33: BTBD6; 15q23: HEXA; 15q26.1: RCCD1; 17q12: PNMT, CDK12, PGAP3; 17q22: SUPT4H1; 18q11.22: RP11-888D10.3; and 19p13.11: PGPEP1) and 11 at six known risk loci (5p15.33: TERT, CLPTM1L, ZDHHC11B; 7p14.1: INHBA; 9q34.2: ABO; 13q12.2: PDX1; 13q22.1: KLF5; and 16q23.1: WDR59, CFDP1, BCAR1, TMEM170A). The association for 12 of these genes (CELA3B, SMC2, and PNMT at novel risk loci and TERT, CLPTM1L, INHBA, ABO, PDX1, KLF5, WDR59, CFDP1, and BCAR1 at known loci) remained statistically significant after Bonferroni correction. CONCLUSIONS: By integrating gene expression and genotype data, we identified novel pancreatic cancer risk loci and candidate functional genes that warrant further investigation.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) stands as the most prevalent malignancy among women and ranks as the second most frequently diagnosed cancer globally among newly identified cases. Post-GPI attachment to proteins factor 3（PGAP3）was reported to involve in lipid remodeling. However, its specific role in breast cancer remains inadequately elucidated. Consequently, the principal objective of this study was to investigate the clinical significance of PGAP3 in breast cancer. METHODS: We conducted an extensive analysis using both public databases and our own sample cohort to assess the role of PGAP3 in breast cancer. Immunohistochemistry was employed to assess PGAP3 expression, immune markers, and the co-expression of PGAP3 with key susceptibility genes. Data analysis was performed using the R programming language. RESULTS: Our findings revealed that PGAP3 is significantly overexpressed in breast cancer, particularly in human epidermal growth factor 2 positive (HER2 +) breast cancer cases (p < 0.001). Co-expression analyses demonstrated a significant correlation between PGAP3 and susceptibility genes associated with breast cancer, including BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, ATM, CHEK2, RAD51C, and RAD51D (p < 0.05). Logistic regression analysis identified PGAP3 as a significant predictor of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), HER2, and lymph node metastasis status (p < 0.01). Furthermore, higher PGAP3 expression was associated with decreased infiltration of CD8 + T cells in breast cancer samples. CONCLUSION: Our study sheds light on the clinical significance of PGAP3 in breast cancer. PGAP3 is not only overexpressed in breast cancer but also correlates with key susceptibility genes, lymph node metastasis, and CD8 + T cell infiltration. These findings provide valuable insights into the potential role of PGAP3 as a biomarker in breast cancer and may contribute to our understanding of the disease's pathogenesis.
Cervical cancer (CC) is still an intractable disease that seriously affects women's health. Elucidating its pathogenesis will bring new targets for clinical treatment. Circular RNA (circRNA) is an endogenous RNA that has recently been reported to be closely related to cancer progression and development. In the current study, by performing in silico analysis and qRT-PCR assay, we found a circRNA derived from PGAP3, referred as circ-PGAP3 (hsa_circ_0106800, chr17:37843549-37844086), which was significantly downregulated in CC tissues. Low circ-PGAP3 was closely linked to poor prognosis. And overexpression of circ-PGAP3 significantly reduced CC cell proliferation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo. In terms of mechanism, circ-PGAP3 was transcriptionally elevated by p53, a well-recognized tumor suppressor, and circ-PGAP3 was located in the cytoplasm where sponged miR-769-5p to increase the levels of p53 and its downstream targets. Importantly, the regulatory feedback loop of circ-PGAP3/p53 was also confirmed in vivo. Overall, our data clearly expounded the tumor-inhibiting role of circ-PGAP3 in CC, circ-PGAP3 repressed CC tumorigenesis via regulating the miR-769-5p/p53 axis. Therefore, restoration of circ-PGAP3 may be a promising therapeutic target for this thorny disease.
Recessive mutations in Post-GPI attachment to proteins 3 (PGAP3) cause the rare neurological disorder hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome 4 type (HPMRS4). Here, we report a novel homozygous nonsense mutation in PGAP3 (c.265C>T-p.Gln89*), in a 3-year-old boy with unique novel clinical features. These include decreased intrauterine fetal movements, dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, olfactory bulb agenesis, dysmorphic features, cleft palate, left ear constriction, global developmental delay, and hypotonia. The zebrafish functional modeling of PGAP3 loss resulted in HPMRS4-like features, including structural brain abnormalities, dysmorphic cranial and facial features, hypotonia, and seizure-like behavior. Remarkably, morphants displayed defective neural tube formation during the early stages of nervous system development, affecting brain morphogenesis. The significant aberrant midbrain and hindbrain formation demonstrated by separation of the left and right tectal ventricles, defects in the cerebellar corpus, and caudal hindbrain formation disrupted oligodendrocytes expression leading to shorter motor neurons axons. Assessment of zebrafish neuromuscular responses revealed epileptic-like movements at early development, followed by seizure-like behavior, loss of touch response, and hypotonia, mimicking the clinical phenotype human patients. Altogether, we report a novel pathogenic PGAP3 variant associated with unique phenotypic hallmarks, which may be related to the gene's novel role in brain morphogenesis and neuronal wiring.
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disease caused by the destruction of insulin-producing pancreatic islet beta cells. Despite significant advancements, the precise pathogenesis of the disease remains unknown. This work integrated data from expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) studies with Genome wide association study (GWAS) summary data of T1D and single-cell transcriptome data to investigate the potential pathogenic mechanisms of the CTSH gene involved in T1D in exocrine pancreas. Using the summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) approach, we obtained four potential causative genes associated with T1D: BTN3A2, PGAP3, SMARCE1 and CTSH. To further investigate these genes'roles in T1D development, we validated them using a scRNA-seq dataset from pancreatic tissues of both T1D patients and healthy controls. The analysis showed a significantly high expression of the CTSH gene in T1D acinar cells, whereas the other three genes showed no significant changes in the scRNA-seq data. Moreover, single-cell WGCNA analysis revealed the strongest positive correlation between the module containing CTSH and T1D. In addition, we found cellular ligand-receptor interactions between the acinar cells and different cell types, especially ductal cells. Finally, based on functional enrichment analysis, we hypothesized that the CTSH gene in the exocrine pancreas enhances the antiviral response, leading to the overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the development of an inflammatory microenvironment. This process promotes beta cells injury and ultimately the development of T1D. Our findings offer insights into the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of T1D.
BACKGROUND: We aimed to clarify the genomic characteristics of HER2-positive and negative gastric cancer cases that potentially affect tumor progression and treatment response in a prospective trial. METHODS: We collected 80 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples (49 HER2+ and 31 HER2-) from gastric cancer patients who participated in the TROX-A1 trial (UMIN000036865). We queried a 435-gene panel (CANCERPLEX-JP) to generate comprehensive genomic profiling data, including the tumor mutation burden, somatic mutations, and copy number variations. In addition, the genomic differences between HER2+ and HER2- gastric cancer patients were analyzed. RESULTS: Mutational analyses showed that TP53 was the most frequently mutated gene regardless of HER2 status. ARID1A mutation was significantly enriched in HER2-negative patients. The number of total mutations in HER2-negative patients with ARID1A mutation was remarkably higher than that in HER2-positive patients. Next, copy number variation analyses showed that the number of amplified genes (such as CCNE1, PGAP3, and CDK12) in HER2-positive cases was significantly higher than that in HER2-negative cases. Moreover, PTEN deletion was more common in HER2-positive cases. Finally, we found that, compared with HER2-positive patients, HER2-negative patients tended to have a higher tumor mutation burden, particularly in patients with ARID1A mutation. Pathway analyses of the gene alterations showed an enrichment of several immune-related pathways in HER2-negative patients. CONCLUSIONS: According to the genomic profiling of HER2-positive and negative gastric cancer, several gene alterations in the HER2 pathway may be the potential mechanism underlying trastuzumab resistance. Relative to HER2-positive gastric cancer, HER2-negative gastric tumors with ARID1A mutation may be sensitive to immune checkpoint inhibitors.
Abnormal blood lipid levels are influenced by genetic and lifestyle/dietary factors. Although many genetic variants associated with blood lipid traits have been identified in Europeans, similar data in Middle Eastern populations are limited. We performed a genome-wide association study with Arab individuals (discovery cohort: 1,353; replication cohort: 1,176) from Kuwait to identify possible associations of genetic variants with high lipid levels. We used Illumina HumanOmniExpress BeadChip and candidate SNP genotyping in the discovery and replication phases, respectively. For association tests, we used genetic models that were based on additive and recessive modes of inheritance. High triglycerides (TGs) were recessively associated with six risk variants (rs1002487/RPS6KA1, rs11805972/LAD1) rs7761746/Or5v1, rs39745/CTTNBP2-LSM8, rs2934952/PGAP3, and rs9626773/RP11-191L9.4-CERK) at genome-wide significance (P circle 6.12E-09), and another six variants (rs10873925/ST6GALNAC5, rs4663379/SPP2-ARL4C, rs10033119/NPY1R, rs17709449/LINC00911-FLRT2, rs11654954/CDK12-NEUROD2, and rs9972882/STARD3) were associated at borderline significance (P circle 5.0E-08). High TG was also additively associated with rs11654954. All of the 12 identified markers are novel and are harbored in runs of homozygosity. Literature evidence supports the involvement of these gene loci in lipid-related processes. This study in an Arab population augments international efforts to identify genetic regulation of lipid traits.
BACKGROUND: Hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome (HPMRS) is a recessive disorder characterized by high blood levels of alkaline phosphatase together with typical dysmorphic signs such as cleft palate, intellectual disability, cardiac abnormalities, and developmental delay. Genes involved in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol pathway and known to be mutated in HPMRS have never been characterized in the Lebanese population. CASE PRESENTATION: Herein, we describe a pair of monozygotic twins presenting with severe intellectual disability, distinct facial dysmorphism, developmental delay, and increased alkaline phosphatase level. Two individuals underwent whole exome sequencing followed by Sanger sequencing to confirm the co-segregation of the mutation in the consanguineous family. A biallelic loss of function mutation in PGAP3 was detected. Both patients were homozygous for the c.203delC (p.C68LfsX88) mutation and the parents were carriers confirming the founder effect of the mutation. High ALP serum levels confirmed the molecular diagnosis. CONCLUSION: Our findings have illustrated the genomic profile of PGAP3-related HPMRS which is essential for targeted molecular and genetic testing. Moreover, we found previously unreported clinical findings such as hypodontia and skin hyperpigmentation. These features, together with the novel mutation expand the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of this rare recessive disorder.
In this study, we conduct a comparison of three most recent statistical methods for joint variable selection and covariance estimation with application of detecting expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and gene network estimation, and introduce a new hierarchical Bayesian method to be included in the comparison. Unlike the traditional univariate regression approach in eQTL, all four methods correlate phenotypes and genotypes by multivariate regression models that incorporate the dependence information among phenotypes, and use Bayesian multiplicity adjustment to avoid multiple testing burdens raised by traditional multiple testing correction methods. We presented the performance of three methods (MSSL - Multivariate Spike and Slab Lasso, SSUR - Sparse Seemingly Unrelated Bayesian Regression, and OBFBF - Objective Bayes Fractional Bayes Factor), along with the proposed, JDAG (Joint estimation via a Gaussian Directed Acyclic Graph model) method through simulation experiments, and publicly available HapMap real data, taking asthma as an example. Compared with existing methods, JDAG identified networks with higher sensitivity and specificity under row-wise sparse settings. JDAG requires less execution in small-to-moderate dimensions, but is not currently applicable to high dimensional data. The eQTL analysis in asthma data showed a number of known gene regulations such as STARD3, IKZF3 and PGAP3, all reported in asthma studies. The code of the proposed method is freely available at GitHub (https://github.com/xuan-cao/Joint-estimation-for-eQTL).
A large proportion of the heritability of pancreatic cancer risk remains elusive, and the contribution of specific mRNA splicing events to pancreatic cancer susceptibility has not been systematically evaluated. In this study, we performed a large splicing transcriptome-wide association study (spTWAS) using three modeling strategies (Enet, LASSO and MCP) to develop alternative splicing genetic prediction models for identifying novel susceptibility loci and splicing introns for pancreatic cancer risk by assessing 8275 pancreatic cancer cases and 6723 controls of European ancestry. Data from 305 subjects of whom the majority are of European descent in the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project (GTEx) were used and both cis-acting and promoter-enhancer interaction regions were considered to build these models. We identified nine splicing events of seven genes (ABO, UQCRC1, STARD3, ETAA1, CELA3B, LGR4 and SFT2D1) that showed an association of genetically predicted expression with pancreatic cancer risk at a false discovery rate </=0.05. Of these genes, UQCRC1 and LGR4 have not yet been reported to be associated with pancreatic cancer risk. Fine-mapping analyses supported likely causal associations corresponding to six splicing events of three genes (P4HTM, ABO and PGAP3). Our study identified novel genes and splicing events associated with pancreatic cancer risk, which can improve our understanding of the etiology of this deadly malignancy.
