Cytochrome P450 1A2; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids, steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Exhibits high catalytic activity for the formation of hydroxyestrogens from estrone (E1) and 17beta- estradiol (E2), namely 2-hydroxy E1 and  [...] 
Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is determined by exhaustion of follicles in the ovaries, which leads to infertility before the age of 40 years. It is characterized by a strong familial and heterogeneous genetic background. Therefore, we will mainly discuss the genetic basis of POI in this review. We identified 107 genes related to POI etiology in mammals described by several independent groups. Thirty-four of these genes (AARS2, AIRE, ANTXR1, ATM, BMPR1B, CLPP, CYP17A1, CYP19A1, DCAF17, EIF2B, ERAL1, FANCA, FANCC, FMR1, FOXL2, GALT, GNAS, HARS2, HSD17B4, LARS2, LMNA, MGME1, NBN, PMM2, POLG, PREPL, RCBTB1, RECQL2/3/4, STAR, TWNK, and XRCC4/9) have been linked to syndromic POI and are mainly implicated in metabolism function and meiosis/DNA repair. In addition, the majority of genes associated with nonsyndromic POI, widely expanded by high-throughput techniques over the last decade, have been implicated in ovarian development and meiosis/DNA repair pathways (ATG7, ATG9, ANKRD31, BMP8B, BMP15, BMPR1A, BMPR1B, BMPR2, BNC1, BRCA2, CPEB1, C14ORF39, DAZL, DIAPH2, DMC1, ERCC6, FANCL, FANCM, FIGLA, FSHR, GATA4, GDF9, GJA4, HELQ, HSF2BP, HFM1, INSL3, LHCGR, LHX8, MCM8, MCM9, MEIOB, MSH4, MSH5, NANOS3, NOBOX, NOTCH2, NR5A1, NUP107, PGRMC1, POLR3H, PRDM1, PRDM9, PSMC3IP, SOHLH1, SOHLH2, SPIDR, STAG3, SYCE1, TP63, UBR2, WDR62, and XRCC2), whereas a few are related to metabolic functions (EIF4ENIF1, KHDRBS1, MRPS22, POLR2C). Some genes, such as STRA8, FOXO3A, KIT, KITL, WNT4, and FANCE, have been shown to cause ovarian insufficiency in rodents, but mutations in these genes have yet to be elucidated in women affected by POI. Lastly, some genes have been rarely implicated in its etiology (AMH, AMHR2, ERRC2, ESR1, INHA, LMN4, POF1B, POU5F1, REC8, SMC1B). Considering the heterogeneous genetic and familial background of this disorder, we hope that an overview of literature data would reinforce that genetic screening of those patients is worthwhile and helpful for better genetic counseling and patient management.
BACKGROUND: Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) is a heme-binding protein inducing dimerization with cytochrome P450, which mediates chemoresistance. Increased PGRMC1 expression is found in multiple types of resistant cancers, but the role of PGRMC1 in the ferroptosis of cancer cells remains unrevealed. Therefore, we examined the role of PGRMC1 in promoting ferroptosis in paclitaxel-tolerant persister cancer cells (PCC). METHODS: The effects of ferroptosis inducers and PGRMC1 gene silencing/overexpression were tested on head and neck cancer (HNC) cell lines and mouse tumor xenograft models. The results were analyzed about cell viability, death, lipid ROS and iron production, mRNA/protein expression and interaction, and lipid assays. RESULTS: PCC had more free fatty acids, lipid droplets, and fatty acid oxidation (FAO) than their parental cells. PCC was highly sensitive to inhibitors of system xc(-) cystine/glutamate antiporter (xCT), such as erastin, sulfasalazine, and cyst(e)ine deprivation, but less sensitive to (1S,3R)-RSL3. PGRMC1 silencing in PCC reduced ferroptosis sensitivity by xCT inhibitors, and PGRMC1 overexpression in parental cells increased ferroptosis by xCT inhibitors. Lipid droplets were degraded along with autophagy induction and autophagosome formation by erastin treatment in PCC. Lipophagy was accompanied by increased tubulin detyrosination, which was increased by SIRT1 activation but decreased by SIRT1 inhibition. FAO and lipophagy were also promoted by the interaction between lipid droplets and mitochondria. CONCLUSION: PGRMC1 expression increased FAO and ferroptosis sensitivity from in vivo mice experiments. Our data suggest that PGRMC1 promotes ferroptosis by xCT inhibition in PCC.
BACKGROUND: Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is characterized by marked heterogeneity, but with a significant genetic contribution. Identifying exact causative genes has been challenging, with many discoveries not replicated. It is timely to take stock of the field, outlining the progress made, framing the controversies and anticipating future directions in elucidating the genetics of POI. METHODS: A search for original articles published up to May 2015 was performed using PubMed and Google Scholar, identifying studies on the genetic etiology of POI. Studies were included if chromosomal analysis, candidate gene screening and a genome-wide study were conducted. Articles identified were restricted to English language full-text papers. RESULTS: Chromosomal abnormalities have long been recognized as a frequent cause of POI, with a currently estimated prevalence of 10-13%. Using the traditional karyotype methodology, monosomy X, mosaicism, X chromosome deletions and rearrangements, X-autosome translocations, and isochromosomes have been detected. Based on candidate gene studies, single gene perturbations unequivocally having a deleterious effect in at least one population include Bone morphogenetic protein 15 (BMP15), Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1), and Fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) premutation on the X chromosome; Growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF9), Folliculogenesis specific bHLH transcription factor (FIGLA), Newborn ovary homeobox gene (NOBOX), Nuclear receptor subfamily 5, group A, member 1 (NR5A1) and Nanos homolog 3 (NANOS3) seem likely as well, but mostly being found in no more than 1-2% of a single population studied. Whole genome approaches have utilized genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to reveal loci not predicted on the basis of a candidate gene, but it remains difficult to locate causative genes and susceptible loci were not always replicated. Cytogenomic methods (array CGH) have identified other regions of interest but studies have not shown consistent results, the resolution of arrays has varied and replication is uncommon. Whole-exome sequencing in non-syndromic POI kindreds has only recently begun, revealing mutations in the Stromal antigen 3 (STAG3), Synaptonemal complex central element 1 (SYCE1), minichromosome maintenance complex component 8 and 9 (MCM8, MCM9) and ATP-dependent DNA helicase homolog (HFM1) genes. Given the slow progress in candidate-gene analysis and relatively small sample sizes available for GWAS, family-based whole exome and whole genome sequencing appear to be the most promising approaches for detecting potential genes responsible for POI. CONCLUSION: Taken together, the cytogenetic, cytogenomic (array CGH) and exome sequencing approaches have revealed a genetic causation in  approximately 20-25% of POI cases. Uncovering the remainder of the causative genes will be facilitated not only by whole genome approaches involving larger cohorts in multiple populations but also incorporating environmental exposures and exploring signaling pathways in intragenic and intergenic regions that point to perturbations in regulatory genes and networks.
Progesterone Receptor Membrane Component 1 (PGRMC1) is a heme-binding protein that has been implicated in a wide range of cell and tissue functions, including cytochromes P450 activity, heme homeostasis, cancer, female reproduction, and protein quality control. Despite an extensive body of literature, a relative lack of mechanistic insight means that how PGRMC1 functions in these different aspects of biology is largely unknown. This review provides an overview of the PGRMC1 literature, highlighting what information is rigorously supported by experimental evidence and where additional investigation is warranted. The central role of PGRMC1 in supporting cytochrome P450 activity is discussed at length. Building on existing models of PGRMC1 function, a speculative model is proposed using the reviewed literature in which PGRMC1 functions as a heme chaperone to shuttle heme from its site of synthesis in the mitochondrion to other subcellular compartments. By spotlighting knowledge gaps, this review will motivate investigators to better understand this enigmatic protein.
Progesterone Receptor Membrane Component 1 (PGRMC1) is located in many different subcellular locations with many different attested and probably location-specific functions. PGRMC1 was recently identified in the mitochondrial outer membrane where it interacts with ferrochelatase, the last enzyme in the heme synthetic pathway. It has been proposed that PGRMC1 may act as a chaperone to shuttle newly synthesized heme from the mitochondrion to cytochrome P450 (cyP450) enzymes. Here we consider potential roles that PGRMC1 may play in transferring heme, and other small hydrophobic ligands such as cholesterol and steroids, between the hydrophobic compartment of the membrane lipid bilayer interior to aqueous proteins, and perhaps to the membranes of other organelles. We review the synthesis and roles of especially PGRMC1- and cyP450-bound heme, the sources and transport of cholesterol, the involvement of PGRMC1 in cholesterol regulation, and the production of the first progestogen pregnenolone from cholesterol. We also show by clustering by inferred models of evolution (CLIME) analysis that PGRMC1 and related proteins exhibit co-evolution with a series of cyP450 enzymes, as well as a group of mitochondrial proteins lacking in several parasitic protist groups. Altogether, PGRMC1 is implicated with important roles in sterol synthesis and energy regulation that are dispensable in certain parasites. Some novel hypothetical models for PGRMC1 function are proposed to direct future investigative research.
Heme oxygenase (HO) is a mono-oxygenase utilizing heme and molecular oxygen (O(2)) as substrates to generate biliverdin-IXalpha and carbon monoxide (CO). HO-1 is inducible under stress conditions, while HO-2 is constitutive. A balance between heme and CO was shown to regulate cell death and survival in many experimental models. However, direct molecular targets to which CO binds to regulate cellular functions remained to be fully examined. We have revealed novel roles of CO-responsive proteins, cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) and progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1), in regulating cellular functions. CBS possesses a prosthetic heme that allows CO binding to inhibit the enzyme activity and to regulate H(2)S generation and/or protein arginine methylation. On the other hand, in response to heme accumulation in cells, PGRMC1 forms a stable dimer through stacking interactions of two protruding heme molecules. Heme-mediated PGRMC1 dimerization is necessary to interact with EGF receptor and cytochromes P450 that determine cell proliferation and xenobiotic metabolism. Furthermore, CO interferes with PGRMC1 dimerization by dissociating the heme stacking, and thus results in modulation of cell responses. This article reviews the intriguing functions of these two proteins in response to inducible and constitutive levels of CO with their pathophysiological implications.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are responsible for tumor chemoresistance, and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is indispensable for maintaining CSC characteristics. Here, we aimed to investigate how the interaction between progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) and AHR contributes to the maintenance of CSC phenotypes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Clinical data and tissue microarray analyses indicated that patients with elevated PGRMC1 expression had poorer prognoses. Moreover, PGRMC1 overexpression enhanced CSC phenotypes and chemotherapy resistance in vitro and in vivo by modulating AHR ubiquitination. We then determined the specific interaction sites between PGRMC1 and AHR. Mass spectrometry screening identified tripartite motif containing 56 (TRIM56) as the E3 ligase targeting AHR. Notably, PGRMC1 overexpression inhibited the interaction between TRIM56 and AHR. Overall, our study revealed a regulatory mechanism that involves PGRMC1, AHR, and TRIM56, providing insights for developing CSC-targeting strategies in NSCLC treatment.
Ovarian dysfunction is one of the most common features of women with Turner syndrome. In these women, oocyte apoptosis is markedly accelerated from the early stage of fetal life. Reduction in the number of germ cells disturbs primordial follicle development and thereby leads to the formation of streak gonads. There are three possible causes of accelerated germ cell loss in 45,X ovaries. First, chromosomal pairing failure due to X chromosomal aneuploidy is believed to induce meiotic arrest. Indeed, it has been suggested that the dosage of the X chromosome is more critical for the survival of the oocytes than for other cells in the ovary. Second, impaired coupling between oocytes and granulosa cells may also contribute to germ cell apoptosis. Previous studies have shown that 45,X ovaries may tend to lose tight junctions which are essential for intercellular interactions. Lastly, ovarian dysfunction in women with Turner syndrome is partly attributable to the reduced dosage of several genes on the X chromosome. Specifically, BMP15, PGRMC1, and some other genes on the X chromosome have been implicated in ovarian function. Further studies on the mechanisms of ovarian dysfunction are necessary to improve the reproductive outcomes of women with Turner syndrome.
Progesterone receptor membrane component (PGRMC) proteins play important roles in tumor growth, progression, and chemoresistance, of which PGRMC1 is the best characterized. The ancestral member predates the evolution of metazoans, so it is perhaps not surprising that many of the purported actions of PGRMC proteins are rooted in fundamental metabolic processes such as proliferation, apoptosis, and DNA damage responses. Despite mediating some of the actions of progesterone (P4) and being fundamentally required for female fertility, PGRMC1 and PGRMC2 are broadly expressed in most tissues. As such, these proteins likely have both progesterone-dependent and progesterone-independent functions. It has been proposed that PGRMC1 acquired the ability to mediate P4 actions over evolutionary time through acquisition of its cytochrome b5-like heme/sterol-binding domain. Diverse reproductive and nonreproductive diseases associate with altered PGRMC1 expression, epigenetic regulation, or gene silencing mechanisms, some of which include polycystic ovarian disease, premature ovarian insufficiency, endometriosis, Alzheimer disease, and cancer. Although many studies have been completed using transformed cell lines in culture or in xenograft tumor approaches, recently developed transgenic model organisms are offering new insights in the physiological actions of PGRMC proteins, as well as pathophysiological and oncogenic consequences when PGRMC expression is altered. The purpose of this mini-review is to provide an overview of PGRMC proteins in cancer and to offer discussion of where this field must go to solidify PGRMC proteins as central contributors to the oncogenic process.
Progesterone has a broad spectrum of actions in the brain. Among these, the neuroprotective effects are well documented. Progesterone neural effects are mediated by multiple signaling pathways involving binding to specific receptors (intracellular progesterone receptors (PR); membrane-associated progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1); and membrane progesterone receptors (mPRs)) and local bioconversion to 3alpha,5alpha-tetrahydroprogesterone (3alpha,5alpha-THPROG), which modulates GABA(A) receptors. This brief review aims to give an overview of the synthesis, metabolism, neuroprotective effects, and mechanism of action of progesterone in the rodent and human brain. First, we succinctly describe the biosynthetic pathways and the expression of enzymes and receptors of progesterone; as well as the changes observed after brain injuries and in neurological diseases. Then, we summarize current data on the differential fluctuations in brain levels of progesterone and its neuroactive metabolites according to sex, age, and neuropathological conditions. The third part is devoted to the neuroprotective effects of progesterone and 3alpha,5alpha-THPROG in different experimental models, with a focus on traumatic brain injury and stroke. Finally, we highlight the key role of the classical progesterone receptors (PR) in mediating the neuroprotective effects of progesterone after stroke.
Reticulophagy is mediated by autophagy receptors that function in one of the two domains of the ER, tubules or flat sheets. Three different conserved mammalian receptors mediate autophagy in ER tubules: RTN3L, ATL3 and CALCOCO1. Previous studies have shown that RTN3L maintains proteostasis by targeting mutant aggregation-prone proteins for autophagy at distinct foci in ER tubules that we named ERPHS (ER-reticulophagy sites). The role for ATL3 and CALCOCO1 in proteostasis has not been addressed. Here we analyzed three different misfolded disease-causing RTN3L substrates and show that ATL3 and CALCOCO1 target the same cargoes for autophagy. Colocalization and knock down studies revealed that RTN3L and ATL3 are both required for the formation of RTN3L-containing ERPHS, while CALCOCO1 is not. We propose that RTN3L, ATL3 and CALCOCO1 work in parallel to maintain proteostasis within the ER network by targeting cargoes at different sites in the tubules.Abbreviation ATL3: atlastin GTPase 3; Baf: bafilomycin A(1); CALCOCO1: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 1; Epr1: ER-phagy receptor 1; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ERAD: ER-associated protein degradation; ERPHS: ER-reticulophagy sites; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; PGRMC1: progesterone receptor membrane component 1; POMC: proopiomelanocortin; Pro-AVP: pro-arginine vasopressin; RETREG1: reticulophagy regulator 1; reticulophagy: endoplasmic reticulum selective autophagy; RTN3L: reticulon 3 long isoform; VAPA: VAMP associated protein A.
Implantation and maintenance of pregnancy involve intricate immunological processes that enable the developing fetus to coexist with the maternal immune system. Progesterone, a critical hormone during pregnancy, is known to promote immune tolerance and prevent preterm labor. However, the mechanism by which progesterone mediates these effects remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of the non-classical progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) in progesterone signaling at the maternal-fetal interface. Using JEG3 cells, a trophoblast model cell line, we observed that progesterone stimulation increased the expression of human leukocyte antigen-C (HLA-C) and HLA-G, key molecules involved in immune tolerance. We also found that progesterone upregulated the expression of the transcription factor ELF3, which is known to regulate trophoblast-specific HLA-C expression. Interestingly, JEG3 cells lacked expression of classical progesterone receptors (PRs) but exhibited high expression of PGRMC1, a finding we confirmed in primary trophoblasts by mining sc-RNA seq data from human placenta. To investigate the role of PGRMC1 in progesterone signaling, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to knockout PGRMC1 in JEG3 cells. PGRMC1-deficient cells showed a diminished response to progesterone stimulation. Furthermore, we found that the progesterone antagonist RU486 inhibited ELF3 expression in a PGRMC1-dependent manner, suggesting that RU486 acts as a progesterone antagonist by competing for receptor binding. Additionally, we found that RU486 inhibited cell invasion, an important process for successful pregnancy, and this inhibitory effect was dependent on PGRMC1. Our findings highlight the crucial role of PGRMC1 in mediating the immunoregulatory effects of progesterone at the maternal-fetal interface.
Evidence is growing that progestogens may enhance breast cancer risk under hormone therapy in the postmenopause or hormonal contraception. However, differences may exist within the progestogen class and certain progestogens may have a higher potency in terms of breast cancer risk. The mechanism(s) by which these progestogens might influence breast cancer risk appear to be mediated via genomic and/or non-genomic effects triggered by activated progestogen receptors. In general, regulation of gene expression by progestogen receptors seems to be a multifactorial process involving both actions which often converge. In the present review, we describe the known genomic and non-genomic effects in the breast, especially focusing on the progestins. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 'Menopause'.
Several receptors for nongenomically initiated actions of progesterone (P4) exist, namely membrane-associated P4 receptors (MAPRs), membrane progestin receptors (mPRs), receptors for neurosteroids [GABA(A) receptor (GABA(AR)), NMDA receptor, sigma-1 and -2 receptors (S1R/S2R)], the classical genomic P4 receptor (PGR), and alpha/beta hydrolase domain-containing protein 2 (ABHD2). Two drugs related to this field have been approved: brexanolone (Zulresso) for the treatment of postpartum depression, and ganaxolone (Ztalmy) for the treatment of CDKL5 deficiency disorder. Both are derivatives of P4 and target the GABA(A)R. Several other indications are in clinical testing. CT1812 (Elayta) is also being tested for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in Phase 2 clinical trials, targeting the P4 receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1)/S2R complex. In this Review, we highlight emerging knowledge on the mechanisms of nongenomically initiated actions of P4 and its derivatives.
Various ovarian cell types including granulosa cells and ovarian surface epithelial cells express the progesterone (P4) binding protein, progesterone receptor membrane component-1 (PGRMC1). PGRMC1 is also expressed in ovarian tumors. PGRMC1 plays an essential role in promoting the survival of both normal and cancerous ovarian cell in vitro. Given the clinical significance of factors that regulate the viability of ovarian cancer, this review will focus on the role of PGRMC1 in ovarian cancer, while drawing insights into the mechanism of PGRMC1's action from cell lines derived from healthy ovaries as well as ovarian tumors. Studies using PGRMC1siRNA demonstrated that P4's ability to inhibit ovarian cells from undergoing apoptosis in vitro is dependent on PGRMC1. To confirm the importance of PGRMC1, the ability of PGRMC1-deplete ovarian cancer cell lines to form tumors in intact nude mice was assessed. Compared to PGRMC1-expressing ovarian cancer cells, PGRMC1-deplete ovarian cancer cells formed tumors in fewer mice (80% compared to 100% for controls). Moreover, the number of tumors derived from PGRMC1-deplete ovarian cancer cells was 50% of that observed in controls. Finally, the tumors that formed from PGRMC1-deplete ovarian cancer cells were about a fourth the size of tumors derived from ovarian cancer cells with normal levels of PGRMC1. One reason for PGRMC1-deplete tumors being smaller is that they had a poorly developed microvasculature system. How PGRMC1 regulates cell viability and in turn tumor growth is not known but part of the mechanism likely involves the regulation of genes that promote cell survival and inhibit apoptosis.
BACKGROUND: Decidualization of endometrial cells is the prerequisite for embryo implantation and subsequent placenta formation and is induced by rising progesterone levels following ovulation. One of the hormone receptors contributing to endometrial homeostasis is Progesterone Receptor Membrane Component 1 (PGRMC1), a non-classical membrane-bound progesterone receptor with yet unclear function. In this study, we aimed to investigate how PGRMC1 contributes to human decidualization. METHODS: We first analyzed PGRMC1 expression profile during a regular menstrual cycle in RNA-sequencing datasets. To further explore the function of PGRMC1 in human decidualization, we implemented an inducible decidualization system, which is achieved by culturing two human endometrial stromal cell lines in decidualization-inducing medium containing medroxyprogesterone acetate and 8-Br-cAMP. In our system, we measured PGRMC1 expression during hormone induction as well as decidualization status upon PGRMC1 knockdown at different time points. We further conferred proximity ligation assay to identify PGRMC1 interaction partners. RESULTS: In a regular menstrual cycle, PGRMC1 mRNA expression is gradually decreased from the proliferative phase to the secretory phase. In in vitro experiments, we observed that PGRMC1 expression follows a rise-to-decline pattern, in which its expression level initially increased during the first 6 days after induction (PGRMC1 increasing phase) and decreased in the following days (PGRMC1 decreasing phase). Knockdown of PGRMC1 expression before the induction led to a failed decidualization, while its knockdown after induction did not inhibit decidualization, suggesting that the progestin-induced 'PGRMC1 increasing phase' is essential for normal decidualization. Furthermore, we found that the interactions of prohibitin 1 and prohibitin 2 with PGRMC1 were induced upon progestin treatment. Knocking down each of the prohibitins slowed down the decidualization process compared to the control, suggesting that PGRMC1 cooperates with prohibitins to regulate decidualization. CONCLUSIONS: According to our findings, PGRMC1 expression followed a progestin-induced rise-to-decline expression pattern during human endometrial decidualization process; and the correct execution of this expression program was crucial for successful decidualization. Thereby, the results of our in vitro model explained how PGRMC1 dysregulation during decidualization may present a new perspective on infertility-related diseases.
OBJECTIVES: A few observational studies have suggested that progesterone and dydrogesterone may have a lower risk of breast cancer than other progestogens. In our earlier xenograft animal experiments, progesterone did not stimulate breast tumors. The aim of this study was to test dydrogesterone for the first time. The study also evaluated the effects of PGRMC1 on proliferation with progestogens. METHODS (1): In-vitro study. The proliferative effects of dydrogesterone and of progesterone were assessed in vitro using T47D cells transfected with PGRMC1 or empty vector in the presence or absence of estradiol. Additionally, to find the strongest proliferator for inclusion as a comparator in the xenograft animal study, norethisterone, levonorgestrel, desogestrel, dienogest, drospirenone, nomegestrol, and cyproterone acetate were tested. METHODS (2): Xenograft main study. PGRMC1-transfected or empty-vector T47D and MCF7 xenotransplants were each treated with four different hormonal preparations: E2+placebo; E2+dydrogesterone; E2+progesterone; E2+norethisterone. A total of 112 castrated mice were randomly allocated to the 16 groups. This was thus a prospective, randomized, blinded, placebo-controlled four-arm study (45-50 days) with the two T47D and two MCF7 xenografts. Tumor volumes were monitored twice weekly. RESULTS (1): In-vitro study. The strongest proliferation was with norethisterone, but only with PGRMC1-transfected cells. There was significant proliferation with dydrogesterone, but not with progesterone in the absence of estradiol. However, no increase in proliferation was achieved by adding dydrogesterone to estradiol compared with the proliferation induced with estradiol alone, in contrast to norethisterone. RESULTS (2): Xenograft main study. There was significantly faster tumor growth with norethisterone + E2 than with E2+placebo in T47D and MCF7 PGRMC1 xenografts, but not with dydrogesterone + E2 or progesterone + E2. There was less tumor growth in empty-vector xenografts, without between-group differences. CONCLUSION: PGRMC1 increases the breast-cell proliferation effects of certain progestogens, including dydrogesterone, in contrast to progesterone, but not during estradiol-induced proliferation, either in vitro or in a xenograft animal model, in contrast to norethisterone. Thus the proliferative potency of dydrogesterone may be similar to that of progesterone. Clinical studies in women overexpressing PGRMC1 are recommended.
INTRODUCTION: S2R (sigma-2 receptor)/Pgrmc1 (progesterone receptor membrane component 1) is a cytochrome-related protein that binds directly to heme and various pharmacological compounds. S2R(Pgrmc1) also associates with cytochrome P450 proteins, the EGFR receptor tyrosine kinase and the RNA-binding protein PAIR-BP1. S2R(Pgrmc1) is induced in multiple types of cancer, where it regulates tumor growth and is implicated in progesterone signaling. S2R(Pgrmc1) also increases cholesterol synthesis in non-cancerous cells and may have a role in modulating drug metabolizing P450 proteins. AREAS COVERED: This review covers the independent identification of S2R and Pgrmc1 and their induction in cancers, as well as the role of S2R(Pgrmc1) in increasing cholesterol metabolism and P450 activity. This article was formed through a PubMed literature search using, but not limited to, the terms sigma-2 receptor, Pgrmc1, Dap1, cholesterol and aromatase. EXPERT OPINION: Multiple laboratories have shown that S2R(Pgrmc1) associates with various P450 proteins and increases cholesterol synthesis via Cyp51. However, the lipogenic role of S2R(Pgrmc1) is tissue-specific. Furthermore, the role of S2R(Pgrmc1) in regulating P450 proteins other than Cyp51 appears to be highly selective, with modest inhibitory activity for Cyp3A4 in vitro and a complex regulatory pattern for Cyp21. Cyp19/aromatase is a therapeutic target in breast cancer, and S2R(Pgrmc1) activated Cyp19 significantly in vitro but modestly in biochemical assays. In summary, S2R(Pgrmc1) is a promising therapeutic target for cancer and possibly cholesterol synthesis but research to date has not identified a major role in P450-mediated drug metabolism.
The influenza A virus (IAV) infection is usually restricted to the respiratory tract and only rarely enters the central nervous system (CNS) and causes neurological symptoms. However, the roles of host factors involved in IAV infection in the CNS remain largely undetermined. Therefore, we aimed to characterize the host responses to IAV infection in the brain. We isolated a strain of IAV H5N6, which is neurotoxic and highly pathogenic to mice. High-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) revealed 240 differentially expressed genes in IAV-infected brains. Among the significantly downregulated genes, we focused on the gene encoding progesterone receptor membrane component-1 (PGRMC1) and observed that IAV H5N6 infection clearly inhibited PGRMC1 in both neuroblastoma and glioma cells. Furthermore, treatment with AG205, a PGRMC1-specific inhibitor, or PGRMC1 knockout promoted H5N6 multiplication in vitro, while overexpression of PGRMC1 resulted in opposite effects. Furthermore, AG205 treatment or PGRMC1 knockout significantly inhibited the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-mediated interferon beta (IFN-beta) signaling pathway and reduced the levels of several antiviral proteins (Mx1 and ISG15). In addition, PGRMC1-mediated regulation of IFN signaling relied on inhibition of the expression and ubiquitination of RIG-I. The loss of PGRMC1 leads to an increased susceptibility of mice (brain and lung) to influenza A virus infection. Conclusively, our results show for the first time that IAV H5N6 downregulates PGRMC1 expression to contribute to virus proliferation by inhibiting RIG-I-mediated IFN-beta production in the brain. These findings may offer new insights regarding the interplay between IAV and host factors that may impact IAV pathogenicity in the brain. IMPORTANCE Central nervous system (CNS) disease is one of the most common extra-respiratory tract complications of influenza A virus (IAV) infections. However, there is still little knowledge about IAV regulating host responses in brain. In this study, we identified progesterone receptor membrane component-1 (PGRMC1) as a novel host factor involved in the replication and propagation of IAV H5N6 in the host brain. We also observed that PGRMC1 antagonism was required for viral evasion from the host immune response during IAV infection via inhibition of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-mediated interferon beta (IFN-beta) signaling pathway and downstream antiviral gene expression. This study revealed a newly identified regulatory mechanism used by IAV H5N6 to ensure its life cycle in the CNS.
Combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs) contain estrogen and progestin, which can stimulate estrogen-sensitive and/or progesterone-sensitive breast cancer growth. Until recently, ethinylestradiol had been almost the only estrogen used for decades, and its dose has been greatly reduced over time. The first generations of birth control pills contained approximately five times more estrogen and four times more progestin than the latest contraceptives. Newer CHCs also contain steroids that more closely mimic the physiological estradiol (E2) and progesterone effects. The newer CHC formulations are thus expected to have less influence on the breast, although it is very difficult to demonstrate any difference among the recent available preparations in human studies. Recently, nomegestrol acetate (NOMAC), a neutral, nonandrogenic, progesterone-like profile progestin, has become available in combination with the 'natural' estrogen, E2. According to the literature, NOMAC/E2 is expected to have either a lesser stimulating effect or a neutral effect on estrogen-sensitive breast cancers. We performed an analysis of the available studies and a bibliographical review. The endocrine and metabolic effects of NOMAC/E2 formulation might lead to a lesser breast tissue stimulation. The data reported, confirmed through clinical studies, should be considered when choosing a hormonal contraceptive, especially when breast stimulation is a concern.
