Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that plays an essential role as cell surface receptor for neuregulins. Binds to neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and is activated by it; ligand-binding increases phosphorylation on tyrosine residues and promotes its association with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. May also be activated by CSPG5. Involved in the regulation of myeloid cell differentiation.
Primary immunodeficiencies are inherited disorders of the immune system, often caused by the mutation of genes required for lymphocyte development and activation. Recently, several studies have identified gain-of-function mutations in the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) genes PIK3CD (which encodes p110delta) and PIK3R1 (which encodes p85alpha) that cause a combined immunodeficiency syndrome, referred to as activated PI3Kdelta syndrome (APDS; also known as p110delta-activating mutation causing senescent T cells, lymphadenopathy and immunodeficiency (PASLI)). Paradoxically, both loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations that affect these genes lead to immunosuppression, albeit via different mechanisms. Here, we review the roles of PI3Kdelta in adaptive immunity, describe the clinical manifestations and mechanisms of disease in APDS and highlight new insights into PI3Kdelta gleaned from these patients, as well as implications of these findings for clinical therapy.
This report of a working group established by the Japan Diabetes Society proposes a new classification and diagnostic criteria for insulin resistance syndrome. Insulin resistance syndrome is defined as a condition characterized by severe attenuation of insulin action due to functional impairment of the insulin receptor or its downstream signaling molecules. This syndrome is classified into two types: genetic insulin resistance syndrome, caused by gene abnormalities, and type B insulin resistance syndrome, caused by autoantibodies to the insulin receptor. Genetic insulin resistance syndrome includes type A insulin resistance as well as Donohue and Rabson-Mendenhall syndromes, all of which are caused by abnormalities of the insulin receptor gene; conditions such as SHORT syndrome caused by abnormalities of PIK3R1, which encodes a regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; conditions caused by abnormalities of AKT2, TBC1D4, or PRKCE; and conditions in which a causative gene has not yet been identified. Type B insulin resistance syndrome is characterized by severe impairment of insulin action due to the presence of insulin receptor autoantibodies. Cases in which hypoglycemia alone is induced by autoantibodies that stimulate insulin receptor were not included in Type B insulin resistance syndrome.
Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase Regulatory Subunit 1 (PIK3R1) is believed to function as a tumor suppressor, while Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase Regulatory Subunit 2 (PIK3R2) as a tumor driver. However, there is no systematic pan-cancer analysis of them. The pan-cancer study comprehensively investigated the gene expression, genetic alteration, DNA methylation, and prognostic significance of PIK3R1 and PIK3R2 in 33 different tumors based on the TIMER, GEPIA, UALCAN, HPA, cBioPortal, and Kaplan-Meier Plotter database. The results indicated that PIK3R1 is lowly expressed in most tumors while PIK3R2 is highly expressed in most tumors, and abnormal gene expression may be related to promoter methylation. Moreover, not only mutations, downregulation of PIK3R1 and upregulation of PIK3R2 were found to be detrimental to the survival of most cancer patients as well. Furthermore, the expression of both PIK3R1 and PIK3R2 was associated with the level of immune infiltration in multiple tumors, such as breast invasive carcinoma. Our study conducted a comparatively comprehensive analysis of the role of PIK3R1 and PIK3R2 in a variety of cancers, contributing to further study of their potential mechanisms in cancer occurrence and progression. Our findings suggested that PIK3R1 and PIK3R2 could serve as prognostic markers for several cancers.
PURPOSE: Oncogenic alterations of the PI3K/AKT pathway occur in >40% of patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer, predominantly via PTEN loss. The significance of other PI3K pathway components in prostate cancer is largely unknown. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Patients in this study underwent tumor sequencing using the MSK-IMPACT clinical assay to capture single-nucleotide variants, insertions, and deletions; copy-number alterations; and structural rearrangements, or were profiled through The Cancer Genome Atlas. The association between PIK3R1 alteration/expression and survival was evaluated using univariable and multivariable Cox proportional-hazards regression models. We used the siRNA-based knockdown of PIK3R1 for functional studies. FDG-PET/CT examinations were performed with a hybrid positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scanner for some prostate cancer patients in the MSK-IMPACT cohort. RESULTS: Analyzing 1,417 human prostate cancers, we found a significant enrichment of PIK3R1 alterations in metastatic cancers compared with primary cancers. PIK3R1 alterations or reduced mRNA expression tended to be associated with worse clinical outcomes in prostate cancer, particularly in primary disease, as well as in breast, gastric, and several other cancers. In prostate cancer cell lines, PIK3R1 knockdown resulted in increased cell proliferation and AKT activity, including insulin-stimulated AKT activity. In cell lines and organoids, PIK3R1 loss/mutation was associated with increased sensitivity to AKT inhibitors. PIK3R1-altered patient prostate tumors had increased uptake of the glucose analogue 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose in PET imaging, suggesting increased glycolysis. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings describe a novel genomic feature in metastatic prostate cancer and suggest that PIK3R1 alteration may be a key event for insulin-PI3K-glycolytic pathway regulation in prostate cancer.
Large granular lymphocyte (LGL) leukemia comprises a group of rare lymphoproliferative disorders whose molecular landscape is incompletely defined. We leveraged paired whole-exome and transcriptome sequencing in the largest LGL leukemia cohort to date, which included 105 patients (93 T-cell receptor alphabeta [TCRalphabeta] T-LGL and 12 TCRgammadelta T-LGL). Seventy-six mutations were observed in 3 or more patients in the cohort, and out of those, STAT3, KMT2D, PIK3R1, TTN, EYS, and SULF1 mutations were shared between both subtypes. We identified ARHGAP25, ABCC9, PCDHA11, SULF1, SLC6A15, DDX59, DNMT3A, FAS, KDM6A, KMT2D, PIK3R1, STAT3, STAT5B, TET2, and TNFAIP3 as recurrently mutated putative drivers using an unbiased driver analysis approach leveraging our whole-exome cohort. Hotspot mutations in STAT3, PIK3R1, and FAS were detected, whereas truncating mutations in epigenetic modifying enzymes such as KMT2D and TET2 were observed. Moreover, STAT3 mutations co-occurred with mutations in chromatin and epigenetic modifying genes, especially KMT2D and SETD1B (P < .01 and P < .05, respectively). STAT3 was mutated in 50.5% of the patients. Most common Y640F STAT3 mutation was associated with lower absolute neutrophil count values, and N647I mutation was associated with lower hemoglobin values. Somatic activating mutations (Q160P, D170Y, L287F) in the STAT3 coiled-coil domain were characterized. STAT3-mutant patients exhibited increased mutational burden and enrichment of a mutational signature associated with increased spontaneous deamination of 5-methylcytosine. Finally, gene expression analysis revealed enrichment of interferon-gamma signaling and decreased phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt signaling for STAT3-mutant patients. These findings highlight the clinical and molecular heterogeneity of this rare disorder.
The 5-methylcytosine (m5C) RNA methyltransferase NSUN2 is involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and metastasis formation and is upregulated in multiple cancers. However, the biological significance of NSUN2 in gastric cancer (GC) and the modification of NSUN2 itself have not been fully investigated. Here, we analyzed the expression level of NSUN2 in tissue microarrays containing 403 GC tissues by immunohistochemistry. NSUN2 was upregulated in GC, and that it was a predictor of poor prognosis. NSUN2 promotes the proliferation, migration, and invasion of GC cells in vitro. We also demonstrated that small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-2/3 interacts directly with NSUN2 by stabilizing it and mediating its nuclear transport. This facilitates the carcinogenic activity of NSUN2. Furthermore, m5C bisulfite sequencing (Bis-seq) in NSUN2-deficient GC cells showed that m5C-methylated genes are involved in multiple cancer-related signaling pathways. PIK3R1 and PCYT1A may be the target genes that participate in GC progression. Our findings revealed a novel mechanism by which NSUN2 functions in GC progression. This may provide new treatment options for GC patients.
Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) is a common aging-associated condition with increased risk of hematologic malignancy. Knowledge of the mechanisms driving evolution from CH to overt malignancy has been hampered by a lack of in vivo models that orthogonally activate mutant alleles. Here, we develop independently regulatable mutations in DNA methyltransferase 3A (Dnmt3a) and nucleophosmin 1 (Npm1), observed in human CH and AML, respectively. We find Dnmt3a mutation expands hematopoietic stem and multipotent progenitor cells (HSC/MPPs), modeling CH. Induction of mutant Npm1 after development of Dnmt3a-mutant CH causes progression to myeloproliferative disorder (MPD), and more aggressive MPD is observed with longer latency between mutations. MPDs uniformly progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) following transplant, accompanied by a decrease in HSC/MPPs and an increase in myeloid-restricted progenitors, the latter of which propagate AML in tertiary recipient mice. At a molecular level, progression of CH to MPD is accompanied by selection for mutations activating Ras/Raf/MAPK signaling. Progression to AML is characterized by additional oncogenic signaling mutations (Ptpn11, Pik3r1, Flt3) and/or mutations in epigenetic regulators (Hdac1, Idh1, Arid1a). Together, our study demonstrates that Npm1 mutation drives evolution of Dnmt3a-mutant CH to AML and rate of disease progression is accelerated with longer latency of CH.
Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is a novel primary immunodeficiency (PID) caused by heterozygous gain of function mutations in PI3Kdelta catalytic p110delta (PIK3CD) or regulatory p85alpha (PIK3R1) subunits leading to APDS1 and APDS2, respectively. Patients with APDS present a spectrum of clinical manifestations, particularly recurrent respiratory infections and lymphoproliferation. We searched PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus databases for APDS patients and screened for eligibility criteria. A total of 243 APDS patients were identified from 55 articles. For all patients, demographic, clinical, immunologic, and molecular data were collected. Overall, 179 APDS1 and 64 APDS2 patients were identified. The most common clinical manifestations were respiratory tract infections (pneumonia (43.6%), otitis media (28.8%), and sinusitis (25.9%)), lymphoproliferation (70.4%), autoimmunity (28%), enteropathy (26.7%), failure to thrive (20.6%), and malignancy (12.8%). The predominant immunologic phenotype was hyper-IgM syndrome (48.1%). Immunologic profiling showed decreased B cells in 74.8% and CD4(+) T cells in 64.8% of APDS patients. The c.3061 G>A (p. E1021K) mutation in APDS1 with 85% frequency and c.1425+1 G> (A, C, T) (p.434-475del) mutation in APDS2 with 79% frequency were hotspot mutations. The majority of APDS patients were placed on long-term immunoglobulin replacement therapy. Immunosuppressive agents such as rituximab, tacrolimus, rapamycin, and leniolisib were also administered for autoimmunity and inflammatory complications. In addition, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) was used in 12.8% of patients. APDS has heterogynous clinical manifestations. It should be suspected in patients with history of recurrent respiratory infections, lymphoproliferation, and raised IgM levels. Moreover, HSCT should be considered in patients with severe and complicated clinical manifestations with no or insufficient response to the conventional therapies.
PIK3R1 (also known as p85alpha) is a regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks). PI3K, a heterodimer of a regulatory subunit and a catalytic subunit, phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol into secondary signaling molecules involved in regulating metabolic homeostasis. PI3K converts phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)) to phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP(3)), which recruits protein kinase AKT to the inner leaflet of the cell membrane to be activated and to participate in various metabolic functions. PIK3R1 stabilizes and inhibits p110 catalytic activity and serves as an adaptor to interact with insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins and growth factor receptors. Thus, mutations in PIK3R1 or altered expression of PIK3R1 could modulate the activity of PI3K and result in significant metabolic outcomes. Interestingly, recent studies also found PI3K-independent functions of PIK3R1. Overall, in this article, we will provide an updated review of the metabolic functions of PIK3R1 that includes studies of PIK3R1 in various metabolic tissues using animal models, the mechanisms modulating PIK3R1 activity, and studies on the mutations of human PIK3R1 gene.
Dysregulation of the PI3K/PTEN pathway is a frequent event in cancer, and PIK3CA and PTEN are the most commonly mutated genes after TP53. PIK3R1 is the predominant regulatory isoform of PI3K. PIK3R2 is an ubiquitous isoform that has been so far overlooked, but data from The Cancer Genome Atlas shows that increased expression of PIK3R2 is also frequent in cancer. In contrast to PIK3R1, which is a tumor-suppressor gene, PIK3R2 is an oncogene. We review here the opposing roles of PIK3R1 and PIK3R2 in cancer, the regulatory mechanisms that control PIK3R2 expression, and emerging therapeutic approaches targeting PIK3R2.
BACKGROUND: Cisplatin (CDDP) is the first-line chemotherapeutic strategy to treat patients with ovarian cancer (OC). The development of CDDP resistance remains an unsurmountable obstacle in OC treatment and frequently induces tumor recurrence. Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are noncoding RNAs with important functions in cancer progression. Whether circRNAs function in CDDP resistance of OC is unclear. METHODS: Platinum-resistant circRNAs were screened via circRNA deep sequencing and examined using in situ hybridization (ISH) in OC. The role of circPLPP4 in CDDP resistance was assessed by clone formation and Annexin V assays in vitro, and by OC patient-derived xenografts and intraperitoneal tumor models in vivo. The mechanism underlying circPLPP4-mediated activation of miR-136/PIK3R1 signaling was examined by luciferase reporter assay, RNA pull-down, RIP, MeRIP and ISH. RESULTS: circPLPP4 was remarkably upregulated in platinum resistant OC. circPLPP4 overexpression significantly enhanced, whereas circPLPP4 silencing reduced, OC cell chemoresistance. Mechanistically, circPLPP4 acts as a microRNA sponge to sequester miR-136, thus competitively upregulating PIK3R1 expression and conferring CDDP resistance. The increased circPLPP4 level in CDDP-resistant cells was caused by increased RNA stability, mediated by increased N6-methyladenosine (m(6)A) modification of circPLPP4. In vivo delivery of an antisense oligonucleotide targeting circPLPP4 significantly enhanced CDDP efficacy in a tumor model. CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals a plausible mechanism by which the m(6)A -induced circPLPP4/ miR-136/ PIK3R1 axis mediated CDDP resistance in OC, suggesting that circPLPP4 may serve as a promising therapeutic target against CDDP resistant OC. A circPLPP4-targeted drug in combination with CDDP might represent a rational regimen in OC.
Metastasis remains major cause of treatment failure in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A comprehensive characterization of the transcriptomic landscape of NSCLC-cells with organ-specific metastatic potentials would advance our understanding of NSCLC metastasis process. In this study, we established NSCLC bone-metastatic (BoM), brain-metastatic (BrM), and lymph-metastatic (LnM) cells by an in vivo spontaneous metastatic model. Subsequently, by analyzing the entire transcriptomic profiles of BoM, BrM, LnM, LuM, in comparison with their parental cell line L9981, we identified miR-660-5p as a key driver that is associated with NSCLC progression and distant metastasis, potentially through its targeting of LIMCH1, SMARCA5 and TPP2. In addition, a six-gene signature (ADRB2, DPYSL2, IL7R, LIMCH1, PIK3R1, and SOX2) was subsequently established to predict NSCLC metastasis based on differentially expressed genes, three of which (DPYSL2, PIK3R1, LIMCH1) along with the transcriptional factors RB1 and TP63, were ultimately validated by experiments. Taken together, aberrant gene signature and miRNA can serve as biomarkers for predicting NSCLC distant metastasis, and targeting them could potentially contribute to the development of novel therapeutic strategies.
Activated phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase-delta syndrome (APDS) due to gain-of-function variant in the class IA PI3K catalytic subunit p110delta (responsible gene: PIK3CD) was described in 2013. The disease is characterized by recurrent airway infections and bronchiectasis. It is associated with hyper-IgM syndrome due to the defect of immunoglobulin class switch recombination and decreased CD27-positive memory B cells. Patients also suffered from immune dysregulations, such as lymphadenopathy, autoimmune cytopenia or enteropathy. T-cell dysfunction due to increased senescence is associated with a decrease in CD4-positive T lymphocytes and CD45RA-positive naive T lymphocytes, along with increased susceptibility to Epstein-Barr virus/cytomegalovirus infections. In 2014, loss-of-function (LOF) mutation of p85alpha (responsible gene: PIK3R1), a regulatory subunit of p110delta, was identified as a causative gene, followed in 2016 by the identification of the LOF mutation of PTEN, which dephosphorylates PIP3, leading to the differentiation of APDS1 (PIK3CD-GOF), APDS2 (PIK3R1-LOF) and APDS-L (PTEN-LOF). Since the pathophysiology of patients with APDS varies with a wide range of severity, it is crucial that patients receive appropriate treatment and management. Our research group created a disease outline and a diagnostic flow chart and summarized clinical information such as the severity classification of APDS and treatment options.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is involved in a broad range of cellular processes, including growth, metabolism, differentiation, proliferation, motility, and survival. The PI3Kdelta enzyme complex is primarily present in the immune system and comprises a catalytic (p110delta) and regulatory (p85alpha) subunit. Dynamic regulation of PI3Kdelta activity is required to ensure normal function and differentiation of immune cells. In the last decade, discovery of germline mutations in genes involved in the PI3Kdelta pathway (PIK3CD, PIK3R1, or phosphatase and tensin homolog [PTEN]) proved that both overactivation and underactivation (gain of function and loss of function, respectively) of PI3Kdelta lead to impaired and dysregulated immunity. Although a small group of patients reported to underactivate PI3Kdelta show predominantly humoral defects and autoimmune features, more than 200 patients have been described with overactivation of PI3Kdelta, presenting with a much more complex phenotype of combined immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation. The clinical and immunologic characterization, as well as current pathophysiologic understanding and specific therapies for PI3K pathway defects leading to immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation, are reviewed here.
Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is a rare genetic disorder that presents clinically as a primary immunodeficiency. Clinical presentation of APDS includes severe, recurrent infections, lymphoproliferation, lymphoma, and other cancers, autoimmunity and enteropathy. Autosomal dominant variants in two independent genes have been demonstrated to cause APDS. Pathogenic variants in PIK3CD and PIK3R1, both of which encode components of the PI3-kinase, have been identified in subjects with APDS. APDS1 is caused by gain of function variants in the PIK3CD gene, while loss of function variants in PIK3R1 have been reported to cause APDS2. We conducted a review of the medical literature and identified 256 individuals who had a molecular diagnosis for APDS as well as age at last report; 193 individuals with APDS1 and 63 with APDS2. Despite available treatments, survival for individuals with APDS appears to be shortened from the average lifespan. A Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for APDS showed the conditional survival rate at the age of 20 years was 87%, age of 30 years was 74%, and ages of 40 and 50 years were 68%. Review of causes of death showed that the most common cause of death was lymphoma, followed by complications from HSCT. The overall mortality rate for HSCT in APDS1 and APDS2 cases was 15.6%, while the mortality rate for lymphoma was 47.6%. This survival and mortality data illustrate that new treatments are needed to mitigate the risk of death from lymphoma and other cancers as well as infection. These analyses based on real-world evidence gathered from the medical literature comprise the largest study of survival and mortality for APDS to date.
BACKGROUND: Membranous nephropathy (MN) is an autoimmune disease and represents the most prevalent type of renal pathology in adult patients afflicted with nephrotic syndrome. Despite substantial evidence suggesting a possible link between MN and cancer, the precise underlying mechanisms remain elusive. METHODS: In this study, we acquired and integrated two MN datasets (comprising a single-cell dataset and a bulk RNA-seq dataset) from the Gene Expression Omnibus database for differential expression gene (DEG) analysis, hub genes were obtained by LASSO and random forest algorithms, the diagnostic ability of hub genes was assessed using ROC curves, and the degree of immune cell infiltration was evaluated using the ssGSEA function. Concurrently, we gathered pan-cancer-related genes from the TCGA and GTEx databases, to analyze the expression, mutation status, drug sensitivity and prognosis of hub genes in pan-cancer. RESULTS: We conducted intersections between the set of 318 senescence-related genes and the 366 DEGs, resulting in the identification of 13 senescence-related DEGs. Afterwards, we meticulously analyzed these genes using the LASSO and random forest algorithms, which ultimately led to the discovery of six hub genes through intersection (PIK3R1, CCND1, TERF2IP, SLC25A4, CAPN2, and TXN). ROC curves suggest that these hub genes have good recognition of MN. After performing correlation analysis, examining immune infiltration, and conducting a comprehensive pan-cancer investigation, we validated these six hub genes through immunohistochemical analysis using human renal biopsy tissues. The pan-cancer analysis notably accentuates the robust association between these hub genes and the prognoses of individuals afflicted by diverse cancer types, further underscoring the importance of mutations within these hub genes across various cancers. CONCLUSION: This evidence indicates that these genes could potentially play a pivotal role as a critical link connecting MN and cancer. As a result, they may hold promise as valuable targets for intervention in cases of both MN and cancer.
The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway is important for multiple stages of herpesvirus replication including virus entry, replication, latency, and reactivation. Recently, patients with gain-of-function mutations in the p110delta-catalytic subunit of PI3K or in the p85-regulatory subunit of PI3K have been reported. These patients have constitutively active PI3K with hyperactivation of Akt. They present with lymphoproliferation and often have infections, particularly recurrent respiratory infections and/or severe virus infections. The most frequent virus infections are due to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV); patients often present with persistent EBV and/or CMV viremia, EBV lymphoproliferative disease, or CMV lymphadenitis. No patients have been reported with CMV pneumonia, colitis, or retinitis. Other herpesvirus infections have included herpes simplex pneumonia, recurrent zoster, and varicella after vaccination with the varicella vaccine. Additional viral infections have included adenovirus viremia, severe warts, and extensive Molluscum contagiosum virus infection. The increased susceptibility to virus infections in these patients is likely due to a reduced number of long-lived memory CD8 T cells and an increased number of terminally differentiated effector CD8 T cells.
While insensitivity to GH (GHI) is characterized by low IGF-I levels, normal or elevated GH levels, and lack of IGF-I response to GH treatment, IGF-I resistance is characterized by elevated IGF-I levels with normal/high GH levels. Several genetic defects are responsible for impairment of GH and IGF-I actions resulting in short stature that could affect intrauterine growth or be present in the postnatal period. The genetic defects affecting GH and/or IGF-I action can be divided into five different groups: GH insensitivity by defects affecting the GH receptor (GHR), the intracellular GH signaling pathway (STAT5B, STAT3, IKBKB, IL2RG, PIK3R1), the synthesis of insulin-like growth factors (IGF1, IGF2), the transport/bioavailability of IGFs (IGFALS, PAPPA2), and defects affecting IGF-I sensitivity (IGF1R). Complete GH insensitivity (GHI) was first reported by Zvi Laron and his colleagues in patients with classical appearance of GH deficiency, but presenting elevated levels of GH. The association of GH insensitivity with several clinical sings of immune-dysfunction and autoimmune dysregulation are characteristic of molecular defects in the intracellular GH signaling pathway (STAT5B, STAT3, IKBKB, IL2RG, PIK3R1). Gene mutations in the IGF1 and IGF2 genes have been described in patients presenting intrauterine growth retardation and postnatal short stature. Molecular defects have also been reported in the IGFALS gene, that encodes the acid-labile subunit (ALS), responsible to stabilize circulating IGF-I in ternary complexes, and more recently in the PAPPA2 gen that encodes the pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A2, a protease that specifically cleaves IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-5 regulating the accessibility of IGFs to their target tissues. Mutations in the IGF1R gene resulted in IGF-I insensitivity in patients with impaired intrauterine and postnatal growth. These studies have revealed novel molecular mechanisms of GH insensitivity/primary IGF-I deficiency beyond the GH receptor gene. In addition, they have also underlined the importance of several players of the GH-IGF axis in the complex system that promotes human growth.
Background: N6-Methyladenosine (m6A) is considered to be the most prevalent and abundant internal modification observed in mRNA between viruses and mammals. As a reversible epigenetic modification, m6A controls gene expression in diverse physiological and pathological processes. Accumulating evidence in recent years reveals that aberrant expression of m6A reader proteins may have tumor-suppressing or carcinogenic functions. However, the biological role and mechanism of m6A reader YTH Domain Containing 1 (YTHDC1) in ovarian cancer progression remain inadequately understood. Methods: Quantitative RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, Western blot, and bioinformatics analyses were undertaken for studying the YTHDC1 expression in ovarian cancer. In vitro and in vivo models were used to examine the role of YTHDC1. RNA sequencing, RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing, m6A-modified RNA immunoprecipitation, actinomycin-D assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and Western blot were used in the investigation the regulatory mechanisms among YTHDC1, Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3), Phosphoinositide-3-Kinase Regulatory Subunit 1 (PIK3R1), and Glucosidase II Alpha Subunit (GANAB). Results: Here, we found that YTHDC1 expression is decreased in ovarian cancer. Overexpression of YTHDC1 inhibited ovarian cancer development both in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistically, PIK3R1 was identified to be the direct target for YTHDC1. YTHDC1 enhanced PIK3R1 stability in an m6A-dependent manner, which subsequently inhibited GANAB expression in the N-glycan biosynthesis via the STAT3 signaling. Conclusions: Our findings unveil YTHDC1 as a tumor suppressor in the progression of ovarian cancer and as a potential prognostic biomarker that could serve as a target in ovarian cancer treatment.
AIM: Rosette-forming glioneuronal tumour (RGNT) is a rare central nervous system (CNS) World Health Organization (WHO) grade 1 brain neoplasm. According to the WHO 2021, essential diagnostic criteria are a 'biphasic histomorphology with neurocytic and a glial component, and uniform neurocytes forming rosettes and/or perivascular pseudorosettes associated with synaptophysin expression' and/or DNA methylation profile of RGNT whereas 'FGFR1 mutation with co-occurring PIK3CA and/or NF1 mutation' are desirable criteria. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We report a series of 46 cases fulfilling the essential pathological diagnostic criteria for RGNT. FGFR1 and PIK3CA hotspot mutations were searched for by multiplexed digital PCR in all cases, whereas DNA methylation profiling and/or PIK3R1 and NF1 alterations were analysed in a subset of cases. RESULTS: Three groups were observed. The first one included 21 intracranial midline tumours demonstrating FGFR1 mutation associated with PIK3CA or PIK3R1 (n = 19) or NF1 (n = 1) or PIK3CA and NF1 (n = 1) mutation. By DNA methylation profiling, eight cases were classified as RGNT (they demonstrated FGFR1 and PIK3CA or PIK3R1 mutations). Group 2 comprised 11 cases associated with one single FGFR1 mutation. Group 3 included six cases classified as low-grade glioma (LGG) other than RGNT (one-sixth showed FGFR1 mutation and one a FGFR1 and NF1 mutation) and eight cases without FGFR1 mutation. Groups 2 and 3 were enriched in lateral and spinal cases. CONCLUSIONS: We suggest adding FGFR1 mutation and intracranial midline location as essential diagnostic criteria. When DNA methylation profiling is not available, a RGNT diagnosis remains certain in cases demonstrating characteristic pathological features and FGFR1 mutation associated with either PIK3CA or PIK3R1 mutation.
