Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit delta isoform; Phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) that phosphorylates PtdIns(4,5)P2 (Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate) to generate phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 plays a key role by recruiting PH domain-containing proteins to the membrane, including AKT1 and PDPK1, activating signaling cascades involved in cell growth, survival, proliferation, motility and morphology. Mediates immune responses. Plays a role in B-cell development, proliferation, migration, and function. Required for B-cell recepto [...] 
Primary immunodeficiencies are inherited disorders of the immune system, often caused by the mutation of genes required for lymphocyte development and activation. Recently, several studies have identified gain-of-function mutations in the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) genes PIK3CD (which encodes p110delta) and PIK3R1 (which encodes p85alpha) that cause a combined immunodeficiency syndrome, referred to as activated PI3Kdelta syndrome (APDS; also known as p110delta-activating mutation causing senescent T cells, lymphadenopathy and immunodeficiency (PASLI)). Paradoxically, both loss-of-function and gain-of-function mutations that affect these genes lead to immunosuppression, albeit via different mechanisms. Here, we review the roles of PI3Kdelta in adaptive immunity, describe the clinical manifestations and mechanisms of disease in APDS and highlight new insights into PI3Kdelta gleaned from these patients, as well as implications of these findings for clinical therapy.
The healthspan of mice is enhanced by killing senescent cells using a transgenic suicide gene. Achieving the same using small molecules would have a tremendous impact on quality of life and the burden of age-related chronic diseases. Here, we describe the rationale for identification and validation of a new class of drugs termed senolytics, which selectively kill senescent cells. By transcript analysis, we discovered increased expression of pro-survival networks in senescent cells, consistent with their established resistance to apoptosis. Using siRNA to silence expression of key nodes of this network, including ephrins (EFNB1 or 3), PI3Kdelta, p21, BCL-xL, or plasminogen-activated inhibitor-2, killed senescent cells, but not proliferating or quiescent, differentiated cells. Drugs targeting these same factors selectively killed senescent cells. Dasatinib eliminated senescent human fat cell progenitors, while quercetin was more effective against senescent human endothelial cells and mouse BM-MSCs. The combination of dasatinib and quercetin was effective in eliminating senescent MEFs. In vivo, this combination reduced senescent cell burden in chronologically aged, radiation-exposed, and progeroid Ercc1(-/Delta) mice. In old mice, cardiac function and carotid vascular reactivity were improved 5 days after a single dose. Following irradiation of one limb in mice, a single dose led to improved exercise capacity for at least 7 months following drug treatment. Periodic drug administration extended healthspan in Ercc1(-/∆) mice, delaying age-related symptoms and pathology, osteoporosis, and loss of intervertebral disk proteoglycans. These results demonstrate the feasibility of selectively ablating senescent cells and the efficacy of senolytics for alleviating symptoms of frailty and extending healthspan.
CRISPR-enabled screening is a powerful tool for the discovery of genes that control T cell function and has nominated candidate targets for immunotherapies(1-6). However, new approaches are required to probe specific nucleotide sequences within key genes. Systematic mutagenesis in primary human T cells could reveal alleles that tune specific phenotypes. DNA base editors are powerful tools for introducing targeted mutations with high efficiency(7,8). Here we develop a large-scale base-editing mutagenesis platform with the goal of pinpointing nucleotides that encode amino acid residues that tune primary human T cell activation responses. We generated a library of around 117,000 single guide RNA molecules targeting base editors to protein-coding sites across 385 genes implicated in T cell function and systematically identified protein domains and specific amino acid residues that regulate T cell activation and cytokine production. We found a broad spectrum of alleles with variants encoding critical residues in proteins including PIK3CD, VAV1, LCP2, PLCG1 and DGKZ, including both gain-of-function and loss-of-function mutations. We validated the functional effects of many alleles and further demonstrated that base-editing hits could positively and negatively tune T cell cytotoxic function. Finally, higher-resolution screening using a base editor with relaxed protospacer-adjacent motif requirements(9) (NG versus NGG) revealed specific structural domains and protein-protein interaction sites that can be targeted to tune T cell functions. Base-editing screens in primary immune cells thus provide biochemical insights with the potential to accelerate immunotherapy design.
B cells develop from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Once generated, they serve multiple roles in immune regulation and host defense. However, their most important function is producing antibodies (Ab) that efficiently clear invading pathogens. This is achieved by generating memory B cells that rapidly respond to subsequent Ag exposure, and plasma cells (PCs) that continually secrete Ab. These B cell subsets maintain humoral immunity and host protection against recurrent infections for extended periods of time. Thus, the generation of antigen (Ag)-specific memory cells and PCs underlies long-lived serological immunity, contributing to the success of most vaccines. Our understanding of immunity is often derived from animal models. However, analysis of individuals with monogenic defects that disrupt immune cell function are unprecedented models to link genotypes to clinical phenotypes, establish mechanisms of disease pathogenesis, and elucidate critical pathways for immune cell development and differentiation. Here, we review fundamental breakthroughs in unraveling the complexities of humoral immunity in humans that have come from the discovery of inborn errors disrupting B cell function.
Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is a novel primary immunodeficiency (PID) caused by heterozygous gain of function mutations in PI3Kdelta catalytic p110delta (PIK3CD) or regulatory p85alpha (PIK3R1) subunits leading to APDS1 and APDS2, respectively. Patients with APDS present a spectrum of clinical manifestations, particularly recurrent respiratory infections and lymphoproliferation. We searched PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus databases for APDS patients and screened for eligibility criteria. A total of 243 APDS patients were identified from 55 articles. For all patients, demographic, clinical, immunologic, and molecular data were collected. Overall, 179 APDS1 and 64 APDS2 patients were identified. The most common clinical manifestations were respiratory tract infections (pneumonia (43.6%), otitis media (28.8%), and sinusitis (25.9%)), lymphoproliferation (70.4%), autoimmunity (28%), enteropathy (26.7%), failure to thrive (20.6%), and malignancy (12.8%). The predominant immunologic phenotype was hyper-IgM syndrome (48.1%). Immunologic profiling showed decreased B cells in 74.8% and CD4(+) T cells in 64.8% of APDS patients. The c.3061 G>A (p. E1021K) mutation in APDS1 with 85% frequency and c.1425+1 G> (A, C, T) (p.434-475del) mutation in APDS2 with 79% frequency were hotspot mutations. The majority of APDS patients were placed on long-term immunoglobulin replacement therapy. Immunosuppressive agents such as rituximab, tacrolimus, rapamycin, and leniolisib were also administered for autoimmunity and inflammatory complications. In addition, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) was used in 12.8% of patients. APDS has heterogynous clinical manifestations. It should be suspected in patients with history of recurrent respiratory infections, lymphoproliferation, and raised IgM levels. Moreover, HSCT should be considered in patients with severe and complicated clinical manifestations with no or insufficient response to the conventional therapies.
Primary immune regulatory disorders (PIRD) are associated with autoimmunity, autoinflammation and/or dysregulation of lymphocyte homeostasis. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a PIRD due to an apoptotic defect in Fas-FasL pathway and characterized by benign and chronic lymphoproliferation, autoimmunity and increased risk of lymphoma. Clinical manifestations and typical laboratory biomarkers of ALPS have also been found in patients with a gene defect out of the Fas-FasL pathway (ALPS-like disorders). Following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA), we identified more than 600 patients suffering from 24 distinct genetic defects described in the literature with an autoimmune lymphoproliferative phenotype (ALPS-like syndromes) corresponding to phenocopies of primary immunodeficiency (PID) (NRAS, KRAS), susceptibility to EBV (MAGT1, PRKCD, XIAP, SH2D1A, RASGRP1, TNFRSF9), antibody deficiency (PIK3CD gain of function (GOF), PIK3R1 loss of function (LOF), CARD11 GOF), regulatory T-cells defects (CTLA4, LRBA, STAT3 GOF, IL2RA, IL2RB, DEF6), combined immunodeficiencies (ITK, STK4), defects in intrinsic and innate immunity and predisposition to infection (STAT1 GOF, IL12RB1) and autoimmunity/autoinflammation (ADA2, TNFAIP3,TPP2, TET2). CTLA4 and LRBA patients correspond around to 50% of total ALPS-like cases. However, only 100% of CTLA4, PRKCD, TET2 and NRAS/KRAS reported patients had an ALPS-like presentation, while the autoimmunity and lymphoproliferation combination resulted rare in other genetic defects. Recurrent infections, skin lesions, enteropathy and malignancy are the most common clinical manifestations. Some approaches available for the immunological study and identification of ALPS-like patients through flow cytometry and ALPS biomarkers are provided in this work. Protein expression assays for NKG2D, XIAP, SAP, CTLA4 and LRBA deficiencies and functional studies of AKT, STAT1 and STAT3 phosphorylation, are showed as useful tests. Patients suspected to suffer from one of these disorders require rapid and correct diagnosis allowing initiation of tailored specific therapeutic strategies and monitoring thereby improving the prognosis and their quality of life.
Current limitations in using chimeric antigen receptor T(CART) cells to treat patients with hematological cancers include limited expansion and persistence in vivo that contribute to cancer relapse. Patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) have terminally differentiated T cells with an exhausted phenotype and experience low complete response rates after autologous CART therapy. Because PI3K inhibitor therapy is associated with the development of T-cell-mediated autoimmunity, we studied the effects of inhibiting the PI3Kdelta and PI3Kgamma isoforms during the manufacture of CART cells prepared from patients with CLL. Dual PI3Kdelta/gamma inhibition normalized CD4/CD8 ratios and maximized the number of CD8+ T-stem cell memory, naive, and central memory T-cells with dose-dependent decreases in expression of the TIM-3 exhaustion marker. CART cells manufactured with duvelisib (Duv-CART cells) showed significantly increased in vitro cytotoxicity against CD19+ CLL targets caused by increased frequencies of CD8+ CART cells. Duv-CART cells had increased expression of the mitochondrial fusion protein MFN2, with an associated increase in the relative content of mitochondria. Duv-CART cells exhibited increased SIRT1 and TCF1/7 expression, which correlated with epigenetic reprograming of Duv-CART cells toward stem-like properties. After transfer to NOG mice engrafted with a human CLL cell line, Duv-CART cells expressing either a CD28 or 41BB costimulatory domain demonstrated significantly increased in vivo expansion of CD8+ CART cells, faster elimination of CLL, and longer persistence. Duv-CART cells significantly enhanced survival of CLL-bearing mice compared with conventionally manufactured CART cells. In summary, exposure of CART to a PI3Kdelta/gamma inhibitor during manufacturing enriched the CART product for CD8+ CART cells with stem-like qualities and enhanced efficacy in eliminating CLL in vivo.
Inhibitors of PI3Kdelta hold great potential for the therapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia and B-cell malignancies. After initially exciting efficacy results with idelalisib, the first-in-class inhibitor, the emergence of unexpected and unpredictable autoimmune toxicities, worse in less heavily treated and younger patients, has decreased the use of the currently available inhibitors. Newer drugs in development are attempting to reduce toxicity with novel schedules and/or combinations. This article reviews the clinical data on efficacy and toxicity across the class and discusses ongoing efforts to understand and mitigate the likely on-target autoimmune toxicity.
Heterozygous loss-of-function (LOF) mutations in PIK3R1 (encoding phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase [PI3K] regulatory subunits) cause activated PI3Kdelta syndrome 2 (APDS2), which has a similar clinical profile to APDS1, caused by heterozygous gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in PIK3CD (encoding the PI3K p110delta catalytic subunit). While several studies have established how PIK3CD GOF leads to immune dysregulation, less is known about how PIK3R1 LOF mutations alter cellular function. By studying a novel CRISPR/Cas9 mouse model and patients' immune cells, we determined how PIK3R1 LOF alters cellular function. We observed some overlap in cellular defects in APDS1 and APDS2, including decreased intrinsic B cell class switching and defective Tfh cell function. However, we also identified unique APDS2 phenotypes including defective expansion and affinity maturation of Pik3r1 LOF B cells following immunization, and decreased survival of Pik3r1 LOF pups. Further, we observed clear differences in the way Pik3r1 LOF and Pik3cd GOF altered signaling. Together these results demonstrate crucial differences between these two genetic etiologies.
BACKGROUND: More than 95% of humans have been infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and develop anti-EBV IgG antibodies, conferring immunity. However, among specific populations, EBV may induce a range of B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (LPDs). EBV may also contribute to T-cell and natural killer (NK)-cell lymphoproliferation. The immune system is essential to prevent infection and development of cancer. Inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) are a heterogenous group of more than 450 genetic disorders predisposing to severe and/or recurrent infection, autoimmunity, autoinflammation, or early-onset/severe neoplasia or lymphoproliferation. Monogenic disorders of T-cell and B-cell signalling are classic IEIs that predispose to EBV-associated LPDs. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to outline the various clinical manifestations of EBV-associated LPDs and the underlying IEIs associated with such presentations and discuss the recommended management and therapeutic options pertaining to these disorders. SOURCES: We searched PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science Core Collection on 30 September 2021. Clinical studies, systematic reviews, narrative reviews, and case reports were identified through search strategy and cross reference from primary literature. CONTENT: Effective T-cell and NK-cell cytotoxicity towards EBV-infected B cells relies on intact MAGT1-dependent NKG2D pathways and signalling lymphocyte activation molecular-associated protein-dependent signalling lymphocyte activation molecular receptors. The interaction between CD27 and CD70 is also critical to drive the expansion of EBV-specific T cells. IEIs due to T-cell and B-cell signalling defects and/or impaired T-cell and NK-cell cytotoxicity predispose to EBV-related lymphoproliferation. This includes classic disorders such as X-linked lymphoproliferative disease 1 (due to SH2D1A mutations), X-linked lymphoproliferative disease 2 (XIAP), and other genetic diseases, such as ITK, MAGT1, CD27, CD70, CTPS1, RASGRP1, and CORO1A deficiencies. EBV-driven lymphoproliferation may manifest to a lesser degree in MST1/STK4, DOCK8, STIM1, CORO1A, IL21R, PIK3CD gain-of-function, and PI3KR1 deficiencies. IMPLICATIONS: Early screening for IEIs is indicated in cases of EBV-related lymphoproliferation because different forms of IEIs have specific prognostic and therapeutic implications.
Activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is a rare genetic disorder that presents clinically as a primary immunodeficiency. Clinical presentation of APDS includes severe, recurrent infections, lymphoproliferation, lymphoma, and other cancers, autoimmunity and enteropathy. Autosomal dominant variants in two independent genes have been demonstrated to cause APDS. Pathogenic variants in PIK3CD and PIK3R1, both of which encode components of the PI3-kinase, have been identified in subjects with APDS. APDS1 is caused by gain of function variants in the PIK3CD gene, while loss of function variants in PIK3R1 have been reported to cause APDS2. We conducted a review of the medical literature and identified 256 individuals who had a molecular diagnosis for APDS as well as age at last report; 193 individuals with APDS1 and 63 with APDS2. Despite available treatments, survival for individuals with APDS appears to be shortened from the average lifespan. A Kaplan-Meier survival analysis for APDS showed the conditional survival rate at the age of 20 years was 87%, age of 30 years was 74%, and ages of 40 and 50 years were 68%. Review of causes of death showed that the most common cause of death was lymphoma, followed by complications from HSCT. The overall mortality rate for HSCT in APDS1 and APDS2 cases was 15.6%, while the mortality rate for lymphoma was 47.6%. This survival and mortality data illustrate that new treatments are needed to mitigate the risk of death from lymphoma and other cancers as well as infection. These analyses based on real-world evidence gathered from the medical literature comprise the largest study of survival and mortality for APDS to date.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway is involved in a broad range of cellular processes, including growth, metabolism, differentiation, proliferation, motility, and survival. The PI3Kdelta enzyme complex is primarily present in the immune system and comprises a catalytic (p110delta) and regulatory (p85alpha) subunit. Dynamic regulation of PI3Kdelta activity is required to ensure normal function and differentiation of immune cells. In the last decade, discovery of germline mutations in genes involved in the PI3Kdelta pathway (PIK3CD, PIK3R1, or phosphatase and tensin homolog [PTEN]) proved that both overactivation and underactivation (gain of function and loss of function, respectively) of PI3Kdelta lead to impaired and dysregulated immunity. Although a small group of patients reported to underactivate PI3Kdelta show predominantly humoral defects and autoimmune features, more than 200 patients have been described with overactivation of PI3Kdelta, presenting with a much more complex phenotype of combined immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation. The clinical and immunologic characterization, as well as current pathophysiologic understanding and specific therapies for PI3K pathway defects leading to immunodeficiency and immune dysregulation, are reviewed here.
BACKGROUND: Activated phosphoinositide-3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is an inborn error of immunity (IEI) with infection susceptibility and immune dysregulation, clinically overlapping with other conditions. Management depends on disease evolution, but predictors of severe disease are lacking. OBJECTIVES: This study sought to report the extended spectrum of disease manifestations in APDS1 versus APDS2; compare these to CTLA4 deficiency, NFKB1 deficiency, and STAT3 gain-of-function (GOF) disease; and identify predictors of severity in APDS. METHODS: Data was collected from the ESID (European Society for Immunodeficiencies)-APDS registry and was compared with published cohorts of the other IEIs. RESULTS: The analysis of 170 patients with APDS outlines high penetrance and early onset of APDS compared to the other IEIs. The large clinical heterogeneity even in individuals with the same PIK3CD variant E1021K illustrates how poorly the genotype predicts the disease phenotype and course. The high clinical overlap between APDS and the other investigated IEIs suggests relevant pathophysiological convergence of the affected pathways. Preferentially affected organ systems indicate specific pathophysiology: bronchiectasis is typical of APDS1; interstitial lung disease and enteropathy are more common in STAT3 GOF and CTLA4 deficiency. Endocrinopathies are most frequent in STAT3 GOF, but growth impairment is also common, particularly in APDS2. Early clinical presentation is a risk factor for severe disease in APDS. CONCLUSIONS: APDS illustrates how a single genetic variant can result in a diverse autoimmune-lymphoproliferative phenotype. Overlap with other IEIs is substantial. Some specific features distinguish APDS1 from APDS2. Early onset is a risk factor for severe disease course calling for specific treatment studies in younger patients.
The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway is important for multiple stages of herpesvirus replication including virus entry, replication, latency, and reactivation. Recently, patients with gain-of-function mutations in the p110delta-catalytic subunit of PI3K or in the p85-regulatory subunit of PI3K have been reported. These patients have constitutively active PI3K with hyperactivation of Akt. They present with lymphoproliferation and often have infections, particularly recurrent respiratory infections and/or severe virus infections. The most frequent virus infections are due to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV); patients often present with persistent EBV and/or CMV viremia, EBV lymphoproliferative disease, or CMV lymphadenitis. No patients have been reported with CMV pneumonia, colitis, or retinitis. Other herpesvirus infections have included herpes simplex pneumonia, recurrent zoster, and varicella after vaccination with the varicella vaccine. Additional viral infections have included adenovirus viremia, severe warts, and extensive Molluscum contagiosum virus infection. The increased susceptibility to virus infections in these patients is likely due to a reduced number of long-lived memory CD8 T cells and an increased number of terminally differentiated effector CD8 T cells.
PI3K signalling is required for activation, differentiation, and trafficking of T cells. PI3Kdelta, the dominant PI3K isoform in T cells, has been extensively characterised using PI3Kdelta mutant mouse models and PI3K inhibitors. Furthermore, characterisation of patients with Activated PI3K Delta Syndrome (APDS) and mouse models with hyperactive PI3Kdelta have shed light on how increased PI3Kdelta activity affects T cell functions. An important function of PI3Kdelta is that it acts downstream of TCR stimulation to activate the major T cell integrin, LFA-1, which controls transendothelial migration of T cells as well as their interaction with antigen-presenting cells. PI3Kdelta also suppresses the cell surface expression of CD62L and CCR7 which controls the migration of T cells across high endothelial venules in the lymph nodes and S1PR1 which controls lymph node egress. Therefore, PI3Kdelta can control both entry and exit of T cells from lymph nodes as well as the recruitment to and retention of T cells within inflamed tissues. This review will focus on the regulation of adhesion receptors by PI3Kdelta and how this contributes to T cell trafficking and localisation. These findings are relevant for our understanding of how PI3Kdelta inhibitors may affect T cell redistribution and function.
Lymphoproliferative disorders (LPD) comprise a heterogeneous group and are originally classified into the "Disease of immune dysregulation" category. Of 96 Taiwanese patients during 2003-2022, 31 (median 66, range 0.03-675 months) developed LPD, mainly including palpable lymphadenopathy (in 10 patients), intestinal lymphadenopathy associated with refractory inflammatory bowel disease (IBD in 8) and hepatosplenomegaly (in 7) during long-term follow-up (median 144, range 3-252 months). They distributed in the categories of antibody deficiency (2 CVID, 2 TTC37, PIK3CD, PIK3R1 and AICDA each), phagocyte (4 CYBB, 1 STAT1 and 1 IFNRG1), immune dysregulation (2 FOXP3, 2 XIAP and 2 HLH), combined immunodeficiencies (2 IL2RG; CD40L, ZAP70 and unknown each), syndromic features (2 STAT3-LOF, 1 WAS and 1 ATM) and three with anti-IFN-gamma autoantibodies. An increased senescent (CD8 + CD57+) and CD21-low, disturbed transitional B (CD38 + IgM++), plasmablast B (CD38++IgM-), memory B (CD19 + CD27+) and T(EMRA) (CD27-IgD-) components were often observed in cross-sectional immunophenotyping and trended to develop LPD.
Activated phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase-delta syndrome (APDS) due to gain-of-function variant in the class IA PI3K catalytic subunit p110delta (responsible gene: PIK3CD) was described in 2013. The disease is characterized by recurrent airway infections and bronchiectasis. It is associated with hyper-IgM syndrome due to the defect of immunoglobulin class switch recombination and decreased CD27-positive memory B cells. Patients also suffered from immune dysregulations, such as lymphadenopathy, autoimmune cytopenia or enteropathy. T-cell dysfunction due to increased senescence is associated with a decrease in CD4-positive T lymphocytes and CD45RA-positive naive T lymphocytes, along with increased susceptibility to Epstein-Barr virus/cytomegalovirus infections. In 2014, loss-of-function (LOF) mutation of p85alpha (responsible gene: PIK3R1), a regulatory subunit of p110delta, was identified as a causative gene, followed in 2016 by the identification of the LOF mutation of PTEN, which dephosphorylates PIP3, leading to the differentiation of APDS1 (PIK3CD-GOF), APDS2 (PIK3R1-LOF) and APDS-L (PTEN-LOF). Since the pathophysiology of patients with APDS varies with a wide range of severity, it is crucial that patients receive appropriate treatment and management. Our research group created a disease outline and a diagnostic flow chart and summarized clinical information such as the severity classification of APDS and treatment options.
Primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) represent a group of mostly monogenic disorders caused by loss- or gain-of-function mutations in over 340 known genes that lead to abnormalities in the development and/or the function of the immune system. However, mutations in different genes can affect the same cell-signaling pathway and result in overlapping clinical phenotypes. In particular, mutations in the genes encoding for members of the phosphoinositide3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT/mTOR/S6 kinase (S6K) signaling cascade or for molecules interacting with this pathway have been associated with different PIDs that are often characterized by the coexistence of both immune deficiency and autoimmunity. The serine/threonine kinase mechanistic/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), which acts downstream of PI3K and AKT, is emerging as a key regulator of immune responses. It integrates a variety of signals from the microenvironment to control cell growth, proliferation, and metabolism. mTOR plays therefore a central role in the regulation of immune cells' differentiation and functions. Here, we review the different PIDs that share an impairment of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR/S6K pathway and we propose to name them "immune TOR-opathies" by analogy with a group of neurological disorders that has been originally defined by PB Crino and that are due to aberrant mTOR signaling (1). A better understanding of the role played by this complex intracellular cascade in the pathophysiology of "immune TOR-opathies" is crucial to develop targeted therapies.
Lung cancer heterogeneity plays an important role in the development of drug resistance. Comprehensive molecular characterizations of lung cancer can describe hereditary and somatic gene changes, mutation, and heterogeneity. We discuss heterogeneity specificity, characterization, and roles of PIK3CD, TP53, and KRAS, as well as target-driven therapies and strategies applied in clinical trials based on a proposed precise self-validation system. The system is a specifically selected strategy of treatment for patients with cancer gene mutations and heterogeneity based on gene sequencing, following validation of the strategies in the patient's own cancer cells or in patient-derived xenografts using their own cancer cells isolated during surgery or biopsies. These results will be more precise if the drugs used in the strategies are selected through protein structure-guided compound screening or a DNA-encoded chemical library before validation in the patient's own cancer cells. Thus, a deeper understanding of heterogeneity mechanisms and improved validation of the therapeutic strategy will result in more precise treatments for patients.
