Group IIF secretory phospholipase A2; May play a role in lipid mediator production in inflammatory conditions, by providing arachidonic acid to downstream cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases (By similarity). Phospholipase A2, which catalyzes the calcium-dependent hydrolysis of the 2-acyl groups in 3-sn- phosphoglycerides. Hydrolyzes phosphatidylethanolamine more efficiently than phosphatidylcholine, with only a modest preference for arachidonic acid versus linoelic acid at the sn-2 position. Comparable activity toward 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl- phosphatidylserine vesicles to that toward 1-pal [...] 
Chronic nonbacterial prostatitis (CNP) is a common urology disease. Our previous research found Poria cocos polysaccharides (PPs) alleviated CNP and suggested the effect was related to gut bacteria. We investigated the crucial bacteria and their metabolites responsible for the anti-CNP effect to discover possible mechanisms. The results showed that after the fermentation of PPs by human fecal microbiota, Parabacteroides, Fusicatenibacter, and Parasutterella were significantly enriched. Haloperidol glucuronide and 7-ketodeoxycholic acid generated by these bacteria could be responsible for the increased expression of Alox15 and Pla2g2f and the reduced expression of Cyp1a1 and Hsd17b7 in colon epithelium. The ratio of dihydrotestosterone to estradiol in serum was regulated, and CNP was alleviated. Our results suggested that Parabacteroides, Fusicatenibacter, and Parasutterella could be the essential bacteria in CNP alleviation and their metabolites of PPs 7-ketodeoxycholic acid and haloperidol glucuronide could be the signal molecules of the "gut-prostate axis".
Epidermal lipids play important roles in skin homeostasis and diseases. Psoriasis is an inflammatory disease characterized by keratinocyte hyperproliferation and Th17 immune responses. We previously reported that ethanolamine-type lysoplasmalogen (P-LPE), preferentially produced by group IIF secreted PLA(2) (sPLA(2)-IIF/PLA2G2F) that is expressed in the suprabasal epidermis, promotes epidermal hyperplasia in psoriatic inflammation. Herein, we show that forcible degradation of epidermal P-LPE by topical application of recombinant lysophospholipase D (LyPls-PLD) from Thermocrispum, a lysoplasmalogen-specific hydrolase, attenuated epidermal hyperplasia and inflammation in imiquimod-induced and K5.Stat3C-transgenic mouse psoriasis models. In humans, P-LPE levels were elevated in the tape-stripped stratum corneum of patients with psoriasis. Moreover, in primary cultured human epidermal keratinocytes, aberrant cell proliferation and activation by psoriatic cytokines were sPLA(2)-IIF/P-LPE-dependent and were suppressed by the addition of LyPls-PLD with a decrease in P-LPE. These findings confirm that the sPLA(2)-IIF/P-LPE axis in the epidermis indeed regulates psoriasis, that P-LPE is a lipid biomarker that predicts the severity of psoriasis, and that pharmacological removal of this bioactive lipid is useful to prevent the disease. Thus, our study may lead to the development of drug discovery and diagnostic techniques based on this pathway.
BACKGROUND: Nifedipine-induced gingival overgrowth (NGO) is a multifactorial pathogenesis with increased extracellular matrix including collagen and glycans, inflammatory cytokines, and phenotype changes of fibroblasts. However, the molecular etiology of NGO is not well understood. The objective of this study is to investigate the key genes in the pathogenesis of NGO. METHODS: In this study, we examined the proliferation and migration abilities of fibroblasts derived from patients with chronic periodontitis, nifedipine nonresponder gingival overgrowth, gingival overgrowth caused by nifedipine, and healthy normal gingiva. We conducted RNA-Seq on these four groups of fibroblasts and analysed the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). RESULTS: Fibroblasts derived from NGO patients had higher proliferation and migration abilities than those of the other groups. Protein-protein interaction network analysis indicated that TGFB2, ITGA8, ITGA11, FGF5, PLA2G4D, PLA2G2F, PTGS1, CSF1, LPAR1, CCL3, and NKX3-1 are involved in the development of NGO. These factors are related to the arachidonic acid metabolism and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways. CONCLUSION: Transcriptional gene expression analysis identified a number of DEGs that might be functionally related to gingival overgrowth induced by nifedipine. Our study provides important information on the molecular mechanism underlying nifedipine-induced gingival overgrowth.
Altered epidermal differentiation along with increased keratinocyte proliferation is a characteristic feature of psoriasis and pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP). However, despite this large degree of overlapping clinical and histologic features, the molecular signatures these skin disorders share are unknown. Using global transcriptomic profiling, we demonstrate that plaque psoriasis and PRP skin lesions have high overlap, with all differentially expressed genes in PRP relative to normal skin having complete overlap with those in psoriasis. The major common pathway shared between psoriasis and PRP involves the phospholipases PLA2G2F, PLA2G4D, and PLA2G4E, which were found to be primarily expressed in the epidermis. Gene silencing each of the 3 PLA2s led to reduction in immune responses and epidermal thickness both in vitro and in vivo in a mouse model of psoriasis, establishing their proinflammatory roles. Lipidomic analyses demonstrated that PLA2s affect mobilization of a phospholipid-eicosanoid pool, which is altered in psoriatic lesions and functions to promote immune responses in keratinocytes. Taken together, our results highlight the important role of PLA2s as regulators of epidermal barrier homeostasis and inflammation, identify PLA2s as a shared pathogenic mechanism between PRP and psoriasis, and as potential therapeutic targets for both diseases.
Epidermal lipids are important for skin homeostasis. However, the entire picture of the roles of lipids, particularly nonceramide lipid species, in epidermal biology still remains obscure. Here, we report that PLA2G2F, a functionally orphan-secreted phospholipase A2 expressed in the suprabasal epidermis, regulates skin homeostasis and hyperplasic disorders. Pla2g2f(-/-) mice had a fragile stratum corneum and were strikingly protected from psoriasis, contact dermatitis, and skin cancer. Conversely, Pla2g2f-overexpressing transgenic mice displayed psoriasis-like epidermal hyperplasia. Primary keratinocytes from Pla2g2f(-) (/-) mice showed defective differentiation and activation. PLA2G2F was induced by calcium or IL-22 in keratinocytes and preferentially hydrolyzed ethanolamine plasmalogen-bearing docosahexaenoic acid secreted from keratinocytes to give rise to unique bioactive lipids (i.e., protectin D1 and 9S-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid) that were distinct from canonical arachidonate metabolites (prostaglandins and leukotrienes). Ethanolamine lysoplasmalogen, a PLA2G2F-derived marker product, rescued defective activation of Pla2g2f(-/-) keratinocytes both in vitro and in vivo. Our results highlight PLA2G2F as a previously unrecognized regulator of skin pathophysiology and point to this enzyme as a novel drug target for epidermal-hyperplasic diseases.
RNA‑binding motif 3 (RBM3) is a cold‑shock protein that has been previously shown to attenuate cancer stem cell‑like features in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. However, the mechanism underlying RBM3 regulation in PCa cells is largely unknown. The present study investigated the impact of RBM3 expression on the whole transcriptome of PCa cells using high‑throughput RNA sequencing (RNA‑seq). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that were identified through RNA‑seq were applied to Gene Ontology (GO), pathway analysis, pathway‑action networks and protein‑protein interaction network analysis. GO and pathway ananlyses showed that RBM3 expression was associated with several metabolism pathways. Combining GO analysis and pathway analysis, certain DEGs, including phospholipase A2 group IIA (PLA2G2A), PLA2G2F, PLA2G4C, endothelin 1, cytochrome P450 family 2 subfamily B member 6, G protein subunit gamma5, nitric oxide synthase 3 and CD38 molecule, were shown to be closely associated with RBM3 regulation in PCa cells. Furthermore, the changes in expression of selected genes upon RBM3‑knockdown in RNA‑seq were confirmed by separate reverse transcription‑quantitative‑polymerase chain reaction, validating the results of RNA‑seq. Thus, the present study provides a series of valuable reference genes and pathways for the future study of the pathogenic role of RBM3 in the development of PCa.
Recent studies suggest that secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s) represent attractive potential tumour biomarkers and therapeutic targets for various cancers. As a first step to address this issue in human colorectal cancer, we examined the expression of the full set of sPLA2s in sporadic adenocarcinomas and normal matched mucosa from 21 patients by quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry. In normal colon, PLA2G2A and PLA2G12A were expressed at high levels, PLA2G2D, PLA2G5, PLA2G10 and PLA2G12B at moderate levels, and PLA2G1B, PLA2G2F and PLA2G3 at low levels. In adenocarcinomas from left and right colon, the expression of PLA2G3 was increased by up to 40-fold, while that of PLA2G2D and PLA2G5 was decreased by up to 23- and 14-fold. The variations of expression for sPLA2-IID, sPLA2-III and sPLA2-V were confirmed at the protein level. The expression pattern of these sPLA2s appeared to be linked respectively to the overexpression of interleukin-8, defensin alpha6, survivin and matrilysin, and downregulation of SFRP-1 and RLPA-1, all these genes being associated to colon cancer. This original sPLA2 profile observed in adenocarcinomas highlights the potential role of certain sPLA2s in colon cancer and suggests that sPLA2-III might be a good candidate as a novel biomarker for both left and right colon cancers.
Self-renewal and differentiation are essential for intestinal epithelium absorptive functioning and adaptation to pathological states such as short gut syndrome, ulcers, and inflammatory bowel disease. The rodent Slfn3 and its human analog Slfn12 are critical in regulating intestinal epithelial differentiation. We sought to characterize intestinal function in Slfn3 knockout (KO) mice. Male and female pair-fed Slfn3KO mice gained less weight with decreased food efficiency than wild type (WT) mice, with more pronounced effects in females. RNA sequencing performed on intestinal mucosa of Slfn3KO and WT mice showed gene ontology decreases in cell adhesion molecule signaling, tumor necrosis factor receptor binding, and adaptive immune cell proliferation/functioning genes in Slfn3KO mice, with greater effects in females. qPCR analysis of fatty acid metabolism genes, Pla2g4c, Pla2g2f, and Cyp3c55 revealed an increase in Pla2g4c, and a decrease in Pla2g2f in Slfn3KO females. Additionally, adipogenesis genes, Fabp4 and Lpl were decreased and ketogenesis gene Hmgcs2 was increased in female Slfn3KO mice. Sequencing did not reveal significant changes in differentiation markers, so qPCR was utilized. Slfn3KO tended to have decreased expression of intestinal differentiation markers sucrase isomaltase, dipeptidyl peptidase 4, villin 1, and glucose transporter 1 (Glut1) vs. WT males, although these trends did not achieve statistical significance unless data from several markers was pooled. Differentiation markers, Glut2 and sodium-glucose transporter 1 (SGLT1), did show statistically significant sex-dependent differences. Glut2 mRNA was reduced in Slfn3KO females, while SGLT1 increased in Slfn3KO males. Notch2 and Cdx2 were only increased in female Slfn3KO mice. Although Slfn3KO mice gain less weight and decreased food efficiency, their biochemical phenotype is more subtle and suggests a complex interplay between gender effects, Slfn3, and another regulatory pathway yet to be identified that compensates for the chronic loss of Slfn3.
Zika virus (ZIKV) outbreak caused one of the most significant medical emergencies in the Americas due to associated microcephaly in newborns. To evaluate the impact of ZIKV infection on neuronal cells over time, we retrieved gene expression data from several ZIKV-infected samples obtained at different time point post-infection (pi). Differential gene expression analysis was applied at each time point, with more differentially expressed genes (DEG) identified at 72h pi. There were 5 DEGs (PLA2G2F, TMEM71, PKD1L2, UBD, and TNFAIP3 genes) across all timepoints, which clearly distinguished between infected and healthy samples. The highest expression levels of all five genes were identified at 72h pi. Taken together, our results indicate that ZIKV infection greatly impacts human neural cells at early times of infection, with peak perturbation observed at 72h pi. Our analysis revealed that all five DEGs, in samples of ZIKV-infected human neural stem cells, remained highly upregulated across the timepoints evaluated. Moreover, despite the pronounced inflammatory host response observed throughout infection, the impact of ZIKV is variable over time. Finally, the five DEGs identified herein play prominent roles in infection, and could serve to guide future investigations into virus-host interaction, as well as constitute targets for therapeutic drug development.
BACKGROUND: Fish oil-derived long-chain omega-3 (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), including eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), reduce plasma triglyceride (TG) levels. Genetic factors such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in genes involved in metabolic pathways of n-3 PUFA could be responsible for well-recognized heterogeneity in plasma TG response to n-3 PUFA supplementation. Previous studies have shown that genes in the glycerophospholipid metabolism such as phospholipase A2 (PLA2) group II, IV, and VI, demonstrate changes in their expression levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) after n-3 PUFA supplementation. METHODS: A total of 208 subjects consumed 3 g/day of n-3 PUFA for 6 weeks. Plasma lipids were measured before and after the supplementation period. Five SNPs in PLA2G2A, six in PLA2G2C, eight in PLA2G2D, six in PLA2G2F, 22 in PLA2G4A, five in PLA2G6, and nine in PLA2G7 were genotyped. The MIXED Procedure for repeated measures adjusted for age, sex, BMI, and energy intake was used in order to test whether the genotype, supplementation or interaction (genotype by supplementation) were associated with plasma TG levels. RESULTS: The n-3 PUFA supplementation had an independent effect on plasma TG levels. Genotype effects on plasma TG levels were observed for rs2301475 in PLA2G2C, rs818571 in PLA2G2F, and rs1569480 in PLA2G4A. Genotype x supplementation interaction effects on plasma TG levels were observed for rs1805018 in PLA2G7 as well as for rs10752979, rs10737277, rs7540602, and rs3820185 in PLA2G4A. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that, SNPs in PLA2 genes may influence plasma TG levels during a supplementation with n-3 PUFA. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT01343342.
Humans with darkly pigmented skin display superior permeability barrier function in comparison with humans with lightly pigmented skin. The reduced pH of the stratum corneum (SC) of darkly pigmented skin could account for enhanced function, because acidifying lightly pigmented human SC resets barrier function to darkly pigmented levels. In SKH1 (nonpigmented) versus SKH2/J (pigmented) hairless mice, we evaluated how a pigment-dependent reduction in pH could influence epidermal barrier function. Permeability barrier homeostasis is enhanced in SKH2/J versus SKH1 mice, correlating with a reduced pH in the lower SC that colocalizes with the extrusion of melanin granules. Darkly pigmented human epidermis also shows substantial melanin extrusion in the outer epidermis. Both acute barrier disruption and topical basic pH challenges accelerate reacidification of SKH2/J (but not SKH1) SC, while inducing melanin extrusion. SKH2/J mice also display enhanced expression of the SC acidifying enzyme, secretory phospholipase A2f (sPLA2f). Enhanced barrier function of SKH2/J mice could be attributed to enhanced activity of two acidic pH-dependent, ceramide-generating enzymes, beta-glucocerebrosidase and acidic sphingomyelinase, leading to accelerated maturation of SC lamellar bilayers. Finally, organotypic cultures of darkly pigmented human keratinocytes display enhanced barrier function in comparison with lightly pigmented cultures. Together, these results suggest that the superior barrier function of pigmented epidermis can be largely attributed to the pH-lowering impact of melanin persistence/extrusion and enhanced sPLA2f expression.
Among the many mammalian secreted phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) enzymes, PLA2G3 (group III secreted phospholipase A2) is unique in that it possesses unusual N- and C-terminal domains and in that its central sPLA2 domain is homologous to bee venom PLA2 rather than to other mammalian sPLA2s. To elucidate the in vivo actions of this atypical sPLA2, we generated transgenic (Tg) mice overexpressing human PLA2G3. Despite marked increases in PLA2 activity and mature 18-kDa PLA2G3 protein in the circulation and tissues, PLA2G3 Tg mice displayed no apparent abnormality up to 9 months of age. However, alterations in plasma lipoproteins were observed in PLA2G3 Tg mice compared with control mice. In vitro incubation of low density (LDL) and high density (HDL) lipoproteins with several sPLA2s showed that phosphatidylcholine was efficiently converted to lysophosphatidylcholine by PLA2G3 as well as by PLA2G5 and PLA2G10, to a lesser extent by PLA2G2F, and only minimally by PLA2G2A and PLA2G2E. PLA2G3-modified LDL, like PLA2G5- or PLA2G10-treated LDL, facilitated the formation of foam cells from macrophages ex vivo. Accumulation of PLA2G3 was detected in the atherosclerotic lesions of humans and apoE-deficient mice. Furthermore, following an atherogenic diet, aortic atherosclerotic lesions were more severe in PLA2G3 Tg mice than in control mice on the apoE-null background, in combination with elevated plasma lysophosphatidylcholine and thromboxane A2 levels. These results collectively suggest a potential functional link between PLA2G3 and atherosclerosis, as has recently been proposed for PLA2G5 and PLA2G10.
