Cytochrome P450 2B6; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of endocannabinoids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH-- hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of arachidonoylethanolamide (anandamide) to 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15- epoxyeicosatrienoic acid ethanolamides (EpETrE-EAs), potentially modulating endocannabinoid system signaling. Hydroxylates steroid hormon [...] 
The genetic and environmental determinants of serum propionylcarnitine concentrations (PC) remain largely unexplored. This study investigated the impact of genetic and environmental factors on serum propionylcarnitine levels in middle-aged and elderly participants from the Ansan/Ansung cohort of the Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study. Our goal was to understand the role of PC on the risk of metabolic syndrome (MetS) leading to cardiovascular disease, particularly concerning branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) metabolism. We analyzed participants' demographic, lifestyle, and biochemical data with and without MetS. Serum metabolite concentrations, including carnitine, acylcarnitine, and amino acid concentrations, were measured, and the components of MetS were evaluated. Genetic variants associated with low and high PC were selected using genome-wide association studies after adjusting for MetS-related parameters. Further, genetic variants and lifestyle factors that interacted with the polygenic risk score (PRS) were analyzed. Participants with MetS were older and less educated, and their alcohol intake was higher than non-MetS participants. PC was significantly associated with the MetS risk and increased the serum levels of BCAAs and other amino acids. Higher PC positively correlated with MetS components, insulin resistance, and cardiovascular risk factors. Intake of calcium, sodium, and vitamin D were inversely associated with PC, but coffee consumption was positively linked to PC. Multiple C2 And Transmembrane Domain Containing-1 (MCTP1)_rs4290997, Kinesin Family Member-7 (KIF7)_rs2350480, Coagulation Factor-II (F2)_rs2070850, Peroxisomal Biogenesis Factor-3 (PEX3)_rs223231, TBC1 Domain Family Member-22A (TBC1D22A)_rs910543, and Phospholipase A2 Group-IV-C (PLA2G4C)_rs7252136 interact with each other to have a threefold influence on PC. The PRS for the six-genetic variant model also interacted with age; the diet rich in beans, potato, and kimchi; and smoking status, influencing PC. In conclusion, elevated PC was associated with MetS and cardiovascular disease risk, suggesting their potential as disease biomarkers.
Lipid droplet (LD) accumulation in hepatocytes is a typical character of steatosis. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, one of the risk factors related to steatosis, induced LD accumulation in cultured cells. However, the mechanisms of which HCV induce LD formation are not fully revealed. Previously we identified cytosolic phospholipase A2 gamma (PLA2G4C) as a host factor upregulated by HCV infection and involved in HCV replication. Here we further revealed that PLA2G4C plays an important role in LD biogenesis and refined the functional analysis of PLA2G4C in LD biogenesis and HCV assembly. LD formation upon fatty acid and HCV stimulation in PLA2G4C knockdown cells was impaired and could not be restored by complementation with PLA2G4A. PLA2G4C was tightly associated in the membrane with the domain around the amino acid residues 260-292, normally in ER but relocated into LDs upon oleate stimulation. Mutant PLA2G4C without enzymatic activity was not able to restore LD formation in PLA2G4C knockdown cells. Thus, both the membrane attachment and the enzymatic activity of PLA2G4C were required for its function in LD formation. The participation of PLA2G4C in LD formation is correlated with its involvement in HCV assembly. Finally, PLA2G4C overexpression itself led to LD formation in hepatic cells and enhanced LD accumulation in the liver of high-fat diet (HFD)-fed mice, suggesting its potential role in fatty liver disease.
We investigated the allele and genotype frequency of the rs4375 and rs1549637 polymorphisms in phospholipase A2 (PLA2)G6 and PLA2G4C genes in 203 patients with schizophrenia and 191 controls in a Croatian population. We hypothesized that these polymorphic variations might influence the age of schizophrenia onset and Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale psychopathology (PANSS) data. We detected a significant overrepresentation of the PLA2G6-CT and PLA2G4C-AT genotype combination in patients compared with controls (14.7% vs. 7.3%, P < 0.05). The combined PLA2G6/PLA2G4C heterozygosity was associated with about a two-fold higher schizophrenia risk. We found no significant influence of the PLA2G6 and PLA2G4C polymorphisms on mean age at first hospital admission (P > 0.05) and that the investigated polymorphisms significantly influenced the clinical psychopathology only in male patients. The PLA2G4C polymorphism accounted for approximately 12% of negative symptom severity; whereas, the PLA2G6/PLA2G4C interaction contributed to a similar extent to total PANSS symptom variations.
CONTEXT: trans-3,4,5,4'-Tetramethoxystilbene (DMU-212), an derivative of resveratrol, shows strong antiproliferative activities against many cancer cells. In our previous study, we demonstrated that DMU-212 possesses potent proapoptosis and antiangiogenesis effects on vascular endothelial cells (VECs), which made it a promising agent for the treatment of angiogenesis-related diseases. OBJECTIVE: We studied the gene expression profile of DMU-212-treated VECs to gain further insight into the mechanisms by which DMU-212 exerts its potent pro-apoptosis and antiangiogenesis effects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The potential changes in the gene expression of VECs incubated with DMU-212 were identified and analyzed using the Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 1.0 array. In addition, the gene expression profile was validated by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis for seven of those altered genes. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: DMU-212 was found to regulate a diverse range of genes, including cytokines (IL8, selectin E, MPZL2, EGR1, CCL20, ITGB8, CXCL1, VCAM1, KITLG, and AREG), transport proteins (TRPC4, SLC41A2, SLC17A5, and CREB5), metabolism (CYP1B1, CYP1A1, PDK4, CSNK1G1, MVK, TCEB3C, and CDKN3), enzymes (RAB23, SPHK1, CHSY3, PLAU, PLA2G4C, and MMP10), and genes involved in signal transduction (TMEM217, DUSP8, and SPRY4), chromosome organization (HIST1H2BH and GEM), cell migration and angiogenesis (ERRFI1, HBEGF, and NEDD9), and apoptosis (TNFSF15, TNFRSF9, CD274, BCL2L11, BIRC3, TNFAIP3, and TIFA), as well as other genes with unknown function (PGM5P2, SNORD1142, LOC151760, KRTAP5-2, C1orf110, SNORA14A, MIR31, C2CD4B, SCARNA4, C2orf66, SC4MOL, LOC644714, and LOC283392). This is the first application of microarray technique to investigate and analyze the profile of genes regulated by DMU-212 in VECs. Our results lead to an increased understanding of the signaling pathways involved in DMU-212-induced apoptosis and antiangiogenesis.
Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) caused nosocomial infections are rising globally. Multiple measures have been investigated to address this issue, altering gut microbiota through dietary intervention represents one of such effort. Stachyose can promote probiotic growth, which makes it a good candidate for potentially inhibiting VRE infection. This study aimed to determine whether stachyose inhibits VRE colonization and investigated the involvement of gut microbiota this effect of stachyose. In VRE-infection experiment, 6-week old female C57/6 J mice pre-treated with vancomycin were infected with 2 x 10(8) CFU VRE via gavage. These mice then received oral administration of stachyose or PBS as control for 7days. Two groups of uninfected mice were also received daily gavage of stachyose or PBS for 7 days to observe the impact of stachyose treatment on normal mice. Fresh fecal and colon samples were collected, then VRE colonization, gut microbiota and gene expression were respectively assessed using cultivation, 16s rRNA sequencing and RNA-sequencing in two parallel experiment, respectively. In VRE-infected mice, stachyose treatment significantly reduced VRE colonization on days 9 and 10 post-infection. Stachyose treatment increased the relative abundance of Porphyromonadaceae, Parabacteroides, and Parabacteroides distasonis compared to the PBS-treated infection mice (P < 0.01). Uninfected mice treated with stachyose showed a significant increase in Lactobacillaceae and Lactobacillus compared to the PBS-treated uninfected mice(P < 0.05). RNA-sequencing results showed that stachyose treatment in VRE-infected mice increased expression of genes involved in TNF and IL-17 signaling pathways. Stachyose treatment also up-regulated Hsd17b14, Cyp3a44, Arg1, and down-regulated Pnliprp2, Ces1c, Pla2g4c genes involving in metabolic pathway in uninfected mice. In conclusion, stachyose supplementation can effectively inhibit VRE colonization and probably altering composition of the microbiome, which can in turn result in changes in expression of genes. Stachyose may also benefit health by increasing the abundance of Lactobacillus and expression of genes involving in metabolic pathway in normal mice.
AIM: To investigate the association between autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and the phospholipase A2 group IVC (PLA2G4C) and phospholipase A2 group XIIA (PLA2G12A) polymorphisms in the Northeast Han Chinese population. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 68 family trios (children diagnosed with ASD and their unaffected parents) were enrolled. Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs9226, rs1045376, rs251684, rs2307279, and rs156631) in PLA2G4C and four SNPs (rs6533451, rs2285714, rs2285713, and rs11728699) in PLA2G12A were selected and genotyped. The association between the SNPs and ASD was analyzed using the transmission disequilibrium test. RESULTS: Our results showed a significant association between ASD and the rs251684 variant of PLA2G4C (transmitted/nontransmitted = 36/21, chi(2) = 3.947, p = 0.047), but no association between ASD and the other eight SNPs investigated (all p > 0.05). Moreover, we found no preference in the transmission of haplotypes constructed for either PLA2G4C or PLA2G12A. CONCLUSION: The rs251684 polymorphism of PLA2G4C may be associated with ASD risk.
INTRODUCTION: Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is a common complication of pregnancy. Lipid metabolism and distribution may contribute to the progression of FGR. However, the metabolism-related mechanisms of FGR remain unclear. The aim of this study was to identify metabolic profiles associated with FGR, as well as probable genes and signaling pathways. METHODS: Metabolomic profiles at the maternal-fetal interface (including the placenta, maternal and fetal serum) from pregnant women with (n = 35) and without (n = 35) FGR were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). Combined with differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from the GSE35574 dataset, analysis was performed for differential metabolites, and identified by the Metabo Analyst dataset. Finally, the pathology and screened DEGs were further identified. RESULTS: The results showed that fatty acids (FAs) accumulated in the placenta and decreased in fetal blood in FGR cases compared to controls. The linoleic acid metabolism was the focus of placental differential metabolites and genes enrichment analysis. In this pathway, phosphatidylcholine can interact with PLA2G2A and PLA2G4C, and 12(13)-EpOME can interact with CYP2J2. PLA2G2A and CYP2J2 were elevated, and PLA2G4C was decreased in the FGR placenta. DISCUSSION: In conclusion, accumulation of FAs in the placental ischemic environments, may involve linoleic acid metabolism, which may be regulated by PLA2G2A, CYP2J2, and PLA2G4C. This study may contribute to understanding the underlying metabolic and molecular mechanisms of FGR.
BACKGROUND: Acquired drug resistance to the chemotherapeutic drug irinotecan (the active metabolite of which is SN-38) is one of the significant obstacles in the treatment of advanced colorectal cancer (CRC). The molecular mechanism or targets mediating irinotecan resistance are still unclear. It is urgent to find the irinotecan response biomarkers to improve CRC patients' therapy. METHODS: Genetic Omnibus Database GSE42387 which contained the gene expression profiles of parental and irinotecan-resistant HCT-116 cell lines was used. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between parental and irinotecan-resistant cells, protein-protein interactions (PPIs), gene ontologies (GOs) and pathway analysis were performed to identify the overall biological changes. The most common DEGs in the PPIs, GOs and pathways were identified and were validated clinically by their ability to predict overall survival and disease free survival. The gene-gene expression correlation and gene-resistance correlation was also evaluated in CRC patients using The Cancer Genomic Atlas data (TCGA). RESULTS: The 135 DEGs were identified of which 36 were upregulated and 99 were down regulated. After mapping the PPI networks, the GOs and the pathways, nine genes (GNAS, PRKACB, MECOM, PLA2G4C, BMP6, BDNF, DLG4, FGF2 and FGF9) were found to be commonly enriched. Signal transduction was the most significant GO and MAPK pathway was the most significant pathway. The five genes (FGF2, FGF9, PRKACB, MECOM and PLA2G4C) in the MAPK pathway were all contained in the signal transduction and the levels of those genes were upregulated. The FGF2, FGF9 and MECOM expression were highly associated with CRC patients' survival rate but not PRKACB and PLA2G4C. In addition, FGF9 was also associated with irinotecan resistance and poor disease free survival. FGF2, FGF9 and PRKACB were positively correlated with each other while MECOM correlated positively with FGF9 and PLA2G4C, and correlated negatively with FGF2 and PRKACB after doing gene-gene expression correlation. CONCLUSION: Targeting the MAPK signal transduction pathway through the targeting of the FGF2, FGF9, MECOM, PLA2G4C and PRKACB might increase tumor responsiveness to irinotecan treatment.
RATIONALE: Augmented smooth muscle contractility of the airways is one of the causes of airway hyperresponsiveness in asthmatics. However, the mechanism of the altered properties of airway smooth muscle cells is not well understood. OBJECTIVES: To identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) related to the bronchial smooth muscle (BSM) hyper-contractility in a murine asthma model. METHODS: The ovalbumin (OA)-sensitized mice were repeatedly challenged with aerosolized OA to induce asthmatic reaction. Transcriptomic profiles were generated by microarray analysis of BSM tissues from the OA-challenged and control animals, and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) Pathway Analysis was applied. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Tension study showed a BSM hyperresponsiveness to acetylcholine (ACh) in the OA-challenged mice. A total of 770 genes were differentially expressed between the OA-challenged and control animals. Pathway analysis showed a significant change in arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism pathway in BSM tissues of the OA-challenged mice. Validation of DEGs by quantitative RT-PCR showed a significant increase in PLA2 group 4c (Pla2g4c)/COX-2 (Ptgs2)/PGD2 synthase 2 (Hpgds) axis. PGD2 level in bronchoalveolar fluids of the OA-challenged mice was significantly increased. A 24-h incubation of BSM tissues with PGD2 caused a hyperresponsiveness to ACh in naive control mice. CONCLUSIONS: AA metabolism is shifted towards PGD2 production in BSM tissues of asthma. Increased PGD2 level in the airways might be a cause of the BSM hyperresponsiveness in asthma.
Preterm birth is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in infants. Its etiology is multifactorial with genes and immune homeostasis. The authors investigated whether prostaglandin (PG) synthesis related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) PLA2G4C rs1366442 and PLA2G4D rs4924618 were associated with the risk of spontaneous preterm birth (SPTB) in a Chinese population of 114 cases of SPTB and 250 controls of term delivery. The risk associations were determined by odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) calculated using multivariate logistic regression. Homology modeling was performed to elucidate potential mechanism of the SNP function. The maternal AT/TT genotype of PLA2G4D rs4924618 was associated with a reduced risk of SPTB (OR, 0.61; 95% CI, 0.37‑0.99), while no significant association between PLA2G4C rs1366442 and SPTB risk was identified. Structure and sequence analysis revealed that the amino acid substitution introduced by this SNP located at the conserved central core of the catalytic domain of cytosolic phospholipase A2 delta and was close to the active site. These findings suggested that the polymorphism of PLA2G4D rs4924618 may have a protective influence on the SPTB susceptibility in a Chinese population, supporting a role for genetics in the association between PG synthesis and preterm birth.
Changes in placental lipid metabolism influence the delivery of lipids critical for fetal development and fetal requirements for lipids change across gestation. We hypothesized that placental lipid content and metabolic enzyme protein levels increase across gestation and are elevated in obesity. Placentas (4-40 weeks' gestation) were collected from control (body mass index, BMI = 18.5-24.9, n=37) and obese (BMI > 30, n=19) pregnant women. Trophoblast villous tissue was homogenized and subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for phospholipid and triacylglycerol (TAG) analysis and western blot for protein quantification. The placental content of TAG species and nine of 35 identified phosphatidylcholines (PC) were significantly higher (P<0.05) in first trimester (28-79%, 10-47%, respectively). Furthermore, two TAG and three PC differed by maternal BMI and were significantly increased (P<0.05) in the obese group in first trimester (72-87%, 88-119%, respectively). Placental protein abundance of glycerol-2-phosphate (GPAT3) and 1-acyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 2 (AGPAT2), involved in de novo synthesis of PC and TAG, were higher (P<0.05) in the first trimester (66 and 74%, respectively). The protein abundance of the PC-remodeling enzyme PLA2G4c was also higher (63%) in first trimester (P<0.05). In conclusion, the placental content of many phospholipid and TAG species and the protein level of associated synthesis enzymes are higher in first-trimester human placenta. The high PC content may be related to the rapid membrane expansion in early pregnancy and the low placental oxygen tension may promote the accumulation of tissue TAGs in first trimester. Maternal obesity had only limited impact on placental lipid content and metabolic enzyme protein abundance.
We hypothesized that attenuated niacin skin flushing in schizophrenia patients might be associated with polymorphic variants in PLA2G6 and PLA2G4C genes (rs4375 and rs1549637 variations) which encode calcium-independent phospholipase A2 beta (iPLA2beta) and cytosolic phospholipase A2 gamma (cPLA2gamma) enzymes. The iPLA2beta and cPLA2gamma may play an important role in niacin-mediated signaling; in addition to their major role - mediating phospholipids remodeling, which alters membrane receptors and signal transduction, they regulate the reservoir of arachidonic acid for prostaglandins synthesis. Skin response to topical niacin of 0.1M, 0.01M, 0.001M and 0.0001M concentrations in 75 schizophrenia patients was rated using the method of volumetric niacin response (VNR). Neither PLA2G6 nor PLA2G4C gene polymorphisms were significantly associated with VNR values. Furthermore, polymorphisms׳ synergy on niacin skin flushing was also not detected.
BACKGROUND: The onset of birth in humans, like other apes, differs from non-primate mammals in its endocrine physiology. We hypothesize that higher primate-specific gene evolution may lead to these differences and target genes involved in human preterm birth, an area of global health significance. METHODS: We performed a comparative genomics screen of highly conserved noncoding elements and identified PLA2G4C, a phospholipase A isoform involved in prostaglandin biosynthesis as human accelerated. To examine whether this gene demonstrating primate-specific evolution was associated with birth timing, we genotyped and analyzed 8 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in PLA2G4C in US Hispanic (n = 73 preterm, 292 control), US White (n = 147 preterm, 157 control) and US Black (n = 79 preterm, 166 control) mothers. RESULTS: Detailed structural and phylogenic analysis of PLA2G4C suggested a short genomic element within the gene duplicated from a paralogous highly conserved element on chromosome 1 specifically in primates. SNPs rs8110925 and rs2307276 in US Hispanics and rs11564620 in US Whites were significant after correcting for multiple tests (p < 0.006). Additionally, rs11564620 (Thr360Pro) was associated with increased metabolite levels of the prostaglandin thromboxane in healthy individuals (p = 0.02), suggesting this variant may affect PLA2G4C activity. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that variation in PLA2G4C may influence preterm birth risk by increasing levels of prostaglandins, which are known to regulate labor.
BACKGROUND: Phospholipase A2 Group IV C (PLA2G4C) catalyzes the release of certain fatty acids from phospholipids and plays a role in a range of physiological functions, such as remodeling of cell membranes and the production of prostaglandins. Furthermore, it has been proposed that PLA2G4C plays an important role in breast cancer cell chemotaxis. This study aimed to investigate the effect of a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1549637 (T>A) of the PLA2G4C gene on the prognosis of colorectal cancer (CRC). MATERIAL AND METHODS: Whole blood DNA was extracted from 381 patients with CRC and 618 controls, and a TaqMan SNP genotyping assay was used to determine the distribution of the genotypes. Cancer-specific and disease-free survival was analyzed by Kaplan-Meier graphs and by uni- and multivariable Cox regression. RESULTS: The cancer-specific survival differed between the genotypes (p = 0.019) and the carriers of the A allele were associated with the highest risk of CRC death, with a hazard ratio (HR) of 1.72 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.17-2.53, p = 0.006] compared with homozygous carriers of the T allele. This increased mortality in the carriers with the allele A was especially marked in stage II with an HR of 3.84 (95% CI 1.51-9.78, p = 0.005). CONCLUSION: The A allele in PLA2G4C SNP (rs1549637) is associated with a worse prognosis in patients with CRC, especially in stage II disease, and it could be a potential prognostic biomarker in the planning of individual adjuvant therapy in stage II patients.
OBJECTIVE: Hyperlipidemia-induced endothelial cell (EC) activation is considered as an initial event responsible for monocyte recruitment in atherogenesis. However, it remains poorly defined what is the mechanism underlying hyperlipidemia-induced EC activation. Here, we tested a novel hypothesis that mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) serve as signaling mediators for EC activation in early atherosclerosis. APPROACH AND RESULTS: Metabolomics and transcriptomics analyses revealed that several lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) species, such as 16:0, 18:0, and 18:1, and their processing enzymes, including Pla2g7 and Pla2g4c, were significantly induced in the aortas of apolipoprotein E knockout mice during early atherosclerosis. Using electron spin resonance and flow cytometry, we found that LPC 16:0, 18:0, and 18:1 induced mtROS in primary human aortic ECs, independently of the activities of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase. Mechanistically, using confocal microscopy and Seahorse XF mitochondrial analyzer, we showed that LPC induced mtROS via unique calcium entry-mediated increase of proton leak and mitochondrial O2 reduction. In addition, we found that mtROS contributed to LPC-induced EC activation by regulating nuclear binding of activator protein-1 and inducing intercellular adhesion molecule-1 gene expression in vitro. Furthermore, we showed that mtROS inhibitor MitoTEMPO suppressed EC activation and aortic monocyte recruitment in apolipoprotein E knockout mice using intravital microscopy and flow cytometry methods. CONCLUSIONS: ATP synthesis-uncoupled, but proton leak-coupled, mtROS increase mediates LPC-induced EC activation during early atherosclerosis. These results indicate that mitochondrial antioxidants are promising therapies for vascular inflammation and cardiovascular diseases.
Chronic inflammation in asthmatics is initiated/exacerbated by many environmental factors, such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide and allergens. Phospholipase A(2) and histone acetyltransferase/deacetylases are enzymes involved in inflammatory process, particularly in lipid inflammatory mediators production and control of transcription of many inflammatory genes, respectively. The aim of the study was to identify differences in the inflammatory process in patients with severe and non-severe asthma, taking as a criterion expression of two groups of enzymes: phospholipases A(2) and histone acetyltransferases/deacetylases. Thirty-two patients with severe, non-severe atopic to house dust mite asthmatics and 14 healthy volunteers were recruited. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were stimulated with Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus allergen (nDer p1) and bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The expression of phospholipases A(2) and histone acetyltransferases and deacetylases were assessed using TaqMan Low Density Array Cards. The protein expression was analyzed with immunoblot. Increased expression of phospholipase A2 Group IVC (PLA2G4C) and cytosolic phospholipase A2 gamma (cPLA(2)gamma) protein was observed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from severe asthmatics in response to LPS and nDer p1, compared to non-severe asthmatics. nDer p1-stimulated PBMC from severe asthmatics exhibit induced expression of HDAC1 and similar trend was observed in protein concentration. Decreased expression of EP300 occurred in PBMC of severe asthmatics. PBMC from non-severe asthmatics showed decreased expression of HDAC2 and PLA2G15 after LPS treatment. In conclusion, in response to LPS and dust mite allergen, PBMC from severe and non-severe asthmatics modulate expression of selected phospholipase A(2), histone acetyltransferases and deacetylases, while increased expression of cPLA(2)gamma characterizes PBMC response from severe asthmatics.
X-linked adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) is an inherited neurometabolic disorder caused by malfunction of the ABCD1 gene, characterized by slowly progressing spastic paraplegia affecting corticospinal tracts, and adrenal insufficiency. AMN is the most common phenotypic manifestation of adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD). In some cases, an inflammatory cerebral demyelination occurs associated to poor prognosis in cerebral AMN (cAMN). Though ABCD1 codes for a peroxisomal transporter of very long-chain fatty acids, the molecular mechanisms that govern disease onset and progression, or its transformation to a cerebral, inflammatory demyelinating form, remain largely unknown. Here we used an integrated -omics approach to identify novel biomarkers and altered network dynamic characteristic of, and possibly driving, the disease. We combined an untargeted metabolome assay of plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of AMN patients, which used liquid chromatography coupled to quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (LC-Q-TOF), with a functional genomics analysis of spinal cords of Abcd1(-) mouse. The results uncovered altered nodes in lipid-driven proinflammatory cascades, such as glycosphingolipid and glycerophospholipid synthesis, governed by the beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase (B4GALT6), the phospholipase 2gamma (PLA2G4C) and the choline/ethanolamine phosphotransferase (CEPT1) enzymes. Confirmatory investigations revealed a non-classic, inflammatory profile, consisting on the one hand of raised plasma levels of several eicosanoids derived from arachidonic acid through PLA2G4C activity, together with also the proinflammatory cytokines IL6, IL8, MCP-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. In contrast, we detected a more protective, Th2-shifted response in PBMC. Thus, our findings illustrate a previously unreported connection between ABCD1 dysfunction, glyco- and glycerolipid-driven inflammatory signaling and a fine-tuned inflammatory response underlying a disease considered non-inflammatory.
The present study detected 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the PLA2G4C and PLA2G6 loci among 240 Chinese parent-offspring trios of Han descent. Of these 9 SNPs, 5 showed highly polymorphic in the Chinese population. They were then applied as genetic markers to test the genetic association of these two calcium-independent cytosolic PLA2 genes with schizophrenia. The transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) showed that rs1549637 at the PLA2G4C locus was the only SNP associated with the illness (chi(2) = 5.63, P = 0.018). The global P-value was 0.082 for 1000 permutations with the TDT analysis. Neither the conditional on allele test nor the conditional on genotype test showed a disease association for the combination of these two genes. Because the PLA2G4C association is so weak, this initial finding should be interpreted with caution.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Extracellular acidity, a characteristic of solid tumors, has been proposed to be a critical factor for aggravating tumor malignancy and conferring resistance to therapeutics. Recently, acidity has been implicated in inflammatory responses, which are mediated through active lipid metabolites in various human tissues. In the present study, we investigated whether acidity can affect lipid-mediated signaling, and found that phospholipase A2 (PLA(2)) activity increased at acidic pH in SNU601 and AGS gastric carcinoma cell lines. MATERIALS AND METHODS: To identify the PLA(2) isoform that is responsible for the acidity-induced activity, we assessed mRNA levels of cPLA(2) isotypes through real-time qPCR, and protein levels through immunoblot assay in cells cultured in acidic medium. RESULTS: It was found that acidic pH conditions markedly elevated the PLA(2)gamma expression. A gene interference study using specific siRNA of cPLA(2)gamma suggested that expression of cPLA(2)gamma in acidic culture conditions may be associated with protection of cancer cells in acidic environment, as shown by cell viability and clonogenic assays. In addition, expression of cPLA(2)gamma appeared to confer cell resistance to anticancer drugs under acidic pH conditions. CONCLUSION: Acidity-induced cPLA(2)gamma expression may exert protective effects by imparting resistance to the gastric cancer cells under acidic environment.
