Cytosolic phospholipase A2; Selectively hydrolyzes arachidonyl phospholipids in the sn-2 position releasing arachidonic acid. Together with its lysophospholipid activity, it is implicated in the initiation of the inflammatory response.
BACKGROUND: Berberine (BBR), an isoquinoline alkaloid isolated from Rhizoma Coptis, is widely used in the treatment of hyperlipidemia (HLP) in China. At present, the efficacy of BBR against HLP is relatively clear, but there are few researches on its mechanism. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the potentially beneficial role of BBR in HLP hamster models, as well as investigate its possible mechanisms and potential lipid biomarkers in combination with network pharmacology. METHODS: HLP hamster model was induced by high-fat diet. Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining was used to determine the degree of hepatic pathological injury. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used to analyze lipid metabolism profiles of liver samples, and multiple statistical analysis methods were used to screen and identify lipid biomarkers. The possible molecular mechanism was unraveled by network pharmacology. RESULTS: The results showed that 13 metabolites, including CE (16:1), HexCer (D18:1/19:0) and LPC (O-22:0) were biomarkers of BBR regulation. CHPT1, PLA2G4A, LCAT and UGCG were predicted as the lipid-linked targets of BBR against HLP, whilst glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid metabolism were the key pathways of BBR against HLP. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, this study provides new insights into the protective mechanism of BBR against HLP through network pharmacology and lipidomic approaches.
Ischemic stroke is an acute and severe neurological disease with high mortality and disability rates worldwide. Polymerase I and transcript release factor (PTRF) plays a pivotal role in regulating cellular senescence, glucose intolerance, lipid metabolism, and mitochondrial bioenergetics, but its mechanism, characteristics, and functions in neuronal cells following the cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury remain to be determined. Methods: Transcription factor motif analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), luciferase and co-Immunoprecipitation (co-IP) assays were performed to investigate the mechanisms of PTRF in neuronal cells after I/R injury. Lentiviral-sgRNA against PTRF gene was introduced to HT22 cells, and adeno-associated virus (AAV) encoding a human synapsin (hSyn) promoter-driven construct was transduced a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) against PTRF mRNA in primary neuronal cells and the cortex of the cerebral I/R mice for investigating the role of PTRF in neuronal damage and PLA2G4A change induced by the cerebral I/R injury. Results: Here, we reported that neuronal PTRF was remarkably increased in the cerebral penumbra after I/R injury, and HIF-1alpha and STAT3 regulated the I/R-dependent expression of PTRF via binding to its promoter in neuronal cells. Moreover, overexpression of neuronal PTRF enhanced the activity and stability of PLA2G4A by decreasing its proteasome-mediated degradation pathway. Subsequently, PTRF promoted reprogramming of lipid metabolism and altered mitochondrial bioenergetics, which could lead to oxidative damage, involving autophagy, lipid peroxidation, and ferroptosis via PLA2G4A in neuronal cells. Furthermore, inhibition of neuronal PTRF/PLA2G4A-axis markedly reduced the neurological deficits, cerebral infarct volumes, and mortality rates in the mice following cerebral I/R injury. Conclusion: Our results thus identify that the STAT3/HIF-1alpha/PTRF-axis in neurons, aggravating cerebral I/R injury by regulating the activity and stability of PLA2G4A, might be a novel therapeutic target for ischemic stroke.
Massive infiltrated and enriched decidual macrophages (dMphi) have been widely regarded as important regulators of maternal-fetal immune tolerance and trophoblast invasion, contributing to normal pregnancy. However, the characteristics of metabolic profile and the underlying mechanism of dMphi residence remain largely unknown. Here, we observe that dMphi display an active glycerophospholipid metabolism. The activation of ENPP2-lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) facilitates the adhesion and retention, and M2 differentiation of dMphi during normal pregnancy. Mechanistically, this process is mediated through activation of the LPA receptors (LPAR1 and PPARG/PPARgamma)-DDIT4-macroautophagy/autophagy axis, and further upregulation of multiple adhesion factors (e.g., cadherins and selectins) in a CLDN7 (claudin 7)-dependent manner. Additionally, poor trophoblast invasion and placenta development, and a high ratio of embryo loss are observed in Enpp2(+/-), lpar1(-/-) or PPARG-blocked pregnant mice. Patients with unexplained spontaneous abortion display insufficient autophagy and cell residence of dMphi. In therapeutic studies, supplementation with LPA or the autophagy inducer rapamycin significantly promotes dMphi autophagy and cell residence, and improves embryo resorption in Enpp2(+/-) and spontaneous abortion mouse models, which should be dependent on the activation of DDIT4-autophagy-CLDN7-adhesion molecules axis. This observation reveals that inactivation of ENPP2-LPA metabolism and insufficient autophagy of dMphi result in resident obstacle of dMphi and further increase the risk of spontaneous abortion, and provides potential therapeutic strategies to prevent spontaneous abortion.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin beta; ADGRE1/F4/80: adhesion G protein-coupled receptor E1; Atg5: autophagy related 5; ATG13: autophagy related 13; BECN1: beclin 1; CDH1/E-cadherin: cadherin 1; CDH5/VE-cadherin: cadherin 5; CFSE: carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester; CLDN7: claudin 7; CSF1/M-CSF: colony stimulating factor 1; CSF2/GM-CSF: colony stimulating factor 2; Ctrl: control; CXCL10/IP-10: chemokine (C-X-C) ligand 10; DDIT4: DNA damage inducible transcript 4; dMphi: decidual macrophage; DSC: decidual stromal cells; ENPP2/ATX: ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 2; Enpp2(+/-): Enpp2 heterozygous knockout mouse; ENPP2i/PF-8380: ENPP2 inhibitor; EPCAM: epithelial cell adhesion molecule; ESC: endometrial stromal cells; FGF2/b-FGF: fibroblast growth factor 2; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GPCPD1: glycerophosphocholine phosphodiesterase 1; HE: heterozygote; HIF1A: hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha; HNF4A: hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha; HO: homozygote; ICAM2: intercellular adhesion molecule 2; IL: interleukin; ITGAV/CD51: integrin subunit alpha V; ITGAM/CD11b: integrin subunit alpha M; ITGAX/CD11b: integrin subunit alpha X; ITGB3/CD61: integrin subunit beta 3; KLRB1/NK1.1: killer cell lectin like receptor B1; KRT7/cytokeratin 7: keratin 7; LPA: lysophosphatidic acid; LPAR: lysophosphatidic acid receptor; lpar1(-/-): lpar1 homozygous knockout mouse; LPAR1i/AM966: LPAR1 inhibitor; LY6C: lymphocyte antigen 6 complex, locus C1; LYPLA1: lysophospholipase 1; LYPLA2: lysophospholipase 2; Lyz2: lysozyme 2; MAP1LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MARVELD2: MARVEL domain containing 2; 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; MBOAT2: membrane bound O-acyltransferase domain containing 2; MGLL: monoglyceride lipase; MRC1/CD206: mannose receptor C-type 1; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; NP: normal pregnancy; PDGF: platelet derived growth factor; PLA1A: phospholipase A1 member A; PLA2G4A: phospholipase A2 group IVA; PLPP1: phospholipid phosphatase 1; pMo: peripheral blood monocytes; p-MTOR: phosphorylated MTOR; PPAR: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor; PPARG/PPARgamma: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma; PPARGi/GW9662: PPARG inhibitor; PTPRC/CD45: protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type, C; Rapa: rapamycin; RHEB: Ras homolog, mTORC1 binding; SA: spontaneous abortion; SELE: selectin E; SELL: selectin L; siCLDN7: CLDN7-silenced; STAT: signal transducer and activator of transcription; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TJP1: tight junction protein 1; VCAM1: vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; WT: wild type.
Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) is observed under many pathological conditions, leading to cellular dysfunction and death. However, the mechanisms by which lysosomal membranes become leaky in vivo are not clear. Our data demonstrate that LMP occurs in neurons following controlled cortical impact induced (CCI) traumatic brain injury (TBI) in mice, leading to impaired macroautophagy (autophagy) and neuronal cell death. Comparison of LC-MS/MS lysosomal membrane lipid profiles from TBI and sham animals suggested a role for PLA2G4A/cPLA2 (phospholipase A2, group IVA [cytosolic, calcium-dependent]) in TBI-induced LMP. Activation of PLA2G4A caused LMP and inhibition of autophagy flux in cell lines and primary neurons. In vivo pharmacological inhibition of PLA2G4A attenuated TBI-induced LMP, as well as subsequent impairment of autophagy and neuronal loss, and was associated with improved neurological outcomes. Inhibition of PLA2G4A in vitro limited amyloid-beta-induced LMP and inhibition of autophagy. Together, our data indicate that PLA2G4A -mediated lysosomal membrane damage is involved in neuronal cell death following CCI-induced TBI and potentially in other neurodegenerative disorders.Abbreviations: AACOCF(3), arachidonyl trifluoromethyl ketone; ACTB/beta-actin, actin, beta; AD, Alzheimer disease; ATG5, autophagy related 5; ATG7, autophagy related 7; ATG12, autophagy related 12; BECN1, beclin 1, autophagy related; C1P, ceramide-1-phosphate; CCI, controlled cortical impact; CTSD, cathepsin D; CTSL, cathepsin L; GFP, green fluorescent protein; IF, immunofluorescence; LAMP1, lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1; LAMP2, lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2; LC-MS/MS, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry; LMP, Lysosomal membrane permeabilization; LPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; LPE, lysophosphatidylethanolamine; MAP1LC3/LC3, microtuble-associated protein 1 light chain 3; NAGLU, alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase (Sanfilippo disease IIIB); PC, diacyl glycerophosphatidylcholine; PE, diacyl glycerophosphatidylethanolamine; PE-O, plasmanyl glycerophosphatidylethanolamine; PE-P, plasmenyl glycerophosphatidylethanolamine; PLA2G4A/cPLA2, phospholipase A2, group IVA (cytosolic, calcium-dependent); RBFOX3, RNA binding protein, fox-1 homolog (C. elegans) 3; RFP, red fluorescent protein; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SQSTM1, sequestosome 1; TUBA1/alpha-tubulin, tubulin, alpha; TBI, traumatic brain injury; TFEB, transcription factor EB; ULK1, unc-51 like kinase 1.
Necrosis that appears at the ischemic distal end of random-pattern skin flaps increases the pain and economic burden of patients. Necroptosis is thought to contribute to flap necrosis. Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) plays an indispensable role in the regulation of necroptosis. Nonetheless, the mechanisms by which lysosomal membranes become leaky and the relationship between necroptosis and lysosomes are still unclear in ischemic flaps. Based on Western blotting, immunofluorescence, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis results, we found that LMP was presented in the ischemic distal portion of random-pattern skin flaps, which leads to disruption of lysosomal function and macroautophagic/autophagic flux, increased necroptosis, and aggravated necrosis of the ischemic flaps. Moreover, bioinformatics analysis of the LC-MS results enabled us to focus on the role of PLA2G4E/cPLA2 (phospholipase A2, group IVE) in LMP of the ischemic flaps. In vivo inhibition of PLA2G4E with an adeno-associated virus vector attenuated LMP and necroptosis, and promoted flap survival. In addition, microRNA-seq helped us determine that Mir504-5p was differentially expressed in ischemic flaps. A string of in vitro and in vivo tests was employed to verify the inhibitory effect of Mir504-5p on PLA2G4E, LMP and necroptosis. Finally, we concluded that the inhibition of PLA2G4E by Mir504-5p reduced LMP-induced necroptosis, thereby promoting the survival of random-pattern skin flaps.Abbreviations: AAV: adeno-associated virus; ACTA2/alpha;-SMA: actin alpha 2, smooth muscle, aorta; ALOX15/12/15-LOX: arachidonate 15- lipoxygenase; c-CASP8: cleaved caspase; c-CASP3: cleaved caspase 3; CTSD: cathepsin D; CTSB: cathepsin B; CTSL: cathepsin L; DMECs: primary mouse dermal microvascular endothelial cells; ELISA: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; F-CHP: 5-FAM-conjugated collagen hybridizing peptide; FISH: fluorescence in situ hybridization; HUVECs: human umbilical vein endothelial cells; LAMP1: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1; LAMP2: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2; LC-MS: liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry; LDBF: laser doppler blood flow; LMP: lysosomal membrane permeabilization; LPE: lysophosphatidylethanolamine; LPC: lysophosphatidylcholine; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; MLKL: mixed lineage kinase domain-like; NDI: N-dodecylimidazole; PECAM1/CD31: platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1; PLA2G4A/cPLA2: phospholipase A2, group IVA (cytosolic, calcium-dependent); PLA2G4E/cPLA2: phospholipase A2, group IVE; qPCR: quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction; RIPK1: receptor (TNFRSF)-interacting serine-threonine kinase 1; RIPK3: receptor-interacting serine-threonine kinase 3; RISC: RNA-induced silencing complex; ROS: reactive oxygen species; shRNA: short hairpin RNA; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TBHP: tert-butyl hydroperoxide; TUNEL: terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labelling.
BACKGROUND: Lipids may influence cellular penetrance by viral pathogens and the immune response that they evoke. We deeply phenotyped the lipidomic response to SARs-CoV-2 and compared that with infection with other pathogens in patients admitted with acute respiratory distress syndrome to an intensive care unit (ICU). METHODS: Mass spectrometry was used to characterise lipids and relate them to proteins, peripheral cell immunotypes and disease severity. RESULTS: Circulating phospholipases (sPLA2, cPLA2 (PLA2G4A) and PLA2G2D) were elevated on admission in all ICU groups. Cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase and epoxygenase products of arachidonic acid (AA) were elevated in all ICU groups compared with controls. sPLA2 predicted severity in COVID-19 and correlated with TxA2, LTE4 and the isoprostane, iPF2alpha-III, while PLA2G2D correlated with LTE4. The elevation in PGD2, like PGI2 and 12-HETE, exhibited relative specificity for COVID-19 and correlated with sPLA2 and the interleukin-13 receptor to drive lymphopenia, a marker of disease severity. Pro-inflammatory eicosanoids remained correlated with severity in COVID-19 28 days after admission. Amongst non-COVID ICU patients, elevations in 5- and 15-HETE and 9- and 13-HODE reflected viral rather than bacterial disease. Linoleic acid (LA) binds directly to SARS-CoV-2 and both LA and its di-HOME products reflected disease severity in COVID-19. In healthy marines, these lipids rose with seroconversion. Eicosanoids linked variably to the peripheral cellular immune response. PGE2, TxA2 and LTE4 correlated with T cell activation, as did PGD2 with non-B non-T cell activation. In COVID-19, LPS stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cell PGF2alpha correlated with memory T cells, dendritic and NK cells while LA and DiHOMEs correlated with exhausted T cells. Three high abundance lipids - ChoE 18:3, LPC-O-16:0 and PC-O-30:0 - were altered specifically in COVID. LPC-O-16:0 was strongly correlated with T helper follicular cell activation and all three negatively correlated with multi-omic inflammatory pathways and disease severity. CONCLUSIONS: A broad based lipidomic storm is a predictor of poor prognosis in ARDS. Alterations in sPLA2, PGD2 and 12-HETE and the high abundance lipids, ChoE 18:3, LPC-O-16:0 and PC-O-30:0 exhibit relative specificity for COVID-19 amongst such patients and correlate with the inflammatory response to link to disease severity.
BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated malignant epithelial tumor endemic to Southern China and Southeast Asia. While previous studies have revealed a low frequency of gene mutations in NPC, its epigenomic aberrations are not fully elucidated apart from DNA hypermethylation. Epigenomic rewiring and enhancer dysregulation, such as enhancer hijacking due to genomic structural changes or extrachromosomal DNA, drive cancer progression. METHODS: We conducted Hi-C, 4C-seq, ChIP-seq, and RNA-seq analyses to comprehensively elucidate the epigenome and interactome of NPC using C666-1 EBV(+)-NPC cell lines, NP69T immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cells, clinical NPC biopsy samples, and in vitro EBV infection in HK1 and NPC-TW01 EBV(-) cell lines. FINDINGS: In C666-1, the EBV genome significantly interacted with inactive B compartments of host cells; the significant association of EBV-interacting regions (EBVIRs) with B compartment was confirmed using clinical NPC and in vitro EBV infection model. EBVIRs in C666-1 showed significantly higher levels of active histone modifications compared with NP69T. Aberrant activation of EBVIRs after EBV infection was validated using in vitro EBV infection models. Within the EBVIR-overlapping topologically associating domains, 14 H3K4me3(+) genes were significantly upregulated in C666-1. Target genes of EBVIRs including PLA2G4A, PTGS2 and CITED2, interacted with the enhancers activated in EBVIRs and were highly expressed in NPC, and their knockdown significantly reduced cell proliferation. INTERPRETATION: The EBV genome contributes to NPC tumorigenesis through "enhancer infestation" by interacting with the inactive B compartments of the host genome and aberrantly activating enhancers. FUNDING: The funds are listed in the Acknowledgements section.
BACKGROUND: Bioactive lipids involved in the progression of various diseases. Nevertheless, there is still a lack of biomarkers and relative regulatory targets. The lipidomic analysis of the samples from platinum-resistant in gastric cancer patients is expected to help us further improve our understanding of it. METHODS: We employed LC-MS based untargeted lipidomic analysis to search for potential candidate biomarkers for platinum resistance in GC patients. Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) and variable importance in projection (VIP) analysis were used to identify differential lipids. The possible molecular mechanisms and targets were obtained by metabolite set enrichment analysis and potential gene network screened. Finally, verified them by immunohistochemical of a tissue microarray. RESULTS: There were 71 differential lipid metabolites identified in GC samples between the chemotherapy-sensitivity group and the chemotherapy resistance group. According to Foldchange (FC) value, VIP value, P values (FC > 2, VIP > 1.5, p < 0.05), a total of 15 potential biomarkers were obtained, including MGDG(43:11)-H, Cer(d18:1/24:0) + HCOO, PI(18:0/18:1)-H, PE(16:1/18:1)-H, PE(36:2) + H, PE(34:2p)-H, Cer(d18:1 + hO/24:0) + HCOO, Cer(d18:1/23:0) + HCOO, PC(34:2e) + H, SM(d34:0) + H, LPC(18:2) + HCOO, PI(18:1/22:5)-H, PG(18:1/18:1)-H, Cer(d18:1/24:0) + H and PC(35:2) + H. Furthermore, we obtained five potential key targets (PLA2G4A, PLA2G3, DGKA, ACHE, and CHKA), and a metabolite-reaction-enzyme-gene interaction network was built to reveal the biological process of how they could disorder the endogenous lipid profile of platinum resistance in GC patients through the glycerophospholipid metabolism pathway. Finally, we further identified PLA2G4A and ACHE as core targets of the process by correlation analysis and tissue microarray immunohistochemical verification. CONCLUSION: PLA2G4A and ACHE regulated endogenous lipid profile in the platinum resistance in GC patients through the glycerophospholipid metabolism pathway. The screening of lipid biomarkers will facilitate earlier precision medicine interventions for chemotherapy-resistant gastric cancer. The development of therapies targeting PLA2G4A and ACHE could enhance platinum chemotherapy effectiveness.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Osteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis in the elderly and is influenced by both genetic and environmental risk factors. The scope of the present article is to offer an overview of recent developments in the genetic epidemiology of knee and hip osteoarthritis, with particular emphasis on published genomewide association studies (GWAS). RECENT FINDINGS: Candidate gene studies and genomewide linkage studies have identified genes in the bone morphogenetic pathway (e.g. GDF5), the thyroid regulation pathway (DIO2) and apoptotic pathways as involved in genetic risk of large joint osteoarthritis. GWAS have reported structural genes (COL6A4), inflammation-related genes (PTGS2/PLA2G4A) and a locus on chr 7q22 (GPR22 and four other genes in the same linkage disequilibrium block) associated with osteoarthritis. SUMMARY: Genetic studies have identified polymorphisms associated with osteoarthritis and related end-points. These include genes in signaling cascades involved in joint and bone biology, as well as genes in inflammatory pathways and a cluster of five genes in perfect linkage disequilibrium in the 7q22 region.
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic gastrointestinal disease that can be managed with 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA), the standard treatment for UC. However, the effectiveness of 5-ASA is not always optimal. Our study revealed that despite 5-ASA treatment, cells continued to experience excessive ferroptosis, which may hinder mucosal healing in UC and limit the success of this treatment approach in achieving disease remission. We found that combining 5-ASA with the ferroptosis inhibitor Fer-1 led to a significant inhibition of ferroptosis in macrophages present in the colon tissue, along with an increase in the proportion of M2 macrophages, suggesting that targeting ferroptosis in M2 macrophages could be a potential therapeutic strategy for alleviating UC. Our study also demonstrated that M2 macrophages are more susceptible to ferroptosis compared to M1 macrophages, and this susceptibility is associated with the activated arachidonic acid (AA) metabolism pathway mediated by ERK-cPLA2-ACSL4. Additionally, we found that the expression of cPLA2 gene pla2g4a was increased in the colon of UC patients compared to healthy controls. Furthermore, targeted metabolomics analysis revealed that the combination treatment group, as opposed to the 5-ASA treatment group, exhibited the ability to modulate AA metabolism. Overall, our findings emphasize the importance of addressing macrophage ferroptosis in order to enhance macrophage anti-inflammation, improve mucosal healing, and achieve better therapeutic outcomes for patients with UC.
Osteoarthritis (OA), which is characterized by articular cartilage degeneration, shows a gradually increasing incidence with age. This study explored the molecular mechanism underlying the proliferation and apoptosis of chondrocytes during OA progression. In this study, chondrocytes were isolated from human knee cartilages. The targeted relationship among nuclear enriched abundant transcript 1 (NEAT1), microRNA-543 (miR-543) and PLA2G4A was predicted on TargetScan V7.2 and starBase and validated by performing dual-luciferase reporter assay. High-expressed NEAT1 was detected in OA cartilage and chondrocytes. NEAT1 was negatively correlated with miR-543 and was low-expressed in OA cartilage and PLA2G4A was negatively correlated with miR-543 and was high-expressed in OA cartilage. In OA chondrocytes, the overexpressed NEAT1 inhibited the expressions of p-Akt1 and Bcl-2 and upregulated that of matrix metalloprotease (MMP)-3, MMP-9, MMP-13, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8, but such effects of overexpressed NEAT1 were reversed by miR-543 mimic. SiRNA-NEAT1 exerted an opposite effect to NEAT1 overexpression on OA chondrocytes, but this could be reversed by miR-543 inhibitor. The effect of PLA2G4A overexpression was the opposite to miR-543 mimic on OA chondrocytes. In conclusion, NEAT1 could sponge miR-543 to induce PLA2G4A expression, inhibit chondrocyte proliferation and promote apoptosis.
BACKGROUND: Necroptosis is a programmed necrotic cell death, in which dying cells rupture and release intracellular components that trigger a proinflammatory response. The current study aimed at probing the circular RNA (circRNA)-mediated regulatory mechanisms in necroptosis in premature ovarian failure (POF). METHODS: CircRNA sequencing analysis was conducted in ovarian tissues of control and POF rats and transcriptome microarrays were acquired from the GSE33423 dataset. Differential expression analysis of circRNAs and mRNAs was executed between the POF and control data. Both a necroptosis-based circRNA-microRNA (miRNA)-mRNA network and a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network were established. Then, the functional annotation and immunological traits were analyzed. RESULTS: Totally, 1266 upregulated and 1283 downregulated circRNAs as well as 1101 upregulated and 1168 downregulated mRNAs were determined in the POF rats versus the controls. The differentially expressed mRNAs predominantly correlated with necroptosis. The circRNA-miRNA-mRNA networks of downregulated necroptosis genes (comprising rno_circRNA_004995-rno-miR-148b-5p-H2afy2, rno_circRNA_016998-rno-miR-29a-5p-Hmgb1, and rno_circRNA_017593-rno-miR-29a-5p-Hmgb1) and upregulated necroptosis genes (comprising rno_circRNA_015900-rno-miR-935-Stat1, rno_circRNA_007946-rno-miR-328a-3p-Stat5a, rno_circRNA_007947-rno-miR-328a-3p-Stat5a, rno_circRNA_005064-rno-miR-18a-5p-Stat1, rno_circRNA_005064-rno-miR-18a-5p-Stat5a, rno_circRNA_005115-rno-miR-22-3p-Stat1, rno_circRNA_009028-rno-miR-342-5p-Stat1, rno_circRNA_011240-rno-miR-1224-Stat5a, rno_circRNA_016078-rno-miR-711-Stat5a) were built. POF-specific necroptosis genes (STAT1, STAT5A, PLA2G4A, HMG1L1, HMGB1, AGER, EGFR, HDAC7, IFNA1, IL10RB, IL27RA, PYGL, SOCS1, TRADD, CXCL10, DDX5, EZH2, FADS2, FER, H2AFY2, HIST1H2AF, IFI44L, IL27, IRGM, MX1, NFKB2, PAFAH2, PEMT, PGM2L1, PGR, PHKA2, and PLB1) were selected since they displayed notable associations with most immune cells, immune checkpoints, chemokines, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules, and immune receptors. CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, we proposed the presence of widespread regulatory mechanisms of circRNAs in necroptosis and demonstrated that altered circRNA biogenesis might contribute to POF by affecting necroptosis.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose is to make aware of the existence of the rare and exclusive small intestine (SI) diseases, namely cryptogenic multifocal ulcerating stenosing enteropathy (CMUSE) or chronic non-specific multiple ulcers of the small intestine (CNSU) and non-granulomatous ulcerating jejunoileitis (NGUJI). The article will elucidate their epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis, differentiating features and management. RECENT FINDINGS: Recent papers have published the clinical features and diagnostic criteria of CMUSE/CNSU and NGUJI. CNSU/CMUSE is caused by gene mutations involved in the prostaglandin pathways. Although capsule endoscopy can detect these lesions, it carries a risk of retention. TNF antagonists and azathioprine have shown response in few cases. CMUSE/CNSU and NGUJI are uncommon diseases that cause relapsing SI obstruction and bleed due to short-segment strictures and multiple shallow ulcers. This article focuses on current knowledge and novel insights regarding their pathogenesis, genetics, clinical features, diagnostic criteria and management. Multicentric clinical and genetic studies are the need of the hour.
OBJECTIVE: It has been observed that local and systemic disorders of lipid metabolism occur during the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), but no specific mechanism has yet been identified. METHODS: The mRNA microarray dataset GSE76925 of COPD patients was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database and screened for differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Lipid metabolism-related genes (LMRGs) were extracted from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database and Molecular Signature Database. The DEGs were intersected with LMRGs to obtain differentially expressed lipid metabolism-related genes (DeLMRGs). GO enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway analysis were performed on DeLMRGs, and protein-protein interaction networks were constructed and screened to identify hub genes. The GSE8581 validation set and further ELISA experiments were used to validate key DeLMRG expression. RESULTS: Differential analysis of dataset GSE76925 identified 587 DEGs, of which 62 genes were up-regulated and 525 were down-regulated. Taking the intersection of 587 DEGs with 1102 LMRGs, 20 DeLMRGs were obtained, including 1 up-regulated gene and 19 down-regulated genes. 10 hub genes were screened by cytohubba plugin, including 9 down-regulated genes PLA2G4A, HPGDS, LEP, PTGES3, LEPR, PLA2G2D, MED21, SPTLC1 and BCHE, as well as the only up-regulated gene PLA2G7. Validation of the identified 10 DeLMRGs using the validation set GSE8581 revealed that BCHE and PLA2G7 expression levels differed between the two groups. We further constructed the ceRNA network of BCHE and PLA2G7. Cell experiments also showed that PLA2G7 expression was up-regulated and BCHE expression was down-regulated in CSE-treated RAW264.7 and THP-1 cells. CONCLUSION: Based on a comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of lipid metabolism genes, we identified BCHE and PLA2G7 as potentially significant biomarkers of COPD. These biomarkers may represent promising targets for COPD diagnosis and treatment.
BACKGROUND: As a severe hematological malignancy in adults, acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by high heterogeneity and complexity. Emerging evidence highlights the importance of the tumor immune microenvironment and lipid metabolism in cancer progression. In this study, we comprehensively evaluated the expression profiles of genes related to lipid metabolism and immune modifications to develop a prognostic risk signature for AML. METHODS: First, we extracted the mRNA expression profiles of bone marrow samples from an AML cohort from The Cancer Genome Atlas database and employed Cox regression analysis to select prognostic hub genes associated with lipid metabolism and immunity. We then constructed a prognostic signature with hub genes significantly related to survival and validated the stability and robustness of the prognostic signature using three external datasets. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was implemented to explore the underlying biological pathways related to the risk signature. Finally, the correlation between signature, immunity, and drug sensitivity was explored. RESULTS: Eight genes were identified from the analysis and verified in the clinical samples, including APOBEC3C, MSMO1, ATP13A2, SMPDL3B, PLA2G4A, TNFSF15, IL2RA, and HGF, to develop a risk-scoring model that effectively stratified patients with AML into low- and high-risk groups, demonstrating significant differences in survival time. The risk signature was negatively related to immune cell infiltration. Samples with AML in the low-risk group, as defined by the risk signature, were more likely to be responsive to immunotherapy, whereas those at high risk responded better to specific targeted drugs. CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals the significant role of lipid metabolism- and immune-related genes in prognosis and demonstrated the utility of these signature genes as reliable bioinformatic indicators for predicting survival in patients with AML. The risk-scoring model based on these prognostic signature genes holds promise as a valuable tool for individualized treatment decision-making, providing valuable insights for improving patient prognosis and treatment outcomes in AML.
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is spreading rapidly around the world. However, the treatment of vitiligo combined with COVID-19 has not been reported. Astragalus membranaceus (AM) has a therapeutic effect on patients with vitiligo and COVID-19. This study aims to discover its possible therapeutic mechanisms and provide potential drug targets. Using the Chinese Medicine System Pharmacological Database (TCMSP), GEO database and Genecards websites and other databases, AM target, vitiligo disease target, and COVID-19 related gene set were established. Then find the crossover genes by taking the intersection. Then use GO, KEGG enrichment analysis, and PPI network to discover its underlying mechanism. Finally, by importing drugs, active ingredients, crossover genes, and enriched signal pathways into Cytoscape software, a "drug-active ingredient-target signal pathway-" network is constructed. TCMSP screened and obtained 33 active ingredients including baicalein (MOL002714), NEOBAICALEIN (MOL002934), Skullcapflavone II (MOL002927), and wogonin (MOL000173), which acted on 448 potential targets. 1166 differentially expressed genes for vitiligo were screened by GEO. CIVID-19 related genes were screened by Genecards. Then by taking the intersection, a total of 10 crossover genes (PTGS2, CDK1, STAT1, BCL2L1, SCARB1, HIF1A, NAE1, PLA2G4A, HSP90AA1, and HSP90B1) were obtained. KEGG analysis found that it was mainly enriched in signaling pathways such as IL-17 signaling pathway, Th17 cell differentiation, Necroptosis, NOD-like receptor signaling pathway. Five core targets (PTGS2, STAT1, BCL2L1, HIF1A, and HSP90AA1) were obtained by analyzing the PPI network. The network of "active ingredients-crossover genes" was constructed by Cytoscape, and the 5 main active ingredients acting on the 5 core crossover genes acacetin, wogonin, baicalein, bis2S)-2-ethylhexyl) benzene-1,2-dicarboxylate and 5,2'-Dihydroxy-6,7,8-trimethoxyflavone. The core crossover genes obtained by PPI and the core crossover genes obtained by the "active ingredient-crossover gene" network are intersected to obtain the three most important core genes (PTGS2, STAT1, HSP90AA1). AM may act on PTGS2, STAT1, HSP90AA1, etc. through active components such as acacetin, wogonin, baicalein, bis2S)-2-ethylhexyl) benzene-1,2-dicarboxylate and 5,2'-Dihydroxy-6,7,8-trimethoxyflavone to activate IL-17 signaling pathway, Th17 cell differentiation, Necroptosis, NOD-like receptor signaling pathway, Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection, and VEGF signaling pathway and other signaling pathways to achieve the effect of treating vitiligo and COVID-19.
PURPOSE: The primary aim was to respectively evaluate PLA2G4A mutants modifying protective effect of tea consumption against colorectal cancer (CRC), colon and rectal cancer. METHODS: All participants were recruited from January 2006 to April 2008. The information about tea consumption was collected by a structured questionnaire. CRC patients were diagnosed based on histology. Four single-nuclear polymorphisms (SNPs) in PLA2G4A gene were selected. Multiple logistic regression models were used for assessing the joint effects between tea consumption and SNPs on CRC, colon and rectal cancer. RESULTS: Three hundred patients with CRC and 296 controls well-matched were used in the final analyses. The significant individual associations between four SNPs (rs6666834, rs10911933, rs4650708 and rs7526089) and CRC were not observed. However, their CTAC haplotype was significantly associated with the increased risk of CRC (OR = 3.06; 95%CI = 1.52-6.19), compared with TCAC haplotype. Drinking tea was correlated with a decreased risk of CRC after adjustment for covariates (OR = 0.61; 95%CI = 0.39-0.97). Meanwhile, compared with no-tea drinkers with TT/CT genotype of rs6666834, tea drinkers with TT/CT or CC had significant lower risk of CRC (OR = 0.6, 95%CI = 0.36-1.00 for TT/CT; 0.38, 0.19-0.74 for CC). The joint effects between the remaining three SNPs and drinking tea on CRC were observed as well. Similar findings were observed on colon and rectal cancers. CONCLUSIONS: Tea consumption and haplotype of mutants in PLA2G4A gene were respectively associated with the risk of CRC. PLA2G4A mutants modified the protective effect of tea consumption against CRC, colon and rectal cancers in Chinese population.
This study evaluated the differences in metabolites between cumulus cells (CCs) and mural granulosa cells (MGCs) from human preovulatory follicles to understand the mechanism of oocyte maturation involving CCs and MGCs. CCs and MGCs were collected from women who were undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF)/intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) treatment. The differences in morphology were determined by immunofluorescence. The metabolomics of CCs and MGCs was measured by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and western blot analysis to further confirm the genes and proteins involved in oocyte maturation. CCs and MGCs were cultured for 48 h in vitro, and the medium was collected for detection of hormone levels. There were minor morphological differences between CCs and MGCs. LC-MS/MS analysis showed that there were differences in 101 metabolites between CCs and MGCs: 7 metabolites were upregulated in CCs, and 94 metabolites were upregulated in MGCs. The metabolites related to cholesterol transport and estradiol production were enriched in CCs, while metabolites related to antiapoptosis were enriched in MGCs. The expression of genes and proteins involved in cholesterol transport (ABCA1, LDLR, and SCARB1) and estradiol production (SULT2B1 and CYP19A1) was significantly higher in CCs, and the expression of genes and proteins involved in antiapoptosis (CRLS1, LPCAT3, and PLA2G4A) was significantly higher in MGCs. The level of estrogen in CCs was significantly higher than that in MGCs, while the progesterone level showed no significant differences. There are differences between the metabolomes of CCs and MGCs. These differences may be involved in the regulation of oocyte maturation.
OBJECTIVE: Necroptosis has been reported to play an important role in different cancers, including leukemia. However, biomarkers of necroptosis-related genes (NRGs) that help predict the prognosis of AML are still lacking. Our research aims to build a novel signature of NRGs that could enhance our understanding of the molecular heterogeneity in leukemia. METHOD: Gene expression profiles as well as clinical features were downloaded from TCGA and GEO databases. Data analysis were executed using R software version 4.2.1 and GraphPad Prism version 9.0.0. RESULT: Univariate cox regression and lasso regression were applied to identify survival-specific genes. Four genes including FADD, PLA2G4A, PYCARD and ZBP1 were considered as independent risk factors that affect the prognosis of patients. Risk scores were calculated according to the coefficient of four genes. Then clinical characteristics and risk scores were enrolled to construct a nomogram. CellMiner was also used to screen potential drugs and analyze the correlations between genes and drug sensitivity. CONCLUSION: In general, we established a signature of four genes related to necroptosis that could be helpful for future risk stratification in patients with AML.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Capsule endoscopy and more sensitive radiological techniques have resulted in more enteropathies being detected. A rare disease of unknown aetiology, 'cryptogenic multifocal ulcerating stenosing enteritis' or 'chronic nonspecific multiple ulcers of the small intestine' (CNSU), has long been recognised. This review aims to describe how disease can be better diagnosed and differentiated from other small bowel inflammatory disorders. RECENT FINDINGS: Genetic studies have shown that some patients with CNSU (the term used in Japanese studies) express SLCO2A1 gene mutations, a gene which encodes a prostaglandin transporter expressed on vascular endothelium, allowing a more specific diagnosis of 'chronic enteropathy associated with SLCO2A1'. Mutations in the PLA2G4A gene result in cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha deficiency and reduced arachidonic acid for prostaglandin synthesis leading to a severe ulcerating, stenosing and fistulating small bowel disease. SUMMARY: A 'prostaglandin-related enteropathy' should be considered in patients with atypical small bowel ulceration and stenosis. Genetic analysis will allow the detection of SLCO2A1 and PLA2G4A gene mutations. However, a careful history of medication use and a urinary metabolite screen may reveal the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, a common cause of small bowel injury which is well recognised as being mediated by prostaglandin inhibition.
