Phospholipase A2, membrane associated; Catalyzes the calcium-dependent hydrolysis of the 2-acyl groups in 3-sn-phosphoglycerides. Thought to participate in the regulation of phospholipid metabolism in biomembranes including eicosanoid biosynthesis. Independent of its catalytic activity, acts as a ligand for integrins. Binds to and activates integrins ITGAV:ITGB3, ITGA4:ITGB1 and ITGA5:ITGB1. Binds to a site (site 2) which is distinct from the classical ligand-binding site (site 1) and induces integrin conformational changes and enhanced ligand binding to site 1. Induces cell proliferat [...] 
The brain is generally resistant to regeneration after damage. The cerebral endogenous mechanisms triggering brain self-recovery have remained unclarified to date. We here discovered that the secreted phospholipase PLA2G2E from peri-infarct neurons generated dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid (DGLA) as necessary for triggering brain-autonomous neural repair after ischemic brain injury. Pla2g2e deficiency diminished the expression of peptidyl arginine deiminase 4 (Padi4), a global transcriptional regulator in peri-infarct neurons. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and epigenetic analysis demonstrated that neuronal PADI4 had the potential for the transcriptional activation of genes associated with recovery processes after ischemic stroke through histone citrullination. Among various DGLA metabolites, we identified 15-hydroxy-eicosatrienoic acid (15-HETrE) as the cerebral metabolite that induced PADI4 in peri-infarct-surviving neurons. Administration of 15-HETrE enhanced functional recovery after ischemic stroke. Thus, our research clarifies the promising potential of brain-autonomous neural repair triggered by the specialized lipids that initiate self-recovery processes after brain injury.
Our previous research defined a novel metabolic cancer associated fibroblasts subset (meCAFs) enriched in loose-type pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and related to CD8(+) T cells accumulation. Consistently, the abundance of meCAFs was associated with poor prognosis but better immunotherapy responses in PDAC patients. However, the metabolic characteristic of meCAFs and its cross-talk with CD8(+) T cells remain to be elucidated. In this study, we identified PLA2G2A as a marker of meCAFs. In particular, the abundance of PLA2G2A(+) meCAFs was positively related to the accumulation of total CD8(+) T cells and negatively correlated with clinical outcomes of PDAC patients and infiltration of intratumoral CD8(+) T cells. We demonstrated that PLA2G2A(+) meCAFs substantially attenuated the antitumor ability of tumor infiltrating CD8(+) T cells and facilitated tumor immune escape in PDAC. Mechanistically, PLA2G2A regulated the function of CD8(+) T cells as a pivotal soluble mediator via MAPK/Erk and NF-kappaB signaling pathways. In conclusion, our study identified the unrecognized role of PLA2G2A(+) meCAFs in promoting tumor immune escape by impeding the antitumor immune function of CD8(+) T cells, and strongly suggested PLA2G2A as a promising biomarker and therapeutic target for immunotherapy in PDAC.
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is a type 2 inflammation- and immunity-driven skin disease, yet a comprehensive understanding of the immune landscape, particularly immune-stromal crosstalk in BP, remains elusive. Herein, using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and in vitro functional analyzes, we pinpoint Th2 cells, dendritic cells (DCs), and fibroblasts as crucial cell populations. The IL13-IL13RA1 ligand-receptor pair is identified as the most significant mediator of immune-stromal crosstalk in BP. Notably, fibroblasts and DCs expressing IL13RA1 respond to IL13-secreting Th2 cells, thereby amplifying Th2 cell-mediated cascade responses, which occurs through the specific upregulation of PLA2G2A in fibroblasts and CCL17 in myeloid cells, creating a positive feedback loop integral to immune-stromal crosstalk. Furthermore, PLA2G2A and CCL17 contribute to an increased titer of pathogenic anti-BP180-NC16A autoantibodies in BP patients. Our work provides a comprehensive insight into BP pathogenesis and shows a mechanism governing immune-stromal interactions, providing potential avenues for future therapeutic research.
BACKGROUND: The pathophysiology of ulcerative colitis (UC) is believed to be heavily influenced by immunology, which presents challenges for both diagnosis and treatment. The main aims of this study are to deepen our understanding of the immunological characteristics associated with the disease and to identify valuable biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment. METHODS: The UC datasets were sourced from the GEO database and were analyzed using unsupervised clustering to identify different subtypes of UC. Twelve machine learning algorithms and Deep learning model DNN were developed to identify potential UC biomarkers, with the LIME and SHAP methods used to explain the models' findings. PPI network is used to verify the identified key biomarkers, and then a network connecting super enhancers, transcription factors and genes is constructed. Single-cell sequencing technology was utilized to investigate the role of Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamma (PPARG) in UC and its correlation with macrophage infiltration. Furthermore, alterations in PPARG expression were validated through Western blot (WB) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) in both in vitro and in vivo experiments. RESULT: By utilizing bioinformatics techniques, we were able to pinpoint PPARG as a key biomarker for UC. The expression of PPARG was significantly reduced in cell models, UC animal models, and colitis models induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS). Interestingly, overexpression of PPARG was able to restore intestinal barrier function in H(2)O(2)-induced IEC-6 cells. Additionally, immune-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) allowed for efficient classification of UC samples into neutrophil and mitochondrial metabolic subtypes. A diagnostic model incorporating the three disease-specific genes PPARG, PLA2G2A, and IDO1 demonstrated high accuracy in distinguishing between the UC group and the control group. Furthermore, single-cell analysis revealed that decreased PPARG expression in colon tissue may contribute to the polarization of M1 macrophages through activation of inflammatory pathways. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, PPARG, a gene related to immunity, has been established as a reliable potential biomarker for the diagnosis and treatment of UC. The immune response it controls plays a key role in the progression and development of UC by enabling interaction between characteristic biomarkers and immune infiltrating cells.
BACKGROUND: Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a common cause of heart failure. However, the role of cellular senescence in DCM has not been fully elucidated. Here, we aimed to investigate senescence in DCM, identify senescence related characteristic genes, and explore the potential small molecule compounds for DCM treatment. METHODS: DCM-associated datasets and senescence-related genes were respectively obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and CellAge database. The characteristic genes were identified through methods including weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), and random forest. The expression of characteristic genes was verified in the mouse DCM model. Moreover, the CIBERSORT algorithm was applied to analyze immune characteristics of DCM. Finally, several therapeutic compounds were predicted by CMap analysis, and the potential mechanism of chlorogenic acid (CGA) was investigated by molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation. RESULTS: Three DCM- and senescence-related characteristic genes (MME, GNMT and PLA2G2A) were ultimately identified through comprehensive transcriptome analysis, and were experimentally verified in the doxorubicin induced mouse DCM. Meanwhile, the established diagnostic model, derived from dataset analysis, showed ideal diagnostic performance for DCM. Immune cell infiltration analysis suggested dysregulation of inflammation in DCM, and the characteristic genes were significantly associated with invasive immune cells. Finally, based on the specific gene expression profile of DCM, several potential therapeutic compounds were predicted through CMap analysis. In addition, molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations suggested that CGA could bind to the active pocket of MME protein. CONCLUSION: Our study presents three characteristic genes (MME, PLA2G2A, and GNMT) and a novel senescence-based diagnostic nomogram, and discusses potential therapeutic compounds, providing new insights into the diagnosis and treatment of DCM.
In this study, we used single-cell transcriptomic analysis to identify new specific biomarkers for nucleus pulposus (NP) and inner annulus fibrosis (iAF) cells, and to define cell populations within non-degenerating (nD) and degenerating (D) human intervertebral discs (IVD) of the same individual. Cluster analysis based on differential gene expression delineated 14 cell clusters. Gene expression profiles at single-cell resolution revealed the potential functional differences linked to degeneration, and among NP and iAF subpopulations. GO and KEGG analyses discovered molecular functions, biological processes, and transcription factors linked to cell type and degeneration state. We propose two lists of biomarkers, one as specific cell type, including C2orf40, MGP, MSMP, CD44, EIF1, LGALS1, RGCC, EPYC, HILPDA, ACAN, MT1F, CHI3L1, ID1, ID3 and TMED2. The second list proposes predictive IVD degeneration genes, including MT1G, SPP1, HMGA1, FN1, FBXO2, SPARC, VIM, CTGF, MGST1, TAF1D, CAPS, SPTSSB, S100A1, CHI3L2, PLA2G2A, TNRSF11B, FGFBP2, MGP, SLPI, DCN, MT-ND2, MTCYB, ADIRF, FRZB, CLEC3A, UPP1, S100A2, PRG4, COL2A1, SOD2 and MT2A. Protein and mRNA expression of MGST1, vimentin, SOD2 and SYF2 (p29) genes validated our scRNA-seq findings. Our data provide new insights into disc cells phenotypes and biomarkers of IVD degeneration that could improve diagnostic and therapeutic options.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a highly potent inflammatory trigger and is reportedly found outside the cells in blood in various pathologies. Platelets are abundant in blood where they promote hemostasis. Although lacking a nucleus, platelets contain functional mitochondria. On activation, platelets produce extracellular vesicles known as microparticles. We hypothesized that activated platelets could also release their mitochondria. We show that activated platelets release respiratory-competent mitochondria, both within membrane-encapsulated microparticles and as free organelles. Extracellular mitochondria are found in platelet concentrates used for transfusion and are present at higher levels in those that induced acute reactions (febrile nonhemolytic reactions, skin manifestations, and cardiovascular events) in transfused patients. We establish that the mitochondrion is an endogenous substrate of secreted phospholipase A2 IIA (sPLA2-IIA), a phospholipase otherwise specific for bacteria, likely reflecting the ancestral proteobacteria origin of mitochondria. The hydrolysis of the mitochondrial membrane by sPLA2-IIA yields inflammatory mediators (ie, lysophospholipids, fatty acids, and mtDNA) that promote leukocyte activation. Two-photon microscopy in live transfused animals revealed that extracellular mitochondria interact with neutrophils in vivo, triggering neutrophil adhesion to the endothelial wall. Our findings identify extracellular mitochondria, produced by platelets, at the midpoint of a potent mechanism leading to inflammatory responses.
Ferroptosis plays important roles both in normal physiology and multiple human diseases. It is well known that selenoprotein named glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) is a crucial regulator for ferroptosis. However, it remains unknown whether other selenoproteins responsible for the regulation of ferroptosis, particularly in gut diseases. In this study, it is observed that Selenoprotein I (Selenoi) prevents ferroptosis by maintaining ether lipids homeostasis. Specific deletion of Selenoi in intestinal epithelial cells induced the occurrence of ferroptosis, leading to impaired intestinal regeneration and compromised colonic tumor growth. Mechanistically, Selenoi deficiency causes a remarkable decrease in ether-linked phosphatidylethanolamine (ePE) and a marked increase in ether-linked phosphatidylcholine (ePC). The imbalance of ePE and ePC results in the upregulation of phospholipase A2, group IIA (Pla2g2a) and group V (Pla2g5), as well as arachidonate-15-lipoxygenase (Alox15), which give rise to excessive lipid peroxidation. Knockdown of PLA2G2A, PLA2G5, or ALOX15 can reverse the ferroptosis phenotypes, suggesting that they are downstream effectors of SELENOI. Strikingly, GPX4 overexpression cannot rescue the ferroptosis phenotypes of SELENOI-knockdown cells, while SELENOI overexpression can partially rescue GPX4-knockdown-induced ferroptosis. It suggests that SELENOI prevents ferroptosis independent of GPX4. Taken together, these findings strongly support the notion that SELENOI functions as a novel suppressor of ferroptosis during colitis and colon tumorigenesis.
Background: Enzymes are central components of many physiological processes, and changes in enzyme activity are linked to numerous disease states, including osteoarthritis (OA). Assessing changes in enzyme function can be challenging because of difficulties in separating affected tissue areas that result in the homogenisation of healthy and diseased cells. Direct correlation between spatially-resolved enzyme distribution(s) and diseased cells/tissues can thus lead to advances in our understanding of OA pathophysiology. Herein, we present a method that uses mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) to visualise the distribution of lipase enzymes and their downstream lipid products in fresh bone and cartilage tissue sections. Immunohistostaining of adjacent tissue sections was then used to identify OA cells/tissues, which were then statistically correlated with molecular-level images. Methods: MSI was used to image lipase enzymes, their substrates, and their metabolic products to validate enzymatic activity and correlate to OA regions determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Based on the modified Mankin score, six non-OA and OA patient-matched osteochondral samples were analysed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI). Due to the involvement of phospholipase A2 (PLA(2)) in inflammatory pathways, explant tissues were treated with IL-1beta to mimic inflammation observed in OA. Bovine explant tissues were then subject to MSI methods to observe the spatial distribution of PLA(2). Results: Compared with non-OA samples, OA samples showed an elevated level of multiple arachidonic acid (AA)-containing phospholipids (P < 0.001), in which the elevation in the surface and deep layer cartilage of OA tissues is correlated to elevated PLA(2) activity (P < 0.001). Bovine explant tissues treated with IL-1beta to mimic OA pathophysiology validated these results and displayed elevated PLA(2) levels in OA mimic samples relative to the controls (P < 0.001). It was established that the PLA(2)G(2)A isoform specifically was responsible for PLA(2) enzyme activity changes in OA tissues (P < 0.001). Conclusion: Our results present a reliable method for imaging enzyme dynamics in OA cartilage, which sets up the foundation for future spatial enzyme dynamics in the OA field. We demonstrated that OA patients exhibit increased expression of PLA(2)G(2)A at the superficial and deep cartilage zone that degrades cartilage differently at the spatial level. A tissue-specific PLA(2)G(2)A precision inhibition may be the potential target for OA.
BACKGROUND: The incidence of ulcerative colitis (UC) continues to rise globally, but effective therapeutic targets are still lacking. In recent years, numerous studies have indicated that lipid therapies could offer a novel perspective for UC treatment. Given the absence of prior research utilizing high-throughput data to identify target genes associated with lipid metabolism, we conducted this work. METHODS: The training set for this study was derived from four datasets within the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), encompassing a total of 357 UC patients. We employed four machine learning methods (LASSO, SVM, RF, and Boruta) to jointly identify core biomarkers in these patients, whose aberrant expression needed to be validated in independent datasets and in dextrose sulfate sodium salt (DSS)-induced UC mouse models. Regarding metabolomics, we detected abnormal oxidized lipids in the serum of UC mouse using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in conjunction with orthogonal partial least squares-discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA). RESULTS: Phospholipase A2 Group IIA (PLA2G2A) was first identified as a possible biomarker for UC, with AUC values of 0.810 and 1.000 in the two validation sets, while in animal models the gene showed similarly significant up-regulation in damaged intestinal mucosa. Further analysis of this gene showed that it was positively correlated with 17 immune cell types and histological severity. Additionally, we pioneered the development of a lipid metabolism score in UC research, which outperformed all individual genes in terms of disease diagnostic efficacy (AUC values of 0.980 and 1.000 for the two validation sets, respectively). Finally, the metabolomics study also identified 31 significantly abnormal oxidized lipids, including 12-HHT and DHA. CONCLUSIONS: PLA2G2A is a key therapeutic target for UC, and oxidized lipids such as 12-HHT can serve as potential serologic indicators for diagnosis.
The mouse secretory phospholipase A2 group IIA (sPLA2-IIA) gene Pla2g2a has been identified as a susceptibility gene for cancer of the small and large intestine. Interestingly, unlike most previously identified tumor susceptibility genes, Pla2g2a does not behave like a classical oncogene or tumor suppressor gene. Hence, identification of its biological functions in tumor development may shed new light on general mechanisms that modulate colon cancer risk. So far, sPLA2-IIA has been proposed to play a role in anti-bacterial defense, inflammation and eicosanoid generation, in clearance of apoptotic cells, and in the Wnt signaling pathway. More recently, comparison of RNA expression profiles of colon from Pla2g2a-transgenic to Pla2g2a-deficient mice confirmed and even extended sPLA2-IIA's diverse biological effects. In this review we aim to summarize current knowledge about the various links of sPLA2-IIA to cancer of the gastro-intestinal tract, and propose several models to illustrate its putative biological effects on tumor development.
AIMS: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a severe pulmonary interstitial pneumonia. Our study focuses on the role of PLA2 enzyme in the IPF to explore a more effective diagnosis and treatment mechanism of IPF. MAIN METHODS: Transcriptome data of IPF from GEO database and bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis mice were analyzed to identify PLA2 enzyme and their metabolite, lysophosphatidylcholines 18:0, in IPF. Based on PLA2G2A and PLA2G2D / PLA2G2A-associated cell death genes (PCDs), the consensus clustering analysis was used to identify the subtypes of IPF and the correlation between PLA2G2A and prognosis was analyzed. The machine learning (ML) models and artificial neural network (ANN) model was used to validate the diagnostic accuracy of PLA2s and PCDs in diagnosing IPF. The gene and protein expression of NLRP3, GSDMD, and CASP-1 was estimated in recombinant PLA2G2A protein induced MLE-12 cells. KEY FINDINGS: The expression of PLA2G2D, PLA2G2A, and LPC18 significantly changed in IPF. Furtherly, PLA2G2A has a significant correlation with poor patient prognosis, which could predict the 2 or 3-years mortality rates of IPF. Two subtypes of IPF patients, identified based on PCDs, showed significant different immunoinfiltration. Recombinant PLA2G2A protein could induce the pyrotosis in the MLE-12 cell. The generalized linear model and ANN model of PLA2s or PCDs accurate diagnosis IPF. SIGNIFICANCE: PLA2G2A is the most robustly associated gene with IPF among the PLA2s, which demonstrates a potential in diagnosing and prognostic value in IPF, and provides a foundation for further understanding and breakthroughs in IPF diagnosis and treatment.
Steatotic liver disease (SLD) prevails as the most common chronic liver disease yet lack approved treatments due to incomplete understanding of pathogenesis. Recently, elevated hepatic and circulating interleukin 32 (IL-32) levels were found in individuals with severe SLD. However, the mechanistic link between IL-32 and intracellular triglyceride metabolism remains to be elucidated. We demonstrate in vitro that incubation with IL-32beta protein leads to an increase in intracellular triglyceride synthesis, while downregulation of IL32 by small interfering RNA leads to lower triglyceride synthesis and secretion in organoids from human primary hepatocytes. This reduction requires the upregulation of Phospholipase A2 group IIA (PLA2G2A). Furthermore, downregulation of IL32 results in lower intracellular type I collagen levels in di-lineage human primary hepatic organoids. Finally, we identify a genetic variant of IL32 (rs76580947) associated with lower circulating IL-32 and protection against SLD measured by non-invasive tests. These data suggest that IL32 downregulation may be beneficial against SLD.
Phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)) catalyses the hydrolysis of the sn-2 position of glycerophospholipids to yield fatty acids and lysophospholipids. So far, more than 30 enzymes that possess PLA(2) or related activity have been identified in mammals. About one third of these enzymes belong to the secreted PLA(2) (sPLA(2)) family, which comprises low molecular weight, Ca(2+) requiring, secreted enzymes with a His/Asp catalytic dyad. Individual sPLA(2)s display distinct localizations and enzymatic properties, suggesting their specialized biological roles. However, in contrast to intracellular PLA(2)s, whose roles in signal transduction and membrane homoeostasis have been well documented, the biological roles of sPLA(2)s in vivo have remained obscure until recently. Over the past decade, information fuelled by studies employing knockout and transgenic mice as well as specific inhibitors, in combination with lipidomics, has clarified when and where the different sPLA(2) isoforms are expressed, which isoforms are involved in what types of pathophysiology, and how they exhibit their specific functions. In this review, we highlight recent advances in PLA(2) research, focusing mainly on the physiological functions of sPLA(2)s and their modes of action on 'extracellular' phospholipid targets versus lipid mediator production.
Group IIA secreted phospholipase A2 (PLA2G2A) hydrolyzes glycerophospholipids at the sn-2 position resulting in the release of fatty acids and lysophospholipids. C57BL/6 mice do not express Pla2g2a due to a frameshift mutation (wild-type [WT] mice). We previously reported that transgenic expression of human PLA2G2A in C57BL/6 mice (IIA+ mice) protects against weight gain and insulin resistance, in part by increasing total energy expenditure. Additionally, we found that brown and white adipocytes from IIA+ mice have increased expression of mitochondrial uncoupling markers, such as uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator, and PR domain containing 16, suggesting that the energy expenditure phenotype might be due to an increased thermogenic capacity in adipose tissue. Here, we further characterize the impact of PLA2G2A on thermogenic mechanisms in adipose tissue. Metabolic analysis of WT and IIA+ mice revealed that even when housed within their thermoneutral zone, IIA+ mice have elevated energy expenditure compared to WT littermates. Increased energy expenditure in IIA+ mice is associated with increased citrate synthase activity in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and increased mitochondrial respiration in both brown and white adipocytes. We also observed that direct addition of recombinant PLA2G2A enzyme to in vitro cultured adipocytes results in the marked induction of UCP1 protein expression. Finally, we report that PLA2G2A induces the expression of numerous transcripts related to energy substrate transport and metabolism in BAT, suggestive of an increase in substrate flux to fuel BAT activity. These data demonstrate that PLA2G2A enhances adipose tissue thermogenesis, in part, through elevated substrate delivery and increased mitochondrial content in BAT.
BACKGROUND: In mouse models of atherosclerosis, knockout of the PLA2G2A gene has been shown to reduce the volume of atherosclerotic plaques. Clinical trials have demonstrated the potential of using the sPLA2 inhibitor Varespladib in combination with statins to reduce lipid levels. However, this approach has not yielded the expected results in reducing the risk of cardiovascular events. Therefore, it is necessary to further investigate the mechanisms of PLA2G2A. METHODS: Single-cell transcriptome data from two sets of carotid plaques, combined with clinical patient information. were used to describe the expression characteristics of PLA2G2A in carotid plaques at different stages. In order to explore the mechanisms of PLA2G2A, we conducted enrichment analysis, cell-cell communication analysis and single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering analyses. We validated the above findings at the cellular level. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that PLA2G2A is primarily expressed in vascular fibroblasts and shows significant cell interactions with macrophages in the early-stage, especially in complement and inflammation-related pathways. We also found that serum sPLA2 levels have stronger diagnostic value in patients with mild carotid artery stenosis. Subsequent comparisons of single-cell transcriptomic data from early and late-stage carotid artery plaques corroborated these findings and predicted transcription factors that might regulate the progression of early carotid atherosclerosis (CA) and the expression of PLA2G2A. CONCLUSIONS: Our study discovered and validated that PLA2G2A is highly expressed by vascular fibroblasts and promotes plaque progression through the activation of macrophage complement and coagulation cascade pathways in the early-stage of CA.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Hua Zhuo Ning Fu Decoction (HZD) is an empirical prescription from traditional Chinese medicine that shows excellent clinical results for psoriasis patients. Uncertainty lingered over HZD's potential anti-psoriasis mechanisms. AIM OF THE STUDY: The study's objective is to investigate the pharmacological processes and therapeutic effects of HZD on psoriasis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the initial phase of the study, an investigation was conducted to assess the effects of HZD on psoriasis-afflicted mice using an imiquimod (IMQ)-induced murine model. The experimental mice were randomly allocated to different groups, including the IMQ-induced model group, the control group, the HZD therapy groups with varying dosage levels (low, medium, and high), and Dexamethasone (DEX, the positive control medicine) group. Bioinformatics analysis and molecular docking were subsequently employed to identify the primary components and molecular targets associated with the therapeutic action of HZD in the context of psoriasis. Additionally, to find the impacts on metabolite regulation, plasma metabolomics based on ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-QTOF/MS) was used. It's interesting to note that the combined mechanisms from metabolomics were examined in tandem with the targets. In vivo tests were the last step in validating the potential mechanism. Throughout the trial, the following data were recorded: body weight, psoriasis area and severity index (PASI). The molecular targets connected to HZD's anti-psoriasis activities were revealed using histological examination, western blot (WB), and ELISA investigation. RESULTS: In mice induced with IMQ, HZD shown good anti-psoriasis effects in terms of PASI score and epidermal acanthosis. 95 HZD targets and 77 bioactive chemicals connected to psoriasis were found by bioinformatics research; of these, 7 key targets (EPHX2, PLA2G2A, TBXAS1, MAOA, ALDH1A3, ADH1A, and ADH1B) were linked to the mechanisms of HZD, the combination degree of which was finally expressed by the score of docking. In addition, HZD regulated nine metabolites. In line with this, HZD modified three metabolic pathways. Additionally, a combined examination of 7 key targets and 9 metabolites suggested that the metabolism of arachidonic acid might be the key metabolic route, which was identified by ELISA analysis. The in vivo investigation shown that HZD could control cytokines associated to inflammation (IL-10, TGF-beta, IL-17A, and IL-23), as well as important antioxidant system markers (ROS, GSH, and MDA). Moreover, HZD controlled iron levels and the expression of ferroptosis-related proteins (ACSL4 and GPX4), suggesting that ferroptosis played a crucial role in this process. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated the whole mechanism and anti-psoriasis effectiveness of HZD, which will promote its clinical application and aid in the investigation of new bioactive components of HZD against psoriasis.
BACKGROUND: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a group of heterogeneous diseases that affects the myocardium. It is also a common familial disease. The symptoms are not common and easy to find. OBJECTIVE: In this paper, we aim to explore and analyze the dysfunctional gene network related to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and the key target genes with diagnostic and therapeutic significance for HCM were screened. METHODS: The gene expression profiles of 37 samples (GSE130036) were downloaded from the GEO database. Differential analysis was used to identify the related dysregulated genes in patients with HCM. Enrichment analysis identified the biological function and signaling pathway of these differentially expressed genes. Then, PPI network was built and verified in the GSE36961 dataset. Finally, the gene of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in HCM samples was screened by means of maftools. RESULTS: In this study, 920 differentially expressed genes were obtained, and these genes were mainly related to metabolism-related signaling pathways. 187 interacting genes were identified by PPI network analysis, and the expression trends of C1QB, F13A1, CD163, FCN3, PLA2G2A, and CHRDL2 were verified by another dataset and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. ROC curve analysis showed that they had certain clinical diagnostic ability, and they were the potential key dysfunctional genes of HCM. In addition, we found that PRMT5 mutation was the most frequent in HCM samples, which may affect the pathogenesis of HCM. CONCLUSION: Therefore, the key genes and enrichment results identified by our analysis may provide a reference for the occurrence and development mechanism of HCM. In addition, mutations in PRMT5 may be a useful therapeutic and diagnostic target for HCM. Our results also provide an independent quantitative assessment of functional limitations in patients with unknown history.
BACKGROUND: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a highly malignant tumor characterized by a lack of effective targeted therapeutic strategies. The protein UHRF1 plays a pivotal role in the preservation of DNA methylation and works synergistically with DNMT1. Posttranscriptional modifications (PTMs), such as ubiquitination, play indispensable roles in facilitating this process. Nevertheless, the specific PTMs that regulate UHRF1 in CCA remain unidentified. METHODS: We confirmed the interaction between STUB1 and UHRF1 through mass spectrometry analysis. Furthermore, we investigated the underlying mechanisms of the STUB1-UHRF1/DNMT1 axis via co-IP experiments, denaturing IP ubiquitination experiments, nuclear‒cytoplasmic separation and immunofluorescence experiments. The downstream PLA2G2A gene, regulated by the STUB1-UHRF1/DNMT1 axis, was identified via RNA-seq.  The negative regulatory mechanism of PLA2G2A was explored via bisulfite sequencing PCR (BSP) experiments to assess changes in promoter methylation. The roles of PLA2G2A and STUB1 in the proliferation, invasion, and migration of CCA cells were assessed using the CCK-8 assay, colony formation assay, Transwell assay, wound healing assay and xenograft mouse model. We evaluated the effects of STUB1/UHRF1 on cholangiocarcinoma by utilizing a primary CCA mouse model. RESULTS: This study revealed that STUB1 interacts with UHRF1, resulting in an increase in the K63-linked ubiquitination of UHRF1. Consequently, this facilitates the nuclear translocation of UHRF1 and enhances its binding affinity with DNMT1. The STUB1-UHRF1/DNMT1 axis led to increased DNA methylation of the PLA2G2A promoter, subsequently repressing its expression. Increased STUB1 expression in CCA was inversely correlated with tumor progression and overall survival. Conversely, PLA2G2A functions as a tumor suppressor in CCA by inhibiting cell proliferation, invasion and migration. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the STUB1-mediated ubiquitination of UHRF1 plays a pivotal role in tumor progression by epigenetically silencing PLA2G2A, underscoring the potential of STUB1 as both a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for CCA.
Arachidonic acid (AA) is a polyunsaturated fatty acid present at high concentrations in the ovarian cancer (OC) microenvironment and associated with a poor clinical outcome. In the present study, we have unraveled a potential link between AA and macrophage functions. Methods: AA-triggered signal transduction was studied in primary monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) by phosphoproteomics, transcriptional profiling, measurement of intracellular Ca(2+) accumulation and reactive oxygen species production in conjunction with bioinformatic analyses. Functional effects were investigated by actin filament staining, quantification of macropinocytosis and analysis of extracellular vesicle release. Results: We identified the ASK1 - p38delta/alpha (MAPK13/14) axis as a central constituent of signal transduction pathways triggered by non-metabolized AA. This pathway was induced by the Ca(2+)-triggered activation of calmodulin kinase II, and to a minor extent by ROS generation in a subset of donors. Activated p38 in turn was linked to a transcriptional stress response associated with a poor relapse-free survival. Consistent with the phosphorylation of the p38 substrate HSP27 and the (de)phosphorylation of multiple regulators of Rho family GTPases, AA impaired actin filament organization and inhibited actin-driven macropinocytosis. AA also affected the phosphorylation of proteins regulating vesicle biogenesis, and consistently, AA enhanced the release of tetraspanin-containing exosome-like vesicles. Finally, we identified phospholipase A(2) group 2A (PLA2G2A) as the clinically most relevant enzyme producing extracellular AA, providing further potentially theranostic options. Conclusion: Our results suggest that AA contributes to an unfavorable clinical outcome of OC by impacting the phenotype of tumor-associated macrophages. Besides critical AA-regulated signal transduction proteins identified in the present study, PLA2G2A might represent a potential prognostic tool and therapeutic target to interfere with OC progression.
