Cytochrome P450 2C9; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids and steroids. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Metabolizes cholesterol toward 25-hydroxycholesterol, a physiological regulato [...] 
T cells are often absent from human cancer tissues during both spontaneously induced immunity and therapeutic immunotherapy, even in the presence of a functional T cell-recruiting chemokine system, suggesting the existence of T cell exclusion mechanisms that impair infiltration. Using a genome-wide in vitro screening platform, we identified a role for phospholipase A2 group 10 (PLA2G10) protein in T cell exclusion. PLA2G10 up-regulation is widespread in human cancers and is associated with poor T cell infiltration in tumor tissues. PLA2G10 overexpression in immunogenic mouse tumors excluded T cells from infiltration, resulting in resistance to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy. PLA2G10 can hydrolyze phospholipids into small lipid metabolites, thus inhibiting chemokine-mediated T cell mobility. Ablation of PLA2G10's enzymatic activity enhanced T cell infiltration and sensitized PLA2G10-overexpressing tumors to immunotherapies. Our study implicates a role for PLA2G10 in T cell exclusion from tumors and suggests a potential target for cancer immunotherapy.
OBJECTIVE: Several secreted phospholipases A2 (sPLA2s), including group IIA, III, V, and X, have been linked to the development of atherosclerosis, which led to the clinical testing of A-002 (varespladib), a broad sPLA2 inhibitor for the treatment of coronary artery disease. Group X sPLA2 (PLA2G10) has the most potent hydrolyzing activity toward phosphatidylcholine and is believed to play a proatherogenic role. METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we show that Ldlr(-/-) mice reconstituted with bone marrow from mouse group X-deficient mice (Pla2g10(-/-)) unexpectedly display a doubling of plaque size compared with Pla2g10(+/+) chimeric mice. Macrophages of Pla2g10(-/-) mice are more susceptible to apoptosis in vitro, which is associated with a 4-fold increase of plaque necrotic core in vivo. In addition, chimeric Pla2g10(-/-) mice show exaggerated T lymphocyte (Th)1 immune response, associated with enhanced T-cell infiltration in atherosclerotic plaques. Interestingly, overexpression of human PLA2G10 in murine bone marrow cells leads to significant reduction of Th1 response and to 50% reduction of lesion size. CONCLUSIONS: PLA2G10 expression in bone marrow cells controls a proatherogenic Th1 response and limits the development of atherosclerosis. The results may provide an explanation for the recently reported inefficacy of A-002 (varespladib) to treat patients with coronary artery disease. Indeed, A-002 is a nonselective sPLA2 inhibitor that inhibits both proatherogenic (groups IIA and V) and antiatherogenic (group X) sPLA2s. Our results suggest that selective targeting of individual sPLA2 enzymes may be a better strategy to treat cardiovascular diseases.
BACKGROUND: Exosomal cargos such as nucleic acids and proteins have been attracting major interest as promising diagnostic biomarkers of cancers. The aim of this study was to characterize the mRNA profiles of serum exosomes and to identify non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) related mRNAs with higher sensitivity and specificity to diagnose and predict prognosis of NSCLC. METHODS: mRNA microarray analysis was conducted to screen differentially expressed mRNAs in the serum exosomes of NSCLC patients. Selected exosomal mRNA candidate PLA2G10 and PLA2G10 protein were quantified by RT-qPCR and ELISA assay, respectively, in the sample cohorts of healthy, benign lung tumor and NSCLC. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses were performed to evaluate the diagnostic power of exosomal PLA2G10 mRNA and protein. Kaplan-Meier plots were used to estimate patients' overall and disease-free survival. RESULTS: Serum exosomal PLA2G10 mRNA levels were elevated in NSCLC patients, and were closely related to more aggressive characteristics (higher stages, lymphatic node metastasis and distant metastasis) and poor overall and disease-free survival of NSCLC patients. Intriguingly, PLA2G10 protein was proved to be incorporated in exosomes, and its expression patterns and relationship with clinical pathological factors were similar to exosomal PLA2G10 mRNA. Additionally, the levels of exosomal PLA2G10 mRNA and protein were positively correlated and their combination could improve the diagnostic power to discriminate less and more malignance of NSCLC. CONCLUSIONS: Increased levels of serum exosomal PLA2G10 mRNA and protein were associated with more aggressive features of NSCLC, suggesting their potential as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers of NSCLC.
INTRODUCTION: Dengue virus (DENV) NS1 is a non-structural secretory protein associated with severe disease and known to cause vascular leak leading to dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF). As phospholipases A(2) (PLA(2)) enzymes, platelet activating factor, and leukotrienes are elevated in dengue, we sought to investigate whether NS1 potentially contributes to disease pathogenesis by inducing PLA(2)s. METHODS: THP-1 cells and primary human monocytes of healthy adults (n = 6) were co-cultured with DENV1 NS1, LPS and media alone. The latter two were used as positive and negative controls. The cell culture supernatants and lysates were harvested at 12 and 24 h and the activity of secretory and cytoplasmic PLA(2), prostaglandins (PGE(2) and PGD(2)) were measured by ELISA and cytokines levels were measured using a magnetic Luminex assay. Expression of PLA2G4A, PLA2G2A, PLA2G5, PLA2G10, PLA2G7, GAPDH, NLRP3 and DDX58 genes were assessed using quantitative RT-PCR. RESULTS: cPLA(2) (p = 0.005), sPLA(2) (p = 0.04), PGE(2) metabolite (p = 0.02) and PGD(2) metabolite (p = 0.04) levels were significantly higher at 12 h in monocytes co-cultured with NS1. Levels of IP-10 (p = 0.005) and IL-10 (p = 0.009) was significantly higher at 24 h, whereas IFNalpha level was significantly higher (p = 0.013) only at 12 h. IL-1beta (p = 0.028 and p = 0.031) and TNFalpha (p = 0.007 and p = 0.011) showed significantly higher levels at both time points. At 12 h significant upregulation of PLA2G4A (p < 0.0001) was seen, whereas PLA2G7 (p = <0.0001), NLRP3 (p = 0.0009) and DDX58 (p = 0.0056) were significantly downregulated. This pattern changed at 24 h with PLA2G4A (p = 0.0069) showing a marked downregulation and PLA2G7, DDX58 and NLRP3 showing an upregulation, although not significant. CONCLUSION: Dengue NS1 induces the production of PLA(2) enzymes, prostaglandins and inflammatory cytokines from primary human monocytes, which could play a role in vascular leak in dengue.
BACKGROUND: Observational studies report that secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) activity is a marker for coronary heart disease (CHD) risk, and activity measures are thought to represent the composite activity of sPLA2-IIA, -V, and -X. The aim of this study was to use genetic variants of PLA2G10, encoding sPLA2-X, to investigate the contribution of sPLA2-X to the measure of sPLA2 activity and coronary heart disease (CHD) risk traits and outcome. METHODS AND RESULTS: Three PLA2G10 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs72546339, rs72546340, and rs4003232) and a previously studied PLA2G10 coding single-nucleotide polymorphism rs4003228, R38C, were genotyped in a nested case: control cohort drawn from the prospective EPIC-Norfolk Study (2175 cases and 2175 controls). Meta-analysis of rs4003228 (R38C) and CHD was performed using data from the Northwick Park Heart Study II and 2 published cohorts AtheroGene and SIPLAC, providing in total an additional 1884 cases and 3119 controls. EPIC-Norfolk subjects in the highest tertile of sPLA2 activity were older and had higher inflammatory markers compared with those in the lowest tertile for sPLA2 activity. None of the PLA2G10 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphism nor R38C, a functional variant, were significantly associated with sPLA2 activity, intermediate CHD risk traits, or CHD risk. In meta-analysis, the summary odds ratio for R38C was odds ratio=0.97 (95% confidence interval, 0.77-1.22). CONCLUSIONS: PLA2G10 variants are not significantly associated with plasma sPLA2 activity or with CHD risk.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic lung disease with a very poor prognosis as it has a 2.5 to 5 years mean survival after proper diagnosis. Even nintedanib and pirfenidone cannot halt the progression, though they slow the progression of IPF. Hence, there is a need to understand the novel pathophysiology. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) could be the ideal candidate to study in IPF, as they have a role in both inflammation and fibrosis. In the present study, we have shown the expression profile of various secretory Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) isoforms by analyzing publicly available transcriptome data of single cells from the lungs of healthy individuals and IPF patients. Among 11 members of sPLA2, PLA2G2A is found to be increased in the fibroblasts and mesothelial cells while PLA2G5 is found to be increased in the fibroblasts of IPF patients. We identified a subset of fibroblasts expressing high PLA2G2A with moderate expression of PLA2G5 and which are specific to IPF only; we named it as PLA2G2A+ IPF fibroblast. Pathway analysis revealed that these PLA2G2A+ IPF fibroblast have upregulation of both inflammatory and fibrosis-related pathways like the TGF-beta signaling pathway, IL-17 signaling, the arachidonic acid metabolism pathway and ECM-receptor interaction. In addition to this, we found elevated levels of sPLA2-IIA in plasma samples of IPF patients in our cohort. PLA2G3, PLA2G10 and PLA2G12B are found in to be increased in certain epithelial cells of IPF patients. Thus, these findings indicate that these five isoforms have a disease-dominant role along with innate immune roles as these isoforms are found predominantly in structural cells of IPF patients. Further, we have targeted sPLA2 in mice model of bleomycin-induced lung fibrosis by pBPB, a known sPLA2 inhibitor. pBPB treatment attenuated lung fibrosis induced by bleomycin along with a reduction in TGF-beta and deposition of extracellular matrix in lung. Thus, these findings indicate that these sPLA2 isoforms especially PLA2G2A may serve as a therapeutic target in lung fibrosis.
The gut microbiota influences physiological functions of the host, ranging from the maintenance of local gut homeostasis to systemic immunity and metabolism. Secreted phospholipase A(2) group X (sPLA(2)-X) is abundantly expressed in colonic epithelial cells but is barely detectable in metabolic and immune tissues. Despite this distribution, sPLA(2)-X-deficient (Pla2g10(-/-)) mice displayed variable obesity-related phenotypes that were abrogated after treatment with antibiotics or cohousing with Pla2g10(+/+) mice, suggesting the involvement of the gut microbiota. Under housing conditions where Pla2g10(-/-) mice showed aggravation of diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance, they displayed increased colonic inflammation and epithelial damage, reduced production of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and lysophospholipids, decreased abundance of several Clostridium species, and reduced levels of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These obesity-related phenotypes in Pla2g10(-/-) mice were reversed by dietary supplementation with omega3 PUFAs or SCFAs. Thus, colonic sPLA(2)-X orchestrates omega3 PUFA-SCFA interplay via modulation of the gut microbiota, thereby secondarily affecting systemic metabolism.
BACKGROUND: Metabolic and transcriptomic differences between visceral adipose tissue (VAT) and subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) compartments, particularly in the context of obesity, may play a role in colorectal carcinogenesis. We investigated the differential functions of their metabolic compositions. OBJECTIVES: Biochemical differences between adipose tissues (VAT compared with SAT) in patients with colorectal carcinoma (CRC) were investigated by using mass spectrometry metabolomics and gene expression profiling. Metabolite compositions were compared between VAT, SAT, and serum metabolites. The relation between patients' tumor stage and metabolic profiles was assessed. DESIGN: Presurgery blood and paired VAT and SAT samples during tumor surgery were obtained from 59 CRC patients (tumor stages I-IV) of the ColoCare cohort. Gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry were used to measure 1065 metabolites in adipose tissue (333 identified compounds) and 1810 metabolites in serum (467 identified compounds). Adipose tissue gene expression was measured by using Illumina's HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips. RESULTS: Compared with SAT, VAT displayed elevated markers of inflammatory lipid metabolism, free arachidonic acid, phospholipases (PLA2G10), and prostaglandin synthesis-related enzymes (PTGD/PTGS2S). Plasmalogen concentrations were lower in VAT than in SAT, which was supported by lower gene expression of FAR1, the rate-limiting enzyme for ether-lipid synthesis in VAT. Serum sphingomyelin concentrations were inversely correlated (P = 0.0001) with SAT adipose triglycerides. Logistic regression identified lipids in patients' adipose tissues, which were associated with CRC tumor stage. CONCLUSIONS: As one of the first studies, we comprehensively assessed differences in metabolic, lipidomic, and transcriptomic profiles between paired human VAT and SAT and their association with CRC tumor stage. We identified markers of inflammation in VAT, which supports prior evidence regarding the role of visceral adiposity and cancer.
Soft tissue leiomyosarcoma (STLMS) is a major histological subtype of adult sarcoma. Although the molecular mechanisms ofLMS have been gradually revealed, no valid therapeutic targets have been identified. In this study, we performed a systematic screening to explore relapse-associated genes in STLMS, using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas-Sarcoma (TCGA-SARC). Then, we investigated the functional role of the gene with the best relapse-prediction value in STLMS by both in-vitro and in-vivo studies. Results showed that AMH and PLA2G10 were two genes with area under curve (AUC) values higher than 0.80 in ROC analysis when detecting relapse. Patients in the high AMH or PLA2G10 expression group had significantly worse relapse-free survival (RFS) compared to the respective low expression group. PLA2G10 was highly expressed in STLMS, but not in other sarcoma subtypes. PLA2G10 overexpression promoted SK-LMS-1 cell growth and G1/S transition, while PLA2G10 knockdown slowed the growth and resulted in G1 phase arrest. PLA2G10 overexpression markedly increased the expression of CDK2 and cyclin E1, but did not influence CDK4, CDK6, cyclin D1, CDK1 or cyclin A expression. PLA2G10 overexpression enhanced SK-LMS-1 cell-derived xenograft tumor growth in nude mice, while PLA2G10 inhibition slowed the growth. Mutation of two critical catalyzing amino acid residues (p.H88A and p.D89A) abrogated the capability of PLA2G10 to catalyze the production of arachidonic acid (AA), and also canceled the regulatory effects on cyclin E1 and CDK2 expression, as well as G1/S transition. In conclusion, PLA2G10 was a specific relapse-associated gene in STLMS. It facilitated the cell-cycle progression of STLMS cells at least by elevating the expression of cyclin E1 and CDK2. The hydrolytic activity was crucial for its oncogenic properties.
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes regulate the formation of eicosanoids and lysophospholipids that contribute to allergic airway inflammation. Secreted PLA2 group X (sPLA2-X) was recently found to be increased in the airways of asthmatics and is highly expressed in airway epithelial cells and macrophages. In the current study, we show that allergen exposure increases sPLA2-X in humans and in mice, and that global deletion of Pla2g10 results in a marked reduction in airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR), eosinophil and T cell trafficking to the airways, airway occlusion, generation of type-2 cytokines by antigen-stimulated leukocytes, and antigen-specific immunoglobulins. Further, we found that Pla2g10-/- mice had reduced IL-33 levels in BALF, fewer type-2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) in the lung, less IL-33-induced IL-13 expression in mast cells, and a marked reduction in both the number of newly recruited macrophages and the M2 polarization of these macrophages in the lung. These results indicate that sPLA2-X serves as a central regulator of both innate and adaptive immune response to proteolytic allergen.
Metabolic reprogramming is a common pathological process of cancer. Expression of metabolism-related genes differs in thyroid cancer (TC) patients with different prognoses. This work committed to constructing a prognostic model for TC through identifying metabolism-related signatures. Expression profiles of mRNAs and clinical data of TC, were acquired from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Differential analysis was performed on mRNA expression profiles. The obtained differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were overlapped with metabolism-related genes from MSigDB database to acquire metabolism-related DEGs. Cox regression and Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator analyses were performed to ascertain feature genes and to build a prognostic model for TC. The model was evaluated comprehensively through survival curve, time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), and Cox regression analyses combining varying clinical information. 7 key genes related to metabolism, including AWAT2, GGT6, ENTPD1, PAPSS2, CYP26A, ACY3 and PLA2G10, were identified, based on which a prognostic model was constructed. The survival analysis indicated that high-risk group presented shorter survival time than low-risk group. ROC curve results exhibited that AUC values of 3-year and 5-year survival of TC patients were both >0.70. Besides, GSEA on high/low-risk groups revealed that DEGs were mainly gathered in biological functions and signaling pathways linked with keratan sulfate catabolism and triglyceride catabolism. Combined with clinical information, Cox regression analyses unveiled that the 7-gene prognostic model can be an independent predictor. In conclusion, this model can effectively predict prognoses of TC patients, and also offer guidance for clinical treatment of TC.
INTRODUCTION: Lipid metabolism participates in various biological processes such as proliferation, apoptosis, migration, invasion, and maintenance of membrane homeostasis of prostate tumor cells. Bufadienolides, the active ingredients of Chansu, show a robust anti-proliferative effect against prostate cancer cells in vitro, but whether bufadienolides could regulate the lipid metabolism in prostate cancer has not been evaluated. OBJECTIVES: Our study explored the regulatory effects of bufadienolides on lipid metabolism in human prostate carcinoma cells (PC-3). METHODS: Untargeted lipidomics and transcriptomics were combined to study the effect of different bufadienolides interventions on lipid and gene changes of PC-3 cells. The key genes related to lipid metabolism and prostate cancer development were verified by qPCR and western blotting. RESULTS: Lipidomic analysis showed that the active bufadienolides significantly downregulated the content of long-chain lipids of PC-3 cells. Based on transcriptomic and qPCR analyses, many genes related to lipid metabolism were significantly regulated by active bufadienolides, such as ELOVL6, CYP2E1, GAL3ST1, CERS1, PLA2G10, PLD1, SPTLC3, and GPX2. Bioinformatics analysis of the Cancer Genome Atlas database and literature retrieval showed that elongation of very long-chain fatty acids protein 6 (ELOVL6) and phospholipase D1 (PLD1) might be important regulatory genes. Western blot analysis revealed that active bufadienolides could downregulate PLD1 protein levels which might promote anti-prostate cancer effect. CONCLUSIONS: All these findings support that bufadienolides might induce lipid metabolic remodeling by regulating long-chain lipids synthesis and phospholipid hydrolysis to achieve an anti-prostate cancer effect, and PLD1 would probably be the key protein.
Endometrial carcinoma (EC), a prevalent gynecological cancer, is characterized by rising incidence and mortality rates, highlighting the need for novel treatments to improve patient outcomes. Maackiain (MA) is a natural compound isolated from common herbal medicines, that has been reported to have anti-cancer effects. However, the underlying roles and mechanisms concerning EC remain unclear. This study focused on deeply exploring the potential roles and mechanisms of MA against EC by network pharmacology, experimentally validated, metabolomics, and molecular docking. A total of 86 potential targets of MA against EC were identified by network pharmacology. In vitro experiments further confirmed network pharmacology' predictions. In addition to suppressing EC cell proliferation, MA also paused the cell cycle at the G2/M phase in a dose-dependent manner. This effect is accompanied by increased p21 and phospho-p53 expression, as well as reduced expression of CDK1 and CCNB1. Furthermore, cell metabolomics analysis revealed that 285 metabolites were changed after MA administration, which majorly affects glycerophospholipid metabolism, nucleotide metabolism, choline metabolism in cancer, and purine metabolism. Combination network pharmacology, metabolomics, and molecular docking, PLA2G10, PDE4D, and PDE5A were found to be potential targets for therapeutic intervention. These findings underlined that MA has anti-EC potential by modulating multiple targets including PLA2G10, PDE4D, and PDE5A, inhibiting EC cell proliferation, inducing G2/M phase arrest, and causing metabolic shifts. This study provides theoretical support for advanced experimental research on its clinical applications.
BACKGROUND: Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a severe facial pain condition often associated with a neurovascular conflict. However, neuroinflammation has also been implicated in TN, as it frequently co-occurs with multiple sclerosis (MS). METHODS: We analysed protein expression levels of TN patients compared to MS patients and controls. Proximity Extension Assay technology was used to analyse the levels of 92 proteins with the Multiplex Neuro-Exploratory panel provided by SciLifeLab, Uppsala, Sweden. Serum and CSF samples were collected from TN patients before (n = 33 and n = 27, respectively) and after (n = 28 and n = 8, respectively) microvascular decompression surgery. Additionally, we included samples from MS patients (n = 20) and controls (n = 20) for comparison. RESULTS: In both serum and CSF, several proteins were found increased in TN patients compared to either MS patients, controls, or both, including EIF4B, PTPN1, EREG, TBCB, PMVK, FKBP5, CD63, CRADD, BST2, CD302, CRIP2, CCL27, PPP3R1, WWP2, KLB, PLA2G10, TDGF1, SMOC1, RBKS, LTBP3, CLSTN1, NXPH1, SFRP1, HMOX2, and GGT5. The overall expression of the 92 proteins in postoperative TN samples seems to shift towards the levels of MS patients and controls in both serum and CSF, as compared to preoperative samples. Interestingly, there was no difference in protein levels between MS patients and controls. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that TN patients showed increased serum and CSF levels of specific proteins and that successful surgery normalizes these protein levels, highlighting its potential as an effective treatment. However, the similarity between MS and controls challenges the idea of shared pathophysiology with TN, suggesting distinct underlying mechanisms in these conditions. SIGNIFICANCE: This study advances our understanding of trigeminal neuralgia (TN) and its association with multiple sclerosis (MS). By analysing 92 protein biomarkers, we identified distinctive molecular profiles in TN patients, shedding light on potential pathophysiological mechanisms. The observation that successful surgery normalizes many protein levels suggests a promising avenue for TN treatment. Furthermore, the contrasting protein patterns between TN and MS challenge prevailing assumptions of similarity between the two conditions and point to distinct pathophysiological mechanisms.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the underlying mechanism of total flavonoids of Litchi seed (TFLS) in treating prostate cancer (PCa). METHODS: Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8), EdU incorporation assay, trypan blue dye assay and colony formation assay were employed to evaluate the effect of TFLS on PCa in vitro. The xenograft mouse model was established to explore the anti-tumour effect of TFLS in vivo. Alterations in the metabolic profiles of the PC3 cells and mouse serum were obtained by untargeted metabolomics. Combination with metabolomics analysis and network pharmacology strategies, the potential targets were predicted and further validated by RT-qPCR. KEY FINDINGS: TFLS attenuated PCa progression both in vitro and in vivo. Metabolomics results yielded from cells and serum indicated that the anti-cancer effect of TFLS was correlated with synergistic modulation of five common metabolic pathways including glycerophospholipid metabolism, arginine and proline metabolism, glycine, serine and threonine metabolism, tryptophan metabolism and steroid biosynthesis. Using in silico prediction and RT-qPCR analysis, we further revealed that TFLS exerted anti-PCa activities via regulating the expressions of nine genes, including MAOA, ACHE, ALDH2, AMD1, ARG1, PLA2G10, PLA2G1B, FDFT1 and SQLE. CONCLUSIONS: TFLS suppressed tumour proliferation in PCa, which may be associated with regulating lipid and amino acid metabolisms.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Inflammation is an integral feature of atherosclerosis, in which inflammatory processes contribute to the initiation, progression and rupture of lipid-rich atherosclerotic plaques. Recent studies have suggested the involvement of the proinflammatory secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2)-IIA in the development of atherosclerosis. This enzyme has been proposed to hydrolyze phosphatidylcholine (PC) in lipoproteins to liberate lyso-PC and free fatty acids in the arterial wall, thereby facilitating the accumulation of bioactive lipids and modified lipoproteins in atherosclerotic foci. However, the recent discovery of several novel sPLA2 isozymes has raised the question of which types of sPLA2 truly contribute to the atherosclerotic process. RECENT FINDINGS: Amongst the 10 mammalian sPLA2 isozymes, sPLA2-X, -V, -IIF and -III exhibit much more potent PC-hydrolyzing activity than do the others, and can release free fatty acids and lysophospholipids from the PC-rich outer leaflet of the cellular plasma membrane. In particular, sPLA2-X and sPLA2-V hydrolyze PC in lipoproteins far more efficiently than does sPLA2-IIA. Moreover, sPLA2-X promotes foam cell formation in vitro and is expressed in the atherosclerotic arterial walls of apolipoprotein E deficient mice in vivo. SUMMARY: PC-hydrolyzing sPLA2 isozymes, particularly sPLA2-V and sPLA2-X, are attractive candidates for proatherosclerotic factors that may act in place of sPLA2-IIA. However, their expression in human atherosclerotic lesions requires confirmation by specific methods that can distinguish between the different sPLA2 isozymes.
BACKGROUND: Phospholipase A2s mediate the rate-limiting step in the formation of eicosanoids such as cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs). Group IVA cytosolic PLA2alpha (cPLA2alpha) is thought to be the dominant PLA2 in eosinophils; however, eosinophils also have secreted PLA2 (sPLA2) activity that has not been fully defined. OBJECTIVES: To examine the expression of sPLA2 group X (sPLA2-X) in eosinophils, the participation of sPLA2-X in the formation of CysLTs, and the mechanism by which sPLA2-X initiates the synthesis of CysLTs in eosinophils. METHODS: Peripheral blood eosinophils were obtained from volunteers with asthma and/or allergy. A rabbit polyclonal anti-sPLA2-X antibody identified sPLA2-X by Western blot. We used confocal microscopy to colocalize the sPLA2-X to intracellular structures. An inhibitor of sPLA2-X (ROC-0929) that does not inhibit other mammalian sPLA2s, as well as inhibitors of the mitogen-activated kinase cascade (MAPK) and cPLA2alpha, was used to examine the mechanism of N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP)-mediated formation of CysLT. RESULTS: Eosinophils express the mammalian sPLA2-X gene (PLA2G10). The sPLA2-X protein is located in the endoplasmic reticulum, golgi, and granules of eosinophils and moves to the granules and lipid bodies during fMLP-mediated activation. Selective sPLA2-X inhibition attenuated the fMLP-mediated release of arachidonic acid and CysLT formation by eosinophils. Inhibitors of p38, extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (p44/42 MAPK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase, and cPLA2alpha also attenuated the fMLP-mediated formation of CysLT. The sPLA2-X inhibitor reduced the phosphorylation of p38 and extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1/2 (p44/42 MAPK) as well as cPLA2alpha during cellular activation, indicating that sPLA2-X is involved in activating the MAPK cascade leading to the formation of CysLT via cPLA2alpha. We further demonstrate that sPLA2-X is activated before secretion from the cell during activation. Short-term priming with IL-13 and TNF/IL-1beta increased the expression of PLA2G10 by eosinophils. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that sPLA2-X plays a significant role in the formation of CysLTs by human eosinophils. The predominant role of the enzyme is the regulation of MAPK activation that leads to the phosphorylation of cPLA2alpha. The sPLA2-X protein is regulated by proteolytic cleavage, suggesting that an inflammatory environment may promote the formation of CysLTs through this mechanism. These results have important implications for the treatment of eosinophilic disorders such as asthma.
INTRODUCTION: Phospholipases are enzymes that occur in many types of human cells, including mast cells, and play an important role in the molecular background of asthma pathogenesis, and the development of inflammation NF-kappaB activities that affect numerous biological processes has been reported in many inflammatory diseases including asthma. Vitamin D is a widely studied factor that affects many diseases, including asthma. The aim of this study is to assess the influence of 1,25-(OH)2D3 on regulation of chosen phospholipase-A2 (PLA2) expression-selected inflammation mediators. METHODS: LUVA mast cells were stimulated with 1,25(OH)2D3, and inhibitors of NF-kappaB p65 and ubiquitination. Expression analysis of phospholipases (PLA2G5, PLA2G10, PLA2G12, PLA2G15, PLA2G4A, PLA2G4B, PLA2G4C, PLAA, NF-kappaB p65, and UBC) was done utilizing real-time PCR and Western blot. Eicosanoid (LTC4, LXA4, 15[S]-HETE, and PGE2) levels and sPLA2 were also measured. RESULTS: We found that 1,25(OH)2D3 decreased the expression of PLA2G5, PLA2G15, PLA2G5,UBC, and NF-kappaB p65 but increased expression of PLAA and PLA2G4C (p < 0.05). Moreover, the expression of PLA2G5 and PLA2G15 decreased after inhibition of NF-kappaB p65 and UBC. Increased levels of released LXA4 and 15(S)-HETE, decreased levels of LTC4, and sPLA2s enzymatic activity in response to 1,25(OH)2D3 were also observed. Additionally, NF-kappaB p65 inhibition led to an increase in the LXA4 concentration. CONCLUSION: Future investigations will be needed to further clarify the role of 1,25(OH)2D3 in the context of asthma and the inflammatory process; however, these results confirm a variety of effects which can be caused by this vitamin. 1,25(OH)2D3-mediated action may result in the development of new therapeutic strategies for asthma treatment.
The genetic background of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has yet to be completely understood. Here, we describe the application of suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) coupled with cDNA microarray analysis for the isolation and identification of differential expression of genes in HCC. Twenty-six known genes were validated as up-regulated and 19 known genes as down-regulated in HCC. The known genes identified were found to have diverse functions. In addition to the overexpression of AFP, these genes (increased in the presence of HCC) are involved in many processes, such as transcription and protein biosynthesis (HNRPDL, PABPC1, POLR2K, SRP9, SNRPA, and six ribosomal protein genes including RPL8, RPL14, RPL41, RPS5, RPS17, RPS24), the metabolism of lipids and proteins (FADS1, ApoA-II, ApoM, FTL), cell proliferation (Syndecan-2, and Annexin A2), and signal transduction (LRRC28 and FMR1). Additionally, a glutathione-binding protein involved in the detoxification of methylglyoxal known as GLO1 and an enzyme which increases the formation of prostaglandin E(2) known as PLA2G10 were up-regulated in HCC. Among the underexpressed genes discovered in HCC, most were responsible for liver-synthesized proteins (fibrinogen, complement species, amyloid, albumin, haptoglobin, hemopexin and orosomucoid). The enzyme implicated in the biotransformation of CYP family members (LOC644587) was decreased. The genes coding enzymes ADH1C, ALDH6A1, ALDOB, Arginase and CES1 were also found. Additionally, we isolated a zinc transporter (Zip14) and a function-unknown gene named ZBTB11 (Zinc finger and BTB domain containing 11) which were underexpressed, and seven expression sequence tags deregulated in HCC without significant homology reported in the public database. Essentially, by using SSH combined with a cDNA microarray we have identified a number of genes associated with HCC, most of which have not been previously reported. Further characterization of these differentially expressed genes will provide information useful in understanding the genes responsible for the development of HCC.
