Neuropeptide-glutamic acid-isoleucine; MCH may act as a neurotransmitter or neuromodulator in a broad array of neuronal functions directed toward the regulation of goal-directed behavior, such as food intake, and general arousal. May also have a role in spermatocyte differentiation; Belongs to the melanin-concentrating hormone family.
Tuberculosis (TB) of breast is an uncommon entity even in endemic regions. Moreover, it is seldom reported. It often presents in young lactating females as a painless breast lump and confused with breast malignancy or pyogenic abscess. A high index of suspicion is required. Fine needle aspiration cytology is important to direct the patient to further tests pertaining to TB. New diagnostic modalities based on detection of nucleic acids have improved the accuracy and cut down the time to diagnosis. Anti-tubercular chemotherapy remains the standard of care. Surgical intervention is seldom required. The fact that the disease being rare, having symptom overlap with commonly prevalent breast malignancy and potentially curable, it becomes important to analyze the presentation, available investigative modalities for early goal directed treatment.
BACKGROUND Rhinitis is the most common clinical manifestation of allergy, affecting more than 400 million people around the world. Rhinitis increases the risk of developing bronchial hyper-responsiveness and asthma. Previous studies have shown that rhinitis is closely related with the physiology, pathology, and pathogenesis of asthma. We analyzed co-expressed genes to explore the relationships between rhinitis and asthma and to find biomarkers of comorbid rhinitis and asthma. MATERIAL AND METHODS Asthma- and rhinitis-related differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by bioinformatic analysis of GSE104468 and GSE46171 datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. After assessment of Gene Ontology (GO) terms and pathway enrichment for DEGs, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was conducted via comprehensive target prediction and network analyses. We also evaluated co-expressed DEGs and corresponding predicted miRNAs involved in the developing process of rhinitis and asthma. RESULTS We identified 687 and 1001 DEGs in bronchial and nasal epithelia samples of asthma patients, respectively. For patients with rhinitis, we found 245 DEGs. The hub-genes of PAX6, NMU, NTS, NMUR1, PMCH, and KRT6A may be associated with rhinitis, while CPA3, CTSG, POSTN, CLCA1, HDC, and MUC5B may be involved in asthma. The co-expressed DEGs of BPIFA1, CCL26, CPA3, and CST1, together with corresponding predicted miRNAs (e.g., miR-195-5p and miR-125a-3p) were found to be significantly correlated with rhinitis and asthma. CONCLUSIONS Rhinitis and asthma are related, and there are significant correlations of BPIFA1, CCL26, CPA3, and CST1 genes with novel biomarkers involved in the comorbidity of rhinitis and asthma.
Classic and modern antipsychotics can induce substantial weight gain causing diabetes, lipid abnormalities and psychological distress. Treatment emergent weight gain varies within the broad class of antipsychotics; however, an individual's propensity to develop weight gain largely depends on genetic factors. The first part of this review highlights current ideas and concepts related to antipsychotic-induced weight gain, including principles on energy homeostasis. The second part summarizes genetic findings emphasizing studies published after 2003 as prior studies have been reviewed in detail elsewhere. Candidate gene studies have produced significant findings in the 5-hydroxytryptamin 2C (5HT2C) and adrenergic alpha2a (ADRalpha2a) receptor genes, as well as in the leptin, guanine nucleotide binding protein (GNB3) and synaptomal-associated protein 25kDa (SNAP25) genes. Results from genome-wide association and linkage studies point to several chromosomal regions (e.g., 12q24) and some specific genes (e.g., promelanin concentrating hormone [PMCH], polycyctic kidney and hepatic disease 1 [PKHD1], peptidylglycine alpha-amidating monooxygenase [PAM]). However, more efforts are needed before risk prediction and personalized medicine can be made available for antipsychotic-induced weight gain.
Different camouflages work best with some background matching colour. Our understanding of the evolution of skin colour is based mainly on the genetics of pigmentation ("background matching"), with little known about the evolution of the neuroendocrine systems that facilitate "background adaptation" through colour phenotypic plasticity. To address the latter, we studied the evolution in vertebrates of three genes, pomc, pmch and pmchl, that code for alpha-MSH and two melanin-concentrating hormones (MCH and MCHL). These hormones induce either dispersion/aggregation or the synthesis of pigments. We find that alpha-MSH is highly conserved during evolution, as is its role in dispersing/synthesizing pigments. Also conserved is the three-exon pmch gene that encodes MCH, which participates in feeding behaviours. In contrast, pmchl (known previously as pmch), is a teleost-specific intron-less gene. Our data indicate that in zebrafish, pmchl-expressing neurons extend axons to the pituitary, supportive of an MCHL hormonal role, whereas zebrafish and Xenopus pmch+ neurons send axons dorsally in the brain. The evolution of these genes and acquisition of hormonal status for MCHL explain different mechanisms used by vertebrates to background-adapt.
Th1 and Th2 cells represent the two main functional subsets of CD4(+) T helper cell, and are defined by their cytokine expression. Human Th1 cells express IFNgamma, whilst Th2 cells express IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13. Th1 and Th2 cells have distinct immunological functions, and can drive different immunopathologies. Here, we show that in vitro-differentiated human Th2 cells highly selectively express the gene for pro-melanin-concentrating hormone (PMCH), using real-time RT-PCR, enzyme immunoassay, and Western blot analysis. PMCH encodes the prohormone, promelanin-concentrating hormone (PMCH), which is proteolytically processed to produce several peptides, including the orexigenic hormone melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). PMCH expression by Th2 cells was activation responsive and increased throughout the 28-day differentiation in parallel with the expression of the Th2 cytokine genes. MCH immunoreactivity was detected in the differentiated Th2 but not Th1 cell culture supernatants after activation, and contained the entire PMCH protein, in addition to several smaller peptides. Human Th1 and Th2 cells were isolated by their expression of IFNgamma and CRTH2, respectively, and the ex vivo Th2 cells expressed PMCH upon activation, in contrast to the Th1 cells. Because Th2 cells are central to the pathogenesis of allergic diseases including asthma, expression of PMCH by activated Th2 cells in vivo may directly link allergic inflammation to energy homeostasis and may contribute to the association between asthma and obesity.
The pre-melanin-concentrating hormone (PMCH) gene is an important gene functionally concerning the regulations of body fat content, feeding behavior and energy balance. In this study, the full-length cDNA of chicken PMCH gene was amplified by SMART RACE method. The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PMCH gene were screened by comparative sequence analysis. The obtained non-synonymous coding SNPs (ncSNPs) were designed for genotyping firstly. Its effects on growth, carcass characteristics and meat quality traits were investigated employing the F2 resource population of Gushi chicken crossed with Anak broiler by AluI CRS-PCR-RFLP. Our results indicated that the cDNA of chicken PMCH shared 67.25 and 66.47% homology with that of human and bovine PMCH, respectively. The deduced amino acid sequence of chicken PMCH (163 amino acids) were 52.07 and 50.89% identical to those of human and bovine PMCH, respectively. The PMCH protein sequence is predicted to have several functional domains, including pro-MCH, CSP, IL7, XPGI and some low complexity sequence. It has 8 phosphorylation sites and no signal peptide sequence. gga-miR-18a, gga-miR-18b, gga-miR-499 microRNA targeting site was predicted in the 3' untranslated region of chicken PMCH mRNA. In addition, a total of seven SNPs including an ncSNP and a synonymous coding SNP, were identified in the PMCH gene. The ncSNP c.81 A>T was found to be in moderate polymorphic state (polymorphic index=0.365), and the frequencies for genotype AA, AB and BB were 0.3648, 0.4682 and 0.1670, respectively. Significant associations between the locus and shear force of breast and leg were observed. This polymorphic site may serve as a useful target for the marker assisted selection of the growth and meat quality traits in chicken.
Current epidemic obesity levels apply great medical and financial pressure to the strenuous economy of obesity-prone cultures, and neuropeptides involved in body weight regulation are regarded as attractive targets for a possible treatment of obesity in humans. The lateral hypothalamus and the nucleus accumbens shell (AcbSh) form a hypothalamic-limbic neuropeptide feeding circuit mediated by Melanin-Concentrating Hormone (MCH). MCH promotes feeding behavior via MCH receptor-1 (MCH1R) in the AcbSh, although this relationship has not been fully characterized. Given the AcbSh mediates reinforcing properties of food, we hypothesized that MCH modulates motivational aspects of feeding.Here we show that chronic loss of the rat MCH-precursor Pmch decreased food intake predominantly via a reduction in meal size during rat development and reduced high-fat food-reinforced operant responding in adult rats. Moreover, acute AcbSh administration of Neuropeptide-GE and Neuropeptide-EI (NEI), both additional neuropeptides derived from Pmch, or chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of NEI, did not affect feeding behavior in adult pmch(+/+) or pmch(-/-) rats. However, acute administration of MCH to the AcbSh of adult pmch(-/-) rats elevated feeding behavior towards wild type levels. Finally, adult pmch(-/-) rats showed increased ex vivo electrically evoked dopamine release and increased limbic dopamine transporter levels, indicating that chronic loss of Pmch in the rat affects the limbic dopamine system.Our findings support the MCH-MCH1R system as an amplifier of consummatory behavior, confirming this system as a possible target for the treatment of obesity. We propose that MCH-mediated signaling in the AcbSh positively mediates motivational aspects of feeding behavior. Thereby it provides a crucial signal by which hypothalamic neural circuits control energy balance and guide limbic brain areas to enhance motivational or incentive-related aspects of food consumption.
Objective: To screen core differentially expressed genes of bronchial asthma and conduct bioinformatics analysis. Methods: Macrophage microarray data GSE22528 from asthma patients were downloaded from gene expression database (GEO). The dataset included transcriptome information from 10 human alveolar lavage fluid samples, and five of them were from allergic asthmatic subjects and five from control subjects. Differential expression genes (DEGs) were screened by R 4.0.4 software. Gene ontology (GO) function and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis were performed to select DEGs using DAVID 6.8 database. Protein interaction network (PPI) was constructed from DEGs encoded proteins using STRING online database. Cytoscape software was used to construct core modules and determine core DEGs. Results: Alveolar lavage fluid samples were all collected from Caucasian Canadians, with age range as (20, 37) and (18, 36) years, respectively, including 3 males for each group. In asthmatic patients, 449 genes were up-regulated and 47 down-regulated. GO analysis showed that the up-regulated genes in asthmatic patients were mainly involved in biological processes such as response to folded proteins, and the molecular function was focused on binding of folded proteins and growth factors. Down-regulated genes were mainly involved in biological processes such as histone deacetylation and ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation, and their molecular functions focused on histone deacetylation activity. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed that pathways were mainly enriched by up-regulation genes, involving Hippo signaling pathway, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, estrogen signaling pathway, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, basal cell carcinoma, neuro-activated receptor ligand interaction, dilated cardiomyopathy and adhesion and connection signaling pathways. Two core modules were obtained by PPI analysis, and 14 core DEGs were screened out. They were pro-melanin concentrating hormone (PMCH), prepronociceptin (PNOC), Sphingosinol-1-phosphate receptor 2 (S1PR2), Sphingosinol-1-phosphate receptor 5 (S1PR5), CC-type chemokine ligand 21 (CCL21), Kelch-like protein 25 (KLHL25), ubiquitin binding enzyme E2V2 (UBE2V2), F-box protein 17 (FBXO17), taste receptor type 2 member 3 (TAS2R3), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), metabolic glutamate receptor 2 (GRM2), Lister E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (LTN1), LIM domain specific protein 7 (LMO7) and ring finger protein 19A gene(RNF19A), in which LTN1 and UBE2V2 were down-regulated and the rest were up-regulated. Conclusion: DEGs was found in macrophages of asthmatic and control individuals. PMCH, PNOC, S1PR2, S1PR5 and CCL21 might be the core genes in the pathological process of asthma.
The lateral hypothalamus (LH) has a heterogeneous cytoarchitectonic organization that has not been elucidated in detail. In this work, we analyzed within the framework of the prosomeric model the differential expression pattern of 59 molecular markers along the ventrodorsal dimension of the medial forebrain bundle in the mouse, considering basal and alar plate subregions of the LH. We found five basal (LH1-LH5) and four alar (LH6-LH9) molecularly distinct sectors of the LH with neuronal cell groups that correlate in topography with previously postulated alar and basal hypothalamic progenitor domains. Most peptidergic populations were restricted to one of these LH sectors though some may have dispersed into a neighboring sector. For instance, histaminergic Hdc-positive neurons were mostly contained within the basal LH3, Nts (neurotensin)- and Tac2 (tachykinin 2)-expressing cells lie strictly within LH4, Hcrt (hypocretin/orexin)-positive and Pmch (pro-melanin-concentrating hormone)-positive neurons appeared within separate LH5 subdivisions, Pnoc (prepronociceptin)-expressing cells were mainly restricted to LH6, and Sst (somatostatin)-positive cells were identified within the LH7 sector. The alar LH9 sector, a component of the Foxg1-positive telencephalo-opto-hypothalamic border region, selectively contained Satb2-expressing cells. Published studies of rodent LH subdivisions have not described the observed pattern. Our genoarchitectonic map should aid in systematic approaches to elucidate LH connectivity and function.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Repeated exposures to insulin-induced hypoglycaemia in people with diabetes progressively impairs the counterregulatory response (CRR) that restores normoglycaemia. This defect is characterised by reduced secretion of glucagon and other counterregulatory hormones. Evidence indicates that glucose-responsive neurons located in the hypothalamus orchestrate the CRR. Here, we aimed to identify the changes in hypothalamic gene and protein expression that underlie impaired CRR in a mouse model of defective CRR. METHODS: High-fat-diet fed and low-dose streptozocin-treated C57BL/6N mice were exposed to one (acute hypoglycaemia [AH]) or multiple (recurrent hypoglycaemia [RH]) insulin-induced hypoglycaemic episodes and plasma glucagon levels were measured. Single-nuclei RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) data were obtained from the hypothalamus and cortex of mice exposed to AH and RH. Proteomic data were obtained from hypothalamic synaptosomal fractions. RESULTS: The final insulin injection resulted in similar plasma glucose levels in the RH group and AH groups, but glucagon secretion was significantly lower in the RH group (AH: 94.5+/-9.2 ng/l [n=33]; RH: 59.0+/-4.8 ng/l [n=37]; p<0.001). Analysis of snRNA-seq data revealed similar proportions of hypothalamic cell subpopulations in the AH- and RH-exposed mice. Changes in transcriptional profiles were found in all cell types analysed. In neurons from RH-exposed mice, we observed a significant decrease in expression of Avp, Pmch and Pcsk1n, and the most overexpressed gene was Kcnq1ot1, as compared with AH-exposed mice. Gene ontology analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) indicated a coordinated decrease in many oxidative phosphorylation genes and reduced expression of vacuolar H(+)- and Na(+)/K(+)-ATPases; these observations were in large part confirmed in the proteomic analysis of synaptosomal fractions. Compared with AH-exposed mice, oligodendrocytes from RH-exposed mice had major changes in gene expression that suggested reduced myelin formation. In astrocytes from RH-exposed mice, DEGs indicated reduced capacity for neurotransmitters scavenging in tripartite synapses as compared with astrocytes from AH-exposed mice. In addition, in neurons and astrocytes, multiple changes in gene expression suggested increased amyloid beta (Abeta) production and stability. The snRNA-seq analysis of the cortex showed that the adaptation to RH involved different biological processes from those seen in the hypothalamus. CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The present study provides a model of defective counterregulation in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. It shows that repeated hypoglycaemic episodes induce multiple defects affecting all hypothalamic cell types and their interactions, indicative of impaired neuronal network signalling and dysegulated hypoglycaemia sensing, and displaying features of neurodegenerative diseases. It also shows that repeated hypoglycaemia leads to specific molecular adaptation in the hypothalamus when compared with the cortex. DATA AVAILABILITY: The transcriptomic dataset is available via the GEO ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/ ), using the accession no. GSE226277. The proteomic dataset is available via the ProteomeXchange data repository ( http://www.proteomexchange.org ), using the accession no. PXD040183.
d-2-Hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (PaD2HGDH) catalyzes the oxidation of d-2-hydroxyglutarate to 2-ketoglutarate, which is a necessary step in the serine biosynthetic pathway. The dependence of P. aeruginosa on PaD2HGDH makes the enzyme a potential therapeutic target against P. aeruginosa. In this study, recombinant His-tagged PaD2HGDH was expressed and purified to high levels from gene PA0317, which was previously annotated as an FAD-binding PCMH-type domain-containing protein. The enzyme cofactor was identified as FAD with fluorescence emission after phosphodiesterase treatment and with mass spectrometry analysis. PaD2HGDH had a k(cat) value of 11 s(-1) and a K(m) value of 60 muM with d-2-hydroxyglutarate at pH 7.4 and 25  degrees C. The enzyme was also active with d-malate but did not react with molecular oxygen. Steady-state kinetics with d-malate and phenazine methosulfate as an electron acceptor established a mechanism that was consistent with ping-pong bi-bi steady-state kinetics at pH 7.4. A comparison of the k(cat)/K(m) values with d-2-hydroxyglutarate and d-malate suggested that the C5 carboxylate of d-2-hydroxyglutarate is important for the substrate specificity of the enzyme. Other homologues of the enzyme have been previously grouped in the VAO/PMCH family of flavoproteins. PaD2HGDH shares fully conserved residues with other alpha-hydroxy acid oxidizing enzymes, and these conserved residues are found in the active site of the PaD2HDGH homology model. An Enzyme Function Initiative-Enzyme Similarity Tool Sequence Similarity Network analysis suggests a functional difference between PaD2HGDH and human D2HGDH, and no relationship with VAO. A phylogenetic tree analysis of PaD2HGDH, VAO, and human D2HGDH establishes genetic diversity among these enzymes.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a cyclic neuropeptide that may be involved in regulation of the stress response and food intake behavior in mammals. MCH and two other putative neuropeptides, NEI and NGE, are encoded by the same precursor, designated pro-melanin-concentrating hormone (PMCH). A panel of somatic cell hybrids segregating either human or rat chromosomes was used to determine the chromosomal localization of the PMCH locus. It was assigned to human chromosome 12q and to rat chromosome 7. This is the first neuropeptide-encoding gene found in this new synteny group conserved in rat and human.
BACKGROUND: The objectives of this study were to find out of normal reference value for age-dependent longitudinal strain values in children and find its correlation with conventional echocardiographic parameters. METHODS: In total, 100 healthy normal children aged between 2 and 15 years were enrolled and divided into three age groups, namely, 2-5 years, 5-10 years, and 10-15 years. Using the GE Vivid 7 ultrasound platform with 4 or 7 MHz probes, both LV and RV global longitudinal strains and conventional echocardiographic parameters were acquired. RESULTS: In normal healthy children, left ventricular GLS values were -20.10 to -19.68 (mean: -19.89), -21.93 to -21.02 (mean: -21.48), and -20.87 to -20.41 (mean: -20.64)) in children aged 2-5 years, 5-10 years, and 10-15 years and right ventricular GLS values were -16.80 to -16.44 (mean: -16.62), -27.85 to -27.27 (mean: -27.56), -28.44 to -27.93 (mean: -28.19) in the above three groups, respectively. No significant increase was noted in the left ventricular strain value from basal to the apical segment from age group 2 years to 15 years and no gender differences were seen. None of the conventional echocardiographic parameters commonly used to assess the left or right ventricular systolic function had a significant correlation with LVGLS and RVGLS. CONCLUSIONS: The mean LVGLS values were -19.89, -21.48, and -20.64 and RVGLS were -16.62, -27.56, and -28.19 in healthy normal children aged 2-5 years, 5-10 years, and 10-15 years, respectively, and conventional echocardiographic parameters did not have any significant correlation with these values.
Toxoplasma gondii is a globally-distributed intracellular parasitic protozoon with wide host range. Chronic infection is the most prevalent form of T. gondii infection, which can lead to significant damage. CD44 plays an important role in body's immune response, however, little is known about the function and mechanism of CD44 in T. gondii infection until now. In the present study, total RNA isolated from four groups including C57BL/6 mouse (C57), C57BL/6 big up tri, openCD44 mouse(C57 big up tri, openCD44), C57BL/6 mouse infected with T. gondii (C57-TG) and C57BL/6 big up tri, openCD44 infected with T. gondii (C57 big up tri, openCD44-TG)were subjected to comparative transcriptome analyses using RNA-seq techniques to explore the possible function of CD44 in mouse brain during chronic Toxoplasma infection. The results indicated a total of 35,908, 54,428, 51,473 and 22,387 unigenes were annotated in KOG, Swissprot, GO and KEGG databases by transcriptome analysis, respectively, and all the databases shared 9,833 unigenes. Subsequently, differentially expressed GO terms and enriched KEGG Pathways showed 20,303 unigenes were annotated belonging to three main GO categories (namely biological process, cellular component and molecular function) and six main KEGG categories (cellular processes, environmental information processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism and organismal systems) between normal C57 and C57 big up tri, openCD44 mice, as well as for C57-TG and C57 big up tri, openCD44-TG mice. For up-regulated genes, Mid1, Ttr and Cd4 were significantly up-regulated in the C57 big up tri, openCD44 mouse compared with the C57 mouse, and Pcp2, Ppp1r17 and Nrk were significantly up-regulated in the C57 big up tri, openCD44-TG mouse compared with the C57-TG mouse. As to down-regulated genes, AC114588.1, Cbln3 and Pmch were significantly down-regulated in the C57 big up tri, openCD44 the mouse compared with the C57 mouse, and down-regulated genes were enriched for immunoglobulins, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II antigens, chemokines ligands and interferon (IFN)-inducible GTPase families in the C57 big up tri, openCD44-TG mouse compared with the C57-TG mouse. The present study is the first trial for exploring the function of CD44 in the mouse brain during chronic infection with T. gondii at the transcriptional level, which can provide a basis for the study of the host immune defense mechanism against T. gondii infection.
The HELLP syndrome is a pregnancy-associated disease inducing hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets in the mother. Although the HELLP symptoms occur in the third trimester in the mother, the origin of the disease can be found in the first trimester fetal placenta. A locus for the HELLP syndrome is present on chromosome 12q23 near PAH. Here, by multipoint nonparametric linkage, pedigree structure allele sharing, and haplotype association analysis of affected sisters and cousins, we demonstrate that the HELLP locus is in an intergenic region on 12q23.2 between PMCH and IGF1. We identified a novel long intergenic noncoding RNA (lincRNA) transcript of 205,012 bases with (peri)nuclear expression in the extravillous trophoblast using strand-specific RT-PCR complemented with RACE and FISH. siRNA-mediated knockdown followed by RNA-sequencing, revealed that the HELLP lincRNA activated a large set of genes that are involved in the cell cycle. Furthermore, blocking potential mutation sites identified in HELLP families decreased the invasion capacity of extravillous trophoblasts. This is the first large noncoding gene to be linked to a Mendelian disorder with autosomal-recessive inheritance.
BACKGROUND: Rhynchophylline (RHY) is an alkaloid component of Uncaria, which are plants extensively used in traditional Asian medicines. Uncaria treatments increase sleep time and quality in humans, and RHY induces sleep in rats. However, like many traditional natural treatments, the mechanisms of action of RHY and Uncaria remain evasive. Moreover, it is unknown whether RHY modifies key brain oscillations during sleep. We thus aimed at defining the effects of RHY on sleep architecture and oscillations throughout a 24-h cycle, as well as identifying the underlying molecular mechanisms. Mice received systemic RHY injections at two times of the day (beginning and end of the light period), and vigilance states were studied by electrocorticographic recordings. RESULTS: RHY enhanced slow wave sleep (SWS) after both injections, suppressed paradoxical sleep (PS) in the light but enhanced PS in the dark period. Furthermore, RHY modified brain oscillations during both wakefulness and SWS (including delta activity dynamics) in a time-dependent manner. Interestingly, most effects were larger in females. A brain spatial transcriptomic analysis showed that RHY modifies the expression of genes linked to cell movement, apoptosis/necrosis, and transcription/translation in a brain region-independent manner, and changes those linked to sleep regulation (e.g., Hcrt, Pmch) in a brain region-specific manner (e.g., in the hypothalamus). CONCLUSIONS: The findings provide support to the sleep-inducing effect of RHY, expose the relevance to shape wake/sleep oscillations, and highlight its effects on the transcriptome with a high spatial resolution. The exposed molecular mechanisms underlying the effect of a natural compound should benefit sleep- and brain-related medicine.
Biphasic pulmonary blastoma (BPB) is an extremely rare highly aggressive malignant tumor that arises from fetal lung tissue and has the classical biphasic histology of epithelial and mesenchymal components. It is usually seen in adults with a slight male predominance and smokers. Previously grouped along with well-differentiated fetal adenocarcinoma (WDFA), and pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB), now it is considered a separate variant and grouped under sarcomatoid neoplasms. Symptoms include chest pain, cough, hemoptysis and it is asymptomatic in at least one-third of the cases. A biopsy is essential for diagnosis and surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Prognosis is poor with 5-year survival less than 20% and recurrence occurring within 12 months of surgery. An aggressive multimodality approach is required for its management and active follow up surveillance is needed to look for recurrence.
BACKGROUND Glucocorticoids (GCs)-induced glaucoma is a common adverse effect of prolonged GCs use. To better understand the effects of GCs on aqueous humor (AH) outflow, we analyzed the dataset GSE37474 using bioinformatics analysis to identify gene changes and pathways in the anterior segment of the human eye induced by dexamethasone (DEX). MATERIAL AND METHODS The GSE37474 dataset downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database was examined in this study. GEO2R was utilized to analyze data and identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway were constructed using the DAVID database followed by construction of a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network performed using Cytoscape software. Finally, modules and hub genes were screened out using MCODE and cytoHubba plugin, respectively. RESULTS A set of 252 DEGs were screened. Among the DEGs, 143 genes were upregulated and 109 were downregulated. GO analysis indicated that some of the DEGs participated in extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and cholesterol homeostasis. Additionally, KEGG pathways were predominantly enriched in tyrosine metabolism and ECM-receptor interaction. From the PPI network, 2 modules were identified, and 10 hub genes were screened out, including CCL2, FOS, IGF1, PTGS2, CCL5, EDN1, IL11, F3, PMCH, and BDKRB1. The 2 module genes primarily participate in the TNF signaling pathway, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and the Jak-STAT signaling pathway. CONCLUSIONS The present study identi fi ed some significant DEGs, hub genes, pathways, and modules in the human anterior segment induced by DEX. These results demonstrate that DEX changes the expression of certain genes and pathways to resist aqueous humor outflow, which could be new targets for developing novel and more effective approaches of diagnosis and therapy for GCs-induced glaucoma.
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) is a peptide that has been isolated from salmon pituitary and rat hypothalamus. In mammals, pro-MCH (PMCH) encodes two putative peptides, named NEI and NGE, in addition to MCH. Those peptides are expressed predominantly in hypothalamus and display a broad array of functions in rat brain. We have previously mapped the PMCH locus on human chromosome 12q and rat chromosome 7. Genomic cloning has revealed the existence of two distinct MCH genes in human: one authentic and one variant. In this report, we describe Southern blotting analysis with DNA from a panel of somatic cell hybrids and demonstrate that the authentic human MCH (hMCH) gene is located as expected on chromosome 12, while the variant form of hMCH gene is located on chromosome 5. Direct chromosomal assignment of the authentic and variant hMCH genes was obtained by using fluorescence in situ hybridization on metaphase chromosomes. A strong signal was observed in 12q23-q24 with the authentic hMCH genomic DNA probe. Surprisingly, two signals were conspicuously found in 5p14 and 5q12-q13 with different variant hMCH genomic DNA probes. These loci were designated PMCHL1 and PMCHL2. Evidence of physiological and pathological data in rodents together with locus linkage analyses in human suggests that hMCH authentic and variant genes may be involved in human brain disorders.
BACKGROUND: Infection with Angiostrongylus cantonensis (AC) in humans or mice can lead to severe eosinophilic meningitis or encephalitis, resulting in various neurological impairments. Developing effective neuroprotective drugs to improve the quality of life in affected individuals is critical. METHODS: We conducted a Gene Ontology enrichment analysis on microarray gene expression (GSE159486) in the brains of AC-infected mice. The expression levels of melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) were confirmed through real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and immunofluorescence. Metabolic parameters were assessed using indirect calorimetry, and mice's energy metabolism was evaluated via pathological hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, serum biochemical assays, and immunohistochemistry. Behavioral tests assessed cognitive and motor functions. Western blotting was used to measure the expression of synapse-related proteins. Mice were supplemented with MCH via nasal administration. RESULTS: Postinfection, a marked decrease in Pmch expression and the encoded MCH was observed. Infected mice exhibited significant weight loss, extensive consumption of sugar and white fat tissue, reduced movement distance, and decreased speed, compared with the control group. Notably, nasal administration of MCH countered the energy imbalance and dyskinesia caused by AC infection, enhancing survival rates. MCH treatment also increased the expression level of postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD95) and microtubule-associated protein-2 (MAP2), as well as upregulated transcription level of B cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 (Bcl2) in the cortex. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that MCH improves dyskinesia by reducing loss of synaptic proteins, indicating its potential as a therapeutic agent for AC infection.
