Protein PML; Functions via its association with PML-nuclear bodies (PML- NBs) in a wide range of important cellular processes, including tumor suppression, transcriptional regulation, apoptosis, senescence, DNA damage response, and viral defense mechanisms. Acts as the scaffold of PML-NBs allowing other proteins to shuttle in and out, a process which is regulated by SUMO-mediated modifications and interactions. Isoform PML-4 has a multifaceted role in the regulation of apoptosis and growth suppression: activates RB1 and inhibits AKT1 via interactions with PP1 and PP2A phosphatases resp [...] 
Albeit N1-Methyladenosine (m1A) RNA modification represents an important regulator of RNA metabolism, the role of m1A modification in carcinogenesis remains enigmatic. Herein, we found that histone lactylation enhances ALKBH3 expression and simultaneously attenuates the formation of tumor-suppressive promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) condensates by removing the m1A methylation of SP100A, promoting the malignant transformation of cancers. First, ALKBH3 is specifically upregulated in high-risk ocular melanoma due to excessive histone lactylation levels, referring to m1A hypomethylation status. Moreover, the multiomics analysis subsequently identified that SP100A, a core component for PML bodies, serves as a downstream candidate target for ALKBH3. Therapeutically, the silencing of ALKBH3 exhibits efficient therapeutic efficacy in melanoma both in vitro and in vivo, which could be reversed by the depletion of SP100A. Mechanistically, we found that YTHDF1 is responsible for recognition of the m1A methylated SP100A transcript, which increases its RNA stability and translational efficacy. Conclusively, we initially demonstrated that m1A modification is necessary for tumor suppressor gene expression, expanding the current understandings of dynamic m1A function during tumor progression. In addition, our results indicate that lactylation-driven ALKBH3 is essential for the formation of PML nuclear condensates, which bridges our knowledge of m1A modification, metabolic reprogramming, and phase-separation events.
Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies, membrane-less organelles in the nucleus, play a crucial role in cellular homeostasis. These dynamic structures result from the assembly of scaffolding PML proteins and various partners. Recent crystal structure analyses revealed essential self-interacting domains, while liquid-liquid phase separation contributes to their formation. PML bodies orchestrate post-translational modifications, particularly stress-induced SUMOylation, impacting target protein functions. Serving as hubs in multiple signaling pathways, they influence cellular processes like senescence. Dysregulation of PML expression contributes to diseases, including cancer, highlighting their significance. Therapeutically, PML bodies are promising targets, exemplified by successful acute promyelocytic leukemia treatment with arsenic trioxide and retinoic acid restoring PML bodies. Understanding their functions illuminates both normal and pathological cellular physiology, guiding potential therapies. This review explores recent advancements in PML body biogenesis, biochemical activity, and their evolving biological roles.
PML nuclear bodies are matrix-associated domains that recruit an astonishing variety of seemingly unrelated proteins. Since their discovery in the early 1960s, PML bodies have fascinated cell biologists because of their beauty and their tight association with cellular disorders. The identification of PML, a gene involved in an oncogenic chromosomal translocation, as the key organizer of these domains drew instant interest onto them. The multiple levels of PML body regulation by a specific posttranslational modification, sumoylation, have raised several unsolved issues. Functionally, PML bodies may sequester, modify or degrade partner proteins, but in many ways, PML bodies still constitute an enigma.
Eukaryotic cells compartmentalize their internal milieu in order to achieve specific reactions in time and space. This organization in distinct compartments is essential to allow subcellular processing of regulatory signals and generate specific cellular responses. In the nucleus, genetic information is packaged in the form of chromatin, an organized and repeated nucleoprotein structure that is a source of epigenetic information. In addition, cells organize the distribution of macromolecules via various membrane-less nuclear organelles, which have gathered considerable attention in the last few years. The macromolecular multiprotein complexes known as Promyelocytic Leukemia Nuclear Bodies (PML NBs) are an archetype for nuclear membrane-less organelles. Chromatin interactions with nuclear bodies are important to regulate genome function. In this review, we will focus on the dynamic interplay between PML NBs and chromatin. We report how the structure and formation of PML NBs, which may involve phase separation mechanisms, might impact their functions in the regulation of chromatin dynamics. In particular, we will discuss how PML NBs participate in the chromatinization of viral genomes, as well as in the control of specific cellular chromatin assembly pathways which govern physiological mechanisms such as senescence or telomere maintenance.
Promyelocytic Leukemia (PML) is a nuclear protein that forms sub-nuclear structures termed nuclear bodies associated with transcriptionally active genomic regions. PML is a tumour suppressor and regulator of cell differentiation. We demonstrate that PML promotes TNFalpha-induced transcriptional responses by promoting NF-kappaB activity. TNFalpha-treated PML(-/-) cells show normal IkappaBalpha degradation and NF-kappaB nuclear translocation but significantly reduced NF-kappaB DNA binding and phosphorylation of NF-kappaB p65. We also demonstrate that the PML retinoic acid receptor-alpha (PML-RARalpha) oncofusion protein, which causes acute promyelocytic leukemia, inhibits TNFalpha induced gene expression and phosphorylation of NF-kappaB. This study establishes PML as an important regulator of NF-kappaB and demonstrates that PML-RARalpha dysregulates NF-kappaB.
The promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is the core organizer of cognate nuclear bodies (PML-NBs). Through physical interaction or modification of diverse protein clients, PML-NBs regulate a multitude of - often antithetical- biological processes such as antiviral and stress response, inhibition of cell proliferation and autophagy, and promotion of apoptosis or senescence. Although PML was originally recognized as a tumor-suppressive factor, more recent studies have revealed a "double-faced" agent role for PML. Indeed, PML displayed tumor cell pro-survival and pro-migratory functions via inhibition of migration suppressing molecules or promotion of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) mediated Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) that may promote cancer cell dissemination. In this line, PML was found to correlate with poor patient prognosis in distinct tumor contexts. Furthermore, in the last decade, a number of publications have implicated PML in the physiology of normal or cancer stem cells (CSCs). Promyelocytic leukemia protein activates fatty acid oxidation (FAO), a metabolic mechanism required for the asymmetric divisions and maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). In embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), PML is required for maintenance of the naive and acquisition of the induced pluripotency state, respectively. Correspondingly, PML ablation causes significant morphological gene expression and lineage choice changes. In this review, we focus on the mechanisms orchestrated by PML and PML-NBs in cancer and healthy stem cells, from cell physiology to the regulation of chromatin dynamics.
The tumor suppressor promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is predominantly localized in the nucleus, where it is essential for the formation and stabilization of the PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs). PML-NBs are involved in the regulation of numerous cellular functions, such as tumorigenesis, DNA damage and antiviral responses. Despite its nuclear localization, a small portion of PML has been found in the cytoplasm. A number of studies recently demonstrated that the cytoplasmic PML (cPML) has diverse functions in many cellular processes including tumorigenesis, metabolism, antiviral responses, cell cycle regulation, and laminopothies. In this prospective, we will summarize the current viewpoints on the regulation and biological significance of cPML and discuss the important questions that still need to be further answered.
Some members of the tripartite motif (TRIM/RBCC) protein family are thought to be important regulators of carcinogenesis. This is not surprising as the TRIM proteins are involved in several biological processes, such as cell growth, development and cellular differentiation and alteration of these proteins can affect transcriptional regulation, cell proliferation and apoptosis. In particular, four TRIM family genes are frequently translocated to other genes, generating fusion proteins implicated in cancer initiation and progression. Among these the most famous is the promyelocytic leukaemia gene PML, which encodes the protein TRIM19. PML is involved in the t(15;17) translocation that specifically occurs in Acute Promyelocytic Leukaemia (APL), resulting in a PML-retinoic acid receptor-alpha (PML-RARalpha) fusion protein. Other members of the TRIM family are linked to cancer development without being involved in chromosomal re-arrangements, possibly through ubiquitination or loss of tumour suppression functions. This chapter discusses the biological functions of TRIM proteins in cancer.
Promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) nuclear bodies (NBs) are dynamic and multiprotein complexes implicated in a variety of important biochemical events. Due to alternative mRNA splicing, PML has at least six nuclear isoforms that share a common N-terminus but differ in their C-terminal regions. However, the unique role of each PML isoform is not clear. Here, we report the characterization of the deubiquitinase ataxin-3 as a specific binding partner of PML isoform II (PML-II). Ataxin-3 was identified as a potential binding protein of PML-II in a yeast-hybrid screen employing the unique C-terminal region of PML-II as bait. Ataxin-3 only binds to the C-terminal region of PML-II and not that of other PML isoforms. The interaction between ataxin-3 and PML-II was confirmed by co-immunoprecipition assays, and immunofluorescent microscopy revealed that PML-II and ataxin-3 were co-localized in PML-NBs. In addition, PML-II not only interacts with ataxin-3 with a normal range of poly-Q repeats (13Q), but also with a pathological form of ataxin-3 with extended poly-Q repeats (79Q). Importantly, the deubiquitinase activity of ataxin-3 was inhibited by PML-II. Our results suggest that PML-II may be a negative regulator of ataxin-3.
PML/TRIM19 is the organizer of PML nuclear bodies (NB), a multiprotein complex associated to the nuclear matrix, which recruit a large number of proteins involved in various cellular processes. Alternative splicing from a single PML gene generates 6 nuclear PML isoforms (PMLI to PMLVI) and one cytoplasmic isoform, PMLVII. Murine PML-null primary cells are resistant to TGF-beta-induced apoptosis. Cytoplasmic PML is an essential activator of TGF-beta signaling by increasing the phosphorylation of transcription factors SMAD2/3 while nuclear PML plays a role in TGF-beta-induced caspase 8 activation and apoptosis. TGF-beta targets nuclear PML by inducing its conjugation to SUMO. In the nucleus, PML is mainly expressed in the nucleoplasm with a small fraction in the nuclear matrix. In response to TGF-beta, PML and caspase 8 shift to the nuclear matrix, where both PML and caspase 8 colocalise within PML NBs. Here, we review the implication of cytoplasmic and nuclear PML isoforms in TGF-beta response.
The promyeloctic leukemia protein PML is a tumor suppressor that was originally identified due to its involvement in the (15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia. While the majority of early research has focused upon the role of PML in the pathogenesis of leukemia, more recent evidence has identified important roles for PML in tissues outside the hemopoietic system, including the central nervous system (CNS). Here, we review recent literature on the role of PML in the CNS, with particular focus on the processes of neurodevelopment and neurodegeneration, and propose new lines of investigation.
Promyelocytic leukemia Nuclear Bodies (PML NBs) are nuclear membrane-less organelles physically associated with chromatin underscoring their crucial role in genome function. The H3.3 histone chaperone complex HIRA accumulates in PML NBs upon senescence, viral infection or IFN-I treatment in primary cells. Yet, the molecular mechanisms of this partitioning and its function in regulating histone dynamics have remained elusive. By using specific approaches, we identify intermolecular SUMO-SIM interactions as an essential mechanism for HIRA recruitment in PML NBs. Hence, we describe a role of PML NBs as nuclear depot centers to regulate HIRA distribution in the nucleus, dependent both on SP100 and DAXX/H3.3 levels. Upon IFN-I stimulation, PML is required for interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) transcription and PML NBs become juxtaposed to ISGs loci at late time points of IFN-I treatment. HIRA and PML are necessary for the prolonged H3.3 deposition at the transcriptional end sites of ISGs, well beyond the peak of transcription. Though, HIRA accumulation in PML NBs is dispensable for H3.3 deposition on ISGs. We thus uncover a dual function for PML/PML NBs, as buffering centers modulating the nuclear distribution of HIRA, and as chromosomal hubs regulating ISGs transcription and thus HIRA-mediated H3.3 deposition at ISGs upon inflammatory response.
The promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) is a tumor suppressor identified in acute PML and implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of tumors. PML is essential for the proper assembly of a nuclear macromolecular structure called the PML nuclear body (PML-NB). PML and PML-NBs are functionally promiscuous and have been associated with the regulation of several cellular functions. Above all these is the control of apoptosis, a function of PML whose physiological relevance is emphasized by in vivo studies that demonstrate that mice and cells lacking Pml are resistant to a vast variety of apoptotic stimuli. The function of PML in regulating apoptosis is not confined to a linear pathway; rather, PML works within a regulatory network that finely tunes various apoptotic pathways, depending on the cellular context and the apoptotic stimulus. Here, we will summarize earlier and recent advances on the molecular mechanisms by which PML regulates apoptosis and the implication of these findings for cancer pathogenesis.
The death domain-associated protein (Daxx) was originally cloned as a CD95 (FAS)-interacting protein and modulator of FAS-induced cell death. Daxx accumulates in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm; in the nucleus, Daxx is found associated with the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) nuclear body and with alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome protein (ATRX)-positive heterochromatic regions. In the cytoplasm, Daxx has been reported to interact with various proteins involved in cell death regulation. Despite a significant number of studies attempting to determine Daxx function in apoptotic and non-apoptotic cell death, its precise role in this process is only partially understood. Here, we critically review the current understanding of Daxx function and shed new light on this interesting field.
PML nuclear bodies are matrix-bound nuclear structures with a variety of functions in human cells. These nuclear domains are interferon regulated and play an essential role during virus infections involving accumulation of SUMO-dependent host and viral factors. PML-NBs are targeted and subsequently manipulated by adenoviral regulatory proteins, illustrating their crucial role during productive infection and virus-mediated oncogenic transformation. PML-NBs have a longstanding antiviral reputation; however, the genomes of Human Adenoviruses and initial sites of viral transcription/replication are found juxtaposed to these domains, resulting in a double-edged capacity of these nuclear multiprotein/multifunctional complexes. This enigma provides evidence that Human Adenoviruses selectively counteract antiviral responses, and simultaneously benefit from or even depend on proviral PML-NB associated components by active recruitment to PML track-like structures, that are induced during infection. Thereby, a positive microenvironment for adenoviral transcription and replication is created at these nuclear subdomains. Based on the available data, this review aims to provide a detailed overview of the current knowledge of Human Adenovirus crosstalk with nuclear PML body compartments as sites of SUMOylation processes in the host cells, evaluating the currently known principles and molecular mechanisms.
Human autoantibodies have performed admirably in the service of characterizing GW/P-bodies. These antibodies have provided a critical point of reference by which other proteins have been shown to be components of GW/P-bodies. In addition,autoantibodies have been used to identify new GW/P-body components, including Ge-l, GW182, RAP55, and YB-1. Using new, high-throughput screening assays, it is likely that additional, novel GW/P-body components will be identified. Human auto antibodies have also raised the possibility of a functional link between two apparently unrelated cellular structures, PML-SplOO nuclear bodies and GW/P-bodies.A key unanswered question remains: What is the role of GW/P-bodies in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disease? Over the next 10 years, as more is learned about the function of GW/P-bodies, it is hoped that molecular and cellular biologists will further consider this question and remember the important contributions of patients with autoimmune disease to the early characterization of these cellular structures.
Gammaherpesviruses like Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) subvert the ubiquitin proteasome system for their own benefit in order to facilitate viral gene expression and replication. In particular, viral tegument proteins that share sequence homology to the formylglycineamide ribonucleotide amidotransferase (FGARAT, or PFAS), an enzyme in the cellular purine biosynthesis, are important for disrupting the intrinsic antiviral response associated with Promyelocytic Leukemia (PML) protein-associated nuclear bodies (PML-NBs) by proteasome-dependent and independent mechanisms. In addition, all herpesviruses encode for a potent ubiquitin protease that can efficiently remove ubiquitin chains from proteins and thereby interfere with several different cellular pathways. In this review, we discuss mechanisms and functional consequences of virus-induced ubiquitination and deubiquitination for early events in gammaherpesviral infection.
Liquid-liquid phase separation has emerged as a crucial mechanism driving the formation of membraneless biomolecular condensates, which play important roles in numerous cellular processes. These condensates, found both in the nucleus and cytoplasm, are formed through multivalent, low-affinity interactions between various molecules. P62-containing condensates serve, among other functions, as proteolytic hubs for the ubiquitin-proteasome system. In this study, we investigated the dynamic interplay between nuclear p62 condensates and promyelocytic nuclear bodies (PML-NBs). We show that p62 condensates stabilize PML-NBs under both basal conditions and following exposure to arsenic trioxide which stimulates their degradation. We further show that this effect on the stability of PML-NBs is due to sequestration of their ubiquitin E3 ligase RNF4 in the p62 condensates with subsequent rapid degradation of the ligase. The sequestration of the ligase is made possible by association between the proline-rich domain of the PML protein and the PB1 domain of p62, which results in the formation of a PML-NB shell around the p62 condensates. Importantly, these hybrid structures do not undergo fusion and mixing of their contents which leaves unsolved the mechanism of sequestration of RNF4 in the condensates. These findings suggest an additional possible mechanism of PML-NB as a tumor suppressor which is mediated via interactions between different biomolecular condensates.
Protein abnormalities are the major cause of neurodegenerative diseases such as spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA). Protein misfolding and impaired degradation leads to the build-up of protein aggregates inside the cell, which may further cause cellular degeneration. Reducing levels of either the soluble misfolded form of the protein or its precipitated aggregate, even marginally, could significantly improve cellular health. Despite numerous pre-existing strategies to target these protein aggregates, there is considerable room to improve their specificity and efficiency. In this study, we demonstrated the enhanced intracellular degradation of both monomers and aggregates of mutant ataxin1 (Atxn1 82Q) by engineering an E3 ubiquitin ligase enzyme, promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML). Specifically, we showed enhanced degradation of both soluble and aggregated Atxn1 82Q in mammalian cells by targeting this protein using PML fused to single chain variable fragments (scFvs) specific for monomers and aggregates of the target protein. The ability to solubilize Atxn1 82Q aggregates was due to the PML-mediated enhanced SUMOylation of the target protein. This ability to reduce the intracellular levels of both misfolded forms of Atxn1 82Q may not only be useful for treating SCA, but also applicable for the treatment of other PolyQ disorders.
The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein is a tumor suppressor acting as the organizer of nuclear matrix-associated structures named nuclear bodies (NBs). The involvement of PML in various cell processes, including cell death, senescence or antiviral defense underlines the multiple functions of PML due to its ability to interact with various partners either in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus. The importance of paracrine signaling in the regulation of PML expression is well established. More recently, a growing body of evidence also supports PML as a key regulator of cytokine signaling. These findings shed light on unsuspected biological functions of PML such as immune response, inflammation and cytokine-induced apoptosis. Here we review the current understanding of the pleiotropic activities of PML on cytokine-induced signaling.
