Serum paraoxonase/arylesterase 1; Hydrolyzes the toxic metabolites of a variety of organophosphorus insecticides. Capable of hydrolyzing a broad spectrum of organophosphate substrates and lactones, and a number of aromatic carboxylic acid esters. Mediates an enzymatic protection of low density lipoproteins against oxidative modification and the consequent series of events leading to atheroma formation; Belongs to the paraoxonase family.
The paraoxonases (PON1, PON2 and PON3) are an enzyme family with a high structural homology. All of them have lactonase activity and degrade lipid peroxides in lipoproteins and cells. As such, they play a role in protection against oxidation and inflammation. Infectious diseases are often associated with oxidative stress and an inflammatory response. Infection and inflammation trigger a cascade of reactions in the host, known as the acute-phase response. This response is associated with dramatic changes in serum proteins and lipoproteins, including a decrease in serum PON1 activity. These alterations have clinical consequences for the infected patient, including an increased risk for cardiovascular diseases, and an impaired protection against the formation of antibiotic-resistant bacterial biofilms. Several studies have investigated the value of serum PON1 measurement as a biomarker of the infection process. Low serum PON1 activities are associated with poor survival in patients with severe sepsis. In addition, preliminary studies suggest that serum PON1 concentration and/or enzyme activity may be useful as markers of acute concomitant infection in patients with an indwelling central venous catheter. Investigating the associations between paraoxonases and infectious diseases is a recent, and productive, line of research.
In humans, three paraoxonase (PON1, PON2, and PON3) genes are clustered on chromosome 7 at a locus that spans a distance around 170 kb. These genes are highly homologous to each other and have a similar protein structural organization. PON2 is the intracellular enzyme, which is expressed in many tissues and organs, while two other members of PON gene family are produced by liver and associate with high density lipoprotein (HDL). The lactonase activity is the ancestral. Besides lactones and organic phosphates, PONs can hydrolyze and therefore detoxify oxidized low density lipoprotein and homocysteine thiolactone, i.e. two cytotoxic compounds with a strong proatherogenic action. Indeed, PONs possess numerous atheroprotective properties, which include antioxidant activity, anti-inflammatory action, preserving HDL function, stimulation of cholesterol efflux, anti-apoptosis, anti-thrombosis, and anti-adhesion. PON genetic polymorphisms contribute to susceptibility/protection from atherosclerosis-related diseases. The bright antiatherogenic activity of the PON cluster makes it a promising target for the development of new therapeutic strategies.
1. Human serum paraoxonase (PON1) is a Ca2+-dependent 45-kDa glycoprotein that is associated with high density lipoprotein (HDL). 2. PON1 hydrolyzes organophosphate (OP) insecticides and nerve gases and is responsible for determining the selective toxicity of these compounds in mammals. 3. PON1 has two genetic polymorphisms giving rise to amino acid substitutions at positions 55 and 192. The position-192 polymorphism is the major determinant of the PON1 activity polymorphism. However, the position-55 polymorphism also modulates activity. 4. Genotyping individuals for both PON1 polymorphisms may provide a method for identifying those most at risk of OP poisoning. The effect of the PON1 polymorphisms on activity may explain why some Gulf War veterans have developed Gulf War syndrome and some have not, despite similar OP exposure. 5. PON1 may also be a determinant of resistance to the development of atherosclerosis by protecting lipoproteins against oxidative modification, perhaps by hydrolyzing phospholipid hydroperoxides. 6. The PON 1 polymorphisms are important in determining the capacity of HDL to protect low density lipoprotein against oxidative modification in vitro, which may explain the relation between the PON1 alleles and coronary heart disease in case-control studies.
The paraoxonase (PON) gene family includes three proteins, PON1, PON2 and PON3. PON1 and PON3 are both associated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) particles and exert anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. PON2 and PON3 are intracellular enzymes which modulate mitochondrial superoxide anion production and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced apoptosis. The pleiotropic roles exerted by PONs have been mainly investigated in cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. In recent years, overexpression of PON2 and PON3 has been observed in cancer cells and it has been proposed that both enzymes could be involved in tumor survival and stress resistance. Moreover, a lower activity of serum PON1 has been reported in cancer patients. This review summarizes literature data on the role of PONs in human cancers and their potential role as a target for antitumor drugs.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is an arylesterase associated with serum high density lipoprotein particles. Its name is derived from hydrolyzing one of several organophosphate compounds, namely paraoxon. Recent studies have shown that PON1 plays a protective role in diseases associated with oxidative stress such as atherosclerosis and diabetes mellitus. Studies have demonstrated reduction-oxidative state changes involving PON1 in humans and laboratory animal models. Although there is less information about the role of this enzyme in veterinary medicine, new data suggest that PON1 might be a new oxidative stress marker in animal patients, similarly to humans.
Organophosphates (OPs) are a class of chemicals commonly used in agriculture as pesticides, that can often lead to severe toxicity in humans. Paraoxonase-1 (PON1) belongs to a family of A-esterases and hydrolyses several OPs while also serving other biological roles. Two main genetic polymorphisms have been shown to affect enzymatic ability; an A > G transition in the 192nd position (192 Q/R, rs662), and an A > T at codon 55 (55 M/L, rs854560). In this review, we searched PubMed for relevant articles published from its inception till June 2018 and included publications from 1996 to 2018. We aimed to address the distribution of the polymorphisms in various populations, the way they affect enzymatic activity and the possible use of PON1 as a biomarker. The polymorphisms present great heterogeneity between populations, with the data being clearer over 192 Q/R, and this heterogeneity is related to the phylogenetic origins of each population. Concerning enzymatic activity, the different genotypes react better or worse to different OP substrates, with studies presenting a variety of findings. Detecting the "paraoxonase status" of an individual -referring to PON1 function- seems to be important in predicting OP toxicity, as studies have shown that some specific-genotype individuals present symptoms of toxicity in higher rates than others. We are strongly convinced that in order for the scientific community to reach a consensus over which polymorphisms confer susceptibility to toxicity and whether PON1 can eventually be used as a biomarker, more studies need to be carried out, since the data thus far does not seem to reach a universal conclusion.
Aging is due to a complex interaction of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors, but a strong genetic component appears to have an impact on survival to extreme ages. In order to identify "longevity genes" in humans, different strategies are now available. In our laboratory, we performed association studies on a variety of "candidate" polymorphisms in Italian centenarians. Many genes/polymorphisms gave negative results, while others showed a positive association with human longevity and a sometimes-positive association with unsuccessful aging (myocardial infarction, Alzheimer's disease, and type 2 diabetes). Results regarding genes involved in inflammation (IL-1 cluster, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta, TLR-4, PPARgamma), insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway and lipid metabolism (apolipoproteins, CETP, PON1), and oxidative stress (p53, p66(shc)) will be described. In addition, a strong role of the interaction between nuclear and mitochondrial genomes (mtDNA haplogroups and the C150T mutation) emerged from our findings. Thus, the genetics of human longevity appears to be quite peculiar in a context where antagonistic pleiotropy can play a major role and genes can have a different biological role at different ages.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-associated enzyme involved in the protection of low-density lipoprotein and HDLs against lipid peroxidation. Several studies documented the capacity of polyphenols to stimulate PON1 transcription activation. The objective of the present review is to provide the main evidence about the role and the potential mechanism of action of polyphenols and polyphenol-rich foods in the modulation of PON1 gene expression and activity. A total of 76 in vitro and in vivo studies were included in the review. Overall, while evidence obtained in vitro is limited to quercetin and resveratrol, those deriving from animal models seem more convincing for a wide range of polyphenols but only at pharmacological doses. Evidence from human studies is promising but deserves more substantiation about the role of polyphenol-rich foods in the regulation of PON1 activity and expression. Research focused on the understanding of the structure-activity relationship of polyphenols with PON1 and on the mechanisms at the base of PON1 modulation is warranted. Well-designed human intervention studies are encouraged to corroborate the findings of polyphenols also at physiological doses.
Understanding the kinetics and function of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is becoming an important issue in atherosclerosis. Low PON1 activity has been consistently linked with an increased risk of major cardiovascular events in the setting of secondary prevention of coronary artery disease. Recent studies have shown that there is a specific interaction of myeloperoxidase (MPO)-apoAI-PON1 on HDL surface that seems to be germane to atherogenesis. MPO specifically inhibits PON1 and PON1 mitigates MPO effects. Surprisingly, very little is known about the routes by which PON1 gets integrated into HDL or its fate during HDL remodeling in the intravascular space. We have developed a method that assesses PON1 activity in the individual HDL subclasses with the aid of which we have shown that PON1 is present across the HDL particle range and preferentially in HDL3, confirming data from ultracentrifugation (UC) studies. Upon HDL maturation ex vivo PON1 is activated and it shows a flux to both smaller and larger HDL particles as well as to VLDL and sdLDL. At the same time apoE, AI and AII are shifted across particle sizes. PON1 activation and flux across HDL particles are blocked by CETP and LCAT inhibitors. In a group of particles with such a complex biology as HDL, knowledge of the interaction between apo-lipoproteins, lipids and enzymes is key for an increased understanding of the yet multiple unknown features of its function. Solving the HDL paradox will necessitate the development of techniques to explore HDL function that are practical and well adapted to clinical studies and eventually become useful in patient monitoring. The confluence of proteomic, functional studies, HDL subclasses, PON1 assays and zymogram will yield data to draw a more elaborate and comprehensive picture of the function of HDL. It must be noted that all these studies are static and conducted in the fasting state. The crucial phase will be achieved when human kinetic studies (both in the fasting and post-prandial states) on HDL-PON1, apoA-I and lipid fate in the circulation are carried out.
Serum paraoxonase-1 (PON1) is the most studied member of the group of paraoxonases (PONs). This enzyme possesses three enzymatic activities: lactonase, arylesterase, and paraoxonase activity. PON1 and its isoforms play an important role in drug metabolism as well as in the prevention of cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases. Although all three members of the PON family have the same origin and very similar amino acid sequences, they have different functions and are found in different locations. PONs exhibit substrate promiscuity, and their true physiological substrates are still not known. However, possible substrates include homocysteine thiolactone, an analogue of natural quorum-sensing molecules, and the recently discovered derivatives of arachidonic acid-bioactive delta-lactones. Directed evolution, site-directed mutagenesis, and kinetic studies provide comprehensive insights into the active site and catalytic mechanism of PON1. However, there is still a whole world of mystery waiting to be discovered, which would elucidate the substrate promiscuity of a group of enzymes that are so similar in their evolution and sequence yet so distinct in their function.
Human PON1 is a HDL-associated lipolactonase capable of preventing LDL and cell membrane oxidation and is therefore considered to be atheroprotective. PON1 contributes to the antioxidative function of HDL and reductions in HDL-PON1 activity, prevalent in a wide variety of diseases with an inflammatory component, are believed to lead to dysfunctional HDL which can promote inflammation and atherosclerosis. However, PON1 is multifunctional and may contribute to other HDL functions such as in innate immunity, preventing infection by quorum sensing gram negative bacteria by destroying acyl lactone mediators of quorum sensing, and putative new roles in cancer development and the promotion of healthy ageing. In this review we explore the physiological roles of PON1 in disease development, as well as PON1 gene and protein structure, promiscuous activities and the roles of SNPs and ethnicity in determining PON1 activity.
BACKGROUND: Nitro-oxidative stress (NOS) has been implicated in the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders. The activity of the polymorphic antioxidant enzyme paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is altered in diseases where NOS is involved. PON1 activity may be estimated using different substrates some of which are influenced by PON1 polymorphisms. OBJECTIVES: 1) to review the association between PON1 activities and psychiatric diseases using a standardized PON1 substrate terminology in order to offer a state-of-the-art review; and 2) to review the efficacy of different strategies (nutrition, drugs, lifestyle) to enhance PON1 activities. METHODS: The PubMed database was searched using the terms paraoxonase 1 and psychiatric diseases. Moreover, the database was also searched for clinical trials investigating strategies to enhance PON1 activity. RESULTS: The studies support decreased PON1 activity as determined using phenylacetate (i.e., arylesterase or AREase) as a substrate, in depression, bipolar disorder, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and schizophrenia, especially in antipsychotic-free patients. PON1 activity as determined with paraoxon (i.e., POase activity) yields more controversial results, which can be explained by the lack of adjustment for the Q192R polymorphism. The few clinical trials investigating the influence of nutritional, lifestyle and drugs on PON1 activities in the general population suggest that some polyphenols, oleic acid, Mediterranean diet, no smoking, being physically active and statins may be effective strategies that increase PON1 activity. CONCLUSION: Lowered PON1 activities appear to be a key component in the ongoing NOS processes that accompany affective disorders, GAD and schizophrenia. Treatments increasing attenuated PON1 activity could possibly be new drug targets for treating these disorders.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The paraoxonase (PON) gene family includes three members, PON1, PON2, and PON3. In-vitro and mouse studies have demonstrated that all three PONs are atheroprotective. Some, but not all, human epidemiologic studies have observed associations between PON gene polymorphisms and risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). In this review, we summarize studies published within the last year, elucidating involvement of PON1 and PON2 in oxidative stress, CVD, and innate immune responses. RECENT FINDINGS: In a prospective study, the PON1 192QQ genotype and low PON1 activity were associated with increased systemic oxidative stress and increased risk for CVD. PON1 expression protected against Pseudomonas aeruginosa lethality in Drosophila, suggesting that PON1 can interfere with quorum sensing in vivo. PON2 attenuated macrophage triglyceride accumulation via inhibition of diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1. Overexpression of PON2 protected against endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis when the stress was induced by interference with protein modification but not when endoplasmic reticulum stress was induced by Ca2+ deregulation. SUMMARY: Both mouse and human studies have demonstrated the antioxidative and atheroprotective effects of PON1. The mechanisms by which PON2 exerts its atheroprotective effects are emerging. Large-scale epidemiologic studies are needed to further examine the relationship between PON2 genetic polymorphisms and risk for CVD. Elucidation of the physiologic substrates of the PON proteins is of particular importance to further advance this field.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a calcium-dependent lactonase synthesized primarily in the liver and secreted into the plasma, where it is associates with high density lipoproteins (HDL). PON1 acts as antioxidant preventing low-density lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation, a process considered critical in the initiation and progression of atherosclerosis. Additionally, PON1 hydrolyzes and detoxifies some toxic metabolites of organophosphorus compounds (OPs). Thus, PON1 activity and expression levels are important for determining susceptibility to OPs intoxication and risk of developing diseases related to inflammation and oxidative stress. Increasing evidence has demonstrated the modulation of PON1 expression by many factors is due to interaction with nuclear receptors (NRs). Here, we briefly review the studies in this area and discuss the role of nuclear receptors in the regulation of PON1 expression, as well as how understanding these mechanisms may allow us to manipulate PON1 levels to improve drug efficacy and treat disease.
Paraoxonase (PON) is a group of proteins present in three forms (PON1, PON2, PON3) encoded by genes PON1, PON2, and PON3. PON1 and PON3 are plasma enzymes, structurally and functionally related to HDL, while PON2 is characterized by an intracellular location. Many polymorphisms of PON have been observed. The most widely and accurately described is the single nucleotide polymorphism, which impacts the conversion of glutamine (Q) to arginine (R) and has the effect of altering the hydrolytic activity of the PON1 form. Each PON form plays an important role in the human body, and they exhibit antioxidant, antiatherosclerotic, and anti-inflammatory influences. The PON family inhibits LDL oxidative modification and suppresses the differentiation of monocytes into macrophages, which is the first stage in the development of atherosclerosis. Furthermore, PON1 prevents the accumulation of oxidized LDL and stimulates cholesterol efflux from macrophages. Establishing these functions has led researchers to study the relationship between PON family and lipids in healthy subjects and in patients with diagnosed cardiovascular diseases. There is a certain relation between PON1 polymorphism and HDL and LDL particles. The PON1192RR genotype is associated with lower HDL levels and higher LDL levels. Lower concentrations of LDL in people with genotype PON155LL have been noted. These dependencies have been observed among healthy people, but the relation disappears in patients with cardiovascular diseases.
BACKGROUND: Low levels of antioxidant paraoxonase 1 (PON1) enzyme activity, PON1-Q192R polymorphism (a glutamine (Q) to arginine (R) substitution at position 192), PON1-L55M polymorphism (a leucine (L) to methionine (M) substitution at position 55), and oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL) are risk factors for coronary heart disease. Aerobic exercise improves PON1 activity, but the effects of hypoxic exercise are yet unclear. The aim of this study was to determine the effects of hypoxic underwater rugby training on PON1 activity and oxLDL levels and the role of the mentioned polymorphisms. METHODS: Serum PON1 and arylesterase activities (ARE), PON1, PON3, and oxLDL protein levels (by using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays) were determined in an athletic group (42 trained male underwater rugby players; age = 21.7 +/- 4.2 years, mean +/- SD) and a control group (43 sedentary men; age = 23.9 +/- 3.2 years). The polymorphisms were determined from genomic DNA samples. RESULTS: PON1 activity (25.1%, p = 0.052), PON3 (p < 0.001), and oxLDL (p < 0.001) of the athletic group, including most genotype groups, were higher than those of the control group. In comparison to the controls, PON1 activity levels (p = 0.005) of the PON1-Q192R homozygote QQ genotype group and PON1 activity levels (30%, p = 0.116) of the PON1-L55M homozygote LL genotype group were higher, whereas ARE activity values of athletic R allele carrier (Rc = QR + RR) (p = 0.005) and LL group (p = 0.002) were lower than the control genotype groups related to their polymorphisms. CONCLUSION: Hypoxic training can cause (1) significant oxidative stress, including oxLDL, and an antioxidant response (increase in PON1 activity and PON3), (2) differences in the activity of PON1 and ARE, which are modified by PON1-Q192R and PON1-L55M polymorphisms, respectively, and (3) improvements in PON1 activity of QQ and LL groups. However, hypoxic training can cause a disadvantage of LL and Rc groups for ARE.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is one of the most significant antioxidative enzymes associated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL). It has been proved that is involved in the pathogenesis of many diseases including chronic kidney disease (CKD). The association between PON1 and CKD seems to be mutual, such that the disease produces a significant decrease in PON1 activity levels, while the genetics of PON1 may affect the risk of susceptibility to CKD. Recent studies reveal that the decrease in serum PON1 activity observed in non-dialyzed and dialyzed CKD patients as well as in renal transplant (RT) patients is linked to an increased vulnerability to atherosclerosis. We intend to summarize current literature concerning PON1 activity in CKD, highlighting on the main determinants of PON1 activity, its association with oxidative stress, the impact of its genetic polymorphism on the disease development, the effect of drugs and nutritional state. Furthermore, evidence supporting the implication of reduced PON1 activity in the incident of cardiovascular disease in CKD patients, is also examined. It appears that despite the lack of standardization of PON1 activity measurement, PON1 remains a valuable biomarker for the researchers through the last decades, which contributes to the assessment of the antioxidant status having prognostic benefit on adverse clinical outcomes at various stages and etiologies of kidney disease.
Paraoxonase 1 (PON1), a component of high-density lipoprotein (HDL), is a calcium-dependent multifunctional enzyme that connects metabolisms of lipoproteins and homocysteine (Hcy). Both PON1 and Hcy have been implicated in human diseases, including atherosclerosis and neurodegeneration. The involvement of Hcy in disease could be mediated through its interactions with PON1. Due to its ability to reduce oxidative stress, PON1 contributes to atheroprotective functions of HDL in mice and humans. Although PON1 has the ability to hydrolyze a variety of substrates, only one of them-Hcy-thiolactone-is known to occur naturally. In humans and mice, Hcy-thiolactonase activity of PON1 protects against N-homocysteinylation, which is detrimental to protein structure and function. PON1 also protects against neurotoxicity associated with hyperhomocysteinemia in mouse models. The links between PON1 and Hcy in relation to pathological states such as coronary artery disease, stroke, diabetic mellitus, kidney failure and Alzheimer's disease that emerge from recent studies are the topics of this review.
Serum paraoxonase (PON1) is an esterase that is involved in the detoxification of organophosphate insecticides. Emerging lines of evidence have shown that functional polymorphisms in the PON1 gene might play a critical role in increasing susceptibility to organophosphate toxicity, but individually published studies showed inconclusive results. This meta-analysis aimed to derive a more precise estimation of the associations between the PON1 polymorphisms and organophosphate toxicity risk. Nine case-control studies were assessed with a total 1,042 patients with organophosphate toxicity and 1014 healthy controls. The meta-analysis results showed that the PON1 192Q and 55L polymorphisms may increase the risk of organophosphate toxicity. Further subgroup analyses by ethnicity showed significant associations of the PON1 192Q and 55L polymorphisms with increased risk of organophosphate toxicity among the Caucasian populations. However, similar associations were not observed among the Asian populations. In conclusion, the current meta-analysis indicates that the PON1 192Q and 55LM polymorphisms may increase the risk of organophosphate toxicity, especially among the Caucasian populations.
Organophosphate (OP) poisoning is a progressively worrying phenomenon as worldwide pesticide production and consumption has doubled. On average, WHO estimates that 3% of agricultural workers in developing Asian countries suffer an episode of pesticide poisoning every year. Furthermore, the threat of OP usage in terrorism is existent, as seen by the subway tragedy in Tokyo in 1995 where sarin was used. Despite these alarming facts, there is currently no global system to track poisonings related to pesticide use. Human serum paraoxonase (PON1) is the enzyme that hydrolyses OP compounds. Serum PON1 levels and activity vary widely among different ethnic populations. Two commonly studied polymorphisms of PON1 are PON1Q192R and PON1L55M. PON1R192 hydrolyses paraoxon faster than PON1Q192 but hydrolyses diazoxon, sarin and soman eight times slower, and vice versa. PON1M55 has lower plasma levels of PON1 than PON1L55. As the prevalence of the different alleles and genotypic distribution vary between the Asian populations we studied, we propose the necessity to study PON1 polymorphisms and its role in OP toxicity in Asian populations. This would help safeguard the proper care of agricultural workers who might be affected by OP poisoning, and alert relevant anti biological terrorism agencies on possible risks involved in the event of an OP attack and provide effective counter measures.
