E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase CHIP; E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase which targets misfolded chaperone substrates towards proteasomal degradation. Collaborates with ATXN3 in the degradation of misfolded chaperone substrates: ATXN3 restricting the length of ubiquitin chain attached to STUB1/CHIP substrates and preventing further chain extension. Ubiquitinates NOS1 in concert with Hsp70 and Hsp40. Modulates the activity of several chaperone complexes, including Hsp70, Hsc70 and Hsp90. Mediates transfer of non-canonical short ubiquitin chains to HSPA8 that have no effect on HSPA8 degradation. Me [...] 
Brown adipose tissue can expend large amounts of energy, and therefore increasing its size or activity is a promising therapeutic approach to combat metabolic disease. In humans, major deposits of brown fat cells are found intimately associated with large blood vessels, corresponding to perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT). However, the cellular origins of PVAT are poorly understood. Here, we determine the identity of perivascular adipocyte progenitors in mice and humans. In mice, thoracic PVAT develops from a fibroblastic lineage, consisting of progenitor cells (Pdgfra(+), Ly6a(+) and Pparg(-)) and preadipocytes (Pdgfra(+), Ly6a(+) and Pparg(+)), which share transcriptional similarity with analogous cell types in white adipose tissue. Interestingly, the aortic adventitia of adult animals contains a population of adipogenic smooth muscle cells (Myh11(+), Pdgfra(-) and Pparg(+)) that contribute to perivascular adipocyte formation. Similarly, human PVAT contains presumptive fibroblastic and smooth muscle-like adipocyte progenitor cells, as revealed by single-nucleus RNA sequencing. Together, these studies define distinct populations of progenitor cells for thermogenic PVAT, providing a foundation for developing strategies to augment brown fat activity.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for the majority of primary liver cancers and is characterized by high recurrence and heterogeneity, yet its mechanism is not well understood. Here we show that N(1)-methyladenosine methylation (m(1)A) in tRNA is remarkably elevated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patient tumour tissues. Moreover, m(1)A methylation signals are increased in liver cancer stem cells (CSCs) and are negatively correlated with HCC patient survival. TRMT6 and TRMT61A, forming m(1)A methyltransferase complex, are highly expressed in advanced HCC tumours and are negatively correlated with HCC survival. TRMT6/TRMT61A-mediated m(1)A methylation is required for liver tumourigenesis. Mechanistically, TRMT6/TRMT61A elevates the m(1)A methylation in a subset of tRNA to increase PPARdelta translation, which in turn triggers cholesterol synthesis to activate Hedgehog signaling, eventually driving self-renewal of liver CSCs and tumourigenesis. Finally, we identify a potent inhibitor against TRMT6/TRMT61A complex that exerts effective therapeutic effect on liver cancer.
Huangqin decoction (HQD) is a Traditional Chinese Medicine formula for ulcerative colitis. However, the pharmacology and molecular mechanism of HQD on ulcerative colitis is still unclear. Combined microarray analysis, network pharmacology, and molecular docking for revealing the therapeutic targets and molecular mechanism of HQD against ulcerative colitis. TCMSP, DrugBank, Swiss Target Prediction were utilized to search the active components and effective targets of HQD. Ulcerative colitis effective targets were obtained by microarray data from the GEO database (GSE107499). Co-targets between HQD and ulcerative colitis are obtained by Draw Venn Diagram. PPI (Protein-protein interaction) network was constructed by the STRING database. To obtain the core target, topological analysis is exploited by Cytoscape 3.7.2. GO and KEGG enrichment pathway analysis was performed to Metascape platform, and molecular docking through Autodock Vina 1.1.2 finished. 161 active components with 486 effective targets of HQD were screened. 1542 ulcerative colitis effective targets were obtained with |Log(2)FC|> 1 and adjusted P-value < 0.05. The Venn analysis was contained 79 co-targets. Enrichment analysis showed that HQD played a role in TNF signaling pathway, IL-17 signaling pathway, Th17 cell differentiation, etc. IL6, TNF, IL1B, PTGS2, ESR1, and PPARG with the highest degree from PPI network were successfully docked with 19 core components of HQD, respectively. According to ZINC15 database, quercetin (ZINC4175638), baicalein (ZINC3871633), and wogonin (ZINC899093) recognized as key compounds of HQD on ulcerative colitis. PTGS2, ESR1, and PPARG are potential therapeutic targets of HQD. HQD can act on multiple targets through multi-pathway, to carry out its therapeutic role in ulcerative colitis.
Body fat distribution is a heritable risk factor for cardiovascular and metabolic disease. In humans, rare Inhibin beta E (INHBE, activin E) loss-of-function variants are associated with a lower waist-to-hip ratio and protection from type 2 diabetes. Hepatic fatty acid sensing promotes INHBE expression during fasting and in obese individuals, yet it is unclear how the hepatokine activin E governs body shape and energy metabolism. Here, we uncover activin E as a regulator of adipose energy storage. By suppressing beta-agonist-induced lipolysis, activin E promotes fat accumulation and adipocyte hypertrophy and contributes to adipose dysfunction in mice. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that activin E elicits its effect on adipose tissue through ACVR1C, activating SMAD2/3 signaling and suppressing PPARG target genes. Conversely, loss of activin E or ACVR1C in mice increases fat utilization, lowers adiposity, and drives PPARG-regulated gene signatures indicative of healthy adipose function. Our studies identify activin E-ACVR1C as a metabolic rheostat promoting liver-adipose cross talk to restrain excessive fat breakdown and preserve fat mass during prolonged fasting, a mechanism that is maladaptive in obese individuals.
BACKGROUND: Immunotherapy has brought about a paradigm shift in the treatment of cancer. However, the majority of patients exhibit resistance or become refractory to immunotherapy, and the underlying mechanisms remain to be explored. METHODS: Sing-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA‑seq) datasets derived from 1 pretreatment and 1 posttreatment achieving pathological complete response (pCR) patient with lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) who received neoadjuvant immunotherapy were collected, and pySCENIC was used to find the gene regulatory network (GRN) between cell types and immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) response. A regulon predicting ICI response was identified and validated using large‑scale pan-cancer data, including a colorectal cancer scRNA‑seq dataset, a breast cancer scRNA‑seq dataset, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) pan-cancer cohort, and 5 ICI transcriptomic cohorts. Symphony reference mapping was performed to construct the myeloid cell map. RESULTS: Thirteen major cluster cell types were identified by comparing pretreatment and posttreatment patients, and the fraction of myeloid cells was higher in the posttreatment group (19.0% vs. 11.8%). A PPARG regulon (containing 23 target genes) was associated with ICI response, and its function was validated by a colorectal cancer scRNA‑seq dataset, a breast cancer scRNA‑seq dataset, TCGA pan-cancer cohort, and 5 ICI transcriptomic cohorts. Additionally, a myeloid cell map was developed, and cluster I, II, and III myeloid cells with high expression of PPARG were identified. Moreover, we constructed a website called PPARG ( https://pparg.online/PPARG/ or http://43.134.20.130:3838/PPARG/ ), which provides a powerful discovery tool and resource value for researchers. CONCLUSIONS: The PPARG regulon is a predictor of ICI response. The myeloid cell map enables the identification of PPARG subclusters in public scRNA-seq datasets and provides a powerful discovery tool and resource value.
BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is an immune-related skin disease notable for its chronic inflammation of the entire system. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is more prevalent in psoriasis than in the general population. Immune-mediated pathophysiologic processes may link these two diseases, but the mechanism is still unclear. This article aimed to explore potential molecular mechanisms in psoriasis and AD. METHODS: Gene expression profiling data of psoriasis and AD were acquired in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and single-sample GSEA (ssGSEA) were first applied in two datasets. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of two diseases were identified, and common DEGs were selected. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis was performed to explore common biological pathways. Signature transcription factors (STFs) were identified and their diagnostic values was calculated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis in the exploration cohort and verified in the validation cohort. The expression levels of STFs were further investigated in the validation cohort and the GTEx Portal Database. Additionally, four kinds of interaction analysis were performed: correlation analysis among STFs, gene-gene, chemical-protein, and protein-ligand interaction analyses. In the end, we predicted the transcription factor that potentially regulates STFs. RESULTS: Biosynthesis and metabolic pathways were enriched in GSEA analysis. In ssGSEA analysis, most immunoreaction gene lists exhibited differential enrichment in psoriasis cases, whereas three receptor-related gene lists did in AD. The KEGG analysis of common DEGs redetermined inflammatory and metabolic pathways essential in both diseases. 5 STFs (PPARG, ZFPM2, ZNF415, HLX, and ANHX) were screened from common DEGs. The ROC analysis indicated that all STFs have diagnostic values in two diseases, especially ZFPM2. The correlation analysis, gene-gene, chemical-protein, and protein-ligand interaction analyses suggested that STFs interplay and involve inflammation and aberrant metabolism. Eventually, ZNF384 was the predicted transcription factor regulating PPARG, ZNF415, HLX, and ANHX. CONCLUSIONS: The STFs (PPARG, ZFPM2, ZNF415, HLX, and ANHX) may increase the morbidity rate of AD in psoriasis by initiating a positive feedback loop of excessive inflammation and metabolic disorders. ZNF384 is a potential therapeutic target for psoriasis and AD by regulating PPARG, ZNF415, HLX, and ANHX.
T helper 9 (T(H)9) cells promote allergic tissue inflammation and express the type 2 cytokines, IL-9 and IL-13, as well as the transcription factor, PPAR-gamma. However, the functional role of PPAR-gamma in human T(H)9 cells remains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that PPAR-gamma drives activation-induced glycolysis, which, in turn, promotes the expression of IL-9, but not IL-13, in an mTORC1-dependent manner. In vitro and ex vivo experiments show that the PPAR-gamma-mTORC1-IL-9 pathway is active in T(H)9 cells in human skin inflammation. Additionally, we find dynamic regulation of tissue glucose levels in acute allergic skin inflammation, suggesting that in situ glucose availability is linked to distinct immunological functions in vivo. Furthermore, paracrine IL-9 induces expression of the lactate transporter, MCT1, in T(H) cells and promotes their aerobic glycolysis and proliferative capacity. Altogether, our findings uncover a hitherto unknown relationship between PPAR-gamma-dependent glucose metabolism and pathogenic effector functions in human T(H)9 cells.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Fatty acid-binding protein 4 (FABP4) plays a role in lipid metabolism and cardiovascular health. In this paper, we cover FABP4 biology, its implications in atherosclerosis from observational studies, genetic factors affecting FABP4 serum levels, and ongoing drug development to target FABP4 and offer insights into future FABP4 research. RECENT FINDINGS: FABP4 impacts cells through JAK2/STAT2 and c-kit pathways, increasing inflammatory and adhesion-related proteins. In addition, FABP4 induces angiogenesis and vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration. FABP4 is established as a reliable predictive biomarker for cardiovascular disease in specific at-risk groups. Genetic studies robustly link PPARG and FABP4 variants to FABP4 serum levels. Considering the potential effects on atherosclerotic lesion development, drug discovery programs have been initiated in search for potent inhibitors of FABP4. Elevated FABP4 levels indicate an increased cardiovascular risk and is causally related to acceleration of atherosclerotic disease, However, clinical trials for FABP4 inhibition are lacking, possibly due to concerns about available compounds' side effects. Further research on FABP4 genetics and its putative causal role in cardiovascular disease is needed, particularly in aging subgroups.
Mitophagy involves the selective elimination of defective mitochondria during chemotherapeutic stress to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis and sustain cancer growth. Here, we showed that CLU (clusterin) is localized to mitochondria to induce mitophagy controlling mitochondrial damage in oral cancer cells. Moreover, overexpression and knockdown of CLU establish its mitophagy-specific role, where CLU acts as an adaptor protein that coordinately interacts with BAX and LC3 recruiting autophagic machinery around damaged mitochondria in response to cisplatin treatment. Interestingly, CLU triggers class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PtdIns3K) activity around damaged mitochondria, and inhibition of mitophagic flux causes the accumulation of excessive mitophagosomes resulting in reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent apoptosis during cisplatin treatment in oral cancer cells. In parallel, we determined that PPARGC1A/PGC1alpha (PPARG coactivator 1 alpha) activates mitochondrial biogenesis during CLU-induced mitophagy to maintain the mitochondrial pool. Intriguingly, PPARGC1A inhibition through small interfering RNA (siPPARGC1A) and pharmacological inhibitor (SR-18292) treatment counteracts CLU-dependent cytoprotection leading to mitophagy-associated cell death. Furthermore, co-treatment of SR-18292 with cisplatin synergistically suppresses tumor growth in oral cancer xenograft models. In conclusion, CLU and PPARGC1A are essential for sustained cancer cell growth by activating mitophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis, respectively, and their inhibition could provide better therapeutic benefits against oral cancer.
CARM1 (coactivator associated arginine methyltransferase 1) has recently emerged as a powerful regulator of skeletal muscle biology. However, the molecular mechanisms by which the methyltransferase remodels muscle remain to be fully understood. In this study, carm1 skeletal muscle-specific knockout (mKO) mice exhibited lower muscle mass with dysregulated macroautophagic/autophagic and atrophic signaling, including depressed AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) site-specific phosphorylation of ULK1 (unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; Ser555) and FOXO3 (forkhead box O3; Ser588), as well as MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase)-induced inhibition of ULK1 (Ser757), along with AKT/protein kinase B site-specific suppression of FOXO1 (Ser256) and FOXO3 (Ser253). In addition to lower mitophagy and autophagy flux in skeletal muscle, carm1 mKO led to increased mitochondrial PRKN/parkin accumulation, which suggests that CARM1 is required for basal mitochondrial turnover and autophagic clearance. carm1 deletion also elicited PPARGC1A (PPARG coactivator 1 alpha) activity and a slower, more oxidative muscle phenotype. As such, these carm1 mKO-evoked adaptations disrupted mitophagy and autophagy induction during food deprivation and collectively served to mitigate fasting-induced muscle atrophy. Furthermore, at the threshold of muscle atrophy during food deprivation experiments in humans, skeletal muscle CARM1 activity decreased similarly to our observations in mice, and was accompanied by site-specific activation of ULK1 (Ser757), highlighting the translational impact of the methyltransferase in human skeletal muscle. Taken together, our results indicate that CARM1 governs mitophagic, autophagic, and atrophic processes fundamental to the maintenance and remodeling of muscle mass. Targeting the enzyme may provide new therapeutic approaches for mitigating skeletal muscle atrophy.Abbreviation: ADMA: asymmetric dimethylarginine; AKT/protein kinase B: AKT serine/threonine kinase; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; ATG: autophagy related; BECN1: beclin 1; BNIP3: BCL2 interacting protein 3; CARM1: coactivator associated arginine methyltransferase 1; Col: colchicine; CSA: cross-sectional area; CTNS: cystinosin, lysosomal cystine transporter; EDL: extensor digitorum longus; FBXO32/MAFbx: F-box protein 32; FOXO: forkhead box O; GAST: gastrocnemius; H(2)O(2): hydrogen peroxide; IMF: intermyofibrillar; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; MAP1LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; mKO: skeletal muscle-specific knockout; MMA: monomethylarginine; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MYH: myosin heavy chain; NFE2L2/NRF2: NFE2 like bZIP transcription factor 2; OXPHOS: oxidative phosphorylation; PABPC1/PABP1: poly(A) binding protein cytoplasmic 1; PPARGC1A/PGC-1alpha: PPARG coactivator 1 alpha; PRKN/parkin: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase; PRMT: protein arginine methyltransferase; Sal: saline; SDMA: symmetric dimethylarginine; SIRT1: sirtuin 1; SKP2: S-phase kinase associated protein 2; SMARCC1/BAF155: SWI/SNF related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily c member 1; SOL: soleus; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; SS: subsarcolemmal; TA: tibialis anterior; TFAM: transcription factor A, mitochondrial; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TOMM20: translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20; TRIM63/MuRF1: tripartite motif containing 63; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; VPS11: VPS11 core subunit of CORVET and HOPS complexes; WT: wild-type.
OBJECTIVE: Synovial fibrosis contributes to osteoarthritis (OA) pathology, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. We have observed increased microRNA-27b-3p (miR-27b-3p) levels in synovial fluid of patients with late-stage radiographic knee OA. Here, we investigated the contribution of miR-27b-3p to synovial fibrosis in patients with severe knee OA and in a mouse model of knee OA. METHODS: We stained synovium sections obtained from patients with radiographic knee OA scored according to the Kellgren/Lawrence scale and mice that underwent destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM) for miR-27b-3p using in situ hybridization. We examined the effects of intraarticular injection of miR-27b-3p mimic into naive mouse knee joints and intraarticular injection of a miR-27b-3p inhibitor into mouse knee joints after DMM. We performed transfection with miR-27b-3p mimic and miR-27b-3p inhibitor in human OA fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) using reverse transcriptase-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) array, RNA sequencing, RT-qPCR, Western blotting, immunofluorescence, and migration assays. RESULTS: We observed increased miR-27b-3p expression in the synovium from patients with knee OA and in mice with DMM-induced arthritis. Injection of the miR-27b-3p mimic in mouse knee joints induced a synovial fibrosis-like phenotype, increased synovitis scores, and increased COL1A1 and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) expression. In the mouse model of DMM-induced arthritis, injection of the miR-27b-3p inhibitor decreased alpha-SMA but did not change COL1A1 expression levels or synovitis scores. Transfection with the miR-27b-3p mimic in human OA FLS induced profibrotic responses, including increased migration and expression of key extracellular matrix (ECM) genes, but transfection with the miR-27b-3p inhibitor had the opposite effects. RNA sequencing identified a PPARG/ADAMTS8 signaling axis regulated by miR-27b-3p in OA FLS. Human OA FLS transfected with miR-27b-3p mimic and then treated with the PPARG agonist rosiglitazone or with ADAMTS8 small interfering RNA exhibited altered expression of select ECM genes. CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that miR-27b-3p has a key role in ECM regulation associated with synovial fibrosis during OA.
BACKGROUND: Metabolic cardiomyopathy (MCM), characterized by intramyocardial lipid accumulation, drives the progression to heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). Although evidence suggests that the mammalian silent information regulator 1 (Sirt1) orchestrates myocardial lipid metabolism, it is unknown whether its exogenous administration could avoid MCM onset. We investigated whether chronic treatment with recombinant Sirt1 (rSirt1) could halt MCM progression. METHODS: db/db mice, an established model of MCM, were supplemented with intraperitoneal rSirt1 or vehicle for 4 weeks and compared with their db/ + heterozygous littermates. At the end of treatment, cardiac function was assessed by cardiac ultrasound and left ventricular samples were collected and processed for molecular analysis. Transcriptional changes were evaluated using a custom PCR array. Lipidomic analysis was performed by mass spectrometry. H9c2 cardiomyocytes exposed to hyperglycaemia and treated with rSirt1 were used as in vitro model of MCM to investigate the ability of rSirt1 to directly target cardiomyocytes and modulate malondialdehyde levels and caspase 3 activity. Myocardial samples from diabetic and nondiabetic patients were analysed to explore Sirt1 expression levels and signaling pathways. RESULTS: rSirt1 treatment restored cardiac Sirt1 levels and preserved cardiac performance by improving left ventricular ejection fraction, fractional shortening and diastolic function (E/A ratio). In left ventricular samples from rSirt1-treated db/db mice, rSirt1 modulated the cardiac lipidome: medium and long-chain triacylglycerols, long-chain triacylglycerols, and triacylglycerols containing only saturated fatty acids were reduced, while those containing docosahexaenoic acid were increased. Mechanistically, several genes involved in lipid trafficking, metabolism and inflammation, such as Cd36, Acox3, Pparg, Ncoa3, and Ppara were downregulated by rSirt1 both in vitro and in vivo. In humans, reduced cardiac expression levels of Sirt1 were associated with higher intramyocardial triacylglycerols and PPARG-related genes. CONCLUSIONS: In the db/db mouse model of MCM, chronic exogenous rSirt1 supplementation rescued cardiac function. This was associated with a modulation of the myocardial lipidome and a downregulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism, trafficking, inflammation, and PPARG signaling. These findings were confirmed in the human diabetic myocardium. Treatments that increase Sirt1 levels may represent a promising strategy to prevent myocardial lipid abnormalities and MCM development.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists have been proposed as breast cancer preventives. Individuals who carry a mutated copy of BRCA1, DNA repair-associated gene, are at increased risk for development of breast cancer. Published data in the field suggest there could be interactions between peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma and BRCA1 that could influence the activity of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists for prevention. This review explores these possible interactions between peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists and BRCA1 and discusses feasible experimental directions to provide more definitive information on the potential connections.
BACKGROUND: The pathophysiology of ulcerative colitis (UC) is believed to be heavily influenced by immunology, which presents challenges for both diagnosis and treatment. The main aims of this study are to deepen our understanding of the immunological characteristics associated with the disease and to identify valuable biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment. METHODS: The UC datasets were sourced from the GEO database and were analyzed using unsupervised clustering to identify different subtypes of UC. Twelve machine learning algorithms and Deep learning model DNN were developed to identify potential UC biomarkers, with the LIME and SHAP methods used to explain the models' findings. PPI network is used to verify the identified key biomarkers, and then a network connecting super enhancers, transcription factors and genes is constructed. Single-cell sequencing technology was utilized to investigate the role of Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamma (PPARG) in UC and its correlation with macrophage infiltration. Furthermore, alterations in PPARG expression were validated through Western blot (WB) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) in both in vitro and in vivo experiments. RESULT: By utilizing bioinformatics techniques, we were able to pinpoint PPARG as a key biomarker for UC. The expression of PPARG was significantly reduced in cell models, UC animal models, and colitis models induced by dextran sodium sulfate (DSS). Interestingly, overexpression of PPARG was able to restore intestinal barrier function in H(2)O(2)-induced IEC-6 cells. Additionally, immune-related differentially expressed genes (DEGs) allowed for efficient classification of UC samples into neutrophil and mitochondrial metabolic subtypes. A diagnostic model incorporating the three disease-specific genes PPARG, PLA2G2A, and IDO1 demonstrated high accuracy in distinguishing between the UC group and the control group. Furthermore, single-cell analysis revealed that decreased PPARG expression in colon tissue may contribute to the polarization of M1 macrophages through activation of inflammatory pathways. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, PPARG, a gene related to immunity, has been established as a reliable potential biomarker for the diagnosis and treatment of UC. The immune response it controls plays a key role in the progression and development of UC by enabling interaction between characteristic biomarkers and immune infiltrating cells.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Full and partial synthetic agonists targeting the transcription factor PPARgamma are contained in FDA-approved insulin-sensitizing drugs and used for the treatment of metabolic syndrome-related dysfunctions. Here, we discuss the association between PPARG genetic variants and drug efficacy, as well as the role of alternative splicing and post-translational modifications as contributors to the complexity of PPARgamma signaling and to the effects of synthetic PPARgamma ligands. RECENT FINDINGS: PPARgamma regulates the transcription of several target genes governing adipocyte differentiation and glucose and lipid metabolism, as well as insulin sensitivity and inflammatory pathways. These pleiotropic functions confer great relevance to PPARgamma in physiological regulation of whole-body metabolism, as well as in the etiology of metabolic disorders. Accordingly, PPARG gene mutations, nucleotide variations, and post-translational modifications have been associated with adipose tissue disorders and the related risk of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Moreover, PPARgamma alternative splicing isoforms-generating dominant-negative isoforms mainly expressed in human adipose tissue-have been related to impaired PPARgamma activity and adipose tissue dysfunctions. Thus, multiple regulatory levels that contribute to PPARgamma signaling complexity may account for the beneficial as well as adverse effects of PPARgamma agonists. Further targeted analyses, taking into account all these aspects, are needed for better deciphering the role of PPARgamma in human pathophysiology, especially in insulin resistance and T2D. The therapeutic potential of full and partial PPARgamma synthetic agonists underlines the clinical significance of this nuclear receptor. PPARG mutations, polymorphisms, alternative splicing isoforms, and post-translational modifications may contribute to the pathogenesis of metabolic disorders, also influencing the responsiveness of pharmacological therapy. Therefore, in the context of the current evidence-based trend to personalized diabetes management, we highlight the need to decipher the intricate regulation of PPARgamma signaling to pave the way to tailored therapies in patients with insulin resistance and T2D.
De novo drug design aims to generate molecules from scratch that possess specific chemical and pharmacological properties. We present a computational approach utilizing interactome-based deep learning for ligand- and structure-based generation of drug-like molecules. This method capitalizes on the unique strengths of both graph neural networks and chemical language models, offering an alternative to the need for application-specific reinforcement, transfer, or few-shot learning. It enables the "zero-shot" construction of compound libraries tailored to possess specific bioactivity, synthesizability, and structural novelty. In order to proactively evaluate the deep interactome learning framework for protein structure-based drug design, potential new ligands targeting the binding site of the human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) subtype gamma are generated. The top-ranking designs are chemically synthesized and computationally, biophysically, and biochemically characterized. Potent PPAR partial agonists are identified, demonstrating favorable activity and the desired selectivity profiles for both nuclear receptors and off-target interactions. Crystal structure determination of the ligand-receptor complex confirms the anticipated binding mode. This successful outcome positively advocates interactome-based de novo design for application in bioorganic and medicinal chemistry, enabling the creation of innovative bioactive molecules.
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) thermogenesis affects energy balance, and thereby it has the potential to induce weight loss and to prevent obesity. Here, we document a macroautophagic/autophagic-dependent mechanism of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) activity regulation that induces brown adipose differentiation and thermogenesis and that is mediated by TP53INP2. Disruption of TP53INP2-dependent autophagy reduced brown adipogenesis in cultured cells. In vivo specific-tp53inp2 ablation in brown precursor cells or in adult mice decreased the expression of thermogenic and mature adipocyte genes in BAT. As a result, TP53INP2-deficient mice had reduced UCP1 content in BAT and impaired maximal thermogenic capacity, leading to lipid accumulation and to positive energy balance. Mechanistically, TP53INP2 stimulates PPARG activity and adipogenesis in brown adipose cells by promoting the autophagic degradation of NCOR1, a PPARG co-repressor. Moreover, the modulation of TP53INP2 expression in BAT and in human brown adipocytes suggests that this protein increases PPARG activity during metabolic activation of brown fat. In all, we have identified a novel molecular explanation for the contribution of autophagy to BAT energy metabolism that could facilitate the design of therapeutic strategies against obesity and its metabolic complications.
Obesity is a global and growing problem. The detrimental health consequences of obesity are significant and include co-morbidities such as diabetes, cancer and coronary heart disease. The marked rise in obesity observed over the last three decades suggests that behavioural and environmental factors underpin the chronic mismatch between energy intake and energy expenditure. However, not all individuals become obese, suggesting that there is considerable variation in responsiveness to 'obesogenic' environments. Some individuals defend easily against a propensity to accumulate fat mass and become overweight whilst others are predisposed to gain weight, possibly as a function of genotype. The genetic contribution to obesity is well established. Common obesity is polygenic, involving complex gene-gene and gene-environment interactions, and it is these interactions that produce the multi-factorial obese phenotypes. Candidate gene variants for polygenic obesity appear to disrupt pathways involved in the regulation of energy intake and expenditure and include adrenergic receptors, uncoupling proteins, PPARG, POMC, MC4R and a set of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FTO locus. Notably, the FTO gene is the most robust gene for common obesity characterised to date, and recent data shows that the FTO locus seems to confer risk of obesity through increasing energy intake and reduced satiety. Gene variants involved in pathways regulating addiction and reward behaviours may also play a role in predisposition to obesity. Understanding the routes through which the genotype is expressed will ultimately provide opportunities for developing strategies to intervene, as the interaction between genotype and environment is potentially modifiable through behaviour change.
Aromatase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of estrogens and a key risk factor for hormone receptor-positive breast cancer. In postmenopausal women, estrogens synthesized in adipose tissue promotes the growth of estrogen receptor positive breast cancers. Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) in adipose stromal cells (ASCs) leads to decreased expression of aromatase and differentiation of ASCs into adipocytes. Environmental chemicals can act as antagonists of PPARgamma and disrupt its function. This study aimed to test the hypothesis that PPARgamma antagonists can promote breast cancer by stimulating aromatase expression in human adipose tissue. Primary cells and explants from human adipose tissue as well as A41hWAT, C3H10T1/2, and H295R cell lines were used to investigate PPARgamma antagonist-stimulated effects on adipogenesis, aromatase expression, and estrogen biosynthesis. Selected antagonists inhibited adipocyte differentiation, preventing the adipogenesis-associated downregulation of aromatase. NMR spectroscopy confirmed direct interaction between the potent antagonist DEHPA and PPARgamma, inhibiting agonist binding. Short-term exposure of ASCs to PPARgamma antagonists upregulated aromatase only in differentiated cells, and a similar effect could be observed in human breast adipose tissue explants. Overexpression of PPARG with or without agonist treatment reduced aromatase expression in ASCs. The data suggest that environmental PPARgamma antagonists regulate aromatase expression in adipose tissue through two mechanisms. The first is indirect and involves inhibition of adipogenesis, while the second occurs more acutely.
BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a common autoimmune disease in clinical practice, and previous observational studies have suggested that PPARG agonists such as Pioglitazone may be potential therapeutic agents. However, due to interference from various confounding factors, different observational studies have not reached a unified conclusion. We aim to evaluate the potential use of PPARG agonists for treating psoriasis from a new perspective through drug-targeted Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study includes data on 8,876 individuals for acute myocardial infarction from GWAS, and LDL cholesterol data from 343,621 Europeans. FinnGen contributed psoriasis vulgaris data for 403,972 individuals. The DrugBank10 databases function to identify genes encoding protein products targeted by active constituents of lipid-modifying targets. A two-sample MR analysis and summary-data-based MR (SMR) analysis estimated the associations between expressions of drug target genes and symptoms of psoriasis vulgaris. A multivariable MR study was further conducted to examine if the observed association was direct association. RESULTS: SMR analysis revealed that enhanced PPARG gene expression in the blood (equivalent to a one standard deviation increase) was a protective factor for psoriasis vulgaris (beta = -0.2017, se = 0.0723, p = 0.0053). Besides, there exists an MR association between LDL mediated by PPARG and psoriasis vulgaris outcomes (beta = -3.9169, se = 0.5676, p = 5.17E-12). These results indicate that PPARG is a therapeutic target for psoriasis, suggesting that psoriasis may be a potential indication for PPARG agonists. CONCLUSION: This study confirms that therapeutic activation of PPARG helps suppress the development of psoriasis. Psoriasis may be a new indication for PPARG agonists, such as Pioglitazone. In the future, new anti-psoriatic drugs could be developed targeting PPARG.
