Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; Nuclear receptor that binds peroxisome proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids. Once activated by a ligand, the nuclear receptor binds to DNA specific PPAR response elements (PPRE) and modulates the transcription of its target genes, such as acyl-CoA oxidase. It therefore controls the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty acids. Key regulator of adipocyte differentiation and glucose homeostasis. ARF6 acts as a key regulator of the tissue-specific adipocyte P2 (aP2) enhancer. Acts as a critical regulator of gut ho [...] 
Gout is a disease caused by uric acid (UA) accumulation in the joints, causing inflammation. Two UA forms - monosodium urate (MSU) and soluble uric acid (sUA) have been shown to interact physically with inflammasomes, especially with the nod-like receptor (NLR) family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3), albeit the role of the immune response to UA is poorly understood, given that asymptomatic hyperuricemia does also exist. Macrophage phagocytosis of UA activate NLRP3, lead to cytokines release, and ultimately, lead to chemoattract neutrophils and lymphocytes to the gout flare joint spot. Genetic variants of inflammasome genes and of genes encoding their molecular partners may influence hyperuricemia and gout susceptibility, while also influencing other comorbidities such as metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular diseases. In this review, we summarize the inflammatory responses in acute and chronic gout, specifically focusing on innate immune cell mechanisms and genetic and epigenetic characteristics of participating molecules. Unprecedently, a novel UA binding protein - the neuronal apoptosis inhibitor protein (NAIP) - is suggested as responsible for the asymptomatic hyperuricemia paradox.Abbreviation: beta2-integrins: leukocyte-specific adhesion molecules; ABCG2: ATP-binding cassete family/breast cancer-resistant protein; ACR: American college of rheumatology; AIM2: absent in melanoma 2, type of pattern recognition receptor; ALPK1: alpha-protein kinase 1; ANGPTL2: angiopoietin-like protein 2; ASC: apoptosis-associated speck-like protein; BIR: baculovirus inhibitor of apoptosis protein repeat; BIRC1: baculovirus IAP repeat-containing protein 1; BIRC2: baculoviral IAP repeat-containing protein 2; C5a: complement anaphylatoxin; cAMP: cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CARD: caspase activation and recruitment domains; CARD8: caspase recruitment domain-containing protein 8; CASP1: caspase 1; CCL3: chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 3; CD14: cluster of differentiation 14; CD44: cluster of differentiation 44; Cg05102552: DNA-methylation site, usually cytosine followed by guanine nucleotides; contains arbitrary identification code; CIDEC: cell death-inducing DNA fragmentation factor-like effector family; CKD: chronic kidney disease; CNV: copy number variation; CPT1A: carnitine palmitoyl transferase - type 1a; CXCL1: chemokine (CXC motif) ligand 1; DAMPs: damage associated molecular patterns; DC: dendritic cells; DNMT(1): maintenance DNA methyltransferase; eQTL: expression quantitative trait loci; ERK1: extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1; ERK2: extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2; EULAR: European league against rheumatism; GMCSF: granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; GWAS: global wide association studies; H3K27me3: tri-methylation at the 27th lysine residue of the histone h3 protein; H3K4me1: mono-methylation at the 4th lysine residue of the histone h3 protein; H3K4me3: tri-methylation at the 4th lysine residue of the histone h3 protein; HOTAIR: human gene located between hoxc11 and hoxc12 on chromosome 12; IkappaBalpha: cytoplasmatic protein/Nf-kappab transcription inhibitor; IAP: inhibitory apoptosis protein; IFNgamma: interferon gamma; IL-1beta: interleukin 1 beta; IL-12: interleukin 12; IL-17: interleukin 17; IL18: interleukin 18; IL1R1: interleukin-1 receptor; IL-1Ra: interleukin-1 receptor antagonist; IL-22: interleukin 22; IL-23: interleukin 23; IL23R: interleukin 23 receptor; IL-33: interleukin 33; IL-6: interleukin 6; IMP: inosine monophosphate; INSIG1: insulin-induced gene 1; JNK1: c-jun n-terminal kinase 1; lncRNA: long non-coding ribonucleic acid; LRR: leucine-rich repeats; miR: mature non-coding microRNAs measuring from 20 to 24 nucleotides, animal origin; miR-1: miR followed by arbitrary identification code; miR-145: miR followed by arbitrary identification code; miR-146a: miR followed by arbitrary identification code, "a" stands for mir family; "a" family presents similar mir sequence to "b" family, but different precursors; miR-20b: miR followed by arbitrary identification code; "b" stands for mir family; "b" family presents similar mir sequence to "a" family, but different precursors; miR-221: miR - followed by arbitrary identification code; miR-221-5p: miR followed by arbitrary identification code; "5p" indicates different mature miRNAs generated from the 5' arm of the pre-miRNA hairpin; miR-223: miR followed by arbitrary identification code; miR-223-3p: mir followed by arbitrary identification code; "3p" indicates different mature miRNAs generated from the 3' arm of the pre-miRNA hairpin; miR-22-3p: miR followed by arbitrary identification code, "3p" indicates different mature miRNAs generated from the 3' arm of the pre-miRNA hairpin; MLKL: mixed lineage kinase domain-like pseudo kinase; MM2P: inductor of m2-macrophage polarization; MSU: monosodium urate; mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin; MyD88: myeloid differentiation primary response 88; n-3-PUFAs: n-3-polyunsaturated fatty-acids; NACHT: acronym for NAIP (neuronal apoptosis inhibitor protein), C2TA (MHC class 2 transcription activator), HET-E (incompatibility locus protein from podospora anserina) and TP1 (telomerase-associated protein); NAIP: neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (human); Naip1: neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein type 1 (murine); Naip5: neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein type 5 (murine); Naip6: neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein type 6 (murine); NBD: nucleotide-binding domain; Nek7: smallest NIMA-related kinase; NET: neutrophil extracellular traps; Nf-kappaB: nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b cells; NFIL3: nuclear-factor, interleukin 3 regulated protein; NIIMA: network of immunity in infection, malignancy, and autoimmunity; NLR: nod-like receptor; NLRA: nod-like receptor NLRA containing acidic domain; NLRB: nod-like receptor NLRA containing BIR domain; NLRC: nod-like receptor NLRA containing CARD domain; NLRC4: nod-like receptor family CARD domain containing 4; NLRP: nod-like receptor NLRA containing PYD domain; NLRP1: nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domain containing 1; NLRP12: nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin domain containing 12; NLRP3: nod-like receptor family pyrin domain containing 3; NOD2: nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain; NRBP1: nuclear receptor-binding protein; Nrf2: nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2; OR: odds ratio; P2X: group of membrane ion channels activated by the binding of extracellular; P2X7: p2x purinoceptor 7 gene; p38: member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family; PAMPs: pathogen associated molecular patters; PBMC: peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PGGT1B: geranylgeranyl transferase type-1 subunit beta; PHGDH: phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase; PI3-K: phospho-inositol; PPARgamma: peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; PPARGC1B: peroxisome proliferative activated receptor, gamma, coactivator 1 beta; PR3: proteinase 3 antigen; Pro-CASP1: inactive precursor of caspase 1; Pro-IL1beta: inactive precursor of interleukin 1 beta; PRR: pattern recognition receptors; PYD: pyrin domain; RAPTOR: regulatory associated protein of mTOR complex 1; RAS: renin-angiotensin system; REDD1: regulated in DNA damage and development 1; ROS: reactive oxygen species; rs000*G: single nuclear polymorphism, "*G" is related to snp where replaced nucleotide is guanine, usually preceded by an id number; SLC2A9: solute carrier family 2, member 9; SLC7A11: solute carrier family 7, member 11; SMA: smooth muscular atrophy; Smac: second mitochondrial-derived activator of caspases; SNP: single nuclear polymorphism; Sp3: specificity protein 3; ST2: serum stimulation-2; STK11: serine/threonine kinase 11; sUA: soluble uric acid; Syk: spleen tyrosine kinase; TAK1: transforming growth factor beta activated kinase; Th1: type 1 helper T cells; Th17: type 17 helper T cells; Th2: type 2 helper T cells; Th22: type 22 helper T cells; TLR: tool-like receptor; TLR2: toll-like receptor 2; TLR4: toll-like receptor 4; TNFalpha: tumor necrosis factor alpha; TNFR1: tumor necrosis factor receptor 1; TNFR2: tumor necrosis factor receptor 2; UA: uric acid; UBAP1: ubiquitin associated protein; ULT: urate-lowering therapy; URAT1: urate transporter 1; VDAC1: voltage-dependent anion-selective channel 1.
The treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is promising in recent years, but still facing critical challenges. The first targeted therapy, sorafenib, prolonged the overall survival by months. However, resistance often occurs, largely limits its efficacy. Sorafenib was found to target the electron transport chain complexes, which results in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). To maintain sorafenib resistance and further facilitate tumor progression, cancer cells develop strategies to overcome excessive ROS production and obtain resistance to oxidative stress-induced cell death. In the present study, we investigated the roles of ROS in sorafenib resistance, and found suppressed ROS levels and reductive redox states in sorafenib-resistant HCC cells. Mitochondria in sorafenib-resistant cells maintained greater functional and morphological integrity under the treatment of sorafenib. However, cellular oxygen consumption rate and mitochondria DNA content analyses revealed fewer numbers of mitochondria in sorafenib-resistant cells. Further investigation attributed this finding to decreased mitochondrial biogenesis, likely caused by the accelerated degradation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1beta (PGC1beta). Mechanistic dissection showed that upregulated UBQLN1 induced PGC1beta degradation in a ubiquitination-independent manner to attenuate mitochondrial biogenesis and ROS production in sorafenib-resistant cells under sorafenib treatment. Furthermore, clinical investigations further indicated that the patients with higher UBQLN1 levels experienced worse recurrence-free survival. In conclusion, we propose a novel mechanism involving mitochondrial biogenesis and ROS homeostasis in sorafenib resistance, which may offer new therapeutic targets and strategies for HCC patients.
Diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major complication of diabetes and is characterized by left ventricular dysfunction. Currently, there is a lack of effective treatments for DCM. Ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7) plays a key role in various diseases. However, whether USP7 is involved in DCM has not been established. In this study, we demonstrated that USP7 was upregulated in diabetic mouse hearts and NMCMs co-treated with HG+PA or H9c2 cells treated with PA. Abnormalities in diabetic heart morphology and function were reversed by USP7 silencing through conditional gene knockout or chemical inhibition. Proteomic analysis coupled with biochemical validation confirmed that PCG1beta was one of the direct protein substrates of USP7 and aggravated myocardial damage through coactivation of the PPARalpha signaling pathway. USP7 silencing restored the expression of fatty acid metabolism-related proteins and restored mitochondrial homeostasis by inhibiting mitochondrial fission and promoting fusion events. Similar effects were also observed in vitro. Our data demonstrated that USP7 promoted cardiometabolic metabolism disorders and mitochondrial homeostasis dysfunction via stabilizing PCG1beta and suggested that silencing USP7 may be a therapeutic strategy for DCM.
MicroRNA-378a (miR-378a), including miR-378a-3p and miR-378a-5p, are encoded in PPARGC1B gene. miR-378a is essential for tumorigenesis and is an independent prognostic biomarker for various malignant tumors. Aberrant expression of miR-378a affects several physiological and pathological processes, including proliferation, apoptosis, tumorigenesis, cancer invasion, metastasis, and therapeutic resistance. Interestingly, miR-378a has a dual functional role in either promoting or inhibiting tumorigenesis, independent of the cancer type. In this review, we comprehensively summarized the role and regulatory mechanisms of miR-378a in cancer development, hoping to provide a direction for its potential use in cancer therapy.
Metabolic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes or obesity, are the consequence of the disruption of the organism's metabolic pathways. The discovery of small non-coding RNAs-microRNAs (miRNAs)-as post-transcriptional gene regulators opened new doors for the development of novel strategies to combat said diseases. The two strands of miR-378a, miR-378a-3p, and miR-378a-5p are encoded in the Ppargc1b gene and have an active role in the regulation of several metabolic pathways such as mitochondrial metabolism and autophagy. Recent studies recognized miR-378a as an important regulator of energy and glucose homeostasis, highlighting it as a potential target for the improvement of metabolic dysregulation. In the present review, the current knowledge on miR-378a will be discussed with a particular emphasis on its biological functions and mechanisms of action in metabolism, mitochondria, and autophagy.
Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common malignant bone tumor with a poor prognosis. Here, we show that the nuclear receptor RORgamma may serve as a potential therapeutic target in OS. OS exhibits a hyperactivated oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) program, which fuels the carbon source to promote tumor progression. We found that RORgamma is overexpressed in OS tumors and is linked to hyperactivated OXPHOS. RORgamma induces the expression of PGC-1beta and physically interacts with it to activate the OXPHOS program by upregulating the expression of respiratory chain component genes. Inhibition of RORgamma strongly inhibits OXPHOS activation, downregulates mitochondrial functions, and increases ROS production, which results in OS cell apoptosis and ferroptosis. RORgamma inverse agonists strongly suppressed OS tumor growth and progression and sensitized OS tumors to chemotherapy. Taken together, our results indicate that RORgamma is a critical regulator of the OXPHOS program in OS and provides an effective therapeutic strategy for this deadly disease.
Emerging evidence suggest that macrophage and osteoclast are two competing differentiation outcomes from myeloid progenitors. In this review, we summarize recent advances in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling the polarization of macrophage and osteoclast. These include nuclear receptors/transcription factors such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and estrogen-related receptor alpha (ERRalpha), their transcription cofactor PPARgamma coactivator 1-beta (PGC-1beta), metabolic factors such as mitochondrial complex I (CI) component NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase iron-sulfur protein 4 (Ndufs4), as well as transmembrane receptors such as very-low-density-lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR). These molecular rheostats promote osteoclast differentiation but suppress proinflammatory macrophage activation and inflammation, by acting lineage-intrinsically, systemically or cross generation. These findings provide new insights to the understanding of the interactions between innate immunity and bone remodeling, advancing the field of osteoimmunology.
Studies in humans and in mice have highlighted the importance of short telomeres and impaired mitochondrial function in driving age-related functional decline in the heart. Although telomere and mitochondrial dysfunction have been viewed mainly in isolation, recent studies in telomerase-deficient mice have provided evidence for an intimate link between these two processes. Telomere dysfunction induces a profound p53-dependent repression of the master regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis and function, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator (PGC)-1alpha and PGC-1beta in the heart, which leads to bioenergetic compromise due to impaired oxidative phosphorylation and ATP generation. This telomere-p53-PGC mitochondrial/metabolic axis integrates many factors linked to heart aging including increased DNA damage, p53 activation, mitochondrial, and metabolic dysfunction and provides a molecular basis of how dysfunctional telomeres can compromise cardiomyocytes and stem cell compartments in the heart to precipitate cardiac aging.
PURPOSE: Previous studies showed that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) and PPARgamma coactivator1 family (PPARGC1A and PPARGC1B) gene single nucleotide variants (SNVs)were strongly associated with cancer susceptibility. The purpose of this study was to investigate the association of PPARgamma, PPARGC1A, and PPARGC1B variants with the risk of gastric cancer (GC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed a case-control study of 490 GC cases and 1,476 healthy controls from eastern China. PPARgamma rs1801282 C > G, rs3856806 C > T, PPARGC1A rs2970847 C > T, rs8192678 C > T and PPARGC1B rs7732671 G > C, rs17572019 G > A SNVs were selected to investigate the association between these SNVs and GC susceptibility. Genotypes of the SNVs were assessed by multiplex fluorescent PCR using a custom-by-design 48-Plex SNPscan(tm) Kit. RESULTS: The PPARgamma rs1801282 SNV was associated with a decreased risk for GC (GC vs. CC: odds ratio (OR) = 0.62, 95% confidence interval (95%CI) = 0.42-0.93, adjusted P = 0.019; GC + GG vs. GG: OR = 0.63 95%CI = 0.42-0.93, adjusted P = 0.019; respectively). In addition, stratified analysis revealed that the PPARgamma rs1801282 SNV was correlated with the risk of GC in subgroups of age >/= 61, no smoking, and no alcohol consuming. We also confirmed that the PPARgamma rs3856806 C > T SNV promoted the risk of GC in women. The PPARGC1A rs8192678 TT genotype decreased the susceptibility of GC in men. The PPARGC1A rs2970847 C > T SNV decreased the susceptibility of GC in the subgroup of BMI >/= 24 kg/m(2). The PPARGC1B rs7732671 G > C and rs17572019 G > A SNVs promoted the risk of GC in the subgroup of BMI >/= 24 kg/m(2). CONCLUSION: This study indicates that the PPARgamma, PPARGC1A, and PPARGC1B SNVs may be associated with the susceptibility of GC in eastern Chinese population. Future studies with larger populations, detailed H. pylori infection status for subgroup analysis, and functional study are needed to further clarify the relationship between these SNVs and GC risk.
BACKGROUND: The inflammatory response in gout disease is induced by the activation of NLR family pyrin domain-containing 3 (NLPR3) signaling pathway mediated by IL-1beta release. OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to determine the association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within NLRP3 inflammasome genes and gout susceptibility. METHODS: Mexican patients with gout from the National Rehabilitation Institute and General Hospital of Mexico were enrolled. A healthy control group was also included. We analyzed the frequency and allelic distribution of eight SNPs from seven different genes within the NLRP3 inflammasome signaling pathway: TLR4 rs2149356, CD14 rs2569190, NLRP3 rs3806268, NLRP3 rs10754558, CARD8 rs2043211, IL-1beta rs1143623, P2RX7 rs3751142, and PPARGC1B rs45520937 SNPs. RESULTS: We found that the SNP rs45520937 of PPARGC1B was associated with the risk of developing gout when it was analyzed using the dominant model (Odds ratio [OR] = 2.30; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.09-4.86; p = 0.030), and it is proposed that the adaptor molecule CD14 rs2569190 polymorphism could be associated with a lower risk of gout under an additive model (OR= 0.41;95% CI: 0.16-1.05; p = 0.064). No significant associations were identified for the remaining SNPs. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the PPARGC1B rs45520937 SNP is associated with gout susceptibility.
INTRODUCTION: The NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) signaling pathway has an important role in inflammation mediated by monosodium urate crystals in gout, and the characterization of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have helped to recognize disease susceptibility. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this review is to provide an overview of the potential role of the inflammasome gene SNPs as a susceptibility factor for gout, discussing the current evidence available. METHODS: This review analyzes the relevant literature in the field of inflammasome SNPs and gout published in the last 10 years. The systematic research was performed in 16 articles, including both the SNPs associated and those not associated with gout, with the goal to have a complete overview. RESULTS: Sixty-nine SNPs from 10 different genes have been reported in the literature. Of these, 13 SNPs present association with gout susceptibility in different populations, while 56 have been established as not being associated with the disease. CONCLUSIONS: This review is a summary of the potential role of inflammasome gene SNPs and their association with gout risk, all of them related with NLRP3 inflammasome signaling, suggesting these polymorphisms are susceptibility candidates and genetic markers for gout. From the 69 SNPs analyzed in the literature, 13 of them have been associated with gout as follows: NLRP3 (rs3806268 and rs10754558), CARD8 (rs2043211), TLR4 (rs2149356), CD14 (rs2569190), IL-1beta (rs1143623), P2RX7 (rs2230911, rs1653624, rs7958316 and rs17525809) and PPARGC1B (rs45520937, rs10491360 and rs7712296) in different populations.
The transcriptional coactivators PGC-1alpha and PGC-1beta are master regulators of oxidative phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation gene expression. Pressure overload hypertrophy and heart failure are associated with repressed PGC-1alpha and PGC-1beta gene expression. Maintaining expression of PGC-1alpha and -beta preserves contractile function in response to a pathological increase in workload. Here, we discuss the regulation of PGC-1 proteins under conditions of pressure overload hypertrophy and heart failure.
Diurnal metabolic rhythms add an important temporal dimension to metabolic homeostasis in mammals. Although it remains a challenge to untangle the intricate networks of crosstalk among the body clock, nutrient signalling and tissue metabolism, there is little doubt that the rhythmic nature of nutrient and energy metabolism is a central aspect of metabolic physiology. Disruption of the synchrony between clock and metabolism has been causally linked to diverse pathophysiological states. As such, restoring the rhythmicity of body physiology and therapeutic targeting directed at specific time windows during the day may have important implications in human health and medicine. In this review, we summarize recent findings on the integration of hepatic glucose metabolism and the body clock through a regulatory network centred on the PPARgamma coactivator 1 (PGC-1) transcriptional coactivators. In addition, we discuss the transcriptional mechanisms underlying circadian control of the autophagy gene programme and autophagy in the liver.
Normal tissues accumulate genetic changes with age, but it is unknown if somatic mutations promote clonal expansion of non-malignant cells in the setting of chronic degenerative diseases. Exome sequencing of diseased liver samples from 82 patients revealed a complex mutational landscape in cirrhosis. Additional ultra-deep sequencing identified recurrent mutations in PKD1, PPARGC1B, KMT2D, and ARID1A. The number and size of mutant clones increased as a function of fibrosis stage and tissue damage. To interrogate the functional impact of mutated genes, a pooled in vivo CRISPR screening approach was established. In agreement with sequencing results, examination of 147 genes again revealed that loss of Pkd1, Kmt2d, and Arid1a promoted clonal expansion. Conditional heterozygous deletion of these genes in mice was also hepatoprotective in injury assays. Pre-malignant somatic alterations are often viewed through the lens of cancer, but we show that mutations can promote regeneration, likely independent of carcinogenesis.
The beating heart consumes more ATP per weight than any other organ. The machineries required for this are many and complex. Fuel and oxygen must be transported via the vasculature, absorbed by cardiomyocytes, broken down, and regulated to match cellular demands. Much of this occurs in mitochondria, which comprise fully one third of cardiac mass. The PGC-1 proteins are transcriptional coactivators that have emerged as powerful orchestrators of these numerous processes, ensuring their proper coregulation in response to intracellular and extracellular cues. An important role for PGC-1s in cardiac function has been revealed over the past few years, and more recently interest in their role in the vasculature has been burgeoning. We review this literature, focusing on recent developments.
Recently, the HLA-DQA1*05 (rs2097432) genetic variation has been reported to be linked to early infliximab (IFX) treatment failure in the Caucasian Crohn's disease (CD) population, but that evidence is scarce in the Asian population. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between rs2097432 and the cumulative discontinuation-free time of IFX (IFX persistence) in 189 Japanese biologics-naive CD patients. We also performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to discover novel genetic predictors for IFX persistence. The C allele of rs2097432 significantly increased the risk of early discontinuation of IFX [Hazard ratio (HR) = 2.23 and P-value = 0.026]. In GWAS, one locus tagged by rs73277969, located upstream of PPARGC1B which attenuates macrophage-mediated inflammation, reached genome-wide significance (HR = 6.04 and P-value = 7.93E-9). Pathway analysis suggested association of signaling by PDGF and FCGR activation signaling with IFX persistence (P-value = 8.56E-5 and 5.80E-4, respectively).
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Elevated urinary 11-dehydro thromboxane B(2) (TxB(2)), a measure of thromboxane A(2) formation in vivo, predicts future atherothrombotic events. To further understand this relationship, the genetic determinants of 11-dehydro TxB(2) and their associations with cardiovascular morbidity were investigated in this study. METHODS: Genome-wide and targeted genetic association studies of urinary 11-dehydro TxB(2) were conducted in 806 Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial (ASCOT) participants. RESULTS: The strongest associations were in PPARGC1B (rs4235745, rs32582, rs10515638) and CNTN4 (rs10510230, rs4684343), these 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were independently associated with 11-dehydro TxB(2) formation. Haplotypes of 11-dehydro TxB(2) increasing alleles for both PPARGC1B and CNTN4 were significantly associated with 11-dehydro TxB(2), explaining 5.2% and 4.5% of the variation in the whole cohort, and 8.8% and 7.9% in participants not taking aspirin, respectively. In a second ASCOT population (n = 6199), addition of these 5 SNPs significantly improved the covariate-only Cox proportional hazards model for cardiovascular events (chisq = 14.7, p=0.01). Two of the risk alleles associated with increased urinary 11-dehydro TxB(2) were individually associated with greater incidences of cardiovascular events - rs10515638 (HR = 1.31, p=0.01) and rs10510230 (HR = 1.25, p=0.007); effect sizes were larger in those not taking aspirin. CONCLUSIONS: PPARGC1B and CNTN4 genotypes are associated with elevated thromboxane A(2) formation and with an excess of cardiovascular events. Aspirin appears to blunt these associations. If specific protection of PPARGC1B and CNTN4 variant carriers by aspirin is confirmed by additional studies, PPARGC1B and CNTN4 genotyping could potentially assist in clinical decision making regarding the use of aspirin in primary prevention.
CONTEXT: Breast cancer (BC) risk has been differentially associated with urinary levels of some phthalate metabolites. OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether PPARgamma and PPARGC1B polymorphisms modulate these associations. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 208 BC cases were age-matched with 220 population controls. Phthalate metabolites were determined by HPLC-MS. PPARgamma Pro12Ala (rs1801281) and PPARGC1B Ala203Pro (rs7732671) and Val279Ile (rs17572019) were genotyped. RESULTS: The association between mono-(2-ethyl-5-hydroxyhexyl) phthalate (MEHHP) and BC risk was positively modified in PPARgamma Pro12Ala C carriers. The association with mono-iso-butyl phthalate (MiBP) in PPARGC1B Ala203Pro G carriers was negatively modified. CONCLUSION: PPARgamma and PPARGC1B polymorphisms modulate the association between phthalate exposure and BC risk.
Chronic disruption of energy balance, where energy intake exceeds expenditure, is a major risk factor for the development of metabolic syndrome. The latter is characterized by a constellation of symptoms including obesity, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, hypertension, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Altered expression of genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism as well as mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of these disorders. The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 (PGC-1) family of transcriptional coactivators is emerging as a hub linking nutritional and hormonal signals and energy metabolism. PGC-1alpha and PGC-1beta are highly responsive to environmental cues and coordinate metabolic gene programs through interaction with transcription factors and chromatin-remodeling proteins. PGC-1alpha has been implicated in the pathogenic conditions including obesity, type 2 diabetes, neurodegeneration, and cardiomyopathy, whereas PGC-1beta plays an important role in plasma lipoprotein homeostasis and serves as a hepatic target for niacin, a potent hypotriglyceridemic drug. Here, we review recent advances in the identification of physiological and pathophysiological contexts involving PGC-1 coactivators, and also discuss their implications for therapeutic development.
