Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta; Ligand-activated transcription factor. Receptor that binds peroxisome proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids. Has a preference for poly-unsaturated fatty acids, such as gamma- linoleic acid and eicosapentanoic acid. Once activated by a ligand, the receptor binds to promoter elements of target genes. Regulates the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty acids. Functions as transcription activator for the acyl-CoA oxidase gene. Decreases expression of NPC1L1 once activated by a ligand. Belongs to the nuclear hormone [...] 
Autophagic pathways cross with lipid homeostasis and thus provide energy and essential building blocks that are indispensable for liver functions. Energy deficiencies are compensated by breaking down lipid droplets (LDs), intracellular organelles that store neutral lipids, in part by a selective type of autophagy, referred to as lipophagy. The process of lipophagy does not appear to be properly regulated in fatty liver diseases (FLDs), an important risk factor for the development of hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). Here we provide an overview on our current knowledge of the biogenesis and functions of LDs, and the mechanisms underlying their lysosomal turnover by autophagic processes. This review also focuses on nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), a specific type of FLD characterized by steatosis, chronic inflammation and cell death. Particular attention is paid to the role of macroautophagy and macrolipophagy in relation to the parenchymal and non-parenchymal cells of the liver in NASH, as this disease has been associated with inappropriate lipophagy in various cell types of the liver.Abbreviations: ACAT: acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase; ACAC/ACC: acetyl-CoA carboxylase; AKT: AKT serine/threonine kinase; ATG: autophagy related; AUP1: AUP1 lipid droplet regulating VLDL assembly factor; BECN1/Vps30/Atg6: beclin 1; BSCL2/seipin: BSCL2 lipid droplet biogenesis associated, seipin; CMA: chaperone-mediated autophagy; CREB1/CREB: cAMP responsive element binding protein 1; CXCR3: C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 3; DAGs: diacylglycerols; DAMPs: danger/damage-associated molecular patterns; DEN: diethylnitrosamine; DGAT: diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase; DNL: de novo lipogenesis; EHBP1/NACSIN (EH domain binding protein 1); EHD2/PAST2: EH domain containing 2; CoA: coenzyme A; CCL/chemokines: chemokine ligands; CCl(4:) carbon tetrachloride; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ESCRT: endosomal sorting complexes required for transport; FA: fatty acid; FFAs: free fatty acids; FFC: high saturated fats, fructose and cholesterol; FGF21: fibroblast growth factor 21; FITM/FIT: fat storage inducing transmembrane protein; FLD: fatty liver diseases; FOXO: forkhead box O; GABARAP: GABA type A receptor-associated protein; GPAT: glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; HDAC6: histone deacetylase 6; HECT: homologous to E6-AP C-terminus; HFCD: high fat, choline deficient; HFD: high-fat diet; HSCs: hepatic stellate cells; HSPA8/HSC70: heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 8; ITCH/AIP4: itchy E3 ubiquitin protein ligase; KCs: Kupffer cells; LAMP2A: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2A; LDs: lipid droplets; LDL: low density lipoprotein; LEP/OB: leptin; LEPR/OBR: leptin receptor; LIPA/LAL: lipase A, lysosomal acid type; LIPE/HSL: lipase E, hormone sensitive type; LIR: LC3-interacting region; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; LSECs: liver sinusoidal endothelial cells; MAGs: monoacylglycerols; MAPK: mitogen-activated protein kinase; MAP3K5/ASK1: mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 5; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MCD: methionine-choline deficient; MGLL/MGL: monoglyceride lipase; MLXIPL/ChREBP: MLX interacting protein like; MTORC1: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1; NAFLD: nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; NAS: NAFLD activity score; NASH: nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; NPC: NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter; NR1H3/LXRalpha: nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group H member 3; NR1H4/FXR: nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group H member 4; PDGF: platelet derived growth factor; PIK3C3/VPS34: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PLIN: perilipin; PNPLA: patatin like phospholipase domain containing; PNPLA2/ATGL: patatin like phospholipase domain containing 2; PNPLA3/adiponutrin: patatin like phospholipase domain containing 3; PPAR: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor; PPARA/PPARalpha: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha; PPARD/PPARdelta: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor delta; PPARG/PPARgamma: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma; PPARGC1A/PGC1alpha: PPARG coactivator 1 alpha; PRKAA/AMPK: protein kinase AMP-activated catalytic subunit; PtdIns3K: class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PtdIns3P: phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate; PTEN: phosphatase and tensin homolog; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SE: sterol esters; SIRT1: sirtuin 1; SPART/SPG20: spartin; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; SREBF1/SREBP1c: sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 1; TAGs: triacylglycerols; TFE3: transcription factor binding to IGHM enhancer 3; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TGFB1/TGFbeta: transforming growth factor beta 1; Ub: ubiquitin; UBE2G2/UBC7: ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 G2; ULK1/Atg1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; USF1: upstream transcription factor 1; VLDL: very-low density lipoprotein; VPS: vacuolar protein sorting; WIPI: WD-repeat domain, phosphoinositide interacting; WDR: WD repeat domain.
OBJECTIVE: Different serum lipids and lipid-modifying targets should affect the risk of cholelithiasis differently, however, whether such effects are causal is still controversial and we aimed to answer this question. DESIGN: We prospectively estimated the associations of four serum lipids with cholelithiasis in UK Biobank using the Cox proportional hazard model, including total cholesterol (TC), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and triglycerides (TG). Furthermore, we estimated the causal associations of the genetically predicted serum lipids with cholelithiasis in Europeans using the Mendelian randomisation (MR) design. Finally, both drug-target MR and colocalisation analyses were performed to estimate the lipid-modifying targets' effects on cholelithiasis, including HMGCR, NPC1L1, PCSK9, APOB, LDLR, ACLY, ANGPTL3, MTTP, PPARA, PPARD and PPARG. RESULTS: We found that serum levels of LDL-C and HDL-C were inversely associated with cholelithiasis risk and such associations were linear. However, the serum level of TC was non-linearly associated with cholelithiasis risk where lower TC was associated with higher risk of cholelithiasis, and the serum TG should be in an inverted 'U-shaped' relationship with it. The MR analyses supported that lower TC and higher TG levels were two independent causal risk factors. The drug-target MR analysis suggested that HMGCR inhibition should reduce the risk of cholelithiasis, which was corroborated by colocalisation analysis. CONCLUSION: Lower serum TC can causally increase the risk of cholelithiasis. The cholelithiasis risk would increase with the elevation of serum TG but would decrease when exceeding 2.57 mmol/L. The use of HMGCR inhibitors should prevent its risk.
beta‑catenin/CTNNB1 is an intracellular scaffold protein that interacts with adhesion molecules (E‑cadherin/CDH1, N‑cadherin/CDH2, VE‑cadherin/CDH5 and alpha‑catenins), transmembrane‑type mucins (MUC1/CD227 and MUC16/CA125), signaling regulators (APC, AXIN1, AXIN2 and NHERF1/EBP50) and epigenetic or transcriptional regulators (BCL9, BCL9L, CREBBP/CBP, EP300/p300, FOXM1, MED12, SMARCA4/BRG1 and TCF/LEF). Gain‑of‑function CTTNB1 mutations are detected in bladder cancer, colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, liver cancer, lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, prostate cancer and uterine cancer, whereas loss‑of‑function CTNNB1 mutations are also detected in human cancer. ABCB1, ALDH1A1, ASCL2, ATF3, AXIN2, BAMBI, CCND1, CD44, CLDN1, CTLA4, DKK1, EDN1, EOMES, FGF18, FGF20, FZD7, IL10, JAG1, LEF1, LGR5, MITF, MSX1, MYC, NEUROD1, NKD1, NODAL, NOTCH2, NOTUM, NRCAM, OPN, PAX3, PPARD, PTGS2, RNF43, SNAI1, SP5, TCF7, TERT, TNFRSF19, VEGFA and ZNRF3 are representative beta‑catenin target genes. beta‑catenin signaling is involved in myofibroblast activation and subsequent pulmonary fibrosis, in addition to other types of fibrosis. beta‑catenin and NF‑kappaB signaling activation are involved in field cancerization in the stomach associated with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection and in the liver associated with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and other etiologies. beta‑catenin‑targeted therapeutics are functionally classified into beta‑catenin inhibitors targeting upstream regulators (AZ1366, ETC‑159, G007‑LK, GNF6231, ipafricept, NVP‑TNKS656, rosmantuzumab, vantictumab, WNT‑C59, WNT974 and XAV939), beta‑catenin inhibitors targeting protein‑protein interactions (CGP049090, CWP232228, E7386, ICG‑001, LF3 and PRI‑724), beta‑catenin inhibitors targeting epigenetic regulators (PKF118‑310), beta‑catenin inhibitors targeting mediator complexes (CCT251545 and cortistatin A) and beta‑catenin inhibitors targeting transmembrane‑type transcriptional outputs, including CD44v6, FZD7 and LGR5. Eradicating H. pylori and HCV is the optimal approach for the first‑line prevention of gastric cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), respectively. However, beta‑catenin inhibitors may be applicable for the prevention of organ fibrosis, second‑line HCC prevention and treating beta‑catenin‑driven cancer. The multi‑layered prevention and treatment strategy of beta‑catenin‑related human diseases is necessary for the practice of personalized medicine and implementation of precision medicine.
The Warburg effect is a tumor-related phenomenon that could potentially be targeted therapeutically. Here, we showed that glioblastoma (GBM) cultures and patients' tumors harbored super-enhancers in several genes related to the Warburg effect. By conducting a transcriptome analysis followed by ChIP-Seq coupled with a comprehensive metabolite analysis in GBM models, we found that FDA-approved global (panobinostat, vorinostat) and selective (romidepsin) histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors elicited metabolic reprogramming in concert with disruption of several Warburg effect-related super-enhancers. Extracellular flux and carbon-tracing analyses revealed that HDAC inhibitors blunted glycolysis in a c-Myc-dependent manner and lowered ATP levels. This resulted in the engagement of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) driven by elevated fatty acid oxidation (FAO), rendering GBM cells dependent on these pathways. Mechanistically, interference with HDAC1/-2 elicited a suppression of c-Myc protein levels and a concomitant increase in 2 transcriptional drivers of oxidative metabolism, PGC1alpha and PPARD, suggesting an inverse relationship. Rescue and ChIP experiments indicated that c-Myc bound to the promoter regions of PGC1alpha and PPARD to counteract their upregulation driven by HDAC1/-2 inhibition. Finally, we demonstrated that combination treatment with HDAC and FAO inhibitors extended animal survival in patient-derived xenograft model systems in vivo more potently than single treatments in the absence of toxicity.
Pluripotent stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes (PSC-CMs) provide an unprecedented opportunity to study human heart development and disease, but they are functionally and structurally immature. Here, we induce efficient human PSC-CM (hPSC-CM) maturation through metabolic-pathway modulations. Specifically, we find that peroxisome-proliferator-associated receptor (PPAR) signaling regulates glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation (FAO) in an isoform-specific manner. While PPARalpha (PPARa) is the most active isoform in hPSC-CMs, PPARdelta (PPARd) activation efficiently upregulates the gene regulatory networks underlying FAO, increases mitochondrial and peroxisome content, enhances mitochondrial cristae formation, and augments FAO flux. PPARd activation further increases binucleation, enhances myofibril organization, and improves contractility. Transient lactate exposure, which is frequently used for hPSC-CM purification, induces an independent cardiac maturation program but, when combined with PPARd activation, still enhances oxidative metabolism. In summary, we investigate multiple metabolic modifications in hPSC-CMs and identify a role for PPARd signaling in inducing the metabolic switch from glycolysis to FAO in hPSC-CMs.
Bone marrow niche cells have been reported to fine-tune hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) stemness via direct interaction or secreted components. Nevertheless, how niche cells control HSC activities remains largely unknown. We previously showed that angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) can support the ex vivo expansion of HSCs by binding to human leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor B2. However, how ANGPTL2 from specific niche cell types regulates HSC activities under physiological conditions is still not clear. Herein, we generated an Angptl2-flox/flox transgenic mouse line and conditionally deleted Angptl2 expression in several niche cells, including Cdh5+ or Tie2+ endothelial cells, Prx1+ mesenchymal stem cells, and Pf4+ megakaryocytes, to evaluate its role in the regulation of HSC fate. Interestingly, we demonstrated that only endothelial cell-derived ANGPTL2 and not ANGPTL2 from other niche cell types plays important roles in supporting repopulation capacity, quiescent status, and niche localization. Mechanistically, ANGPTL2 enhances peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor D (PPARD) expression to transactivate G0s2 to sustain the perinuclear localization of nucleolin to prevent HSCs from entering the cell cycle. These findings reveal that endothelial cell-derived ANGPTL2 serves as a critical niche component to maintain HSC stemness, which may benefit the understanding of stem cell biology in bone marrow niches and the development of a unique strategy for the ex vivo expansion of HSCs.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gut dysbiosis and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are implicated in primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) pathogenesis. However, it remains unknown whether gut microbiota or their metabolites can modulate MDSCs homeostasis to rectify immune dysregulation in PBC. METHODS: We measured fecal short-chain fatty acids levels using targeted gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and analyzed circulating MDSCs using flow cytometry in 2 independent PBC cohorts. Human and murine MDSCs were differentiated in vitro in the presence of butyrate, followed by transcriptomic, epigenetic (CUT&Tag-seq and chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative polymerase chain reaction), and metabolic (untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, mitochondrial stress test, and isotope tracing) analyses. The in vivo role of butyrate-MDSCs was evaluated in a 2-octynoic acid-bovine serum albumin-induced cholangitis murine model. RESULTS: Decreased butyrate levels and defective MDSC function were found in patients with incomplete response to ursodeoxycholic acid, compared with those with adequate response. Butyrate induced expansion and suppressive activity of MDSCs in a manner dependent on PPARD-driven fatty acid beta-oxidation (FAO). Pharmaceutical inhibition or genetic knockdown of the FAO rate-limiting gene CPT1A abolished the effect of butyrate. Furthermore, butyrate inhibited HDAC3 function, leading to enhanced acetylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 at promoter regions of PPARD and FAO genes in MDSCs. Therapeutically, butyrate administration alleviated immune-mediated cholangitis in mice via MDSCs, and adoptive transfer of butyrate-treated MDSCs also displayed protective efficacy. Importantly, reduced expression of FAO genes and impaired mitochondrial physiology were detected in MDSCs from ursodeoxycholic acid nonresponders, and their impaired suppressive function was restored by butyrate. CONCLUSIONS: We identify a critical role for butyrate in modulation of MDSC homeostasis by orchestrating epigenetic and metabolic crosstalk, proposing a novel therapeutic strategy for treating PBC.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the main pathological type of liver cancer, is linked to risk factors such as viral hepatitis, alcohol intake and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Recent advances have greatly improved our understanding that NAFLD is playing a major risk factor for HCC. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are a class of transcription factors divided into three subtypes: PPARalpha (PPARA), PPARdelta/beta (PPARD) and PPARgamma (PPARG). As important nuclear receptors, PPARs are involved in many physiological processes, and PPARs can improve NAFLD by regulating lipid metabolism, accelerating fatty acid oxidation and inhibiting inflammation. In recent years, some studies have shown that PPARs can participate in the occurrence and development of HCC by regulating metabolic pathways. In addition, PPAR modulators have been reported to inhibit the proliferation and metastasis of HCC cells and can enhance the curative effect of conventional treatments. This article reviews the role of PPARs in the occurrence and development of HCC, as well as its value in the diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of HCC, in order to provide directions for future research.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPARD) regulates cell metabolism, proliferation, and inflammation and has been associated with gastric and other cancers. Villin-positive epithelial cells are a small population of quiescent gastric progenitor cells. We expressed PPARD from a villin promoter to investigate the role of these cells and PPARD in development of gastric cancer. METHODS: We analyzed gastric tissues from mice that express the Ppard (PPARD1 and PPARD2 mice) from a villin promoter, and mice that did not carry this transgene (controls), by histology and immunohistochemistry. We performed cell lineage-tracing experiments and analyzed the microbiomes, chemokine and cytokine production, and immune cells and transcriptomes of stomachs of these mice. We also performed immunohistochemical analysis of PPARD levels in 2 sets of human gastric tissue microarrays. RESULTS: Thirty-eight percent of PPARD mice developed spontaneous, invasive gastric adenocarcinomas, with severe chronic inflammation. Levels of PPARD were increased in human gastric cancer tissues, compared with nontumor tissues, and associated with gastric cancer stage and grade. We found an inverse correlation between level of PPARD in tumor tissue and patient survival time. Gastric microbiomes from PPARD and control mice did not differ significantly. Lineage-tracing experiments identified villin-expressing gastric progenitor cells (VGPCs) as the origin of gastric tumors in PPARD mice. In these mice, PPARD up-regulated CCL20 and CXCL1, which increased infiltration of the gastric mucosa by immune cells. Immune cell production of inflammatory cytokines promoted chronic gastric inflammation and expansion and transformation of VGPCs, leading to tumorigenesis. We identified a positive-feedback loop between PPARD and interferon gamma signaling that sustained gastric inflammation to induce VGPC transformation and gastric carcinogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: We found PPARD overexpression in VPGCs to result in inflammation, dysplasia, and tumor formation. PPARD and VGPCs might be therapeutic targets for stomach cancer.
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is a group of malignant diseases of the haematopoietic system. AML occurs as the result of mutations in haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, which upregulate Wnt signalling through a variety of mechanisms. Other mechanisms of Wnt activation in AML have been described such as Wnt antagonist inactivation through promoter methylation. Wnt signalling is necessary for the maintenance of leukaemic stem cells. Several molecules involved in or modulating Wnt signalling have a prognostic value in AML. These include: beta-catenin, LEF-1, phosphorylated-GSK3beta, PSMD2, PPARD, XPNPEP, sFRP2, RUNX1, AXIN2, PCDH17, CXXC5, LLGL1 and PTK7. Targeting Wnt signalling for tumour eradication is an approach that is being explored in haematological and solid tumours. A number of preclinical studies confirms its feasibility, albeit, so far no reliable clinical trial data are available to prove its utility and efficacy.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Elafibranor is an agonist of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-delta. Elafibranor improves insulin sensitivity, glucose homeostasis, and lipid metabolism and reduces inflammation. We assessed the safety and efficacy of elafibranor in an international, randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial of patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). METHODS: Patients with NASH without cirrhosis were randomly assigned to groups given elafibranor 80 mg (n = 93), elafibranor 120 mg (n = 91), or placebo (n = 92) each day for 52 weeks at sites in Europe and the United States. Clinical and laboratory evaluations were performed every 2 months during this 1-year period. Liver biopsies were then collected and patients were assessed 3 months later. The primary outcome was resolution of NASH without fibrosis worsening, using protocol-defined and modified definitions. Data from the groups given the different doses of elafibranor were compared with those from the placebo group using step-down logistic regression, adjusting for baseline nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score. RESULTS: In intention-to-treat analysis, there was no significant difference between the elafibranor and placebo groups in the protocol-defined primary outcome. However, NASH resolved without fibrosis worsening in a higher proportion of patients in the 120-mg elafibranor group vs the placebo group (19% vs 12%; odds ratio = 2.31; 95% confidence interval: 1.02-5.24; P = .045), based on a post-hoc analysis for the modified definition. In post-hoc analyses of patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease activity score >/=4 (n = 234), elafibranor 120 mg resolved NASH in larger proportions of patients than placebo based on the protocol definition (20% vs 11%; odds ratio = 3.16; 95% confidence interval: 1.22-8.13; P = .018) and the modified definitions (19% vs 9%; odds ratio = 3.52; 95% confidence interval: 1.32-9.40; P = .013). Patients with NASH resolution after receiving elafibranor 120 mg had reduced liver fibrosis stages compared with those without NASH resolution (mean reduction of 0.65 +/- 0.61 in responders for the primary outcome vs an increase of 0.10 +/- 0.98 in nonresponders; P < .001). Liver enzymes, lipids, glucose profiles, and markers of systemic inflammation were significantly reduced in the elafibranor 120-mg group vs the placebo group. Elafibranor was well tolerated and did not cause weight gain or cardiac events, but did produce a mild, reversible increase in serum creatinine (effect size vs placebo: increase of 4.31 +/- 1.19 mumol/L; P < .001). CONCLUSIONS: A post-hoc analysis of data from trial of patients with NASH showed that elafibranor (120 mg/d for 1 year) resolved NASH without fibrosis worsening, based on a modified definition, in the intention-to-treat analysis and in patients with moderate or severe NASH. However, the predefined end point was not met in the intention to treat population. Elafibranor was well tolerated and improved patients' cardiometabolic risk profile. ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT01694849.
The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are a group of nuclear receptors that function as transcription factors regulating the expression of genes involved in cellular differentiation, development, metabolism and also tumorigenesis. Three PPAR isotypes (alpha, beta/delta and gamma) have been identified, among which PPARbeta/delta is the most difficult to functionally examine due to its tissue-specific diversity in cell fate determination, energy metabolism and housekeeping activities. PPARbeta/delta acts both in a ligand-dependent and -independent manner. The specific type of regulation, activation or repression, is determined by many factors, among which the type of ligand, the presence/absence of PPARbeta/delta-interacting corepressor or coactivator complexes and PPARbeta/delta protein post-translational modifications play major roles. Recently, new global approaches to the study of nuclear receptors have made it possible to evaluate their molecular activity in a more systemic fashion, rather than deeply digging into a single pathway/function. This systemic approach is ideally suited for studying PPARbeta/delta, due to its ubiquitous expression in various organs and its overlapping and tissue-specific transcriptomic signatures. The aim of the present review is to present in detail the diversity of PPARbeta/delta function, focusing on the different information gained at the systemic level, and describing the global and unbiased approaches that combine a systems view with molecular understanding.
Recent studies showed that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) had effects on the progression of multiple tumors, but the role of PPARD and PPARG in glioma remains poorly understand. We conducted a case-control study to investigate the association of polymorphisms in PPARD and PPARG with glioma risk and prognosis in the Chinese Han population. Seven polymorphisms (PPARD: rs2016520, rs67056409, rs1053049 and rs2206030; PPARG: rs2920503, rs4073770 and rs1151988) were genotyped using the Agena MassARRAY system in 568 glioma patients and 509 healthy controls. The odd ratios (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated to assess the association of PPARD and PPARG polymorphisms with glioma risk. The Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method was used to analysis interactions of genetic polymorphisms on glioma risk. Then, we conducted log-rank test, Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox regression model to evaluate the relationship of PPARD and PPARG polymorphisms with glioma prognosis. We found PPARD polymorphisms (rs2016520, rs67056409, rs1053049) were significantly associated with glioma risk in multiple models (P < 0.05). Stratified analysis showed rs2016520, rs67056409, rs1053049 of PPARD significantly decreased risk of glioma in the subgroup of age > 40 and astrocytoma (P < 0.05). For male, PPARD rs1053049 had a strong relationship with glioma risk in allele (P = 0.041), dominant (P = 0.040) and additive (P = 0.040) models. The effect of PPARG rs2920503 on glioma risk was related to glioma grade (P < 0.05). MDR showed that a seven-locus model was the best polymorphisms interaction pattern. Moreover, surgery and chemotherapy had strongly impact on overall survival and progression free survival of glioma patients. Our findings suggested that PPARD and PPARG polymorphisms were associated with glioma risk and prognosis in the Chinese Han population, and further studies are need to confirm our results.
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is essential for creating and maintaining tissue homeostasis in the central nervous system (CNS), which is key for proper neuronal function. In most vertebrates, the BBB is localized to microvascular endothelial cells that acquire barrier properties during angiogenesis of the neuroectoderm. Complex and continuous tight junctions, and the lack of fenestrae combined with low pinocytotic activity render the BBB endothelium a tight barrier for water-soluble molecules that may only enter the CNS via specific transporters. The differentiation of these unique endothelial properties during embryonic development is initiated by endothelial-specific flavours of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in a precise spatiotemporal manner. In this review, we summarize the currently known cellular (neural precursor and endothelial cells) and molecular (VEGF and Wnt/beta-catenin) mechanisms mediating brain angiogenesis and barrier formation. Moreover, we introduce more recently discovered crosstalk with cellular and acellular elements within the developing CNS such as the extracellular matrix. We discuss recent insights into the downstream molecular mechanisms of Wnt/beta-catenin in particular, the recently identified target genes like Foxf2, Foxl2, Foxq1, Lef1, Ppard, Zfp551, Zic3, Sox17, Apcdd1 and Fgfbp1 that are involved in refining and maintaining barrier characteristics in the mature BBB endothelium. Additionally, we elute to recent insight into barrier heterogeneity and differential endothelial barrier properties within the CNS, focussing on the circumventricular organs as well as on the neurogenic niches in the subventricular zone and the hippocampus. Finally, open questions and future BBB research directions are highlighted in the context of taking benefit from understanding BBB development for strategies to modulate BBB function under pathological conditions.
The three major components of dyslipidemia associated with the metabolic syndrome are increased fasting and postprandial triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRLs), decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and increased small, dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles. Insulin resistance and compensatory hyperinsulinemia lead to overproduction of very low-density lipoprotein particles. A relative deficiency of lipoprotein lipase, an insulin-sensitive enzyme, is partly responsible for the decreased clearance of fasting and postprandial TRLs, and the decreased production of HDL particles. The resulting increased concentration of cholesteryl ester-rich fasting and postprandial TRLs is the central lipoprotein abnormality of the metabolic syndrome. The increase of small, dense LDL particles, and decrease of large, buoyant HDL particles are consequential events. All these lipoprotein defects contribute largely to the increased cardiovascular disease risk in individuals with insulin resistance. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)a, PPARg, and PPARd agonists seem to improve dyslipidemia of the metabolic syndrome by regulating the expression of important genes involved in the deranged lipoprotein metabolism associated with insulin resistance.
Forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) regulates muscle growth, but the metabolic role of FOXO1 in skeletal muscle and its mechanisms remain unclear. To explore the metabolic role of FOXO1 in skeletal muscle, we generated skeletal muscle-specific Foxo1 inducible knockout (mFOXO1 iKO) mice and fed them a high-fat diet to induce obesity. We measured insulin sensitivity, fatty acid oxidation, mitochondrial function, and exercise capacity in obese mFOXO1 iKO mice and assessed the correlation between FOXO1 and mitochondria-related protein in the skeletal muscle of patients with diabetes. Obese mFOXO1 iKO mice exhibited improved mitochondrial respiratory capacity, which was followed by attenuated insulin resistance, enhanced fatty acid oxidation, and improved skeletal muscle exercise capacity. Transcriptional inhibition of FOXO1 in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPARdelta) expression was confirmed in skeletal muscle, and deletion of PPARdelta abolished the beneficial effects of FOXO1 deficiency. FOXO1 protein levels were higher in the skeletal muscle of patients with diabetes and negatively correlated with PPARdelta and electron transport chain protein levels. These findings highlight FOXO1 as a new repressor in PPARdelta gene expression in skeletal muscle and suggest that FOXO1 links insulin resistance and mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle via PPARdelta.
mRNA vaccines are becoming a feasible alternative for treating cancer. To develop mRNA vaccines against LUAD, potential antigens were identified and LUAD ferroptosis subtypes distinguished for selecting appropriate patients. The genome expression omnibus, cancer genome atlas (TCGA) and FerrDB were used to collect gene expression profiles, clinical information, and the genes involved in ferroptosis, respectively. cBioPortal was used to visualize and compare genetic alterations, GEPIA2 to calculate prognostic factors of the selected antigens, and TIMER to visualize the relationship between potential antigens and tumor immune cell infiltration. Consensus clustering analysis was utilized to identify ferroptosis subtypes and their prognostic value assessed by Log-rank and cox regression tests. The modules of ferroptosis-related gene screening were conducted by weight gene co-expression network analysis. The LUAD ferroptosis landscape was visualized through dimensionality reduction and graph learning. Six tumor antigens had obvious LUAD-mutations, positively correlated with different antigen-presenting cells, and might induce tumor cell ferroptosis. LUAD patients were stratified into three ferroptosis subtypes (FS1, FS2, and FS3) according to diverse molecular, cellular, and clinical characteristics. FS3 showed the highest tumor mutation burden and the most somatic mutations, deemed potential indicators of mRNA vaccine effectiveness. Moreover, different ferroptosis subtypes expressed distinct immune checkpoints and immunogenic cell death modulators. AGPS, NRAS, MTDH, PANX1, NOX4, and PPARD are potentially suitable for mRNA vaccinations against LUAD, specifically in patients with FS3 tumors. This study defines vaccination candidates and establishes a theoretical basis for LUAD mRNA vaccinations.
BACKGROUND: Athletic performances are complex traits with heritability of ~66%. Dynamic balance is one of the most important athletic performances, and there has been little studies for it in sports genomics. The candidate PPARD gene was reported to be able to affect muscle development for balance predisposition and influence the athletic performance including skiing triumph in the Caucasian population. This study aims to investigate whether the PPARD gene is a susceptibility gene for dynamic balance performance in Han Chinese children. RESULTS: A total 2244 children were recruited and their balance beam performances were measured. Five polymorphisms in the PPARD gene were genotyped through the MassARRAY Sequenom platform. Rs2016520 exerted significant association with dynamic balance performance (minor allele C, P = 0.015, P(corrected) < 0.05) and was affirmed in a meta-analysis by combining previously reported Caucasian cohorts (OR = 1.57, 95% CI = [1.30, 1.91], P < 10 (-5)) . Another polymorphism, rs2267668, was also significantly associated with dynamic balance performance (minor allele G, P = 0.015, P(corrected) < 0.05). In the dichotomous study, 321 cases (61% boys and 39% girls) and 370 controls (49% boys and 51% girls) in our samples were selected as representatives, and the thresholds were the mean velocity (0.737 m/s) +/- standard deviation (0.264 m/s), in which rs2016520-C and rs2267668-G still remained significant (CI =1.41 [1.11~1.79], P = 0.004, P(corrected) < 0.016; CI =1.45 [1.14~1.86], P = 0.002, P(corrected) < 0.016). In different genders, consistent OR direction was observed for each variant. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that the PPARD gene is associated with dynamic balance performance of human being, and further studies to reveal its etiology is strongly suggested.
Recent studies have revealed the importance of the gut microbiota in the regulation of metabolic phenotypes of highly prevalent metabolic diseases such as obesity, type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and cardiovascular disease. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are a family of ligand-activated nuclear receptors that interact with PPAR-gamma co-activator-1alpha (PPARGC1A) to regulate lipid and glucose metabolism. Genetic polymorphisms in PPARD (rs 2267668; A/G) and PPARGC1A (rs 8192678; G/A) are linked to T2DM. We studied the association between the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs 2267668 and rs 8192678 and microbiota signatures and their relation to predicted metagenome functions, with the aim of determining possible microbial markers in a healthy population. Body composition, physical exercise and diet were characterized as potential confounders. Microbiota analysis of subjects with PPARGC1A (rs 8192678) and PPARD (rs 2267668) SNPs revealed certain taxa associated with the development of insulin resistance and T2DM. Kyoto encyclopedia of gene and genomes analysis of metabolic pathways predicted from metagenomes highlighted an overrepresentation of ABC sugar transporters for the PPARGC1A (rs 8192678) SNP. Our findings suggest an association between sugar metabolism and the PPARGC1A rs 8192678 (G/A) genotype and support the notion of specific microbiota signatures as factors related to the onset of T2DM.
Recent reports have shown that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPARD) plays an important role in different vascular processes suggesting that PPARD is a significant modulator of cardiovascular disease. This review will focus on PPARD in relation to cardiovascular risk factors based on cell, animal and human data. Mouse studies suggest that Ppard is an important metabolic modulator that may have implications for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Specific human PPARD gene variants show no clear association with CVD but interactions between variants and lifestyle factors might influence disease risk. During recent years, development of specific and potent PPARD agonists has also made it possible to study the effects of PPARD activation in humans. PPARD agonists seem to exert beneficial effects on dyslipidemia and insulin-resistant syndromes but safety issues have been raised due to the role that PPARD plays in cell proliferation. Thus, large long term outcome as well as detailed safety and tolerability studies are needed to evaluate whether PPARD agonists could be used to treat CVD in humans.
