Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C; Pore-forming, alpha-1C subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Mediates influx of calcium ions into the cytoplasm, and thereby triggers calcium release from the sarcoplasm (By similarity). Plays an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Required for normal heart development and normal regulation of heart rhythm. Required for normal contraction of smooth muscle cells in blood vessels and in the intestine. Essential for normal blood pressure regulation via  [...] 
BACKGROUND: Fewer than 50% of patients who develop aortic valve calcification have concomitant atherosclerosis, implying differential pathogenesis. Although circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) act as biomarkers of cardiovascular diseases, tissue-entrapped EVs are associated with early mineralization, but their cargoes, functions, and contributions to disease remain unknown. METHODS: Disease stage-specific proteomics was performed on human carotid endarterectomy specimens (n=16) and stenotic aortic valves (n=18). Tissue EVs were isolated from human carotid arteries (normal, n=6; diseased, n=4) and aortic valves (normal, n=6; diseased, n=4) by enzymatic digestion, (ultra)centrifugation, and a 15-fraction density gradient validated by proteomics, CD63-immunogold electron microscopy, and nanoparticle tracking analysis. Vesiculomics, comprising vesicular proteomics and small RNA-sequencing, was conducted on tissue EVs. TargetScan identified microRNA targets. Pathway network analyses prioritized genes for validation in primary human carotid artery smooth muscle cells and aortic valvular interstitial cells. RESULTS: Disease progression drove significant convergence (P<0.0001) of carotid artery plaque and calcified aortic valve proteomes (2318 proteins). Each tissue also retained a unique subset of differentially enriched proteins (381 in plaques; 226 in valves; q<0.05). Vesicular gene ontology terms increased 2.9-fold (P<0.0001) among proteins modulated by disease in both tissues. Proteomics identified 22 EV markers in tissue digest fractions. Networks of proteins and microRNA targets changed by disease progression in both artery and valve EVs revealed shared involvement in intracellular signaling and cell cycle regulation. Vesiculomics identified 773 proteins and 80 microRNAs differentially enriched by disease exclusively in artery or valve EVs (q<0.05); multiomics integration found tissue-specific EV cargoes associated with procalcific Notch and Wnt signaling in carotid arteries and aortic valves, respectively. Knockdown of tissue-specific EV-derived molecules FGFR2, PPP2CA, and ADAM17 in human carotid artery smooth muscle cells and WNT5A, APP, and APC in human aortic valvular interstitial cells significantly modulated calcification. CONCLUSIONS: The first comparative proteomics study of human carotid artery plaques and calcified aortic valves identifies unique drivers of atherosclerosis versus aortic valve stenosis and implicates EVs in advanced cardiovascular calcification. We delineate a vesiculomics strategy to isolate, purify, and study protein and RNA cargoes from EVs entrapped in fibrocalcific tissues. Integration of vesicular proteomics and transcriptomics by network approaches revealed novel roles for tissue EVs in modulating cardiovascular disease.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is an immunologically "cold" tumor that does not respond to current immunotherapy. Here, we demonstrate a fundamental role for the alpha-isoform of the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase-2A (PP2Ac) in regulating glioma immunogenicity. Genetic ablation of PP2Ac in glioma cells enhanced double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) production and cGAS-type I IFN signaling, MHC-I expression, and tumor mutational burden. In coculture experiments, PP2Ac deficiency in glioma cells promoted dendritic cell (DC) cross-presentation and clonal expansion of CD8+ T cells. In vivo, PP2Ac depletion sensitized tumors to immune-checkpoint blockade and radiotherapy treatment. Single-cell analysis demonstrated that PP2Ac deficiency increased CD8+ T-cell, natural killer cell, and DC accumulation and reduced immunosuppressive tumor-associated macrophages. Furthermore, loss of PP2Ac increased IFN signaling in myeloid and tumor cells and reduced expression of a tumor gene signature associated with worse patient survival in The Cancer Genome Atlas. Collectively, this study establishes a novel role for PP2Ac in inhibiting dsDNA-cGAS-STING signaling to suppress antitumor immunity in glioma. SIGNIFICANCE: PP2Ac deficiency promotes cGAS-STING signaling in glioma to induce a tumor-suppressive immune microenvironment, highlighting PP2Ac as a potential therapeutic target to enhance tumor immunogenicity and improve response to immunotherapy.
The microtubule-associated protein tau is an abundant component of neurons of the central nervous system. In Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative tauopathies, tau is found hyperphosphorylated and aggregated in neurofibrillary tangles. To obtain a better understanding of the cellular perturbations that initiate tau pathogenesis, we performed a CRISPR-Cas9 screen for genetic modifiers that enhance tau aggregation. This initial screen yielded three genes, BANF1, ANKLE2, and PPP2CA, whose inactivation promotes the accumulation of tau in a phosphorylated and insoluble form. In a complementary screen, we identified three additional genes, LEMD2, LEMD3, and CHMP7, that, when overexpressed, provide protection against tau aggregation. The proteins encoded by the identified genes are mechanistically linked and recognized for their roles in the maintenance and repair of the nuclear envelope. These results implicate the disruption of nuclear envelope integrity as a possible initiating event in tauopathies and reveal targets for therapeutic intervention.
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) is characterized by progressive loss of cognitive function, linked to marked neuronal loss. Pathological hallmarks of the disease are the accumulation of the amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide in the form of amyloid plaques and the intracellular formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). Accumulating evidence supports a key role for protein phosphorylation in both the normal and pathological actions of Abeta as well as the formation of NFTs. NFTs contain hyperphosphorylated forms of the microtubule-binding protein tau, and phosphorylation of tau by several different kinases leads to its aggregation. The protein kinases involved in the generation and/or actions of tau or Abeta are viable drug targets to prevent or alleviate AD pathology. However, it has also been recognized that the protein phosphatases that reverse the actions of these protein kinases are equally important. Here, we review recent advances in our understanding of serine/threonine and tyrosine protein phosphatases in the pathology of AD.
PURPOSE: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a very common malignancy of the digestive system. Despite a variety of treatments including surgery, chemotherapeutic and targeted drugs, the prognosis for patients with CRC is still unsatisfactory and the mortality remains high. Protein phosphorylation plays an essential role in tumorigenesis and progression and is also crucial for protein to act with proper functions. Ferroptosis is found widely involved in various diseases especially tumors as a newly identified programmed cell death. METHODS: In our study, we aimed at PPP2CA as a prospective target which may play a crucial role in CRC progression. In one hand, knockdown of PPP2CA significantly enhanced the malignant phenotype in HCT116. In the other hand, knockdown of PPP2CA significantly enhanced Erastin-induced ferroptosis as well. RESULTS: Specifically, knockdown of PPP2CA in HCT116 significantly increased the relative level of malondialdehyde (MDA), reactive oxygen species (ROS) and Fe(2+), and decreased GSH/GSSG ratio after the treatment of certain concentration of Erastin. Besides, we found that the inhibition of PPP2CA further led to the suppression of SCD1 expression in CRC cells in a AMPK-dependent way. CONCLUSION: Ultimately, we conclude that PPP2CA may regulate Erastin-induced ferroptosis through AMPK/SCD1 signaling pathway.
Conserved genomic sequences disrupted in humans may underlie uniquely human phenotypic traits. We identified and characterized 10,032 human-specific conserved deletions (hCONDELs). These short (average 2.56 base pairs) deletions are enriched for human brain functions across genetic, epigenomic, and transcriptomic datasets. Using massively parallel reporter assays in six cell types, we discovered 800 hCONDELs conferring significant differences in regulatory activity, half of which enhance rather than disrupt regulatory function. We highlight several hCONDELs with putative human-specific effects on brain development, including HDAC5, CPEB4, and PPP2CA. Reverting an hCONDEL to the ancestral sequence alters the expression of LOXL2 and developmental genes involved in myelination and synaptic function. Our data provide a rich resource to investigate the evolutionary mechanisms driving new traits in humans and other species.
By removing Ser/Thr-specific phosphorylations in a multitude of protein substrates in diverse tissues, Protein Phosphatase type 2A (PP2A) enzymes play essential regulatory roles in cellular signalling and physiology, including in brain function and development. Here, we review current knowledge on PP2A gene mutations causally involved in neurodevelopmental disorders and intellectual disability, focusing on PPP2CA, PPP2R1A and PPP2R5D. We provide insights into the impact of these mutations on PP2A structure, substrate specificity and potential function in neurobiology and brain development.
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women worldwide. Functional studies have demonstrated that miRNA dysregulation in many cases of cancer, in which miRNAs act as either oncogenes or tumor suppressor. Here we report that miR-345-3p is generally upregulated in breast cancer tissues and breast cancer cell lines. Overexpression and inhibition of miR-345-3p revealed its capacity in regulating proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells. Further research identified protein phosphatase 2 catalytic subunit alpha (PPP2CA), a suppressor of AKT phosphorylation, as a candidate target of miR-345-3p. In vitro, miR-345-3p mimics promoted AKT phosphorylation by targeting its negative regulator, PPP2CA. Blocking miR-345-3p relieved its inhibition of PPP2CA, which attenuated PI3K-AKT signaling pathway. In vivo, inhibiting miR-345-3p by miR-345-3p-inhibition lentivirus suppressed tumor growth and invasiveness in mice. Together, the miR-345-3p/PPP2CA signaling axis exhibits tumor-promoting functions by regulating proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells. These data provide a clue to novel therapeutic approaches for breast cancer.
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), a tumor suppressor protein, has been implicated in cell cycle and apoptosis. Additionally, studies have illustrated its crucial roles in transformation of normal human cells to tumorigenic status. PPP2CA, which encodes the alpha isoform of the catalytic subunit of PP2A, has been recently reported to be associated with several types of cancers. Therefore, we hypothesized that genetic variants in PPP2CA might influence susceptibility of gastric cancer. To test this hypothesis, three tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in PPP2CA were genotyped in a case-control study including 1,113 cases and 1,848 controls in a Chinese population. Three tagging SNPs in PPP2CA were genotyped using Illumina Human Exome BeadChip. We observed that the A allele of rs13187105 was associated with an increased risk of gastric cancer (adjusted odds ratio (OR) = 1.14, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.02-1.28, P = 0.017). Further analyses showed that rs13187105 [A] was associated with decreased expression of PPP2CA mRNA (P = 5.1 x 10(-6)), and PPP2CA mRNA was significantly lower in gastric tumor tissues when comparing that in their adjacent normal tissues (P = 0.037). These findings support our hypothesis that genetic variants in PPP2CA may be implicated in gastric cancer susceptibility in Chinese population.
PURPOSE: Aberrant expression of miRNAs is crucial in several tissues tumorigenesis including thyroid. Recent studies demonstrated that miR-650 plays different role depending on the cancer type. Herein, we investigated the role of miR-650 in thyroid carcinoma. METHODS: The expression of miR-650 was analyzed in human thyroid tissues by q-RT-PCR. Anaplastic (8505C, CAL62, SW1736) and papillary (TPC-1) thyroid cancer cell lines were used to dissect the role of miR-650 on malignant hallmarks of transformation. Label-free proteomic analysis was exploited to unravel the targets of miR-650, while luciferase reporter assay and functional experiments were performed to confirm a selected target. Spearman's rank correlation test was used to assess the association between miR-650 and its target in human thyroid cancer tissues. RESULTS: miR-650 is over-expressed in anaplastic (ATC) thyroid carcinoma where it enhances cell migration and invasion. Proteomic label-free and bioinformatics analysis revealed that the serine-threonine protein phosphatase 2 catalytic subunit alpha (PPP2CA) is a target of miR-650; these finding were confirmed by luciferase assay. Restoration of PPP2CA mRNA, deprived of its 3'UTR, is able to revert the malignant phenotype induced by miR-650 in HEK-293 cells. Importantly, PPP2CA is down-regulated in ATC tissues and is inversely correlated with miR-650. CONCLUSIONS: miR-650 displayed oncogenic activity in ATC cells through targeting PPP2CA phosphatase. These results suggest that miR-650/PPP2CA axis could be modulated to interfere with motile ability of thyroid carcinoma cells.
Long-term use of low-toxic natural products holds the promise for eradicating cancer stem cells. In this study, we report that luteolin, a natural flavonoid, attenuates the stemness of ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs) by directly binding to KDM4C and epigenetic suppression of PPP2CA/YAP axis. Ovarian cancer stem like cells (OCSLCs) isolated by suspension culture and CD133 + ALDH+ cell sorting was employed as OCSCs model. The maximal non-toxic dose of luteolin suppressed stemness properties, including sphere-forming capacity, the expression of OCSCs markers, sphere-initiating and tumor-initiating capacities, as well as the percentage of CD133 + ALDH+ cells of OCSLCs. Mechanistic study showed that luteolin directly binds to KDM4C, blocks KDM4C-induced histone demethylation of PPP2CA promoter, inhibits PPP2CA transcription and PPP2CA-mediated YAP dephosphorylation, thereby attenuating YAP activity and the stemness of OCSLCs. Furthermore, luteolin sensitized OCSLCs to traditional chemotherapeutic drugs in vitro and in vivo. In summary, our work revealed the direct target of luteolin and the underlying mechanism of the inhibitory effect of luteolin on the stemness of OCSCs. This finding thus suggests a novel therapeutic strategy for eradicating human OCSCs driven by KDM4C.
Dynamic assembly/disassembly of signaling complexes are crucial for cellular functions. Specialized latency and activation chaperones control the biogenesis of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) holoenzymes that contain a common scaffold and catalytic subunits and a variable regulatory subunit. Here we show that the butterfly-shaped TIPRL (TOR signaling pathway regulator) makes highly integrative multibranching contacts with the PP2A catalytic subunit, selective for the unmethylated tail and perturbing/inactivating the phosphatase active site. TIPRL also makes unusual wobble contacts with the scaffold subunit, allowing TIPRL, but not the overlapping regulatory subunits, to tolerate disease-associated PP2A mutations, resulting in reduced holoenzyme assembly and enhanced inactivation of mutant PP2A. Strikingly, TIPRL and the latency chaperone, alpha4, coordinate to disassemble active holoenzymes into latent PP2A, strictly controlled by methylation. Our study reveals a mechanism for methylation-responsive inactivation and holoenzyme disassembly, illustrating the complexity of regulation/signaling, dynamic complex disassembly, and disease mutations in cancer and intellectual disability.
Psoriasis, a common skin disease, endangers human physiological and mental health; however, its pathogenesis remains unclear. Keratinocyte proliferation is a typical pathological characteristic of psoriasis. Serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is one of the most important phosphatases for maintaining normal phosphorylation levels in humans. PP2Acalpha is the alpha subtype of the PP2A C subunit (encoded by PPP2CA), which maintains the catalytic functions of PP2A. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is activated by phosphorylation (p-EGFR) to regulate the downstream signalling pathway to promote epidermal cell proliferation. Previous studies have found that PPP2CA induced epidermal hyperplasia, keratinization and other pathological phenomena similar to those in mouse models of psoriasis. The present study showed that PP2Acalpha negatively regulated EGFR phosphorylation and epidermal cell proliferation, and EGFR inhibitors could alleviate PP2Acalpha by inhibiting epidermal cell proliferation. This study further examined the effect of mechanisms on epidermal cell proliferation and the downstream signalling pathway of EGFR using molecular technological methods to explore new ideas for treating psoriasis.
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) enzymes can suppress tumors, but they are often inactivated in human cancers overexpressing inhibitory proteins. Here, we identify a class of small-molecule iHAPs (improved heterocyclic activators of PP2A) that kill leukemia cells by allosterically assembling a specific heterotrimeric PP2A holoenzyme consisting of PPP2R1A (scaffold), PPP2R5E (B56epsilon, regulatory), and PPP2CA (catalytic) subunits. One compound, iHAP1, activates this complex but does not inhibit dopamine receptor D2, a mediator of neurologic toxicity induced by perphenazine and related neuroleptics. The PP2A complex activated by iHAP1 dephosphorylates the MYBL2 transcription factor on Ser241, causing irreversible arrest of leukemia and other cancer cells in prometaphase. In contrast, SMAPs, a separate class of compounds, activate PP2A holoenzymes containing a different regulatory subunit, do not dephosphorylate MYBL2, and arrest tumor cells in G1 phase. Our findings demonstrate that small molecules can serve as allosteric switches to activate distinct PP2A complexes with unique substrates.
Kawasaki disease (KD)), also known as mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome (MCLS), is an autoimmune and systemic vasculitis syndrome. Its etiology and pathogenesis are still unclear. microRNAs (miRNA), a novel class of small non-coding RNAs, regulate the expression of multiple protein-encoding genes at the post-transcriptional level. We intend to study the change of miRNA-133a in the plasma of patients with KD, explore the role of miRNA-133a on HUVEC and define the pathogenesis of vascular dysfunction in KD. miRNA-133a expression and the mRNA and protein expression of protein phosphatase 2 catalytic subunit alpha (PPP2CA) were assessed by RT-qPCR and Western blot, respectively. The PPP2CA mRNA 3'UTR was predicted to be the potential target of miRNA-133a by using the miRNA databases and verified by the luciferase assay. The plasmids of miRNA-133a mimics and inhibitors were transfected into HUVEC cells. The plasma soluble vascular endothelial cadherin (sVE-cadherin, the excised extracellular part of VE-cadherin) levels were investigated by ELISA. The results suggested that miRNA-133a was increased by 3.8 times in the acute KD group and by 2.7 times in the convalescent KD group compared with the control group (both P = .000). PPP2CA is the target gene of miRNA-133a and its expression was inhibited by miRNA-133a acting on PPP2CA mRNA 3'UTR (P = .013). The plasma sVE-cadherin levels in the acute KD groups were increased compared with the control group (P = .024). The ROC curve analysis showed that the expression of miRNA-133a segregate acute KD patients from convalescent KD patients and healthy children. Our results suggest that miRNA-133a might be a new biomarker for KD.
Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are a group of high-incidence rare diseases with genetic heterogeneity. PPP2R1A, the regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A, is a recently discovered gene associated with NDDs. Whole/clinical exome sequencing was performed in five patients with a family with NDDs. In vitro experiments were performed to evaluate the mutants' expression and interactions with the complex. The genotype-phenotype correlations of reported cases as well as our patients with PPP2R1A variants were reviewed. We reported five unrelated individuals with PPP2R1A variants, including two novel missense variants and one frameshift variant. The protein expression of the Arg498Leu variant was less than that of the wild-type protein, the frameshift variant Asn282Argfs*14 was not decreased but truncated, and these two variants impaired the interactions with endogenous PPP25RD and PPP2CA. Furthermore, we found that pathogenic variants clustered in HEAT repeats V, VI and VII, and patients with the Met180Val/Thr variants had macrocephaly, severe ID and hypotonia, but no epilepsy, whereas those with Arg258 amino acid changes had microcephaly, while a few had epilepsy or feeding problems. In this study, we reported five NDD patients with PPP2R1A gene variants and expanded PPP2R1A pathogenic variant spectrum. The genotype and phenotype association findings provide reminders regarding the prognostication and evidence for genetic counseling.
The aetiology of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is complex and is known to involve both genetic and environmental factors. In a small number of patients, single-gene defects can lead to the development of SLE. Such genes include those encoding early components of the complement cascade and the 3'-5' DNA exonuclease TREX1. In addition, genome-wide association studies have identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms that confer some susceptibility to SLE. In this Review, we discuss selected examples of genes whose products have distinctly altered function in SLE and contribute to the pathogenic process. Specifically, we focus on the genes encoding integrin alphaM (ITGAM), IgG Fc receptors, sialic acid O-acetyl esterase (SIAE), the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase PP2A (PPP2CA) and signalling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) family members. Moreover, we highlight the changes in epigenetic signatures that occur in SLE. Such epigenetic modifications, which are abundantly present and might alter gene expression in the presence or absence of susceptibility variants, should be carefully considered when deconstructing the contribution of individual genes to the complex pathogenesis of SLE.
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a highly complex heterotrimeric Ser/Thr phosphatase that regulates many cellular processes. PP2A is dysregulated in several human diseases, including oncological pathology; interestingly, PP2A appears to be essential for controlling cell growth and may be involved in cancer development. The role of PP2A as a tumor suppressor has been extensively studied and reviewed. To leverage the potential clinical utility of combination PP2A inhibition and radiotherapy treatment, it is vital that novel highly specific PP2A inhibitors be developed. In this review, the existing literature on the role of PP2A in brain tumors, especially in gliomas and glioblastoma (GBM), was analyzed. Interestingly, the review focused on the role of PP2A inhibitors, focusing on CIP2A inhibition, as CIP2A participated in tumor cell growth by stimulating cell-renewal survival, cellular proliferation, evasion of senescence and inhibition of apoptosis. This review suggested CIP2A inhibition as a promising strategy in oncology target therapy.
PURPOSE: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD) caused by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) dysfunction have mainly been associated with de novo variants in PPP2R5D and PPP2CA, and more rarely in PPP2R1A. Here, we aimed to better understand the latter by characterizing 30 individuals with de novo and often recurrent variants in this PP2A scaffolding Aalpha subunit. METHODS: Most cases were identified through routine clinical diagnostics. Variants were biochemically characterized for phosphatase activity and interaction with other PP2A subunits. RESULTS: We describe 30 individuals with 16 different variants in PPP2R1A, 21 of whom had variants not previously reported. The severity of developmental delay ranged from mild learning problems to severe intellectual disability (ID) with or without epilepsy. Common features were language delay, hypotonia, and hypermobile joints. Macrocephaly was only seen in individuals without B55alpha subunit-binding deficit, and these patients had less severe ID and no seizures. Biochemically more disruptive variants with impaired B55alpha but increased striatin binding were associated with profound ID, epilepsy, corpus callosum hypoplasia, and sometimes microcephaly. CONCLUSION: We significantly expand the phenotypic spectrum of PPP2R1A-related NDD, revealing a broader clinical presentation of the patients and that the functional consequences of the variants are more diverse than previously reported.
PURPOSE: Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most primary bone malignant tumor in adolescents. Although the treatment of OS has made great progress, patients' prognosis remains poor due to tumor invasion and metastasis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We downloaded the expression profile GSE12865 from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. We screened differential expressed genes (DEGs) by making use of the R limma software package. Based on Gene Ontology, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, we performed the function and pathway enrichment analyses. Then, we constructed a Protein-Protein Interaction network and screened hub genes through the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes. RESULT: By analyzing the gene expression profile GSE12865, we obtained 703 OS-related DEGs, which contained 166 genes upregulated and 537 genes downregulated. The DEGs were primarily abundant in ribosome, cell adhesion molecules, ubiquitin-ubiquitin ligase activity, and p53 signaling pathway. The hub genes of OS were KDR, CDH5, CD34, CDC42, RBX1, POLR2C, PPP2CA, and RPS2 through PPI network analysis. Finally, GSEA analysis showed that cell adhesion molecules, chemokine signal pathway, transendothelial migration, and focal adhesion were associated with OS. CONCLUSION: In this study, through analyzing microarray technology and bioinformatics analysis, the hub genes and pathways about OS are identified, and the new molecular mechanism of OS is clarified.
