Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C; Pore-forming, alpha-1C subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Mediates influx of calcium ions into the cytoplasm, and thereby triggers calcium release from the sarcoplasm (By similarity). Plays an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Required for normal heart development and normal regulation of heart rhythm. Required for normal contraction of smooth muscle cells in blood vessels and in the intestine. Essential for normal blood pressure regulation via  [...] 
Mutation in CUL4B gene is one of the most common causes for X-linked intellectual disability (XLID). CUL4B is the scaffold protein in CUL4B-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL4B) complex. While the roles of CUL4B in cancer progression and some developmental processes like adipogenesis, osteogenesis, and spermatogenesis have been studied, the mechanisms underlying the neurological disorders in patients with CUL4B mutations are poorly understood. Here, using 2D neuronal culture and cerebral organoids generated from the patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells and their isogenic controls, we demonstrate that CUL4B is required to prevent premature cell cycle exit and precocious neuronal differentiation of neural progenitor cells. Moreover, loss-of-function mutations of CUL4B lead to increased synapse formation and enhanced neuronal excitability. Mechanistically, CRL4B complex represses transcription of PPP2R2B and PPP2R2C genes, which encode two isoforms of the regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) complex, through catalyzing monoubiquitination of H2AK119 in their promoter regions. CUL4B mutations result in upregulated PP2A activity, which causes inhibition of AKT and ERK, leading to premature cell cycle exit. Activation of AKT and ERK or inhibition of PP2A activity in CUL4B mutant organoids rescues the neurogenesis defect. Our work unveils an essential role of CUL4B in human cortical development.
RNA-binding proteins can regulate nucleotide metabolism and gene expression. UPF3B regulator of nonsense mediated mRNA decay (UPF3B) exhibits dysfunction in cancers. However, its role in the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is still insufficiently understood. Here, we found that UPF3B was markedly upregulated in HCC samples and associated with adverse prognosis in patients. UPF3B dramatically promoted HCC growth both in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistically, UPF3B was found to bind to PPP2R2C, a regulatory subunit of PP2A, boosting its mRNA degradation and activating the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. E2F transcription factor 6 (E2F6) directly binds to the UPF3B promoter to facilitate its transcription. Together, the E2F6/UPF3B/PPP2R2C axis promotes HCC growth through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Hence, it could be a promising therapeutic target for treating HCC.
We investigated the how miR-572 regulates PPP2R2C, and studied the effects of miR-572 and PPP2R2C on proliferation and migration as well as invasion of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cells. NPC tissues and normal tissues were collected, and the expressions of miR-572 and PPP2R2C were detected by real-time PCR. Western blot was applied to detect the expression of PPP2R2C protein. The target relationship between miR-572 and PPP2R2C was confirmed by dual luciferase reporter gene assay. MTT assay and flow cytometry were applied to investigate the viability and apoptosis levels of NPC cells. Transwell as well as wound healing assays were used, respectively, to detect the invasiveness and migration of NPC cells. MiR-572 was highly expressed in NPC tissues as well as NPC cells, and there was lower expression of PPP2R2C in NPC tissues compared with normal samples. MiR-572 could bind to the 3' UTR of PPP2R2C and decrease its expression. Over-expressed miR-572 and decreased PPP2R2C expression could both inhibit proliferation and invasion and induce apoptosis of NPC cells. Thus, miR-572 promotes the proliferation and invasion of NPC by directly down-regulating PPP2R2C.
This study aimed to explore gene expression profiles that drive malignancy from low- to high-grade head and neck carcinomas (HNC), as well as to analyze their correlations with survival. Gene expressions and clinical data of HNC were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository. The significantly differential genes (SDGs) between low- and high-grade HNC were screened. Cox regressions were performed to identify prognostic SDGs of progression-free survival (PFS) and disease-specific survival (DSS). The genes were experimentally validated by RT-PCR in clinical tissue specimens. Thirty-five SDGs were identified in 47 low-grade and 30 high-grade HNC samples. Cox regression analyses showed that CXCL14, SLC44A1, and UBD were significantly associated with DSS, and PPP2R2C and SLC44A1 were associated with PFS. Patients were grouped into high-risk or low-risk groups for prognosis based on gene signatures. High-risk patients had significantly shorter DSS and PFS than low-risk patients (P=0.033 and P=0.010, respectively). Multivariate Cox regression showed HPV (P=0.033), lymph node status (P=0.032), and residual status (P<0.044) were independent risk factors for PFS. ROC curves showed the risk score had better efficacy to predict survival both for DSS and PFS (AUC=0.858 and AUC=0.901, respectively). The results showed CXCL14 and SLC44A1 were significantly overexpressed in the low-grade HNC tissues and the UBD were overexpressed in the high-grade HNC tissues. Our results suggested that SDGs had different expression profiles between the low-grade and high-grade HNC, and these genes may serve as prognostic biomarkers to predict survival.
Using publically available datasets on gene expression in medulloblastoma (MB) subtypes, we selected genes for ubiquitin ligases and identified statistically those that best predicted each of the four major MB subgroups as separate disease entities. We identify a gene coding for an ubiquitin ligase, ZNRF3, whose overexpression alone can predict the WNT subgroup for 100% in the Pfister dataset. For the SHH subgroup, we identify a gene for a regulatory subunit of the protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), PPP2R2C, as the major predictor among the E3 ligases genes. The ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like conjugation database (UUCD) lists PPP2R2C as coding for a Cullin Ring ubiquitin ligase adaptor. For group 3 MBs, the best ubiquitin ligase predictor was PPP2R2B, a gene which codes for another regulatory subunit of the PP2A holoenzyme. For group 4, the best E3 gene predictors were MID2, ZBTB18, and PPP2R2A, which codes for a third PP2A regulatory subunit. Heatmap analysis of the E3 gene data shows that expression of ten genes for ubiquitin ligases can be used to classify MBs into the four major consensus subgroups. This was illustrated by analysis of gene expression of ubiquitin ligases of the Pfister dataset and confirmed in the dataset of Cavalli. We conclude that genes for ubiquitin ligases can be used as genetic markers for MB subtypes and that the proteins coded for by these genes should be investigated as subtype specific therapeutic targets for MB.
Targeting of PP2A suggests a close link to tau-related cognitive and functional declines. However, little is known about how the expression of PP2A subunits and PP2A activity are dysregulated in the course of AD, precluding any specific targeting strategy for restoring PP2A in AD patients. Although the PP2A heterotrimer containing the regulatory subunit PR55/Balpha (encoded by the PPP2R2A gene) is the major tau phosphatase, the involvement of other brain-specific PP2A regulatory subunits in tau dephosphorylation remains unknown. PR55/Bgamma (encoded by the PPP2R2C gene) is a pivotal phosphatase in the brain, and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PPP2R2C are involved in several mental disorders. By measuring the differential spatiotemporal expression patterns of PPP2R2C in Wt and transgenic AD mice, we revealed that PPP2R2C expression is downregulated in the aged AD mouse brain as compared to the Wt mouse brain. In cultured cells, PPP2R2C expression regulates PP2A activity and tau dephosphorylation. These results suggest that dysregulation of PPP2R2C expression may be involved in the onset of AD and that specifically targeting PPP2R2C expression or activity is a promising strategy against brain dementia disorders, including AD and other tauopathies.
In mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), chemical blockade of Gsk3alpha/beta and Mek1/2 (2i) instructs a self-renewing ground state whose endogenous inducers are unknown. Here we show that the axon guidance cue Netrin-1 promotes naive pluripotency by triggering profound signalling, transcriptomic and epigenetic changes in mESCs. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Netrin-1 can substitute for blockade of Gsk3alpha/beta and Mek1/2 to sustain self-renewal of mESCs in combination with leukaemia inhibitory factor and regulates the formation of the mouse pluripotent blastocyst. Mechanistically, we reveal how Netrin-1 and the balance of its receptors Neo1 and Unc5B co-regulate Wnt and MAPK pathways in both mouse and human ESCs. Netrin-1 induces Fak kinase to inactivate Gsk3alpha/beta and stabilize beta-catenin while increasing the phosphatase activity of a Ppp2r2c-containing Pp2a complex to reduce Erk1/2 activity. Collectively, this work identifies Netrin-1 as a regulator of pluripotency and reveals that it mediates different effects in mESCs depending on its receptor dosage, opening perspectives for balancing self-renewal and lineage commitment.
Intellectual disability (ID) comprises a vast collection of clinically diverse and genetically heterogeneous disorders characterized primarily by central nervous system defects of varying severity with or without additional dysmorphic, metabolic, neuromuscular or psychiatric features. Much progress has been made to elucidate the genetic causes for ID, especially on the X-chromosome. In order to identify autosomal genes involved in ID, patients with a balanced chromosomal rearrangement are a valuable source since the breakpoints may disrupt or deregulate a candidate ID gene(s). Here, we report a familial reciprocal translocation (4;6)(p16.1;q22) that segregates with mild ID, epilepsy and behavioural problems and that disrupts the PPP2R2C gene on chromosome 4p. The PPP2R2C gene, encoding a subunit of protein phosphatase 2A, has a unique expression pattern in mouse brain that suggests a role in synaptic plasticity and hence learning and memory.
Prostate cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths among men in the worldwide, it's important to find new prognostic factors and therapeutic targets. microRNAs play critical roles in the development and progression of prostate cancer. Here we revealed miR-1301 promoted prostate cancer progression. miR-1301 was upregulated in prostate cancer tissues and cells, overexpression of miR-1301 promoted anchorage-dependent and -independent growth using MTT analysis, colony formation analysis and soft agar growth analysis, whereas knockdown of miR-1301 suppressed anchorage-dependent and -independent growth. We also found overexpression of miR-1301 inhibited p27 expression and promoted Cyclin D1 expression, whereas knockdown of miR-1301 reduced this effect, suggesting miR-1301 promoted the G1/S transition. These results suggested miR-1301 promoted cell proliferation of prostate cancer. microRNAs can inhibit target mRNA translation or/and induce mRNA degradation, we found tumor suppresser PPP2R2C was the target of miR-1301, simultaneous downregualtion of PPP2R2C and miR-1301 promoted anchorage-dependent and -independent growth. These findings suggested miR-1301 promoted prostate cancer proliferation by inhibiting PPP2R2C, and might a therapeutic target for prostate cancer.
There are several lines of evidence that the 4p16 region is a candidate locus of both attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and bipolar disorder. None of the harbored candidate genes of this region were hitherto shown to be associated with ADHD despite promising functionality. One of the most promising candidate genes in this region is protein phosphatase 2, regulatory subunit B, gamma (PPP2R2C), which, however, thus far has not been assessed for a potential association with ADHD. A total of 513 in- and outpatients affected with adult ADHD and 536 controls as well as 170 nuclear families with 249 children affected with ADHD were genotyped for 35 SNPs, which tagged the promoter region, the 5' and 3' UTRs, and the exons of the PPP2R2C. Two independent samples provided evidence that the major G allele of rs16838844 increases risk toward ADHD. Allelic variations of PPP2R2C rs16838698 on the other hand might be associated with a variety of personality traits. There is evidence that allelic variation in PPP2R2C may be associated with a variety of personality traits and ADHD per se. Nevertheless, as all those conditions are comorbid, PPP2R2C might reflect a common underlying neurobiological risk factor.
Metastatic prostate cancers generally rely on androgen receptor (AR) signaling for growth and survival, even following systemic androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT). However, recent evidence suggests that some advanced prostate cancers escape ADT by using signaling programs and growth factors that bypass canonical AR ligand-mediated mechanisms. We used an in vitro high-throughput RNA interference (RNAi) screen to identify pathways in androgen-dependent prostate cancer cell lines whose loss-of-function promotes androgen ligand-independent growth. We identified 40 genes where knockdown promoted proliferation of both LNCaP and VCaP prostate cancer cells in the absence of androgen. Of these, 14 were downregulated in primary and metastatic prostate cancer, including two subunits of the protein phosphatase 2 (PP2A) holoenzyme complex: PPP2R1A, a structural subunit with known tumor-suppressor properties in several tumor types; and PPP2R2C, a PP2A substrate-binding regulatory subunit that has not been previously identified as a tumor suppressor. We show that loss of PPP2R2C promotes androgen ligand depletion-resistant prostate cancer growth without altering AR expression or canonical AR-regulated gene expression. Furthermore, cell proliferation induced by PPP2R2C loss was not inhibited by the AR antagonist MDV3100, indicating that PPP2R2C loss may promote growth independently of known AR-mediated transcriptional programs. Immunohistochemical analysis of PPP2R2C protein levels in primary prostate tumors determined that low PPP2R2C expression significantly associated with an increased likelihood of cancer recurrence and cancer-specific mortality. These findings provide insights into mechanisms by which prostate cancers resist AR-pathway suppression and support inhibiting PPP2R2C complexes or the growth pathway(s) activated by PPP2R2C as a therapeutic strategy.
Background:RAS gene family mutations are the most prevalent in thyroid nodules with indeterminate cytology and are present in a wide spectrum of histological diagnoses. We evaluated differentially expressed genes and signaling pathways across the histological/clinical spectrum of RAS-mutant nodules to determine key molecular determinants associated with a high risk of malignancy. Methods: Sixty-one thyroid nodules with RAS mutations were identified. Based on the histological diagnosis and biological behavior, the nodules were grouped into five categories indicating their degree of malignancy: non-neoplastic appearance, benign neoplasm, indeterminate malignant potential, low-risk cancer, or high-risk cancer. Gene expression profiles of these nodules were determined using the NanoString PanCancer Pathways and IO 360 Panels, and Angiopoietin-2 level was determined by immunohistochemical staining. Results: The analysis of differentially expressed genes using the five categories as supervising parameters unearthed a significant correlation between the degree of malignancy and genes involved in cell cycle and apoptosis (BAX, CCNE2, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, CHEK1, E2F1, GSK3B, NFKB1, and PRKAR2A), PI3K pathway (CCNE2, CSF3, GSKB3, NFKB1, PPP2R2C, and SGK2), and stromal factors (ANGPT2 and DLL4). The expression of Angiopoietin-2 by immunohistochemistry also showed the same trend of increasing expression from non-neoplastic appearance to high-risk cancer (p < 0.0001). Conclusions: The gene expression analysis of RAS-mutant thyroid nodules suggests increasing upregulation of key oncogenic pathways depending on their degree of malignancy and supports the concept of a stepwise progression. The utility of ANGPT2 expression as a potential diagnostic biomarker warrants further evaluation.
OBJECTIVE: To identify key genes in ovarian cancer using transcriptome sequencing in two cell lines: MCV152 (benign ovarian epithelial tumour) and SKOV-3 (ovarian serous carcinoma). METHODS: Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between SKOV-3 and MCV152 were identified. Candidate genes were assessed for enrichment in gene ontology function and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes pathway. Candidate gene expression in SKOV-3 and MCV152 cells was validated using Western blots. RESULTS: A total of 2020 upregulated and 1673 downregulated DEGs between SKOV3 and MCV152 cells were identified that were significantly enriched in the cell adhesion function. Upregulated DEGs, such as angiopoietin 2 (ANGPT2), CD19 molecule (CD19), collagen type IV alpha 3 chain (COL4A3), fibroblast growth factor 18 (FGF18), integrin subunit beta 4 (ITGB4), integrin subunit beta 8 (ITGB8), laminin subunit alpha 3 (LAMA3), laminin subunit gamma 2 (LAMC2), protein phosphatase 2 regulatory subunit Bgamma (PPP2R2C) and spleen associated tyrosine kinase (SYK) were significantly involved in the extracellular matrix-receptor interaction pathway. Downregulated DEGs, such as AKT serine/threonine kinase 3 (AKT3), collagen type VI alpha 1 chain (COL6A1), colony stimulating factor 3 (CSF3), fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1), integrin subunit alpha 2 (ITGA2), integrin subunit alpha 11 (ITGA11), MYB proto-oncogene, transcription factor (MYB), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2, mitochondrial (PCK2), placental growth factor (PGF), phosphoinositide-3-kinase adaptor protein 1 (PIK3AP1), serum/glucocorticoid regulated kinase 1 (SGK1), toll like receptor 4 (TLR4) and tumour protein p53 (TP53) were involved in PI3K-Akt signalling. Expression of these DEGs was confirmed by Western blot analyses. CONCLUSION: Candidate genes enriched in cell adhesion, extracellular matrix-receptor interaction and PI3K-Akt signalling pathways were identified that may be closely associated with ovarian cancer invasion and potential targets for ovarian cancer treatment.
Ovarian cancer (OC) remains one of the most common types of malignant cancer, and the molecular mechanism underlying its proliferation is still largely unclear. It is reported that microRNAs acted as important regulators of cell proliferation by regulating its targeted gene. In this study, our result showed that miR-572 was markedly upregulated in OC cell lines and clinical tissues. Results of both gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments revealed that upregulation of miR-572 expression dramatically promoted OC cell proliferation, whereas decreased miR-572 expression significantly reduced cell proliferation. Bioinformatics analysis and luciferase reporter assays further revealed PPP2R2C, a putative tumor suppressor as a potential target of miR-572. Moreover, silencing of PPP2R2C using small interfering RNA (siRNA) counteracted the proliferation arrest by miR-572-in in OC cells. In sum, our data provide that miR-572 promoted cell proliferation in OC by targeting PPP2R2C and might serve as a therapeutic target of OC.
BACKGROUND: Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a prevalent hematologic malignancy characterized by a steady rise in morbidity and mortality rates over time. The upregulation of methyltransferase-like 14 (METTL14) expression in AML has been identified; however, its specific contributions to AML progression and underlying molecular mechanisms have yet to be elucidated. METHOD: METTL14-bound mRNAs were predicted using bioinformatics methods, analyzed, and screened to identify T-complex protein 1 (TCP1). The regulatory impact of METTL14 on TCP1 was observed. TCP1 expression in AML clinical samples was assessed using quantitative real-time PCR and western blot analysis. The involvement of TCP1 in AML malignant progression was assessed through in vitro and in vivo functional assays. The String database was utilized for predicting proteins that interact with TCP1, while western blot assays and immunoprecipitation were employed to validate the associated signaling pathways. RESULTS: METTL14 overexpression upregulates TCP1 expression in AML cells. AML patients exhibit high levels of TCP1 expression. Elevated TCP1 levels in HL60 and U937 cells in vitro lead to increased proliferation, migration, invasion, and inhibition of apoptosis, while in vivo, it accelerates AML proliferation and tumorigenesis. Mechanistically, METTL14 modulates AML progression by influencing TCP1 transcript stability via m6A methylation, thereby regulating TCP1 expression. Additionally, PPP2R2C potentially serves as a crucial functional target of TCP1 implicated in the malignant progression of AML. CONCLUSION: Upregulation of TCP1 expression in AML through METTL14-mediated m6A modification accelerates the malignant progression of the disease. Therefore, targeting the m6A modification of TCP1 could be a potential therapeutic strategy to enhance the treatment of AML.
The ubiquitin proteasome system regulates key cellular processes in normal and in cancer cells. Herein, we review published data on the role of ubiquitin ligases in the four major subgroups of medulloblastoma (MB). While conventional literature serves as an initial source of information on cellular pathways in MB, large publicly available datasets of gene expression can be used to add information not previously identified in the literature. By analysing the publicly available Cavalli dataset, we show that increased expression of ZNRF3 characterizes the WNT subgroup of MB. The ZNRF3 gene codes for an E3 ligase associated with WNT receptors. Loss of a copy of chromosome 6 in a subtype of the WNT group was associated with decreased expression of the gene encoding the E3 ligase RNF146. While the E3 ligase SMURF regulates SHH receptors, increased expression of the gene encoding the Cullin Ring E3 adaptor PPP2R2C was statistically a better genetic marker of the SHH group. Genes whose expression was statistically strongly related to Group 3 included the E3 ligase gene TRIM58, and the gene for the E3 ligase adaptor, PPP2R2B. Group 4 MB was associated with expression of genes encoding several E3 ligases and E3 ligase adaptors involved in ribosome biogenesis. Increased expression of the genes encoding the E3 ligase adaptors and transcription repressors ZBTB18 and ZBTB38 were also noted in subgroup 4. These data suggest that several E3 ligases and their adaptors should be investigated as therapeutic targets for subgroup specific MB brain tumors.
Up until now, no study has looked specifically at epigenomic landscapes throughout twin samples, discordant for Anorexia nervosa (AN). Our goal was to find evidence to confirm the hypothesis that epigenetic variations play a key role in the aetiology of AN. In this study, we quantified genome-wide patterns of DNA methylation using the Infinium Human DNA Methylation EPIC BeadChip array ("850 K") in DNA samples isolated from whole blood collected from a group of 7 monozygotic twin pairs discordant for AN. Results were then validated performing a genome-wide DNA methylation profiling using DNA extracted from whole blood of a group of non-family-related AN patients and a group of healthy controls. Our first analysis using the twin sample revealed 9 CpGs associated to a gene. The validation analysis showed two statistically significant CpGs with the rank regression method related to two genes associated to metabolic traits, PPP2R2C and CHST1. When doing beta regression, 6 of them showed statistically significant differences, including 3 CpGs associated to genes JAM3, UBAP2L and SYNJ2. Finally, the overall pattern of results shows genetic links to phenotypes which the literature has constantly related to AN, including metabolic and psychological traits. The genes PPP2R2C and CHST1 have both been linked to the metabolic traits type 2 diabetes through GWAS studies. The genes UBAP2L and SYNJ2 have been related to other psychiatric comorbidity.
OBJECTIVES: 3GO, defined as the simultaneous presence of hypertension, hyperglycemia, and dyslipidemia, is rising in Asians. We determined polygenetic risk scores (PRS) for 3GO risk and the interactions between PRS and lifestyle habits on 3GO risk in Korean adults aged 40 to 77 y recruited from the urban hospital cohort of the Korean Genomic and Epidemiology Study (KoGES), conducted from 2004 to 2013. METHODS: Participants were divided into a group with 3GO (n = 570) and a group without any of the three components of 3GO (0GO; n = 14 155). A genome-wide association study revealed genetic variants, and generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction was used to identify the best model of interaction between genetic variant and gene variant. The PRS was calculated from the genetic variants in the best model, and the effects of PRS interactions with lifestyles on 3GO risk were investigated. RESULTS: The PRS for 3GO risk was calculated from five genetic variants: CTNNA2_rs17018376, PPP2R2C_rs6835336, CDKAL1_rs12662218, ADCY8_rs1329797, and KCNQ1_rs2237892. After adjustment for lifestyle, a high PRS was found to increase the risk of 3GO by 2.567-fold (95% confidence interval [CI], 1.917-3.437) as compared with controls (P < 0.001). PRS interacted with serum glucose (odds ratio, 2.283; 95% CI, 1.557-3.347), low high-density lipoprotein (odds ratio, 2.605; 95% CI, 1.701-3.991), and triacylglycerol concentration (odds ratio, 2.468; 95% CI, 1.630-3.737; P < 0.001). Interactions between PRS and alcohol (P < 0.0001), exercise (P = 0.035), and smoking (P = 0.006) significantly affected 3GO risk. PRSs were significantly correlated with 3GO risk among smokers, alcohol drinkers, and those who exercised infrequently. CONCLUSIONS: PRSs calculated using a PRS model based on five single-nucleotide polymorphisms revealed that insulin sensitivity and secretion were significantly associated with 3GO risk. Furthermore, reducing alcohol intake, exercising regularly, and quitting smoking might be effective for reducing 3GO risk in individuals with a high PRS.
This study aimed to identify and validate a 9-gene signature for predicting overall survival (OS) in glioma patients. Analysis of multiple gene expression datasets led to the identification of 135 candidate genes associated with OS in glioma patients. Further analysis revealed that IGFBP2, PBK, NRXN3, TGIF1, DNAJA4, and LGALS3BP were identified as risk factors for OS, while ENAH, PPP2R2C, and SPHKAP were found to be protective factors. Multifaceted validation using different databases confirmed their differential expression patterns in glioma tissues compared to normal brain tissue. By utilizing LASSO regression and multivariate Cox regression analysis, a risk score was developed based on the expression levels of the 9 crucial genes. The risk score showed a significant correlation with OS in both training and validation cohorts and yielded superior predictive accuracy compared to individual gene expression. Moreover, a predictive nomogram incorporating the risk score, WHO grade, age, IDH mutation, and 1p/19q co-deletion was constructed and validated, which exhibited high predictive capabilities for survival rates at different time points. Enrichment analysis revealed the involvement of extracellular matrix-related pathways and immune system signaling in glioma prognosis. Furthermore, the risk score showed a strong correlation with immune cell infiltration and immune checkpoint expression, suggesting its potential role in the tumor immune microenvironment. In conclusion, our study provides a robust 9-gene signature and a predictive nomogram for evaluating the prognosis of glioma patients, offering valuable insights into personalized treatment strategies.
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is one kind of serine/ threonine protein phosphatase regulating mainly cell growth and division. It comprises three subunits, A, B, and C. The B-subunit is involved in enzyme activity and substrate specificity. The B-subunit family is of great diversity and is divided into three classes, the B1, B2, and B3 subfamilies. Until now, two members of the B1 subfamily, B1alpha and B1beta, have been identified in human. In this report, the third member of the sub-family, B1gamma, was identified, and its cDNA was isolated from a human brain cDNA library. This novel cDNA is 4,120 bp in length and contains an open reading frame (nt 55-1,398) encoding 447 amino acid residues. The putative protein shares 81 and 85% identity with B1alpha (PPP2R2A) and B1beta (PPP2R2B), respectively, and was named PPP2R2C for its high level of homology to the other two isoforms. One remarkable characteristic of this novel gene is that it is highly expressed in brain with a 4.7-kb transcript while it is nearly undetectable in other tissues. In addition, the PPP2R2C gene was localized to human chromosome 4p16 between markers D4S2925 and D4S3007 with 5.45 cR (LOD > 14) and 2.63 cR (LOD > 15) RH distance, respectively, by radiation hybrid panel mapping.
