DNA primase small subunit; Catalytic subunit of the DNA primase complex and component of the DNA polymerase alpha complex (also known as the alpha DNA polymerase-primase complex) which play an essential role in the initiation of DNA synthesis. During the S phase of the cell cycle, the DNA polymerase alpha complex (composed of a catalytic subunit POLA1, an accessory subunit POLA2 and two primase subunits, the catalytic subunit PRIM1 and the regulatory subunit PRIM2) is recruited to DNA at the replicative forks via direct interactions with MCM10 and WDHD1 (By similarity). The primase sub [...] 
During eukaryotic DNA replication, Pol alpha-primase generates primers at replication origins to start leading-strand synthesis and every few hundred nucleotides during discontinuous lagging-strand replication. How Pol alpha-primase is targeted to replication forks to prime DNA synthesis is not fully understood. Here, by determining cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of budding yeast and human replisomes containing Pol alpha-primase, we reveal a conserved mechanism for the coordination of priming by the replisome. Pol alpha-primase binds directly to the leading edge of the CMG (CDC45-MCM-GINS) replicative helicase via a complex interaction network. The non-catalytic PRIM2/Pri2 subunit forms two interfaces with CMG that are critical for in vitro DNA replication and yeast cell growth. These interactions position the primase catalytic subunit PRIM1/Pri1 directly above the exit channel for lagging-strand template single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), revealing why priming occurs efficiently only on the lagging-strand template and elucidating a mechanism for Pol alpha-primase to overcome competition from RPA to initiate primer synthesis.
The splicing factor RNA-binding motif protein 10 (RBM10) is frequently mutated in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) (9-25%). Most RBM10 cancer mutations are loss-of-function, correlating with increased tumorigenesis and limiting the efficacy of current LUAD targeted therapies. Remarkably, therapeutic strategies leveraging RBM10 deficiency remain unexplored. Here, we conduct a CRISPR-Cas9 synthetic lethality (SL) screen and identify ~60 RBM10 SL genes, including WEE1 kinase. WEE1 inhibition sensitizes RBM10-deficient LUAD cells in-vitro and in-vivo. Mechanistically, we identify a splicing-independent role of RBM10 in regulating DNA replication fork progression and replication stress response, which underpins RBM10-WEE1 SL. Additionally, RBM10 interacts with active DNA replication forks, relying on DNA Primase Subunit 1 (PRIM1) that synthesizes Okazaki RNA primers. Functionally, we demonstrate that RBM10 serves as an anchor for recruiting Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to facilitate H4K16 deacetylation and R-loop homeostasis to maintain replication fork stability. Collectively, our data reveal a role of RBM10 in fine-tuning DNA replication and provide therapeutic arsenal for targeting RBM10-deficient tumors.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Numerous observational studies link obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) to inflammatory proteins, yet the directionality of these associations remains ambiguous. Therefore, we aimed to clarify the potential associations of gene-predicted inflammatory proteins with OSA. METHODS: Based on genome-wide association study data, we applied Mendelian randomization (MR) to explore potential connections between circulating inflammatory proteins and OSA, primarily using the inverse-variance weighting method for robustness. Cochran's Q test, MR‒Egger intercept test, MR-PRESSO, and leave-one-out method were used to perform sensitivity tests for pleiotropy and heterogeneity. Replication analyses and meta-analyses were performed using other independent data. Steiger tests and multivariate MR assessed the independent effects of exposure factors, and the functional mapping and annotation (FUMA) platform was used to identify key genes to enhance the understanding of genetics. RESULTS: Our investigation revealed 21 circulating inflammatory proteins significantly associated with OSA-related phenotypes. Notably, IL-10RA, IL-18R1, TNFSF14, CCL23, ADA, and SLAMF1 had significant effects on multiple phenotypes. After FDR correction, IL-18R1, SLAMF1, IL-10RA, and IL-17C were identified as important candidates for OSA, and multivariate MR analysis strengthened the independent heritability of 20 inflammatory factors. The FUMA platform revealed seven overlapping genes: ROBO1, PRIM1, NACA, SHBG, HSD17B6, RBMS2, and WWOX. All reverse MR analyses and sensitivity analyses confirmed the robustness of these associations. CONCLUSIONS: Our results underscore crucial associations between inflammatory proteins and OSA pathogenesis, revealing new correlates and susceptibility genes. These findings advance biomarker identification for OSA risk and highlight the importance of genetic and inflammatory profiles in OSA management.
BACKGROUND The aim of this study was to evaluate the differently expressed genes (DEGs) relevant to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and pathway by performing integrated bioinformatics analysis. MATERIAL AND METHODS The gene expression datasets GSE7014 and GSE29221 were downloaded in GEO database, and DEGs from type 2 diabetes mellitus and normal skeletal muscle tissues were identified. Biological function analysis of the DEGs was enriched by GO and KEEG pathway. A PPI network for the identified DEGs was built using the STRING database. RESULTS Thirty top DEGs were identified from 2 datasets: GSE7014 and GSE29221. Of the 30 top DEGs, 20 were up-regulated and 10 were down-regulated. The 20 up-regulated genes were enriched in regulation of mRNA, protein biding, and phospholipase D signaling pathway. The 10 down-regulated genes were enriched in telomere maintenance via semi-conservative replication, AGE-RAGE signaling pathway in diabetic complications, and insulin resistance pathway. In the PPI network of 20 up-regulated DEGs, there were 40 nodes and 84 edges, with an average node degree of 4.2. For the 10 down-regulated DEGs, we found a total of 30 nodes and 105 edges, with an average node degree of 7.0 and local clustering coefficient of 0.812. Among the 30 DEGs, 10 hub genes (CNOT6L, CNOT6, CNOT1, CNOT7, RQCD1, RFC2, PRIM1, RFC4, RFC5, and RFC1) were also identified through Cytoscape. CONCLUSIONS DEGs of T2DM may play an essential role in disease development and may be potential pathogeneses of T2DM.
BACKGROUND: Neonatal sepsis is a deadly disease with non-specific clinical signs, delaying diagnosis and treatment. There remains a need for early biomarkers to facilitate timely intervention. Our objective was to identify neonatal sepsis gene expression biomarkers that could predict sepsis at birth, prior to clinical presentation. METHODS: Among 720 initially healthy full-term neonates in two hospitals (The Gambia, West Africa), we identified 21 newborns who were later hospitalized for sepsis in the first 28 days of life, split into early-onset sepsis (EOS, onset </=7 days of life) and late-onset sepsis (LOS, onset 8-28 days of life), 12 neonates later hospitalized for localized infection without evidence of systemic involvement, and 33 matched control neonates who remained healthy. RNA-seq was performed on peripheral blood collected at birth when all neonates were healthy and also within the first week of life to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Machine learning methods (sPLS-DA, LASSO) identified genes expressed at birth that predicted onset of neonatal sepsis at a later time. FINDINGS: Neonates who later developed EOS already had  approximately 1000 DEGs at birth when compared to control neonates or those who later developed a localized infection or LOS. Based on these DEGs, a 4-gene signature (HSPH1, BORA, NCAPG2, PRIM1) for predicting EOS at birth was developed (training AUC = 0.94, sensitivity = 0.93, specificity = 0.92) and validated in an external cohort (validation AUC = 0.72, sensitivity = 0.83, and specificity = 0.83). Additionally, during the first week of life, EOS disrupted expression of >1800 genes including those influencing immune and metabolic transitions observed in healthy controls. INTERPRETATION: Despite appearing healthy at birth, neonates who later developed EOS already had distinct whole blood gene expression changes at birth, which enabled the development of a 4-gene predictive signature for EOS. This could facilitate early recognition and treatment of neonatal sepsis, potentially mitigating its long-term sequelae. FUNDING: CIHR and NIH/NIAID.
DNA replication in eukaryotes relies on the synthesis of a  approximately 30-nucleotide RNA/DNA primer strand through the dual action of the heterotetrameric polymerase alpha-primase (pol-prim) enzyme. Synthesis of the 7-10-nucleotide RNA primer is regulated by the C-terminal domain of the primase regulatory subunit (PRIM2C) and is followed by intramolecular handoff of the primer to pol alpha for extension by  approximately 20 nucleotides of DNA. Here, we provide evidence that RNA primer synthesis is governed by a combination of the high affinity and flexible linkage of the PRIM2C domain and the surprisingly low affinity of the primase catalytic domain (PRIM1) for substrate. Using a combination of small angle X-ray scattering and electron microscopy, we found significant variability in the organization of PRIM2C and PRIM1 in the absence and presence of substrate, and that the population of structures with both PRIM2C and PRIM1 in a configuration aligned for synthesis is low. Crosslinking was used to visualize the orientation of PRIM2C and PRIM1 when engaged by substrate as observed by electron microscopy. Microscale thermophoresis was used to measure substrate affinities for a series of pol-prim constructs, which showed that the PRIM1 catalytic domain does not bind the template or emergent RNA-primed templates with appreciable affinity. Together, these findings support a model of RNA primer synthesis in which generation of the nascent RNA strand and handoff of the RNA-primed template from primase to polymerase alpha is mediated by the high degree of inter-domain flexibility of pol-prim, the ready dissociation of PRIM1 from its substrate, and the much higher affinity of the POLA1cat domain of polymerase alpha for full-length RNA-primed templates.
DNA Primase Subunit 1 (PRIM1) is crucial for cancer development and progression. However, there remains a lack of comprehension concerning the clinical implication of PRIM1 in HCC. Here, aberrant expression of PRIM1 was identified in HCC according to available databases. The prognostic value of PRIM1 in patients presenting with HCC was further assessed based on TCGA data. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was subsequently conducted to investigate the potential function of PRIM1. Additionally, the correlations between tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TIICs) and PRIM1 expression were evaluated. The data from TCGA, GEO, ONCOMINE, and HCCDB databases illustrated that PRIM1 was overexpressed in HCC tissues, compared to normal liver tissues (all p < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that high PRIM1 expression in HCC was closely correlated with worse overall survival (p < 0.05). The univariate and multivariate analyses illustrated that PRIM1 expression was an independent novel prognostic indicator in HCC. Additionally, the area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve for PRIM1 reached 0.8651, indicating the diagnostic significance of PRIM1 in patients with HCC. GSEA showed that PRIM1 overexpression was significantly enriched in several tumor-related signaling pathways. Besides, TIIC analysis clarified the association between PRIM1 expression and TIICs in HCC. The findings disclose that PRIM1 profoundly implicated in promoting tumorigenesis might work as a desirable biomarker for HCC.
DNA replication is fundamental for cell proliferation in all organisms. Nonetheless, components of the replisome have been implicated in human disease, and here we report PRIM1 encoding the catalytic subunit of DNA primase as a novel disease gene. Using a variant classification agnostic approach, biallelic mutations in PRIM1 were identified in five individuals. PRIM1 protein levels were markedly reduced in patient cells, accompanied by replication fork asymmetry, increased interorigin distances, replication stress, and prolonged S-phase duration. Consequently, cell proliferation was markedly impaired, explaining the patients' extreme growth failure. Notably, phenotypic features distinct from those previously reported with DNA polymerase genes were evident, highlighting differing developmental requirements for this core replisome component that warrant future investigation.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a highly heterogeneous hematological malignancy that is currently incurable. Individualized therapeutic approaches based on accurate risk assessment are essential for improving the prognosis of MM patients. Nevertheless, current prognostic models for MM exhibit certain limitations and prognosis heterogeneity still an unresolved issue. Recent studies have highlighted the pivotal involvement of mitochondrial autophagy in the development and drug sensitivity of MM. This study seeks to conduct an integrative analysis of the prognostic significance and immune microenvironment of mitophagy-related signature in MM, with the aim of constructing a novel predictive risk model. GSE4581 and GSE47552 datasets were acquired from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. MM-differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified by limma between MM samples and normal samples in GSE47552. Mitophagy key module genes were obtained by weighted gene co-expression network analysis in the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)-MM dataset. Mitophagy DEGs were identified by the overlap genes between MM-DEGs and mitophagy key module genes. Prognostic genes were selected through univariate Cox regression and least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) analysis, and a risk model was subsequently constructed based on these prognostic genes. Subsequently, the MM samples were stratified into high- and low-risk groups based on their median risk scores. The validity of the risk model was further evaluated using the GSE4581 dataset. Moreover, a nomogram was developed using the independent prognostic factors identified from the risk score and various clinical indicators. Additionally, analyses were conducted on immune infiltration, immune scores, immune checkpoint, and chemotherapy drug sensitivity. The 17 mitophagy DEGs were obtained by intersection of 803 MM-DEGs and 1084 mitophagy key module genes. Five prognostic genes (CDC6, PRIM1, SNRPB, TOP2A, and ZNF486) were selected via LASSO and univariate cox regression analyses. The predictive performance of the risk model, which was constructed based on the five prognostic genes, demonstrated favorable results in both TCGA-MM and GSE4581 datasets as indicated by the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. In addition, calibration curve, ROC curve, and decision curve analysis curve corroborated that the nomogram exhibited superior predictive accuracy for MM. Furthermore, immune analysis results indicated a significant difference in stromal scores of two risk groups categorized on median risk scores. And four immune checkpoints (CD274, CTLA4, LAG3, and PDCD1LG2) showed significant differences in different risk groups. The analysis of chemotherapy drug sensitivity revealed that etoposide and doxorubicin, which target TOP2A, exhibited superior treatment outcomes in the high-risk group. A novel prognostic model for MM was developed and validated, demonstrating significant potential in predicting patient outcomes and providing valuable guidance for personalized immunotherapy counseling.
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase-related kinase ATR is a central regulator of the DNA damage response. Its chemical inhibition eliminates subsets of cancer cells in various tumor types. This effect is caused at least partly by the synthetically lethal relationship between ATR and certain DNA repair genes. In a previous screen using an siRNA library against DNA repair genes, we identified PRIM1, a part of the polymerase alpha-primase complex, as acting synthetically lethal with ATR. Applying a genetic ATR knock-in model of colorectal cancer cells, we confirmed that PRIM1 depletion inhibited proliferation of ATR-deficient cells and excluded artifacts due to clonal variation using an ATR reexpressing cell clone. We expanded these data by demonstrating in different cell lines that also chemical inhibition of ATR or its main effector kinase CHK1 reduces proliferation upon depletion of PRIM1. Mechanistically, PRIM1 depletion in ATR-deficient cells caused S-phase stasis in the absence of increased DNA damage followed by Wee1-mediated activation of caspase 8 and apoptosis. As PRIM1 inactivation sensitizes cancer cells to ATR and CHK1 inhibitors, mutations in PRIM1 or other components of the polymerase alpha-primase complex could represent novel targets for individualized tumor therapeutic approaches using ATR/CHK1 inhibitors, as has been previously demonstrated for POLD1, the catalytic subunit of polymerase delta.
Insights into common genetic susceptibility between primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) and natural or early menopause have delivered an innovative way of assessing the genetic mechanisms involved in POI. PRIM1 plays a crucial role in DNA replication by synthesizing RNA primers for Okazaki fragments. It is closely associated with age at natural menopause, early menopause and POI in European women. In this study, we aimed to investigate whether mutations in PRIM1 contribute to POI in Chinese women. All exons and exon-intron boundaries of PRIM1 gene were sequenced in 192 Han Chinese women with non-syndromic POI. No plausible mutations were identified. The results suggest that the perturbations in PRIM1 gene are not a common explanation for POI in Chinese women.
Eukaryotic DNA replication depends on the primosome - a complex of DNA polymerase alpha (Pol alpha) and primase - to initiate DNA synthesis by polymerisation of an RNA-DNA primer. Primer synthesis requires the tight coordination of primase and polymerase activities. Recent cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) analyses have elucidated the extensive conformational transitions required for RNA primer handover between primase and Pol alpha and primer elongation by Pol alpha. Because of the intrinsic flexibility of the primosome, however, structural information about the initiation of RNA primer synthesis is still lacking. Here, we capture cryoEM snapshots of the priming reaction to reveal the conformational trajectory of the human primosome that brings DNA primase subunits 1 and 2 (PRIM1 and PRIM2, respectively) together, poised for RNA synthesis. Furthermore, we provide experimental evidence for the continuous association of primase subunit PRIM2 with the RNA primer during primer synthesis, and for how both initiation and termination of RNA primer polymerisation are licenced by specific rearrangements of DNA polymerase alpha catalytic subunit (POLA1), the polymerase subunit of Pol alpha. Our findings fill a critical gap in our understanding of the conformational changes that underpin the synthesis of the RNA primer by the primosome. Together with existing evidence, they provide a complete description of the structural dynamics of the human primosome during DNA replication initiation.
Mutations in genes of the DNA polymerase complex have been linked to impaired immunological function next to distinct syndromic features. Biallelic mutations in PRIM1 are associated with a primordial dwarfism syndrome with variable hypogammaglobulinemia. The disease is mostly lethal in infancy due to pulmonary infections as well as hepatic cirrhosis. We studied 3 novel patients with PRIM1-deficiency with a focus on immunological consequences. All three shared dysmorphic features including a prominent forehead, triangular face and bilateral cryptorchidism. P1 carried the novel homozygous PRIM1 splice variant c.103+2T>G, allowing residual protein expression and associated with a mild clinical phenotype. P2 and P3 carried the known homozygous variant c.638+36C>G and died in infancy. Paradoxically, B cell lymphopenia was most pronounced in P1. No other significant lymphocyte abnormalities were detected. Interestingly, all 3 patients showed variable, but intermittently excessive Type I interferon signatures. In summary, the B-cell deficiency in PRIM1-deficiency is markedly variable and the severity of syndromic manifestations is not predictive of the immunological phenotype. We highlight a potential contribution of pathological type I interferon activation to disease pathogenesis which warrants further investigations.
PURPOSE: Our previous studies have confirmed that aspirin combined with Lipitor inhibited the development of prostate cancer (PCa), but the mechanisms need to be comprehensively expounded. The study aims to screen out the hub genes of combination therapy and to explore their association with the pathogenesis and prognosis of PCa. METHODS: Gene expressions were quantified by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Altered biological function, pathways of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), protein-protein interaction network, the filtering of hub genes, gene co-expression and the pathogenesis and prognosis were revealed by bioinformatics analysis. The correlation between hub gene expression and patient survival was validated by Kaplan-Meier. The effects of silent DNA replication and sister chromatid cohesion 1 (siDSCC1) combined with Lipitor and aspirin on DSCC1 expression, viability, invasion and migration of PCa cells were detected by qRT-PCR, Wound healing and transwell assays. RESULTS: 157 overlapped DEGs involved in FoxO, PI3K-Akt and p53 signaling pathways were identified. Ten hub genes (NEIL3, CDC7, DSCC1, CDC25C, PRIM1, MCM10, FBXO5, DTL, SERPINE1, EXO1) were verified to be correlated with the pathology and prognosis of PCa. DSCC1 silencing not only inhibited the viability, migration and invasion of PCa cells, but also strengthened the suppressing effects of Lipitor and aspirin alone or in combination on PCa cells. CONCLUSION: The enrichment pathways and targets of Lipitor combined with aspirin in PCa are discovered, and DSCC1 silencing can potentiate the effect of Lipitor combined with aspirin in the treatment of PCa.
The DNA primase polypeptide 1 (PRIM1) is responsible for synthesizing small RNA primers for Okazaki fragments generated during discontinuous DNA replication. PRIM1 mRNA expression levels in breast tumor samples were detected by real-time PCR analysis. Xenografted tumor model was established to study the carcinogenic role of PRIM1 and its potential therapeutic applications. The average PRIM1 mRNA (copy number x 10(3) /mug) expression was 4.7-fold higher in tumors than in normal tissue (*p = 0.005, n = 254). PRIM1 was detected preferentially at a higher level (>40-fold) in poorly differentiated tumor tissues (n = 46) compared with more highly differentiated tumors tissues (n = 10) (*p = 0.005). Poor overall survival rate was correlated to the estrogen receptor positive (ER+, n = 20) patients with higher PRIM1 expression when compare to the ER- (n = 10) patients (Chi Square test, p = 0.03). Stable expression of PRIM1-siRNA in the ER+ BT-474 cells-xenograft tumors significantly reduced tumor volume in SCID mice (*p = 0.005). The anti-tumoral effects of inotilone isolated from Phellinus linteus was tested and had significant effects on the inhibition of PRIM1 protein expression in ER+ breast cancer cells. In vivo study was performed by administering inotilone (10 mg/kg, twice a week for 6 weeks), which resulted in significantly reduced BT-474-xenografted tumor growth volume compared with control (n =5 per group, *p < 0.05). This study provides evidences for the prognostic effects of PRIM1 with poor overall survival rate in the ER+ patients and will be valuable to test for therapeutic purpose.
Biochemical and physiological evidence suggest that pre-synaptic calcium channels are attached to the transmitter release site within the active zone by a molecular tether. A recent study has proposed that 'Rab3a Interacting Molecule' (RIM) serves as the tether for CaV2.1 channels in mouse brain, based in part on biochemical co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) using a monoclonal antibody, mRIM. We previously argued against this idea for CaV2.2 calcium channel at chick synapses based on experiments using a different anti-RIM antibody, pRIM1,2: while staining for the two proteins co-localized and co-varied at the transmitter release face, consistent with an association, they failed to co-IP from a synaptosome membrane lysate. RIM is, however, a family of proteins and we tested the possibility that the mRIM antibody used in the more recent study identifies a particular channel-tethering variant. We find that co-immunostaining with mRIM and anti-CaV2.2 antibody neither co-localized nor co-varied at the transmitter release face and the two proteins did not co-IP, arguing against a common protein complex and a key CaV2.2 scaffolding role for RIM at the active zone. The differing results might be reconciled, however, in a model where a RIM family member contributes to a protein bridge that anchors the pre-fusion secretory vesicle to the calcium channel protein complex.
Genetic association studies of many heritable traits resulting from physiological testing often have modest sample sizes due to the cost and burden of the required phenotyping. This reduces statistical power and limits discovery of multiple genetic associations. We present a strategy to leverage pleiotropy between traits to both discover new loci and to provide mechanistic hypotheses of the underlying pathophysiology. Specifically, we combine a colocalization test with a locus-level test of pleiotropy. In simulations, we show that this approach is highly selective for identifying true pleiotropy driven by the same causative variant, thereby improves the chance to replicate the associations in underpowered validation cohorts and leads to higher interpretability. Here, as an exemplar, we use Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA), a common disorder diagnosed using overnight multi-channel physiological testing. We leverage pleiotropy with relevant cellular and cardio-metabolic phenotypes and gene expression traits to map new risk loci in an underpowered OSA GWAS. We identify several pleiotropic loci harboring suggestive associations to OSA and genome-wide significant associations to other traits, and show that their OSA association replicates in independent cohorts of diverse ancestries. By investigating pleiotropic loci, our strategy allows proposing new hypotheses about OSA pathobiology across many physiological layers. For example, we identify and replicate the pleiotropy across the plateletcrit, OSA and an eQTL of DNA primase subunit 1 (PRIM1) in immune cells. We find suggestive links between OSA, a measure of lung function (FEV1/FVC), and an eQTL of matrix metallopeptidase 15 (MMP15) in lung tissue. We also link a previously known genome-wide significant peak for OSA in the hexokinase 1 (HK1) locus to hematocrit and other red blood cell related traits. Thus, the analysis of pleiotropic associations has the potential to assemble diverse phenotypes into a chain of mechanistic hypotheses that provide insight into the pathogenesis of complex human diseases.
BACKGROUND: Amygdalin has anticancer benefits because of its active component, hydrocyanic acid. However, the underlying molecular mechanism is unclear. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanism by which amygdalin exerts antiproliferative effects in the human Michigan Cancer Foundation-7 (MCF-7) breast cancer cell line. METHODS: MCF-7 cells were exposed to amygdalin at a particular IC(50) value for 24 and 48 hours and compared to non-treated cells. An Affymetrix whole-transcript expression array was used to analyze the expression of 32 genes related to DNA replication. RESULTS: Among the 32 genes, amygdalin downregulated the expression of 16 genes and 19 genes by >1.5-fold at 24 and 48 hours, respectively. At 24 hours, the downregulated genes from the DNA polymerase alpha-primase complex were POLA1, POLA2, PRIM1, and PRIM2; DNA polymerase delta complex: POLD3; DNA polymerase epsilon complex: POLE4, Minichromosome Maintenance protein (MCM) complex (helicase): MCM2, MCM3, MCM4, MCM6, and MCM7; clamp and clamp loader: PCNA; nuclease: FEN1; and DNA ligase: LIG1. At 48 hours, the downregulated genes from the DNA polymerase alpha-primase complex were POLA1, POLA2, and PRIM1; DNA polymerase delta complex: POLD3; DNA polymerase epsilon complex: POLE and POLE2; MCM complex (helicase): MCM2, MCM3, MCM4, MCM5, MCM6, and MCM7; clamp and clamp loader: PCNA, RFC2, and RFC3; RNase H: RNASEH2A; nucleases: DNA2 and FEN1; and DNA ligase: LIG1. CONCLUSION: Amygdalin treatment caused downregulation of several genes that play critical roles in DNA replication in the MCF-7 cell line. Thus, it might be useful as an anticancer agent.
Malignant proliferation is the fundamental trait of tumor cells. The initiation of DNA replication represents a key process for cell proliferation, and has a marked impact on tumorigenesis and progression. Here we report that Sine oculis homeobox homolog 1 (SIX1) functions as a master regulator in DNA replication of cervical cancer cells. The expression of SIX1 was induced by the E7 oncoprotein of human papillomaviruses in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical cancer. The increase of SIX1 expression resulted in the upregulation of multiple genes related to the initiation of DNA replication, including the genes coding for the proteins in minichromosome maintenance complex (MCM2, MCM3, MCM6), DNA polymerase alpha-primase complex (POLA1, PRIM1, PRIM2), clamp loader (RFC3, RFC4, RFC5), DNA polymerase delta complex (POLD3) and DNA polymerase epsilon complex (POLE2). In line with this, the increase of SIX1 expression enhanced DNA synthesis, accelerated G1 to S phase progression, and promoted the proliferation of cervical cancer cells and the growth of cervical cancer. Consistently, knockdown of SIX1 could hamper DNA synthesis, slow down G1 to S phase progression, and suppress tumor cell proliferation and tumor growth. Importantly, SIX1 could more efficiently promote anchorage-independent cell growth. These results suggest that the increase of SIX1 expression could promote tumorigenesis, progression and invasive growth of cervical cancer by promoting DNA replication, and that targeting SIX1 may have significant therapeutic value in cervical cancer treatment.
