Beta-1 adrenergic receptor; Beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. This receptor binds epinephrine and norepinephrine with approximately equal affinity. Mediates Ras activation through G(s)-alpha- and cAMP-mediated signaling. Involved in the regulation of sleep/wake behaviors ; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRB1 sub-subfamily.
The incidence of biliary tract cancer (BTC), including intrahepatic (ICC) and extrahepatic (ECC) cholangiocarcinoma and gallbladder cancer, has increased globally; however, no effective targeted molecular therapies have been approved at the present time. Here we molecularly characterized 260 BTCs and uncovered spectra of genomic alterations that included new potential therapeutic targets. Gradient spectra of mutational signatures with a higher burden of the APOBEC-associated mutation signature were observed in gallbladder cancer and ECC. Thirty-two significantly altered genes, including ELF3, were identified, and nearly 40% of cases harbored targetable genetic alterations. Gene fusions involving FGFR2 and PRKACA or PRKACB preferentially occurred in ICC and ECC, respectively, and the subtype-associated prevalence of actionable growth factor-mediated signals was noteworthy. The subgroup with the poorest prognosis had significant enrichment of hypermutated tumors and a characteristic elevation in the expression of immune checkpoint molecules. Accordingly, immune-modulating therapies might also be potentially promising options for these patients.
The DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion transcript is the oncogenic driver in fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma, a lethal disease lacking specific therapies. This study reports on the identification, characterization, and immunotherapeutic application of HLA-presented neoantigens specific for the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion transcript in fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma. DNAJB1-PRKACA-derived HLA class I and HLA class II ligands induce multifunctional cytotoxic CD8(+) and T-helper 1 CD4(+) T cells, and their cellular processing and presentation in DNAJB1-PRKACA expressing tumor cells is demonstrated by mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidome analysis. Single-cell RNA sequencing further identifies multiple T cell receptors from DNAJB1-PRKACA-specific T cells. Vaccination of a fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma patient, suffering from recurrent short interval disease relapses, with DNAJB1-PRKACA-derived peptides under continued Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor therapy induces multifunctional CD4(+) T cells, with an activated T-helper 1 phenotype and high T cell receptor clonality. Vaccine-induced DNAJB1-PRKACA-specific T cell responses persist over time and, in contrast to various previous treatments, are accompanied by durable relapse free survival of the patient for more than 21 months post vaccination. Our preclinical and clinical findings identify the DNAJB1-PRKACA protein as source for immunogenic neoepitopes and corresponding T cell receptors and provide efficacy in a single-patient study of T cell-based immunotherapy specifically targeting this oncogenic fusion.
Gene fusions and rearrangements play a crucial role in tumor biology. They are rare events typically detected in KRAS wild-type (WT) pancreatic tumors. Their identification can inform clinical management by enabling precision oncology, as fusions involving BRAF, FGFR2, RET, NTRK, NRG1, and ALK represent actionable targets in KRAS-WT cancers, and serve diagnostic purposes since fusions involving PRKACA/B represent the diagnostic hallmark of intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs). Although they are rare, the therapeutic and diagnostic importance of these genomic events should not be underestimated, highlighting the need for quality-ensured molecular diagnostics in the management of cancer. Herein we review the existing literature on the role of fusion genes in pancreatic tumors and their clinical potential as effective biomarkers and therapeutic targets.
Clinically relevant pituitary tumors presenting with altered hormonal secretion or mass effect represent a significant proportion of patients in endocrinology clinics. However, in recent years, these patients are also referred to clinical genetic services due to possible germline mutations causing syndromic or isolated pituitary adenomas. While somatic mutations have been identified in GNAS, USB8, PIK3CA, GPR101 and rarely in RAS, germline mutations have been identified in MEN1, cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor genes, AIP, DICER1, PRKAR1A, PRKACA, SDH genes and GPR101. In this review, we present a short overview of pituitary adenoma classifications, pituitary development and somatic and germline genetic changes identified in these adenomas.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is a liver tumor with a high mortality burden and few treatment options. A promising therapeutic vulnerability in FLC is its driver mutation, a conserved DNAJB1-PRKACA gene fusion that could be an ideal target neoantigen for immunotherapy. In this study, we aim to define endogenous CD8 T cell responses to this fusion in FLC patients and evaluate fusion-specific T cell receptors (TCRs) for use in cellular immunotherapies. We observe that fusion-specific CD8 T cells are rare and that FLC patient TCR repertoires lack large clusters of related TCR sequences characteristic of potent antigen-specific responses, potentially explaining why endogenous immune responses are insufficient to clear FLC tumors. Nevertheless, we define two functional fusion-specific TCRs, one of which has strong anti-tumor activity in vivo. Together, our results provide insights into the fragmented nature of neoantigen-specific repertoires in humans and indicate routes for clinical development of successful immunotherapies for FLC.
Carney complex is a multiple neoplasia syndrome having endocrine and non-endocrine manifestations. Diagnostic criteria include myxoma, lentigines, and primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, amongst other signs/symptoms. In most cases it is an autosomal dominant disease, and diagnosis therefore requires study and follow-up of the family members. Inactivating mutations of the PRKAR1A gene were identified as the main cause of the disease, although since 2015 other disease-related genes, including PRKACA and PRKACB activating mutations, have also been related with Carney complex. This review will address the genetic aspects related to Carney complex.
Intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs) are distinct from intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms based on characteristic morphologic and genetic features represented by fusion genes involving PRKACA or PRKACB (PRKACA/B). However, pancreatic and biliary tumors with partial oncocytic features are often encountered clinically, and their molecular features are yet to be clarified. This study included 80 intraductal papillary neoplasms: 32 tumors with mature IOPN morphology (typical), 28 with partial or subclonal oncocytic features (atypical), and 20 without oncocytic features (control). We analyzed PRKACA/B fusion genes, including ATP1B1::PRKACA, DNAJB1::PRKACA, and ATP1B1::PRKACB, by reverse-transcription PCR; mRNA expression of fusion genes and nonrearranged PRKACA/B genes by quantitative reverse-transcription PCR; mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and GNAS by targeted sequencing or droplet digital PCR; and the expression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunits alpha (PRKACA) and beta (PRKACB), phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein, and aberrations of p16, p53, SMAD4, STK11, and beta-catenin by immunohistochemistry. PRKACA/B fusion genes were detected in 100% (32/32) of typical, 46% (13/28) of atypical, and 0% (0/20) of control (P < .05). Expression of PRKACA, PRKACB, and phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein was upregulated in neoplasms with PRKACA/B fusion genes (P < .05). mRNA expression of the PRKACA/B fusion genes and protein expression of PRKACA or PRKACB tended to be higher in typical than in atypical cases (mRNA, P = .002; protein expression, P = .054). In some atypical neoplasms with mixed subtypes, PRKACA/B fusion genes were superimposed exclusively on oncocytic components. Typical IOPNs harbored fewer KRAS and GNAS mutations than control samples and fewer alterations in p53 and STK11 than atypical samples (P < .05). In conclusion, PRKACA/B fusion genes not only are the characteristic drivers of IOPNs but also play a crucial role in the development of subclonal oncocytic neoplasms. Moreover, oncocytic morphology is strongly associated with upregulation of PRKACA/B, which may provide clues for potential therapeutic options.
Untargeted, next generation sequencing approaches have provided deep insights into genetic events that result in unopposed steroidogenesis from the adrenal cortex. In particular, somatic mutations in the gene encoding the catalytic subunit alpha of protein kinase A (PKA) (PRKACA) were identified independently by several groups as the most frequently altered gene in cortisol-producing adenomas. Detailed functional studies could explore the molecular consequences of these hot-spot mutations and large international cohorts have provided the basis to explore the clinical characteristics associated with this mutation. Thereby, PRKACA mutations are highly specific for cortisol over-secretion, while they are absent or very rare in the context of other adrenal diseases. Patients carrying these somatic mutations are affected by a more severe phenotype and are identified at a younger age. Thus, these genotype/phenotype correlations provide further evidence for the importance of PKA-dependent pathways for adrenal physiology and disease.
Fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FLC) is a rare liver cancer that is driven by the fusion of DNAJB1 and PRKACA, the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKA). PKA activity is controlled through regulatory proteins that both inhibit catalytic activity and control localization, and an excess of regulatory subunits ensures PRKACA activity is inhibited. Here, we found an increase in the ratio of catalytic to regulatory units in FLC patient tumors driven by DNAJB1::PRKACA using mass spectrometry, biochemistry, and immunofluorescence, with increased nuclear localization of the kinase. Overexpression of DNAJB1::PRKACA, ATP1B1::PRKACA, or PRKACA, but not catalytically inactive kinase, caused similar transcriptomic changes in primary human hepatocytes, recapitulating the changes observed in FLC. Consistently, tumors in patients missing a regulatory subunit or harboring an ATP1B1::PRKACA fusion were indistinguishable from FLC based on the histopathological, transcriptomic, and drug-response profiles. Together, these findings indicate that the DNAJB1 domain of DNAJB1::PRKACA is not required for FLC. Instead, changes in PKA activity and localization determine the FLC phenotype. Significance: Alterations leading to unconstrained protein kinase A signaling, regardless of the presence or absence of PRKACA fusions, drive the phenotypes of fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma, reshaping understanding of the pathogenesis of this rare liver cancer.
Fusion genes have been identified in a wide array of human neoplasms including hematologic and solid tumors, including gastrointestinal tract neoplasia. A fusion gene is the product of parts of two genes that are joined together following a deletion, translocation, or chromosomal inversion. Together with single nucleotide variants, insertions, deletions, and amplification, fusion genes represent one of the key genomic mechanisms for tumor development. Detecting fusions in the clinic is accomplished by a variety of techniques including break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and next-generation sequencing. Some recurrent gene fusions have been successfully targeted by small molecule or monoclonal antibody therapies (ie targeted therapies), while others are used as biomarkers for diagnostic and prognostic purposes. The purpose of this review article is to discuss the clinical utility of detection of gene fusions in carcinomas and neoplasms arising primarily in the digestive system.
Carney complex (CNC) is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome, characterized by pigmented lesions of the skin and mucosa, cardiac, cutaneous and other myxomas and multiple endocrine tumors. The disease is caused by inactivating mutations or large deletions of the PRKAR1A gene located at 17q22-24 coding for the regulatory subunit type I alpha of protein kinase A (PKA) gene. Most recently, components of the complex have been associated with defects of other PKA subunits, such as the catalytic subunits PRKACA (adrenal hyperplasia) and PRKACB (pigmented spots, myxomas, pituitary adenomas). In this report, we review CNC, its clinical features, diagnosis, treatment and molecular etiology, including PRKAR1A mutations and the newest on PRKACA and PRKACB defects especially as they pertain to adrenal tumors and Cushing's syndrome.
CONTEXT: Somatic gene mutations have been identified in only about half of cortisol-producing adenomas (CPAs). Affected genes include PRKACA, GNAS, PRKAR1A, and CTNNB1. OBJECTIVE: This work aims to expand our understanding of the prevalence of somatic mutations in CPAs from patients with overt Cushing syndrome (OCS) and "subclinical" mild autonomous cortisol excess (MACE), with an immunohistochemistry (IHC)‒guided targeted amplicon sequencing approach using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. METHODS: We analyzed FFPE adrenal tissue from 77 patients (n = 12 men, 65 women) with either OCS (n = 32) or MACE (n = 45). Using IHC for 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1) and 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B2), we identified 78 CPAs (32 OCS CPAs and 46 MACE CPAs). Genomic DNA was isolated from the FFPE CPAs and subjected to targeted amplicon sequencing for identification of somatic mutations. RESULTS: Somatic mutations were identified in 71.8% (56/78) of the CPAs. While PRKACA was the most frequently mutated gene in OCS CPAs (14/32, 43.8%), somatic genetic aberrations in CTNNB1 occurred in 56.5% (26/46) of the MACE CPAs. Most GNAS mutations were observed in MACE CPAs (5/7, 71.4%). No mutations were observed in PRKAR1A. In addition to the known mutations, we identified one previously unreported mutation in PRKACA. Two patients with MACE harbored 2 adjacent tumors within the same adrenal gland - one patient had 2 CPAs, and the other patient had a CPA and an aldosterone-producing adenoma (identified by IHC for aldosterone synthase). CONCLUSION: A comprehensive FFPE IHC-guided gene-targeted sequencing approach identified somatic mutations in 71.8% of the CPAs. OCS CPAs demonstrated a distinct mutation profile compared to MACE CPAs.
Benign adrenocortical adenomas and hyperplasia are relatively common and include a spectrum of distinct entities, which diagnosis depends on the macroscopic aspect and the secretion profile. Recent advances in genomics have proposed high-throughput molecular characterization of adrenal tumors, thereby improving our knowledge on the pathophysiology and tumorigenesis of these tumors. Genomic (exome and chromosome alteration profiles), epigenomic (micro-RNAs expression and methylation profiles) and transcriptomic (gene expression profiles) studies highlighted the major roles of intracellular calcium signaling in aldosterone-producing adenomas (APA), of protein kinase A (PKA)/cAMP pathway in cortisol-producing tumors, and of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in non-secreting tumors. Exome sequencing revealed new major drivers in all tumor types, including KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D and CACNA1H mutations in APA, PRKACA mutations in cortisol-producing adenomas (CPA) and ARMC5 mutations in primary macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (PMAH). The clinical impact of these findings is just starting to evolve. The identification of genetic syndromes, such as germline ARMC5 mutations in PMAH, has allowed genetic counseling. Key molecular alterations could serve as a basis for the development of targeted medical treatments for benign adrenal tumors. The recent developments in genomics, including single-cell technologies, and in proteomics and metabolomics will probably offer new perspectives for characterizing benign adrenal tumorigenesis.
Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is a rare adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH)-independent Cushing's syndrome (CS). Pediatric patients with PPNAD typically have unusual skin lesions and slow growth with unknown causes. We present a case of a female Chinese patient with PPNAD caused by the germline PRKACA gene copy number gain of chromosome 19. The patient initially presented with kidney stones, short stature, and obesity. After further testing, it was discovered that the patient had diabetes, mild hypertension, low bone mass, a low ACTH level, and hypercortisolemia, and neither the low-dose or high-dose dexamethasone suppression test was able to inhibit hematuric cortisol, which paradoxically increased. PPNAD was pathologically diagnosed after unilateral adrenalectomy. Chromosome microarrays and whole exon sequencing analyses of the peripheral blood, as well as testing of sectioned adrenal tissue, showed a rise in the copy number of the duplication-containing PRKACA gene on chromosome 19p13.13p13.12, a de novo but not heritable gene defect that causes disease. The clinical signs and symptoms supported the diagnosis of Carney complex (CNC). One significant mechanism of CNC pathogenesis may be the rise in germline PRKACA copy number of chromosome 19. When assessing PPNAD patients for CNC, the possibility of PRKACA gene amplification should be considered. The effect of PRKACA gene amplification on the clinical manifestations of CNC needs to be confirmed by more cases.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC), a rare, lethal hepatic cancer, occurs primarily in adolescents and young adults. Unlike hepatocellular carcinoma, FLC has no known association with viral, metabolic or chemical agents that cause cirrhosis. Currently, surgical resection is the only treatment demonstrated to achieve cure, and no standard of care exists for systemic therapy. Progress in FLC research illuminates a transition from an obscure cancer to one for which an interactive community seems poised to uncover fundamental mechanisms and initiate translation towards novel therapies. In this Roadmap, we review advances since the seminal discovery in 2014 that nearly all FLC tumours express a signature oncogene (DNAJB1-PRKACA) encoding a fusion protein (DNAJ-PKAc) in which the J-domain of a heat shock protein 40 (HSP40) co-chaperone replaces an amino-terminal segment of the catalytic subunit of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Important gains include increased understanding of oncogenic pathways driven by DNAJ-PKAc; identification of potential therapeutic targets; development of research models; elucidation of immune mechanisms with potential for the development of immunotherapies; and completion of the first multicentre clinical trials of targeted therapy for FLC. In each of these key areas we propose a Roadmap for future progress.
This work combines functional studies in model systems and examination of human tumor specimens to define a central oncogenic pathway driven by DNAJB1-PRKACA fusions in FLC. DNAJB1-PRKACA-mediated inactivation of the SIK stimulates CRTC2-p300-mediated transcription to drive tumor growth. The findings illuminate pathogenic mechanisms and inform therapeutic development.
Advances in genomics over the past two decades have allowed for elucidation of the genetic alterations leading to the development of adrenocortical tumors and/or hyperplasias. These molecular changes were initially discovered through the study of rare familial tumor syndromes such as McCune-Albright Syndrome, Carney complex, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, with the identification of alterations in genes and molecular pathways that subsequently led to the discovery of aberrations in these or related genes and pathways in sporadic tumors. Genetic alterations in GNAS, PRKAR1A, PRKACA, PRKACB, PDE11A, and PDE8B, that lead to aberrant cyclic adenosine monophosphate-protein (cAMP) kinase A signaling, were found to play a major role in the development of benign cortisol-producing adrenocortical tumors and/or hyperplasias, whereas genetic defects in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D, CACNA1H, and CLCN2 were implicated in the development of benign aldosterone-producing tumors and/or hyperplasias through modification of intracellular calcium signaling. Germline ARMC5 defects were found to cause the development of primary bilateral macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia with glucocorticoid and/or mineralocorticoid oversecretion. Adrenocortical carcinoma was linked primarily to aberrant p53 signaling and/or Wnt-beta-catenin signaling, as well as IGF2 overexpression, with frequent genetic alterations in TP53, ZNRF3, CTNNB1, and 11p15. This review focuses on the genetic underpinnings of benign cortisol- and aldosterone-producing adrenocortical tumors/hyperplasias and adrenocortical carcinoma.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma is distinctive at clinical and histologic levels. A novel DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion gene characterizes almost all cases, distinguishes it from other hepatocellular neoplasms, and drives the pathogenesis of this unique tumor. A subset of cases of fibrolamellar carcinoma is associated with alternate mechanisms of protein kinase A activation. This review article discusses common and unusual histologic features of fibrolamellar carcinoma, its differential diagnoses, and how to make the diagnosis while avoiding key pitfalls. The impact of the discovery of the fusion gene on the understanding of the tumor and the prognosis of fibrolamellar carcinoma are also discussed.
Our appreciation of the scope and influence of second messenger signaling has its origins in pioneering work on the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Also called protein kinase A (PKA), this holoenzyme exists as a tetramer comprised of a regulatory (R) subunit dimer and two catalytic (C) subunits. Upon binding of two molecules of the second messenger cAMP to each R subunit, a conformational change in the PKA holoenzyme occurs to release the C subunits. These active kinases phosphorylate downstream targets to propagate cAMP responsive cell signaling events. This article focuses on the discovery, structure, cellular location and physiological effects of the catalytic subunit alpha of protein kinase A (encoded by the gene PRKACA). We also explore the potential role of this essential gene as a molecular mediator of certain disease states.
