Prolactin-releasing peptide receptor; Receptor for prolactin-releasing peptide (PrRP). Implicated in lactation, regulation of food intake and pain-signal processing; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a pathogen with a substantial impact on both livestock and human health. However, the critical host factors in the virus life cycle remain poorly understood. Using a library comprising 123411 small guide RNAs (sgRNAs) targeting 19050 human genes, we conducted a genome-wide clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas9-based screen to identify essential genes for JEV replication. By employing knockout or knockdown techniques on genes, we identified eleven human genes crucial for JEV replication, such as prolactin releasing hormone receptor (PRLHR), activating signal cointegrator 1 complex subunit 3 (ASCC3), acyl-CoA synthetase long chain family member 3 (ACSL3), and others. Notably, we found that PRLHR knockdown blocked the autophagic flux, thereby inhibiting JEV infection. Taken together, these findings provide effective data for studying important host factors of JEV replication and scientific data for selecting antiviral drug targets.
In recent years, new DNA methylation variants have been reported in genes biologically relevant to Alzheimer's disease (AD) in human brain tissue. However, this AD-specific epigenetic information remains brain-locked and unreachable during patients' lifetimes. In a previous methylome performed in the hippocampus of 26 AD patients and 12 controls, we found higher methylation levels in AD patients in the promoter region of PRLHR, a gene involved in energy balance regulation. Our aim was to further characterize PRLHR's role in AD and to evaluate if the liquid biopsy technique would provide life access to this brain information in a non-invasive way. First, we extended the methylation mapping of PRLHR and validated previous methylome results via bisulfite cloning sequencing. Next, we observed a positive correlation between PRLHR methylation levels and AD-related neuropathological changes and a decreased expression of PRLHR in AD hippocampus. Then, we managed to replicate the hippocampal methylation differences in plasma cfDNA from an additional cohort of 35 AD patients and 35 controls. The isolation of cfDNA from the plasma of AD patients may constitute a source of potential epigenetic biomarkers to aid AD clinical management.
Prolactin-releasing peptide (PrRP) belongs to the large RF-amide neuropeptide family with a conserved Arg-Phe-amide motif at the C-terminus. PrRP plays a main role in the regulation of food intake and energy expenditure. This review focuses not only on the physiological functions of PrRP, but also on its pharmacological properties and the actions of its G-protein coupled receptor, GPR10. Special attention is paid to structure-activity relationship studies on PrRP and its analogs as well as to their effect on different physiological functions, mainly their anorexigenic and neuroprotective features and the regulation of the cardiovascular system, pain, and stress. Additionally, the therapeutic potential of this peptide and its analogs is explored.
BACKGROUND: Gastric and colorectal cancers have a major impact on public health, and are the most common malignant tumors in China. The aim of this research was to study whether polymorphisms of CHCHD3P1-HSP90AB7P, GRID1, HSPA12A, PRLHR, SBF2, POLD3 and C11orf93-C11orf92 genes are associated with the risk of gastric and colorectal cancers in the Chinese Han population. METHODS: We genotyped seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from seven genes. We selected 588 patients with gastric cancer and 449 with colorectal cancer, along with 703 healthy controls. All these SNPs were evaluated using the chi(2) test and genetic model analysis. RESULTS: The genotype "A/T" of rs12413624 in PRLHR gene was associated with a decreased risk of colorectal cancer in allele model analysis [odds ratio (OR) = 0.81; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.68-0.97; p = 0.018] and log-additive model analysis (OR = 0.81; 95% CI = 0.66-0.98; p = 0.032). The genotype "A/G" of rs1665650 in HSPA12A gene was associated with a decreased risk of gastric cancer in overdominant model analysis (OR = 0.77; 95% CI = 0.60-0.99; p = 0.038). CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidence that variants of PRLHR gene are a protective factor in colorectal cancer and variants of HSPA12A gene are a protective factor in gastric cancer in the Chinese Han population.
Uterine leiomyomas (fibroids) are the most common benign neoplasms in premenopausal women, which confer significant morbidity during the reproductive years and represent a significant public health issue. The incidence of fibroids has been associated with African-American race, early onset of menarche, early parity, and environmental/dietary exposures. These sex steroid-responsive uterine tumors are characterized by de novo transformation of the myometrium into fibroids via excessive formation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Cytogenic anomalies, mutations in mediator complex subunit 12 (MED 12), and aberrant DNA methylation/demethylation have been observed, but have not been reported as direct mediators of fibroid development. Recent advances in epigenetics have implied a functional role of G protein-coupled receptor 10 (GPR10) overexpression and irregular microRNA expression in the pathobiology of fibroids that require future investigation. Herein, the impact of epidemiologic and genetic factors on the incidence and development of fibroids is reviewed.
BACKGROUND: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs), such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), are examples of complex and partially overlapping phenotypes that often lack definitive corroborating genetic information. ADHD and ASD have complex genetic associations implicated by rare recurrent copy number variations (CNVs). Both of these NDDs have been shown to share similar biological etiologies as well as genetic pleiotropy. METHODS: Platforms aimed at investigating genetic-based associations, such as high-density microarray technologies, have been groundbreaking techniques in the field of complex diseases, aimed at elucidating the underlying disease biology. Previous studies have uncovered CNVs associated with genes within shared candidate genomic networks, including glutamate receptor genes, across multiple different NDDs. To examine shared biological pathways across two of the most common NDDs, we investigated CNVs across 15,689 individuals with ADHD (n = 7920), ASD (n = 4318), or both (n = 3,416), as well as 19,993 controls. Cases and controls were matched by genotype array (i.e., Illumina array versions). Three case-control association studies each calculated and compared the observed vs. expected frequency of CNVs across individual genes, loci, pathways, and gene networks. Quality control measures of confidence in CNV-calling, prior to association analyses, included visual inspection of genotype and hybridization intensity. RESULTS: Here, we report results from CNV analysis in search for individual genes, loci, pathways, and gene networks. To extend our previous observations implicating a key role of the metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) network in both ADHD and autism, we exhaustively queried patients with ASD and/or ADHD for CNVs associated with the 273 genomic regions of interest within the mGluR gene network (genes with one or two degrees protein-protein interaction with mGluR 1-8 genes). Among CNVs in mGluR network genes, we uncovered CNTN4 deletions enriched in NDD cases (P = 3.22E - 26, OR = 2.49). Additionally, we uncovered PRLHR deletions in 40 ADHD cases and 12 controls (P = 5.26E - 13, OR = 8.45) as well as clinically diagnostic relevant 22q11.2 duplications and 16p11.2 duplications in 23 ADHD + ASD cases and 9 controls (P = 4.08E - 13, OR = 15.05) and 22q11.2 duplications in 34 ADHD + ASD cases and 51 controls (P = 9.21E - 9, OR = 3.93); those control samples were not with previous 22qDS diagnosis in their EHR records. CONCLUSION: Together, these results suggest that disruption in neuronal cell-adhesion pathways confers significant risk to NDDs and showcase that rare recurrent CNVs in CNTN4, 22q11.2, and 16p11.2 are overrepresented in NDDs that constitute patients predominantly suffering from ADHD and ASD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02286817 First Posted: 10 November 14, ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02777931 first posted: 19 May 2016, ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03006367 first posted: 30 December 2016, ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02895906 first posted: 12 September 2016.
BACKGROUND: Excess adiposity in childhood is associated with numerous adverse health outcomes. As this condition is difficult to treat once present, identification of risk early in life can help inform and implement strategies to prevent the onset of the condition. We performed an epigenome-wide association study to prospectively investigate the relationship between cord blood DNA methylation and adiposity measurements in childhood. METHODS: We measured genome-wide DNA methylation from 478 children in cord blood and measured overall and central adiposity via skinfold caliper measurements in early (range 3.1-3.3 years) and mid-childhood (age range 7.3-8.3 years) and via dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) in mid-childhood. Final models were adjusted for maternal age at enrollment, pre-pregnancy body mass index, education, folate intake during pregnancy, smoking during pregnancy, and gestational weight gain, and child sex, race/ethnicity, current age, and cord blood cell composition. RESULTS: We identified four promoter proximal CpG sites that were associated with adiposity as measured by subscapular (SS) and triceps (TR) ratio (SS:TR) in early childhood, in the genes KPRP, SCL9A10, MYLK2, and PRLHR. We additionally identified one gene body CpG site associated with early childhood SS + TR on PPAPDC1A; this site was nominally associated with SS + TR in mid-childhood. Higher methylation at one promoter proximal CpG site in MMP25 was also associated with SS:TR in mid-childhood. In regional analyses, methylation at an exonal region of GFPT2 was positively associated with SS:TR in early childhood. Finally, we identified regions of two long, non-coding RNAs which were associated with SS:TR (LOC100049716) and fat-free mass index (LOC102723493) in mid-childhood. CONCLUSION: This analysis identified novel CpG loci associated with adiposity outcomes. However, our results suggest little consistency across the various adiposity outcomes tested, particularly among the more accurate DXA measurements of body composition. We recommend using caution when interpreting these associations.
Epigenetic modifications have been highlighted in chronic non-communicable diseases. The aim of this study was to investigate genome-wide DNA methylation for the identification of methylation markers in obesity. With obese Chinese preschool children, we performed comprehensive DNA methylation profiling of gene promoters and CpG islands to determine the differentially methylated genes using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation followed by hybridization to the NimbleGen Human DNA Methylation 385K Promoter Plus CpG Island Microarray. We found that compared to lean children, 251 promoters and 575 CGIs were demethylated, and 141 promoters and 277 CGIs were hypermethylated in obese children, and their distribution on chromosomes was imbalanced, showing more promoters and CGIs with demethylation on chromosomes 3, 16, 17 and 19 and more differentially methylated promoters and CGIs on chromosome X compared with chromosome Y. Further analysis indicated that aberrant methylations occurred mostly in HCP promoters and promoter CGIs. Among the top 80 promoters and CGIs that had differentiated methylation between obese and lean children, nearly half have been previously studied, and almost all of them are involved in the pathogenesis of cancers that are associated with many organs. Furthermore, four genes (FZD7, PRLHR, EXOSC4, and EIF6) with differential promoter methylation were validated, and their associations with obesity must be clarified. In conclusion, this study represents the first effort to determine methylation markers in obese Chinese children, which has potential relevance for identifying markers that are useful in elucidating the mechanisms of obesity pathogenesis and its complications.
OBJECTIVE: Obesity is influenced by genetic and environmental factors. Despite the success of human genome-wide association studies, the specific genes that confer obesity remain largely unknown. The objective of this study was to use outbred rats to identify the genetic loci underlying obesity and related morphometric and metabolic traits. METHODS: This study measured obesity-relevant traits, including body weight, body length, BMI, fasting glucose, and retroperitoneal, epididymal, and parametrial fat pad weight in 3,173 male and female adult N/NIH heterogeneous stock (HS) rats across three institutions, providing data for the largest rat genome-wide association study to date. Genetic loci were identified using a linear mixed model to account for the complex family relationships of the HS and using covariates to account for differences among the three phenotyping centers. RESULTS: This study identified 32 independent loci, several of which contained only a single gene (e.g., Epha5, Nrg1, Klhl14) or obvious candidate genes (e.g., Adcy3, Prlhr). There were strong phenotypic and genetic correlations among obesity-related traits, and there was extensive pleiotropy at individual loci. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the utility of HS rats for investigating the genetics of obesity-related traits across institutions and identify several candidate genes for future functional testing.
Disruption of brain-expressed G protein-coupled receptor-10 (GPR10) causes obesity in animals. Here, we identify multiple rare variants in GPR10 in people with severe obesity and in normal weight controls. These variants impair ligand binding and G protein-dependent signalling in cells. Transgenic mice harbouring a loss of function GPR10 variant found in an individual with obesity, gain excessive weight due to decreased energy expenditure rather than increased food intake. This evidence supports a role for GPR10 in human energy homeostasis. Therapeutic targeting of GPR10 may represent an effective weight-loss strategy.
A panel of docking scaffolds was developed for the known molecular targets of the anticancer agents, thieno[2,3-b]pyridines, in order to glean insight into their mechanism of action. The reported targets are the copper-trafficking antioxidant 1 protein, tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterase 1, the colchicine binding site in tubulin, adenosine A2A receptor, and, finally, phospholipase C-delta1. According to the panel, the A2A receptor showed the strongest binding, inferring it to be the most plausible target, closely followed by tubulin. To investigate whether the thieno[2,3-b]pyridines modulate G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) other than A2A, a screen against 168 GPCRs was conducted. According to the results, ligand 1 modulates five receptors in the low microM region, four as an antagonist; CRL-RAMP3 (IC(50)-11.9 microM), NPSR1B (IC(50)-1.0 microM), PRLHR (IC(50)-9.3 microM), and CXCR4 (IC(50)-6.9 microM). Finally, one agonist, GPRR35, was found (EC(50) of 7.5 microM). Molecular modelling showed good binding to all of the receptors investigated; however, none of these surpass the A2A receptor. Furthermore, the newly-identified receptors are relatively modestly expressed in the cancer cell lines most affected by the thieno[2,3-b]pyridines, making them less likely to be the main targets of the mechanism of action for this compound class. Nevertheless, new modulators against GPCRs are of an interest as potential hits for further drug development.
Detecting gene losses is a novel aspect of evolutionary genomics that has been made feasible by whole-genome sequencing. However, research to date has concentrated on elucidating evolutionary patterns of genomic components shared between species, rather than identifying disparities between genomes. In this study, we searched for gene losses in the lineage leading to eutherian mammals. First, as a pilot analysis, we selected five gene families (Wnt, Fgf, Tbx, TGFbeta, and Frizzled) for molecular phylogenetic analyses, and identified mammalian lineage-specific losses of Wnt11b, Tbx6L/VegT/tbx16, Nodal-related, ADMP1, ADMP2, Sizzled, and Crescent. Second, automated genome-wide phylogenetic screening was implemented based on this pilot analysis. As a result, we detected 147 chicken genes without eutherian orthologs, which resulted from 141 gene loss events. Our inventory contained a group of regulatory genes governing early embryonic axis formation, such as Noggins, and multiple members of the opsin and prolactin-releasing hormone receptor ("PRLHR") gene families. Our findings highlight the potential of genome-wide gene phylogeny ("phylome") analysis in detecting possible rearrangement of gene networks and the importance of identifying losses of ancestral genomic components in analyzing the molecular basis underlying phenotypic evolution.
We recently showed that Xq26.3 microduplications cause X-linked acrogigantism (X-LAG). X-LAG patients mainly present with growth hormone and prolactin-secreting adenomas and share a minimal duplicated region containing at least four genes. GPR101 was the only gene highly expressed in their pituitary lesions, but little is known about its expression patterns. In this work, GPR101 transcripts were characterized in human tissues by 5'-Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (RACE) and RNAseq, while the putative promoter was bioinformatically predicted. We investigated GPR101 mRNA and protein expression by RT-quantitative PCR (qPCR), whole-mount in situ hybridization, and immunostaining, in human, rhesus monkey, rat and zebrafish. We identified four GPR101 isoforms characterized by different 5'-untranslated regions (UTRs) and a common 6.1kb long 3'UTR. GPR101 expression was very low or absent in almost all adult human tissues examined, except for specific brain regions. Strong GPR101 staining was observed in human fetal pituitary and during adolescence, whereas very weak/absent expression was detected during childhood and adult life. In contrast to humans, adult monkey and rat pituitaries expressed GPR101, but in different cell types. Gpr101 is expressed in the brain and pituitary during rat and zebrafish development; in rat pituitary, Gpr101 is expressed only after birth and shows sexual dimorphism. This study shows that different GPR101 transcripts exist and that the brain is the major site of GPR101 expression across different species, although divergent species- and temporal-specific expression patterns are evident. These findings suggest an important role for GPR101 in brain and pituitary development and likely reflect the very different growth, development and maturation patterns among species.
BACKGROUND: Uterine leiomyomas (fibroids) are highly prevalent benign smooth muscle tumors of the uterus. In the USA, the lifetime risk for women developing uterine leiomyomas is estimated as up to 75%. Except for hysterectomy, most therapies or treatments often provide only partial or temporary relief and are not successful in every patient. There is a clear racial disparity in the disease; African-American women are estimated to be three times more likely to develop uterine leiomyomas and generally develop more severe symptoms. There is also familial clustering between first-degree relatives and twins, and multiple inherited syndromes in which fibroid development occurs. Leiomyomas have been described as clonal and hormonally regulated, but despite the healthcare burden imposed by the disease, the etiology of uterine leiomyomas remains largely unknown. The mechanisms involved in their growth are also essentially unknown, which has contributed to the slow progress in development of effective treatment options. METHODS: A comprehensive PubMed search for and critical assessment of articles related to the epidemiological, biological and genetic clues for uterine leiomyoma development was performed. The individual functions of some of the best candidate genes are explained to provide more insight into their biological function and to interconnect and organize genes and pathways in one overarching figure that represents the current state of knowledge about uterine leiomyoma development and growth. RESULTS: In this review, the widely recognized roles of estrogen and progesterone in uterine leiomyoma pathobiology on the basis of clinical and experimental data are presented. This is followed by fundamental aspects and concepts including the possible cellular origin of uterine fibroids. The central themes in the subsequent parts are cytogenetic aberrations in leiomyomas and the racial/ethnic disparities in uterine fibroid biology. Then, the attributes of various in vitro and in vivo, human syndrome, rodent xenograft, naturally mutant, and genetically modified models used to study possible molecular mechanisms of leiomyoma development and growth are described. Particular emphasis is placed on known links to fibrosis, hypertrophy, and hyperplasia and genes that are potentially important in these processes. CONCLUSIONS: Menstrual cycle-related injury and repair and coinciding hormonal cycling appears to affect myometrial stem cells that, at a certain stage of fibroid development, often obtain cytogenetic aberrations and mutations of Mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12). Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a master regulator of proliferation, is activated in many of these tumors, possibly by mechanisms that are similar to some human fibrosis syndromes and/or by mutation of upstream tumor suppressor genes. Animal models of the disease support some of these dysregulated pathways in fibroid etiology or pathogenesis, but none are definitive. All of this suggests that there are likely several key mechanisms involved in the disease that, in addition to increasing the complexity of uterine fibroid pathobiology, offer possible approaches for patient-specific therapies. A final model that incorporates many of these reported mechanisms is presented with a discussion of their implications for leiomyoma clinical practice.
We present seven new vertebrate homologs of the prolactin-releasing hormone receptor (PRLHR) and show that these are found as two separate subtypes, PRLHR1 and PRLHR2. Analysis of a number of vertebrate sequences using phylogeny, pharmacology, and paralogon analysis indicates that the PRLHRs are likely to share a common ancestry with the neuropeptide Y (NPY) receptors. Moreover, a micromolar level of NPY was able to bind and inhibit completely the PRLH-evoked response in PRLHR1-expressing cells. We suggest that an ancestral PRLH peptide started coevolving with a redundant NPY binding receptor, which then became PRLHR, approximately 500 million years ago. The PRLHR1 subtype was shown to have a relatively high evolutionary rate compared to receptors with fixed peptide preference, which could indicate a drastic change in binding preference, thus supporting this hypothesis. This report suggests how gene duplication events can lead to novel peptide ligand/receptor interactions and hence spur the evolution of new physiological functions.
Hypothalamic peptide hormones regulate the secretion of most of the anterior pituitary hormones, that is, growth hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone and adrenocorticotropin. These peptides do not regulate the secretion of prolactin, at least in a specific manner, however. The peptides act through specific receptors, which are referred to as seven-transmembrane-domain receptors or G-protein-coupled receptors. Although prolactin is important in pregnancy and lactation in mammals, and is involved in the development of the mammary glands and the promotion of milk synthesis, a specific prolactin-releasing hormone has remained unknown. Here we identify a potent candidate for such a hormone. We first proposed that there may still be unknown peptide hormone factors that control pituitary function through seven-transmembrane-domain receptors. We isolated the complementary DNA encoding an 'orphan' receptor (that is, one for which the ligand is unknown). This receptor, hGR3, is specifically expressed in the human pituitary. We then searched for the hGR3 ligand in the hypothalamus and identified a new peptide, which shares no sequence similarity with known peptides and proteins, as an endogenous ligand. We show that this ligand is a potent prolactin-releasing factor for rat anterior pituitary cells; we have therefore named this peptide prolactin-releasing peptide.
Since the first discovery of a peptide with RFamide structure at its C-terminus (i.e., an RFamide peptide) from an invertebrate in 1977, numerous studies on RFamide peptides have been conducted, and a variety have been identified in various phyla throughout the animal kingdom. The first reported mammalian RFamide peptides were neuropeptide FF (NPFF) and neuropeptide AF (NPAF) in 1985. However, for many years after this, no new novel RFamide peptides were identified in mammals. A breakthrough in discovering mammalian RFamide peptides was made possible by reverse pharmacology on the basis of orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) research. The first report of an RFamide peptide identified from orphan GPCR research was prolactin (PRL)-releasing peptide (PrRP) in 1998. To date, a total of five RFamide peptide genes have been discovered in mammals. Orphan GPCR research has contributed considerably to the identification of these peptides and their receptor genes. This paper examines these mammalian RFamide peptides focusing especially on PrRP, RFamide-related peptides (RFRPs) and, the most recently identified, pyroglutamylated RFamide peptide (QRFP), the discovery of all of which the authors were at least partly involved in. We review here the strategies employed for the identification of these peptides and examine their characteristics, tissue distribution, receptors and functions.
The anorexigenic neuropeptide prolactin-releasing peptide (PrRP) is involved in the regulation of food intake and energy expenditure. Lipidization of PrRP stabilizes the peptide, facilitates central effect after peripheral administration and increases its affinity for its receptor, GPR10, and for the neuropeptide FF (NPFF) receptor NPFF-R2. The two most potent palmitoylated analogs with anorectic effects in mice, palm(11)-PrRP31 and palm-PrRP31, were studied in vitro to determine their agonist/antagonist properties and mechanism of action on GPR10, NPFF-R2 and other potential off-target receptors related to energy homeostasis. Palmitoylation of both PrRP31 analogs increased the binding properties of PrRP31 to anorexigenic receptors GPR10 and NPFF-R2 and resulted in a high affinity for another NPFF receptor, NPFF-R1. Moreover, in CHO-K1 cells expressing GPR10, NPFF-R2 or NPFF-R1, palm(11)-PrRP and palm-PrRP significantly increased the phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), protein kinase B (Akt) and cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB). Palm(11)-PrRP31, unlike palm-PrRP31, did not activate either c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), p38, c-Jun, c-Fos or CREB pathways in cells expressing NPFF-1R. Palm-PrRP31 also has higher binding affinities for off-target receptors, namely, the ghrelin, opioid (KOR, MOR, DOR and OPR-L1) and neuropeptide Y (Y(1), Y(2) and Y(5)) receptors. Palm(11)-PrRP31 exhibited fewer off-target activities; therefore, it has a higher potential to be used as an anti-obesity drug with anorectic effects.
Mammalian RF-amide peptides including RF-amide-related peptides-1 and -3, neuropeptides AF and FF, Prolactin releasing peptides, Kisspeptins and RFa peptides are currently considered endogenous peptides for the GPCRs NPFF1R, NPFF2R, GPR10, GPR54 and GPR103, respectively. While NPFF1R and NPFF2R displayed high affinity for all the RF-amide peptides, GPR10, GPR54 and GPR103 only bind their cognate ligands. Through a systematic and sequential N-terminus deletion and benzoylation of either RF-amide neuropeptide (RFRP-3, NPFF, Kp-10, PrRP20, and 26RFa), we report the corresponding impact on affinity and activity towards all the RF-amide receptors (NPFF1R, NPFF2R, GPR10, GPR54 and GPR103). Our results highlight the difficulty to develop selective peptide ligands for GPR10, GPR54 or GPR103 without a modification of the C-terminus RF-amide signature, but open the door to the design of new RF-amide peptides acting as agonist for one receptor and antagonist for another one.
