Mammaglobin-B; May bind androgens and other steroids, may also bind estramustine, a chemotherapeutic agent used for prostate cancer. May be under transcriptional regulation of steroid hormones.
Advanced metastasis of colon cancer makes it more difficult to treat colon cancer. Finding the markers of colon cancer (Colon Cancer) can diagnose the stage of cancer in time and improve the prognosis with timely treatment. This paper uses gene expression profiling data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for the diagnosis of colon cancer and its staging. In this study, we first selected the gene modules with the greatest correlation with cancer by Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA), extracted the characteristic genes for differential expression results using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator algorithm (Lasso) and performed survival analysis, and then combined the genes in the modules with the Lasso-extracted feature genes were combined to diagnose colon cancer versus healthy controls using RF, SVM and decision trees, and colon cancer staging was diagnosed using differentially expressed genes for each stage. Finally, Protein-Protein Interaction Networks (PPI) networks were done for 289 genes to identify clusters of aggregated proteins for survival analysis. Finally, the RF model had the best results in the diagnosis of colon cancer versus control group fold cross-validation with an average accuracy of 99.81%, F1 value reaching 0.9968, accuracy of 99.88%, and recall of 99.5%, and an average accuracy of 91.5%, F1 value reaching 0.7679, accuracy of 86.94%, and recall in the diagnosis of colon cancer stages I, II, III and IV. The recall rate reached 73.04%, and eight genes associated with colon cancer prognosis were identified for GCNT2, GLDN, SULT1B1, UGT2B15, PTGDR2, GPR15, BMP5 and CPT2.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized by anti-nuclear autoantibodies whose production is promoted by autoreactive T follicular helper (TFH) cells. During SLE pathogenesis, basophils accumulate in secondary lymphoid organs (SLO), amplify autoantibody production and disease progression through mechanisms that remain to be defined. Here, we provide evidence for a direct functional relationship between TFH cells and basophils during lupus pathogenesis, both in humans and mice. PD-L1 upregulation on basophils and IL-4 production are associated with TFH and TFH2 cell expansions and with disease activity. Pathogenic TFH cell accumulation, maintenance, and function in SLO were dependent on PD-L1 and IL-4 in basophils, which induced a transcriptional program allowing TFH2 cell differentiation and function. Our study establishes a direct mechanistic link between basophils and TFH cells in SLE that promotes autoantibody production and lupus nephritis.
Studies have shown that the prostaglandin (PG) family acts as an allergic inflammatory mediator in malignant diseases. Furthermore, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and its related receptors, as well as the prostaglandin D2 (PGD2)/PGD2 receptor (PTGDR2), play irreplaceable roles in tumorigenesis and anti-tumor therapy. Several experiments have demonstrated that PGD2 signaling through PTGDR2 not only directly inhibits cancer cell survival, proliferation, and migration but also reduces resistance toward conventional chemotherapeutic agents. Recent studies from our and other laboratories have shown that PGD2, its ligands, and related metabolites can significantly alter the tumor microenvironment (TME) by promoting the secretion of chemokines and cytokines, thereby inhibiting tumor progression. Additionally, reduced PGD2 expression has been associated with poor prognosis in patients with gastric, breast, lung, and pancreatic cancers, validating the preclinical findings and their clinical relevance. This review focuses on the current understanding of PGD2/PTGDR2 expression patterns and biological activity in cancer, proposing questions to guide the assessment of PGD2 and its receptors as potential targets for effective cancer therapies.
The antitumor effect of prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) on gastric cancer (GC) has been known for decades. However, the mechanism of PGD2's control of GC growth is unclear. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are implicated in tumor neovascularization, invasiveness, and therapeutic resistance. Herein, we discovered that signaling between PGD2 and its receptor (PTGDR2) has the ability to restrict the self-renewal of GC cells in vitro and suppress tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. To obtain these findings, we first determined that PGD2 synthase (L-PTGDS) and PTGDR2 expression were lower in GC tissues than adjacent tissues and was associated with the patients' prognosis. Moreover, the expression of L-PTGDS and PTGDR2 was negatively correlated with the GC-CSC markers Sall4 and Lgr5 in GC tissues. Second, L-PTGDS and PTGDR2 expression were knocked down in CSC-like cells, resulting in enhanced expression of CSC markers and self-renewal ability. Direct PGD2 stimulation and L-PTGDS overexpression produced the opposite effect. Thirdly, PGD2 inhibited tumor growth and incidence rate in a subcutaneous tumor model and suppressed liver and mesenteric metastasis in a peritoneal metastasis model. Interfering with the expression of PTGDR2 reversed these effects in vivo. Last, a mechanistic study found that PGD2 inhibited STAT3 phosphorylation and nuclear expression. Further experiments revealed that the inhibitory effect of PGD2 on the expression of CSC markers disappeared after mutations were introduced into STAT3 phosphorylation (Thr705) site. In short, this study reveals a novel function of PGD2/PTGDR2 signaling on CSC regulation and provides a new way to control the development of GC. Stem Cells 2018;36:990-1003.
Tuberculosis (TB) has remained an unsolved problem and a major public health issue, particularly in developing countries. Pakistan is one of the countries with the highest tuberculosis infection rates globally. However, methods or biomarkers to detect early signs of TB infection are limited. Here, we characterized the mRNA profiles of immune responses in unstimulated Peripheral blood mononuclear cells obtained from treatment naive patients with early signs of active pulmonary tuberculosis without previous history of clinical TB. We identified a unique mRNA profile in active TB compared to uninfected controls, including cytokines such as IL-27, IL-15, IL-2RA, IL-24, and TGFbeta, transcription factors such as STAT1 and NFATC1 and immune markers/receptors such as TLR4, IRF1, CD80, CD28, and PTGDR2 from an overall 84 different transcripts analyzed. Among 12 significant differentially expressed transcripts, we identified five gene signatures which included three upregulated IL-27, STAT1, TLR4 and two downregulated IL-24 and CD80 that best discriminate between active pulmonary TB and uninfected controls with AUC ranging from 0.9 to 1. Our data identified a molecular immune signature associated with the early stages of active pulmonary tuberculosis and it could be further investigated as a potential biomarker of pulmonary TB.
Soon after diagnosis with type 1 diabetes (T1D), many patients experience a period of partial remission. A longer partial remission is associated with a better response to treatment, but the mechanism is not known. The frequency of CD4(+)CD25(+)CD127(hi) (127-hi) cells, a cell subset with an anti-inflammatory Th2 bias, correlates positively with length of partial remission. The purpose of this study was to further characterize the nature of the Th2 bias in 127-hi cells. Single cell RNA sequencing paired with TCR sequencing of sorted 127-hi memory cells identifies clonally expanded Th2 clusters in 127-hi cells from T1D, but not from healthy donors. The Th2 clusters express GATA3, GATA3-AS1, PTGDR2, IL17RB, IL4R and IL9R. The existence of 127-hi Th2 cell clonal expansion in T1D suggests that disease factors may induce clonal expansion of 127-hi Th2 cells that prolong partial remission and delay disease progression.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignant tumors. The aim of the present study was to identify key genes and pathways to improve the understanding of the mechanism of CRC. GSE87211, including 203 CRC samples and 160 control samples, was screened to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). In total, 853 DEGs were obtained, including 363 upregulated genes and 490 downregulated genes. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis of DEGs were performed to obtain enrichment datasets. GO analysis showed that DEGs were significantly enriched in the extracellular region, cell-cell signaling, hormone activity, and cytokine activity. KEGG pathway analysis revealed that the DEGs were mainly enriched in the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, drug metabolism, androgen and estrogen metabolism, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. The Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network of DEGs was constructed by using Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING). The app MCODE plugged in Cytoscape was used to explore the key modules involved in disease development. 43 key genes involved in the top two modules were identified. Six hub genes (CXCL(2), CXCL(3), PTGDR2, GRP, CXCL(11), and AGTR1) were statistically associated with patient overall survival or disease-free survival. The functions of six hub genes were mainly related to the hormone and chemokine activities. In conclusion, the present study may help understand the molecular mechanisms of CRC development.
The main role of the host immune system is to identify and eliminate cancer cells, which is a complex process, but it is not a fail-safe mechanism. Many sarcoma patients succumb to this disease despite treatments rendered. The aim of this pilot study was to compare the levels of CD4+ T-cells, T-regulatory (Treg) cells, and cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), interleukin-17A (IL-17A), and transforming growth factor-beta-1 (TGF-beta1) in peripheral blood leukocytes of sarcoma patients and healthy controls. For gene expression studies, total ribonucleic acid (RNA) was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes and genes that were differentially regulated in peripheral blood leukocytes of sarcoma patients compared with healthy controls were determined using a commercial T-helper cell differentiation quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) array. Flow cytometer analysis was performed on blood samples from 26 sarcoma patients and 10 healthy controls to identify the levels of CD4+ T-cells and T-reg cells. The level of cytokines in plasma and culture supernatant were quantified using commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits. A marked reduction in the percentage of CD4+ T-cells (p = 0.037) and levels of TNF-alpha (p = 0.004) and IFN-gamma (0.010) was observed in sarcoma patients. Gene expression analysis showed five genes (homeobox A10 (HOXA10), GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), prostaglandin D2 receptor 2 (PTGDR2), thymocyte selection associated high mobility group box (TOX), and C-C motif chemokine receptor 3 (CCR3)) were dysregulated (p < 0.05) in sarcoma patients. This study suggests that T-helper-1 immune responses are reduced in sarcoma patients.
OBJECTIVE: Asthma and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) often occur simultaneously, with GERD being a comorbidity of asthma. This study aimed to explore the biological markers related to asthma and GERD by bioinformatics analysis. METHODS: Initially, gene expression datasets for asthma and GERD were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database, and subsequent differential expression analysis yielded 620 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for asthma and 2367 DEGs for GERD. The intersection of these two gene sets yielded a total of 84 DEGs. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analyses revealed that these genes may be involved in steroid hormone secretion and cellular stress response. Five hub genes (PTGDR2, CPA3, FCER1A, TPSAB1, and IL1RL1) were identified by a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis and topological algorithm. RESULTS: Enrichment analysis results indicated that hub genes may be involved in hormone secretion and disease development, particularly in regulating the renin-angiotensin system and systemic arterial blood pressure. PTGDR2, CPA3, TPSAB1, and IL1RL1 were upregulated in both asthma and GERD patient groups, while FCER1A was upregulated in asthma patients but downregulated in GERD patients. Through drug prediction, 22 drugs targeting hub genes PTGDR2, FCER1A, and TPSAB1 were identified. By constructing a transcription factor (TF)-target gene network, we found that eight TFs may regulate the expression of PTGDR2, FCER1A, and IL1RL1. CONCLUSION: Hence, Asthma and GERD were related to steroid hormone secretion and the renin-angiotensin system.
INTRODUCTION: Cancer stem cells have been implicated angiogenesis of tumor and invasiveness, drug resistance in tumors. Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP) owns carcinogenic roles in various organs, but the role of YAP in cancer stem cells of gastric cancer (GC) remains unclear. In this study, we explored the function and mechanism of YAP in GC cancer stem cells. MATERIALS AND METHODS, AND RESULTS: First, we confirmed that the expression of YAP mRNA and protein in GC tissues was higher than in adjacent tissues by RT-PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry. Immunofluorescence staining of the GC tissues revealed that the region of YAP expression coincided with the region of expression of the cancer stem cell marker SALL4 but did not overlap with that of the epithelial marker cytokeratin 14 (CK14). Additional research revealed that spherical cells expressed relatively high levels of YAP protein, and YAP overexpression reinforced self-renewal and expression of stem cell markers in the GC cells. Knockdown the expression of YAP reversed this phenomenon. Second, we examined the expression patterns of lipocalin-type prostaglandin D2 synthase (L-PTGDS) and prostaglandin D2 receptor 2 (PTGDR2) in GC tissues and proved that there was negatively correlation between the expression of L-PTGDS and PTGDR2 and YAP in GC tissues. Finally, we confirmed that YAP inhibited the expression of L-PTGDS and PTGDR2 by gain- and loss-of-function experiments. Moreover, the overexpression of L-PTGDS and PTGDR2 suppressed the proliferation and self-renewal induced by YAP in vitro and reversed the pro-tumor effect of YAP in vivo. CONCLUSION: Our results revealed a novel function of YAP and the mechanism underlying cancer stem cell regulation by YAP.
BACKGROUND: Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) has been shown to restrict the occurrence and development of multiple cancers; nevertheless, its underlying molecular mechanism has not been fully elucidated. The present study investigated the effect of PGD2 on the biological function of the enriched gastric cancer stem cells (GCSCs), as well as its underlying molecular mechanism, to provide a theoretical basis and potential therapeutic drugs for gastric cancer (GC) treatment. METHODS: The plasma PGD2 levels were detected by Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Silencing of lipocalin prostaglandin D synthetases (L-PTGDS) and prostaglandin D2 receptor 2 (PTGDR2) was carried out in GCSCs from SGC-7901 and HGC-27 cell lines. Cell Counting Kit-8, transwell, flow cytometry, and western blotting assays were used to determine cell viability, invasion, apoptosis, and stemness of GCSCs. In vivo xenograft models were used to assess tumor growth. RESULTS: Clinically, it was found that the plasma PGD2 level decreased significantly in patients with GC. PGD2 suppressed viability, invasion, and stemness and increased the apoptosis of GCSCs. Downregulating L-PTGDS and PTGDR2 promoted viability, invasion, and stemness and reduced the apoptosis of GCSCs. Moreover, the inhibition of GCSCs induced by PGD2 was eliminated by downregulating the expression of PTGDR2. The results of in vivo experiments were consistent with those of in vitro experiments. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that PGD2 may be an important marker and potential therapeutic target in the clinical management of GC. L-PTGDS/PTGDR2 may be one of the critical targets for GC therapy. The PGD2/PTGDR2 signal affects the viability, invasion, apoptosis, and stemness of GCSCs and prevents the progression of GC.
CRTh2 (encoded by PTGDR2) is a G-protein coupled receptor expressed by Th2 cells as well as eosinophils, basophils and innate lymphoid cells (ILC)2s. Activation of CRTh2, by its ligand prostaglandin (PG)D2, mediates production of type 2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13), chemotaxis and inhibition of apoptosis. As such, the PGD2-CRTh2 pathway is considered important to the development and maintenance of allergic inflammation. Expression of CRTh2 is mediated by the transcription factor GATA3 during Th2 cell differentiation and within ILC2s. Other than this, relatively little is known regarding the cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating expression of CRTh2. Here, we show using primary human Th2 cells that activation (24hrs) through TCR crosslinking (alphaCD3/alphaCD28) reduced expression of both mRNA and surface levels of CRTh2 assessed by flow cytometry and qRT-PCR. This effect took more than 4 hours and expression was recovered following removal of activation. EMSA analysis revealed that GATA3 and NFAT1 can bind independently to overlapping sites within a CRTh2 promoter probe. NFAT1 over-expression resulted in loss of GATA3-mediated CRTh2 promoter activity, while inhibition of NFAT using a peptide inhibitor (VIVIT) coincided with recovery of CRTh2 expression. Collectively these data indicate that expression of CRTh2 is regulated through the competitive action of GATA3 and NFAT1. Though prolonged activation led to NFAT1-mediated downregulation, CRTh2 was re-expressed when stimulus was removed suggesting this is a dynamic mechanism and may play a role in PGD2-CRTh2 mediated allergic inflammation.
OBJECTIVE: Adenoids, tubal tonsil, palatine tonsil, and lingual tonsil are immunological organs included in the Waldeyer's ring, the basic function of which is the antibody production to common environmental antigens. Adenoidal hypertrophy (AH) is a major medical issue in children, and adenoidectomy is still the most used treatment worldwide. The response of adenoids to allergens is a good model to evaluate their immunological function. This report assessed the immunological changes in adenoid tissues from children with allergic rhinitis (AR) undergoing sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT). METHODS: Adenoid samples from 16 children (seven males, nine females, mean age 7.12 years) with AH and clinical indication to adenoidectomy were collected. Of them, five children were not allergic and 11 had house dust mite and grass pollen-induced AR. Among allergic children, in four AR was treated by antihistamines while in seven AR was treated by high-dose SLIT during 4-6 months. The evaluation addressed the T helper 1 (Th1), Th2, and Th3 cells by performing a PCR array on mRNA extracted from adenoid samples. RESULTS: In non-allergic children, a typical Th1 pattern was found. SLIT induced a strong down-regulation of genes involved in Th2 and Th1 activation and function. In particular, in SLIT-treated allergic children IL-4, CCR2, CCR3, and PTGDR2 (Th2 related genes) and CD28, IL-2, and INHA (Th1 related genes) expression was reduced, compared with children treated with antihistamines. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary findings warrant investigation in trials including larger numbers of patients, but indicate that hypertrophic adenoids of allergic children have the typical response to the specific allergen administered by SLIT. This should suggest that one should reconsider the immunological role of adenoids.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is an adult-onset neurodegenerative disease characterized by aggregation of alpha-synuclein in oligodendrocytes to form glial cytoplasmic inclusions. According to the distribution of neurodegeneration, MSA is subtyped as striatonigral degeneration (SND), olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA), or as combination of these 2 (mixed MSA). In the current study, we aimed to investigate regional microglial populations and gene expression in the 3 different MSA subtypes. Microscopy with microglial marker Iba-1 combined with either proinflammatory marker CD68 or anti-inflammatory marker Arginase-1 was analyzed in control, SND, and OPCA cases (n = 5) using paraffin embedded sections. Western immunoblotting and cytokine array were used to determine protein expression in MSA and control brain regions. Gene expression was investigated using the NanoString nCounter Human Inflammation panel v2 mRNA Expression Assay. Analysis of neuropathological subtypes of MSA demonstrated a significant increase in microglia in the substantia nigra of OPCA cases. There was no difference in the microglial activation state in any region. Cytokine expression in MSA was comparable with controls. Decreased expression of CX3CL1 precursor protein and significantly greater CX3CR1 protein was found in MSA. NanoString analysis revealed the >2-fold greater expression of ARG1, MASP1, NOX4, PTGDR2, and C6 in MSA.
BACKGROUND: Chronic inflammation is a risk factor for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and other diseases. Prostanoid receptors are clearly involved in the development of many types of cancer. However, their role is not simple and is poorly understood in HNSCC. METHODS: Methylation profiles of prostanoid receptor family genes were generated for tumour samples obtained from 274 patients with HNSCC, including 69 hypopharynx, 51 larynx, 79 oral cavity, and 75 oropharynx tumour samples, by quantitative methylation-specific PCR. Promoter methylation was then evaluated with respect to various clinical characteristics and patient survival. RESULTS: The mean number of methylated genes per sample was 2.05 +/- 2.59 (range 0 to 9). Promoters of PTGDR1, PTGDR2, PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, PTGER4, PTGFR, PTGIR, and TBXA2R were methylated in 43.8%, 18.2%, 25.5%, 17.5%, 41.2%, 8.0%, 19.3%, 20.4%, and 11.3% of the samples, respectively. Methylation indices for prostanoid receptor family genes tended to be higher as the number of TET methylation events increased. Patients with 5-9 methylated genes had a significantly lower survival rate than that of patients with 0-4 methylated genes (log-rank test, P= 0.007). In multivariate analyses, PTGDR1 methylation was most highly correlated with recurrence in patients with hypopharyngeal cancer (P = 0.014). A similar correlation was observed for PTGER4 in patients with laryngeal cancer (P = 0.046). Methylation of the PTGIR and TBXA2R promoters was positively correlated with recurrence in oropharyngeal cancer (P = 0.028 and P = 0.006, respectively). Moreover, Patients with 5-9 methylated genes were extremely lower of 5hmC levels (P = 0.035) and was correlated with increasing expression of DNMT3A and DNMT3B (P < 0.05 and P < 0.05, respectively). CONCLUSION: We characterised the relationship between the methylation status of prostanoid receptor genes and recurrence in HNSCC. These results provide new perspectives for the development of molecular targeted treatment approaches.
AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: GPR44 (DP2, PTGDR2, CRTh2) is the receptor for the pro-inflammatory mediator prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) and it is enriched in human islets. In rodent islets, PGD2 is produced in response to glucose, suggesting that the PGD2-GPR44/DP2 axis may play a role in human islet function during hyperglycemia. Consequently, the aim of this work was to elucidate the insulinotropic role of GPR44 antagonism in vitro in human beta-cells and in type 2 diabetes (T2DM) patients. METHODS: We determined the drive on PGD2 secretion by glucose and IL-1beta, as well as, the impact on insulin secretion by pharmacological GPR44/DP2 antagonism (AZD1981) in human islets and beta-cells in vitro. To test if metabolic control would be improved by antagonizing a hyperglycemia-driven increased PGD2 tone, we performed a proof-of-mechanism study in 20 T2DM patients (average 54 years, HbA1c 9.4%, BMI 31.6 kg/m2). The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study consisted of two three-day treatment periods (AZD1981 or placebo) separated by a three-day wash-out period. Mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) and intravenous graded glucose infusion (GGI) was performed at start and end of each treatment period. Assessment of AZD1981 pharmacokinetics, glucose, insulin, C-peptide, glucagon, GLP-1, and PGD2 pathway biomarkers were performed. RESULTS: We found (1) that PGD2 is produced in human islet in response to high glucose or IL-1beta, but likely by stellate cells rather than endocrine cells; (2) that PGD2 suppresses both glucose and GLP-1 induced insulin secretion in vitro; and (3) that the GPR44/DP2 antagonist (AZD1981) in human beta-cells normalizes insulin secretion. However, AZD1981 had no impact on neither glucose nor incretin dependent insulin secretion in humans (GGI AUC C-peptide 1-2h and MMTT AUC Glucose 0-4h LS mean ratios vs placebo of 0.94 (80% CI of 0.90-0.98, p = 0.12) and 0.99 (90% CI of 0.94-1.05, p = 0.45), despite reaching the expected antagonist exposure. CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Pharmacological inhibition of the PGD2-GPR44/DP2 axis has no major impact on the modulation of acute insulin secretion in T2DM patients. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02367066.
BACKGROUND: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) is a chronic sinonasal disease characterized by heterogeneous inflammation. However, the presence of systemic inflammation heterogeneity in CRSwNP patients remains unknown. This study aims to profile transcriptomic alterations in the blood of CRSwNP patients and characterize the CRSwNP heterogeneity based on blood transcriptomic biomarkers. METHODOLOGY: Patients with CRSwNP were prospectively recruited from three hospitals and chronologically divided into exploratory (n=123) and independent validation (n=46) cohorts. Transcriptomic profiles were generated by whole blood mRNA sequencing and subjected to patient clustering, differential expression, and pathway analysis. Differences in immune pattern and clinicopathologic features between clusters were assessed. A transcriptomic signature was defined and applied to an independent cohort to validate the findings. RESULTS: CRSwNP patients showed diverse blood transcriptomic profiles versus healthy controls, or when stratified by tissue and blood eosinophils and asthma comorbidity. Transcriptome-wide correlation analysis revealed a transcriptional signature associated with blood eosinophil levels, consisting of nine T2-related genes (CLC, SIGLEC8, ALOX15, IL5RA, PTGDR2, CCL23, CCR3, EPX and IL1RL1). Three distinct clusters with differing systemic eosinophilic and neutrophilic inflammation patterns and asthma comorbidity were identified based on transcriptomic profiling of T2 and T1/3-related blood biomarkers. A 36-gene signature was developed by machine learning and accurately predicted the three CRSwNP subtypes. Validation on an independent cohort confirmed the prediction robustness. CONCLUSIONS: There is heterogeneous systemic inflammation associated with eosinophilic and neutrophilic patterns in patients with CRSwNP. Endotyping based on blood transcriptomic biomarkers might lead to more personalized treatment strategies for CRSwNP in the future.
