Prostaglandin D2 receptor; Receptor for prostaglandin D2 (PGD2). The activity of this receptor is mainly mediated by G(s) proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase, resulting in an elevation of intracellular cAMP. A mobilization of calcium is also observed, but without formation of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (By similarity).
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized by anti-nuclear autoantibodies whose production is promoted by autoreactive T follicular helper (TFH) cells. During SLE pathogenesis, basophils accumulate in secondary lymphoid organs (SLO), amplify autoantibody production and disease progression through mechanisms that remain to be defined. Here, we provide evidence for a direct functional relationship between TFH cells and basophils during lupus pathogenesis, both in humans and mice. PD-L1 upregulation on basophils and IL-4 production are associated with TFH and TFH2 cell expansions and with disease activity. Pathogenic TFH cell accumulation, maintenance, and function in SLO were dependent on PD-L1 and IL-4 in basophils, which induced a transcriptional program allowing TFH2 cell differentiation and function. Our study establishes a direct mechanistic link between basophils and TFH cells in SLE that promotes autoantibody production and lupus nephritis.
The prostaglandin D2 receptor (PTGDR) gene has been associated to asthma and related phenotypes by linking and association studies. Functional studies involving animal models and other expression studies based on in vitro cell models also point to a possible role of polymorphisms in the promoter region, in the differential binding of transcription factors, and thus in PTGDR expression, which appear to be associated to the development of asthma or of susceptibility to the disease.
Recently, functional genetic variants of the PTGDR gene have been associated with asthma. The objective of this work was to study polymorphisms of the promoter region of PTGDR and their haplotype and diplotype combinations in a Spanish population of children with asthma. In this study, 200 Caucasian individuals were included. Asthma was specialist-physician diagnosed according to the ATS criteria. The polymorphisms were analyzed by direct sequencing. In the study, the new polymorphism (-613C > T) in the promoter region of PTGDR was analyzed. The CT genotype was more common in controls (17%) than in patients with asthma (1%) (p-value = 0.0003; OR, 0.057; 95% CI, 0.007-0.441). The CCCT CCCC diplotype (promoter positions -613, -549, -441, and -197) was more frequent in the group of patients with asthma [Fisher's p-value = 0.012; OR, 10.24; 95% CI (1.25-83.68)]; this diplotype is unambiguous. To our knowledge, this is the first study of -613C > T PTGDR polymorphism in patients. This analysis provides more complete information on influence of diplotype combinations of PTGDR polymorphisms in asthma.
Our knowledge of genetic predisposing factors of drug hypersensitivity reactions (DHRs) is still scarce. The analysis of the genetic basis of these reactions may contribute to dissect the underlying mechanisms. We will outline current knowledge of the genetic predictors of most common DHRs, including reactions to betalactam antibiotics (BLs), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and biological agents. The predictors of DHRs to BLs are mostly linked to IgE-class switching, IgE pathway and atopy (IL4R, NOD2, LGALS3) in replicated candidate gene studies, and to antigen presentation (HLA-DRA) in the single replicated GWAS performed so far. The HLA-DRA variants are predictors of allergy to penicillins, but not to cephalosporins and they influence also the sensitization against prevalent allergens. The predictors of DHRs against NSAIDs are mostly linked to metabolism of eicosanoids (ALOX5, ALOX5AP, TBXAS1, PTGDR, CYSLTR1). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in histamine biosynthesis and antigen presentation, HLA, could also have a role in DHRs against NSAIDs. The intriguing association of DHRs to NSAIDs with atopy should deserve further attention. Predictors of DHRs against asparaginase and other biological agents relate to antigen presentation (HLA-DRB1 and HLA-A alleles, respectively). The potential relationship of genetic predictors of DHRs with pathomechanisms also involved in environmental exposure and atopy highlights the need to perform GWAS in contrasted populations, taking into account world-wide variations of allele frequencies and contrasted situations of environmental exposure.
Drug hypersensitivity reactions (DHRs) are unpredictable, complex responses to medicines in predisposed individuals. They represent a major health problem owing to the number of patients affected and the severity of the clinical conditions they can induce. In addition to environmental factors, the underlying mechanisms of DHRs are also influenced by genetic factors, although considerable gaps remain in our knowledge. Therefore, further study of the genetics of DHRs is necessary to shed light on their underlying mechanisms. In this manuscript, we provide an update on the genetic basis of the most frequent types of DHRs, including those mediated by immunological and nonimmunological mechanisms. For the first group, we will focus on immediate reactions to beta-lactam antibiotics, which are associated mainly with the IgE pathway (IL13, IL4R, LGALS3, and NOD2) and antigen presentation (HLA-DRA), and nonimmediate reactions to allopurinol, anticonvulsants, antibiotics, and antiretrovirals, which are often associated with polymorphisms in the HLA system. For the second group, we will focus on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, which are mostly associated with genetic variants in enzymes and receptors from the arachidonic acid pathway (eg, ALOX5, ALOX5AP, PTGDR, and CYSLTR1). The information provided here will be of interest for medical practitioners from a range of disciplines who come across these reactions in their clinical practice, as well as for allergologists.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Vitamin A has been linked to the development of allergic diseases although its role is not fully understood, Retinoic acid (RA), a metabolite of Vitamin A, has been previously associated with the prostaglandin pathway, and PTGDR, a receptor of PGD2, has been proposed as a candidate gene in allergy and asthma. Considering the role of PTGDR in allergy, the goal of this study was to analyze the effect of RA on the activation of the promoter region of the PTGDR gene. METHODS: A549 lung epithelial cells were transfected with 4 combinations of genetic variants of the PTGDR promoter and stimulated with all-trans RA (ATRA); luciferase assays were performed using the Dual Luciferase Reporter System, and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to measure the expression of PTGDR, CYP26A1, RARA, RARB, RARG, and RXRA in basal A549 cell cultures and after ATRA treatment. We also performed an in silico analysis. RESULTS: After ATRA treatment increased expression of CYP26A1 (12-fold) and RARB (4-fold) was detected. ATRA activated PTGDR promoter activity in transfected cells (P<.001) and RA response element sequences were identified in silico in this promoter region. CONCLUSIONS: RA modulated PTGDR promoter activity. Differential response to RA and to new treatments based on PTGDR modulation could depend on genetic background in allergic asthmatic patients.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Prostaglandin D2 receptors are acquiring a relevant role as potential therapeutic targets in allergy. PTGDR has been described as a candidate gene in allergic disease, although functional studies on this gene are lacking. Objective: The objective of this case-control study was to investigate the potential role of PTGDR in allergy. METHODS: The study population comprised 195 allergic patients and 112 healthy controls. The PTGDR promoter polymorphisms -1289G>A, -1122T>C, -881C>T, -834C>T, -613C>T, -549T>C, -441C>T, -197T>C, and -95G>T were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequenced. PTGDR expression levels were analyzed using quantitative PCR and normalized to GAPDH and TBP mRNA levels. All procedures were performed following the Minimum Information for Publication of Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiment guidelines. RESULTS: PTGDR expression levels were significantly higher in allergic patients than in controls (P<.001). Receiver operating characteristic analysis for expression of PTGDR showed a sensitivity of 81.4% compared with 67% for IgE levels. In addition, differences in the genotypic distribution of the polymorphisms -1289G>A and -1122T>C were found in allergic patients (P=.009). CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that PTGDR overexpression is associated with allergy. The polymorphisms -1289G>A and -1122T>C partly explain the variation in expression we observed. PTGDR expression could have a potential role as a biomarker and pharmacogenetic factor in allergy.
Functional studies suggest that promoter polymorphisms of the Prostaglandin D Receptor (PTGDR) gene can be involved in asthma. All-trans Retinoic acid (ATRA) has also been linked to allergic diseases. We have previously described the PTGDR promoter activation mediated by ATRA through response elements (RARE) at position -549T> C. In this study we aimed to analyze the effect of retinoic acid (RA) on the expression of PTGDR, the production of cytokines as well as to evaluate the binding of RA receptors to RA-Response Elements (RARE) sequences. A549 cells were transfected with vectors carrying different PTGDR haplotypes and treated with all-Trans Retinoic Acid (ATRA). PTGDR expression was measured by qPCR. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP) were performed in ATRA stimulated KU812 cells and in PBMCs of patients carrying CTCT, CCCC or CCCT haplotypes. In addition, a broad panel of cytokines was analyzed by cytometric bead assay in A549 cells. The expression of PTGDR increased in A549 cells transfected with PTGDR-variants. The CCCC haplotype showed a significantly higher expression compared with CTCT. However, we found that RA up-regulated PTGDR expression through RARalpha mainly in the CTCT variant. Experiments on PBMCs from allergic patients carrying the -549T and -549C variant of the PTGDR promoter after ATRA and RAR antagonist administration confirmed the modulation of PTGDR by ATRA. The cytokine analysis showed that IL4 and IL6 levels were significantly increased in A549 cells transfected with PTGDR. In addition, ATRA treatment decreased the levels of IL4, IL6 and TNFalpha in A549 cells, whereas it increased IL4 and TNFalpha levels in PTGDR-transfected cells. We observed genetic differences in the regulation of PTGDR by ATRA that could contribute to the phenotypic differences observed in allergic patients. Our findings showed that RAR modulation by PTGDR might have an impact on Th2 responses, suggesting that RAR could be a potential therapeutic target in allergic inflammation.
The aim of this study was to explore whether prostaglandin D2 receptor (PTGDR) polymorphisms confer susceptibility to asthma. A meta-analysis was conducted on the associations between the PTGDR -549 C/T, -441 C/T, and -197 C/T polymorphisms and asthma using: (1) allele contrast, (2) the recessive model, (3) the dominant model, and (4) the additive model. Three polymorphism haplotypes were constructed in the order -549/-441/-179. Meta-analysis was performed on the haplotype CCC (high transcriptional activity) and of TCT (low transcriptional activity). A total of 13 separate comparative studies in 9 articles involving 7,155 patients with asthma and 7,285 control subjects were included in this meta-analysis. An association between asthma and the PTGDR -549 C/T polymorphism was found by allele contrast (OR = 1.133, 95 % CI = 1.004-1.279, P = 0.043). Ethnicity-specific meta-analysis showed an association between asthma and the PTGDR -549 C allele in Europeans (OR = 1.192, 95 % CI = 1.032-1.377, P = 0.017). Furthermore, stratifying subjects by age indicated an association between the PTGDR -549 C allele and asthma in adults (OR = 1.248, 95 % CI = 1.076-1.447, P = 0.003), but no association in children (OR = 0.933, 95 % CI = 0.756-1.154, P = 0.324). Analyses using the dominant and additive models showed the similar pattern as that observed for the PTGDR -549 C allele, that is, a significant association in Europeans and adults, but not in children. No association was found between asthma and the PTGDR -441 C/T or -197 C/T polymorphisms, and meta-analysis stratified by ethnicity and age also revealed no association between asthma and these polymorphisms. Furthermore, no association was found between asthma and the CCC and TCT haplotypes of PTGDR, and meta-analysis stratified by ethnicity and age revealed no association between asthma and the CCC and TCT PTGDR haplotypes. This meta-analysis demonstrates that the PTGDR -549 C/T polymorphism confers susceptibility to asthma in Europeans and adults. However, no association was found between the PTGDR 441 C/T and -197 C/T polymorphisms or the CCC and TCT haplotypes and asthma susceptibility.
INTRODUCTION: Chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps is a multifactorial disease with a complex pathophysiology involving multiple genetic and environmental factors. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this work review is to focus on the importance of genetic studies in chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps besides the several barriers that exists for its understanding. METHODS: A systematic review on studies of association between single nucleotide polymorphisms and chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps based on a PubMed/Medline and Periodicos CAPES search of all articles published between January 2005 and January 2015 was made. The search was guided on studies containing the terms polymorphisms, rhinosinusitis, and polyps. RESULTS: Two studies found an association of MMP-9 and MMP-2 polymorphisms and chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps, but not in patients with recurrent nasal polyps. Other studies found an association of nasal polyps with MMP-9 polymorphisms, but not with MMP-2 ones. There is evidence of an association of LTC4S, NOS2A, PTGDR, MET, COX-2, OSF-2, and LF polymorphisms and the risk of developing nasal polyps, especially when combined with chronic allergic rhinitis and asthma. CONCLUSION: Genetic studies on chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps are promising and may offer insights into its pathophysiology, which is likely affected by multiple genetic factors.
Activation of the prostaglandin D2 receptor (PTGDR) may contribute to pulmonary vasodilation, bronchoconstriction, recruitment of eosinophils, basophils and T-lymphocytes, and enhanced synthesis of leukotriene C4. We investigated whether polymorphisms of the leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S) -444A/C and PTGDR -441T/C were associated with clinical phenotypes and responsiveness to leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) in Korean asthmatic children. We enrolled 270 normal and 870 asthmatic children. We prescribed montelukast (5 mg per day) to 100 of asthmatic children, and analyzed the responsiveness to LTRA by exercise challenge tests. Polymorphisms were genotyped by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism. As the number of minor alleles of the PTGDR -441T/C and LTC4S -444A/C polymorphisms increased, the log total eosinophil counts increased in atopic asthmatic children (P-value=0.03). We found a significant association between responsiveness to montelukast and the PTGDR polymorphism (P-value=0.038). However, the LTC4S -444A/C and PTGDR -441T/C were not associated with the susceptibility for asthma (LTC4S, AA versus AC+CC, adjusted odds ratio of 0.98 (95% confidence interval, 0.73-1.31); PTGDR, TT versus TC+CC, adjusted odds ratio of 0.90 (95% confidence interval, 0.68-1.19)) or clinical phenotypes (P-value>0.05). The effects of the PTGDR and LTC4S polymorphisms on the enhancement of eosinophil counts were additive in the Korean children with asthma. In addition, the PTGDR polymorphism seems to be associated with the responsiveness to LTRA. Therefore, therapies that target the PTGDR may be useful for modulating the responsiveness to LTRA.
Genetic variation in specific G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) is associated with a spectrum of respiratory disease predispositions and drug response phenotypes. Although certain GPCR gene variants can be disease-causing through the expression of inactive, overactive, or constitutively active receptor proteins, many more GPCR gene variants confer risk for potentially deleterious endophenotypes. Endophenotypes are traits, such as bronchiole hyperactivity, atopy, and aspirin intolerant asthma, which have a strong genetic component and are risk factors for a variety of more complex outcomes that may include disease states. GPCR genes implicated in asthma endophenotypes include variants of the cysteinyl leukotriene receptors (CYSLTR1 and CYSLTR2), and prostaglandin D2 receptors (PTGDR and CRTH2), thromboxane A2 receptor (TBXA2R), beta2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2), chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5), and the G protein-coupled receptor associated with asthma (GPRA). This review of the contribution of variability in these genes places the contribution of the cysteinyl leukotriene system to respiratory endophenotypes in perspective. The genetic variant(s) of receptors that are associated with endophenotypes are discussed in the context of the extent to which they contribute to a disease phenotype or altered drug efficacy.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) development is accompanied by changes in expression for several genes; but the details of the underlying regulatory procesess remain unknown. Our aims were to assess the role of epigenetic processes in tumour formation and to identify characteristic DNA methylation and miRNA alterations in the colorectal adenoma-carcinoma sequence. METHODS: Whole genome expression profiling was performed on colonic biopsy samples (49 healthy normal, 49 colorectal adenoma (AD), 49 CRC); on laser capture microdissected (LCM) epithelial and stromal cells from 6 CRC-normal adjacent tissue (NAT) samples pairs, and on demethylated human CRC cell lines using HGU133 Plus 2.0 microarrays (Affymetrix). Methylation status of genes with gradually altering expression along the AD-CRC sequence was further analysed on 10-10 macrodissected and 5-5 LCM samples from healthy colon, from adenoma and from CRC biopsy samples using bisulfite-sequencing PCR (BS-PCR) followed by pyrosequencing. In silico miRNA prediction for the selected genes was performed with miRWALK algorithm, miRNA expression was analysed on 3 CRC-NAT sample pairs and 3 adenoma tissue samples using the Human Panel I + II (Exiqon). SFRP1 immunohistochemistry experiments were performed. RESULTS: A set of transcripts (18 genes including MAL, SFRP1, SULT1A1, PRIMA1, PTGDR) showed decreasing expression (p < 0.01) in the biopsy samples along the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. Three of those (COL1A2, SFRP2, SOCS3) showed hypermethylation and THBS2 showed hypomethylation both in AD and in CRC samples compared to NAT, while BCL2, PRIMA1 and PTGDR showed hypermethylation only in the CRC group. miR-21 was found to be significantly (p < 0.01) upregulated in adenoma and tumour samples compared to the healthy colonic tissue controls and could explain the altered expression of genes for which DNA methylation changes do not appear to play role (e.g. BCL2, MAL, PTGS2). Demethylation treatment could upregulate gene expression of genes that were found to be hypermethylated in human CRC tissue samples. Decreasing protein levels of SFRP1 was also observed along the adenoma-carcinoma sequence. CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation of the selected markers (MAL, PRIMA1, PTGDR and SFRP1) can result in reduced gene expression and may contribute to the formation of colorectal cancer.
Asthma is a multifactorial pathology influenced by environmental and genetic factors. Glucocorticoid treatment decreases symptoms by regulating genes involved in the inflammatory process through binding to specific DNA sequences. Polymorphisms located in the promoter region of the Prostaglandin D Receptor (PTGDR) gene have been related to asthma. We aimed to analyze the effect of PTGDR promoter haplotypes on gene expression and response to corticosteroid therapy. A549 lung epithelial cells were transfected with vectors carrying four different PTGDR haplotypes (CTCT, CCCC, CCCT and TCCT), and treated with dexamethasone. Different approaches to study the promoter activity (Dual Luciferase Reporter System), gene expression levels (qPCR) and cytokine secretion (Multiplexed Bead-based Flow Cytometric) were used. In addition, in silico analysis was also performed. Cells carrying the TCCT haplotype showed the lowest promoter activity (p-value<0.05) and mRNA expression levels in basal conditions. After dexamethasone treatment, cells carrying the wild-type variant CTCT showed the highest response, and those carrying the TCCT variant the lowest (p-value<0.05) in luciferase assays. Different transcription factor binding patterns were identified in silico. Moreover, differences in cytokine secretion were also found among different promoter haplotypes. Polymorphisms of PTGDR gene influence basal promoter activity and gene expression, as well as the cytokine secretory pattern. Furthermore, an association between these positions and response to corticoid treatment was observed.
Airway sensitization requires the expression of prostanoid DP receptor in mice. Recent studies reported that polymorphisms in the gene encoding prostanoid DP receptor (PTGDR) were associated with asthma in White people and Black people, but this association could not be replicated among Latinos and Koreans. This study investigated the association between asthma-related traits and six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PTGDR in Chinese children, consisted of 308 asthmatics and 368 non-allergic controls. Plasma total and aeroallergen-specific immunoglobulin E were measured by immunoassays. PTGDR SNPs were determined by multiplex SNaPshot genotyping. All polymorphic markers followed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium except G1044A in the controls (p = 0.021). The linkage disequilibrium (LD) scores for these SNPs were moderate to high, and in particular, T-549C and C-441T were in strong LD. Significant interethnic variations in PTGDR alleles and haplotypes (up to 41%) were found in our subjects when compared with White people or Latinos. Asthma diagnosis, atopy and aeroallergen sensitization did not differ among children with different PTGDR genotypes (p > 0.15 for all). Linear regression showed weakly significant associations between T-197C and G1044A of PTGDR and spirometric variables. PTGDR haplotypes were not associated with asthma and atopy phenotypes (p > 0.09 for all). Our results do not support PTGDR to be a major candidate gene for asthma traits in Chinese children.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Haplotypes in the promoter region of the prostanoid DP receptor (PTGDR) gene have been shown to functionally influence gene transcription and to be associated with asthma in two previous case-control studies in Caucasians. This study tested the association of PTGDR haplotypes with asthma phenotypes in two large Caucasian-Australian populations. These results were incorporated in a meta-analysis with previously published data to determine the overall role for these haplotypes in the risk of asthma. METHODS: Three PTGDR promoter-region single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were genotyped in 368 individuals from the Western Australian Twin Child Health study and 2988 individuals from the Busselton Health Study. Logistic regression and transition disequilibrium tests were used to assess whether SNP genotypes and three SNP haplotypes were associated with doctor-diagnosed asthma or intermediate quantitative traits. Longitudinal data from the Busselton Health Study were used to examine whether PTGDR influences changes in lung function over time. Meta-analysis incorporated the findings of this study with those of two previous studies in Caucasian populations. RESULTS: Cross-sectional associations between PTGDR haplotypes and asthma phenotypes were non-significant (P > 0.05) in both populations. Longitudinal analyses of PTGDR and lung function were also non-significant. Meta-analysis, however, suggested that haplotype TCT was significantly associated with decreased risk of asthma (OR = 0.76; P = 0.02) while haplotype CCC was not significantly associated with asthma (OR = 1.30; P = 0.07). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that despite the non-significant findings in the present study populations, PTGDR promoter haplotypes may account for a small but significant proportion of the risk of asthma in Caucasian populations.
Background: Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is the most common gastrointestinal emergency in preterm infants. Epigenetic changes in DNA methylation may be present prior to NEC onset. Methods: 24 preterm infants with NEC and 45 matched controls were included. Human DNA was isolated from stool samples and methylation of CTDSPL2, HERC1, NXPE3 and PTGDR was measured using pyrosequencing. Results: CTDSPL2 displayed a higher DNA methylation of 51% compared with 17% in controls, prior to NEC onset (p = 0.047). Discussion: Noninvasive measurement of methylation in stool allows for comparison with healthy preterm controls. This potentially allows future biomarker or risk predictor use. The effect of CTDSPL2 hypermethylation on gene expression remains unclear.
Our earlier work showed that knockout of hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase (HPGDS, an enzyme that produces prostaglandin D2) caused more adenomas in Apc(Min/+) mice. Conversely, highly expressed transgenic HPGDS allowed fewer tumors. Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) binds to the prostaglandin D2 receptor known as PTGDR (or DP1). PGD2 metabolites bind to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG). We hypothesized that Ptgdr or Pparg knockouts may raise numbers of tumors, if these receptors take part in tumor suppression by PGD2. To assess, we produced Apc(Min/+) mice with and without Ptgdr knockouts (147 mice). In separate experiments, we produced Apc(Min/+) mice expressing transgenic lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase (PTGDS), with and without heterozygous Pparg knockouts (104 mice). Homozygous Ptgdr knockouts raised total numbers of tumors by 30-40% at 6 and 14 weeks. Colon tumors were not affected. Heterozygous Pparg knockouts alone did not affect tumor numbers in Apc(Min/+) mice. As mentioned above, our Pparg knockout assessment also included mice with highly expressed PTGDS transgenes. Apc(Min/+) mice with transgenic PTGDS had fewer large adenomas (63% of control) and lower levels of v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog (MYC) mRNA in the colon. Heterozygous Pparg knockouts appeared to blunt the tumor-suppressing effect of transgenic PTGDS. However, tumor suppression by PGD2 was more clearly mediated by receptor PTGDR in our experiments. The suppression mechanism did not appear to involve changes in microvessel density or slower proliferation of tumor cells. The data support a role for PGD2 signals acting through PTGDR in suppression of intestinal tumors.
Lipids in the skin are the most diverse in the entire human body. Their bioactivity in health and disease is underexplored. Prostaglandin D2 has recently been identified as a factor which is elevated in the bald scalp of men with androgenetic alopecia (AGA) and has the capacity to decrease hair lengthening. An enzyme which synthesizes it, prostaglandin D2 synthase (PTGDS or lipocalin-PGDS), is hormone responsive in multiple other organs. PGD2 has two known receptors, GPR44 and PTGDR. GPR44 was found to be necessary for the decrease in hair growth by PGD2 . This creates an exciting opportunity to perhaps create novel treatments for AGA, which inhibit the activity of PTGDS, PGD2 or GPR44. This review discusses the current knowledge surrounding PGD2 , and future steps needed to translate these findings into novel therapies for patients with AGA.
Prostaglandin D(2) (PGD(2)) is one of the most abundant lipid mediators present in the airways of asthmatics. However, little was known of the role it plays in the pathophysiology of asthma, until the identification of DP (DP1, PTGDR) and CRTH2 (DP2), two PGD(2)-specific transmembrane receptors with different distribution and intracellular signaling. Pharmacological tools, such as receptor-specific agonists and antagonists, and genetically-engineered mice, which lack either DP or CRTH2, have helped understand the complex effects of PGD(2) in allergic inflammation of the airways. Furthermore, genetic association studies have shown a positive linkage of the genetic polymorphisms in DP and CRTH2, with asthma phenotypes from specific ethnic backgrounds, further highlighting the importance of PGD(2) and its receptors in the pathophysiology of asthma.
