Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP3 subtype; Receptor for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The activity of this receptor can couple to both the inhibition of adenylate cyclase mediated by G(i) proteins, and to an elevation of intracellular calcium. Required for normal development of fever in response to pyrinogens, including IL1B, prostaglandin E2 and bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Required for normal potentiation of platelet aggregation by prostaglandin E2, and thus plays a role in the regulation of blood coagulation. Required for increased HCO3(-) secretion in the duodenum in response to muco [...] 
BACKGROUND: Endometriosis (EM) is a common gynecological disorder that often leads to irregular menstruation and infertility. The pathogenesis of EM remains unclear and delays in diagnosis are common. Thus, it is urgent to explore potential biomarkers and underlying molecular mechanisms for EM diagnosis and therapies. METHODS: Three EM-related datasets (GSE11691, GSE25628, and GSE86534) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) which were integrated into a combined dataset after removing batch effect. Differentially expressed immune cell-related genes were obtained by CIBERSORT, WGCNA, and the identification of differentially expressed genes. Random forest model (RF), support vector machine model (SVM), and generalized linear model (GLM) were then constructed and the biomarkers for EM were determined. A nomogram evaluating the risk of disease was constructed and the validity was assessed by the calibration curve, DCA curve, and clinical impact curve. Single-gene Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)was performed to explore the molecular mechanisms of biomarkers. The ceRNA regulatory network of biomarkers was created by Cytoscape and potential target drugs were obtained in the DGIdb database (Drug-Gene Interaction database).The expression levels of biomarkers from clinical samples was quantified by RT-qPCR. RESULTS: The ratio of eight immune cells was significantly different between the eutopic and ectopic endometrium samples. A total of eight differentially expressed immune cell-related genes were investigated. The SVM model was a relatively suitable model for the prediction of EM and five genes (CXCL12, PDGFRL, AGTR1, PTGER3, and S1PR1) were selected from the model as biomarkers. The calibration curve, DCA curve, and clinical impact curve indicated that the nomogram based on the five biomarkers had a robust ability to predict disease. Single gene GSEA result suggested that all five biomarkers were involved in labyrinthine layer morphogenesis and transmembrane transport-related biological processes in EM. A ceRNA regulatory network containing 184 nodes and 251 edges was constructed. Seven drugs targeting CXCL12, 49 drugs targeting AGTR1, 16 drugs targeting PTGER3, and 21 drugs targeting S1PR1 were extracted as potential drugs for EM therapy. Finally, the expression of PDGFRL and S1PR1 in clinical samples was validated by RT-qPCR, which was consistent with the result of public database. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we identified five biomarkers (CXCL12, PDGFRL, AGTR1, PTGER3, and S1PR1) and constructed diagnostic model, furthermore predicted the potential therapeutic drugs for EM. Collectively, these findings provide new insights into EM diagnosis and treatment.
Pathogen infection causes a stereotyped state of sickness that involves neuronally orchestrated behavioural and physiological changes(1,2). On infection, immune cells release a 'storm' of cytokines and other mediators, many of which are detected by neurons(3,4); yet, the responding neural circuits and neuro-immune interaction mechanisms that evoke sickness behaviour during naturalistic infections remain unclear. Over-the-counter medications such as aspirin and ibuprofen are widely used to alleviate sickness and act by blocking prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) synthesis(5). A leading model is that PGE2 crosses the blood-brain barrier and directly engages hypothalamic neurons(2). Here, using genetic tools that broadly cover a peripheral sensory neuron atlas, we instead identified a small population of PGE2-detecting glossopharyngeal sensory neurons (petrosal GABRA1 neurons) that are essential for influenza-induced sickness behaviour in mice. Ablating petrosal GABRA1 neurons or targeted knockout of PGE2 receptor 3 (EP3) in these neurons eliminates influenza-induced decreases in food intake, water intake and mobility during early-stage infection and improves survival. Genetically guided anatomical mapping revealed that petrosal GABRA1 neurons project to mucosal regions of the nasopharynx with increased expression of cyclooxygenase-2 after infection, and also display a specific axonal targeting pattern in the brainstem. Together, these findings reveal a primary airway-to-brain sensory pathway that detects locally produced prostaglandins and mediates systemic sickness responses to respiratory virus infection.
BACKGROUND: Prostaglandin E2 receptor 3 (PTGER3, EP3) is essential for many malignancies growth and metastasis. The role of PTGER3 in kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC) was assessed in terms of its prognosis and its association with immune infiltration. METHODS: Transcriptomic expression profiles of PTGER3 were acquired from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Comparative analysis was performed to evaluate the disparity in PTGER3 expression between KIRC and normal tissues. The discriminative potential of PTGER3 as a distinguishing determinant was assessed through receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. Prognostic factors were evaluated employing COX regression and logistic models. Furthermore, the impact of PTGER3 on survival was ascertained utilizing the Kaplan-Meier method. A protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed utilizing the STRING database. To investigate the correlation between immune infiltration levels and PTGER3 expression, a single-sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) method was employed, employing the Gene Set Variation Analysis (GSVA) package and the Tumor Immune Estimation Resource (TIMER) database. RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis unveiled a significant downregulation of PTGER3 expression in KIRC tissues compared to paraneoplastic tissues (p < 0.001). Furthermore, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) experiments demonstrated a reduction in PTGER3 expression in 786-O cells in contrast to paraneoplastic tissues (p < 0.01). The ROC curve, employing PTGER3 as a potential diagnostic biomarker, exhibited a substantial area under the curve (AUC) value of 0.929. According to the Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, reduced PTGER3 expression increased the chance of negative overall survival (OS) (p = 0.019). A PPI network was constructed, elucidating the interaction patterns between PTGER3 and the top 10 co-expressed genes. An examination of gene enrichment and immune infiltration levels found a link between PTGER3 transcription and immune infiltration levels. Notably, high B cell counts and low Mast cell counts were connected to a poor prognosis in KIRC patients. CONCLUSIONS: The expression of PTGER3 was found to be diminished in KIRC in comparison to paracancerous tissue. This observation exhibited a correlation with both prognosis and immune cell infiltration. As a result, our findings suggest that PTGER3 could be considered a promising biomarker to forecast KIRC prognosis and as a possible target for immunotherapy.
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are acute inflammatory vesiculobullous reactions of the mucosa of the ocular surface, oral cavity, and genitals, and of the skin. Severe ocular complications (SOC) are present in about half of SJS/TEN patients diagnosed by dermatologists. We review our group's findings on the genetic predisposition for and the etiology of SJS/TEN with SOC. We suspected that abnormal innate mucosal immunity, resulting in an anomalous response to commensal bacteria that usually do not elicit such a response, contributes to the ocular surface inflammation seen in SJS/TEN with SOC. We found that cold medicines, including multi-ingredient cold medications and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, were the main causative drugs especially in patients with SJS/TEN with SOC. Cold medicine-related SJS/TEN (CM-SJS/TEN) with SOC was strongly associated with HLA-A*02:06 in the Japanese populations, and significantly associated with HLA-B*44:03 in the Japanese and in Indian and Brazilian populations. Single nucleotide polymorphism association analysis showed that the Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), prostaglandin-E receptor 3 (PTGER3), and IKZF1 gene were significantly associated with CM-SJS/TEN with SOC and that they could regulate mucocutaneous inflammation including that of the ocular surface. As we found several HLA-SNP sets with a high odds ratio, we postulated that they may help to predict the possible development of SJS/TEN with SOC. From our findings we suggest that besides microbial infection and cold medicines, a combination of multiple gene polymorphisms and their interactions contribute strongly to the onset of CM-SJS/TEN with SOC.
BACKGROUND: Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is a primary complication of diabetes mellitus (DM). The pathology of DN is still vague, and diagnostic accuracy is not enough. This study was performed to identify miRNAs and genes that have possibilities of being used as therapeutic targets for DN in type 2 DM. METHODS: Human miRNA data GSE51674 and gene data GSE111154 were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and miRNAs (DEmiRNAs) in the kidney between control and DN patients were screened out. The competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network was constructed, and key lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA pairs were selected accordingly. Potential drugs targeting DEGs were screened out and validated using PCR analysis. RESULTS: Totally, 83 DEmiRNAs and 293 DEGs were identified in GSE51674 and GSE111154, respectively. Thirteen of the top 20 DEmiRNAs (10 up and 10 down) targeted to 47 DEGs. In the ceRNA network, RP11-363E7.4/TTN-AS1/HOTAIRM1-hsa-miR-106b-5p-PTGER3 and LINC00960-hsa-miR-1237-3p-MMP-2 interaction pairs were identified as the key ceRNA network. Interestingly, PTGER3 and hsa-miR-1237-3p were downregulated, and MMP-2 and hsa-miR-106b-5p were upregulated in the kidney of patients with DN compared with normal controls, respectively. PTGER3 and MMP-2 were targeted by drugs including iloprost, treprostinil, or captopril, and the deregulation of the two genes was confirmed in the plasma samples from patients with DN as compared with controls. CONCLUSIONS: We speculated that the RP11-363E7.4/TTN-AS1/HOTAIRM1-hsa-miR-106b-5p-PTGER3 and LINC00960-hsa-miR-1237-3p-MMP-2 networks were associated with diabetic renal injury.
BACKGROUND: Inflammatory mediator prostaglandin E2-prostaglandin E2 receptor EP3 (PTGER3) signaling is critical for tumor-associated angiogenesis, tumor growth, and chemoresistance. However, the mechanism underlying these effects in ovarian cancer is not known. METHODS: An association between higher tumoral expression of PTGER3 and shorter patient survival in the ovarian cancer dataset of The Cancer Genome Atlas prompted investigation of the antitumor effects of PTGER3 downmodulation. PTGER3 mRNA and protein levels were higher in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cells than in their cisplatin-sensitive counterparts. FINDINGS: Silencing of PTGER3 via siRNA in cancer cells was associated with decreased cell growth and less invasiveness, as well as cell-cycle arrest and increased apoptosis, mediated through the Ras-MAPK/Erk-ETS1-ELK1/CFTR1 axis. Furthermore, sustained PTGER3 silencing with multistage vector and liposomal 2'-F-phosphorodithioate-siRNA-mediated silencing of PTGER3 combined with cisplatin resulted in robust antitumor effects in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer models. INTERPRETATION: These findings identify PTGER3 as a potential therapeutic target in chemoresistant ovarian cancers expressing high levels of this oncogenic protein. FUND: National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute, USA.
Prostaglandin E receptor 3 (PTGER3) is involved in a variety of biological processes in the human body and is closely associated with the development and progression of a variety of cancer types. However, the role of PTGER3 in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) remains unclear. In the present study, low PTGER3 expression was found to be associated with poor prognosis in TNBC patients. PTGER3 plays a crucial role in regulating TNBC cell invasion, migration, and proliferation. Upregulation of PTGER3 weakens the epithelial-mesenchymal phenotype in TNBC and promotes ferroptosis both in vitro and in vivo by repressing glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) expression. On the other hand, downregulation of PTGER3 inhibits ferroptosis by increasing GPX4 expression and activating the PI3K-AKT pathway. Upregulation of PTGER3 also enhances the sensitivity of TNBC cells to paclitaxel. Overall, this study has elucidated critical pathways in which low PTGER3 expression protects TNBC cells from undergoing ferroptosis, thereby promoting its progression. PTGER3 may thus serve as a novel and promising biomarker and therapeutic target for TNBC.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to identify associations between maternal and fetal genetic variants in candidate genes and spontaneous preterm birth (PTB) in a Norwegian population and to determine the effect size of those associations that corroborate a previous study of PTB. METHODS: DNA from 434 mother-baby dyads (214 cases and 220 controls) collected from the Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort (MoBa) was examined for association between 1,430 single nucleotide polymorphisms in 143 genes and PTB. These results were compared to a previous study on European Americans (EA) from Centennial Women's Hospital in Nashville, TN, USA. Odds ratios for SNPs that corroborated the Cenntennial study were determined on the combined MoBa and Centennial studies. RESULTS: In maternal samples the strongest results that corroborated the Centennial study were in the prostaglandin E receptor 3 gene (PTGER3; rs977214) (combined genotype p = 3x10(-4)). The best model for rs977214 was the AG/GG genotypes relative to the AA genotype and resulted in an OR of 0.55 (95% CI = 0.37-0.82, p = 0.003), indicating a protective effect. In fetal samples the most significant association in the combined data was rs854552 in the paraoxonase 1 gene (PON1) (combined allele p = 8x10(-4)). The best model was the TT genotype relative to the CC/CT genotypes, and resulted in an OR of 1.32 (95% CI = 1.13-1.53, p = 4x10(-4)). CONCLUSIONS: These studies identify single locus associations with preterm birth for both maternal and fetal genotypes in two populations of European ancestry.
PURPOSE: Keratoconus (KC) is a progressive corneal disease that can lead to corneal blindness if not properly managed. The purpose of this study was to identify genetic associations with KC in China and to investigate whether these genetic variants are associated with corneal thickness and corneal curvature in KC cases. METHODS: A genome-wide association study was conducted on 853 patients with KC and 6248 controls. The KC cases were genotyped with the Illumina Infinium Human Asian Screening Array BeadChip, and the controls were genotyped with the Illumina Infinium Human Global Screening Array BeadChip. Genetic associations with KC, as well as correlations between the positive variants and corneal parameters including central corneal thickness (CCT) and mean keratometry (Km), were compared using PLINK version 1.90. RESULTS: Our present study identified four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within four risk loci (PTGER3: rs2300163, EYA1: rs1077435, ASS1: rs141365191, and CHTF8: rs3743680) associated with KC in Chinese patients that reached genome-wide significance. Among the identified SNPs with P < 1.00 x 10-4, seven SNPs (FOSL2-PLB1: rs12622211, RXRA-COL5A1: rs3118515, rs3132306, rs1536482, rs3118520, KAT6B: rs192187772, RAP2A-IPO5: rs41361245) were observed to be associated with CCT, and one SNP (USP13: rs6767552) was found to be associated with Km. CONCLUSIONS: In the first genome-wide association study of KC with a relatively large study population in China, we identified four SNPs in four risk loci associated with the disease. The findings enriched the understanding of genetic susceptibility to KC and provided new insights into the genetic etiology of the disease.
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common endocrine disorders prevailing in reproductive age women, present in 3-15% population of women worldwide. Although there are many studies on PCOS, its underlying mechanism remains to be determined. The present study was to construct protein-protein interaction networks based on the potential disease-causing genes for PCOS and characterize the underlying molecular mechanisms of PCOS using the networks. PCOS-associated genes were extracted from DisGeNet and the protein-protein interaction networks (PPIN) of PCOS were constructed using the String Database. Then we utilized MCODE algorithm to analyse the hub-gene modules from the PPIN. Finally, the major biological functions and signaling pathways involved in the hub modules were explored by functional enrichment analysis. A total of 522 candidate genes associated to PCOS were extracted from DisGeNET database. The PPIN constructed using the genes we have collected above included 488 genes and 2767 interaction relationships. Moreover, seven major gene modules were obtained after analyzing the PPIN with the use of MCODE plug-in. The major modules generated were enriched in certain biological functions such as cancer and cell proliferation and apoptosis, regulation of lipid and glucose metabolism, cell cycle and so on. The integrated analysis performed in the current study revealed that these hub modules and their related genes are closely associated to the pathogenesis of PCOS, which may probably provide novel insights for the treatment of PCOS and the study of its latent pathogenic mechanism. The relationship between several of the key genes including ALB, TOP2A, PTGER3, NPB and BRD2 in the modules and PCOS has not been investigated previously and it remains to be verified by further research of large sample, multi-center and multi-ethnic.
BACKGROUND: Median overall survival (OS) for women with high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is  approximately 4 years, yet survival varies widely between patients. There are no well-established, gene expression signatures associated with prognosis. The aim of this study was to develop a robust prognostic signature for OS in patients with HGSOC. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expression of 513 genes, selected from a meta-analysis of 1455 tumours and other candidates, was measured using NanoString technology from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumour tissue collected from 3769 women with HGSOC from multiple studies. Elastic net regularization for survival analysis was applied to develop a prognostic model for 5-year OS, trained on 2702 tumours from 15 studies and evaluated on an independent set of 1067 tumours from six studies. RESULTS: Expression levels of 276 genes were associated with OS (false discovery rate < 0.05) in covariate-adjusted single-gene analyses. The top five genes were TAP1, ZFHX4, CXCL9, FBN1 and PTGER3 (P < 0.001). The best performing prognostic signature included 101 genes enriched in pathways with treatment implications. Each gain of one standard deviation in the gene expression score conferred a greater than twofold increase in risk of death [hazard ratio (HR) 2.35, 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.02-2.71; P < 0.001]. Median survival [HR (95% CI)] by gene expression score quintile was 9.5 (8.3 to -), 5.4 (4.6-7.0), 3.8 (3.3-4.6), 3.2 (2.9-3.7) and 2.3 (2.1-2.6) years. CONCLUSION: The OTTA-SPOT (Ovarian Tumor Tissue Analysis consortium - Stratified Prognosis of Ovarian Tumours) gene expression signature may improve risk stratification in clinical trials by identifying patients who are least likely to achieve 5-year survival. The identified novel genes associated with the outcome may also yield opportunities for the development of targeted therapeutic approaches.
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) is an acute inflammatory vesiculobullous reaction of the skin and mucosa, often including the ocular surface, and sometimes progresses to toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN). SJS/TEN may be initiated by certain types of medication coupled with possible infection; however, few susceptibility genes have been identified as indicators for risk prediction, except for certain human leukocyte antigen alleles, although several candidate susceptibility genes were identified by candidate gene and genome-wide approaches. As an alternative genetic model, gene-gene interactions between candidate genes were investigated using high-dimensional variable selection methods such as iterative sure independence screening. Linkage disequilibria around the toll-like receptor (TLR)3 and prostaglandin E receptor (PTGER)3 genes were also investigated using additional single nucleotide polymorphisms in an extended additional sample set. A murine experimental allergic conjunctivitis (EAC) model was used to examine the functional interactions. Iterative sure independence screening analyses of Japanese SJS/TEN patients with ocular surface complications revealed 2 interactions that exerted SJS/TEN susceptibility effects, which were locus pairs of TLR3-PTGER3 and HLA-A-IL1alpha. Furthermore, functional interactions between TLR3 and EP3 (the protein of PTGER3) were demonstrated using the EAC model. Identification of functional interactions between TLR3 and EP3 supports an epistatic interaction conferring an increased risk for SJS with ocular complications.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test-Consumption (AUDIT-C) questionnaire screens for harmful drinking using a 12-month timeframe. A score of 0 is assigned to individuals who report abstaining from alcohol in the past year. However, many middle-age individuals reporting current abstinence are former drinkers (FDs). Because FDs may be more genetically prone to harmful alcohol use than lifelong abstainers (LAs) and are often combined with LAs, we evaluated the impact of differentiating them on the identification of genetic association. DESIGN AND SETTING: The United Kingdom Biobank (UKBB) includes AUDIT-C and alcohol drinker status. PARTICIPANTS: 131 510 Europeans, including 5135 FDs. MEASUREMENTS: We compared three genome-wide association (GWAS) analyses to explore the effects of removing FDs: the full AUDIT-C data, AUDIT-C data without FDs, and data from a random sample numerically matched to the data without FDs. Because prior studies show a consistent association of the ADH1B polymorphism rs1229984 with both alcohol consumption and alcohol use disorder, we compared allele frequencies for rs1229984 stratified by AUDIT-C value and FD versus LA status. Additionally, we calculated polygenic risk scores (PRS) of related diseases. FINDINGS: The rs1229984 allele frequencies among FDs were numerically comparable to those with high AUDIT-C scores and very different from those of LAs. Removing FDs from GWAS yielded a stronger association with rs1229984 (P value after removal: 1.9 x 10(-70) vs 1.7 x 10(-65) and 2.5 x 10(-62) ), more statistically significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (after removal: 11 vs 9 and 8), and genomic loci (after removal: 11 vs 9 and 7). Additional independent SNPs were identified after removal of FDs: rs2817866 (PTGER3), rs7105867 (ANO3), and rs17601612 (DRD2). For PRS of alcohol use disorder and major depressive disorder, there are statistically significant differences between FDs and LAs. CONCLUSIONS: Differentiating between former drinkers and lifelong abstainers can improve Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test-Consumption (AUDIT-C) genome-wide association results.
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the action of the crude hydroalcoholic extract of Piper cubeba fruits and isolated lignans (cubebin, dihydrocubebin, ethylcubebin, hinokinin and methylcubebin) on head and neck cancer cells. We evaluated the influence of the Piper cubeba extract and isolated lignans (10, 50 e 100 mug/mL) for 4, 24, 48 and 72 h, in the larynx (Hep-2) and oral (SCC-25) squamous cell carcinoma cells and normal fibroblasts, on morphology, cell proliferation and migration, cytotoxicity, genotoxicity and gene and protein expression (PTGS2, PTGER3, PTGER4, MMP2, MMP9). The results showed that the P. cubeba extract and different lignans do not alter the cellular morphology, but decrease cell proliferation and migration, have low cytotoxic and genotoxic effects, probably due to the alteration of the expression of genes and proteins involved with inflammatory process. From these data, we can conclude that the lignans cubebin and methylcubebin had a greater effect on head and neck cancer cells in the antiproliferative, antimigratory and genotoxic action, and could be the target of the development of new therapies including possible new drugs as a therapeutic resource for the treatment of head and neck cancer due to its immense range of biological properties.
Prostaglandin EP3 receptor subtype is a seven-membrane-spanning protein with multiple C-terminal tails generated by alternative mRNA splicing. We report here the structural organization of the human EP3 gene (PTGER3). The human EP3 gene spanned more than 80 kb and was composed of 10 exons separated by nine introns. Exon 1 and the 5' 180-bp portion of exon 2 (exon 2a) encoded the seven transmembrane domains and 10 amino acid residues of the cytoplasmic tail, which are common to all EP3 isoforms. The 3' 3461-bp portion of exon 2 (exon 2b) or combinations of exons 3-10 encoded the EP3 isoform-specific C termini and formed their 3'-untranslated regions by multiple fashions of alternative mRNA splicing. Exons 2b, 4, 6, and 10 contained polyadenylation sites. The EP3 gene formed nine distinct mRNAs encoding eight EP3 isoforms, two of which were novel ones tentatively designated EP3-V and EP3-VI. The transcription initiation sites of the human EP3 gene were mapped 227 to approximately 231 bp upstream of the ATG start codon. The 360-bp 5'-flanking region contained a TATA box-like sequence, a GC box, and several cis-acting regulatory elements. The present study provides insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the prostanoid receptor family.
BACKGROUND: With the broadened application of gene expression profiles analysis, the role of miRNA and circRNA are of increasing concern in recent years, especially during the pathogenesis of cancer. However, to date, the reported on this area in cervical cancer are limited. METHOD: In this study, Weighted Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) and differential gene expression analysis were utilized to screen out differentially expressed (DE) circular RNAs in cervical cancer, and then we predicted and screened the combined microRNAs (miRNA) and downstream mRNAs to construct circular (circ)RNA-miRNA-mRNA network. RESULT: As a result, a regulatory circular (circ)RNA-miRNA-mRNA with 1 circRNA node, 4 miRNA nodes, 135 mRNA nodes were constructed in an attempt to provide novel biomarkers for the pathogenesis of cervical cancer. In addition, enrichment analysis including Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) were performed on mRNAs in the network. After further screening of mRNAs by two online databases of GEPIA2 and RNAyhrid, precise target genes were obtained. Next, we screened out four target genes (CXCL16, IRF4, OAS3 and PTGER3) by constructing the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network, and mapped them to the initial network to reconstruct the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network. Notably, the low expression of IRF4 was demonstrated to be associated with a significantly poorer overall survival in the GEPIA2 database, which was also verified by the immunofluorescence of the sections in Human Protein Atlas (HPA). The upstream miRNA corresponding to IRF4 is hsa-miR-1228-3p. CONCLUSION: From above concern, it can conclude that hsa_circ_0000301/hsa-miR-1228-3p/IRF4 may be involved in the occurrence and development of cervical cancer. However, the specific mechanism should be further studied and confirmed.
Endogenous prostaglandins (PGs) play an important role in modulating the mucosal integrity and various functions of the alimentary tract, and E type PGs are most effective in these actions. PGE2 protects against acid reflux esophagitis and affords gastric cytoprotection against ethanol and indomethacin. These effects are mimicked by EP1 agonists and attenuated by an EP1 antagonist. Adaptive cytoprotection induced by mild irritants is also attenuated by the EP1 antagonist as well as indomethacin. PGs contribute to capsaicin-induced gastric cytoprotection, yet this effect is mitigated by indomethacin and sensory deafferentation but not the EP1 antagonist. Similarly, PGE2 does not exhibit gastric cytoprotection in EP1-receptor knockout mice, while capsaicin-induced protection is observed in animals lacking either EP1 receptors but disappears in IP-receptor knockout mice. In the duodenum, acid perfusion produces damage in animals lacking EP3 receptors. The protective effect of PGE2 on indomethacin-induced small intestinal damage is mimicked by both EP3 and EP4 agonists. PGE2 also shows a healing-promoting effect on gastric ulcers as well as intestinal lesions via the activation of EP4 receptors. The underlying mechanisms of these actions of PGE2 in the stomach, duodenum, or small intestine are related to inhibition of stomach contraction (EP1), stimulation of duodenal HCO3- secretion (EP3/EP4), or suppression of bacterial invasion due to inhibition of intestinal contraction (EP4) and stimulation of mucus secretion (EP3/EP4) respectively, although the mechanisms related to the esophageal protection remain unknown. Furthermore, the healing-promoting effect is associated with the stimulation of angiogenesis via an increase in VEGF expression (EP4).
OBJECTIVE: Cross-intolerance to NSAIDs is a class of drug hypersensitivity reaction, of which NSAIDs-induced urticaria and/or angioedema (NIUA) are the most frequent clinical entities. They are considered to involve dysregulation of the arachidonic acid pathway; however, this mechanism has not been confirmed for NIUA. In this work, we assessed copy number variations (CNVs) in eight of the main genes involved in the arachidonic acid pathway and their possible genetic association with NIUA. MATERIALS AND METHODS: CNVs in ALOX5, LTC4S, PTGS1, PTGS2, PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, and PTGER4 were analyzed using TaqMan copy number assays. Genotyping was carried out by real-time quantitative PCR. Individual genotypes were assigned using the CopyCaller Software. Statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad prism 5, PLINK, EPIDAT, and R version 3.1.2. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: A total of 151 cases and 139 controls were analyzed during the discovery phase and 148 cases and 140 controls were used for replication. CNVs in open reading frames were found for ALOX5, PTGER1, PTGER3, and PTGER4. Statistically significant differences in the CNV frequency between NIUA and controls were found for ALOX5 (Pc=0.017) and PTGER1 (Pc=1.22E-04). This study represents the first analysis showing an association between CNVs in exonic regions of ALOX5 and PTGER1 and NIUA. This suggests a role of CNVs in this pathology that should be explored further.
BACKGROUND: Several microRNAs (miRs) have been described as potential biomarkers in liquid biopsies and in the context of allergic asthma, while therapeutic effects on the airway expression of miRs remain elusive. In this study, we investigated epigenetic miR-associated mechanisms in the sputum of grass pollen-allergic patients with and without allergen-specific immunotherapy (AIT). METHODS: Induced sputum samples of healthy controls (HC), AIT-treated and -untreated grass pollen-allergic rhinitis patients with (AA) and without asthma (AR) were profiled using miR microarray and whole-transcriptome microarray analysis of the same samples. miR targets were predicted in silico and used to identify inverse regulation. Local PGE(2)  levels were measured using ELISA. RESULTS: Two hundred and fifty nine miRs were upregulated in the sputum of AA patients compared with HC, while only one was downregulated. The inverse picture was observed in induced sputum of AIT-treated patients: while 21 miRs were downregulated, only 4 miRs were upregulated in asthmatics upon AIT. Of these 4 miRs, miR-3935 stood out, as its predicted target PTGER3, the prostaglandin EP(3) receptor, was downregulated in treated AA patients compared with untreated. The levels of its ligand PGE(2) in the sputum supernatants of these samples were increased in allergic patients, especially asthmatics, and downregulated after AIT. Finally, local PGE(2)  levels correlated with ILC2 frequencies, secreted sputum IL-13 levels, inflammatory cell load, sputum eosinophils and symptom burden. CONCLUSIONS: While profiling the sputum of allergic patients for novel miR expression patterns, we uncovered an association between miR-3935 and its predicted target gene, the prostaglandin E(3) receptor, which might mediate AIT effects through suppression of the PGE(2) -PTGER3 axis.
