Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP4 subtype; Receptor for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The activity of this receptor is mediated by G(s) proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase. Has a relaxing effect on smooth muscle. May play an important role in regulating renal hemodynamics, intestinal epithelial transport, adrenal aldosterone secretion, and uterine function.
Intratumor heterogeneity may result from the evolution of tumor cells and their continuous interactions with the tumor microenvironment which collectively drives tumorigenesis. However, an appearance of cellular and molecular heterogeneity creates a challenge to define molecular features linked to tumor malignancy. Here we perform multiregional single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis of seven liver cancer patients (four hepatocellular carcinoma, HCC and three intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, iCCA). We identify cellular dynamics of malignant cells and their communication networks with tumor-associated immune cells, which are validated using additional scRNA-seq data of 25 HCC and 12 iCCA patients as a stable fingerprint embedded in a malignant ecosystem representing features of tumor aggressiveness. We further validate the top ligand-receptor interaction pairs (i.e., LGALS9-SLC1A5 and SPP1-PTGER4 between tumor cells and macrophages) associated with unique transcriptome in additional 542 HCC patients. Our study unveils stable molecular networks of malignant ecosystems, which may open a path for therapeutic exploration.
BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) is clinically heterogenous according to location (cardia/non-cardia) and histopathology (diffuse/intestinal). We aimed to characterize the genetic risk architecture of GC according to its subtypes. Another aim was to examine whether cardia GC and oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) and its precursor lesion Barrett's oesophagus (BO), which are all located at the gastro-oesophageal junction (GOJ), share polygenic risk architecture. METHODS: We did a meta-analysis of ten European genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of GC and its subtypes. All patients had a histopathologically confirmed diagnosis of gastric adenocarcinoma. For the identification of risk genes among GWAS loci we did a transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS) and expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) study from gastric corpus and antrum mucosa. To test whether cardia GC and OAC/BO share genetic aetiology we also used a European GWAS sample with OAC/BO. FINDINGS: Our GWAS consisting of 5816 patients and 10,999 controls highlights the genetic heterogeneity of GC according to its subtypes. We newly identified two and replicated five GC risk loci, all of them with subtype-specific association. The gastric transcriptome data consisting of 361 corpus and 342 antrum mucosa samples revealed that an upregulated expression of MUC1, ANKRD50, PTGER4, and PSCA are plausible GC-pathomechanisms at four GWAS loci. At another risk locus, we found that the blood-group 0 exerts protective effects for non-cardia and diffuse GC, while blood-group A increases risk for both GC subtypes. Furthermore, our GWAS on cardia GC and OAC/BO (10,279 patients, 16,527 controls) showed that both cancer entities share genetic aetiology at the polygenic level and identified two new risk loci on the single-marker level. INTERPRETATION: Our findings show that the pathophysiology of GC is genetically heterogenous according to location and histopathology. Moreover, our findings point to common molecular mechanisms underlying cardia GC and OAC/BO. FUNDING: German Research Foundation (DFG).
Expansion of antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells is critical for the success of tumour-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL)-adoptive cell therapy (ACT) in patients with cancer(1). Interleukin-2 (IL-2) acts as a key regulator of CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocyte functions by promoting expansion and cytotoxic capability(2,3). Therefore, it is essential to comprehend mechanistic barriers to IL-2 sensing in the tumour microenvironment to implement strategies to reinvigorate IL-2 responsiveness and T cell antitumour responses. Here we report that prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2)), a known negative regulator of immune response in the tumour microenvironment(4,5), is present at high concentrations in tumour tissue from patients and leads to impaired IL-2 sensing in human CD8(+) TILs via the PGE(2) receptors EP2 and EP4. Mechanistically, PGE(2) inhibits IL-2 sensing in TILs by downregulating the IL-2Rgamma(c) chain, resulting in defective assembly of IL-2Rbeta-IL2Rgamma(c) membrane dimers. This results in impaired IL-2-mTOR adaptation and PGC1alpha transcriptional repression, causing oxidative stress and ferroptotic cell death in tumour-reactive TILs. Inhibition of PGE(2) signalling to EP2 and EP4 during TIL expansion for ACT resulted in increased IL-2 sensing, leading to enhanced proliferation of tumour-reactive TILs and enhanced tumour control once the cells were transferred in vivo. Our study reveals fundamental features that underlie impairment of human TILs mediated by PGE(2) in the tumour microenvironment. These findings have therapeutic implications for cancer immunotherapy and cell therapy, and enable the development of targeted strategies to enhance IL-2 sensing and amplify the IL-2 response in TILs, thereby promoting the expansion of effector T cells with enhanced therapeutic potential.
The initiation of an intestinal tumour is a probabilistic process that depends on the competition between mutant and normal epithelial stem cells in crypts(1). Intestinal stem cells are closely associated with a diverse but poorly characterized network of mesenchymal cell types(2,3). However, whether the physiological mesenchymal microenvironment of mutant stem cells affects tumour initiation remains unknown. Here we provide in vivo evidence that the mesenchymal niche controls tumour initiation in trans. By characterizing the heterogeneity of the intestinal mesenchyme using single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis, we identified a population of rare pericryptal Ptgs2-expressing fibroblasts that constitutively process arachidonic acid into highly labile prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)). Specific ablation of Ptgs2 in fibroblasts was sufficient to prevent tumour initiation in two different models of sporadic, autochthonous tumorigenesis. Mechanistically, single-cell RNA-sequencing analyses of a mesenchymal niche model showed that fibroblast-derived PGE(2) drives the expansion omicronf a population of Sca-1(+) reserve-like stem cells. These express a strong regenerative/tumorigenic program, driven by the Hippo pathway effector Yap. In vivo, Yap is indispensable for Sca-1(+) cell expansion and early tumour initiation and displays a nuclear localization in both mouse and human adenomas. Using organoid experiments, we identified a molecular mechanism whereby PGE(2) promotes Yap dephosphorylation, nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity by signalling through the receptor Ptger4. Epithelial-specific ablation of Ptger4 misdirected the regenerative reprogramming of stem cells and prevented Sca-1(+) cell expansion and sporadic tumour initiation in mutant mice, thereby demonstrating the robust paracrine control of tumour-initiating stem cells by PGE(2)-Ptger4. Analyses of patient-derived organoids established that PGE(2)-PTGER4 also regulates stem-cell function in humans. Our study demonstrates that initiation of colorectal cancer is orchestrated by the mesenchymal niche and reveals a mechanism by which rare pericryptal Ptgs2-expressing fibroblasts exert paracrine control over tumour-initiating stem cells via the druggable PGE(2)-Ptger4-Yap signalling axis.
OBJECTIVE: Dysfunctional resolution of intestinal inflammation and altered mucosal healing are essential features in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Intestinal macrophages are vital in the process of inflammation resolution, but the mechanisms underlying their mucosal healing capacity remain elusive. DESIGN: We investigated the role of the prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) receptor PTGER4 on the differentiation of intestinal macrophages in patients with IBD and mouse models of intestinal inflammation. We studied mucosal healing and intestinal epithelial barrier regeneration in Csf1r-iCre Ptger4(fl/fl) mice during dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis. The effect of PTGER4(+) macrophage secreted molecules was investigated on epithelial organoid differentiation. RESULTS: Here, we describe a subset of PTGER4-expressing intestinal macrophages with mucosal healing properties both in humans and mice. Csf1r-iCre Ptger4(fl/fl) mice showed defective mucosal healing and epithelial barrier regeneration in a model of DSS colitis. Mechanistically, an increased mucosal level of PGE(2) triggers chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1) secretion in monocyte-derived PTGER4(+) macrophages via mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). CXCL1 drives epithelial cell differentiation and proliferation from regenerating crypts during colitis. Specific therapeutic targeting of macrophages with liposomes loaded with an MAPK agonist augmented the production of CXCL1 in vivo in conditional macrophage PTGER4-deficient mice, restoring their defective epithelial regeneration and favouring mucosal healing. CONCLUSION: PTGER4(+) intestinal macrophages are essential for supporting the intestinal stem cell niche and regeneration of the injured epithelium. Our results pave the way for the development of a new class of therapeutic targets to promote macrophage healing functions and favour remission in patients with IBD.
Liver cancer accounts for 6% of all malignancies causing death worldwide, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common histological type. HCC is a heterogeneous cancer, but how the tumour microenvironment (TME) of HCC contributes to the progression of HCC remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the immune microenvironment by multiomics analysis. The tumour immune infiltration characteristics of HCC were determined at the genomic, epigenetic, bulk transcriptome and single-cell levels by data from The Cancer Genome Atlas portal and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). An epigenetic immune-related scoring system (EIRS) was developed to stratify patients with poor prognosis. SPP1, one gene in the EIRS system, was identified as an immune-related predictor of poor survival in HCC patients. Through receptor-ligand pair analysis in single-cell RNA-seq, SPP1 was indicated to mediate the crosstalk between HCC cells and macrophages via SPP1-CD44 and SPP1-PTGER4 association. In vitro experiments further validate SPP1 can trigger the polarization of macrophages to M2-phenotype tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs).
Whether sensory nerve can sense bone density or metabolic activity to control bone homeostasis is unknown. Here we found prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) secreted by osteoblastic cells activates PGE2 receptor 4 (EP4) in sensory nerves to regulate bone formation by inhibiting sympathetic activity through the central nervous system. PGE2 secreted by osteoblasts increases when bone density decreases as demonstrated in osteoporotic animal models. Ablation of sensory nerves erodes the skeletal integrity. Specifically, knockout of the EP4 gene in the sensory nerves or cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) in the osteoblastic cells significantly reduces bone volume in adult mice. Sympathetic tone is increased in sensory denervation models, and propranolol, a beta2-adrenergic antagonist, rescues bone loss. Furthermore, injection of SW033291, a small molecule to increase PGE2 level locally, significantly boostes bone formation, whereas the effect is obstructed in EP4 knockout mice. Thus, we show that PGE2 mediates sensory nerve to control bone homeostasis and promote regeneration.
Regular, long-term aspirin use may act synergistically with genetic variants, particularly those in mechanistically relevant pathways, to confer a protective effect on colorectal cancer (CRC) risk. We leveraged pooled data from 52 clinical trial, cohort, and case-control studies that included 30,806 CRC cases and 41,861 controls of European ancestry to conduct a genome-wide interaction scan between regular aspirin/nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use and imputed genetic variants. After adjusting for multiple comparisons, we identified statistically significant interactions between regular aspirin/NSAID use and variants in 6q24.1 (top hit rs72833769), which has evidence of influencing expression of TBC1D7 (a subunit of the TSC1-TSC2 complex, a key regulator of MTOR activity), and variants in 5p13.1 (top hit rs350047), which is associated with expression of PTGER4 (codes a cell surface receptor directly involved in the mode of action of aspirin). Genetic variants with functional impact may modulate the chemopreventive effect of regular aspirin use, and our study identifies putative previously unidentified targets for additional mechanistic interrogation.
PURPOSE: Immunotherapies targeting immune checkpoint molecules have shown promising treatment for a subset of cancers; however, many "cold" tumors, such as prostate cancer, remain unresponsive. We aimed to identify a potential targetable marker relevant to prostate cancer and develop novel immunotherapy. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Analysis of transcriptomic profiles at single-cell resolution was performed in clinical patients' samples, along with integrated analysis of multiple RNA-sequencing datasets. The antitumor activity of YY001, a novel EP4 antagonist, combined with anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) antibody was evaluated both in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: We identified EP4 (PTGER4) as expressed in epithelial cells and various immune cells and involved in modulating the prostate cancer immune microenvironment. YY001, a novel EP4 antagonist, inhibited the differentiation, maturation, and immunosuppressive function of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) while enhancing the proliferation and anticancer functions of T cells. Furthermore, it reversed the infiltration levels of MDSCs and T cells in the tumor microenvironment by overturning the chemokine profile of tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. The combined immunotherapy demonstrated a robust antitumor immune response as indicated by the robust accumulation and activation of CD8(+) cytotoxic T cells, with a significantly decreased MDSC ratio and reduced MDSC immunosuppression function. CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified EP4 as a specific target for prostate cancer immunotherapy and demonstrated that YY001 inhibited the growth of prostate tumors by regulating the immune microenvironment and strongly synergized with anti-PD-1 antibodies to convert completely unresponsive prostate cancers into responsive cancers, resulting in marked tumor regression, long-term survival, and lasting immunologic memory.
BACKGROUND: Crohn's disease complicated by perianal fistulae is more prevalent and severe in patients of African ancestry. METHODS: We profiled single cells from diverse patients with Crohn's disease with perianal fistula from colorectal mucosa and fistulous tracts. Immunofluorescence was performed to validate predicted cell-cell interactions. Unstimulated monocytes were chronically cultured in diverse cohorts. A subset was analyzed by single-nucleus RNA + ATAC sequencing. FINDINGS: Fistulous tract cells from complete proctectomies demonstrated enrichment of myeloid cells compared to paired rectal tissues. Ligand-receptor analysis highlights myeloid-stromal cross-talk and cellular senescence, with cellular co-localization validated by immunofluorescence. Chitinase-3 like-protein-1 (CHI3L1) is a top upregulated gene in stromal cells from fistulae expressing both destructive and fibrotic gene signatures. Monocyte cultures from patients of African ancestry and controls demonstrated differences in CHI3L1 and oncostatin M (OSM) expression upon differentiation compared to individuals of European ancestry. Activating protein-1 footprints are present in ATAC-seq peaks in stress response genes, including CHI3L1 and OSM; genome-wide chromatin accessibility including JUN footprints was observed, consistent with reported mechanisms of inflammatory memory. Regulon analyses confirm known cell-specific transcription factor regulation and implicate novel ones in fibroblast subsets. All pseudo-bulked clusters demonstrate enrichment of genetic loci, establishing multicellular contributions. In the most significant African American Crohn's genetic locus, upstream of prostaglandin E receptor 4, lymphoid-predominant ATAC-seq peaks were observed, with predicted RORC footprints. CONCLUSIONS: Population differences in myeloid-stromal cross-talk implicate fibrotic and destructive fibroblasts, senescence, epigenetic memory, and cell-specific enhancers in perianal fistula pathogenesis. The transcriptomic and epigenetic data provided here may guide optimization of promising mesenchymal stem cell therapies for perianal fistula. FUNDING: This work was supported by grants U01DK062422, U24DK062429, and R01DK123758.
While prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) is produced in human tumor microenvironment (TME), its role therein remains poorly understood. Here, we examine this issue by comparative single-cell RNA sequencing of immune cells infiltrating human cancers and syngeneic tumors in female mice. PGE receptors EP4 and EP2 are expressed in lymphocytes and myeloid cells, and their expression is associated with the downregulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and MYC targets, glycolysis and ribosomal proteins (RPs). Mechanistically, CD8(+) T cells express EP4 and EP2 upon TCR activation, and PGE(2) blocks IL-2-STAT5 signaling by downregulating Il2ra, which downregulates c-Myc and PGC-1 to decrease OXPHOS, glycolysis, and RPs, impairing migration, expansion, survival, and antitumor activity. Similarly, EP4 and EP2 are induced upon macrophage activation, and PGE(2) downregulates c-Myc and OXPHOS in M1-like macrophages. These results suggest that PGE(2)-EP4/EP2 signaling impairs both adaptive and innate immunity in TME by hampering bioenergetics and ribosome biogenesis of tumor-infiltrating immune cells.
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of human death globally. Lipid mediators contribute to the initiation and resolution of inflammation in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. These resolving lipid mediators antagonize the effects of pro-inflammatory prostaglandins (PGs) and leukotrienes (LTs) on macrophage/neutrophil infiltration, enhance macrophage phagocytosis towards apoptotic cells, and accelerate tissue repair. Importantly, pro-inflammatory PGs and LTs may be converted into anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective metabolites, suggesting potential benefits to cardiovascular diseases. Area covered：In this review, the authors not only reviewed biosynthesis and bioactivities of various lipid mediators but also discussed the strategies for the discovery of novel lipid mediators in cardiovascular diseases. The authors further employed bioinformatics analysis and network pharmacology analysis to elucidate the interactions between lipid mediators and proteins, and predict the new targets for cardiovascular diseases. Expert opinion: Bioinformatics and network pharmacology analysis indeed helped the prediction of several new targets (e.g. FAAH, HDAC4, SIP and PTGER4). Such information consolidates the therapeutic potential of lipid mediators in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. Nevertheless, future success in the development of lipid mediators as new therapy requires extensive effort to explore toxicological property, drug delivery study, biosynthesis and the underlying mechanisms of treating cardiovascular diseases.
Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic condition, which affects the immune system. It can also affect any part of the digestive tract and be associated with external manifestations. The causes of the disease remain unknown, although it seems to be the result of a combination of factors, such as genetic predisposition, environment, lifestyle and the composition of the microbiota, among others. The treatment protocol begins with a change in eating and smoking habits, and is continued with different lines of treatment, including corticosteroids, immunomodulators and biologic therapy (infliximab and adalimumab), which have shown differences in response among patients, especially with biologic treatment. Several studies have considered the possibility that these differences in response are caused by the genetic variability of patients. Many genes have been investigated as potential predictors of response to biological drugs, such as ADAM17, ATG16L1, EMSY, CASP9, CCNY, CNTN5, FASLG, FCGR, NOD2, PTGER4, IL13, IL1B, IL27, IL11, IL17F, TNF and TNFR genes. In this review, we will gather the information on influence of gene polymorphisms investigated to date on response to biological drugs in CD patients.
BACKGROUND: Tumor regression following immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) is often associated with immune-related adverse events (irAEs), marked by inflammation in non-cancerous tissues. This study was undertaken to investigate the functional relationship between anti-tumor and anti-self immunity, to facilitate irAE management while promoting anti-tumor immunity. METHODS: Multiple biopsies from tumor and inflamed tissues were collected from a patient with melanoma experiencing both tumor regression and irAEs on ICB, who underwent rapid autopsy. Immune cells infiltrating melanoma lesions and inflamed normal tissues were subjected to gene expression profiling with multiplex qRT-PCR for 122 candidate genes. Subsequently, immunohistochemistry was conducted to assess the expression of 14 candidate markers of immune cell subsets and checkpoints. TCR-beta sequencing was used to explore T cell clonal repertoires across specimens. RESULTS: While genes involved in MHC I/II antigen presentation, IFN signaling, innate immunity and immunosuppression were abundantly expressed across specimens, irAE tissues over-expressed certain genes associated with immunosuppression (CSF1R, IL10RA, IL27/EBI3, FOXP3, KLRG1, SOCS1, TGFB1), including those in the COX-2/PGE2 pathway (IL1B, PTGER1/EP1 and PTGER4/EP4). Immunohistochemistry revealed similar proportions of immunosuppressive cell subsets and checkpoint molecules across samples. TCRseq did not indicate common TCR repertoires across tumor and inflammation sites, arguing against shared antigen recognition between anti-tumor and anti-self immunity in this patient. CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive study of a single patient with melanoma experiencing both tumor regression and irAEs on ICB explores the immune landscape across these tissues, revealing similarities between anti-tumor and anti-self immunity. Further, it highlights expression of the COX-2/PGE2 pathway, which is known to be immunosuppressive and potentially mediates ICB resistance. Ongoing clinical trials of COX-2/PGE2 pathway inhibitors targeting the major COX-2 inducer IL-1B, COX-2 itself, or the PGE2 receptors EP2 and EP4 present new opportunities to promote anti-tumor activity, but may also have the potential to enhance the severity of ICB-induced irAEs.
Bisphosphonates target and bind avidly to the mineral (hydroxyapatite) found in bone. This targeting ability has been exploited to design and prepare bisphosphonate conjugate prodrugs to deliver a wide variety of drug molecules selectively to bones. It is important that conjugates be stable in the blood stream and that conjugate that is not taken up by bone is eliminated rapidly. The prodrugs should release active drug at a rate appropriate so as to provide efficacy. Radiolabelling is the best method to quantify and evaluate pharmacokinetics, tissue distribution, bone uptake and release of the active drug(s). Recent reports have described bisphosphonate conjugates derived from the antiresorptive drug, alendronic acid and anabolic prostanoid drugs that effectively deliver prostaglandins and prostaglandin EP4 receptor agonists to bone and show enhanced anabolic efficacy and tolerability compared to the drugs alone. These conjugate drugs can be dosed infrequently (weekly or bimonthly) whereas the free drugs must be dosed daily.
BACKGROUND: Gastric carcinomas (GC) are aggressive malignancies, and only ~15% of patients respond to anti-programmed cell death (ligand) 1 (PD-(L)1) monotherapy. However, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated GCs (~5-10% of GCs) often harbor PD-L1 and PD-L2 chromosomal amplifications and robust CD8+ T cell infiltrates, and respond at a high rate to anti-PD-1. The current study compares the tumor immune microenvironments (TiMEs) of EBV+ versus EBV(-) GCs. METHODS: Over 1000 cases of primary invasive GCs were screened to identify 25 treatment-naive specimens for study (11 EBV+, 14 EBV(-)). Quantitative immunohistochemistry (IHC) was conducted for markers of immune cell subsets and co-regulatory molecules. Gene expression profiling (GEP) was performed on RNAs isolated from macrodissected areas of CD3+ T cell infiltrates abutting PD-L1+ stromal/tumor cells, using multiplex quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR for a panel of 122 candidate immune-related genes. RESULTS: IHC revealed that 17/25 GCs contained PD-L1+ stromal cells, with no significant difference between EBV+/- specimens; however, only 3/25 specimens (all EBV+) contained PD-L1+ tumor cells. CD8+ T cell densities were higher in EBV+ versus EBV(-) tumors (p=0.044). With GEP normalized to the pan-leukocyte marker PTPRC/CD45, EBV+ GCs overexpressed ITGAE (CD103, marking intraepithelial T cells and a dendritic cell subset) and the interferon-inducible genes CXCL9 and IDO1. In contrast, EBV(-) tumors overexpressed several functionally-related gene groups associated with myeloid cells (CD163, IL1A, NOS2, RIGI), immunosuppressive cytokines/chemokines (CXCL2, CXCR4, IL10, IL32), coinhibitory molecules (HAVCR2/TIM-3 and VSIR/VISTA), and adenosine pathway components (ENTPD1/ CD39 and NT5E/CD73). Notably, compared with EBV+ GCs, EBV(-) GCs also overexpressed components of the cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) pathway associated with cancer-promoting inflammation, including PTGS2/COX-2 (most highly upregulated gene, 32-fold, p=0.005); prostaglandin receptors PTGER1 (EP1; up 21-fold, p=0.015) and PTGER4 (EP4; up twofold, p=0.022); and the major COX-2-inducing cytokine IL1B (up 11-fold, p=0.019). Consistent with these findings, COX-2 protein expression trended higher in EBV(-) versus EBV+ GCs (p=0.068). CONCLUSIONS: While certain markers of immunosuppression are found in the GC TiME regardless of EBV status, EBV(-) GCs, which are much more common than EBV+ GCs, overexpress components of the COX-2/PGE2 pathway. These findings provide novel insights into the immune microenvironments of EBV+ and EBV(-) GC, and offer potential targets to overcome resistance to anti-PD-(L)1 therapies.
BACKGROUND: The results from previous studies on association between prostaglandin E receptor 4 (PTGER4) polymorphisms and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) risk in Caucasian were conflict. The present study aimed to investigate the genetic association by conducting a meta-analysis. METHODS: Systematic literature search was conducted through Wiley Online Library, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and PubMed databases. Odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to investigate the associations between rs4613763 T/C, 17234657T/G polymorphisms, and IBD risk in Caucasian. RESULTS: Twenty case-control studies consisting of 18,495 Crohn disease (CD) patients and 4203 ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, as well as 26,063 controls were included in this meta-analysis. The rs4613763T/C polymorphism had obvious influence on CD, UC risk in Caucasian. However, rs17234657T/G polymorphism had obvious influence on CD but not UC in Caucasian. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis suggested that both the rs4613763 T/C, rs17234657T/G polymorphisms had obvious influence on risk of CD in Caucasian. In addition, rs4613763 T/C, polymorphism had obvious influence on risk of UC in Caucasian.
BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. The alteration of DNA methylation plays a major role in the development of lung cancer. Methylation biomarkers become a possible method for lung cancer diagnosis. RESULTS: We identified eleven lung cancer-specific methylation markers (CDO1, GSHR, HOXA11, HOXB4-1, HOXB4-2, HOXB4-3, HOXB4-4, LHX9, MIR196A1, PTGER4-1, and PTGER4-2), which could differentiate benign and malignant pulmonary nodules. The methylation levels of these markers are significantly higher in malignant tissues. In bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples, the methylation signals maintain the same differential trend as in tissues. An optimal 5-marker model for pulmonary nodule diagnosis (malignant vs. benign) was developed from all possible combinations of the eleven markers. In the test set (57 tissue and 71 BALF samples), the area under curve (AUC) value achieves 0.93, and the overall sensitivity is 82% at the specificity of 91%. In an independent validation set (111 BALF samples), the AUC is 0.82 with a specificity of 82% and a sensitivity of 70%. CONCLUSIONS: This model can differentiate pulmonary adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma from benign diseases, especially for infection, inflammation, and tuberculosis. The model's performance is not affected by gender, age, smoking history, or the solid components of nodules.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The Roucongrong Pill (RCRP), originating from the historical General Medical Collection of Royal Benevolence, is frequently used to treat postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP). Despite its prevalent application, the specific anti-osteoporotic mechanisms of RCRP remain to be elucidated. AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aims to elucidate the therapeutic mechanism of RCRP in the context of ovariectomy (OVX)-induced PMOP in rats. By employing an integrative approach, the research combines medicinal chemistry, gut microbiota (GM) profiling, metabolomics, MetOrigin traceability, network pharmacology, molecular docking, and molecular dynamics simulations to deliver a comprehensive analysis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats underwent bilateral OVX to establish a PMOP model. The therapeutic efficacy of RCRP was evaluated through bone metrics (BMD, bone strength, BV/TV, Tb.Sp), hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) histological assessment, and bone metabolism markers (OPG, BALP, TRACP-5b, beta-CTX, RANKL). Fecal metabolomics and 16S rDNA sequencing were employed to assess the influence of RCRP on GM and metabolite profiles. Furthermore, MetOrigin facilitated the traceability analysis of relevant metabolites. Molecular docking identified potential RCRP compounds with anti-PMOP activity, while their stability and protein interactions were assessed through molecular dynamics simulations. Network pharmacology further confirms the targets of action. RESULTS: RCRP alleviated PMOP in rats, enhancing bone strength, cortical and trabecular BMD, BV/TV, and serum OPG levels, while reducing Tb.Sp, serum BALP, TRACP-5b, beta-CTX, and RANKL concentrations. A total of twenty-six distinct metabolites were identified, of which ten-tribufos, sulfoacetic acid, betamethasone dipropionate, 9-oxooctadeca-10,12,15-trienoic acid, menatetrenone, piperlongumine, maltopentaose, enol-phenylpyruvate, catechol, pentaacetate, and (+)-2-methylpropanoic acid-exhibited correlations with six GM species: Turicibacter, Roseburia, Colidextribacter, Helicobacter, Odoribacter, and Lachnoclostridium, as determined by Spearman's correlation analysis. Notably, MetOrigin revealed the microbial metabolism of taurine and hypotaurine, along with host-specific steroid hormone synthesis. Computational docking studies demonstrated robust interactions between five RCRP-derived steroids (hydroxyecdysone, corticosterone, trilostane, 5alpha-androstan-3,6,17-trione, and cortisol) and key enzymes (estradiol 17alpha-dehydrogenase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase), suggesting a potential enhancement of therapeutic efficacy against PMOP. Furthermore, molecular dynamics simulations indicated stable interactions between hydroxyecdysone and two proteins, with binding free energies of -67.427 kJ/mol and -156.948 kJ/mol, respectively. Through network pharmacology and molecular docking approaches, potential targets of these metabolites were identified, including estrogen receptors ESR1 and ESR2, dual specificity phosphatase 6 (DUSP6), sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), prostaglandin E receptor 4 (PTGER4), cannabinoid receptor 2 (CNR2), cathepsin K (CTSK), and androgen receptor (AR). CONCLUSIONS: RCRP effectively mitigates OVX-induced bone loss in PMOP rats by modulating GM and associated metabolites, along with their potential targets and key metabolic pathways, including taurine and hypotaurine metabolism, as well as steroid hormone biosynthesis. These findings offer new insights into the therapeutic mechanisms by which RCRP may alleviate PMOP.
