Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP1 subtype; Receptor for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The activity of this receptor is mediated by G(q) proteins which activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. May play a role as an important modulator of renal function. Implicated the smooth muscle contractile response to PGE2 in various tissues; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Inflammation can be either beneficial or detrimental to the liver, depending on multiple factors. Mild (i.e., limited in intensity and destined to resolve) inflammatory responses have indeed been shown to exert consistent hepatoprotective effects, contributing to tissue repair and promoting the re-establishment of homeostasis. Conversely, excessive (i.e., disproportionate in intensity and permanent) inflammation may induce a massive loss of hepatocytes and hence exacerbate the severity of various hepatic conditions, including ischemia-reperfusion injury, systemic metabolic alterations (e.g., obesity, diabetes, non-alcoholic fatty liver disorders), alcoholic hepatitis, intoxication by xenobiotics and infection, de facto being associated with irreversible liver damage, fibrosis, and carcinogenesis. Both liver-resident cells (e.g., Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells, sinusoidal endothelial cells) and cells that are recruited in response to injury (e.g., monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, natural killer cells) emit pro-inflammatory signals including - but not limited to - cytokines, chemokines, lipid messengers, and reactive oxygen species that contribute to the apoptotic or necrotic demise of hepatocytes. In turn, dying hepatocytes release damage-associated molecular patterns that-upon binding to evolutionary conserved pattern recognition receptors-activate cells of the innate immune system to further stimulate inflammatory responses, hence establishing a highly hepatotoxic feedforward cycle of inflammation and cell death. In this review, we discuss the cellular and molecular mechanisms that account for the most deleterious effect of hepatic inflammation at the cellular level, that is, the initiation of a massive cell death response among hepatocytes.
Chemotherapeutic agents, such as doxorubicin (DOX), may cause cardiomyopathy, even life-threatening arrhythmias in cancer patients. Ferroptosis-an iron-dependent oxidative form of programmed necrosis, plays a pivotal role in DOX-induced cardiomyopathy (DIC). Prostaglandins (PGs) are bioactive signaling molecules that profoundly modulate cardiac performance in both physiologic and pathologic conditions. Here, we found that PGE(2) production and its E-prostanoid 1 receptor (EP1) expression were upregulated in erastin (a ferroptosis inducer) or DOX-treated cardiomyocytes. EP1 inhibition markedly aggravated erastin or DOX-induced cardiomyocyte ferroptosis, whereas EP1 activation exerted opposite effect. Genetic depletion of EP1 in cardiomyocytes worsens DOX-induced cardiac injury in mice, which was efficiently rescued by the ferroptosis inhibitor Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1). Mechanistically, EP1 activation protected cardiomyocytes from DOX-induced ferroptosis by promoting nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-driven anti-oxidative gene expression, such as glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) and solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11). EP1 was coupled with G(alphaq) to elicit intracellular Ca(2+) flux and activate the PKC/Nrf2 cascade in ferroptotic cardiomyocytes. EP1 activation also prevents DOX-induced ferroptosis in human cardiomyocytes. Thus, PGE(2)/EP1 axis protects cardiomyocytes from DOX-induced ferroptosis by activating PKC/Nrf2 signaling and activation of EP1 may represent an attractive strategy for DIC prevention and treatment.
BACKGROUND AIMS: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a highly lethal malignancy originating from the biliary ducts. Current CCA diagnostic and prognostic assessments cannot satisfy the clinical requirement. Bile detection is rarely performed, and herein, we aim to estimate the clinical significance of bile liquid biopsy by assessing bile exosomal concentrations and components. APPROACH RESULTS: Exosomes in bile and sera from CCA, pancreatic cancer, and common bile duct stone were identified and quantified by transmission electronmicroscopy, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and nanoFCM. Exosomal components were assessed by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry and microRNA sequencing (miRNA-seq). Bile exosomal concentration in different diseases had no significant difference, but miR-182-5p and miR-183-5p were ectopically upregulated in CCA bile exosomes. High miR-182/183-5p in both CCA tissues and bile indicates a poor prognosis. Bile exosomal miR-182/183-5p is secreted by CCA cells and can be absorbed by biliary epithelium or CCA cells. With xenografts in humanized mice, we showed that bile exosomal miR-182/183-5p promotes CCA proliferation, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by targeting hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in CCA cells and mast cells (MCs), and increasing prostaglandin E2 generation, which stimulates PTGER1 and increases CCA stemness. In single-cell mRNA-seq, hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase is predominantly expressed in MCs. miR-182/183-5p prompts MC to release VEGF-A release from MC by increasing VEGF-A expression, which facilitates angiogenesis. CONCLUSIONS: CCA cells secret exosomal miR-182/183-5p into bile, which targets hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in CCA cells and MCs and increases prostaglandin E2 and VEGF-A release. Prostaglandin E2 promotes stemness by activating PTGER1. Our results reveal a type of CCA self-driven progression dependent on bile exosomal miR-182/183-5p and MCs, which is a new interplay pattern of CCA and bile.
INTRODUCTION: Immunity is involved in a variety of bone metabolic processes, especially osteoporosis. The aim of this study is to explore new bone immune-related markers by bioinformatics method and evaluate their ability to predict osteoporosis. METHODS: The mRNA expression profiles were obtained from GSE7158 in Gene expression Omnibus (GEO), and immune-related genes were obtained from ImmPort database (https://www.immport.org/shared/). immune genes related to bone mineral density(BMD) were screened out for differential analysis. protein-protein interaction (PPIs) networks were used to analyze the interrelationships between different immune-related genes (DIRGs). Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses of DIRGs function were performed. A least absolute shrinkage and selection operation (LASSO) regression model and multiple Support Vector Machine-Recursive Feature Elimination (mSVM-RFE) model were constructed to identify the candidate genes for osteoporosis prediction The receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves were used to validate the performances of predictive models and candidate genes in GEO database (GSE7158,GSE13850).Through the RT - qPCR verify the key genes differentially expressed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells Finally, we constructed a nomogram model for predicting osteoporosis based on five immune-related genes. CIBERSORT algorithm was used to calculate the relative proportion of 22 immune cells. RESULTS: A total of 1158 DEGs and 66 DIRGs were identified between high-BMD and low-BMD women. These DIRGs were mainly enriched in cytokine-mediated signaling pathway, positive regulation of response to external stimulus and the cellular components of genes are mostly localized to external side of plasma membrane. And the KEGG enrichment analysis were mainly involved in Cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction,Natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity. Then five key genes (CCR5, IAPP, IFNA4, IGHV3-73 and PTGER1) were identified and used as features to construct a predictive prognostic model for osteoporosis using the GSE7158 dataset. CONCLUSION: Immunity plays an important role in the development of osteoporosis.CCR5, IAPP, IFNA4, IGHV3-73 and PTGER1were play an important role in the occurrences and diagnosis of OP.
BACKGROUND: Tumor regression following immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) is often associated with immune-related adverse events (irAEs), marked by inflammation in non-cancerous tissues. This study was undertaken to investigate the functional relationship between anti-tumor and anti-self immunity, to facilitate irAE management while promoting anti-tumor immunity. METHODS: Multiple biopsies from tumor and inflamed tissues were collected from a patient with melanoma experiencing both tumor regression and irAEs on ICB, who underwent rapid autopsy. Immune cells infiltrating melanoma lesions and inflamed normal tissues were subjected to gene expression profiling with multiplex qRT-PCR for 122 candidate genes. Subsequently, immunohistochemistry was conducted to assess the expression of 14 candidate markers of immune cell subsets and checkpoints. TCR-beta sequencing was used to explore T cell clonal repertoires across specimens. RESULTS: While genes involved in MHC I/II antigen presentation, IFN signaling, innate immunity and immunosuppression were abundantly expressed across specimens, irAE tissues over-expressed certain genes associated with immunosuppression (CSF1R, IL10RA, IL27/EBI3, FOXP3, KLRG1, SOCS1, TGFB1), including those in the COX-2/PGE2 pathway (IL1B, PTGER1/EP1 and PTGER4/EP4). Immunohistochemistry revealed similar proportions of immunosuppressive cell subsets and checkpoint molecules across samples. TCRseq did not indicate common TCR repertoires across tumor and inflammation sites, arguing against shared antigen recognition between anti-tumor and anti-self immunity in this patient. CONCLUSIONS: This comprehensive study of a single patient with melanoma experiencing both tumor regression and irAEs on ICB explores the immune landscape across these tissues, revealing similarities between anti-tumor and anti-self immunity. Further, it highlights expression of the COX-2/PGE2 pathway, which is known to be immunosuppressive and potentially mediates ICB resistance. Ongoing clinical trials of COX-2/PGE2 pathway inhibitors targeting the major COX-2 inducer IL-1B, COX-2 itself, or the PGE2 receptors EP2 and EP4 present new opportunities to promote anti-tumor activity, but may also have the potential to enhance the severity of ICB-induced irAEs.
In the last few years, nivolumab has become the standard of care for advanced-stage lung cancer patients. Unfortunately, up to 60% of patients do not respond to this treatment. In our study, we identified variations in gene expression related to primary resistance to immunotherapy. Bronchoscopy biopsies were obtained from advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients previously characterized as responders or non-responders after nivolumab treatment. Ten tumor biopsies (from three responders and seven non-responders) were analyzed by the differential expression of 760 genes using the NanoString nCounter platform. These genes are known to be involved in the response to anti-PD1/PD-L1 therapy. All the patients were treated with nivolumab. Examining the dysregulated expression of 24 genes made it possible to predict the response to nivolumab treatment. Supervised analysis of the gene expression profile (GEP) revealed that responder patients had significantly higher levels of expression of CXCL11, NT5E, KLRK1, CD3G, GZMA, IDO1, LCK, CXCL9, GNLY, ITGAL, HLA-DRB1, CXCR6, IFNG, CD8A, ITK, B2M, HLA-B, and HLA-A than did non-responder patients. In contrast, PNOC, CD19, TP73, ARG1, FCRL2, and PTGER1 genes had significantly lower expression levels than non-responder patients. These findings were validated as predictive biomarkers in an independent series of 201 patients treated with nivolumab (22 hepatocellular carcinomas, 14 non-squamous cell lung carcinomas, 5 head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, 1 ureter/renal pelvis carcinoma, 120 melanomas, 4 bladder carcinomas, 31 renal cell carcinomas, and 4 squamous cell lung carcinomas). ROC curve analysis showed that the expression levels of ITK, NT5E, ITGAL, and CD8A were the best predictors of response to nivolumab. Further, 13/24 genes showed an adverse impact on overall survival (OS) in an independent, large series of patients with NSCLC (2166 cases). In summary, we found a strong association between the global GEP of advanced NSCLC and the response to nivolumab. The classification of NSCLC patients based on GEP enabled us to identify those patients who genuinely benefited from treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). We also demonstrated that abnormal expression of most of the markers comprising the genomic signature has an adverse influence on OS, making them significant markers for therapeutic decision-making. Additional prospective studies in larger series of patients are required to confirm the clinical utility of these biomarkers.
OBJECTIVE: Cross-intolerance to NSAIDs is a class of drug hypersensitivity reaction, of which NSAIDs-induced urticaria and/or angioedema (NIUA) are the most frequent clinical entities. They are considered to involve dysregulation of the arachidonic acid pathway; however, this mechanism has not been confirmed for NIUA. In this work, we assessed copy number variations (CNVs) in eight of the main genes involved in the arachidonic acid pathway and their possible genetic association with NIUA. MATERIALS AND METHODS: CNVs in ALOX5, LTC4S, PTGS1, PTGS2, PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, and PTGER4 were analyzed using TaqMan copy number assays. Genotyping was carried out by real-time quantitative PCR. Individual genotypes were assigned using the CopyCaller Software. Statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad prism 5, PLINK, EPIDAT, and R version 3.1.2. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: A total of 151 cases and 139 controls were analyzed during the discovery phase and 148 cases and 140 controls were used for replication. CNVs in open reading frames were found for ALOX5, PTGER1, PTGER3, and PTGER4. Statistically significant differences in the CNV frequency between NIUA and controls were found for ALOX5 (Pc=0.017) and PTGER1 (Pc=1.22E-04). This study represents the first analysis showing an association between CNVs in exonic regions of ALOX5 and PTGER1 and NIUA. This suggests a role of CNVs in this pathology that should be explored further.
BACKGROUND: Gastric carcinomas (GC) are aggressive malignancies, and only ~15% of patients respond to anti-programmed cell death (ligand) 1 (PD-(L)1) monotherapy. However, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated GCs (~5-10% of GCs) often harbor PD-L1 and PD-L2 chromosomal amplifications and robust CD8+ T cell infiltrates, and respond at a high rate to anti-PD-1. The current study compares the tumor immune microenvironments (TiMEs) of EBV+ versus EBV(-) GCs. METHODS: Over 1000 cases of primary invasive GCs were screened to identify 25 treatment-naive specimens for study (11 EBV+, 14 EBV(-)). Quantitative immunohistochemistry (IHC) was conducted for markers of immune cell subsets and co-regulatory molecules. Gene expression profiling (GEP) was performed on RNAs isolated from macrodissected areas of CD3+ T cell infiltrates abutting PD-L1+ stromal/tumor cells, using multiplex quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR for a panel of 122 candidate immune-related genes. RESULTS: IHC revealed that 17/25 GCs contained PD-L1+ stromal cells, with no significant difference between EBV+/- specimens; however, only 3/25 specimens (all EBV+) contained PD-L1+ tumor cells. CD8+ T cell densities were higher in EBV+ versus EBV(-) tumors (p=0.044). With GEP normalized to the pan-leukocyte marker PTPRC/CD45, EBV+ GCs overexpressed ITGAE (CD103, marking intraepithelial T cells and a dendritic cell subset) and the interferon-inducible genes CXCL9 and IDO1. In contrast, EBV(-) tumors overexpressed several functionally-related gene groups associated with myeloid cells (CD163, IL1A, NOS2, RIGI), immunosuppressive cytokines/chemokines (CXCL2, CXCR4, IL10, IL32), coinhibitory molecules (HAVCR2/TIM-3 and VSIR/VISTA), and adenosine pathway components (ENTPD1/ CD39 and NT5E/CD73). Notably, compared with EBV+ GCs, EBV(-) GCs also overexpressed components of the cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2)/prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) pathway associated with cancer-promoting inflammation, including PTGS2/COX-2 (most highly upregulated gene, 32-fold, p=0.005); prostaglandin receptors PTGER1 (EP1; up 21-fold, p=0.015) and PTGER4 (EP4; up twofold, p=0.022); and the major COX-2-inducing cytokine IL1B (up 11-fold, p=0.019). Consistent with these findings, COX-2 protein expression trended higher in EBV(-) versus EBV+ GCs (p=0.068). CONCLUSIONS: While certain markers of immunosuppression are found in the GC TiME regardless of EBV status, EBV(-) GCs, which are much more common than EBV+ GCs, overexpress components of the COX-2/PGE2 pathway. These findings provide novel insights into the immune microenvironments of EBV+ and EBV(-) GC, and offer potential targets to overcome resistance to anti-PD-(L)1 therapies.
This study aimed to evaluate the methylation levels of G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) related genes and the effects of methylation on mRNA expression levels in aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA). DNA methylation array and transcriptome analysis were applied in non-functioning adrenocortical adenoma (NFA) and APA. We investigated 192 GPCR-related genes and found hypo-methylation in the promoter region of 66 of these genes in APA. An integration study between microarray and methylation analysis revealed that HTR4, MC2R, TACR1, GRM3, and PTGER1 showed hypo-methylation and up-regulation of mRNA in APA. qPCR analysis showed that HTR4 and PTGER1 expression was 9.3-fold and 6.6-fold higher in APAs than in NFAs, respectively, whereas expression of the other genes was not different between the groups. Methylation of HTR4 and PTGER1 at positions -229 and -666 from the transcription start site, respectively, showed a significant inverse correlation with their mRNA levels. Methylation levels were not associated with KCNJ5 or ATP1A1 mutations in human adrenal samples. We demonstrated an increased incidence of CpG island demethylation of GPCR-related gene in APA. The expression of two receptors, HTR4 and PTGER1, showed a strong association with DNA methylation.
GIPC1/GIPC/RGS19IP1, GIPC2, and GIPC3 genes constitute the human GIPC gene family. GIPC1 and GIPC2 show 62.0% total-amino-acid identity. GIPC1 and GIPC3 show 59.9% total-amino-acid identity. GIPC2 and GIPC3 show 55.3% total-amino-acid identity. GIPCs are proteins with central PDZ domain and GIPC homology (GH1 and GH2) domains. PDZ, GH1, and GH2 domains are conserved among human GIPCs, Xenopus GIPC/Kermit, and Drosophila GIPC/ LP09416. Bioinformatics revealed that GIPC genes are linked to prostanoid receptor genes and DNAJB genes in the human genome as follows: GIPC1 gene is linked to prostaglandin E receptor 1 (PTGER1) gene and DNAJB1 gene in human chromosome 19p13.2-p13.1 region; GIPC2 gene to prostaglandin F receptor (PTGFR) gene and DNAJB4 gene in human chromosome 1p31.1-p22.3 region; GIPC3 gene to thromboxane A2 receptor (TBXA2R) gene in human chromosome 19p13.3 region. GIPC1 and GIPC2 mRNAs are expressed together in OKAJIMA, TMK1, MKN45 and KATO-III cells derived from diffuse-type of gastric cancer, and are up-regulated in several cases of primary gastric cancer. PDZ domain of GIPC family proteins interact with Frizzled-3 (FZD3) class of WNT receptor, insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF1) receptor, receptor tyrosine kinase TrkA, TGF-beta type III receptor (TGF-beta RIII), integrin alpha6A subunit, transmembrane glycoprotein 5T4, and RGS19/RGS-GAIP. Because RGS19 is a member of the RGS family that regulate heterotrimeric G-protein signaling, GIPCs might be scaffold proteins linking heterotrimeric G-proteins to seven-transmembrane-type WNT receptor or to receptor tyrosine kinases. Therefore, GIPC1, GIPC2 and GIPC3 might play key roles in carcinogenesis and embryogenesis through modulation of growth factor signaling and cell adhesion.
Prostanoids are well-described primary mediators of inflammatory processes and are essential for the normal physiological function of the female reproductive system. The aim of this study was to determine the temporal expression of the prostanoid biosynthetic enzymes (PTGS1, PTGS2, PTGES, PTGES2, PTGES3, AKR1B1, AKR1C3, CBR1, HPGDS, PTGDS, PTGIS, TBXAS1 and HPGD) and the prostanoid receptors (PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, PTGER4, PTGFR, PTGDR, GPR44, PTGIR and TBXA2R) in the human endometrium throughout the menstrual cycle. The analysis identified PTGFR to have a distinct expression profile compared with other components of the prostanoid system, as expression is maximal during the proliferative phase. Immunohistochemical analysis for PTGER1 suggests a dual function for this receptor depending on its temporal (proliferative versus secretory) and spatial (nuclear versus cell membrane) expression. The expression profiles of the PGF(2alpha) synthases identified AKR1B1 and CBR1 as the likely regulators of PGF(2alpha) production during the menstrual phase. Immunohistochemical analysis for AKR1B1, CBR1 and AKR1C3 suggest expression to be in the glandular epithelium and vasculature. This study represents the first comprehensive analysis of the components of prostanoid biosynthetic and signalling pathway in the human endometrium. The expression profiles described have the potential to identify specific prostanoid components that may be dysregulated in inflammatory-associated disorders of the endometrium.
Animals under stress take adaptive actions that may lead to various types of behavioral disinhibition. Such behavioral disinhibition, when expressed excessively and impulsively, can result in harm in individuals and cause a problem in our society. We now show that, under social or environmental stress, mice deficient in prostaglandin E receptor subtype EP1 (Ptger1(-/-)) manifest behavioral disinhibition, including impulsive aggression with defective social interaction, impaired cliff avoidance, and an exaggerated acoustic startle response. This phenotype was reproduced in wild-type mice by administration of an EP1-selective antagonist, whereas administration of an EP1-selective agonist suppressed electric-shock-induced impulsive aggression. Dopamine turnover in the frontal cortex and striatum was increased in Ptger1(-/-) mice, and administration of dopaminergic antagonists corrected their behavioral phenotype. These results suggest that prostaglandin E(2) acts through EP1 to control impulsive behavior under stress, a finding potentially exploitable for development of drugs that attenuate impulsive behavior in humans.
OBJECTIVE: To identify key genes involved in occurrence and development of retinoblastoma. METHODS: The microarray dataset, GSE5222, was downloaded from the gene expression omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between unilateral and bilateral retinoblastoma were identified and functional enrichment analysis performed. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed and analysed by STRING and Cytoscape. RESULTS: DEGs were mainly associated with activation of cysteine-type endopeptidase activity involved in apoptotic process and small molecule catabolic process. Seven genes (WAS, GNB3, PTGER1, TACR1, GPR143, NPFF and CDKN2A) were identified as HUB genes. CONCLUSION: Our research provides more understanding of the mechanisms of the disease at a molecular level and may help in the identification of novel biomarkers for retinoblastoma.
BACKGROUND: MYCN amplification (MNA) has been proved to be related to poor prognosis in neuroblastoma (NBL), but the MYCN-related immune signatures and genes remain unclear. METHODS: Enrichment analysis was used to identify the significant enrichment pathways of differentially expressed immune-related genes (DEIRGs). Weight gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) was applied to reveal the correlation between these DEIRGs and MYCN status. Univariate and multivariate Cox analyses were used to construct risk model. The relevant fractions of immune cells were evaluated by CIBERSORT and single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA). RESULTS: Five genes, including CHGA, PTGER1, SHC3, PLXNC1, and TRIM55 were enrolled into the risk model. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve showed that our model performed well in predicting the outcomes of NBL (3-years AUC = 0.720, 5-year AUC = 0.775, 10-years AUC = 0.782), which has been validated in the GSE49711 dataset and the E-MTAB-8248 dataset. By comparing with the tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion (TIDE) and tumor inflammation signature (TIS), we further proved that our model is reliable. Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses indicated that the risk score, age, and MYCN can serve as independent prognostic factors in the E-MATB-8248. Functional enrichment analysis showed the DEIRGs were enriched in leukocyte adhesion-related signaling pathways. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed the significantly enriched pathways of the five MYCN-related DEIRGs. The risk score was negatively correlated with the immune checkpoint CD274 (PD-L1) but no significant difference with the TMB. We also confirmed the prognostic value of our model in predicting immunotherapeutics. CONCLUSION: We constructed and verified a signature based on DEIRG that related to MNA and predicted the survival of NBL based on relevant immune signatures. These findings could provide help for predicting prognosis and developing immunotherapy in NBL.
BACKGROUND: The guanine nucleotide binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptors (GPCRs) regulate cell growth, proliferation and differentiation. G proteins are also implicated in erythroid differentiation, and some of them are expressed principally in hematopoietic cells. GPCRs-linked NO/cGMP and p38 MAPK signaling pathways already demonstrated potency for globin gene stimulation. By analyzing erythroid progenitors, derived from hematopoietic cells through in vitro ontogeny, our study intends to determine early markers and signaling pathways of globin gene regulation and their relation to GPCR expression. RESULTS: Human hematopoietic CD34+ progenitors are isolated from fetal liver (FL), cord blood (CB), adult bone marrow (BM), peripheral blood (PB) and G-CSF stimulated mobilized PB (mPB), and then differentiated in vitro into erythroid progenitors. We find that growth capacity is most abundant in FL- and CB-derived erythroid cells. The erythroid progenitor cells are sorted as 100% CD71+, but we did not find statistical significance in the variations of CD34, CD36 and GlyA antigens and that confirms similarity in maturation of studied ontogenic periods. During ontogeny, beta-globin gene expression reaches maximum levels in cells of adult blood origin (176 fmol/mug), while gamma-globin gene expression is consistently up-regulated in CB-derived cells (60 fmol/mug). During gamma-globin induction by hydroxycarbamide, we identify stimulated GPCRs (PTGDR, PTGER1) and GPCRs-coupled genes known to be activated via the cAMP/PKA (ADIPOQ), MAPK pathway (JUN) and NO/cGMP (PRPF18) signaling pathways. During ontogeny, GPR45 and ARRDC1 genes have the most prominent expression in FL-derived erythroid progenitor cells, GNL3 and GRP65 genes in CB-derived cells (high gamma-globin gene expression), GPR110 and GNG10 in BM-derived cells, GPR89C and GPR172A in PB-derived cells, and GPR44 and GNAQ genes in mPB-derived cells (high beta-globin gene expression). CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the concomitant activity of GPCR-coupled genes and related signaling pathways during erythropoietic stimulation of globin genes. In accordance with previous reports, the stimulation of GPCRs supports the postulated connection between cAMP/PKA and NO/cGMP pathways in activation of gamma-globin expression, via JUN and p38 MAPK signaling.
CONTEXT: Endometriosis is a common gynecologic condition characterized by an important inflammatory process mediated by the prostaglandin pathway. Oral contraceptives are the treatment of choice for symptomatic endometriotic women. However the effects of oral contraceptives use and prostaglandin pathway in endometriotic women are actually still unknown. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of prostaglandin pathway key genes in endometriotic tissue, affected or not by hormonal therapy, as compared with healthy endometrial tissue. DESIGN: This was a comparative laboratory study. SETTING: This study was conducted in a tertiary-care university hospital. PATIENTS: Seventy-six women, with (n = 46) and without (n = 30) histologically proven endometriosis. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Prostaglandin-endoperoxidase synthase (PTGS)1, PTGS2, prostaglandin E receptor (PTGER)1, PTGER2, PTGER3, and PTGER4 mRNA levels in endometrium of disease-free women and in eutopic and ectopic endometrium of endometriosis-affected women. PTGS2 expression was further investigated by immunohistochemistry, using specific monoclonal antibodies. PTGS2 expression was analyzed at mRNA and protein levels and correlated with taking hormonal treatment. RESULTS: PTGS2 expression was significantly increased in eutopic and ectopic endometrium as compared with healthy tissue (induction of 9.6- and 6.3-fold, respectively; P = .001). PTGS2 immunoreactivity increased gradually from normal endometrium to eutopic and ectopic endometrium (h-score of 96.7 +/- 55.0, 128.3 +/- 66.1, and 226.7 +/- 62.6, respectively, P < .001). PTGER2, PTGER3, and PTGER4 expression increased significantly and gradually from normal to eutopic and ectopic endometrium, whereas PTGER1 remained unchanged. Patients under hormonal treatment had a higher PTGS2 expression at transcriptional and protein levels as compared with those without treatment (P = .002 and P = .025, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Prostaglandin pathway is strongly deregulated in eutopic and ectopic endometrium of women suffering from endometriosis for the benefit of an increased PTGS2 expression. We show for the first time that hormonal treatment appears to enhance even more PTGS2 expression. These results contribute to explain why medical treatment could fail to control endometriosis progression.
In luteinizing granulosa cells, prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) can exert luteotrophic actions, apparently via the cAMP signalling pathway. In addition to stimulating progesterone synthesis, PGE(2) can also stimulate oxidation of the physiological glucocorticoid, cortisol, to its inactive metabolite, cortisone, by the type 1 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11betaHSD1) enzyme in human granulosa-lutein cells. Having previously shown these human ovarian cells to express functional G-protein coupled, E-series prostaglandin (PTGER)1, PTGER2 and PTGER4 receptors, the aim of this study was to delineate the roles of PTGER1 and PTGER2 receptors in mediating the effects of PGE(2) on steroidogenesis and cortisol metabolism in human granulosa-lutein cells. PGE(2)-stimulated concentration-dependent increases in both progesterone production and cAMP accumulation (by 1.9 +/- 0.1- and 18.7 +/- 6.8-fold respectively at 3000 nM PGE(2)). While a selective PTGER1 antagonist, SC19220, could partially inhibit the steroidogenic response to PGE(2) (by 55.9 +/- 4.1% at 1000 nM PGE(2)), co-treatment with AH6809, a mixed PTGER1/PTGER2 receptor antagonist, completely abolished the stimulation of progesterone synthesis at all tested concentrations of PGE(2) and suppressed the stimulation of cAMP accumulation. Both PGE(2) and butaprost (a preferential PTGER2 receptor agonist) stimulated concentration-dependent increases in cortisol oxidation by 11betaHSD1 (by 42.5 +/- 3.1 and 40.0 +/- 3.0% respectively, at PGE(2) and butaprost concentrations of 1000 nM). Co-treatment with SC19220 enhanced the ability of both PGE(2) and butaprost to stimulate 11betaHSD1 activity (by 30.2 +/- 0.2 and 30.5 +/- 0.6% respectively), whereas co-treatment with AH6809 completely abolished the 11betaHSD1 responses to PGE(2) and butaprost. These findings implicate the PTGER2 receptor-cAMP signalling pathway in the stimulation of progesterone production and 11betaHSD1 activity by PGE(2) in human granulosa-lutein cells.
There is strong evidence for an important role for increased COX (cyclo-oxygenase)-2 expression and PG (prostaglandin) E2 production in colorectal tumorigenesis. PGE(2) acts through four E-prostanoid receptors (EP1-4). COX-2 has therefore become a target for the potential chemoprevention and therapy of colorectal cancer. However, any therapeutic/preventive strategy has the potential to have an impact on physiological processes and hence result in side effects. General COX (COX-1 and -2) inhibition by traditional NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), such as aspirin, although chemopreventive, has some side effects, as do some conventional COX-2-selective NSAIDs. As PGE2 is thought to be the major PG species responsible for promoting colorectal tumorigenesis, research is being directed to a number of protein targets downstream of COX-2 that might allow the selective inhibition of the tumour-promoting activities of PGE2, while minimizing the associated adverse events. The PGE synthases and E-prostanoid receptors (EP1-4) have therefore recently attracted considerable interest as potential novel targets for the prevention/therapy of colorectal cancer. Selective (and possibly combinatorial) inhibition of the synthesis and signalling of those PGs most highly associated with colorectal tumorigenesis may have some advantages over COX-2-selective inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Prostaglandins play an important role in ureteral obstruction, but the detailed expression profiles of the prostaglandin receptors (PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, PTGER4, PTGFR) remain unknown in the different parts of the human ureter. METHODS: The expression pattern of PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, PTGER4 and PTGFR was determined in human distal, mid and proximal ureter and renal pelvis samples using immunohistochemistry (protein levels) and quantitative real-time PCR (mRNA). RESULTS: PTGER1 was highly expressed in most samples irrespective of the ureteral localization; however, urothelial cells had higher levels of PTGER1 than smooth muscle cells. PTGFR was also moderately to strongly expressed in urothelial and smooth muscle cells. In comparison, PTGER2-4 expression was mostly unexpressed or weakly expressed in urothelial and smooth cells in all regions. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate high levels of PTGER1 in ureters.
STUDY QUESTION: Which receptors for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA) mediate angiogenesis in the human follicle around the time of ovulation? SUMMARY ANSWER: PGE2 and VEGFA act via multiple PGE2 receptors (PTGERs) and VEGF receptors (VEGFRs) to play complementary roles in follicular angiogenesis. WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Production of PGE2 and VEGFA by the follicle are prerequisites for ovulation. PGE2 is an emerging regulator of angiogenesis and has not been examined in the context of the human ovulatory follicle. VEGFA is an established regulator of follicular angiogenesis. STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Ovarian biopsies containing the ovulatory follicle were obtained from 11 women of reproductive age (30-45 years) undergoing surgery for laparoscopic sterilization. In some cases, women received hCG to substitute for the ovulatory LH surge before ovarian biopsy. In addition, aspirates from four women of reproductive age (18-31 years) undergoing gonadotrophin stimulation for oocyte donation were obtained for isolation of human ovarian microvascular endothelial cells (hOMECs). PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Ovarian biopsies were utilized for immunocytochemical detection of von Willebrand factor to identify endothelial cells. hOMECs were cultured with PGE2, PTGER receptor selective agonists, VEGFA, or VEGFR selective agonists. hOMECs were assessed for proliferation by Ki67 immunocytochemistry. hOMEC migration was determined by counting cells which migrated through a porous membrane in vitro. Sprout formation was quantified by determining sprout number and length from photographs take after culture of hOMECs in a 3-dimensional matrix. MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Endothelial cells were not observed within the granulosa cell layer of human ovulatory follicles prior to an ovulatory dose of hCG and were first seen amongst granulosa cells 18-34 h after hCG. In vitro, PGE2 enhanced migration and sprout formation but did not alter hOMEC proliferation. Agonists selective for each PTGER increased migration with no change in proliferation. PTGER1 and PTGER2 agonists increased the number of sprouts, while only PTGER1 affected sprout length. VEGFA increased hOMEC proliferation, migration, and formation of structures resembling capillary sprouts. Signaling through VEGFR1 promoted hOMEC migration, proliferation, and the formation of few, long endothelial cell sprouts, while VEGFR2 stimulation promoted hOMEC migration and the formation of many, short sprouts. All effects of treatments in vitro were considered significant at P < 0.05. LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: While primary cultures of hOMECs respond to PGE2 and VEGFA differently than other cultured endothelial cells, hOMECs may not respond to PGE2 and VEGFA in vivo as they do in vitro. WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Agonists and antagonists selective for PTGER1, PTGER2, VEGFR1, or VEGFR2 may have therapeutic value to promote or prevent ovulation in women. STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This research was supported by grant funding from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institutes of Child Health and Human Development (HD071875 to D.M.D., T.E.C., M.B.). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
