Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP2 subtype; Receptor for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The activity of this receptor is mediated by G(s) proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase. The subsequent raise in intracellular cAMP is responsible for the relaxing effect of this receptor on smooth muscle.
Expansion of antigen-experienced CD8(+) T cells is critical for the success of tumour-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL)-adoptive cell therapy (ACT) in patients with cancer(1). Interleukin-2 (IL-2) acts as a key regulator of CD8(+) cytotoxic T lymphocyte functions by promoting expansion and cytotoxic capability(2,3). Therefore, it is essential to comprehend mechanistic barriers to IL-2 sensing in the tumour microenvironment to implement strategies to reinvigorate IL-2 responsiveness and T cell antitumour responses. Here we report that prostaglandin E2 (PGE(2)), a known negative regulator of immune response in the tumour microenvironment(4,5), is present at high concentrations in tumour tissue from patients and leads to impaired IL-2 sensing in human CD8(+) TILs via the PGE(2) receptors EP2 and EP4. Mechanistically, PGE(2) inhibits IL-2 sensing in TILs by downregulating the IL-2Rgamma(c) chain, resulting in defective assembly of IL-2Rbeta-IL2Rgamma(c) membrane dimers. This results in impaired IL-2-mTOR adaptation and PGC1alpha transcriptional repression, causing oxidative stress and ferroptotic cell death in tumour-reactive TILs. Inhibition of PGE(2) signalling to EP2 and EP4 during TIL expansion for ACT resulted in increased IL-2 sensing, leading to enhanced proliferation of tumour-reactive TILs and enhanced tumour control once the cells were transferred in vivo. Our study reveals fundamental features that underlie impairment of human TILs mediated by PGE(2) in the tumour microenvironment. These findings have therapeutic implications for cancer immunotherapy and cell therapy, and enable the development of targeted strategies to enhance IL-2 sensing and amplify the IL-2 response in TILs, thereby promoting the expansion of effector T cells with enhanced therapeutic potential.
Precise molecular characterization of circulating polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSCs) is hampered by their mixed composition of mature and immature cells and lack of specific markers. Here, we focus on mature CD66b(+)CD10(+)CD16(+)CD11b(+) PMN-MDSCs (mPMN-MDSCs) from either cancer patients or healthy donors receiving G-CSF for stem cell mobilization (GDs). By RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) experiments, we report the identification of a distinct gene signature shared by the different mPMN-MDSC populations under investigation, also validated in mPMN-MDSCs from GDs and tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) by single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) experiments. Analysis of such a gene signature uncovers a specific transcriptional program associated with mPMN-MDSC differentiation and allows us to identify that, in patients with either solid or hematologic tumors and in GDs, CD52, CD84, and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) represent potential mPMN-MDSC-associated markers. Altogether, our findings indicate that mature PMN-MDSCs distinctively undergo specific reprogramming during differentiation and lay the groundwork for selective immunomonitoring, and eventually targeting, of mature PMN-MDSCs.
BACKGROUND: Senescence is significantly associated with cancer prognosis. This study aimed to construct a senescence-related prognostic model for colorectal cancer (CRC) and to investigate the influence of senescence on the tumor microenvironment. METHODS: Transcriptome and clinical data of CRC cases were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases. Senescence-related prognostic genes detected by univariate Cox regression were included in Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) analysis to construct a model. The efficacy of the model was validated using the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve and survival analysis. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified and Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment were performed. CIBERSORT and Immuno-Oncology Biological Research (IOBR) were used to investigate the features of the tumor microenvironment. Single-cell RNA-seq data were used to investigate the expression levels of model genes in various cell types. Immunofluorescence staining for p21, SPP1, and CD68 was performed with human colon tissues. RESULTS: A seven-gene (PTGER2, FGF2, IGFBP3, ANGPTL4, DKK1, WNT16 and SPP1) model was finally constructed. Patients were classified as high- or low-risk using the median score as the threshold. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) for the 1-, 2-, and 3-year disease-specific survival (DSS) were 0.731, 0.651, and 0.643, respectively. Survival analysis showed a better 5-year DSS in low-risk patients in the construction and validation cohorts. GO and KEGG analyses revealed that DEGs were enriched in extracellular matrix (ECM)-receptor interactions, focal adhesion, and protein digestion and absorption. CIBERSORT and IOBR analyses revealed an abundance of macrophages and an immunosuppressive environment in the high-risk subgroup. Low-risk patients had higher response rates to immunotherapy than high-risk patients. ScRNA-seq data revealed high expression of SPP1 in a subset of macrophages with strong senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) features. Using CRC tumor tissues, we discovered that SPP1(+) macrophages were surrounded by a large number of senescent tumor cells in high-grade tumors. CONCLUSION: Our study presents a novel model based on senescence-related genes that can identify CRC patients with a poor prognosis and an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment. SPP1(+) macrophages may correlate with cell senescence leading to poor prognosis.
Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) is well known to promote tumor progression by boosting cancer cell proliferation while inhibiting anticancer immunity. Recent data from Lacher et al. and Morotti et al. demonstrate that one of the mechanisms through which PGE(2) suppresses tumor-targeting immune responses involves downregulation of interleukin 2 (IL2) receptors and consequent inhibition of mitochondrial metabolism in T cells.
While prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) is produced in human tumor microenvironment (TME), its role therein remains poorly understood. Here, we examine this issue by comparative single-cell RNA sequencing of immune cells infiltrating human cancers and syngeneic tumors in female mice. PGE receptors EP4 and EP2 are expressed in lymphocytes and myeloid cells, and their expression is associated with the downregulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and MYC targets, glycolysis and ribosomal proteins (RPs). Mechanistically, CD8(+) T cells express EP4 and EP2 upon TCR activation, and PGE(2) blocks IL-2-STAT5 signaling by downregulating Il2ra, which downregulates c-Myc and PGC-1 to decrease OXPHOS, glycolysis, and RPs, impairing migration, expansion, survival, and antitumor activity. Similarly, EP4 and EP2 are induced upon macrophage activation, and PGE(2) downregulates c-Myc and OXPHOS in M1-like macrophages. These results suggest that PGE(2)-EP4/EP2 signaling impairs both adaptive and innate immunity in TME by hampering bioenergetics and ribosome biogenesis of tumor-infiltrating immune cells.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a rate-limiting enzyme converting arachidonic acid to prostaglandins and a key player in neuroinflammation, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases, and in traumatic brain injury- and ischemia-induced neuronal damage, and epileptogenesis. Accumulated information suggests that the contribution of COX-2 to neuropathology is associated with its involvement in synaptic modification. Inhibition or elevation of COX-2 has been shown to suppress or enhance excitatory glutamatergic neurotransmission and long-term potentiation (LTP). These events are mainly mediated via PGE(2), the predominant reaction product of COX-2, and the PGE(2) subtype 2 receptor (EP(2))-protein kinase A pathway. Recent evidence shows that endogenous cannabinoids are substrates for COX-2 and can be oxygenated by COX-2 to form new classes of prostaglandins (prostaglandin glycerol esters and prostaglandin ethanolamides). These COX-2 oxidative metabolites of endocannabinoids, as novel signaling mediators, modulate synaptic transmission and plasticity and cause neurodegeneration. The actions of these COX-2 metabolites are likely mediated by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP(3)) signal transduction pathways. These discoveries suggest that the contributions of COX-2 to neurotransmission and brain malfunction result not only from its conversion of arachidonic acid to classic prostaglandins but also from its oxidative metabolism of endocannabinoids to novel prostaglandins. Thus, elucidation of COX-2 in synaptic signaling may provide a mechanistic basis for designing new drugs aimed at preventing, treating or alleviating neuroinflammation-associated neurological disorders.
BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer is the second leading cause of gynecologic cancer-associated deaths. Cancer stemness and chemoresistance are responsible for ovarian cancer metastasis and the poor prognosis of patients. In this study, we determined the function of N6-methyladenine (m6A) RNA methylation and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) in ovarian cancer progression. METHODS: The m6A RNA methylation-associated PTGER2 in ovarian cancer was identified using bioinformatics analysis. The role of PTGER2 in ovarian cancer was elucidated in cell lines and clinical samples with cellular and molecular experiments. RESULTS: In this investigation, bioinformatics analysis based on a public cancer database was used to elucidate the impact of m6A modification on the prognosis of patients with ovarian cancer. Moreover, PTGER2 was identified as a potential oncogene associated with the distant metastasis of ovarian cancer and poor patient prognosis. Interestingly, PTGER2 expression was experimentally shown to be enhanced by N6-adenosine-methyltransferase 70 kDa subunit (METTL3)-mediated m6A modification. In addition, PTGER2 enhanced cancer stem cell self-renewal properties, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and DNA damage repair, thus potentiating cell stemness, therapy resistance to carboplatin, proliferation, and metastasis of ovarian cancer. Importantly, PTGER2 expression in clinical samples was associated with distant metastasis, predicted poor patient prognosis, and independently served as a prognostic predictor in ovarian cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Our work defines PTGER2 as an oncogene and reveals that PTGER2 is a prognostic predictor and novel therapeutic target for the management of ovarian cancer.
The new corpora lutea (CLs) in pigs are formed from the preovulatory follicles after the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge. However, total autonomy and independence of CLs from LH up to Day 12 of cycle has recently been questioned. Transformation of estrous cycle CL to CL of pregnancy initiated by embryonic signals requires not only the cessation of prostaglandin F2 (PGF(2alpha)) supply to the luteal tissue but also needs the CL to overcome luteolytic acquisition and/or changing its sensitivity to PGF(2alpha) during Days 12-14 of pregnancy. The luteolytic cascade is prevented by inhibition of lymphocyte infiltration and leucocyte recruitment, limitation of cell apoptosis, upregulation of pregnancy-associated genes and an enhanced antiluteolytic role of PGE(2) Our 'two-signal switch hypothesis' highlights the importance of post PGF(2alpha) and PGE(2) receptor signaling pathways activation in CLs during luteolysis and rescue. The 'luteolytic switch' involves increased expression of many regression mediators and activation of the post PTGFR signaling pathway. The 'rescue switch' initiated by embryonic signals - estradiol 17beta and PGE(2) - induces post PTGER2/4 pathway, turning the 'luteolytic switch' off and triggering activity of genes responsible for CL maintenance. In mid and late pregnancy, CLs are maintained by LH and the synergistic action of metabolic hormones. This paper provides an outline of recent views on CL regression, rescue and maintenance during pregnancy in pigs that conflict with previous paradigms and highlights new findings regarding the actions of prostaglandins, role of microRNAs (miRNA) and immune system and signaling pathways governing the life cycle of porcine CL.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a devastating lung disease that is characterized by excessive proliferation of fibroblasts. The lipid mediator prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has the capacity to limit fibrosis through its inhibition of numerous functions of these fibroblasts; however, in the setting of fibrosis, fibroblasts have been shown to be resistant to PGE2. We have linked such resistance to decreased expression levels of the E prostanoid 2 (EP2) receptor. In this study, in fibroblasts from both mice and humans with pulmonary fibrosis, we show that DNA hypermethylation is responsible for diminished EP2 expression levels and PGE2 resistance. Bisulfite sequencing of the prostaglandin E receptor 2 gene (PTGER2) promoter revealed that fibrotic fibroblasts exhibit greater PTGER2 methylation than nonfibrotic control cells. Treatment with the DNA methylation inhibitors 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and zebularine as well as DNA methyltransferase-specific siRNA decreased PTGER2 methylation, increased EP2 mRNA and protein expression levels, and restored PGE2 responsiveness in fibrotic fibroblasts but not in nonfibrotic controls. PTGER2 promoter hypermethylation was driven by an increase in Akt signal transduction. In addition to results described for the PTGER2 promoter, fibrotic fibroblasts also exhibited increased global DNA methylation. These findings demonstrate that the down-regulation of PTGER2 and consequent PGE2 resistance are both mediated by DNA hypermethylation; we identified increased Akt signal transduction as a novel mechanism that promotes DNA hypermethylation during fibrogenesis.
Despite the fact that cyclooxygenase and its products, prostaglandins, have been traditionally associated with the development of inflammation, PGE2 was implicated early on as potentially beneficial in asthma. During the 1970s and 1980s, several studies reported the bronchodilator effect of PGE2 in asthma patients. In parallel, it was being shown to exert an inhibitory effect on mast cells in vitro. In spite of this, data supporting the beneficial role for PGE2 in asthma were scarce and sometimes controversial. Many years later, in vitro and in vivo studies suggested a range of biological activities attributable to PGE2, others than the ability to relax smooth muscle, that potentially explained some of the observed positive effects in asthma. The identification and cloning of the four PGE2 receptors made available new tools with which to fine-tune investigation of the anti-inflammatory, pro-inflammatory, immunoregulatory, and bronchodilation mechanisms of PGE2. Among these, several suggested involvement of mast cells, a cell population known to play a fundamental role in acute and chronic asthma. Indeed, it has been shown that PGE2 prevents human and murine MC activity in vitro through activation of the EP2 receptor, and also that both exogenously administered and endogenous PGE2 inhibit airway MC activity in vivo in mouse models of asthma (likely through an EP2-mediated mechanism as well). In the last few years, we have furthered into the functional connection between PGE2-induced mast cells inhibition and attenuated damage, in asthma and allergy models. The validity of the findings supporting a beneficial effect of PGE2 in different asthma phases, the direct effect of PGE2 on mast cells populations, and the functional implications of the PGE2-MC interaction on airway function are some of the topics addressed in this review, under the assumption that increased understanding of the PGE2-EP2-mast cell axis will likely lead to the discovery of novel antiasthma targets.
We hypothesized that polymorphisms of genes involved in the prostaglandin pathway could be associated with COPD. In this study we explored the involvement of genetic polymorphisms in PTGS2, PTGER2 and PTGER4 genes in the development and severity of COPD and their effects on plasma concentrations of inflammatory/oxidative stress markers. We identified genotypes of PTGS2, PTGER2 and PTGER4 SNPs in a Tunisian cohort including COPD patients (n = 138) and control subjects (n = 216) using PCR-RFLP and PCR TaqMan. Pulmonary function (FEV1 and FVC) were assessed by plethsmography. PGE(2), PGD(2) and cytokine plasma (IL-6, IL-18, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta) concentrations were measured using ELISA and colorimetric standard methods were used to determine oxidative stress concentrations. Genotype frequencies of rs2745557 in PTGS2 and rs2075797 in PTGER2 were different between COPD cases and controls. There was no correlation between these polymorphisms and lung function parameters. For rs2745557, the A allele frequency was higher in COPD cases than in controls. For rs2075797, carriers of the GG genotype were more frequent in the COPD group than in controls. Only rs2745557 in PTGS2 had an effect on PGD(2) and cytokine plasma concentrations. PGD(2) was significantly decreased in COPD patients with the GA or AA genotypes. In contrast, IL-18 and NO plasma concentrations were increased in COPD rs2745557 A allele carriers as compared to homozygous GG subjects. Our findings suggest that rs2745557 in PTGS2 and rs2075797 in PTGER2 are associated with COPD development but not with its severity.
Prostanoids, which consist of prostaglandins (PGs) and thromboxane, are produced from arachidonic acid by cyclooxygenases (COXs) as a rate-limiting step, and they exert various biological actions. Classically, prostanoids are suspected to be closely related to female reproductive processes such as ovulation, luteolysis and uterine contraction, as well as pathological processes such as fever generation and pain modulation. Recently the cDNA cloning of a series of prostaglandin-synthesizing enzymes and receptors enabled us to clarify which isoform or subtype is involved in each reproductive process by generating individual gene-deficient mice. In late pregnancy, PGF2 alpha synthesized by COX-1 is essential for induction of parturition via luteolysis. Furthermore, impaired induction of COX-2 in the myometrium of PGF2 alpha receptor-deficient mice is accompanied with loss of parturition, suggesting that COX-2 is presumably responsible for producing uterotonic PGs. In early pregnancy, PGE2 synthesized by COX-2 induces the expansion of cumulus cells through EP2 receptor and contributes to ovulation and fertilization. These results may be useful in not only developing novel drugs in the reproductive area but also understanding and overcoming harmful reproductive side effects of classical and novel drugs in non-reproductive areas.
Worldwide, more than 1 in 10 infants is born prior to 37 weeks gestation. Preterm birth can lead to increased mortality risk and poor life-long health and neurodevelopmental outcomes. Whether environmental risk factors affect preterm birth through epigenetic phenomena is largely unstudied. We sought to determine whether preterm risk factors, such as smoke exposure and education, were associated with cervical DNA methylation in the prostaglandin E receptor 2 gene (PTGER2) and a repetitive element, long interspersed nuclear element-1 Homo sapiens-specific (LINE 1-HS). Second, we aimed to determine whether mid-pregnancy DNA methylation of these regions in cervical samples could predict the length of gestation. We obtained a cervical swab between 16-19 weeks gestation from 80 women participating in a Mexico City birth cohort, used pyrosequencing to analyze DNA methylation of PTGER2 and LINE 1-HS, and examined associations with maternal covariates. We used accelerated failure time models to analyze associations of DNA methylation with the length of gestation. DNA methylation of both sequences was associated with Pap smear inflammation. LINE 1-HS methylation was associated with smoke exposure, BMI and parity. In adjusted models, gestations were 3.3 days longer (95%CI 0.6, 6.0) for each interquartile range of PTGER2 DNA methylation. Higher LINE 1-HS methylation was associated with shorter gestations (-3.3 days, 95%CI -6.5, -0.2). In conclusion, cervical DNA methylation was associated with risk factors for preterm birth and the length of gestation.
Recent epidemiological research has shown the increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with endometriosis compared with the general population. The aim of this review is to explore common pathophysiologic mechanisms between endometriosis and obstetric complications. A computerized literature search was performed to identify relevant studies. The search covered the period between January 2008 and October 2018. One of the potential mechanisms driving the initiation and progression of endometriosis is the accumulation of a variety of epigenetic changes in endometrial cells. Epigenetic control of gene expression which is considered to be responsible for the development of endometriosis is commonly seen in patients with preeclampsia, small for gestational age (SGA), or preterm birth. DLX5 and GATA3, paternally imprinted genes, and CDKN1C, a maternally imprinted gene, were aberrantly expressed in placenta tissues of the preeclampsia; CDKN1C, the growth inhibitor gene, was upregulated in human SGA placentas; and hypomethylation of PTGER2 would be associated with preterm birth. Preeclampsia, SGA, or preterm birth may share common epigenetic alterations with endometriosis, which raises the possibility that the occurrence of two conditions might be nonrandom. To date, however, there is a lack of evidence that links endometriosis and other obstetric complications, such as postpartum hemorrhage or placental abruption, at the epigenetic level. In conclusion, epigenetic changes may be a common hallmark of two conditions: endometriosis and obstetrical complications, such as preeclampsia, SGA, or preterm birth.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive brain tumour in the central nervous system, but the current treatment is very limited and unsatisfactory. PGE(2) -initiated cAMP signalling via EP(2) and EP(4) receptors is involved in the tumourigenesis of multiple cancer types. However, whether or how EP(2) and EP(4) receptors contribute to GBM growth largely remains elusive. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We performed comprehensive data analysis of gene expression in human GBM samples and determined their expression correlations through multiple bioinformatics approaches. A time-resolved fluorescence energy transfer (TR-FRET) assay was utilized to characterize PGE(2) -mediated cAMP signalling via EP(2) and EP(4) receptors in human glioblastoma cells. Using recently reported potent and selective small-molecule antagonists, we determined the effects of inhibition of EP(2) and EP(4) receptors on GBM growth in subcutaneous and intracranial tumour models. KEY RESULTS: The expression of both EP(2) and EP(4) receptors was upregulated and highly correlated with a variety of tumour-promoting cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors in human gliomas. Further, they were heterogeneously expressed in human GBM cells, where they compensated for each other to mediate PGE(2) -initiated cAMP signalling and to promote colony formation, cell invasion and migration. Inhibition of EP(2) and EP(4) receptors revealed that these receptors might mediate GBM growth, angiogenesis, and immune evasion in a compensatory manner. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: The compensatory roles of EP(2) and EP(4) receptors in GBM development and growth suggest that concurrently targeting these two PGE(2) receptors might represent a more effective strategy than inhibiting either alone for GBM treatment.
The EP(2) and EP(4) prostanoid receptors are two of the four subtypes of receptors for prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)). They are in the family of G-protein coupled receptors and both receptors were initially characterized as coupling to Gs and increasing intracellular cAMP formation. Recently, however, we have shown that both receptors can stimulate T-cell factor (Tcf) mediated transcriptional activity. The EP(2) receptor does this primarily through cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), whereas the EP(4) utilizes phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) as well as PKA. In addition, we have shown that the EP(4) receptor, but not the EP(2), can activate the extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) 1 and 2 by way of PI3K leading to the induction of early growth response factor-1 (EGR-1), a transcription factor traditionally associated with wound healing. This induction of EGR-1 expression has significant implications concerning the potential role of PGE(2) in cancer and inflammatory disorders.
Induction of COX-2 expression and enzymatic activity promotes neuronal injury in a number of models of neurological disease. Inhibition of COX-2 activity, either genetically or pharmacologically, has been shown to be neuroprotective in rodent models of stroke, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Inhibition of COX activity with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduces inflammation and amyloid accumulation in murine transgenic models of Familial Alzheimer's disease, and the use of NSAIDs decreases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease in healthy aging populations. COX-mediated neuronal injury is presumed be due to downstream effects of one or more prostaglandin products including PGE2, PGD2, PGF2alpha, PGI2 (prostacylin) and TXA2 (thromboxane) that effect cellular changes through activation of specific prostaglandin receptor subtypes and second messenger systems. In this proceeding, we review recent data demonstrating effects of prostaglandin signaling on neuronal viability that are paradoxically protective, when taken in the context that COX-2 induces neuronal injury in the setting of excitotoxicity. Conversely, in the context of an inflammatory stimulus, the EP2 receptor enhances neuronal injury. These findings argue for an additional level of complexity in the prostaglandin response in neurological disease.
BACKGROUND: Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2, the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee-approved official symbol for cycloxygenase-2, COX-2) and its enzymatic product prostaglandin E2 have critical roles in inflammation and carcinogenesis through the G protein-coupled receptor PTGER2 (EP2). The PTGS2 (COX-2) pathway is a promising target for cancer therapy and chemoprevention. PTGS2 (COX-2) expression in colon cancer has been inversely associated with survival as well as tumoral microsatellite instability (MSI) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). However, the prognostic significance of PTGER2 expression or its relationship with MSI, CIMP, LINE-1 hypomethylation, or PTGS2 (COX-2) remains uncertain. METHODS: Using the database of 516 colorectal cancers in two prospective cohort studies with clinical outcome data, we detected PTGER2 overexpression in 169 (33%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We analyzed MSI using 10 microsatellite markers; CIMP by MethyLight (real-time methylation-specific PCR) on an eight-marker panel [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1]; BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA, and methylation in LINE-1 by Pyrosequencing; and CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) and TP53 (p53) by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: PTGER2 overexpression was positively associated with the mucinous component (P = 0.0016), signet ring cells (P = 0.0024), CIMP-high (P = 0.0023), and MSI-high (P < 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, the significant relationship between PTGER2 and MSI-high persisted (adjusted odds ratio, 2.82; 95% confidence interval, 1.69-4.72; P < 0.0001). PTGER2 was not significantly associated with PTGS2 (COX-2), TP53, or CTNNB1 expression, patient survival, or prognosis. CONCLUSION: PTGER2 overexpression is associated with MSI-high in colorectal cancer. IMPACT: Our data imply potential roles of inflammatory reaction by PTGER2 upregulation in carcinogenic process to MSI-high colorectal cancer.
BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common monogenic kidney disorder. Half of the patients would slowly progress to end-stage renal disease. However, the potential target for ADPKD treatment is still lacking. METHODS: Four ADPKD patients and two healthy family members were included in this study. The peripheral blood samples were obtained and tested by the whole exome sequencing (WES). The autosomal mutations in ADPKD patients were retained as candidate sites. The Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment, and protein-protein interaction network (PPI) analyses were performed by clusterProfiler R package. A dataset containing 18 ADPKD patients and three normal samples were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and analyzed using the limma R package. RESULTS: A total of six mutant genes were identified based on the dominant genetic pattern and most of them had not been reported to be associated with ADPKD. Furthermore, 19 harmful genes were selected according to the harmfulness of mutation. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses showed that the processes of single-organism cellular process, response to stimulus, plasma membrane, cell periphery, and anion binding as well as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signaling pathway and pathways in cancer were significantly enriched. Through integrating PPI and gene expression analyses, acyl-CoA thioesterase 13 (ACOT13), which has not been reported to be related to ADPKD, and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) were identified as potential genes associated with ADPKD. CONCLUSIONS: Through combination of WES, gene expression, and PPI network analyses, we identified ACOT13 and PTGER2 as potential ADPKD-related genes.
