Cellular tumor antigen p53; Acts as a tumor suppressor in many tumor types; induces growth arrest or apoptosis depending on the physiological circumstances and cell type. Involved in cell cycle regulation as a trans-activator that acts to negatively regulate cell division by controlling a set of genes required for this process. One of the activated genes is an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases. Apoptosis induction seems to be mediated either by stimulation of BAX and FAS antigen expression, or by repression of Bcl-2 expression. Its pro-apoptotic activity is activated via its intera [...] 
Primary tumors are drivers of pre-metastatic niche formation, but the coordination by the secondary organ toward metastatic dissemination is underappreciated. Here, by single-cell RNA sequencing and immunofluorescence, we identified a population of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2)-expressing adventitial fibroblasts that remodeled the lung immune microenvironment. At steady state, fibroblasts in the lungs produced prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which drove dysfunctional dendritic cells (DCs) and suppressive monocytes. This lung-intrinsic stromal program was propagated by tumor-associated inflammation, particularly the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1beta, supporting a pre-metastatic niche. Genetic ablation of Ptgs2 (encoding COX-2) in fibroblasts was sufficient to reverse the immune-suppressive phenotypes of lung-resident myeloid cells, resulting in heightened immune activation and diminished lung metastasis in multiple breast cancer models. Moreover, the anti-metastatic activity of DC-based therapy and PD-1 blockade was improved by fibroblast-specific Ptgs2 deletion or dual inhibition of PGE2 receptors EP2 and EP4. Collectively, lung-resident fibroblasts reshape the local immune landscape to facilitate breast cancer metastasis.
Ferroptosis and pyroptosis have not been fully studied in atherosclerosis. We aimed to investigate the expression of ferroptosis-related and pyroptosis-related proteins in human coronary arteries and analyse correlation with severity of atherosclerosis and clarify the interactions between proteins and possible mechanisms of atherosclerosis. 40 human coronary artery specimens were employed. The atherosclerotic lesions were characterized by Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining. The expression of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), anti-acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4), glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), caspase-1, and NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) were analysed by immunohistochemical assay. Correlations between expression of proteins and severity of atherosclerosis were assessed using Spearman correlation analysis. Bioinformatic and coexpression analyses were performed to study the possible pathways and interactions. In the present study, PTGS2, ACSL4, caspase-1, and NLRP3, were upregulated, while GPX4 was downregulated in the advanced stages of atherosclerosis. The severity of atherosclerosis was positively associated with the expression of PTGS2, ACSL4, caspase-1, and NLRP3 and negatively associated with the expression of GPX4. Biological processes of lipid metabolism and inflammation and C-type lectin receptor signaling pathway were enriched. The five proteins interacted with each other directly or indirectly and PTGS2 might be the hub gene of atherosclerosis. Ferroptosis and pyroptosis may regulate the occurrence and development of atherosclerosis. These findings may shed light on new ideas and potential targets for the prevention and treatment of coronary artery atherosclerosis and the proteins may be used as biomarkers for the severity of atherosclerosis.
Prostaglandins are lipid mediators involved in physiological processes, such as constriction or dilation of blood vessels, but also pathophysiological processes, which include inflammation, pain and fever. They are produced by almost all cell types in the organism by activation of Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthases/Cyclooxygenases. The inducible Prostaglandin Endoperoxide Synthase 2/Cyclooxygenase 2 (PTGS2/COX2) plays an important role in pathologies associated with inflammatory signaling. The main product derived from PTGS2/COX2 expression and activation is Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), which promotes a wide variety of tissue-specific effects, pending environmental inputs. One of the major sources of PGE(2) are infiltrating inflammatory cells - the production of this molecule increases drastically in damaged tissues. Immune infiltration is a hallmark of type 1 diabetes mellitus, a multifactorial disease that leads to autoimmune-mediated pancreatic beta cell destruction. Controversial effects for the PTGS2/COX2-PGE(2) signaling cascade in pancreatic islet cells subjected to diabetogenic conditions have been reported, allocating PGE(2) as both, cause and consequence of inflammation. Herein, we review the main effects of this molecular pathway in a tissue-specific manner, with a special emphasis on beta cell mass protection/destruction and its potential role in the prevention or development of T1DM. We also discuss strategies to target this pathway for future therapies.
Metastatic progression of epithelial cancers can be associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) including transcriptional inhibition of E-cadherin (CDH1) expression. Recently, EM plasticity (EMP) and E-cadherin-mediated, cluster-based metastasis and treatment resistance have become more appreciated. However, the mechanisms that maintain E-cadherin expression in this context are less understood. Through studies of inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) and a 3D tumor cell "emboli" culture paradigm, we discovered that cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2; PTGS2), a target gene of C/EBPdelta (CEBPD), or its metabolite prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) promotes protein stability of E-cadherin, beta-catenin, and p120 catenin through inhibition of GSK3beta. The COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib downregulated E-cadherin complex proteins and caused cell death. Coexpression of E-cadherin and COX-2 was seen in breast cancer tissues from patients with poor outcome and, along with inhibitory GSK3beta phosphorylation, in patient-derived xenografts (PDX) including triple negative breast cancer (TNBC).Celecoxib alone decreased E-cadherin protein expression within xenograft tumors, though CDH1 mRNA levels increased, and reduced circulating tumor cell (CTC) clusters. In combination with paclitaxel, celecoxib attenuated or regressed lung metastases. This study has uncovered a mechanism by which metastatic breast cancer cells can maintain E-cadherin-mediated cell-to-cell adhesions and cell survival, suggesting that some patients with COX-2+/E-cadherin+ breast cancer may benefit from targeting of the PGE2 signaling pathway.
As a vital inducible sensor, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) plays an important role in the progress of hepatic fibrogenesis. Activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) in the liver can significantly accelerate the onset and development of liver fibrosis. COX-2 overexpression triggers inflammation that is an important inducer in hepatic fibrosis. Increasing evidence indicates that COX-2 is involved in the main pathogenesis of liver fibrosis, such as inflammation, apoptosis, and cell senescence. Moreover, COX-2 expression is altered in patients and animal models with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease or cirrhosis. These findings suggest that COX-2 has a broad and critical role in the development of liver fibrosis. In this review, we summarize the latest advances in the regulation and signal transduction of COX-2 and its impact on liver fibrosis.
Accumulating evidence suggests that endothelial cells can be useful therapeutic targets. One of the potential targets is an endothelial cell-specific protein, Roundabout4 (ROBO4). ROBO4 has been shown to ameliorate multiple diseases in mice, including infectious diseases and sepsis. However, its mechanisms are not fully understood. In this study, using RNA-seq analysis, we found that ROBO4 downregulates prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), which encodes cyclooxygenase-2. Mechanistic analysis reveals that ROBO4 interacts with IQ motif-containing GTPase-activating protein 1 (IQGAP1) and TNF receptor-associated factor 7 (TRAF7), a ubiquitin E3 ligase. In this complex, ROBO4 enhances IQGAP1 ubiquitination through TRAF7, inhibits prolonged RAC1 activation, and decreases PTGS2 expression in inflammatory endothelial cells. In addition, Robo4-deficiency in mice exacerbates PTGS2-associated inflammatory diseases, including arthritis, edema, and pain. Thus, we reveal the molecular mechanism by which ROBO4 suppresses the inflammatory response and vascular hyperpermeability, highlighting its potential as a promising therapeutic target for inflammatory diseases.
The mammalian oviduct is a dynamic organ where important events such as final maturation of oocytes, transport of gametes, sperm capacitation, fertilization, embryo development, and transport take place. Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), also known as cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), is the rate-limiting enzyme in the production of prostaglandins (PGs) and plays an essential role during early pregnancy, including ovulation, fertilization, implantation, and decidualization. Even though the maternal-embryo communication originates in the oviduct, not many studies have systemically investigated PTGS2 signaling during early development. Most of the studies investigating implantation and decidualization processes in Ptgs2-/- mice employed embryo transfer into the uterus, thereby bypassing the mammalian oviduct. Consequently, an understanding of the mechanistic action as well as the regulation of PTGS2 and derived PGs in oviductal functions is far from complete. In this review, we aim to focus on the importance of PTGS2 and associated PGs signaling in the oviduct particularly in humans, farm animals, and laboratory rodents to provide a broad perspective to guide further research in this field. Specifically, we review the role of PTGS2-derived PGs in fertilization, embryo development, and transport. We focus on the actions of ovarian steroid hormones on PTGS2 regulation in the oviduct. Understanding of cellular PTGS2 function during early embryo development and transport in the oviduct will be an important step toward a better understanding of reproduction and may have potential implication in the assisted reproductive technology.
Originally, apomorphine was a broad-spectrum dopamine agonist with an affinity for all subtypes of the Dopamine D1 receptor to the D5 receptor. We previously identified apomorphine as a potential therapeutic agent for mitochondrial diseases by screening a chemical library of fibroblasts from patients with mitochondrial diseases. In this study, we showed that apomorphine prevented ferroptosis in fibroblasts from various types of mitochondrial diseases as well as in normal controls. Well-known biomarkers of ferroptosis include protein markers such as prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), a key gene for ferroptosis-related inflammation PTGS2, lipid peroxidation, and reactive oxygen species. Our findings that apomorphine induced significant downregulation of PTSG2 and suppressed lipid peroxide to the same extent as other inhibitors of ferroptosis also indicate that apomorphine suppresses ferroptosis. To our knowledge, this is the first study to report that the anti-ferroptosis effect of apomorphine is not related to dopamine receptor agonist action and that apomorphine is a potent inhibitor of ferroptotic cell death independent of dopaminergic receptors.
Parturition at term is characterized by inflammatory overload in both feto-maternal tissues. Despite the large number of individual studies on changes in inflammatory biomarkers linked to labor, a comprehensive profile of them in each of the uterine compartments is not available to better understand their mechanistic contributions to labor. This systematic review investigated the pro- and anti-inflammatory biomarkers reported in intra-uterine tissues (amnion, chorion, decidua, placenta, and myometrium) at term labor. We conducted a systematic review of studies on pro- and anti-inflammatory biomarkers (mRNA and/or protein) reported in feto-maternal tissues during normal human term labor, published in English (1980-2016), in 3 electronic data bases. From a total of 3712 citations, 172 were included for final review. Each tissue expresses a unique set of biomarkers at the time of term labor, but there is significant overlap between tissues. All tissues had IL-6, IL-8, IL-1beta, COX-2, PGE-2, TNF-alpha, and hCAP18 in common at term labor. Common and unique inflammatory biomarkers are expressed in various feto-maternal compartments at term labor. Increase in pro-inflammatory markers in all gestational tissue signifies their harmonious functional role in promoting labor. Anti-inflammatory markers at term labor are hardly reported.
Cyclooxygenase (COX; also known as prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase) is a key enzyme in the biochemical pathway leading to the synthesis of prostaglandins. A large amount of epidemiological and experimental evidence supports a role for COX-2, the inducible form of the enzyme, in human tumorigenesis, notably in colorectal cancer. COX-2 mediates this role through the production of PGE(2) that acts to inhibit apoptosis, promote cell proliferation, stimulate angiogenesis, and decrease immunity. Similarly, COX-2 is believed to be involved in the oncogenesis of some cancers in domestic animals. Here, the author reviews the current knowledge on COX-2 expression and role in cancers of dogs, cats, and horses. Data indicate that COX-2 upregulation is present in many animal cancers, but there is presently not enough information to clearly define the prognostic significance of COX-2 expression. To date, only few reports document an association between COX-2 expression and survival, notably in canine mammary cancers and osteosarcomas. Some evidence suggests that COX inhibitors could be useful in the prevention and/or treatment of certain cancers in domestic animals, the best example being urinary transitional cell carcinomas in dogs. However, determination of the levels of COX-2 in a tumor does not appear to be a good prognostic factor or a good indicator for the response to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug therapy. Clearly, additional research, including the development of in vitro cell systems, is needed to determine if COX-2 expression can be used as a reliable prognostic factor and as a definite therapeutic target in animal cancers.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common form of neurodegeneration in the elderly population. PD is clinically characterized by tremors, rigidity, slowness of movement and postural imbalance. A significant association has been demonstrated between PD and low levels of thiamine in the serum, which suggests that elevated thiamine levels might provide protection against PD. Genetic studies have helped identify a number of factors that link thiamine to PD pathology, including the DJ-1 gene, excitatory amino acid transporters (EAATs), the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (KGDHC), coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10 or ubiquinone), lipoamide dehydrogenase (LAD), chromosome 7, transcription factor p53, the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 gene (PARP-1). Thiamine has also been implicated in PD through its effects on L-type voltage-sensitive calcium channels (L-VSCC), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), prostaglandins (PGs), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), reactive oxygen species (ROS), and nitric oxide synthase (NOS). Recent studies highlight a possible relationship between thiamine and PD. Genetic studies provide opportunities to determine which proteins may link thiamine to PD pathology. Thiamine can also act through a number of non-genomic mechanisms that include protein expression, oxidative stress, inflammation, and cellular metabolism. Further studies are needed to determine the benefits of using thiamine as a treatment for PD.
A variable responsiveness to antiplatelet drugs is a clinical phenomenon that does not principally differ from other drug treatments in other therapeutic fields. The pharmacological part is to clarify whether a "true" resistance exists in pharmacological terms, i.e., a reduced potency of the compound to work as suggested and to find out the underlying cellular mechanism(s). Two principally different methods of laboratory control for platelet sensitivity to aspirin (ASA) are available: measurement of platelet function (ex vivo) or measurement of inhibition of thromboxane formation. Both methods have limitations and did not yet result in a generally accepted definition of a pharmacological ASA "resistance". The new typological approach of Weber et al. [A.A. Weber, B. Przytulski, A. Schanz, et al., Towards a definition of aspirin resistance: a typological approach. Platelets 13 (2002) 37.] helps to identify different subtypes of ASA resistance in pharmacological terms by combining in vitro aggregometry with thromboxane measurement. Using this method, a "true" pharmacological resistance, associated with a reduced antiplatelet response to ASA and reduced inhibition of thromboxane formation, was found in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass surgery. Platelets of these patients expressed a hitherto unknown isoform of COX-2-COX-2a which might generate a different gene product. In this context, it is interesting that CABG patients express transiently an immunoreactive COX-2 protein with lower molecular weight. Studies on the significance of this finding for ASA resistance are in progress.
Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2: official gene symbol - PTGS2) has long been regarded as playing a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of airway inflammation in respiratory diseases including asthma. COX-2 can be rapidly and robustly expressed in response to a diverse range of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators. Thus, increased levels of COX-2 protein and prostanoid metabolites serve as key contributors to pathobiology in respiratory diseases typified by dysregulated inflammation. But COX-2 products may not be all bad: prostanoids can exert anti-inflammatory/bronchoprotective functions in airways in addition to their pro-inflammatory actions. Herein, we outline COX-2 regulation and review the diverse stimuli known to induce COX-2 in the context of airway inflammation. We discuss some of the positive and negative effects that COX-2/prostanoids can exert in in vitro and in vivo models of airway inflammation, and suggest that inhibiting COX-2 expression to repress airway inflammation may be too blunt an approach; because although it might reduce the unwanted effects of COX-2 activation, it may also negate the positive effects. Evidence suggests that prostanoids produced via COX-2 upregulation show diverse actions (and herein we focus on prostaglandin E2 as a key example); these can be either beneficial or deleterious and their impact on respiratory disease can be dictated by local concentration and specific interaction with individual receptors. We propose that understanding the regulation of COX-2 expression and associated receptor-mediated functional outcomes may reveal number of critical steps amenable to pharmacological intervention. These may prove invaluable in our quest towards future development of novel anti-inflammatory pharmacotherapeutic strategies for the treatment of airway diseases.
Targeting the prostaglandin (PG) pathway is potentially a critical intervention for the prevention and treatment of cancer. Central to PG biosynthesis are two isoforms of cyclooxygenase (COX 1 and 2), which produce prostaglandin H(2) (PGH(2)) from plasma membrane stores of fatty acids. COX-1 is constitutively expressed, whereas COX-2 is an inducible isoform upregulated in many cancers. Differences between COX-1 and COX-2 catalytic sites enabled development of selective inhibitors. Downstream of the COX enzymes, prostaglandin E(2) synthase converts available PGH(2) to prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), which can stimulate cancer progression. Significant research efforts are helping identify more selective targets and fully elucidate the downstream targets of prostaglandin E(2)-mediated oncogenesis. Nonetheless, as a key rate-limiting control point of PG biosynthesis, COX-2 continues to be an important anticancer target. As we embark upon a new era of individualized medicine, a better understanding of the individual risk and/or benefit involved in COX-2 selective targeting is rapidly evolving. This review endeavors to summarize developments in our understanding of COX-2 and its downstream targets as vital areas of anticancer research and to provide the current status of an exciting aspect of molecular medicine.
The biosynthesis of prostanoids is involved in both physiological and pathological processes. The expression of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2; also known as COX-2) has been traditionally associated to the onset of several pathologies, from inflammation to cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and oncologic events. For this reason, the search of selective PTGS2 inhibitors has been a focus for therapeutic interventions. In addition to the classic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, selective and specific PTGS2 inhibitors, termed coxibs, have been generated and widely used. PTGS2 activity is less restrictive in terms of substrate specificity than the homeostatic counterpart PTGS1, and it accounts for the elevated prostanoid synthesis that accompanies several pathologies. The main regulation of PTGS2 occurs at the transcription level. In addition to this, the stability of the mRNA is finely regulated through the interaction with several cytoplasmic elements, ranging from specific microRNAs to proteins that control mRNA degradation. Moreover, the protein has been recognized to be the substrate for several post-translational modifications that affect both the enzyme activity and the targeting for degradation via proteasomal and non-proteasomal mechanisms. Among these modifications, phosphorylation, glycosylation and covalent modifications by reactive lipidic intermediates and by free radicals associated to the pro-inflammatory condition appear to be the main changes. Identification of these post-translational modifications is relevant to better understand the role of PTGS2 in several pathologies and to establish a correct analysis of the potential function of this protein in diseases progress. Finally, these modifications can be used as biomarkers to establish correlations with other parameters, including the immunomodulation dependent on molecular pathological epidemiology determinants, which may provide a better frame for potential therapeutic interventions.
The link between chronic inflammation and cancer involves cytokines and mediators of inflammatory pathways. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), a key enzyme in fatty acid metabolism, is upregulated during both inflammation and cancer. COX-2 is induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines at the site of inflammation and enhanced COX-2-induced synthesis of prostaglandins stimulates cancer cell proliferation, promotes angiogenesis, inhibits apoptosis, and increases metastatic potential. As a result, COX-2 inhibitors are a subject of intense research interest toward potential clinical applications. Epidemiological studies highlight the potential benefits of diets rich in phytonutrients for cancer prevention. Plants contain numerous phytonutrient secondary metabolites shown to modulate COX-2. Studies have shown that these metabolites, some of which are used in traditional medicine, can reduce inflammation and carcinogenesis. This review describes the molecular mechanisms by which phytonutrients modulate inflammation, including studies of carotenoids, phenolic compounds, and fatty acids targeting various inflammation-related molecules and pathways associated with cancer. Examples of pathways include those of COX-2, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and transcription factors like nuclear factor kappa B. Such phytonutrient modulation of COX-2 and inflammation continue to be explored for applications in the prevention and treatment of cancer.
BACKGROUND: The COX/prostaglandin (COX/PG) pathway plays a role in cancer pathogenesis via the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). In breast cancer, the expression patterns of the COX/PG pathway enzymes involved in PGE2 synthesis are not well defined. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using the Cancer Genome Atlas data, we analyzed the expression patterns of cyclooxygenases, COX1 (PTGS1) and COX2 (PTGS2), and four downstream enzymes of the COX/prostaglandin pathway - PTGS3 (PTGDS), PTGES1, PTGES2 and PTGES3 - in invasive breast cancer. The Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium database was used to determine the expression of these six genes at the protein level. Existing single-cell RNA sequencing data were used to evaluate the expression of the six COX/PG genes in luminal and basal epithelial cells from normal breast tissues. Cox regression Kaplan-Meier adjusted survival analyses were performed to evaluate the association of COX/PG pathway genes in overall survival using the TCGA data. Finally, we utilized the Tumor Immune Estimation Resource to correlate the expression of these six COX/PG genes with tumor infiltrating immune cell number. RESULTS: COX1, COX2 and PTGES3 were significantly upregulated at the protein level in breast cancer compared to normal tissues (P < 0.005). However, only PTGES3 expression was elevated at both the mRNA and protein level in breast cancer (P < 0.0005). PTGES3 is the most highly expressed enzymes within the COX/PG pathway in both luminal and basal epithelial cells in normal breast tissues. Using Cox Regression Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, PTGES3 expression had a significant inverse prognostic association with breast cancer survival [HR >1.43, P = 0.0057]. Elevated PTGES3 expression within the tumor microenvironment significantly correlated with CD8+ T cell abundance, suggesting a possible immunomodulatory role of PTGES3 in the tumor microenvironment. CONCLUSIONS: PTGES3, a terminal synthetase in the COX/prostaglandin pathway, is a putative prognostic marker in breast cancer.
The biological applications of cerium oxide nanoparticles (nanoceria) have received extensive attention in recent decades. The coexistence of trivalent cerium and tetravalent cerium on the surface of nanoceria allows the scavenging of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The regeneratable changes between Ce(3+) and Ce(4+) make nanoceria a suitable therapeutic agent for treating ROS-related diseases and inflammatory diseases. The size, morphology and Ce(3+)/Ce(4+) state of cerium oxide nanoparticles are affected by the synthesis method. This review focuses on various synthesis methods of cerium oxide nanoparticles and discusses their corresponding physical characteristics, and anti-ROS and anti-inflammatory properties.
Uterine contraction is crucial for a successful labor and the prevention of postpartum hemorrhage. It is enhanced by hypoxia; however, its underlying mechanisms are yet to be elucidated. In this study, transcriptomes revealed that hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha was upregulated in laboring myometrial biopsies, while blockade of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha decreased the contractility of the myometrium and myocytes in vitro via small interfering RNA and the inhibitor, 2-methoxyestradiol. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing revealed that hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha directly binds to the genome of contraction-associated proteins: the promoter of Gja1 and Ptgs2, and the intron of Oxtr. Silencing the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha reduced the expression of Ptgs2, Gja1, and Oxtr. Furthermore, blockade of Gja1 or Ptgs2 led to a significant decrease in myometrial contractions in the hypoxic tissue model, whereas atosiban did not remarkably influence contractility. Our study demonstrates that hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha is essential for promoting myometrial contractility under hypoxia by directly targeting Gja1 and Ptgs2, but not Oxtr. These findings help us to better understand the regulation of myometrial contractions under hypoxia and provide a promising strategy for labor management and postpartum hemorrhage treatment.
Epidemiological and experimental evidence has emerged that a dysregulated inflammation is associated with most of the tumors. Recent studies have begun to unravel molecular pathways linking inflammation and cancer. The identification of transcription factors such as NF-kappaB, STAT3, HIF-1 alpha and their gene products such as COX-2, cytokines, chemokines and chemokine receptors have laid molecular foundation for the decisive role of inflammation in carcinogenesis. Inflammation contributes to survival and proliferation of malignant cells, tumor angiogenesis, metastasis and reduced response to chemotherapy. In view of their involvement at different stages of tumor development, inflammatory pathways represent attractive targets for cancer prevention and therapy. However, advances in this field have not been fully realized, and challenge remains to obtain clinical data from patients and then to utilize this information for optimal and personalized therapy. We present evidence that targeting inflammatory pathways have a potential role to improve chemotherapy of cancer.
