Prostaglandin G/H synthase 1; Converts arachidonate to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), a committed step in prostanoid synthesis. Involved in the constitutive production of prostanoids in particular in the stomach and platelets. In gastric epithelial cells, it is a key step in the generation of prostaglandins, such as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which plays an important role in cytoprotection. In platelets, it is involved in the generation of thromboxane A2 (TXA2), which promotes platelet activation and aggregation, vasoconstriction and proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells; Belongs to th [...] 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can damage the gastrointestinal tract, causing widespread morbidity and mortality. Although mechanisms of damage involve the activities of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 (PTGS1 or cyclooxygenase [COX] 1) and PTGS1 (COX2), other factors are involved. We review the mechanisms of gastrointestinal damage induction by NSAIDs via COX-mediated and COX-independent processes. NSAIDs interact with phospholipids and uncouple mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, which initiates biochemical changes that impair function of the gastrointestinal barrier. The resulting increase in intestinal permeability leads to low-grade inflammation. NSAID inhibition of COX enzymes, along with luminal aggressors, results in erosions and ulcers, with potential complications of bleeding, protein loss, stricture formation, and perforation. We propose a model for NSAID-induced damage to the gastrointestinal tract that includes these complex, interacting, and inter-dependent factors. This model highlights the obstacles for the development of safer NSAIDs.
The cyclooxygenase isoenzymes, COX-1 and COX-2, catalyze the formation of prostaglandins, thromboxane, and levuloglandins. The prostaglandins are autocoid mediators that affect virtually all known physiological and pathological processes via their reversible interaction with G-protein coupled membrane receptors. The levuloglandins are a newer class of products that appear to act via irreversible, covalent attachment to numerous proteins. COX enzymes are clinically important because they are inhibited by aspirin and numerous other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. This inhibition of COX confers relief from inflammatory, pyretic, thrombotic, neurodegenerative and oncological maladies. About one hundred years have elapsed since Hoffman designed and synthesized acetylsalicylic (aspirin) as an agent intended to lessen the gastrointestinal irritation of salicylates while maintaining their efficacy. During the past forty years systematic advances in our understanding of the structure, regulation and function of COX isoenzymes have enabled the design and synthesis of COX-2 selective inhibitors as agents intended to lessen the gastrointestinal irritation of aspirin and non-selective NSAIDs. This review discusses: 1) how two separate catalytic processes in COX - peroxidase and prostaglandin synthase - act in an integrated fashion manner to generate prostaglandins; 2) why irreversible inactivation of COX is important constitutively and pharmacologically; 3) how cells have managed to use two closely related, almost identical enzymes in ways that discriminate their physiological versus pathological roles; 4) how investigators have used these advances to formulate and test medically important uses for old drugs (i.e. aspirin) and create new ones that still seek to achieve Hoffman's original goal.
Cyclooxygenases (COX-1 and COX-2) are key enzymes in several physiopathological processes. Many adverse drugs reactions to NSAIDs are attributable to COX-inhibition. The genes coding for these enzymes (PTGS1 and PTGS2) are highly variable, and variations in these genes may underlie the risk of developing, or the clinical evolution of, several diseases and adverse drug reactions. We analyze major variations in the PTGS1 and PTGS2 genes, allele frequencies, functional consequences and population genetics. The most salient clinical associations of PTGS gene variations are related to colorectal cancer and stroke. In many studies, the SNPs interact with NSAIDs use, dietary or environmental factors. We provide an up-to-date catalog of PTGS clinical associations based on case-control studies and genome-wide association studies, and future research suggestions.
Over the past three decades studies have been conducted to determine the role of prostaglandins in normal physiology and in certain diseases. Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) or prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase (Pghs) is required for the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins. Two isoforms of this enzyme have been identified which are referred to as COX-1 and COX-2. Under most circumstances, COX-1 is produced constitutively, whereas COX-2 can be induced by several physiological stimuli and is expressed at sites of inflammation. Although these isozymes catalyze identical reactions, they are often regulated by different signalling systems. The goal of this chapter is to provide a review of the role of cyclo-oxygenase in biology and disease, and to summarize the current understanding of mechanisms for the regulation of COX-2 expression.
Dihydroartemisinin (DHA) exerts an anti-tumor effect in multiple cancers, however, the molecular mechanism of DHA and whether DHA facilitates the anti-tumor efficacy of cisplatin in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are unclear. Here, we found that DHA potentiated the anti-tumor effects of cisplatin in NSCLC cells by stimulating reactive oxygen species (ROS)-mediated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, C-Jun-amino-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK signaling pathways both in vitro and in vivo. Of note, we demonstrated for the first time that DHA inhibits prostaglandin G/H synthase 1 (PTGS1) expression, resulting in enhanced ROS production. Importantly, silencing PTGS1 sensitized DHA-induced cell death by increasing ROS production and activating ER-stress, JNK and p38 MAPK signaling pathways. In summary, our findings provided new experimental basis and therapeutic prospect for the combined therapy with DHA and cisplatin in some NSCLC patients.
Eicosanoids and related compounds are pleiotropic lipid mediators, which play a role in cell differentiation and in the pathogenesis of various diseases. The biosynthesis of these lipids has extensively been studied in highly developed mammals including humans but little is known about the formation of these mediators in more ancient Prototheria. We searched the genomes of two extant prototherian species (platypus, short-beaked echidna) for genes encoding for lipoxygenase- (ALOX) and prostaglandin synthase-isoforms (PTGS) and detected intact single copy genes for ALOX5, ALOX12, ALOX12B, ALOXE3, PTGS1 and PTGS2. Moreover, we identified two copies of ALOX15B genes (ALOX15B-1 and ALOX15B-2) but in echidna the ALOX15B-2 gene was structurally corrupted. Interestingly, in the two genomes ALOX15 genes were lacking. For functional characterization we expressed the prototherian ALOX15B isoforms and compared important enzyme characteristics of the wildtype proteins and of relevant enzyme mutants with those of human and mouse ALOX15B. Here we observed that the prototherian ALOX15B isoforms exhibit the same reaction specificity as their human ortholog. Mutagenesis of the Triad determinants did not alter the reaction specificity of the prototherian enzymes but modification of the Jisaka determinants murinized the catalytic properties. These data indicate that Prototheria exhibit an active eicosanoid metabolism. They express functional ALOX15B orthologs but lack ALOX15 genes. These observations and the previous findings that ALOX15 orthologs rarely occur in non-mammalian vertebrates such as fish and birds suggest that ALOX15 orthologs were introduced during Prototheria-Metatheria transition via an ALOX15B gene duplication and subsequent divergent enzyme evolution.
Androgen receptor (AR) targeting is an important therapeutic strategy for treating prostate cancer. Most tumors progress to castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and develop the neuroendocrine (NE) phenotype under androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). The molecular basis for NE transdifferentiation after ADT remains incompletely understood. Herein, we show that an immunocyte expression protein, ZBTB46, induces inflammatory response gene expression and contributes to NE differentiation of prostate cancer cells. We demonstrated a molecular mechanism whereby ZBTB46 can be regulated by the androgen-responsive gene, SPDEF, and is associated with NE prostate cancer (NEPC) differentiation. In addition, ZBTB46 acts as a transcriptional coactivator that binds to the promoter of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 1 (PTGS1) and transcriptionally regulated PTGS1 levels. Overexpression of ZBTB46 decreases the sensitivity of the combination of enzalutamide and a PTGS1 inhibitor; however, knockdown of ZBTB46 sensitizes the PTGS1 inhibitor and reduces tumor malignancy. ZBTB46 is inversely correlated with SPDEF and is increased in higher tumor grades and small-cell NE prostate cancer (SCNC) patients, which are positively associated with PTGS1. Our findings suggest that the induction of ZBTB46 results in increased PTGS1 expression, which is associated with NEPC progression and linked to the dysregulation of the AR-SPDEF pathway.
Biosynthesis of prostaglandins from arachidonic acid (AA) is catalyzed by cyclooxygenase (COX), which exists as COX-1 and COX-2. AA is in turn released from the cell membrane upon neopathological stimuli. COX inhibitors interfere in this catalytic and disease onset process. The recent prominent discovery involvements of COX-1 are mainly in cancer and inflammation. Five classes of COX-1 inhibitors are known up to now and this classification is based on chemical features of both synthetic compounds and substances from natural sources. Physicochemical interactions identification between such molecules and COX-1 active site was achieved through X-ray, mutagenesis experiments, specific assays and docking investigations, as well as through a pharmacometric predictive model building. All these insights allowed the design of new highly selective COX-1 inhibitors to be tested into those disease models in which COX-1 is involved. Particularly, COX-1 is expressed at high levels in the early to advanced stages of human epithelial ovarian cancer, and it also seems to play a pivotal role in cancer progression. The refinement of COX-1 selective inhibitor structure has progressed to the stage that some of the inhibitors described in this review could be considered as promising active principle ingredients of drugs and hence part of specific therapeutic protocols. This review aims to outline achievements, in the last 5 years, dealing with the identification of highly selective synthetic and from plant extracts COX-1 inhibitors and their theranostic use in neuroinflammation and ovarian cancer. Their gastrotoxic effect is also discussed.
PGs are important mediators of normal physiology, response to injury, and pathologic processes. Dissecting these biochemical and molecular pathways allows development of therapeutic agents that can be [figure: see text] applied to specific clinical situations, while preserving PGs that play a role in normal physiology.
BACKGROUND: Several studies have investigated whether the polymorphisms in the prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 1 (PTGS1) and PTGS2 genes and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use are associated with cancer risk; however, those studies have produced mixed results. Therefore, we performed a meta-analysis to evaluate the association between the PTGS1 and PTGS2 polymorphisms and the effect of NSAID use on the risk of developing cancer. METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search in PubMed through March 2012. The odds ratios (ORs) with the corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated using the fixed-effect model or the random-effect model. RESULTS: The database search generated 13 studies that met the inclusion criteria. For PTGS1 rs3842787, NSAID users homozygous for the major allele (CC) had a significantly decreased cancer risk compared with non-NSAID users (OR = 0.73, 95% CI = 0.59-0.89). For PTGS2 rs5275 and rs20417, there were no significant differences between the gene polymorphism and NSAID use on cancer risk among the 8 and 7 studies, respectively. However, in the stratified analysis by the type of cancer or ethnicity population, NSAID users homozygous for the major allele (TT) in rs5275 demonstrated significantly decreased cancer risk compared with non-NSAID users in cancer type not involving colorectal adenoma (OR = 0.70, 95% CI = 0.59-0.83) and among the USA population (OR = 0.67, 95% CI = 0.56-0.82). NSAID users homozygous for the major allele (GG) in rs20417 displayed a significantly decreased cancer risk than non-NSAID users among the US population (OR = 0.72, 95% CI = 0.58-0.88). For the PTGS2 rs689466 and rs2745557 SNPs, there were no significant differences. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis suggests that the associations between PTGS polymorphisms and NSAID use on cancer risk may differ with regard to the type of cancer and nationality.
Osteoporosis, characterized by reduced bone mass and increased bone fragility, is a disease prevalent in women. Likewise, breast cancer is a multifactorial disease and considered the major cause of mortality in premenopausal and postmenopausal women worldwide. Our data demonstrated the association of the MYLK gene and PTGS1 gene variants with osteoporosis and benign breast tumor risk and the impact of ovariectomy on osteoporosis in Korean women. We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of women with osteoporosis and benign breast tumors. There were 60 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 12 SNPs in the MYLK and PTGS1 genes, associated with benign breast tumors and osteoporosis. Our study showed that women with homozygous MYLK rs12163585 major alleles had an increased risk of osteoporosis following ovariectomy compared to those with minor alleles. Women carrying the minor PTGS1 rs1213265 allele and not treated via ovariectomy carried a higher risk of osteoporosis than those who underwent ovariectomy with a homozygous genotype at the major alleles. Our results suggest that both the MYLK and PTGS1 genes are genetic factors associated with the phenotypes, and these associations appear to be modulated by ovariectomy.
The cyclooxygenase isoenzymes (COX-1 and -2) catalyze the rate-limiting steps in prostanoid biosynthesis. COX-1 and -2 genes encode two isoenzymes with overlapping yet distinct expression patterns and functions. Physiologically, various extracellular stimuli such as growth factors, cytokines and tumor promoters regulate the expression of COX-1 and -2 genes at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. COX-2 is overexpressed in rheumatoid arthritis, colorectal and breast cancer. Prostanoids produced by the COX pathway signal via plasma membrane-localized, G-protein-coupled receptors as well as via nuclear receptors. Currently, several COX-2-selective inhibitors are developed to control the anti-inflammatory and anti-neoplastic activities of the COX-2 isoenzyme. Inhibition of the COX isoenzyme activity and/or expression may be the basis of future generation of anti-inflammatory and anti-neoplastic drugs.
Cyclooxygenase (COX), first purified in 1976 and cloned in 1988, is the key enzyme in the synthesis of prostaglandins (PGs) from arachidonic acid. In 1991, several laboratories identified a product from a second gene with COX activity and called it COX-2. However, COX-2 was inducible, and the inducing stimuli included pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors, implying a role for COX-2 in both inflammation and control of cell growth. The two isoforms of COX are almost identical in structure but have important differences in substrate and inhibitor selectivity and in their intracellular locations. Protective PGs, which preserve the integrity of the stomach lining and maintain normal renal function in a compromised kidney, are synthesized by COX-1. In addition to the induction of COX-2 in inflammatory lesions, it is present constitutively in the brain and spinal cord, where it may be involved in nerve transmission, particularly that for pain and fever. PGs made by COX-2 are also important in ovulation and in the birth process. The discovery of COX-2 has made possible the design of drugs that reduce inflammation without removing the protective PGs in the stomach and kidney made by COX-1. These highly selective COX-2 inhibitors may not only be anti-inflammatory but may also be active in colon cancer and Alzheimer's disease.
Cyclooxygenase (COX), also known as prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase, is the key enzyme required for the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins. Two COX isoforms have been identified, COX-1 and COX-2. In many situations, the COX-1 enzyme is produced constitutively (e.g., in gastric mucosa), whereas COX-2 is highly inducible (e.g., at sites of inflammation and cancer). Traditional nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit both enzymes, and a new class of COX-2 selective inhibitors (COXIBs) preferentially inhibit the COX-2 enzyme. This review summarizes our current understanding of the role of COX-1 and COX-2 in normal physiology and disease.
Prostanoids, which consist of prostaglandins (PGs) and thromboxane, are produced from arachidonic acid by cyclooxygenases (COXs) as a rate-limiting step, and they exert various biological actions. Classically, prostanoids are suspected to be closely related to female reproductive processes such as ovulation, luteolysis and uterine contraction, as well as pathological processes such as fever generation and pain modulation. Recently the cDNA cloning of a series of prostaglandin-synthesizing enzymes and receptors enabled us to clarify which isoform or subtype is involved in each reproductive process by generating individual gene-deficient mice. In late pregnancy, PGF2 alpha synthesized by COX-1 is essential for induction of parturition via luteolysis. Furthermore, impaired induction of COX-2 in the myometrium of PGF2 alpha receptor-deficient mice is accompanied with loss of parturition, suggesting that COX-2 is presumably responsible for producing uterotonic PGs. In early pregnancy, PGE2 synthesized by COX-2 induces the expansion of cumulus cells through EP2 receptor and contributes to ovulation and fertilization. These results may be useful in not only developing novel drugs in the reproductive area but also understanding and overcoming harmful reproductive side effects of classical and novel drugs in non-reproductive areas.
BACKGROUND: Several layers of slender, smooth muscle-like, peritubular cells and extracellular matrix (ECM) form the peritubular compartment of the human testis. Peritubular cells are the least explored testicular cells. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Human testicular peritubular cells (HTPCs) can be isolated from small testicular fragments of patients and studied in vitro. We have used this cellular model, in combination with human testicular samples, to examine how peritubular cells may contribute to male (in)fertility. RESULTS: Human testicular peritubular cells (HTPCs) retain contractile abilities in vitro and secrete many proteins. Among them are factors, which serve intra-testicular roles, for example, glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), thought to be important for the renewal of spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs). Studies in mutant mice indicated that peritubular cell-derived GDNF is crucial for lifelong spermatogenesis. Thus, peritubular cells are a functional part of the SSC niche. Peritubular cells of mice and men express androgen receptors (AR). In mouse peritubular cells, androgens enhanced GDNF production, but not in HTPCs. Rather, AR activation increased the levels of AR and smooth muscle proteins and thereby enhanced the smooth muscle-like phenotype. Following the lead of a proteomic analysis, which identified the key prostaglandin (PG)-synthesizing enzyme (PTGS1 = COX1), we found that HTPCs secrete PGE(2) . COX1, and PGE(2) receptors (EP1, 2, and 4) were identified in peritubular cells in situ, supporting in vivo relevance. In HTPCs, activation of EP1/4 increased GDNF and a smooth muscle protein. Ibuprofen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), which blocks PG synthesis. Added to HTPCs it reduced PGE(2) and GDNF production and lowered smooth muscle protein levels. If applicable to the in vivo situation, the results suggest that ibuprofen and possibly other NSAIDs may impair important peritubular cell functions and consequently testicular functions. CONCLUSION: The few examples highlighted, together with others not mentioned here, indicate that HTPCs provide an experimental window into the human testis.
Acetaminophen (paracetamol) and other analgesic/antipyretic drugs such as dipyrone have been postulated to act centrally through inhibition of cyclooxygenases (COXs). COX activity in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated mammalian leukocytes, microglial cells, and platelets is inhibited by these drugs at physiological concentrations. Yet purified COX enzymes are poorly inhibited by acetaminophen, particularly under conditions of high oxidant tone and elevated substrate levels. This suggests the presence of cell-specific differences that govern COX inhibition by these drugs. COX-3, a variant of COX-1, has been found in canine brain and is inhibited by acetaminophen and dipyrone at physiological concentrations. Additionally, other new COX-1-derived proteins called PCOX have been identified that do not make prostaglandins but apparently bind heme and may have other enzymatic properties. Antibodies specific for these variants detect analogous proteins in human tissues. Expression of COX variants is postulated to be an integral part of the mechanism of action of analgesic/antipyretic drugs.
We have identified a rare missense variant on chromosome 9, position 125145990 (GRCh37), in exon 8 in PTGS1 (the gene encoding cyclo-oxygenase 1, COX-1, the target of anti-thrombotic aspirin therapy). We report that in the homozygous state within a large consanguineous family this variant is associated with a bleeding phenotype and alterations in platelet reactivity and eicosanoid production. Western blotting and confocal imaging demonstrated that COX-1 was absent in the platelets of three family members homozygous for the PTGS1 variant but present in their leukocytes. Platelet reactivity, as assessed by aggregometry, lumi-aggregometry and flow cytometry, was impaired in homozygous family members, as were platelet adhesion and spreading. The productions of COX-derived eicosanoids by stimulated platelets were greatly reduced but there were no changes in the levels of urinary metabolites of COX-derived eicosanoids. The proband exhibited additional defects in platelet aggregation and spreading which may explain why her bleeding phenotype was slightly more severe than those of other homozygous affected relatives. This is the first demonstration in humans of the specific loss of platelet COX-1 activity and provides insight into its consequences for platelet function and eicosanoid metabolism. Notably despite the absence of thromboxane A2 (TXA2) formation by platelets, urinary TXA2 metabolites were in the normal range indicating these cannot be assumed as markers of in vivo platelet function. Results from this study are important benchmarks for the effects of aspirin upon platelet COX-1, platelet function and eicosanoid production as they define selective platelet COX-1 ablation within humans.
BACKGROUND: The COX/prostaglandin (COX/PG) pathway plays a role in cancer pathogenesis via the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). In breast cancer, the expression patterns of the COX/PG pathway enzymes involved in PGE2 synthesis are not well defined. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using the Cancer Genome Atlas data, we analyzed the expression patterns of cyclooxygenases, COX1 (PTGS1) and COX2 (PTGS2), and four downstream enzymes of the COX/prostaglandin pathway - PTGS3 (PTGDS), PTGES1, PTGES2 and PTGES3 - in invasive breast cancer. The Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium database was used to determine the expression of these six genes at the protein level. Existing single-cell RNA sequencing data were used to evaluate the expression of the six COX/PG genes in luminal and basal epithelial cells from normal breast tissues. Cox regression Kaplan-Meier adjusted survival analyses were performed to evaluate the association of COX/PG pathway genes in overall survival using the TCGA data. Finally, we utilized the Tumor Immune Estimation Resource to correlate the expression of these six COX/PG genes with tumor infiltrating immune cell number. RESULTS: COX1, COX2 and PTGES3 were significantly upregulated at the protein level in breast cancer compared to normal tissues (P < 0.005). However, only PTGES3 expression was elevated at both the mRNA and protein level in breast cancer (P < 0.0005). PTGES3 is the most highly expressed enzymes within the COX/PG pathway in both luminal and basal epithelial cells in normal breast tissues. Using Cox Regression Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, PTGES3 expression had a significant inverse prognostic association with breast cancer survival [HR >1.43, P = 0.0057]. Elevated PTGES3 expression within the tumor microenvironment significantly correlated with CD8+ T cell abundance, suggesting a possible immunomodulatory role of PTGES3 in the tumor microenvironment. CONCLUSIONS: PTGES3, a terminal synthetase in the COX/prostaglandin pathway, is a putative prognostic marker in breast cancer.
The cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes catalyze a key step in the conversion of arachidonate to PGH2, the immediate substrate for a series of cell specific prostaglandin and thromboxane synthases. Prostaglandins play critical roles in numerous biologic processes, including the regulation of immune function, kidney development, reproductive biology, and gastrointestinal integrity. There are two COX isoforms, which differ mainly in their pattern of expression. COX-1 is expressed in most tissues, whereas COX-2 usually is absent, but is induced by numerous physiologic stimuli. Surprisingly, disruption of Cox1 (Ptgs1) in the mouse did not result in gastrointestinal abnormalities. cox-2 (Ptgs2) null mice show reproductive anomalies and defects in kidney development. Epidemiologic, animal, and human data indicate that NSAIDs, inhibitors of cyclooxygenase, are chemopreventive for colon cancer. COX-2 is overexpressed in 50% of benign polyps and 80-85% of adenocarcinomas. Offspring from cox-2 null by Apcdelta716 matings exhibit an 86% reduction in polyp number when compared to offspring from control animals, thus providing genetic evidence that COX-2 contributes to tumor formation or growth. The in vivo mechanism by which COX-2 affects tumor growth has not been determined. It is possible that both tumor and stromally derived COX-2 could influence tumor angiogenesis and/ or immune function.
