Protein-tyrosine kinase 6; Non-receptor tyrosine-protein kinase implicated in the regulation of a variety of signaling pathways that control the differentiation and maintenance of normal epithelia, as well as tumor growth. Function seems to be context dependent and differ depending on cell type, as well as its intracellular localization. A number of potential nuclear and cytoplasmic substrates have been identified. These include the RNA-binding proteins: KHDRBS1/SAM68, KHDRBS2/SLM1, KHDRBS3/SLM2 and SFPQ/PSF; transcription factors: STAT3 and STAT5A/B and a variety of signaling molecule [...] 
The molecular heterogeneity and distinct features of HER2-low breast cancers, particularly in the Chinese population, are not well understood, limiting its precise management in the era of antibody‒drug conjugates. To address this issue, we established a cohort of 434 Chinese patients with HER2-low breast cancer (433 female and one male) and integrated genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic profiling data. In this cohort, HER2-low tumors are more distinguished from HER2-0 tumors in the hormone receptor-negative subgroup. Within HER2-low tumors, significant interpatient heterogeneity also exists in the hormone receptor-negative subgroup: basal-like tumors resemble HER2-0 disease, and non-basal-like HER2-low tumors mimic HER2-positive disease. These non-basal-like HER2-low tumors are enriched in the HER2-enriched subtype and the luminal androgen receptor subtype and feature PIK3CA mutation, FGFR4/PTK6/ERBB4 overexpression and lipid metabolism activation. Among hormone receptor-positive tumors, HER2-low tumors show less loss/deletion in 17q peaks than HER2-0 tumors. In this work, we reveal the heterogeneity of HER2-low breast cancers and emphasize the need for more precise stratification regarding hormone receptor status and molecular subtype.
As a key step of tumor lymphatic metastasis, lymphangiogenesis is regulated by VEGFC-VEGFR3 signaling pathway mediated by immune cells, mainly macrophages, in the tumor microenvironment. However, little is known whether tumor associated neutrophils are involved in lymphangiogenesis. Here, it is found that TANs infiltration is increased in LN-metastatic BCa and is associated with poor prognosis. Neutrophil depletion results in significant reduction in popliteal LN metastasis and lymphangiogenesis. Mechanistically, transcription factor ETV4 enhances BCa cells-derived CXCL1/8 to recruit TANs, leading to the increase of VEGFA and MMP9 from TANs, and then facilitating lymphangiogenesis and LN metastasis of BCa. Moreover, phosphorylation of ETV4 at tyrosine 392 by tyrosine kinase PTK6 increases nuclear translocation of ETV4 and is essential for its function in BCa. Overall, the findings reveal a novel mechanism of how tumor cells regulate TANs-induced lymphangiogenesis and LN metastasis and identify ETV4 as a therapeutic target of LN metastasis in BCa.
BACKGROUND: Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is an intracellular tyrosine kinase that is distantly related to SRC family kinases. PTK6 is nuclear in normal prostate epithelia, but nuclear localization is lost in prostate tumours. Increased expression of PTK6 is detected in human prostate cancer, especially at metastatic stages, and in other types of cancers, including breast, colon, head and neck cancers, and serous carcinoma of the ovary. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Potential novel substrates of PTK6 identified by mass spectrometry were validated in vitro. The significance of PTK6-induced phosphorylation of these substrates was addressed using human prostate cell lines by knockdown of endogenous PTK6 or overexpression of targeted PTK6 to different intracellular compartments. RESULTS: We identified AKT, p130CAS and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) as novel PTK6 substrates and demonstrated their roles in promoting cell proliferation, migration and resistance to anoikis. In prostate cancer cells, active PTK6 is primarily associated with membrane compartments, although the majority of total PTK6 is localized within the cytoplasm. Ectopic expression of membrane-targeted PTK6 transforms immortalized fibroblasts. Knockdown of endogenous cytoplasmic PTK6 in PC3 prostate cancer cells impairs proliferation, migration and anoikis resistance. However, re-introduction of PTK6 into the nucleus significantly decreases cell proliferation, suggesting context-specific functions for nuclear PTK6. CONCLUSIONS: In human prostate cancer, elevated PTK6 expression, translocation of PTK6 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and its activation at the plasma membrane contribute to increased phosphorylation and activation of its substrates such as AKT, p130CAS and FAK, thereby promoting prostate cancer progression.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Whether alcohol-related DNA methylation has a causal effect on psychiatric disorders has not been investigated. Furthermore, a comprehensive investigation into the causal relationship and underlying mechanisms linking alcohol consumption and psychiatric disorders has been lacking. This study aimed to evaluate the causal effect of general alcohol intake and pathological drinking behaviors on psychiatric disorders, alcohol-associated DNA methylation on gene expression and psychiatric disorders, and gene expression on psychiatric disorders. DESIGN: Two-sample design Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. Various sensitivity and validation analyses, including colocalization analysis, were conducted to test the robustness of the results. SETTING: Genome-wide association study (GWAS) data mainly from GWAS and Sequencing Consortium of Alcohol and Nicotine use (GSCAN), Genetics of DNA Methylation Consortium (GoDMC) and Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) with European ancestry. PARTICIPANTS: The GWAS summary data on general alcohol intake (drinks per week, n = 941 280), pathological drinking behaviors (including alcohol use disorder [AUD, n = 313 959] and problematic alcohol use [PAU, n = 435 563]) and psychiatric disorders (including schizophrenia, major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder, n = 51 710-500 199) were included. Alcohol-related DNA methylation CpG sites (n = 9643) and mQTL data from blood (n = 27 750) and brain (n = 1160), BrainMeta v2 and GTEx V8 eQTL summary data (n = 73-2865) were also included. MEASUREMENTS: Genetic variants were selected as instrumental variables for exposures, including drinks per week, AUD, PAU, alcohol-related DNA methylation CpG sites (mQTL) and genes selected (eQTL). FINDINGS: Pathological drinking behaviors were associated with an increased risk of psychiatric disorders after removing outliers or controlling for alcohol consumption. MR analysis identified 10 alcohol-related CpG sites with colocalization evidence that were causally associated with psychiatric disorders (P = 1.65 x 10(-4)-7.52 x 10(-22)). Furthermore, the expression of genes (RERE, PTK6, GATAD2B, COG8, PDF and GAS5) mapped to these CpG sites in the brain, led by the cortex, were significantly associated with psychiatric disorders (P = 1.19 x 10(-2)-3.51 x 10(-7)). CONCLUSIONS: Pathological drinking behavior and alcohol-related DNA methylation appear to have a causal effect on psychiatric disorders. The expression of genes regulated by the alcohol-related DNA methylation sites may underpin this association.
Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is the most well studied member of the PTK6 family of intracellular tyrosine kinases. While it is expressed at highest levels in differentiated cells in the regenerating epithelial linings of the gastrointestinal tract and skin, induction and activation of PTK6 is detected in several cancers, including breast and prostate cancer where high PTK6 expression correlates with worse outcome. PTK6 expression is regulated by hypoxia and cell stress, and its kinase activity is induced by several growth factor receptors implicated in cancer including members of the ERBB family, IGFR1 and MET. Activation of PTK6 at the plasma membrane has been associated with the epithelial mesenchymal transition and tumor metastasis. Several lines of evidence indicate that PTK6 has context dependent functions that depend on cell type, intracellular localization and kinase activation. Systemic disruption of PTK6 has been shown to reduce tumorigenesis in mouse models of breast and prostate cancer, and more recently small molecule inhibitors of PTK6 have exhibited efficacy in inhibiting tumor growth in animal models. Here we review data that suggest targeting PTK6 may have beneficial therapeutic outcomes in some cancers.
BACKGROUND: Chemoresistance is the major cause of chemotherapy failure in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is aberrantly overexpressed in clinical CRC tissues undergoing chemotherapy. We studied if PTK6 contributed to the chemoresistance of CRC in human and mice. METHODS: We obtained tissue samples from patients with CRC and measured the expression of PTK6 by immunohistochemistry. Gain- and loss-of-function assays were performed to study the biological functions of PTK6. We constructed the FLAG-tagged wild type (WT), kinase-dead, and inhibition-defective recombinant mutants of PTK6 to study the effect phosphorylated activation of PTK6 played on CRC cell stemness and chemoresistance. We used small molecule inhibitor XMU-MP-2 to test the influence of PTK6 on sensitivity of CRC cells to 5-FU/L-OHP in both nude mouse and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) animal models. RESULTS: PTK6 is overexpressed in CRC tissues and plays a stimulatory role in the proliferation and chemoresistance of CRC cells both in vitro and in vivo. PTK6, especially the phosphorylated PTK6, can promote the stemness of CRC cells through interacting with JAK2 and phosphorylating it to activate the JAK2/STAT3 signaling. Pharmacological inhibition of PTK6 using XMU-MP-2 effectively reduces the stemness property of CRC cells and improves its chemosensitivity to 5-FU/L-OHP in both nude mice subcutaneously implanted tumor model and PDX model constructed with NOD-SCID mice. CONCLUSIONS: PTK6 interacts with JAK2 and phosphorylates it to activate JAK2/STAT3 signaling to promote the stemness and chemoresistance of CRC cells. Pharmacological inhibition of PTK6 by small molecule inhibitor dramatically enhances the sensitivity to chemotherapy in nude mice and PDX models.
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer promotes metastasis and chemotherapy resistance. A subset of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) exhibits a mesenchymal gene signature that is associated with poor patient outcomes. We previously identified PTK6 tyrosine kinase as an oncogenic driver of EMT in a subset of TNBC. PTK6 induces EMT by stabilizing SNAIL, a key EMT-initiating transcriptional factor. Inhibition of PTK6 activity reverses mesenchymal features of TNBC cells and suppresses their metastases by promoting SNAIL degradation via a novel mechanism. In the current study, we identify membrane-associated RING-CH2 (MARCH2) as a novel PTK6-regulated E3 ligase that promotes the ubiquitination and degradation of SNAIL protein. The MARCH2 RING domain is critical for SNAIL ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. PTK6 inhibition promotes the interaction of MARCH2 with SNAIL. Overexpression of MARCH2 exhibits tumor suppressive properties and phenocopies the effects of SNAIL downregulation and PTK6 inhibition in TNBC cells, such as inhibition of migration, anoikis resistance, and metastasis. Consistent with this, higher levels of MARCH2 expression in breast and other cancers are associated with better prognosis. We have identified MARCH2 as a novel SNAIL E3 ligase that regulates EMT and metastases of mesenchymal TNBC. SIGNIFICANCE: EMT is a process directly linked to drug resistance and metastasis of cancer cells. We identified MARCH2 as a novel regulator of SNAIL, a key EMT driver, that promotes SNAIL ubiquitination and degradation in TNBC cells. MARCH2 is oncogene regulated and inhibits growth and metastasis of TNBC. These insights could contribute to novel strategies to therapeutically target TNBC.
Expression of Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is upregulated in several human solid tumors, and it has oncogenic roles in prostate and breast cancer. PTK6 and SRC kinase are distantly related, share many substrates, and often regulate the same signaling pathways, but whether they interact to regulate signaling is not well understood. We characterized crosstalk between PTK6 and SRC and show that PTK6 can directly phosphorylate SRC to promote its activation. Stable knockdown of PTK6 in multiple cancer cell lines leads to decreased activating phosphorylation of SRC. We show that coexpression of kinase-dead SRC and active PTK6 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking Src, Yes, and Fyn results in activating phosphorylation of SRC. However, there is no reciprocal effect, because active SRC does not promote activating phosphorylation of PTK6. Overexpression of active PTK6 maintained activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), AKT, and FAK, but not SHP2 and ERK1/2 in cells with knockdown of SRC. Both PTK6 and SRC are regulated by EGFR, and its inhibition with erlotinib downregulated PTK6 and to a lesser degree SRC activation in LNCaP cells that overexpress active PTK6. Erlotinib treatment also led to AKT inhibition, but overexpression of active PTK6 prevented this. Our data demonstrate overlapping and unique functions for PTK6 and SRC. Finally, we show that PTK6 and SRC are coexpressed in subsets of human prostate and breast cancer cells, and active PTK6 and active SRC colocalize in prostate cancer, supporting a role for PTK6 in promoting SRC activity in cancer.
Akt kinase, a member of AGC kinases, is important in many cellular functions including proliferation, migration, cell growth and metabolism. There are three known Akt isoforms which play critical and diverse roles in the cardiovascular system. Akt activity is regulated by its upstream regulatory pathways at transcriptional and post-translational levels. Beta-catenin/Tcf-4, GLI1 and Stat-3 are some of few known transcriptional regulators of AKT gene. Threonine 308 and serine 473 are the two critical phosphorylation sites of Akt1. Translocation of Akt to the cell membrane facilitates PDK1 phosphorylation of the threonine site. The serine site is phosphorylated by mTORC2. Ack1, Src, PTK6, TBK1, IKBKE and IKKepsilon are some of the non-canonical pathways which affect the Akt activity. Protein-protein interactions of Akt to actin and Hsp90 increase the Akt activity while Akt binding to other proteins such as CTMP and TRB3 reduces the Akt activity. The action of Akt on its downstream targets determines its function in cardiovascular processes such as cell survival, growth, proliferation, angiogenesis, vasorelaxation, and cell metabolism. Akt promotes cell survival via caspase-9, YAP, Bcl-2, and Bcl-x activities. Inhibition of FoxO proteins by Akt also increases cell survival by transcriptional mechanisms. Akt stimulates cell growth and proliferation through mTORC1. Akt also increases VEGF secretion and mediates eNOS phosphorylation, vasorelaxation and angiogenesis. Akt can increase cellular metabolism through its downstream targets GSK3 and GLUT4. The alterations of Akt signaling play an important role in many cardiovascular pathological processes such as atherosclerosis, cardiac hypertrophy, and vascular remodeling. Several Akt inhibitors have been developed and tested as anti-tumor agents. They could be potential novel therapeutics for the cardiovascular diseases.
Disruption of the gene encoding Protein Tyrosine Kinase 6 (Ptk6) delayed differentiation and increased growth in the mouse intestine. However, Ptk6-null mice were also resistant to azoxymethane-induced colon tumorigenesis. To further explore functions of PTK6 in colon cancer, expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers, as well as proliferation, migration, and xenograft tumor growth, was examined in human colon tumor cell lines with knockdown or overexpression of PTK6. PTK6 protein, transcript, and activation were also examined in a human colon tumor tissue array, using immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR. Knockdown of PTK6 led to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in SW480 and HCT116 cells, whereas overexpression of PTK6 in SW620 cells restored an epithelial phenotype in a kinase-independent manner. PTK6 knockdown also increased xenograft tumor growth of SW480 cells, suggesting tumor suppressor functions. In clinical specimens, PTK6 expression was highest in normal differentiated epithelial cells and reduced in tumors. In contrast, overexpression of constitutively active PTK6 promoted STAT3 and ERK5 activation in colon cancer cells, and endogenous PTK6 promoted cell survival and oncogenic signaling in response to DNA-damaging treatments. These data indicate that PTK6 has complex, context-specific functions in colon cancer; PTK6 promotes the epithelial phenotype to antagonize the EMT in a kinase-independent manner, whereas activation of PTK6 promotes oncogenic signaling. IMPLICATIONS: Understanding context-specific functions of PTK6 is important, because although it promotes cell survival and oncogenic signaling after DNA damage, expression of PTK6 in established tumors may maintain the epithelial phenotype, preventing tumor progression. Mol Cancer Res; 14(6); 563-73. (c)2016 AACR.
Src-related kinase lacking C-terminal regulatory tyrosine and N-terminal myristoylation sites (SRMS) is a tyrosine kinase that was discovered in 1994. It is a member of a family of nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that also includes Brk (PTK6) and Frk. Compared with other tyrosine kinases, there is relatively little information about the structure, function, and regulation of SRMS. In this review, we summarize the current state of knowledge regarding SRMS, including recent results aimed at identifying downstream signaling partners. We also present a structural model for the enzyme and discuss the potential involvement of SRMS in cancer cell signaling.
Autophagy dysfunction is one of the common causes of tumor formation and plays an important role in uveal melanoma (UM). However, little is known about the regulatory mechanisms of autophagy in UM. Here, we show that PTK6 can promote the proliferation, migration, and invasion of UM cells by inhibiting autophagy. SOCS3 can inhibit the proliferation, migration, and invasion of UM cells. Overexpression of SOCS3 can partially rescue the PTK6-induced promotion of UM cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically, PTK6 can bind to SOCS3, and SOCS3 can downregulate the expression of PTK6. Furthermore, PTK6 can upregulate the phosphorylation of mTOR to inhibit autophagy. Taken together, our findings demonstrate the functions of PTK6 and SOCS3 in UM cells and targeting the SOCS3-PTK6 signaling axis might be a novel and promising therapeutic strategy for patients with UM.
BACKGROUND: Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) plays an important role in cell proliferation and differentiation. However, the functions of PTK6 appear highly context-dependent and differ depending on the cell type, as well as its intracellular localization. High PTK6 expression in tumor has been associated with poor pathological features and prognosis in some studies, but other studies have reported opposite results. Therefore, we performed this meta-analysis to derive more precise estimations of the association of PTK6 expression with prognosis and clinicopathological features in cancer patients. METHODS: We conducted a literature search in PubMed, Ovid MEDLINE, and MEDLINE databases to cover all articles published until June 2021. All 1475 patients from the eight studies were included in the meta-analysis. Because of heterogeneity in PTK6 expression in non-tumor tissues, the included studies were divided into two subgroups according to PTK expression in non-tumor tissues: the low expression subgroup (LESG) or high expression subgroup (HESG). RESULTS: Patients with high PTK expression showed significantly worse overall survival (OS) in LESG (Hazard Ratio (HR) = 2.53 [95% Confidence Interval (CI), 1.68-3.83], p < 0.0001), but significantly better OS in HESG (HR = 0.56 [95% CI, 0.40-0.78], p = 0.0006). PTK6 expression also showed different associations with clinicopathological features, such as advanced T classification, stage, and differentiation according to PTK6 expression in non-tumor tissues. CONCLUSIONS: PTK6 expression in tumor was a prognostic factor in patients with various cancers, but the direction of prognosis differs, depending on the degree of PTK6 expression in non-tumor tissues.
The signal-transducing adaptor protein (STAP) family, including STAP-1 and STAP-2, contributes to a variety of intracellular signaling pathways. The proteins in this family contain typical structures for adaptor proteins, such as Pleckstrin homology in the N-terminal regions and SRC homology 2 domains in the central regions. STAP proteins bind to inhibitor of kappaB kinase complex, breast tumor kinase, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), and STAT5, during tumorigenesis and inflammatory/immune responses. STAP proteins positively or negatively regulate critical steps in intracellular signaling pathways through individually unique mechanisms. This article reviews the roles of the novel STAP family and the possible therapeutic applications of targeting STAP proteins in cancer.
Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6), a non-receptor tyrosine kinase, is an oncogenic driver in many tumor types. However, agents that therapeutically target PTK6 are lacking. Although several PTK6 kinase inhibitors have been developed, none have been clinically translated, which may be due to kinase-independent functions that compromise their efficacy. PTK6 kinase inhibitor treatment phenocopies some, but not all effects of PTK6 downregulation. PTK6 downregulation inhibits growth of breast cancer cells, but treatment with PTK6 kinase inhibitor does not. To chemically downregulate PTK6, we designed a PROTAC, MS105, which potently and specifically degrades PTK6. Treatment with MS105, but not PTK6 kinase inhibitor, inhibits growth and induces apoptosis of breast cancer cells, phenocopying the effects of PTK6 (short hairpin RNA) shRNA/CRISPR. In contrast, both MS105 and PTK6 kinase inhibitor effectively inhibit breast cancer cell migration, supporting the differing kinase dependencies of PTK6's oncogenic functions. Our studies support PTK6 degraders as a preferred approach to targeting PTK6 in cancer.
Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) has shown important cancer‑promoting effects in a variety of cancer types. Nonetheless, its vital role in cervical cancer has not been completely elucidated. The present study sought to address whether PTK6 is involved in the malignant progression of cervical cancer via its interaction with GRB2‑associated binding 1 (GAB1). Western blotting was used to examine PTK6 and GAB1 expression levels. Cell Counting Kit‑8, Transwell, wound healing, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl‑transferase‑mediated dUTP nick end labeling assays were performed to estimate the corresponding proliferative, migratory, invasive, and apoptotic abilities of the cells. Co‑immunoprecipitation (Co‑IP) assays confirmed binding of PTK6 to GAB1. The results revealed that the expression levels of PTK6 and GAB1 were markedly increased in cervical cancer cell lines compared with those noted in normal cervical epithelial cells. The cell proliferative, invasive, and migratory activities of cervical cancer cells were reduced in the absence of PTK6 expression, whereas the induction of apoptosis was aggravated under these conditions. The results of the Co‑IP assay indicated that PTK6 expression was positively associated with GAB1. In addition, the suppressive effect of PTK6 silencing on the malignant phenotypes of cervical cancer cells was reversed following overexpression of GAB1. In summary, the present study indicated that knockdown of PTK6 expression protected against the malignant progression of cervical cancer, while overexpression of GAB1 counteracted the inhibitory effects of PTK6 knockdown on cervical cancer cells.
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) accounts for over 90% of oral cancers and causes considerable morbidity and mortality. Epigenetic deregulation is a common mechanism underlying carcinogenesis. DNA methylation deregulation is the epigenetic change observed during the transformation of normal cells to precancerous and eventually cancer cells. This study investigated the DNA methylation patterns of PTK6 during the development of OSCC. Bisulfite genomic DNA sequencing was performed to determine the PTK6 methylation level. OSCC animal models were established to examine changes in PTK6 expression in the different stages of OSCC development. The DNA methylation of PTK6 was decreased during the development of OSCC. The mRNA and protein expression of PTK6 was increased in OSCC cell lines compared with human normal oral keratinocytes. In mice, the methylation level of PTK6 decreased after treatment with 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide and arecoline, and the mRNA and protein expression of PTK6 was increased. PTK6 hypomethylation can be a diagnostic marker of OSCC. Upregulation of PTK6 promoted the proliferation, migration, and invasion of OSCC cells. PTK6 promoted carcinogenesis and metastasis by increasing STAT3 phosphorylation and ZEB1 expression. The epigenetic deregulation of PTK6 can serve as a biomarker for the early detection of OSCC and as a treatment target.
BReast tumor Kinase (BRK, also known as PTK6) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that is highly expressed in breast carcinomas while having low expression in the normal mammary gland, which hints at the oncogenic nature of this kinase in breast cancer. In the past twenty-six years since the discovery of BRK, an increasing number of studies have strived to understand the cellular roles of BRK in breast cancer. Since then, BRK has been found both in vitro and in vivo to activate a multitude of oncoproteins to promote cell proliferation, metastasis, and cancer development. The compelling evidence concerning the oncogenic roles of BRK has also led, since then, to the rapid and exponential development of inhibitors against BRK. This review highlights recent advances in BRK biology in contributing to the "hallmarks of cancer", as well as BRK's therapeutic significance. Importantly, this review consolidates all known inhibitors of BRK activity and highlights the connection between drug action and BRK-mediated effects. Despite the volume of inhibitors designed against BRK, none have progressed into clinical phase. Understanding the successes and challenges of these inhibitor developments are crucial for the future improvements of new inhibitors that can be clinically relevant.
Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) expression, activation, and amplification of the PTK6 gene have been reported in ERBB2/HER2-positive mammary gland cancers. To explore contributions of PTK6 to mammary gland tumorigenesis promoted by activated ERBB2, we crossed Ptk6-/- mice with the mouse mammary tumor virus-ERBB2 transgenic mouse line expressing activated ERBB2 and characterized tumor development and progression. ERBB2-induced tumorigenesis was significantly delayed and diminished in mice lacking PTK6. PTK6 expression was induced in the mammary glands of ERBB2 transgenic mice before tumor development and correlated with activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and increased proliferation. Disruption of PTK6 impaired STAT3 activation and proliferation. Phosphorylation of the PTK6 substrates focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and breast cancer anti-estrogen resistance 1 (BCAR1; p130CAS) was decreased in Ptk6-/- mammary gland tumors. Reduced numbers of metastases were detected in the lungs of Ptk6-/- mice expressing activated ERBB2, compared with wild-type ERBB2 transgenic mice. PTK6 activation was detected at the edges of ERBB2-positive tumors. These data support roles for PTK6 in both ERBB2-induced mammary gland tumor initiation and metastasis, and identify STAT3, FAK, and BCAR1 as physiologically relevant PTK6 substrates in breast cancer. Including PTK6 inhibitors as part of a treatment regimen could have distinct benefits in ERBB2/HER2-positive breast cancers.
Protein tyrosine kinase 6 (PTK6) is an intracellular tyrosine kinase that is nuclear in epithelial cells of the normal prostate, but cytoplasmic in prostate tumors and in the PC3 prostate tumor cell line. The impact of altered PTK6 intracellular localization in prostate tumor cells has not been extensively explored. Knockdown of endogenous cytoplasmic PTK6 resulted in decreased PC3 cell proliferation and colony formation, suggesting that cytoplasmic PTK6 stimulates oncogenic pathways. In contrast, reintroduction of PTK6 into nuclei of PC3 cells had a negative effect on growth. Enhanced tyrosine phosphorylation of the PTK6 substrate Sam68 was detected in cells expressing nuclear-targeted PTK6. We found that mechanisms regulating nuclear localization of PTK6 are intact in PC3 cells. Transiently overexpressed PTK6 readily enters the nucleus. Ectopic expression of ALT-PTK6, a catalytically inactive splice variant of PTK6, did not affect localization of endogenous PTK6 in PC3 cells. Using leptomycin B, we confirmed that cytoplasmic localization of endogenous PTK6 is not due to Crm-1/exportin-1 mediated nuclear export. In addition, overexpression of the PTK6 nuclear substrate Sam68 is not sufficient to bring PTK6 into the nucleus. While exogenous PTK6 was readily detected in the nucleus when transiently expressed at high levels, low-level expression of inducible wild type PTK6 in stable cell lines resulted in its cytoplasmic retention. Our results suggest that retention of PTK6 in the cytoplasm of prostate cancer cells disrupts its ability to regulate nuclear substrates and leads to aberrant growth. In prostate cancer, restoring PTK6 nuclear localization may have therapeutic advantages.
