Tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type 12; Dephosphorylates a range of proteins, and thereby regulates cellular signaling cascades. Dephosphorylates cellular tyrosine kinases, such as ERBB2 and PTK2B/PYK2, and thereby regulates signaling via ERBB2 and PTK2B/PYK2. Selectively dephosphorylates ERBB2 phosphorylated at 'Tyr-1112', 'Tyr-1196', and/or 'Tyr-1248'.
In this study, we report the experience of the only reference clinical next-generation sequencing lab in Saudi Arabia with the first 1000 families who span a wide-range of suspected Mendelian phenotypes. A total of 1019 tests were performed in the period of March 2016-December 2016 comprising 972 solo (index only), 14 duo (parents or affected siblings only), and 33 trio (index and parents). Multigene panels accounted for 672 tests, while whole exome sequencing (WES) represented the remaining 347 tests. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants that explain the clinical indications were identified in 34% (27% in panels and 43% in exomes), spanning 279 genes and including 165 novel variants. While recessive mutations dominated the landscape of solved cases (71% of mutations, and 97% of which are homozygous), a substantial minority (27%) were solved on the basis of dominant mutations. The highly consanguineous nature of the study population also facilitated homozygosity for many private mutations (only 32.5% of the recessive mutations are founder), as well as the first instances of recessive inheritance of previously assumed strictly dominant disorders (involving ITPR1, VAMP1, MCTP2, and TBP). Surprisingly, however, dual molecular diagnosis was only observed in 1.5% of cases. Finally, we have encountered candidate variants in 75 genes (ABHD6, ACY3, ADGRB2, ADGRG7, AGTPBP1, AHNAK2, AKAP6, ASB3, ATXN1L, C17orf62, CABP1, CCDC186, CCP110, CLSTN2, CNTN3, CNTN5, CTNNA2, CWC22, DMAP1, DMKN, DMXL1, DSCAM, DVL2, ECI1, EP400, EPB41L5, FBXL22, GAP43, GEMIN7, GIT1, GRIK4, GRSF1, GTRP1, HID1, IFNL1, KCNC4, LRRC52, MAP7D3, MCTP2, MED26, MPP7, MRPS35, MTDH, MTMR9, NECAP2, NPAT, NRAP, PAX7, PCNX, PLCH2, PLEKHF1, PTPN12, QKI, RILPL2, RIMKLA, RIMS2, RNF213, ROBO1, SEC16A, SIAH1, SIRT2, SLAIN2, SLC22A20, SMDT1, SRRT, SSTR1, ST20, SYT9, TSPAN6, UBR4, VAMP4, VPS36, WDR59, WDYHV1, and WHSC1) not previously linked to human phenotypes and these are presented to accelerate post-publication matchmaking. Two of these genes were independently mutated in more than one family with similar phenotypes, which substantiates their link to human disease (AKAP6 in intellectual disability and UBR4 in early dementia). If the novel candidate disease genes in this cohort are independently confirmed, the yield of WES will have increased to 83%, which suggests that most "negative" clinical exome tests are unsolved due to interpretation rather than technical limitations.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review provides a detailed update regarding the genetics, pathogenesis, disease phenotype evaluation, therapies and expected outcomes for children with enthesitis-related arthritis (ERA). RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies evaluated human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27 subtypes and non-major histocompatibility complex genes including toll like receptor 4, NLRP3, CXCR4 and PTPN12 in children with ERA. The microbiome and gammadelta-T cells have also been an area of active investigation. Several studies focus on the imaging phenotype of children with ERA, including the use of ultrasonography and MRI. MRI techniques studied in this population include dedicated MRI, whole-body MRI and diffusion-weighted imaging. Conventional and biologic disease-modifying agents continue to be the mainstay of therapy, though the past 2 years have witnessed several greatly needed randomized controlled trials to study the efficacy of these medications in ERA. Finally, long-term effectiveness studies of biologics in children with ERA have helped inform provider and patient expectations of disease response and prognosis. SUMMARY: Further evaluation of the role of the microbiome and the interleukin 17/interleukin 23 axis, techniques to optimize evaluation of disease features, and efficacy and effectiveness of newer medications are greatly needed in this understudied population of children.
BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence indicates the pivotal involvement of circular RNAs (circRNAs) in cancer initiation and progression. Understanding the functions and underlying mechanisms of circRNAs in tumor development holds promise for uncovering novel diagnostic indicators and therapeutic targets. In this study, our focus was to elucidate the function and regulatory mechanism of hsa-circ-0003764 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). METHODS: A newly discovered hsa-circ-0003764 (circPTPN12) was identified from the circbase database. QRT-PCR analysis was utilized to assess the expression levels of hsa-circ-0003764 in both HCC tissues and cells. We conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments to examine the impact of circPTPN12 on the proliferation and apoptosis of HCC cells. Additionally, RNA-sequencing, RNA immunoprecipitation, biotin-coupled probe pull-down assays, and FISH were employed to confirm and establish the relationship between hsa-circ-0003764, PDLIM2, OTUD6B, P65, and ESRP1. RESULTS: In HCC, the downregulation of circPTPN12 was associated with an unfavorable prognosis. CircPTPN12 exhibited suppressive effects on the proliferation of HCC cells both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, RNA sequencing assays unveiled the NF-kappaB signaling pathway as a targeted pathway of circPTPN12. Functionally, circPTPN12 was found to interact with the PDZ domain of PDLIM2, facilitating the ubiquitination of P65. Furthermore, circPTPN12 bolstered the assembly of the PDLIM2/OTUD6B complex by promoting the deubiquitination of PDLIM2. ESRP1 was identified to bind to pre-PTPN12, thereby fostering the generation of circPTPN12. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our findings indicate the involvement of circPTPN12 in modulating PDLIM2 function, influencing HCC progression. The identified ESRP1/circPTPN12/PDLIM2/NF-kappaB axis shows promise as a novel therapeutic target in the context of HCC.
BACKGROUND: The global morbidity of cancer is rising rapidly. Despite advances in molecular biology, immunology, and cytotoxic and immune-anticancer therapies, cancer remains a major cause of death worldwide. Protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 12 (PTPN12) is a new member of the cytoplasmic protein tyrosine phosphatase family, isolated from a cDNA library of adult colon tissue. Thus far, no studies have reviewed the correlation between PTPN12 gene expression and human tumors. METHODS: This article summarizes the latest domestic and international research developments on how the expression of PTPN12 relates to human tumors. The extensive search in Web of Science and PubMed with the keywords including PTPN12, tumor, renal cell carcinoma, proto-oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes was undertaken. RESULTS: More and more studies have shown that a tumor is essentially a genetic disease, arising from a broken antagonistic function between proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. When their antagonistic effect is out of balance, it may cause uncontrolled growth of cells and lead to the occurrence of tumors. PTPN12 is a tumor suppressor gene, so inhibiting its activity will lead directly or indirectly to the occurrence of tumors. CONCLUSION: The etiology, prevention, and treatment of tumors have become the focus of research around the world. PTPN12 is a tumor suppressor gene. In the future, PTPN12 might serve as a novel molecular marker to benefit patients, and even the development of tumor suppressor gene activation agents can form a practical research direction.
Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), which are ubiquitously expressed in hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic cells, are critical for regulating cell proliferation as well as differentiation in the physiology of multicellular organisms. PTPs regulate the intracellular signaling mechanism of immune cells via dephosphorylation of multiple targets and are associated with the onset of various autoimmune diseases through genomic alterations. PTPs also affect disease through their role in innate and/or acquired immunity. By modulating multiple substrates, PTPN12, a member of the proline-, glutamic acid-, serine- and threonine-rich (PEST) family of PTPs, is an important regulator of cell migration and adhesion. According to its newly identified roles and functions, PTPN12 is considered a promising therapeutic target against critical diseases, including cancer, diabetes, metabolic disease and autoimmune diseases. In this review, we provide an overview of PTPs and discuss the critical roles of PTPN12/PTP-PEST in tumor progression.
PTPN12 is an important tumor suppressor that plays critical roles in various physiological processes. However, the molecular basis underlying the substrate specificity of PTPN12 remains uncertain. Here, enzymological and crystallographic studies have enabled us to identify two distinct structural features that are crucial determinants of PTPN12 substrate specificity: the pY+1 site binding pocket and specific basic charged residues along its surface loops. Key structurally plastic regions and specific residues in PTPN12 enabled recognition of different HER2 phosphorylation sites and regulated specific PTPN12 functions. In addition, the structure of PTPN12 revealed a CDK2 phosphorylation site in a specific PTPN12 loop. Taken together, our results not only provide the working mechanisms of PTPN12 for desphosphorylation of its substrates but will also help in designing specific inhibitors of PTPN12.
BACKGROUND: Protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor 12 (PTPN12) plays a prominent role in various cancers as a tumor suppressor. However, the expression of PTPN12 and its biological functions in osteosarcoma (OS) remains to be determined. METHODS: PTPN12 expression in OS was explored in public databases and detected by immunohistochemistry and Western blot. The cell viability was determined by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay and colony formation. The cell migration and invasion were assessed by the Transwell assay. Flow cytometry analysis was applied to detect cell apoptosis and cell cycle distribution. To investigate the related mechanism, the levels of EGFR and downstream proteins were detected by Western blot. RESULTS: PTPN12 expression was significantly decreased in OS samples in GEO database and our hospital. OS cell lines in Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database and our cultured OS cells also demonstrated low PTPN12 expression. Lentivirus-induced overexpression of PTPN12 significantly inhibited the cell viability, migration and invasion of 143B and U2OS cells. The results of flow cytometry found that PTPN12 overexpression promoted cell apoptosis and induced cell cycle arrest at G1 phase in 143B and U2OS cells. The phosphorylation levels of EGFR and subsequent proteins of the PI3K/AKT and ERK pathways were inactivated as a result of PTPN12 overexpression in OS. CONCLUSION: PTPN12 plays a tumor suppressive role in OS cells. Restoring of PTPN12 activity may provide new insights for the treatment of this disease.
BACKGROUND: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is a common urological disease. Expression of the protein tyrosine phosphatase 12 gene (PTPN12) is decreased in many cancers; however, the relationship between PTPN12 gene function and renal cancer remains unclear. METHODS: We detected PTPN12 protein expression in ccRCC and corresponding normal tissues from 64 patients with ccRCC by immunohistochemistry, and relative PTPN12 mRNA levels by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The relationships between the relative expression levels of PTPN12 mRNA and the patients' clinical data were analyzed. RESULTS: PTPN12 protein and mRNA expression levels were significantly lower in ccRCC compared with the corresponding normal tissues. The mRNA expression levels in the ccRCC and corresponding normal tissues from the 64 patients with ccRCC were 0.459+/-0.445 and 1.001+/-0.128, respectively, compared with the control (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase). There was a significant correlation between relative expression of PTPN12 mRNA in ccRCC tissues and tumor diameter and clinical stage. CONCLUSION: The expression levels of PTPN12 protein and mRNA were significantly lower in ccRCC tissues compared with normal tissues. The role of PTPN12 may provide new insights and evidence to aid the diagnosis and targeted therapy of ccRCC.
Several tyrosine phosphatases control cell motility; understanding their signaling helps to decipher cancer mechanisms. Previously, we found that the negative regulation of migration exerted by PTPN12 in ovarian cancer SKOV-3 cells involves direct FAK Y397 targeting, in HER2-dependent way. In this study, we describe that PTPN12 silencing depresses also PTEN RNA and protein. This, in turn, contributes to regulate FAK, through the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway, resulting in GSK3 inactivation and decreased FAK phosphorylation at the inhibitory and GSK3 target S722. Altogether, in SKOV-3 cells, both PTPN12 and PTEN signaling merge on FAK which is negatively regulated through Y397 dephosphorylation (directly by PTPN12) and S722 phosphorylation (through PTEN/AKT/GSK3). Although HER2 activity sustains SKOV-3 cell motility, the HER2 inhibitor Ag825 impairs migration only in PTPN12 silenced cells, suggesting the ability of PTPN12 to affect HER2. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that, in migrating cells, Ag825 decreases HER2 phosphorylation at Y1248, Y1221/2, and Y877 (i.e., inactivates HER2) only after PTPN12 silencing. Conversely, cell exposure to the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 increases HER2 phosphorylation, suggesting the involvement of PI3K/AKT in HER2 regulation. Altogether, the results reveal a new PTEN mechanism in the control cell migration and suggest a complex cross-talk between PTPN12 and HER2.
Genome-wide approaches applied for the identification of new hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC) genes, identified several potential causal genes, including RPS20, IL12RB1, LIMK2, POLE2, MRE11, POT1, FAN1, WIF1, HNRNPA0, SEMA4A, FOCAD, PTPN12, LRP6, POLQ, BLM, MCM9, and the epigenetic inactivation of PTPRJ. Here we attempted to validate the association between variants in these genes and nonpolyposis CRC by performing a mutational screening of the genes and PTPRJ promoter methylation analysis in 473 familial/early-onset CRC cases, a systematic review of the published cases, and assessment of allele frequencies in control population. In the studied cohort, 24 (5%) carriers of (predicted) deleterious variants in the studied genes and no constitutional PTPRJ epimutations were identified. Assessment of allele frequencies in controls compared with familial/early-onset patients with CRC showed association with increased nonpolyposis CRC risk of disruptive variants in RPS20, IL12RB1, POLE2, MRE11 and POT1, and of FAN1 c.149T>G (p.Met50Arg). Lack of association was demonstrated for LIMK2, PTPN12, LRP6, PTPRJ, POLQ, BLM, MCM9 and FOCAD variants. Additional studies are required to provide conclusive evidence for SEMA4A, WIF1, HNRNPA0 c.-110G>C, and FOCAD large deletions.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal disease caused by mutations in the DMD gene that encodes dystrophin. Dystrophin deficiency also impacts muscle stem cells (MuSCs), resulting in impaired asymmetric stem cell division and myogenic commitment. Using MuSCs from DMD patients and the DMD mouse model mdx, we found that PTPN1 phosphatase expression is up-regulated and STAT3 phosphorylation is concomitantly down-regulated in DMD MuSCs. To restore STAT3-mediated myogenic signaling, we examined the effect of K884, a novel PTPN1/2 inhibitor, on DMD MuSCs. Treatment with K884 enhanced STAT3 phosphorylation and promoted myogenic differentiation of DMD patient-derived MuSCs. In MuSCs from mdx mice, K884 treatment increased the number of asymmetric cell divisions, correlating with enhanced myogenic differentiation. Interestingly, the pro-myogenic effect of K884 is specific to human and murine DMD MuSCs and is absent from control MuSCs. Moreover, PTPN1/2 loss-of-function experiments indicate that the pro-myogenic impact of K884 is mediated mainly through PTPN1. We propose that PTPN1/2 inhibition may serve as a therapeutic strategy to restore the myogenic function of MuSCs in DMD.
OBJECTIVE: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) shows the leading morbidity in otorhinolaryngological malignant tumor. It is a common malignancy in China with obvious reginal distribution. NPC is a polygenic disease that is affected by numerous factors. Protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 12 (PTPN12) regulates multiple tumor proliferation and development, including breast cancer and colon cancer. However, the role of PTPN12 in NPC occurrence and development has not been elucidated. PATIENTS AND METHODS: NPC cell line CNE2 was cultured in vitro and divided into three groups, including control, empty plasmid, and PTPN12 groups. PTPN12 mRNA and protein expressions were tested by real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. CNE2 cell proliferation was detected by MTT assay. Cell migration was determined by wound healing assay. Cell apoptosis was evaluated by caspase 3 activity detection. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression was assessed by Western blot. RESULTS: PTPN12 plasmid transfection increased PTPN12 mRNA and protein expressions, suppressed cell proliferation and migration, reduced EGFR level, and enhanced caspase 3 activity compared with control and empty plasmid groups (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: PTPN12 regulates NPC proliferation and migration through negative regulating EGFR. It could be treated as a molecular target for NPC diagnosis and prognosis analysis.
Proline-serine-threonine-phosphatase-interacting protein 2 (PSTPIP2) belongs to the Fes/CIP4 homology-Bin/Amphiphysin/Rvs (F-BAR) domain family. It exhibits lipid-binding, membrane deformation, and F-actin binding activity, suggesting broader roles at the membrane-cytoskeleton interface. PSTPIP2 is known to participate in macrophage activation, neutrophil migration, cytokine production, and osteoclast differentiation. In recent years, it has been observed to play important roles in innate immune diseases and autoinflammatory diseases (AIDs). Current research indicates that the protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP-PEST, Src homology domain-containing inositol 5'-phosphatase 1 (SHIP1), and C-terminal Src kinase (CSK) can bind to PSTPIP2 and inhibit the development of AIDs. However, the mechanisms underlying the function of PSTPIP2 have not been fully elucidated. This article reviews the research progress and mechanisms of PSTPIP2 in AIDs. PSTPIP2 also provides a new therapeutic target for the treatment of AIDs.
BACKGROUND: Previous evidence has suggested that circular RNA (circRNA) is abnormally expressed in osteoarthritis (OA). However, the underlying mechanism of circRNA in OA progression remains unclear. The study aims to reveal the mechanism of circ_0128846 regulating OA. METHODS: Human chondrocytes (C28/I2 cells) were treated with interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) to mimic an OA cell model. The expression levels of circ_0128846, miR-940 and protein tyrosine phosphatase 12 (PTPN12) were detected by qRT-PCR. Protein expression was checked by Western blotting. Cell viability, proliferation, and apoptosis were analyzed by a cell counting kit-8 assay, 5-Ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) assay and flow cytometry analysis, respectively. The production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and IL-6 was determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The binding relationship between miR-940 and circ_0128846 or PTPN12 was identified by dual-luciferase reporter assay and RNA immunoprecipitation assay. RESULTS: Circ_0128846 and PTPN12 expression were significantly upregulated, whereas miR-940 was downregulated in the cartilage tissues of OA patients and IL-1beta-treated C28/I2 cells compared with controls. IL-1beta treatment inhibited C28/I2 cell proliferation and induced cell apoptosis and the production of inflammatory factors, TNF-alpha and IL-6; however, these effects were partly reversed after circ_0128846 depletion. In terms of mechanism, circ_0128846 acted as a miR-940 sponge, and miR-940 combined with PTPN12. Also, circ_0128846 depletion partly ameliorated IL-1beta-induced C28/I2 cell disorders through miR-940. PTPN12 overexpression also partly relieved miR-940-mediated effects in IL-1beta-treated C28/I2 cells. Further, circ_0128846 induced PTPN12 expression by interacting with miR-940. CONCLUSION: Circ_0128846 regulated human chondrocyte proliferation, apoptosis and inflammation through the miR-940/PTPN12 pathway in OA.
Advances in mass-spectrometry have generated increasingly large-scale proteomics datasets containing tens of thousands of phosphorylation sites (phosphosites) that require prioritization. We develop a bioinformatics tool called HotPho and systematically discover 3D co-clustering of phosphosites and cancer mutations on protein structures. HotPho identifies 474 such hybrid clusters containing 1255 co-clustering phosphosites, including RET p.S904/Y928, the conserved HRAS/KRAS p.Y96, and IDH1 p.Y139/IDH2 p.Y179 that are adjacent to recurrent mutations on protein structures not found by linear proximity approaches. Hybrid clusters, enriched in histone and kinase domains, frequently include expression-associated mutations experimentally shown as activating and conferring genetic dependency. Approximately 300 co-clustering phosphosites are verified in patient samples of 5 cancer types or previously implicated in cancer, including CTNNB1 p.S29/Y30, EGFR p.S720, MAPK1 p.S142, and PTPN12 p.S275. In summary, systematic 3D clustering analysis highlights nearly 3,000 likely functional mutations and over 1000 cancer phosphosites for downstream investigation and evaluation of potential clinical relevance.
Multicellular organisms have evolved processes to prevent abnormal proliferation or inappropriate tissue infiltration of cells, and these tumor suppressive mechanisms serve to prevent tissue hyperplasia, tumor development, and metastatic spread of tumors. These include potentially reversible processes such as cell cycle arrest and cellular senescence, as well as apoptotic cell death, which in contrast eliminates dangerous cells that may initiate tumor development. Tumor suppressive processes are organized as complex, extensive signaling networks, controlled by central "nodes." These "nodes" are prominent tumor suppressors, such as P53 or PTEN, whose loss is responsible for the development of the majority of human cancers. In this review we discuss the processes by which some of these prominent tumor suppressors trigger apoptotic cell death and how this process protects us from cancer development.
In many cancers, a stem-like cell subpopulation mediates tumor initiation, dissemination and drug resistance. Here, we report that cancer stem cell (CSC) abundance is transcriptionally regulated by C-terminally phosphorylated p27 (p27pT157pT198). Mechanistically, this arises through p27 co-recruitment with STAT3/CBP to gene regulators of CSC self-renewal including MYC, the Notch ligand JAG1, and ANGPTL4. p27pTpT/STAT3 also recruits a SIN3A/HDAC1 complex to co-repress the Pyk2 inhibitor, PTPN12. Pyk2, in turn, activates STAT3, creating a feed-forward loop increasing stem-like properties in vitro and tumor-initiating stem cells in vivo. The p27-activated gene profile is over-represented in STAT3 activated human breast cancers. Furthermore, mammary transgenic expression of phosphomimetic, cyclin-CDK-binding defective p27 (p27CK-DD) increases mammary duct branching morphogenesis, yielding hyperplasia and microinvasive cancers that can metastasize to liver, further supporting a role for p27pTpT in CSC expansion. Thus, p27pTpT interacts with STAT3, driving transcriptional programs governing stem cell expansion or maintenance in normal and cancer tissues.
AIMS: The present study showed that the expression of PTPN12 is epigenetically regulated. 5-Azacytidine (5-Azac), a DNA hypomethylating agent, significantly increased the expression of PTPN12 at low concentrations (1muM and 2.5muM) and decreased the expression of PTPN12 at 5muM in the MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 triple-negative breast cancer cell lines. MAIN METHODS: Human MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 cells were exposed to different concentrations of 5-Azac for 24 and 48h. RT-PCR was performed to determine the mRNA expression of PTPN12, E-cadherin and miRNA-124. Western blotting was performed to assess the protein expression of various proteins, including PTPN12, E-cadherin, DNMT and PARP. KEY FINDINGS: 5-Azac, a DNA hypomethylating agent, significantly increased the expression of PTPN12 at low concentrations (1muM and 2.5muM) and decreased PTPN12 expression at 5muM. We provide the first evidence that PTPN12 expression is epigenetically regulated and that it is up-regulated at a lower dose of a DNMT1 inhibitor in MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 cells. Interestingly, the levels of miRNA-124 were increased only at 5muM, the concentration at which PTPN12 expression was suppressed. SIGNIFICANCE: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report that highlights the therapeutic potential of low-dose 5-Azac for the treatment of TNBC. Therefore, 5-Azac, an agent that has already been tested in acute myeloid leukemia, may be more effective at lower doses for the treatment of triple-negative breast cancer.
Protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 12 (PTPN12) has been recognized as a tumor suppressor gene that may inhibit tumor growth. However, PTPN12 expression in oral squamous carcinoma (OSCC) has not been studied. We showed reduced expression of PTPN12 in OSCC tissues. Decreased PTPN12 expression was significantly associated with clinical stage of the disease (P < 0.01). Moreover, reduction in PTPN12 correlated with the overactivation of STAT3. PTPRD negatively related to STAT3 phosphorylation (R = -0.535). Low expression of PTPN12 and high level of phosphorylation of STAT3 correlated with poor prognosis. Overexpression of PTPN12 inhibited proliferation and migration in OSCC cells. PTPN12 was associated with STAT3 and induced STAT3 dephosphorylation. Moreover, our results suggested that PTPN12 might function through binding and dephosphorylation of STAT3. Therefore, PTPN12 is a potential marker for prognosis of OSCC.
