Peroxidasin-like protein; [Isoform PMR1]: Endonuclease selectively degrading some target mRNAs while they are engaged by translating ribosomes, among which albumin and beta-globin mRNAs.
Therapeutic failure in breast cancer patients is largely attributed to postoperative advancement and therapy resistance. Nevertheless, an efficacious prognostic signature for recognizing this population is lacking. The basement membrane (BM) has been proven to be strongly involved in cancer progression and metastasis, and has the potential to be a powerful predictor in breast cancer. In this study, substantial bulk RNA transcriptomics, single cell RNA transcriptomics and clinical information were collected from TCGA-BRCA, METABRIC and GSE96058, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves, single cell analysis and in vitro experiments were conducted to validate the signature. From the results, a prognostic index, namely, the BMscore, was established with six pivotal BM genes, specifically LOXL1, FBLN1, FBLN5, SDC1, ADAMTS8 and PXDNL. Verification by independent cohorts showed that breast cancer patients with high BMscore had a distinctly worse outcome. By integrating the BMscore and clinical factors, we constructed a prognostic nomogram that displayed good predictive capability. Furthermore, we evaluated the implication of the BMscore in breast cancer immune infiltration. More importantly, a strongly positive correlation between the BMscore and EMT activity was revealed with immunohistochemistry and in vitro experiments. Taken together, we provided a novel BMscore gene signature for breast cancer patients to predict clinical prognosis and metastasis accurately, which may help with individualized clinical decision-making.
BACKGROUND: Gastroparesis (GP) is characterized by delayed gastric emptying in the absence of mechanical obstruction. OBJECTIVE: Genetic predisposition may play a role; however, investigation at the genome-wide level has not been performed. METHODS: We carried out a genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis on (i) 478 GP patients from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Gastroparesis Clinical Research Consortium (GpCRC) compared to 9931 population-based controls from the University of Michigan Health and Retirement Study; and (ii) 402 GP cases compared to 48,340 non-gastroparesis controls from the Michigan Genomics Initiative. Associations for 5,811,784 high-quality SNPs were tested on a total of 880 GP patients and 58,271 controls, using logistic mixed models adjusted for age, sex, and principal components. Gene mapping was obtained based on genomic position and expression quantitative trait loci, and a gene-set network enrichment analysis was performed. Genetic associations with clinical data were tested in GpCRC patients. Protein expression of selected candidate genes was determined in full thickness gastric biopsies from GpCRC patients and controls. RESULTS: While no SNP associations were detected at strict significance (p </= 5 x 10(-8) ), nine independent genomic loci were associated at suggestive significance (p </= 1 x 10(-5) ), with the strongest signal (rs9273363, odds ratio = 1.4, p = 1 x 10(-7) ) mapped to the human leukocyte antigen region. Computational annotation of suggestive risk loci identified 14 protein-coding candidate genes. Gene-set network enrichment analysis revealed pathways potentially involved in immune and motor dysregulation (p(FDR) </= 0.05). The GP risk allele rs6984536A (Peroxidasin-Like; PXDNL) was associated with increased abdominal pain severity scores (Beta = 0.13, p = 0.03). Gastric muscularis expression of PXDNL also positively correlated with abdominal pain in GP patients (r = 0.8, p = 0.02). Dickkopf WNT Signaling Pathway Inhibitor 1 showed decreased expression in diabetic GP patients (p = 0.005 vs. controls). CONCLUSION: We report preliminary GWAS findings for GP, which highlight candidate genes and pathways related to immune and sensory-motor dysregulation. Larger studies are needed to validate and expand these findings in independent datasets.
Aberrant left-right patterning in the developing human embryo can lead to a broad spectrum of congenital malformations. The causes of most laterality defects are not known, with variants in established genes accounting for <20% of cases. We sought to characterize the genetic spectrum of these conditions by performing whole-exome sequencing of 323 unrelated laterality cases. We investigated the role of rare, predicted-damaging variation in 1726 putative laterality candidate genes derived from model organisms, pathway analyses, and human phenotypes. We also evaluated the contribution of homo/hemizygous exon deletions and gene-based burden of rare variation. A total of 28 candidate variants (26 rare predicted-damaging variants and 2 hemizygous deletions) were identified, including variants in genes known to cause heterotaxy and primary ciliary dyskinesia (ACVR2B, NODAL, ZIC3, DNAI1, DNAH5, HYDIN, MMP21), and genes without a human phenotype association, but with prior evidence for a role in embryonic laterality or cardiac development. Sanger validation of the latter variants in probands and their parents revealed no de novo variants, but apparent transmitted heterozygous (ROCK2, ISL1, SMAD2), and hemizygous (RAI2, RIPPLY1) variant patterns. Collectively, these variants account for 7.1% of our study subjects. We also observe evidence for an excess burden of rare, predicted loss-of-function variation in PXDNL and BMS1- two genes relevant to the broader laterality phenotype. These findings highlight potential new genes in the development of laterality defects, and suggest extensive locus heterogeneity and complex genetic models in this class of birth defects.
PurposeGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been instrumental to our understanding of the genetic risk determinants of complex traits. A common challenge in GWAS is the interpretation of signals, which are usually attributed to the genes closest to the polymorphic markers that display the strongest statistical association. Naturally occurring complete loss of function (knockout) of these genes in humans can inform GWAS interpretation by unmasking their deficiency state in a clinical context.MethodsWe exploited the unique population structure of Saudi Arabia to identify novel knockout events in genes previously highlighted in GWAS using combined autozygome/exome analysis.ResultsWe report five families with homozygous truncating mutations in genes that had only been linked to human disease through GWAS. The phenotypes observed in the natural knockouts for these genes (TRAF3IP2, FRMD3, RSRC1, BTBD9, and PXDNL) range from consistent with, to unrelated to, the previously reported GWAS phenotype.ConclusionWe expand the role of human knockouts in the medical annotation of the human genome, and show their potential value in informing the interpretation of GWAS of complex traits.
AIMS: Peroxidases serve diverse biological functions including well-characterized activities in host defence and hormone biosynthesis. More recently, peroxidasin (PXDN) was found to be involved in collagen IV cross-linking in the extracellular matrix (ECM). The aim of this study was to characterize the expression and function of peroxidasin-like protein (PXDNL), a previously unknown peroxidase homologue. METHODS AND RESULTS: We cloned the PXDNL cDNA from the human heart and identified its expression pattern by northern blot, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. PXDNL is expressed exclusively in the heart and it has evolved to lose its peroxidase activity. The protein is produced by cardiomyocytes and localizes to cell-cell junctions. We also demonstrate that PXDNL can form a complex with PXDN and antagonizes its peroxidase activity. Furthermore, we show an increased expression of PXDNL in the failing myocardium. CONCLUSION: PXDNL is a unique component of the heart with a recently evolved inactivation of peroxidase function. The elevation of PXDNL levels in the failing heart may contribute to ECM dysregulation due to its antagonism of PXDN function.
Breast cancer is a frequent female malignant tumor with high mortality and poor prognosis. Peroxidasin like (PXDNL) has many biological functions, including characteristic activity of hormone biosynthesis, host defense, and cell motility. In addition, PXDNL is closely connected with the progression of breast cancer. In this study, we found that PXDNL may be an independent prognostic biomarker of breast cancer.We tested the mRNA expression of PXDNL in breast cancer by detecting The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. The chi-squared test was used to evaluate clinical correlation. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were drawn to evaluate diagnosis potential in breast cancer. Subsequently, survival analyses were performed to identify the relevance between the expression of PXDNL and the overall survival/relapse-free survival of patients with breast cancer. Univariate/multivariate Cox regression model was executed to detect risk factors affecting the prognosis of patients with breast cancer.PXDNL is highly expressed in breast cancer tissues and is related to survival status of patients. The ROC curve showed that PXDNL had beneficial diagnostic ability in breast cancer. Survival analysis indicated that patients with breast cancer with high PXDNL expression generally had decreased overall survival/relapse-free survival. Univariate/multivariate Cox model analyses further suggested an association between PXDNL expression and prognosis of patients with breast cancer.High PXDNL expression is a potential and independent prognostic biomarker in breast cancer.
AIMS: Although aberrant expression of peroxidasin-like (PXDNL) has been associated with carcinogenesis, its potential role in the Urothelial Carcinoma of the Bladder (UCB) remains unknown. The present study aimed to explore the role of PXDNL in UCB carcinogenesis and its potential clinical value. MAIN METHODS: Based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data, bioinformatics was used to explore the potential clinical value of PXDNL. Wound healing and Transwell invasion assays were employed for the purpose of assessing the cell motility, while the Western Blotting experiments were utilized for investigating the protein expression pattern of PXDNL in UCB and investigating the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) and Wnt/beta-catenin pathways for understanding the probable mechanisms involved. KEY FINDS: PXDNL mRNA was overexpressed in UCB tissues and indicated a poor prognosis. High PXDNL mRNA levels were also associated with advanced clinicopathological features and were regarded as independent prognostic factors for UCB. However, PXDNL showed a weak correlation with immune cell infiltration in UCB. In addition, the findings of the study verified that the existing form of the PXDNL protein was 57-kDa and it was upregulated in the UCB cell lines and tissue samples. Furthermore, silencing PXDNL inhibited, while overexpressing PXDNL promoted EMT and motility of UCB cells in vitro. Mechanistic studies showed that PXDNL activated UCB cell motility via the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. SIGNIFICANCE: The results reveal a novel molecular target that could be further explored for developing preventive, predictive, and individualized treatment strategies for UCB.
INTRODUCTION: Ovarian Cancer (OC) is a heterogeneous malignancy with poor outcomes. Oxidative stress plays a crucial role in developing drug resistance. However, the relationships between Oxidative Stress-related Genes (OSRGs) and the prognosis of platinum-resistant OC remain unclear. This study aimed to develop an OSRGs-based prognostic risk model for platinum- resistant OC patients. METHODS: Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed to determine the expression difference of OSRGs between platinum-resistant and -sensitive OC patients. Cox regression analyses were used to identify the prognostic OSRGs and establish a risk score model. The model was validated by using an external dataset. Machine learning was used to determine the prognostic OSRGs associated with platinum resistance. Finally, the biological functions of selected OSRG were determined via in vitro cellular experiments. RESULTS: Three gene sets associated with oxidative stress-related pathways were enriched (p < 0.05), and 105 OSRGs were found to be differentially expressed between platinum-resistant and - sensitive OC (p < 0.05). Twenty prognosis-associated OSRGs were identified (HR: 0:562-5.437; 95% CI: 0.319-20.148; p < 0.005), and seven independent OSRGs were used to construct a prognostic risk score model, which accurately predicted the survival of OC patients (1-, 3-, and 5-year AUC=0.69, 0.75, and 0.67, respectively). The prognostic potential of this model was confirmed in the validation cohort. Machine learning showed five prognostic OSRGs (SPHK1, PXDNL, C1QA, WRN, and SETX) to be strongly correlated with platinum resistance in OC patients. Cellular experiments showed that WRN significantly promoted the malignancy and platinum resistance of OC cells. CONCLUSION: The OSRGs-based risk score model can efficiently predict the prognosis and platinum resistance of OC patients. This model may improve the risk stratification of OC patients in the clinic.
The PMR1 endonuclease was discovered in Xenopus liver and identified as a member of the large and diverse peroxidase gene family. The peroxidase genes arose from multiple duplication and rearrangement events, and their high degree of sequence similarity confounded attempts to identify human PMR1. The functioning of PMR1 in mRNA decay depends on the phosphorylation of a tyrosine in the C-terminal polysome targeting domain by c-Src. The sequences of regions that are required for c-Src binding and phosphorylation of Xenopus PMR1 were used to inform a bioinformatics search that identified two related genes as potential candidates for human PMR1: peroxidasin homolog (PXDN) and peroxidasin homolog-like (PXDNL) protein. Although each of these genes is predicted to encode a large, multidomain membrane-bound peroxidase, alternative splicing of PXDNL pre-mRNA yields a transcript whose predicted product is a 57-kDa protein with 42% sequence identity to Xenopus PMR1. Results presented here confirm the existence of the predicted 57-kDa protein, show this is the only form of PXDNL detected in any of the human cell lines examined, and confirm its identity as human PMR1. Like the Xenopus protein, human PMR1 binds to c-Src, is tyrosine phosphorylated, sediments on polysomes, and catalyzes the selective decay of a PMR1 substrate mRNA. Importantly, the expression of human PMR1 stimulates cell motility in a manner similar to that of the Xenopus PMR1 expressed in human cells, thus providing definitive evidence linking endonuclease decay to the regulation of cell motility.
OBJECTIVE: To identify plasma uric acid-related genes in extremely obese and normal weight individuals using genome-wide association studies (GWASs). DESIGN AND METHODS: Using genotypes from a GWAS focusing on obesity and thinness, quantitative trait association analyses (PLINK) for plasma uric acid levels in 1,060 extremely obese individuals (BMI > 35 kg/m2) and normal-weight controls (BMI < 25 kg/m2) were performed. In 961 samples with uric acid data, 924 were females. RESULTS: Significant associations were found in SLC2A9 gene SNPs and plasma uric acid levels (rs6449213, P = 3.15 x 10(-12) ). DIP2C gene SNP rs877282 also reached genome-wide significance (P = 4.56 x 10(-8)). Weaker associations (P < 1x 10(-5)) were found in F5, PXDNL, FRAS1, LCORL, and MICAL2 genes. Besides SLC2A9, three previously identified uric acid-related genes ABCG2 (rs2622605, P= 0.0026), SLC17A1 (rs3799344, P = 0.0017), and RREB1 (rs1615495, P = 0.00055) received marginal support in our study. CONCLUSIONS: Two genes/chromosome regions reached genome-wide association significance (P < 1 x 10(-7) , 550 K SNPs) in our GWAS: SLC2A9, the chromosome 2 60.1 Mb region (rs6723995), and the DIP2C gene region. Five other genes (F5, PXDNL, FRAS1, LCORL, and MICAL2) yielded P < 1 x 10(-5) . Four previous reported associations were replicated in our study, including SLC2A9, ABCG2, RREB, and SLC17A1.
Myoepithelial neoplasms of the skin and soft tissue still represent a confusing and somewhat controversial field in pathology as it appears that this category includes several different entities. However, recent studies have suggested that both apocrine mixed tumors (AMT) and cutaneous myoepitheliomas (CM) harbor identical chromosomal rearrangements involving the PLAG1 gene and hence may represent a morphological spectrum. The aim of the present study was to share our institutional experience with these tumors and specifically focus on studying their immunohistochemical and molecular features to further assess their relatedness. Eleven cases of AMT and 7 cases of CM were collected and analyzed using immunohistochemistry (IHC), PLAG1 FISH, and Archer FusionPlex assay. There were 14 male and 4 female patients with ages ranging from 26 to 85 years (median 55.8 years, mean 58.5 years). AMTs were mainly located in the head and neck (n = 10), while CMs were mainly located in the acral sites (n = 5). PLAG1 IHC was diffusely strongly positive in 14/17 (82%) cases, whereas a single case of AMT diffusely expressed HMGA2. Both tumor groups showed PLAG1 gene fusions which were detected in 6/13 analyzable samples (AMT, n = 4 and CM, n = 2), and included TRPS1::PLAG1 (n = 3), NDRG1::PLAG1 (n = 1), CTNNB1::PLAG1 (n = 1) and a novel PXDNL::PLAG1 fusion (n = 1). The remaining 5 cases were negative, 5 were not analyzable and the single case positive for HMGA2 by IHC revealed a potential HMGA2 gene rearrangement. The cases were further studied by FISH, with 12/17 cases showing PLAG1 gene rearrangement (AMT, n = 8 and CM, n = 4). Altogether, 14/18 cases showed PLAG1 gene rearrangement by at least one of the methods. PLAG1 immunohistochemistry had a 92% specificity and sensitivity. Our study provided additional data to suggest that AMT and CM share overlapping morphological and immunohistochemical features as well as molecular background characterized by PLAG1 gene fusions and thus represent a morphological spectrum. In addition, we identified a novel PXDNL::PLAG1 fusion and suggested that rare cases may harbor HMGA2 gene alterations which seem to be mutually exclusive with PLAG1 gene fusions. The relatedness of these tumors to salivary gland myoepithelial neoplasms and distinctness from eccrine mixed tumors and other skin and soft tissue myoepithelial neoplasms with EWSR1/FUS fusions is discussed.
BACKGROUND: The use of somatic mutations for predicting clinical outcome is difficult because a mutation can indirectly influence the function of many genes, and also because clinical follow-up is sparse in the relatively young next generation sequencing (NGS) databanks. Here we approach this problem by linking sequence databanks to well annotated gene-chip datasets, using a multigene transcriptomic fingerprint as a link between gene mutations and gene expression in breast cancer patients. METHODS: The database consists of 763 NGS samples containing mutational status for 22,938 genes and RNA-seq data for 10,987 genes. The gene chip database contains 5,934 patients with 10,987 genes plus clinical characteristics. For the prediction, mutations present in a sample are first translated into a 'transcriptomic fingerprint' by running ROC analysis on mutation and RNA-seq data. Then correlation to survival is assessed by computing Cox regression for both up- and downregulated signatures. RESULTS: According to this approach, the top driver oncogenes having a mutation prevalence over 5 % included AKT1, TRANK1, TRAPPC10, RPGR, COL6A2, RAPGEF4, ATG2B, CNTRL, NAA38, OSBPL10, POTEF, SCLT1, SUN1, VWDE, MTUS2, and PIK3CA, and the top tumor suppressor genes included PHEX, TP53, GGA3, RGS22, PXDNL, ARFGEF1, BRCA2, CHD8, GCC2, and ARMC4. The system was validated by computing correlation between RNA-seq and microarray data (r(2) = 0.73, P < 1E-16). Cross-validation using 20 genes with a prevalence of approximately 5 % confirmed analysis reproducibility. CONCLUSIONS: We established a pipeline enabling rapid clinical validation of a discovered mutation in a large breast cancer cohort. An online interface is available for evaluating any human gene mutation or combinations of maximum three such genes ( http://www.g-2-o.com ).
Convergent evidence from genetics, symptomatology, and psychopharmacology implies that there are intrinsic connections between schizophrenia (SCZ), bipolar disorder (BPD), and major depressive disorder (MDD); for example, any two or even three of these disorders could co-exist in some families. A total of 48,753 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on chromosome 8 were genotyped by Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP array 6.0 on 119 SCZ, 253 BPD (type I), 177 MDD patients, and 1000 controls. Associated SNP loci were comprehensively revealed, and outstanding susceptibility genes were identified including CSMD1, NRG1, PXDNL, SGCZ, and TMEM66. Unexpectedly, flanking genes for up to 95.9 % of the associated SNPs were replicated (P </= 9.9E-8) in the enlarged cohort of 986 SCZ patients. Considering convergent evidence, our results implicate that bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder might be subtypes of schizophrenia.
