Pyroglutamylated RF-amide peptide receptor; Receptor for the orexigenic neuropeptide QRFP. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that modulate adenylate cyclase activity and intracellular calcium levels.
26RFa is a neuropeptide that activates the rhodopsin-like G protein-coupled receptor QRFPR/GPR103. This peptidergic system is involved in the regulation of a wide array of physiological processes including feeding behavior and glucose homeostasis. Herein, the pharmacological profile of a homogenous library of QRFPR-targeting peptide derivatives was investigated in vitro on human QRFPR-transfected cells with the aim to provide possible insights into the structural determinants of the Phe residues to govern receptor activation. Our work advocates to include in next generations of 26RFa((20-26))-based QRFPR agonists effective substitutions for each Phe unit, i.e., replacement of the Phe(22) residue by a constrained 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline-3-carboxylic acid moiety, and substitution of both Phe(24) and Phe(26) by their para-chloro counterpart. Taken as a whole, this study emphasizes that optimized modifications in the C-terminal part of 26RFa are mandatory to design selective and potent peptide agonists for human QRFPR.
Neuropeptides possessing the Arg-Phe-NH2 (RFamide) motif at their C-termini (designated as RFamide peptides) have been characterized in a variety of animals. Among these, neuropeptide 26RFa (also termed QRFP) is the latest member of the RFamide peptide family to be discovered in the hypothalamus of vertebrates. The neuropeptide 26RFa/QRFP is a 26-amino acid residue peptide that was originally identified in the frog brain. It has been shown to exert orexigenic activity in mammals and to be a ligand for the previously identified orphan G protein-coupled receptor, GPR103 (QRFPR). The cDNAs encoding 26RFa/QRFP and QRFPR have now been characterized in representative species of mammals, birds, and fish. Functional studies have shown that, in mammals, the 26RFa/QRFP-QRFPR system may regulate various functions, including food intake, energy homeostasis, bone formation, pituitary hormone secretion, steroidogenesis, nociceptive transmission, and blood pressure. Several biological actions have also been reported in birds and fish. This review summarizes the current state of identification, localization, and understanding of the functions of 26RFaQRFP and its cognate receptor, QRFPR, in vertebrates.
Intellectual disability (ID) is a measurable phenotypic consequence of genetic and environmental factors. In this study, we prospectively assessed the diagnostic yield of genomic tools (molecular karyotyping, multi-gene panel and exome sequencing) in a cohort of 337 ID subjects as a first-tier test and compared it with a standard clinical evaluation performed in parallel. Standard clinical evaluation suggested a diagnosis in 16% of cases (54/337) but only 70% of these (38/54) were subsequently confirmed. On the other hand, the genomic approach revealed a likely diagnosis in 58% (n=196). These included copy number variants in 14% (n=54, 15% are novel), and point mutations revealed by multi-gene panel and exome sequencing in the remaining 43% (1% were found to have Fragile-X). The identified point mutations were mostly recessive (n=117, 81%), consistent with the high consanguinity of the study cohort, but also X-linked (n=8, 6%) and de novo dominant (n=19, 13%). When applied directly on all cases with negative molecular karyotyping, the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing was 60% (77/129). Exome sequencing also identified likely pathogenic variants in three novel candidate genes (DENND5A, NEMF and DNHD1) each of which harbored independent homozygous mutations in patients with overlapping phenotypes. In addition, exome sequencing revealed de novo and recessive variants in 32 genes (MAMDC2, TUBAL3, CPNE6, KLHL24, USP2, PIP5K1A, UBE4A, TP53TG5, ATOH1, C16ORF90, SLC39A14, TRERF1, RGL1, CDH11, SYDE2, HIRA, FEZF2, PROCA1, PIANP, PLK2, QRFPR, AP3B2, NUDT2, UFC1, BTN3A2, TADA1, ARFGEF3, FAM160B1, ZMYM5, SLC45A1, ARHGAP33 and CAPS2), which we highlight as potential candidates on the basis of several lines of evidence, and one of these genes (SLC39A14) was biallelically inactivated in a potentially treatable form of hypermanganesemia and neurodegeneration. Finally, likely causal variants in previously published candidate genes were identified (ASTN1, HELZ, THOC6, WDR45B, ADRA2B and CLIP1), thus supporting their involvement in ID pathogenesis. Our results expand the morbid genome of ID and support the adoption of genomics as a first-tier test for individuals with ID.
OBJECTIVE: Preeclampsia is a common and serious heritable disorder of human pregnancy. Although there have been notable successes in identification of maternal susceptibility genes a large proportion of the heritability of preeclampsia remains unaccounted for. It is has been postulated that rare variation may account for some of this missing heritability. In this study, we performed whole-exome sequencing (WES) in multiplex families to identify rare exonic risk variants. METHODS: We conducted WES in 244 individuals from 34 Australian/New Zealand multiplex preeclampsia families. Variants were tested for association with preeclampsia using a threshold model and logistic regression. RESULTS: We found significant association for two moderately rare missense variants, rs145743393 (Padj = 0.0032, minor allele frequency = 0.016) in the chromosome 1 open reading frame 35 (C1orf35) gene, and rs34270076 (Padj = 0.0128, minor allele frequency = 0.024) in the pyroglutamylated RFamide peptide receptor (QRFPR) gene. To replicate these associations we performed imputation in our Australian genome wide association scan for preeclampsia and found no significant exonic variants in either C1orf35 or QRFPR. However, 11 variants demonstrating nominal significance (P < 0.05) in the genomic region between QRFPR and annexin A5 (ANXA5) were identified. We further leveraged publicly available genome-wide available summary data from the UK Biobank to investigate association of these two variants with the underlying clinical phenotypes of preeclampsia and detected nominal association of the QRFPR variant (rs34270076, P = 0.03) with protein levels in females. CONCLUSION: The study represents the first to use WES in multiplex families for preeclampsia and identifies two novel genes (QRFPR and C1orf35) not previously associated with preeclampsia and find nominal association of rs34270076 with protein levels, a key clinical feature of preeclampsia. We find further support for ANXA5 previously associated with pregnancy complications, including preeclampsia.
We performed an unbiased proteome-scale profiling of humoral autoimmunity in recent-onset type 1 diabetes (T1D) patients and nondiabetic controls against  approximately 10 000 human proteins using a Nucleic Acid Programmable Protein Array (NAPPA) platform, complemented by a knowledge-based selection of proteins from genes enriched in human pancreas. Although the global response was similar between cases and controls, we identified and then validated six specific novel T1D-associated autoantibodies (AAbs) with sensitivities that ranged from 16 to 27% at 95% specificity. These included AAbs against PTPRN2, MLH1, MTIF3, PPIL2, NUP50 (from NAPPA screening), and QRFPR (by targeted ELISA). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that NUP50 protein behaved differently in islet cells, where it stained both nucleus and cytoplasm, compared with only nuclear staining in exocrine pancreas. Conversely, PPIL2 staining was absent in islet cells, despite its presence in exocrine cells. The combination of anti-PTPRN2, -MLH1, -PPIL2, and -QRFPR had an AUC of 0.74 and 37.5% sensitivity at 95% specificity. These data indicate that these markers behave independently and support the use of unbiased screening to find biomarkers because the majority was not predicted based on predicted abundance. Our study enriches the knowledge of the "autoantibody-ome" in unprecedented breadth and width.
The newly identified pyroglutamylated RFamide peptide (QRFP) signaling system has been shown to be implicated in regulating a variety of physiological processes. G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are preferentially N-glycosylated on extracellular domains. The human QRFP receptor QRFPR (GPR103) possesses three N-glycosylation consensus sites, two located on the N-terminal domain (N5 and N19) and one on the first extracellular loop (ECL1) (N106); however, to date, their role in QRFPR expression and signaling has not been established. Here, we combined mutants with glutamine substitution of the critical asparagines of the consensus sites with glycosidase PNGase F and N-glycosylation inhibitor tunicamycin to study the effect of N-glycosylation in the regulation of QRFPR cell surface expression and signaling. Western blot analysis performed with site-directed mutagenesis revealed that two asparagines at N19 in the N-terminus and N106 in ECL1, but not N5 in the N-terminus, served as sites for N-glycosylation. Treatment with PNGase F and tunicamycin resulted in a reduction in both two-protein species, ~43 kDa and ~85 kDa in size, by 2-4 kDa. Analysis with confocal microscopy and quantitative ELISA showed that N-glycosylation of QRFPR is not essentially required for targeting the cell membrane. However, further binding assay and functional assays demonstrated that removal of N-glycosylation sequons or treatment with tunicamycin led to significant impairments in the interaction of receptor with QRFP26 and downstream signaling. Thus, our findings suggest that for the human QRFP receptor (QRFPR), N-glycosylation is not important for cell surface expression but is a pre-requisite for ligand binding and receptor activation.
BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence has suggested that obesity affects the occurrence and progression of osteoarthritis (OA). However, the underlying molecular mechanism that obesity affects the course of OA is not fully understood and remains to be studied. METHODS: The gene expression profiles of the GSE117999 and GSE98460 datasets were derived from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Firstly, we explored the correlation between obesity and OA using chi-square test. Next, weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) was executed to identify obesity patients with OA- (obesity OA-) related genes in the GSE117999 dataset by "WGCNA" package. Moreover, differential expression analysis was performed to select the hub genes by "limma" package. Furthermore, ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and functional enrichment analysis ("clusterProfiler" package) were conducted to investigate the functions of genes. Finally, the regulatory networks of hub genes and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network were created by the Cytoscape 3.5.1 software and STRING. RESULTS: A total of 15 differentially expressed obesity OA-related genes, including 9 lncRNAs and 6 protein coding genes, were detected by overlapping 66 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between normal BMI samples and obesity OA samples and 451 obesity OA-related genes. Moreover, CCR10, LENG8, QRFPR, UHRF1BP1, and HLA-DRB4 were identified as hub genes. IPA results indicated that the hub genes were noticeably enriched in antimicrobial response, inflammatory response, and humoral immune response. PPI network showed that CCR10 interacted more with other proteins. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) indicated that the hub genes were related to protein translation, cancer, chromatin modification, antigen processing, and presentation. CONCLUSION: Our results further demonstrated the role of obesity in OA and might provide new targets for the treatment of obesity OA.
Background: Neuromusculoskeletal anomalies generally in combination with severe clinical symptoms, comprise a heterogeneous group of fairly common and mostly fatal disorders in man and animals. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), also known as brittle bone disease, causes bone fragility and deformity. Prominent extra-skeletal accessory manifestations of OI comprise blue/gray sclerae, hearing impairment, lung abnormalities and hypercalciuria. Cases of OI in cattle have been reported. However, no causative mutations have been identified in cattle so far.Aim: To report a possible oligogenic origin identified in a calf from clinically healthy parents suffering from OI.Materials and Methods: A neonatal embryo transfer male Holstein calf developing multiple fractures with bone tissue showing marked osteopenia was used for whole genome re-sequencing as well as its parents. In addition, 2,612 randomly chosen healthy Holstein cattle were genotyped as well as controls.Results: Sixteen candidate genes with potential protein-altering variants were selected revealing non-synonymous variants only within IFITM5 and CRTAP genes. However, in-depth gene analysis did not result in the identification of a single causative mutation in the OI calf.Conclusion: The analysis of the OI case revealed a possible oligogenic origin of the disease attributable to additive effects of three candidate genes, i.e., ABCA13, QRFPR, and IFTIM5.Clinical relevance: Most OI cases in humans and domestic animals reported so far are caused by distinct dominant or recessive monogenic mutations, therefore a potential oligogenic additive genetic effect is a novel finding. Furthermore, the case presented here demonstrates that cross-species genetic analyses might not always be straightforward.
This study aims to build a prognostic model based on lactic acid metabolism-related genes (LMRGs) to predict survival outcomes and tumor microenvironment status of Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients. The model was used to calculate riskscores of clinical samples. Survival analysis and Cox regression analysis were conducted to verify the independence and reliability of the riskscore to determine its clinical significance in prognosis evaluation of HCC. Additionally, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of tumor mutation burden (TMB), immune cell infiltration, and gene set molecular function in the high- and low-risk groups. We obtained 134 LMRGs mainly involved in cellular calcium homeostasis and calcium signaling pathways. The LMRGs in the risk assessment model included PFKFB4, SLC16A3, ADRA2B, SLC22A1, QRFPR, and PROK1. This study discovered much shorter overall survival and median survival time of patients with higher riskscores when compared to those with lower riskscores. It was indicated that for independent prediction of patients' prognosis, the riskscore had a significant clinical value. A remarkable difference was also found regarding TMB between the two groups. Finally, cell experiments demonstrated that the knockout of PFKFB4 and SLC16A3 genes suppressed lactate. Our research demonstrated that the riskscore, established based on LMRGs, is a promising biomarker.
Identification of novel neuropeptides and their cognate G protein-coupled receptors is essential for a better understanding of neuroendocrine regulations. The RFamide peptides represent a family of regulatory peptides that all possess the Arg-Phe-NH2 motif at their C-terminus. In mammals, seven RFamide peptides encoded by five distinct genes have been characterized. The present review focuses on 26RFa (or QRFP) which is the latest member identified in this family. 26RFa is present in all vertebrate phyla and its C-terminal domain (KGGFXFRF-NH2), which is responsible for its biological activity, has been fully conserved during evolution. 26RFa is the cognate ligand of the orphan G protein-coupled receptor GPR103 that is also present from fish to human. In all vertebrate species studied so far, 26RFa-expressing neurons show a discrete localization in the hypothalamus, suggesting important neuroendocrine activities for this RFamide peptide. Indeed, 26RFa plays a crucial role in the control of feeding behavior in mammals, birds and fish. In addition, 26RFa up-regulates the gonadotropic axis in mammals and fish. Finally, evidence that the 26RFa/GPR103 system regulates steroidogenesis, bone formation, nociceptive transmission and arterial blood pressure has also been reported. Thus, 26RFa appears to act as a key neuropeptide in vertebrates controlling vital neuroendocrine functions. The pathophysiological implication of the 26RFa/GPR103 system in human is totally unknown and some fields of investigation are proposed.
BACKGROUND: QRFPR is a recently identified member of the G protein-coupled receptor and is an orphan receptor for 26Rfa, which plays important role in the regulation of many physiological functions. METHODS: Here, we employed whole exome sequencing (WES) to examine the patients with intellectual disability (ID) and difficulty in feeding. We performed SIFT and PolyPhen2 predictions for the variants. The structure model was built from scratch by I-TASSER. Here, results derived from a number of cell-based functional assays, including shRNA experiment, intracellular Ca(2+) measurement, the expression of PI3 K-AKT-mTOR, and phosphorylation. The functional effect of QRFPR variants on PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling was evaluated in vitro transfection experiments. RESULT: Here, we identified two QRFPR variants at c.202 T>C (p.Y68H) and c.1111C>T (p.R371W) in 2 unrelated individuals. Structural analysis revealed that p.Y68H and p.R371W variants may affect the side chain structure of adjacent amino acids causing reduced binding of QRFPR to 26Rfa. The results show that QRFPR stimulated by 26Rfa leading to the transient rise of intracellular Ca(2+) . The QRFPR variations p.Y68H and p.R371 W can reduce the mobilization of intracellular Ca(2+) . The phosphorylation levels of the PI3K, Akt, and mTOR were significantly up- or downregulated by QRFPR overexpression or silencing, respectively. The QRFPR variations inhibited PI3K-AKT-mTOR signaling, resulting in downregulation of p-mTOR. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that QRFPR acts as important role in neurodevelopment, and the effects of QRFPR are likely to be mediated by the Ca(2+) -dependent PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathways. Importantly, these findings provide a foundation for future elucidation of GPCR-mediated signaling and the physiological implications.
Pyroglutamylated RF-amide peptide (QRFP) is a peptide hormone with a C-terminal RF-amide motif. QRFP selectively activates a class A G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) GPR103 to exert various physiological functions such as energy metabolism and appetite regulation. Here, we report the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the QRFP26-GPR103-G(q) complex at 3.19 A resolution. QRFP26 adopts an extended structure bearing no secondary structure, with its N-terminal and C-terminal sides recognized by extracellular and transmembrane domains of GPR103 respectively. This movement, reminiscent of class B1 GPCRs except for orientation and structure of the ligand, is critical for the high-affinity binding and receptor specificity of QRFP26. Mutagenesis experiments validate the functional importance of the binding mode of QRFP26 by GPR103. Structural comparisons with closely related receptors, including RY-amide peptide-recognizing GPCRs, revealed conserved and diversified peptide recognition mechanisms, providing profound insights into the biological significance of RF-amide peptides. Collectively, this study not only advances our understanding of GPCR-ligand interactions, but also paves the way for the development of novel therapeutics targeting metabolic and appetite disorders and emergency medical care.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that preferentially affects individuals of advanced age. Heritability estimates for AD range between 60 and 80%, but only few genetic risk factors have been identified so far. In the present explorative study, we aimed at characterizing the genetic contribution to late-onset AD in participants of the Vienna Transdanube Aging (VITA) longitudinal birth cohort study in a two-step approach. First, we performed a genome-wide screen of pooled DNA samples (n = 588) to identify allele frequency differences between AD patients and non-AD individuals using life-time diagnoses made at the age of 80 (t = 60 months). This analysis suggested a high proportion of brain-expressed genes required for cell adhesion, cell signaling and cell morphogenesis, and also scored in known AD risk genes. In a second step, we confirmed associations using individual genotypes of top-ranked markers examining AD diagnoses as well as the dimensional scores: FULD and MMSE determined up to the age of 82.5 (t = 90 months). Taken together, our study proposes genes ANKS1B, ENST00000414107, LOC100505811, SLC22A14, QRFPR, ZDHHC8P1, ADAMTS3 and PPFIA1 as possible new candidates involved in the etiology of late-onset AD, with further research being needed to clarify their exact roles.
The spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR) strain was shown to be a useful animal model to study several behavioral, pathophysiological and pharmacological aspects of schizophrenia and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. To further understand the genetic underpinnings of this model, our primary goal in this study was to compare the gene expression profile of neurotransmitter receptors and regulators in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and nucleus accumbens (NAcc) of SHR and Wistar rats (control group). In addition, we investigated DNA methylation pattern of promoter region of the genes differentially expressed. We performed gene expression analysis using a PCRarray technology, which simultaneously measures the expression of 84 genes related to neurotransmission. Four genes were significantly downregulated in the PFC of SHR compared to Wistar rats (Gad2, Chrnb4, Slc5a7, and Qrfpr) and none in nucleus accumbens. Gad2 and Qrfpr have CpG islands in their promoter region. For both, the promoter region was hypomethylated in SHR group, and probably this mechanism is not related with the downregulation of these genes. In summary, we identified genes that are downregulated in the PFC of SHR, and might be related to the behavioral abnormalities exhibited by this strain.
Dementia refers to an umbrella phenotype of many different underlying pathologies with Alzheimer's disease (AD) being the most common type. Neuropathological examination remains the gold standard for accurate AD diagnosis, however, most that we know about AD genetics is based on Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) of clinically defined AD. Such studies have identified multiple AD susceptibility variants with a significant portion of the heritability unexplained and highlighting the phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of the clinically defined entity. Furthermore, despite women's increased susceptibility to dementia, there is a lack of sex-specific genetic studies and understanding of sex-specific background for the disorder. Here, we aim to tackle the heterogeneity of AD by specifically concentrating on neuropathological features and pursuing sex-specific analysis. We bring together 14 different genomic and neuropathology datasets (6960 individuals) and we integrate our GWAS findings with transcriptomic and phenotypic data aiming to also identify biomarkers for AD progression. We uncover novel genetic associations to AD neuropathology, including BIN1 and OPCML. Our sex-specific analysis points to a role for BIN1 specifically in women as well as novel AD loci including QRFPR and SGCZ. Post-GWAS analyses illuminate the functional and biological mechanisms underlying AD and reveal sex-specific differences. Finally, through PheWAS and Mendelian Randomization analysis, we identify causal links with AD neuropathology pointing to disrupted lipid metabolism, as well as impaired peripheral immune response and liver dysfunction as part of a vicious cycle that fuels neurodegeneration.
QRFP is expressed in central and peripheral regions important for nutrient intake and metabolism. Central administration of QRFP-26 and QRFP-43 induces a macronutrient specific increase in the intake of high fat diet in male and female rats. Recently, cell culture models have indicated that QRFP-26 and QRFP-43 are involved in glucose and fatty acid uptake in pancreatic islets and adipocytes. Since skeletal muscle is a major consumer of circulating glucose and a primary contributor to whole body metabolism, the current study examined the effects of QRFP-26 and QRFP-43 on insulin-stimulated uptake of glucose in skeletal muscle using L6 myotubes. The current experiments were designed to test the hypothesis that QRFP and its receptors, GPR103a and GPR103b are expressed in L6 myotubes and that QRFP-26 and QRFP-43 affect insulin-stimulated uptake of glucose in L6 myotubes. The results indicate that prepro-QRFP mRNA and GPR103a mRNA are expressed in L6 cells, though GPR103b mRNA was not detected. Using complementary assays, co-incubation with QRFP-26, increased insulin's ability to induce glycogen synthesis and 2-deoxyglucose uptake in L6 cells. These data suggest that QRFP-26, but not QRFP-43, is involved in the metabolic effects of skeletal muscle and may enhance insulin's effects on glucose uptake in skeletal muscle. These data support a role for QRFP as a modulator of nutrient intake in skeletal muscle.
The neuropeptide 26RFa plays important roles in the regulation of many physiological functions. 26RFa has been recognized as an endogenous ligand for receptor GPR103. In the present study, we demonstrate that GPR103 dually couples to Galphaq and Galphai/o proteins. However, two naturally occurring missense mutations were identified from a young male patient. In the first, Y68H, induction of Ca(2+) mobilization was noted without detection of ERK1/2 activation. In the second, R371W, the potential to activate ERK1/2 signaling was retained but with failure to evoke Ca(2+) mobilization. Further analysis provides evidence that Galphaq, L-type Ca(2+) channel and PKCbetaI and betaII are involved in the Y68H-mediated signaling pathway, whereas Galphai/o, Gbetagamma, and PKCzeta are implicated in the R371W-induced signaling. Our results demonstrate that two point mutations, Y68H and R371W, affect the equilibrium between the different receptor conformations, leading to alteration of G protein-coupling preferences. Importantly, these findings provide a foundation for future elucidation of GPCR-mediated biased signaling and the physiological implications of their bias.
