Thymidylate synthase; Contributes to the de novo mitochondrial thymidylate biosynthesis pathway.
INTRODUCTION: There has been a cumulative interest in relationships between systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and cancer risk. Breast cancer is the most common cancer among women worldwide. However, the casual association and pathogenesis between SLE and breast cancer remains incompletely unknown. METHODS: Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis was first conducted to investigate the potential causality between SLE and breast cancer. Sensitivity analyses were applied to validate the reliability of MR results. Transcriptomic data analyses based on the Cancer Genome Atlas and Gene Expression Omnibus databases were then performed to identify and construct a SLE-related gene signature (SLEscore). RESULTS: The MR analysis demonstrated that genetic predisposition to SLE was casually associated with the decreased risk of breast cancer in the East Asian cohort (odds ratios: 0.95, 95% confidence interval: 0.92-0.98, p=0.006). However, no casual associations were observed in the European population. Furthermore, sensitivity analyses proved the robustness of the present MR results. A prognostic SLEscore consisting of five SLE-related genes (RACGAP1, HMMR, TTK, TOP2A, and KIF15) could distribute patients with breast cancer into the high- and low-risk groups according to survival rates with good predictive ability (p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Our MR study provided evidence that genetic changes in SLE were significantly associated with the decreased risk of breast cancer in the East Asian population, while no causality was found in the European cohorts. Transcriptome data analyses indicated that the SLEscore could serve as a novel biomarker for predicting prognosis when breast cancer and SLE coexisted in patients.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Intense efforts have been made to elucidate the pathogeny, but the molecular mechanisms of HCC are still not well understood. To identify the candidate genes in the carcinogenesis and progression of HCC, microarray datasets GSE19665, GSE33006 and GSE41804 were downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified, and function enrichment analyses were performed. The protein-protein interaction network (PPI) was constructed and the module analysis was performed using STRING and Cytoscape. A total of 273 DEGs were identified, consisting of 189 downregulated genes and 84 upregulated genes. The enriched functions and pathways of the DEGs include protein activation cascade, complement activation, carbohydrate binding, complement and coagulation cascades, mitotic cell cycle and oocyte meiosis. Sixteen hub genes were identified and biological process analysis revealed that these genes were mainly enriched in cell division, cell cycle and nuclear division. Survival analysis showed that BUB1, CDC20, KIF20A, RACGAP1 and CEP55 may be involved in the carcinogenesis, invasion or recurrence of HCC. In conclusion, DEGs and hub genes identified in the present study help us understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the carcinogenesis and progression of HCC, and provide candidate targets for diagnosis and treatment of HCC.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDA) are hereditary disorders characterized by ineffective erythropoiesis. This review evaluates newly developed CDA disease models, the latest advances in understanding the pathogenesis of the CDAs, and recently identified CDA genes. RECENT FINDINGS: Mice exhibiting features of CDAI were recently generated, demonstrating that Codanin-1 (encoded by Cdan1) is essential for primitive erythropoiesis. Additionally, Codanin-1 was found to physically interact with CDIN1, suggesting that mutations in CDAN1 and CDIN1 result in CDAI via a common mechanism. Recent advances in CDAII (which results from SEC23B mutations) have also been made. SEC23B was found to functionally overlap with its paralogous protein, SEC23A, likely explaining the absence of CDAII in SEC23B-deficient mice. In contrast, mice with erythroid-specific deletion of 3 or 4 of the Sec23 alleles exhibited features of CDAII. Increased SEC23A expression rescued the CDAII erythroid defect, suggesting a novel therapeutic strategy for the disease. Additional recent advances included the identification of new CDA genes, RACGAP1 and VPS4A, in CDAIII and a syndromic CDA type, respectively. SUMMARY: Establishing cellular and animal models of CDA is expected to result in improved understanding of the pathogenesis of these disorders, which may ultimately lead to the development of new therapies.
PLAGL2 is upregulated in various tumors, including bladder cancer (BCa). However, the mechanisms underlying the tumorigenic effects of PLAGL2 in BCa remain unclear. In our study, we proved that PLAGL2 was overexpressed in BCa tissues and correlated with decreased survival. Functionally, PLAGL2 deficiency significantly suppressed the proliferation and metastasis of BCa cells in vitro and in vivo. RNA sequencing, qRT‒PCR, immunoblotting, immunofluorescence staining, luciferase reporter, and ChIP assays revealed that overexpressed PLAGL2 disrupted the Hippo pathway and increased YAP1/TAZ activity by transactivating RACGAP1. Further investigations demonstrated that PLAGL2 activated YAP1/TAZ signaling via RACGAP1-mediated RhoA activation. Importantly, the RhoA inhibitor simvastatin or the YAP1/TAZ inhibitor verteporfin abrogated the proproliferative and prometastatic effects of BCa enhanced by PLAGL2. These findings suggest that PLAGL2 promotes BCa progression via RACGAP1/RhoA GTPase/YAP1 signaling. Hence, the core nodes of signaling may be promising therapeutic targets for BCa.
Binucleated polyploid cells are common in many animal tissues, where they arise by endomitosis, a non-canonical cell cycle in which cells enter M phase but do not undergo cytokinesis. Different steps of cytokinesis have been shown to be inhibited during endomitosis M phase in rodents, but it is currently unknown how human cells undergo endomitosis. In this study, we use fetal-derived human hepatocyte organoids (Hep-Orgs) to investigate how human hepatocytes initiate and execute endomitosis. We find that cells in endomitosis M phase have normal mitotic timings, but lose membrane anchorage to the midbody during cytokinesis, which is associated with the loss of four cortical anchoring proteins, RacGAP1, Anillin, SEPT9, and citron kinase (CIT-K). Moreover, reduction of WNT activity increases the percentage of binucleated cells in Hep-Orgs, an effect that is dependent on the atypical E2F proteins, E2F7 and E2F8. Together, we have elucidated how hepatocytes undergo endomitosis in human Hep-Orgs, providing new insights into the mechanisms of endomitosis in mammals.
RACGAP1 is a Rho-GTPase-activating protein originally discovered in male germ cells to inactivate Rac, RhoA and Cdc42 from the GTP-bound form to the GDP-bound form. GAP has traditionally been known as a tumor suppressor. However, studies increasingly suggest that overexpressed RACGAP1 activates Rac and RhoA in multiple cancers to mediate downstream oncogene overexpression by assisting in the nuclear translocation of signaling molecules and to promote cytokinesis by regulating the cytoskeleton or serving as a component of the central spindle. Contradictorily, it was also reported that RACGAP1 in gastric cancer could inactivate Rac and RhoA. In addition, studies have revealed that RACGAP1 can be a biomarker for prognosis, and its role in reducing doxorubicin sensitivity poses difficulties for treatment, while the current drug targets mainly focus on its downstream molecule. This article mainly reviews the expression regulation of RACGAP1 and its cancer-promoting functions through oncogene expression mediation and Rho-GTPase activation.
A particular GTPase-activating protein called RACGAP1 is involved in apoptosis, proliferation, invasion, metastasis, and drug resistance in a variety of malignancies. Nevertheless, the role of RACGAP1 in pan-cancer was less studied, and its value of the expression and prognostic of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) has not been explored. Hence, the goal of this study was to investigate the oncogenic and immunological roles of RACGAP1 in various cancers and its potential value in NPC. We comprehensively analyzed RACGAP1 expression, prognostic value, function, methylation levels, relationship with immune cells, immune infiltration, and immunotherapy response in pan-cancer utilizing multiple databases. The results discovered that RACGAP1 expression was elevated in most cancers and suggested poor prognosis, which could be related to the involvement of RACGAP1 in various cancer-related pathways such as the cell cycle and correlated with RACGAP1 methylation levels, immune cell infiltration and reaction to immunotherapy, and chemoresistance. RACGAP1 could inhibit anti-tumor immunity and immunotherapy responses by fostering immune cell infiltration and cytotoxic T lymphocyte dysfunction. Significantly, we validated that RACGAP1 mRNA and protein were highly expressed in NPC. The Gene Expression Omnibus database revealed that elevated RACGAP1 expression was associated with shorter PFS in patients with NPC, and RACGAP1 potentially influenced cell cycle progression, DNA replication, metabolism, and immune-related pathways, resulting in the recurrence and metastasis of NPC. This study indicated that RACGAP1 could be a potential biomarker in pan-cancer and NPC.
Hereditary dyserythropoietic anemias, or congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs), are rare disorders disrupting normal erythroid lineage development, resulting in ineffective erythropoiesis and monolinear cytopenia. CDAs include three main types (I, II, III), transcription-factor-related forms, and syndromic forms. The widespread use of next-generation sequencing in the last decade has unveiled novel causative genes and unexpected genotype-phenotype correlations. The discovery of the genetic defects underlying the CDAs not only facilitates accurate diagnosis but also enhances understanding of CDA pathophysiology. Notable advancements include identifying a hepatic-specific role of the SEC23B loss-of-function in iron metabolism dysregulation in CDA II, deepening CDIN1 dysfunction during erythroid differentiation, and uncovering a recessive CDA III form associated with RACGAP1 variants. Current treatments primarily rely on supportive measures tailored to disease severity and clinical features. Comparative studies with pyruvate kinase deficiency have illuminated new therapeutic avenues by elucidating iron dyshomeostasis and dyserythropoiesis mechanisms. We herein discuss recent progress in diagnostic methodologies, novel gene discoveries, and enhanced comprehension of CDA pathogenesis and molecular genetics.
BACKGROUND: Endocrine resistance driven by sustained activation of androgen receptor (AR) signaling pathway in advanced prostate cancer (PCa) is fatal. Characterization of mechanisms underlying aberrant AR pathway activation to search for potential therapeutic strategy is particularly important. Rac GTPase-activating protein 1 (RACGAP1) is one of the specific GTPase-activating proteins. As a novel tumor proto-oncogene, overexpression of RACGAP1 was related to the occurrence of various tumors. METHODS: Bioinformatics methods were used to analyze the relationship of expression level between RACGAP1 and AR as well as AR pathway activation. qRT-PCR and western blotting assays were performed to assess the expression of AR/AR-V7 and RACGAP1 in PCa cells. Immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence experiments were conducted to detect the interaction and co-localization between RACGAP1 and AR/AR-V7. Gain- and loss-of-function analyses were conducted to investigate the biological roles of RACGAP1 in PCa cells, using MTS and colony formation assays. In vivo experiments were conducted to evaluate the effect of RACGAP1 inhibition on the tumor growth. RESULTS: RACGAP1 was a gene activated by AR, which was markedly upregulated in PCa patients with CRPC and enzalutamide resistance. AR transcriptionally activated RACGAP1 expression by binding to its promoter region. Reciprocally, nuclear RACGAP1 bound to the N-terminal domain (NTD) of both AR and AR-V7, blocking their interaction with the E3 ubiquitin ligase MDM2. Consequently, this prevented the degradation of AR/AR-V7 in a ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent pathway. Notably, the positive feedback loop between RACGAP1 and AR/AR-V7 contributed to endocrine therapy resistance of CRPC. Combination of enzalutamide and in vivo cholesterol-conjugated RIG-I siRNA drugs targeting RACGAP1 induced potent inhibition of xenograft tumor growth of PCa. CONCLUSION: In summary, our results reveal that reciprocal regulation between RACGAP1 and AR/AR-V7 contributes to the endocrine resistance in PCa. These findings highlight the therapeutic potential of combined RACGAP1 inhibition and enzalutamide in treatment of advanced PCa.
Several recent studies have pointed out that arc GTPase activating protein 1 (RACGAP1) is a putative oncogene in many human tumors. However, to date, no pan-cancer analysis has been performed to study the different aspects of this gene expression and behavior in tumor tissues. Here, we applied several bioinformatics tools to perform a comprehensive analysis for RACGAP1. First, we assessed the expression of RACGAP1 in several types of human tumors and tried to correlate that with the stage of the tumors analyzed. We then performed a survival analysis to study the correlation between RACGAP1 upregulation in tumors and the clinical outcome. Additionally, we investigated the mutation forms, the correlation with several immune cell infiltration, the phosphorylation status of the interested protein in normal and tumor tissues, and the potential molecular mechanisms of RACGAP1 in cancerous tissue. The results demonstrated that RACGAP1, a highly expressed gene across several types of tumors, correlated with a poor prognosis in several types of human cancers. Moreover, it was found that RACGAP1 affects the tumor immune microenvironment by influencing the infiltration level of several immune cells. Collectively, the current study provides a comprehensive overview of the oncogenic roles of RACGAP1, where our results nominate it as a potential prognostic biomarker and a target for antitumor therapy development.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a malignant tumor. It is estimated that approximately 50-80% of HCC cases worldwide are caused by hepatitis b virus (HBV) infection, and other pathogenic factors have been shown to promote the development of HCC when coexisting with HBV. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV-HCC) is crucial for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of the disease. In this study, we analyzed the molecular mechanisms of HBV-induced HCC by combining bioinformatics and deep learning methods. Firstly, we collected a gene set related to HBV-HCC from the GEO database, performed differential analysis and WGCNA analysis to identify genes with abnormal expression in tumors and high relevance to tumors. We used three deep learning methods, Lasso, random forest, and SVM, to identify key genes RACGAP1, ECT2, and NDC80. By establishing a diagnostic model, we determined the accuracy of key genes in diagnosing HBV-HCC. In the training set, RACGAP1(AUC:0.976), ECT2(AUC:0.969), and NDC80 (AUC: 0.976) showed high accuracy. They also exhibited good accuracy in the validation set: RACGAP1(AUC:0.878), ECT2(AUC:0.731), and NDC80(AUC:0.915). The key genes were found to be highly expressed in liver cancer tissues compared to normal liver tissues, and survival analysis indicated that high expression of key genes was associated with poor prognosis in liver cancer patients. This suggests a close relationship between key genes RACGAP1, ECT2, and NDC80 and the occurrence and progression of HBV-HCC. Molecular docking results showed that the key genes could spontaneously bind to the anti-hepatocellular carcinoma drugs Lenvatinib, Regorafenib, and Sorafenib with strong binding activity. Therefore, ECT2, NDC80, and RACGAP1 may serve as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of HBV-HCC and as targets for the development of targeted therapeutic drugs.
Cells tune adherens junction dynamics to regulate epithelial integrity in diverse (patho)physiological processes, including cancer metastasis. We hypothesized that the spatially confining architecture of peritumor stroma promotes metastatic cell dissemination by remodeling cell-cell adhesive interactions. By combining microfluidics with live-cell imaging, FLIM/FRET biosensors, and optogenetic tools, we show that confinement induces leader cell dissociation from cohesive ensembles. Cell dissociation is triggered by myosin IIA (MIIA) dismantling of E-cadherin cell-cell junctions, as recapitulated by a mathematical model. Elevated MIIA contractility is controlled by RhoA/ROCK activation, which requires distinct guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Confinement activates RhoA via nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of the cytokinesis-regulatory proteins RacGAP1 and Ect2 and increased microtubule dynamics, which results in the release of active GEF-H1. Thus, confining microenvironments are sufficient to induce cell dissemination from primary tumors by remodeling E-cadherin cell junctions via the interplay of microtubules, nuclear trafficking, and RhoA/ROCK/MIIA pathway and not by down-regulating E-cadherin expression.
Considering the importance of microRNAs (miRNAs) in regulating cellular processes, we performed microarray analysis and revealed miR-4324 as one of the most differentially expressed miRNAs in bladder cancer (BCa). Then, we discovered that miR-4324 was a negative regulator of Rac GTPase activating protein 1 (RACGAP1) and that RACGAP1 functioned as an oncogenic protein in BCa. Our studies indicated that ectopic overexpression of miR-4324 in BCa cells significantly suppressed cell proliferation and metastasis and enhanced chemotherapy sensitivity to doxorubicin by repressing RACGAP1 expression. Further studies showed that estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) increased the expression of miR-4324 by binding to its promoter, while the downregulation of ESR1 in BCa was caused by hypermethylation of its promoter. p-STAT3 induced the enrichment of DNMT3B by binding to the ESR1 promoter and then induced methylation of the ESR1 promoter. In turn, RACGAP1 induced STAT3 phosphorylation, increasing p-STAT3 expression and promoting its translocation to the nucleus. Therefore, the miR-4324-RACGAP1-STAT3-ESR1 feedback loop could be a critical regulator of BCa progression.
RACGAP1 (Rac GTPase-activating protein 1) is correlated with tumor aggressiveness and poor prognosis, but the role of RACGAP1 in cervical cancer has not been fully reported. Analysis of RACGAP1 expression data in cervical cancer from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database was carried out by GEPIA and UALCAN websites. In addition, the UALCAN database was used to identify the RACGAP1 positively correlated genes, which were used for the enrichment analysis. qRT-PCR, immunohistochemistry, western blot, and immunofluorescence were utilized to measure RACGAP1 expression in tissues and cells. Western blot, flow cytometry, MTT, and colony formation assays were applied to assess the effects of RACGAP1 on cell cycle, growth and viability in cervical cancer. Through bioinformatics analysis, we found that the level of RACGAP1 was aberrantly increased in cervical cancer, which was confirmed in cervical cancer tissues and cells. RACGAP1 associated genes, including CDC25C, were mainly enriched in cell cycle pathway, and RACGAP1 expression was negatively associated with CDC25C expression. RACGAP1 overexpression was related to patient's poor prognosis and promoted cervical cancer cell proliferation. Furthermore, RACGAP1 knockdown decreased the level of CDC2, p-CDC2, CDC25C, and Cyclin B1, inhibited proliferation and delayed cell cycle progression in cervical cancer cells. In mechanism, overexpression of CDC25C attenuated RACGAP1 knockdown-mediated cell growth inhibition and cell cycle arrest. Taken together, this study demonstrated that RACGAP1 was overexpressed in cervical cancer, and downregulation of RACGAP1 could inhibit the cervical cancer cell proliferation and cell cycle progression through regulating CDC25C expression.
Most cancer deaths are due to the colonization of tumor cells in distant organs. More evidence indicates that overexpression of RACGAP1 plays a critical role in cancer metastasis. However, the underlying mechanism still remains poorly understood. Here we found that RACGAP1 promoted breast cancer metastasis through regulating mitochondrial quality control. Overexpression of RACGAP1 in breast cancer cells led to the fragmentation of mitochondria, increased mitophagy intensity, mitochondrial turnover, and aerobic glycolysis ATP production. We showed that RACGAP1 promoted mitochondrial fission through recruiting ECT2 during anaphase and subsequently had activated ERK-DRP1 pathway. We further demonstrated the phosphorylation of RACGAP1 is essential for its ability of binding with ECT2 and its downstream effects. RACGAP1 overexpression also increased the expression of PGC-1a, a key mitochondrial biogenesis regulator, presumably by the increased mitophagy intensity induced by RACGAP1. PGC-1a increased the enrichment of DNMT1 in mitochondria, mitochondrial DNMT1 augmented mitochondrial DNA methylation and upregulated mitochondrial genome transcription. Our data indicated that RACGAP1 simultaneously facilitated mitophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis through regulating DRP1 phosphorylation and PGC-1a expression, eventually improved mitochondrial quality control in breast cancer cells. Our study provided a new angle in understanding the RACGAP1-overexpression related malignancy in breast cancer patients.
Like RAS proteins, the aberrant function of RHO family small GTPases has been implicated in driving cancer development and growth. However, unlike the RAS family, where gain-of-function missense mutations are found in  approximately 25% of all human cancers, missense mutations are relatively rare in RHO proteins. Instead, altered RHO activity in cancer more commonly arises through the aberrant functions of RHO GTPase regulators. In many cancer types, altered expression and/or mutation of RHO-selective guanine nucleotide exchange factors (RHOGEFs) or GTPase-activating proteins (RHOGAPs), which activate or inactivate RHO GTPases, respectively, is observed. For example, deletion or loss of expression of the RHOA GAP DLC1 is well-established to drive cancer growth. Recently, we identified high expression of 2 RHOGAPs, ARHGAP11A and RACGAP1, in the basal-like breast cancer subtype. Unexpectedly, both of these RHOA GAPs exhibited properties of oncoproteins rather than tumor suppressors, in contrast to DLC1. In this commentary, we summarize our findings and speculate that different RHOA GAPs can play distinct roles in cancer depending on their spatial regulation and cancer type context. We also evaluate our results in light of recently-described cancer genome sequencing studies that have identified loss-of-function mutations of RHOA in specific cancer types.
Circular RNAs (circRNA) are known to function as competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) in various cancers by regulating microRNAs (miRNA). However, in colorectal cancer (CRC), the precise pathological role of circ000240/miRNA/mRNA remains indeterminate. The expression level of hsa_circ_000240 was evaluated using qRT-PCR in matching pairs of CRC tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples in our laboratory. Then, to determine whether hsa_circ_000240 acted as a ceRNA in CRC, the linked miRNAs and gene targets were retrieved. Topological analysis of candidate genes using a network approach identified the most critical hub genes and subnetworks related to CRC disease. Microarray and bulk RNA sequencing analyses were utilized to comprehensively evaluate the expression levels of both miRNA and mRNA in CRC. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis was also used to evaluate the significant overall survival (OS) genes at the cellular level. ATAC-seq data provided insights into candidate genes' accessible chromatin regions. The research uncovered a considerable upregulation of hsa_circ_000240 in CRC tissues. Three miRNAs interacted with the target circRNA. One thousand six hundred eighty intersected genes regulated by three miRNAs were further identified, and the relevant functionality of identified neighbor genes highlighted their relevance to cancer. The topological analysis of the constructed network has identified 33 hub genes with notably high expression in CRC. Among these genes, eight, including CHEK1, CDC6, FANCI, GINS2, MAD2L1, ORC1, RACGAP1, and SMC4, have demonstrated a significant impact on overall survival. The utilization of single-cell RNA sequencing unequivocally corroborated the augmented expression levels of CDC6 and ORC1 in individuals with CRC, alongside their noteworthy connection with the infiltration of immune cells. ATAC-seq analyses revealed altered accessibility regions in Chr2, 4, and 12 for CDC6 and ORC1 high-expression. Correlation analysis of CDC6 and ORC1 further highlighted the association of candidate gene expression with exhaustion markers such as CTLA4, CD247, TIGIT, and CD244. The candidate genes exhibit a positive correlation with chromatin remodeling and histone acetylation. These epigenetic modifications play a significant role in influencing the cancer progression following expression of CDC6 and ORC1 in CRC. Additionally, results showed that the methylation rate of the promoter region of CDC6 was elevated in CRC disease, confirming the functional importance of CDC6 and their interaction with hsa_circ_000240 and associated ceRNA in CRC. In conclusion, this study highlights hsa_circ_000240's role as a ceRNA in CRC. It opens new avenues for further dissection of CDC6, ORC1, and underlying novel epigenetics and immunotherapy targets for CRC therapy.
Rac GTPase activating protein 1 (RacGAP1) can regulate cytokinesis and cell differentiation. The oncogenic role of RacGAP1 has been partially studied in gastric cancer, colorectal cancer, and breast cancer. In the present study, we endeavor to evaluate its expression and functions in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). We retrospectively collected the clinicopathological information of 117 patients who underwent curative surgery for EOC. Expression of RacGAP1 protein in primary tumor tissues was evaluated by immunohistochemistry, which was significantly associated with tumor pathological grade, tumor stage, and lymph node metastasis. Patients with lower RacGAP1 level had a longer survival time and lower recurrence risk. Multivariate results identified the independent prognostic role of RacGAP1 for both recurrence and survival in EOC patients. Cellular studies showed that RacGAP1 can positively regulate the activation of RhoA and Erk proteins. In addition, wound healing assay and Transwell assay found that RacGAP1 can up-regulate the migration and invasion process of EOC cells, respectively. In all, our results not only confirmed the prognostic role of RacGAP1 for recurrence and survival in EOC patients, but also highlighted its possible potency for drug development.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the dominating tumors causing death due to lack of timely discovery and valid treatment. Abnormal increase of Rac GTPase activating protein 1 (RACGAP1) has been verified to be an oncogene in plenty tumors. The profound mechanism of RACGAP1 was rarely reported in HCC. In this study, we explored the function and mechanism of RACGAP1 in HCC through multiple analysis and experiments. RACGAP1 expression was up-regulated in HCC samples and the high expression of RACGAP1 was an independent prognostic risk factor for HCC patients. Meanwhile, RACGAP1 promoted developments of HCC both in vitro and in vivo. We verified that RACGAP1 promoted proliferation of HCC via PI3K/AKT/CDK2 and PI3K/AKT/GSK3beta/Cyclin D1 signaling pathway. RACGAP1 accelerated the invasion and metastasis of HCC via phosphorylation of GSK3beta and nuclear translocation of beta-catenin. Furthermore, by luciferase reporter assay and Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we confirmed Recombinant GA Binding Protein Transcription Factor Alpha (GABPA) regulated the transcription of RACGAP1. All these findings revealed that RACGAP1 promotes the progression of HCC through a novel mechanism, which might be a new therapeutic target for HCC patients.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignant tumors with high mortality worldwide, which is characterized by aggressive growth and metastasis. However, the relationship between TOP2A and CDC6 and HCC remains unclear. GSE121248 and GSE101728 profiles for liver cancer were downloaded from the gene expression omnibus database generated using GPL21047and GPL570. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened and weighted gene co-expression network analysis was performed. The construction and analysis of protein-protein interaction network, functional enrichment analysis, gene set enrichment analysis. Gene expression heat map was drawn and survival analysis was performed. Comparative toxicogenomics database analysis were performed to find the disease most related to the core gene. TargetScan was used to screen miRNAs regulating central DEGs. 885 DEGs were identified. According to gene ontology analysis, they were mainly enriched in organic acid metabolism process, metabolic pathway, p53 signal pathway and PPAR signal pathway. The enrichment items are similar to the GOKEGG enrichment items of differentially expressed genes, mainly in the process of organic acid metabolism, p53 signal pathway and PPAR signal pathway. In the enrichment project of metascape, gene ontology has PIDPLK1 pathway, mitotic cell cycle, tumor retinoblastoma gene. The construction and analysis of protein-protein interaction network obtained 10 core genes (TOP2A, CDK1, ASPM, RACGAP1, ZWINT, CDC6, AURKA, NCAPG, BUB1B, CCNB1), and found that these core genes were highly expressed in tumor tissues and low in normal tissues. Comparative toxicogenomics database analysis showed that 10 genes (TOP2A, CDK1, ASPM, RACGAP1, ZWINT, CDC6, AURKA, NCAPG, BUB1B, CCNB1) were related to necrosis, inflammation, HCC, liver cirrhosis, and adenoid cystic carcinoma. TOP2A and CDC6 are highly expressed in liver cancer, which may become molecular targets for early diagnosis and precise treatment.
