Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
The t(15;17)(q24;q21), generating a PML-RARA fusion gene, is the hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). At present, eight other genes fusing with RARA have been identified. The resulting fusion proteins retain domains of the RARA protein allowing binding to retinoic acid response elements (RARE) and dimerization with the retinoid X receptor protein (RXRA). They participate in protein-protein interactions, associating with RXRA to form hetero-oligomeric complexes that can bind to RARE. They have a dominant-negative effect on wild-type RARA/RXRA transcriptional activity. Moreover, RARA fusion proteins can homodimerize, conferring the ability to regulate an expanded repertoire of genes normally not affected by RARA. RARA fusion proteins behave as potent transcriptional repressors of retinoic acid signalling, inducing a differentiation blockage at the promyelocyte stage which can be overcome with therapeutic doses of ATRA or arsenic trioxide. However, resistance to these two drugs is a major problem, which necessitates development of new therapies.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a special disease entity of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The clinical use of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has transformed APL into the most curable form of AML. The majority of APL cases are characterized by the fusion gene PML-RARA. Although the PML-RARA fusion gene can be detected in almost all APL cases, translocation variants of APL have been reported. To date, this is the most comprehensive review of these translocations, discussing 15 different variants. Reviewed genes involved in APL variants include: ZBTB16, NPM, NuMA, STAT5b, PRKAR1A, FIP1L1, BCOR, NABP1, TBLR1, GTF2I, IRF2BP2, FNDC3B, ADAMDTS17, STAT3, and TFG. The genotypic and phenotypic features of APL translocations are summarized. All reported studies were either case reports or case series indicating the rarity of these entities and limiting the ability to drive conclusions regarding their characteristics. However, reported variants have shown variable clinical and morphological features, with diverse responsiveness to ATRA.
N(6)-Methyladenosine (m(6)A) represents the most prevalent internal modification in mammalian mRNAs. Despite its functional importance in various fundamental bioprocesses, the studies of m(6)A in cancer have been limited. Here we show that FTO, as an m(6)A demethylase, plays a critical oncogenic role in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). FTO is highly expressed in AMLs with t(11q23)/MLL rearrangements, t(15;17)/PML-RARA, FLT3-ITD, and/or NPM1 mutations. FTO enhances leukemic oncogene-mediated cell transformation and leukemogenesis, and inhibits all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced AML cell differentiation, through regulating expression of targets such as ASB2 and RARA by reducing m(6)A levels in these mRNA transcripts. Collectively, our study demonstrates the functional importance of the m(6)A methylation and the corresponding proteins in cancer, and provides profound insights into leukemogenesis and drug response.
Nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) are ligand-binding transcription factors that are widely targeted therapeutically. Agonist binding triggers NR activation and subsequent degradation by unknown ligand-dependent ubiquitin ligase machinery. NR degradation is critical for therapeutic efficacy in malignancies that are driven by retinoic acid and estrogen receptors. Here, we demonstrate the ubiquitin ligase UBR5 drives degradation of multiple agonist-bound NRs, including the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA), retinoid x receptor alpha (RXRA), glucocorticoid, estrogen, liver-X, progesterone, and vitamin D receptors. We present the high-resolution cryo-EMstructure of full-length human UBR5 and a negative stain model representing its interaction with RARA/RXRA. Agonist ligands induce sequential, mutually exclusive recruitment of nuclear coactivators (NCOAs) and UBR5 to chromatin to regulate transcriptional networks. Other pharmacological ligands such as selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs) degrade their receptors through differential recruitment of UBR5 or RNF111. We establish the UBR5 transcriptional regulatory hub as a common mediator and regulator of NR-induced transcription.
KRAS is among the most commonly mutated oncogenes in human malignancies. Although the advent of sotorasib and adagrasib, has lifted the "undruggable" stigma of KRAS, the resistance to KRAS inhibitors quickly becomes a major issue. Here, we reported that aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member A1 (ALDH1A1), an enzyme in retinoic acid biosynthesis and redox balance, increases in response to KRAS inhibitors and confers resistance in a range of cancer types. KRAS inhibitors' efficacy is significantly improved in sensitive or drug-resistant cells, patient-derived organoids (PDO), and xenograft models by ALDH1A1 knockout, loss of enzyme function, or inhibitor. Furthermore, we discovered that ALDH1A1 suppresses the efficacy of KRAS inhibitors by counteracting ferroptosis. ALDH1A1 detoxicates deleterious aldehydes, boosts the synthesis of NADH and retinoic acid (RA), and improves RARA function. ALDH1A1 also activates the CREB1/GPX4 pathway, stimulates the production of lipid droplets in a pH-dependent manner, and subsequently prevents ferroptosis induced by KRAS inhibitors. Meanwhile, we established that GTF2I is dephosphorylated at S784 via ERK by KRAS inhibitors, which hinders its nuclear translocation and mediates ALDH1A1's upregulation in response to KRAS inhibitors. In summary, the results offer valuable insights into targeting ALDH1A1 to enhance the effectiveness of KRAS-targeted therapy through ferroptosis in cancer treatment.
The GTF2I is a general transcription factor and its mutations have been reported to be recurrent in thymic epithelial tumours and are rare in other malignancies. Apart from thymic epithelial tumours, these mutations have also been reported in a subgroup of T cell lymphomas, angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphomas. Soft tissue angiofibroma has been reported to harbour GTF2I-NCOA2 fusion, whereas GTF2I partners with Retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) in acute promyelocytic leukaemia as GTF2I-RARA GTF2I has also been implicated in immune disorders and two neuropsychiatric genetic disorders, namely autism and Williams-Beuren syndrome. The various structural, biochemical and functional properties of GTF2I suggest towards the oncogenic nature of this gene. Studies involving patients are presently few and the availability of biospecimens amenable to molecular diagnostic studies is limited. Future studies involving biospecimens and transformed cell lines shall provide a clear understanding of the GTF2I mechanistic to eventually lead to targeted treatment.
Atypical acute promyelocytic leukemia (aAPL) presents a complex landscape of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) fusion genes beyond the well-known PML::RARA fusion. Among these, 31 individually rare RARA and RARG fusion genes have been documented, often reported in the canonical X::RAR bipartite fusion form. Intriguingly, some artificially mimicked bipartite X::RAR fusions respond well to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in vitro, contrasting with the ATRA resistance observed in patients. To unravel the underlying mechanisms, we conducted a comprehensive molecular investigation into the fusion transcripts in 27 RARA fusion gene-positive aAPL (RARA-aAPL) and 21 RARG-aAPL cases. Our analysis revealed an unexpected novel form of X::RAR::X- or X::RAR::Y-type tripartite fusions in certain RARA-aAPL and all RARG-aAPL cases, with shared features and notable differences between these 2 disease subgroups. In RARA-aAPL cases, the occurrence of RARA 3' splices was associated with their 5' fusion partner genes, mapping across the coding region of helix 11_12 (H11_12) within the ligand-binding domain (LBD), resulting in LBD-H12 or H11_12 truncation. In RARG-aAPL cases, RARG 3' splices were consistently localized to the terminus of exon 9, leading to LBD-H11_12 truncation. Significant differences were also observed between RARA and RARG 5' splice patterns. Our analysis also revealed extensive involvement of transposable elements in constructing RARA and RARG 3' fusions, suggesting transposition mechanisms for fusion gene ontogeny. Both protein structural analysis and experimental results highlighted the pivotal role of LBD-H11_12/H12 truncation in driving ATRA unresponsiveness and leukemogenesis in tripartite fusion-positive aAPL, through a protein allosteric dysfunction mechanism.
Several canonical translocations produce oncofusion genes that can initiate acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Although each translocation is associated with unique features, the mechanisms responsible remain unclear. While proteins interacting with each oncofusion are known to be relevant for how they act, these interactions have not yet been systematically defined. To address this issue in an unbiased fashion, we fused a promiscuous biotin ligase (TurboID) in-frame with 3 favorable-risk AML oncofusion cDNAs (PML::RARA, RUNX1::RUNX1T1, and CBFB::MYH11) and identified their interacting proteins in primary murine hematopoietic cells. The PML::RARA- and RUNX1::RUNX1T1-TurboID fusion proteins labeled common and unique nuclear repressor complexes, implying their nuclear localization. However, CBFB::MYH11-TurboID-interacting proteins were largely cytoplasmic, probably because of an interaction of the MYH11 domain with several cytoplasmic myosin-related proteins. Using a variety of methods, we showed that the CBFB domain of CBFB::MYH11 sequesters RUNX1 in cytoplasmic aggregates; these findings were confirmed in primary human AML cells. Paradoxically, CBFB::MYH11 expression was associated with increased RUNX1/2 expression, suggesting the presence of a sensor for reduced functional RUNX1 protein, and a feedback loop that may attempt to compensate by increasing RUNX1/2 transcription. These findings may have broad implications for AML pathogenesis.
Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia is caused by expression of the oncogenic Promyelocytic Leukemia (PML)-Retinoic Acid Receptor Alpha (RARA) fusion protein. Therapy with arsenic trioxide results in degradation of PML-RARA and PML and cures the disease. Modification of PML and PML-RARA with SUMO and ubiquitin precedes ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis. To identify additional components of this pathway, we performed proteomics on PML bodies. This revealed that association of p97/VCP segregase with PML bodies is increased after arsenic treatment. Pharmacological inhibition of p97 altered the number, morphology, and size of PML bodies, accumulated SUMO and ubiquitin modified PML and blocked arsenic-induced degradation of PML-RARA and PML. p97 localized to PML bodies in response to arsenic, and siRNA-mediated depletion showed that p97 cofactors UFD1 and NPLOC4 were critical for PML degradation. Thus, the UFD1-NPLOC4-p97 segregase complex is required to extract poly-ubiquitinated, poly-SUMOylated PML from PML bodies, prior to degradation by the proteasome.
Fibroepithelial tumours are biphasic neoplasms of the breast comprising the common benign fibroadenomas and the less common phyllodes tumours (PTs), which have recurrent potential. PTs are classified into benign, borderline or malignant, based on five histopathological criteria, with malignant PTs having the highest metastatic capability. Accurate diagnosis can be challenging due to the subjective assessment of histopathological parameters. Fibroadenomas bear morphological similarities to benign PTs, while borderline and malignant PTs can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from other spindle cell tumours of the breast. From clonality studies to whole-genome sequencing, much research has been conducted to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of fibroepithelial tumours, which, in turn, have allowed leveraging the findings for diagnostic applications, including grading of PTs. The most noteworthy discovery was of recurrent MED12 mutations in both fibroadenomas and PTs. Subsequent studies also uncovered relatively frequent genetic mutations in TERT promoter and RARA A customised panel of 16 most frequently mutated genes in fibroepithelial tissues has been compiled previously and has contributed to resolving a few diagnostic dilemmas. This review will introduce the 16 genes and focus on the top three that are most frequently mutated in fibroepithelial tumours: MED12, TERT, and RARA.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with reciprocal and balanced chromosomal translocations always involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARa) gene on chromosome 17 and variable partner genes (X genes) on distinct chromosomes. RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the majority of APL cases, and in a few cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b genes. As a consequence, X-RARalpha and RARalpha-X fusion genes are generated encoding aberrant chimeric proteins that exert critical oncogenic functions. Here we will integrate some of the most recent findings in APL research in a unified model and discuss some of the outstanding questions that remain to be addressed.
Liver fibrosis can occur in many chronic liver diseases, and no effective treatments are available due to the poorly characterized molecular pathogenesis. Semaphorin 4D (Sema4D) has immune functions and serves important roles in T cell priming. Here, we found that Sema4D was highly expressed in fibrotic liver, and the expression of Sema4D increased with hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) activation. Knockout of Sema4D alleviated liver fibrosis. Mechanistically, knockout of Sema4D alleviated liver fibrosis by suppressing the expression of AOX1 in retinol metabolism. Further investigation demonstrated that retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA), an important nuclear receptor of retinoic acid, was reduced by Sema4D knockout during liver fibrogenesis. Sema4D knockout-mediated suppression of liver fibrosis was partly mediated by regulating the balance of Th1, Th2, Th17, and T-bet(+)Treg cells via inhibiting AOX1/RARA. Thus, targeting Sema4D may hold promise as a potential therapeutic approach for treating liver fibrosis.
The underlying mechanism(s) by which the PML::RARA fusion protein initiates acute promyelocytic leukemia is not yet clear. We defined the genomic binding sites of PML::RARA in primary mouse and human hematopoietic progenitor cells with V5-tagged PML::RARA, using anti-V5-PML::RARA chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and CUT&RUN approaches. Most genomic PML::RARA binding sites were found in regions that were already chromatin-accessible (defined by ATAC-seq) in unmanipulated, wild-type promyelocytes, suggesting that these regions are "open" prior to PML::RARA expression. We found that GATA binding motifs, and the direct binding of the chromatin "pioneering factor" GATA2, were significantly enriched near PML::RARA binding sites. Proximity labeling studies revealed that PML::RARA interacts with ~250 proteins in primary mouse hematopoietic cells; GATA2 and 33 others require PML::RARA binding to DNA for the interaction to occur, suggesting that binding to their cognate DNA target motifs may stabilize their interactions. In the absence of PML::RARA, Gata2 overexpression induces many of the same epigenetic and transcriptional changes as PML::RARA. These findings suggested that PML::RARA may indirectly initiate its transcriptional program by activating Gata2 expression: Indeed, we demonstrated that inactivation of Gata2 prior to PML::RARA expression prevented its ability to induce self-renewal. These data suggested that GATA2 binding creates accessible chromatin regions enriched for both GATA and Retinoic Acid Receptor Element motifs, where GATA2 and PML::RARA can potentially bind and interact with each other. In turn, PML::RARA binding to DNA promotes a feed-forward transcriptional program by positively regulating Gata2 expression. Gata2 may therefore be required for PML::RARA to establish its transcriptional program.
Nucleophosmin (NPM) is a nucleolar phosphoprotein that plays multiple roles in ribosome assembly and transport, cytoplasmic-nuclear trafficking, centrosome duplication and regulation of p53. In hematological malignancies, the NPM1 gene is frequently involved in chromosomal translocation, mutation and deletion. The NPM1 gene on 5q35 is translocated with the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene in anaplastic large cell lymphoma with t(2;5). The MLF1 and RARA genes are fused with NPM1 in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with t(3;5) and acute promyelocytic leukemia with t(5;17), respectively. In each fused protein, the N-terminal NPM portion is associated with oligomerization of a partner protein leading to altered signal transduction or transcription. Recently, mutations of exon 12 have been found in a significant proportion of de novo AML, especially in those with a normal karyotype. Mutant NPM is localized aberrantly in the cytoplasm, but the molecular mechanisms for leukemia remain to be studied. Studies of knock-out mice have revealed new aspects regarding NPM1 as a tumor-suppressor gene. This review focuses on the clinical significance of the NPM1 gene in hematological malignancies and newly discovered roles of NPM associated with oncogenesis.
The majority of patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) manifest the t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.2) translocation; however, a minor but significant proportion of patients with APL harbor complex, cryptic, or variant translocations, which typically involve RARA. With the exception of ZBTB16/RARA, these variants have similar morphologic and immunophenotypic features as classic APL. Study of the variant forms of APL not only gives insight into the pathogenesis of APL but also allows us to understand the mechanism of retinoid therapy. It is important to identify these cryptic and variant translocations because certain variants, including ZBTB16/RARA and STAT5B/RARA, are resistant to treatment with all-trans retinoic acid, arsenic trioxide, and anthracyclines.
Ferroptosis is a recently discovered form of cell death that plays an important role in tumor growth and holds promise as a target for antitumor therapy. However, evidence in the regulation of ferroptosis in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) remains elusive. Here, we show that retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) is upregulated with the treatment of ferroptosis inducers (FINs). Pharmacological activation of RARA increases the resistance of LUAD to ferroptosis according to cell viability and lipid peroxidation assays, while RARA inhibitor or knockdown (KD) does the opposite. Through transcriptome sequencing in RARA-KD cells and chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP)-Seq data, we identify thioredoxin (TXN) and protein phosphatase 1 F (PPM1F) as downstream targets of RARA, both of which inhibit ferroptosis. We confirm that RARA binds to the promotor region of TXN and PPM1F and promotes their transcription by CHIP-qPCR and dual-luciferase assays. Overexpression of TXN and PPM1F reverses the effects of RARA knockdown on ferroptosis in vitro and vivo. Clinically, RARA knockdown or inhibitor increases cells' sensitivity to pemetrexed and cisplatin (CDDP). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of LUAD from our cohort shows the same expression tendency of RARA and the downstream targets. Our study uncovers that RARA inhibits ferroptosis in LUAD by promoting TXN and PPM1F, and inhibiting RARA-TXN/PPM1F axis represents a promising strategy for improving the efficacy of FINs or chemotherapy in the treatment of LUAD patients.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a series of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) fusion genes that lead to the dysregulation of RAR signaling and onset of APL. PML-RARA is the most common fusion generated from t(15;17)(q24;q21). In addition, the reciprocal fusion RARA-PML is present in over 80% of t(15;17) APL cases. The bcr3 types of RARA-PML and RARA-PLZF in particular are reciprocal fusions that contribute to leukemogenesis. Here, we report a variant APL case with t(11;17;15)(q13;q21.2;q24.1). Massive parallel sequencing of patient RNA detected the novel fusion transcripts RARA-SNX15 and SNX15-LINC02255 along with the bcr3 type of PML-RARA. Genetic analysis revealed that RARA-SNX15L is an in-frame fusion due to intron retention caused by RNA mis-splicing. RARA-SNX15L consisted mainly of SNX15 domains, including the Phox-homology domain, which has a critical role in protein-protein interactions among sorting nexins and with other partners. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that RARA-SNX15L is directly associated with SNX15 and with itself. Further studies are needed to evaluate the biological significance of RARA-SNX15L in APL. In conclusion, this is the first report of APL with a complex chromosomal rearrangement involving SNX15.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with typically PML::RARA fusion gene caused by t (15;17) (q22; q12) was distinguished from other types of acute myeloid leukemia. In a subset of patients with APL, t (15;17) (q22;q21) and PML::RARA fusion cannot be detected. In this report, we identified the coexistence of STAT3::RARA and RARA::STAT5b fusions for the first time in a variant APL patient lacking t (15;17)(q22;q21)/PML::RARA fusion. Then, this patient was resistant to all-trans retinoic acid combined arsenic trioxide chemotherapy. Accurate detection of RARA gene partners is crucial for variant APL, and effective therapeutic regime is urgently needed.
A superenhancer at the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) gene is associated with RARA mRNA overexpression in  approximately 30% of non-acute promyelocytic leukemia acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and in  approximately 50% of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). RARA overexpression is an actionable target for treatment with tamibarotene, an oral potent and selective RARalpha agonist. Sensitivity to the RARalpha agonist tamibarotene was demonstrated in RARA-high but not RARA-low preclinical AML models. The combination of oral tamibarotene plus azacitidine was evaluated in a phase 2 clinical study in 51 newly diagnosed unfit patients with AML identified as RARA-positive (n = 22) or RARA-negative (n = 29) for RARA mRNA overexpression in peripheral blasts using a blood-based biomarker test. In 18 response-evaluable RARA-positive patients, complete remission (CR)/CR with incomplete hematologic recovery rate was 61%, CR rate was 50%, and time to initial composite CR was rapid at 1.2 months. Transfusion independence was attained by 72% of RARA-positive patients. In contrast, 28 response-evaluable RARA-negative patients had response rates that were consistent with azacitidine monotherapy. Tamibarotene in combination with azacitidine was well tolerated. The majority of nonhematologic adverse events were low grade and hematologic adverse events were comparable to single-agent azacitidine, demonstrating that there was no additional myelosuppression when tamibarotene was combined with azacitidine. These results support further evaluation of tamibarotene-based treatment strategies in patients with AML or MDS with RARA overexpression to provide a targeted approach with the goal of improving patient outcomes. This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT02807558.
BACKGROUND: Autoantibodies binding to podocyte antigens cause idiopathic membranous glomerulonephritis (iMGN). However, it remains elusive how autoantibodies reach the subepithelial space because the glomerular filtration barrier (GFB) is size selective and almost impermeable for antibodies. METHODS: Kidney biopsies from patients with iMGN, cell culture, zebrafish, and mouse models were used to investigate the role of nephronectin (NPNT) regulating microRNAs (miRs) for the GFB. RESULTS: Glomerular endothelial cell (GEC)-derived miR-192-5p and podocyte-derived miR-378a-3p are upregulated in urine and glomeruli of patients with iMGN, whereas glomerular NPNT is reduced. Overexpression of miR-192-5p and morpholino-mediated npnt knockdown induced edema, proteinuria, and podocyte effacement similar to podocyte-derived miR-378a-3p in zebrafish. Structural changes of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) with increased lucidity, splitting, and lamellation, especially of the lamina rara interna, similar to ultrastructural findings seen in advanced stages of iMGN, were found. IgG-size nanoparticles accumulated in lucidity areas of the lamina rara interna and lamina densa of the GBM in npnt-knockdown zebrafish models. Loss of slit diaphragm proteins and severe structural impairment of the GBM were further confirmed in podocyte-specific Npnt knockout mice. GECs downregulate podocyte NPNT by transfer of miR-192-5p-containing exosomes in a paracrine manner. CONCLUSIONS: Podocyte NPNT is important for proper glomerular filter function and GBM structure and is regulated by GEC-derived miR-192-5p and podocyte-derived miR-378a-3p. We hypothesize that loss of NPNT in the GBM is an important part of the initial pathophysiology of iMGN and enables autoantigenicity of podocyte antigens and subepithelial immune complex deposition in iMGN.
