Retinoic acid receptor beta; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9-cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence or presence of hormone ligand, acts mainly as an activator of gene expression due to weak binding to corepressors. The RXRA/RARB heterodimer can act as a repressor on the DR1 element  [...] 
The development and progression of melanoma have been attributed to independent or combined genetic and epigenetic events. There has been remarkable progress in understanding melanoma pathogenesis in terms of genetic alterations. However, recent studies have revealed a complex involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of gene expression, including methylation, chromatin modification and remodeling, and the diverse activities of non-coding RNAs. The roles of gene methylation and miRNAs have been relatively well studied in melanoma, but other studies have shown that changes in chromatin status and in the differential expression of long non-coding RNAs can lead to altered regulation of key genes. Taken together, they affect the functioning of signaling pathways that influence each other, intersect, and form networks in which local perturbations disturb the activity of the whole system. Here, we focus on how epigenetic events intertwine with these pathways and contribute to the molecular pathogenesis of melanoma.
The prefrontal cortex (PFC) and its connections with the mediodorsal thalamus are crucial for cognitive flexibility and working memory(1) and are thought to be altered in disorders such as autism(2,3) and schizophrenia(4,5). Although developmental mechanisms that govern the regional patterning of the cerebral cortex have been characterized in rodents(6-9), the mechanisms that underlie the development of PFC-mediodorsal thalamus connectivity and the lateral expansion of the PFC with a distinct granular layer 4 in primates(10,11) remain unknown. Here we report an anterior (frontal) to posterior (temporal), PFC-enriched gradient of retinoic acid, a signalling molecule that regulates neural development and function(12-15), and we identify genes that are regulated by retinoic acid in the neocortex of humans and macaques at the early and middle stages of fetal development. We observed several potential sources of retinoic acid, including the expression and cortical expansion of retinoic-acid-synthesizing enzymes specifically in primates as compared to mice. Furthermore, retinoic acid signalling is largely confined to the prospective PFC by CYP26B1, a retinoic-acid-catabolizing enzyme, which is upregulated in the prospective motor cortex. Genetic deletions in mice revealed that retinoic acid signalling through the retinoic acid receptors RXRG and RARB, as well as CYP26B1-dependent catabolism, are involved in proper molecular patterning of prefrontal and motor areas, development of PFC-mediodorsal thalamus connectivity, intra-PFC dendritic spinogenesis and expression of the layer 4 marker RORB. Together, these findings show that retinoic acid signalling has a critical role in the development of the PFC and, potentially, in its evolutionary expansion.
Prion diseases are transmissible, fatal neurodegenerative diseases that include scrapie and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in animals and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in human. The prion protein gene (PRNP) is the major genetic determinant of susceptibility, however, several studies now suggest that other genes are also important. Two recent genome wide association studies in human have identified four new loci of interest: ZBTB38-RASA2 in UK CJD cases and MTMR7 and NPAS2 in variant CJD. Complementary studies in mouse have used complex crosses to identify new modifiers such as Cpne8 and provided supporting evidence for previously implicated genes (Rarb and Stmn2). Expression profiling has identified new candidates, including Hspa13, which reduces incubation time in a transgenic model.
Prostate cancer (CaP) is the second leading cause of cancer death and displays a broad range of clinical behavior from relatively indolent to aggressive metastatic disease. The etiology of most cases of CaP is not understood completely, which makes it imperative to search for the molecular basis of CaP and markers for early diagnosis. Epigenetic modifications, including changes in DNA methylation patterns, histone modifications, miRNAs, and lncRNAs are key drivers of prostate tumorigenesis. These epigenetic defects might be due to deregulated expression of the epigenetic machinery, affecting the expression of several important genes like GSTP1, RASSF1, CDKN2, RARRES1, IGFBP3, RARB, TMPRSS2-ERG, ITGB4, AOX1, HHEX, WT1, HSPE, PLAU, FOXA1, ASC, GPX3, EZH2, LSD1, etc. In this review, we highlighted the most important epigenetic gene alterations and their variations as a diagnostic marker and target for therapeutic intervention of CaP in the future. Characterization of epigenetic changes involved in CaP is obscure and adequate validation studies are still required to corroborate the present results that would be the impending future of transforming basic research settings into clinical practice.
The retinoic acid receptors (RARA, RARB, and RARG) are ligand-regulated nuclear receptors that act as transcriptional switches. These master genes drew significant interest in the 1990s because of their key roles in embryogenesis and involvement in a rare malignancy, acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), in which the RARA (and very rarely, RARG or RARB) genes are rearranged, underscoring the central role of deregulated retinoid signaling in leukemogenesis. Several recent provocative observations have revived interest in the roles of retinoids in non-APL acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as well as in normal hematopoietic differentiation. We review the role of retinoids in hematopoiesis, as well as in the treatment of non-APL AMLs. From this perspective, broader uses of retinoids in the management of hematopoietic tumors are discussed.
PURPOSE: Dominant variants in the retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB) gene underlie a syndromic form of microphthalmia, known as MCOPS12, which is associated with other birth anomalies and global developmental delay with spasticity and/or dystonia. Here, we report 25 affected individuals with 17 novel pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in RARB. This study aims to characterize the functional impact of these variants and describe the clinical spectrum of MCOPS12. METHODS: We used in vitro transcriptional assays and in silico structural analysis to assess the functional relevance of RARB variants in affecting the normal response to retinoids. RESULTS: We found that all RARB variants tested in our assays exhibited either a gain-of-function or a loss-of-function activity. Loss-of-function variants disrupted RARB function through a dominant-negative effect, possibly by disrupting ligand binding and/or coactivators' recruitment. By reviewing clinical data from 52 affected individuals, we found that disruption of RARB is associated with a more variable phenotype than initially suspected, with the absence in some individuals of cardinal features of MCOPS12, such as developmental eye anomaly or motor impairment. CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that pathogenic variants in RARB are functionally heterogeneous and associated with extensive clinical heterogeneity.
Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) are contagious infectious diseases that can be prevented by immunization. However, MMR infections can occur in previously immunized individuals. The vaccine response is, among other factors, influenced by the combined effects of many genes. This systematic review investigates the genetic influence on measles, mumps and rubella antibody responses after childhood vaccination. In accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA), systematic literature searches were conducted in the medical databases PubMed, EMBASE and PsycINFO. Search strings were adjusted for each database. Citations were included if they measured and compared the immune response with immunogenetics after vaccination with a vaccine containing one or more of the following components: measles, mumps and/or rubella, MMR. The measure of vaccine response studied was antibodies after vaccination. Forty-eight articles were included in the final analysis. The results suggest that genetic determinants, including host genes, and single nucleotide polymorphisms in immune-related genes influence the MMR antibody responses after vaccination. Specifically, replicated associations were found between HLA, CD46, RARB, IRF9, EIF2AK2, cytokine genes and MMR vaccine-induced humoral immune responses. This knowledge can be useful in understanding and predicting immune responses and may have implications for future vaccine strategies.
Gene promoter methylation is a common epigenetic event, taking place in the early phase of tumorigenesis, which has a great potential as a diagnostic and prognostic cancer biomarker. In this umbrella review, we provide an overview on the association between gene-promoter methylation of protein-coding genes and cancer risk based on currently available meta-analyses data on gene promoter methylation. We searched MEDLINE via PubMed and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews for meta-analyses that examine the association between gene-promoter methylation and cancer, published until January 2019 in English. We used AMSTAR to assess the quality of the included studies and applied a set of pre-specified criteria to evaluate the magnitude of each association. We provide a comprehensive overview of 80 unique combinations between 22 different genes and 18 cancer outcomes, all of which indicated a positive association between promoter hypermethylation and cancer. In total, the 70 meta-analyses produced significant results under a random-effects model with odds ratios that ranged from 1.94 to 26.60, with the summary effect being in favor of the unmethylated group in all cases. Three of the strong evidence associations involve RASSF1 methylation on bladder cancer risk (OR = 18.46; 95% CI: 12.69-26.85; I(2) = 0%), MGMT methylation on NSCLC (OR = 4.25; 95% CI: 2.83-6.38; I(2) = 22.4%) and RARB methylation on prostate cancer (OR = 6.87; 95% CI: 4.68-10.08; I(2) = 0%). Meta-analyses showed a moderate quality, AMSTAR score ranging from 4 to 9 (Mdn = 8; IQR: 7.0 to 8.0). As primary studies and meta-analyses on the subject accumulate, more genetic loci may be found to be highly associated with specific cancer types and hence the biomarker sets will become wider.
Androgens are precursors for sex steroids and are predominantly produced in the human gonads and the adrenal cortex. They are important for intrauterine and postnatal sexual development and human reproduction. Although human androgen biosynthesis has been extensively studied in the past, exact mechanisms underlying the regulation of androgen production in health and disease remain vague. Here, the knowledge on human androgen biosynthesis and regulation is reviewed with a special focus on human adrenal androgen production and the hyperandrogenic disorder of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Since human androgen regulation is highly specific without a good animal model, most studies are performed on patients harboring inborn errors of androgen biosynthesis, on human biomaterials and human (tumor) cell models. In the past, most studies used a candidate gene approach while newer studies use high throughput technologies to identify novel regulators of androgen biosynthesis. Using genome wide association studies on cohorts of patients, novel PCOS candidate genes have been recently described. Variant 2 of the DENND1A gene was found overexpressed in PCOS theca cells and confirmed to enhance androgen production. Transcriptome profiling of dissected adrenal zones established a role for BMP4 in androgen synthesis. Similarly, transcriptome analysis of human adrenal NCI-H295 cells identified novel regulators of androgen production. Kinase p38alpha (MAPK14) was found to phosphorylate CYP17 for enhanced 17,20 lyase activity and RARB and ANGPTL1 were detected in novel networks regulating androgens. The discovery of novel players for androgen biosynthesis is of clinical significance as it provides targets for diagnostic and therapeutic use.
Osteosarcoma, the primary bone cancer in adolescents and young adults, is notorious for its aggressive growth and metastatic potential. Our study delved into the prognostic impact of inflammasome-related gene signatures in osteosarcoma patients, employing comprehensive genetic profiling to uncover signatures linked with patient outcomes. We identified three patient subgroups through consensus clustering, with one showing worse survival rates correlated with high FGFR3 and RARB expressions. Immune profiling revealed significant immune cell infiltration differences among these subgroups, affecting survival. Utilising advanced machine learning, including StepCox and gradient boosting machine algorithms, we developed a prognostic model with a notable c-index of 0.706, highlighting CD36 and MYD88 as key genes. Higher inflammasome risk scores from our model were associated with poorer survival, corroborated across datasets. In vitro experiments validated CD36 and MYD88's roles in promoting osteosarcoma cell proliferation, invasion and migration, emphasising their therapeutic potential. This research offers new insights into inflammasomes' role in osteosarcoma, introducing novel biomarkers for risk assessment and potential therapeutic targets. Our findings suggest a pathway towards personalised treatment strategies, potentially improving patient outcomes in osteosarcoma.
BACKGROUND: Methylation levels may be associated with and serve as markers to predict risk of progression of precancerous cervical lesions. We conducted an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) of CpG methylation and progression to high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2 +) following an abnormal screening test. METHODS: A prospective US cohort of 289 colposcopy patients with normal or CIN1 enrollment histology was assessed. Baseline cervical sample DNA was analyzed using Illumina HumanMethylation 450K (n = 76) or EPIC 850K (n = 213) arrays. Participants returned at provider-recommended intervals and were followed up to 5 years via medical records. We assessed continuous CpG M values for 9 cervical cancer-associated genes and time-to-progression to CIN2+. We estimated CpG-specific time-to-event ratios (TTER) and hazard ratios using adjusted, interval-censored Weibull accelerated failure time models. We also conducted an exploratory EWAS to identify novel CpGs with false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05. RESULTS: At enrollment, median age was 29.2 years; 64.0% were high-risk HPV-positive, and 54.3% were non-white. During follow-up (median 24.4 months), 15 participants progressed to CIN2+. Greater methylation levels were associated with a shorter time-to-CIN2+ for CADM1 cg03505501 (TTER = 0.28; 95%CI 0.12, 0.63; FDR = 0.03) and RARB Cluster 1 (TTER = 0.46; 95% CI 0.29, 0.71; FDR = 0.01). There was evidence of similar trends for DAPK1 cg14286732, PAX1 cg07213060, and PAX1 Cluster 1. The EWAS detected 336 novel progression-associated CpGs, including those located in CpG islands associated with genes FGF22, TOX, COL18A1, GPM6A, XAB2, TIMP2, GSPT1, NR4A2, and APBB1IP. CONCLUSIONS: Using prospective time-to-event data, we detected associations between CADM1-, DAPK1-, PAX1-, and RARB-related CpGs and cervical disease progression, and we identified novel progression-associated CpGs. IMPACT: Methylation levels at novel CpG sites may help identify individuals with </=CIN1 histology at higher risk of progression to CIN2+ and inform risk-based cervical cancer screening guidelines.
Prion diseases or transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) are neurodegenerative disorders of humans and animals for which there are no effective treatments or cure. They include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) in humans and sheep scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and chronic wasting disease (CWD) in cervids. The prion protein (PrP) is central to the disease process. An abnormal form of PrP is generally considered to be the sole or principal component of the infectious agent and a multimeric isomer (PrP(Sc)) is deposited in affected brains. Inherited prion diseases are caused by over 30 mutations in the prion protein gene (PRNP) and common polymorphisms can have a considerable affect on susceptibility and phenotype. Susceptibility and incubation time are also partly determined by other (non-PRNP) genetic modifiers. Understanding how these other genes modify prion diseases may lead to insights into biological mechanisms. Several approaches including human genome wide association studies (GWAS), mouse mapping and differential expression studies are now revealing some of these genes which include RARB (retinoic acid receptor beta), the E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD2 and SPRN (Shadoo, shadow of prion protein gene).
Microphthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma (MAC) are distinct phenotypes that represent a continuum of structural developmental eye defects. In severe bilateral cases (anophthalmia or severe microphthalmia) the genetic cause is now identifiable in approximately 80 percent of cases, with de novo heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in SOX2 or OTX2 being the most common. The genetic cause of other forms of MAC, in particular isolated coloboma, remains unknown in the majority of cases. This review will focus on MAC phenotypes that are associated with mutation of the genes SOX2, OTX2, PAX6, STRA6, ALDH1A3, RARB, VSX2, RAX, FOXE3, BMP4, BMP7, GDF3, GDF6, ABCB6, ATOH7, C12orf57, TENM3 (ODZ3), and VAX1. Recently reported mutation of the SALL2 and YAP1 genes are discussed in brief. Clinical and genetic features were reviewed in a total of 283 unrelated MAC cases or families that were mutation-positive from these 20 genes. Both the relative frequency of mutations in MAC cohort screens and the level of confidence in the assignment of disease-causing status were evaluated for each gene.
Osteosarcoma is the most common primary malignant bone tumour in children and adolescents. Chemoresistance leads to poor responses to conventional therapy in patients with osteosarcoma. The discovery of novel effective therapeutic targets and drugs is still the main focus of osteosarcoma research. Nuclear receptors (NRs) have shown substantial promise as novel therapeutic targets for various cancers. In the present study, we performed a drug screen using 29 chemicals that specifically target 17 NRs in several different human osteosarcoma and osteoblast cell lines. The retinoic acid receptor beta (RARb) antagonist LE135, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPARg) antagonist T0070907, liver X receptor (LXR) agonist T0901317 and Rev-Erba agonist SR9011 significantly inhibited the proliferation of malignant osteosarcoma cells (U2OS, HOS-MNNG and Saos-2 cells) but did not inhibit the growth of normal osteoblasts. The effects of these NR modulators on osteosarcoma cells occurred in a dose-dependent manner and were not observed in NR-knockout osteosarcoma cells. These NR modulators also significantly inhibited osteosarcoma growth in vivo and enhanced the antitumour effect of doxorubicin (DOX). Transcriptomic and immunoblotting results showed that these NR modulators may inhibit the growth of osteosarcoma cells by regulating the PI3K/AKT/mTOR and ERK/mTOR pathways. DDIT4, which blocks mTOR activation, was identified as one of the common downstream target genes of these NRs. DDIT4 knockout significantly attenuated the inhibitory effects of these NR modulators on osteosarcoma cell growth. Together, our results revealed that modulators of RARb, PPARg, LXRs and Rev-Erba inhibit osteosarcoma growth both in vitro and in vivo through the mTOR signaling pathway, suggesting that treatment with these NR modulators is a novel potential therapeutic strategy.
We conducted a genome-wide association study of Digit Symbol Substitution Test scores administered in 4207 family members of the Long Life Family Study (LLFS). Genotype data were imputed to the HRC panel of 64,940 haplotypes resulting in  approximately 15M genetic variants with a quality score > 0.7. The results were replicated using genetic data imputed to the 1000 Genomes phase 3 reference panel from 2 Danish twin cohorts: the study of Middle Aged Danish Twins and the Longitudinal Study of Aging Danish Twins. The genome-wide association study in LLFS discovered 18 rare genetic variants (minor allele frequency (MAF) < 1.0%) that reached genome-wide significance (p-value < 5 x 10(-8)). Among these, 17 rare variants in chromosome 3 had large protective effects on the processing speed, including rs7623455, rs9821776, rs9821587, rs78704059, which were replicated in the combined Danish twin cohort. These SNPs are located in/near 2 genes, THRB and RARB, that belonged to the thyroid hormone receptors family that may influence the speed of metabolism and cognitive aging. The gene-level tests in LLFS confirmed that these 2 genes are associated with processing speed.
Breast cancer, a leading cause of death in women, is a complex heterogeneous disease comprising multiple molecular subtypes with different treatment responses and hence clinical outcomes. The present study aims to gain a deeper insight into the disease complexities at the level of molecular subtypes. For this, first, three subtype networks of breast cancer, viz., ER-/HER2-, ER+/HER2-, and HER2+, were constructed utilizing mRNA expression profiles of tumor tissues. Subsequently, these networks were used to construct three exclusively subtype-specific networks. Further, the mRNA expression profiles of all three subtypes were analyzed using differential correlations based on z-statistics of the F-test. Finally, functional enrichment analysis was carried out to elucidate functions and processes of important genes involved in subtype networks. From this analysis, it was observed that these subtype networks share a commonality among them in terms of preserved patterns. However, these networks possess specific patterns that result in exclusively subtypespecific networks having unique sets of wiring among the genes. Additionally, the significantly differentially correlated gene pairs between two subtypes demonstrate subtype-specific expressional patterns which make them different at the molecular level. Furthermore, the network analysis also revealed ER-/HER2--specific genes, viz., LUM, RARB, and ERCC6. Thus, the present analysis provides new insights for further research on breast cancer subtypes and hence the development of the most effective diagnosis and treatment.
Gastric cancer (GC), one of the most common human cancers, is a heterogeneous disease with different phenotypes, prognoses, and responses to treatment. Understanding the pathogenesis of GC at the molecular level is important for prognosis prediction and determining treatments. Microsatellite instability (MSI), silencing of MLH1, MGMT, and CDKN2A genes by DNA hypermethylation, KRAS mutation, APC mutation, and ERBB2 amplification are frequently found in intestinal type GC. Inactivation of CDH1 and RARB by DNA hypermethylation, and amplification of FGFR and MET, are frequently detected in diffuse type GC. In addition, BST2 and PCDHB9 genes are overexpressed in intestinal type GC. Both genes are associated with GC progression. GC can be divided into gastric/intestinal mucin phenotypes according to mucin expression. MSI, alterations of TP73, CDH1 mutation, and DNA methylation of MLH are detected frequently in the gastric mucin phenotype. TP53 mutation, deletion of APC, and DNA methylation of MGMT are detected frequently in the intestinal mucin phenotype. FKTN is overexpressed in the intestinal mucin phenotype, and IQGAP3 is overexpressed in the gastric mucin phenotype. These genes are involved in GC progression. To characterize cancer stem cells, a useful method is spheroid colony formation. KIFC1 and KIF11 genes show more than twofold higher expression in spheroid-forming cells than that in parental cells. Both KIF genes are overexpressed in GC, and knockdown of these genes inhibits spheroid formation. Alterations of these molecules may be useful to understand gastric carcinogenesis. Specific inhibitors of these molecules may also be promising anticancer drugs.
BACKGROUND: A 45,X monosomy (Turner syndrome, TS) is the only chromosome haploinsufficiency compatible with life. Nevertheless, the surviving TS patients still suffer from increased morbidity and mortality, with around one-third of them subjecting to heart abnormalities. How loss of one X chromosome drive these conditions remains largely unknown. METHODS: Here, we have generated cardiomyocytes (CMs) from wild-type and TS patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells and profiled the mRNA, lncRNA and circRNA expression in these cells. RESULTS: We observed lower beating frequencies and higher mitochondrial DNA copies per nucleus in TS-CMs. Moreover, we have identified a global transcriptome dysregulation of both coding and non-coding RNAs in TS-CMs. The differentially expressed mRNAs were enriched of heart development genes. Further competing endogenous RNA network analysis revealed putative regulatory circuit of autosomal genes relevant with mitochondrial respiratory chain and heart development, such as COQ10A, RARB and WNT2, mediated by X-inactivation escaping lnc/circRNAs, such as lnc-KDM5C-4:1, hsa_circ_0090421 and hsa_circ_0090392. The aberrant expressions of these genes in TS-CMs were verified by qPCR. Further knockdown of lnc-KDM5C-4:1 in wild-type CMs exhibited significantly reduced beating frequencies. CONCLUSIONS: Our study has revealed a genomewide ripple effect of X chromosome halpoinsufficiency at post-transcriptional level and provided insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying heart abnormalities in TS patients.
BACKGROUND: Today, the prognostic tools available at the time of diagnosis in colorectal cancer (CRC) are limited. Better prognostic tools are a prerequisite for personalised treatment. This study aimed to investigate whether circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA) markers found in plasma before clinical diagnosis of CRC could contribute to the prediction of poor prognosis. METHODS: This observational cohort study included patients diagnosed with CRC stage I-III within 24 months following participation in the Trondelag Health Study (n = 85). Known methylated ctDNA biomarkers of CRC were analysed by PCR in plasma. Outcomes were overall survival (OS), recurrence-free survival (RFS) and poor prognosis (PP). Candidate clinical and methylated ctDNA predictors of the outcomes were identified by Cox regression analyses. RESULTS: Methylated GRIA4 (HR 1.96 (1.06-3.63)), RARB (HR 9.48 (3.00-30.00)), SLC8A1 (HR 1.97 (1.03-3.77)), VIM (HR 2.95 (1.22-7.14)) and WNT5A (HR 5.83 (2.33-14.56)) were independent predictors of OS, methylated RARB (HR 9.67 (2.54-36.81)), SDC2 (HR 3.38 (1.07-10.66)), SLC8A1 (HR 2.93 (1.01-8.51)) and WNT5A (HR 6.95 (1.81-26.68)) were independent predictors of RFS and methylated RARB (HR 6.11 (1.69-22.18)), SDC2 (HR 2.79 (1.20-6.49)) and WNT5A (HR 5.57 (3.04-15.26)) were independent predictors of PP (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Prediagnostic ctDNA markers are promising contributors to predicting poor prognosis in CRC, potentially becoming one of the tools guiding more personalised treatment.
Gene promoter methylation may be used a potential biomarker for detecting solid tumor including cervical cancer. Here, we used methylation sensitive-high resolution melting (MS-HRM) analysis to detecting promoter methylation ratios of DAPK1, MGMT and RARB gene in patients with different cervical disease grade. The detection of gene promoter methylation was conducted in two hundred fifty patients' samples including normal cytology (n=48), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 1 (CIN1, n=54), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 2 (CIN2, n=47), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 (CIN3, n=56) and cervical squamous cell carcinomas (SCS, n=45). We found there were a significant positive correlation between the promoter methylation status of DAPK1 and cervical disease grade (P=0.022). In addition, the methylated promoters of DAPK1 combined with MGMT, MGMT combined with RARB, DAPK1 combined with RARB were positive correlated with cervical disease grade (P < 0.05). All three genes promoters methylated were positive correlated with cervical disease grade (P < 0.001). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves was conducted to evaluate whether the three genes methylation could be used to be a potential marker for diagnosing high grade cervical disease (HSIL and SCC). The cutoff values for the methylation rates of all these genes were 0-5%. Regrettably, only the methylation of MGMT combined with DAPK1 gave 43.4% sensitivity and 68.6% specificity. The current results indicated that MS-HRM-based testing for DNA methylations of MGMT plus DAPK1 genes holds some promise for high grade cervical disease screening.
