Extracellular cell-membrane anchored RET cadherin 120 kDa fragment; Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase involved in numerous cellular mechanisms including cell proliferation, neuronal navigation, cell migration, and cell differentiation upon binding with glial cell derived neurotrophic factor family ligands. Phosphorylates PTK2/FAK1. Regulates both cell death/survival balance and positional information. Required for the molecular mechanisms orchestration during intestine organogenesis; involved in the development of enteric nervous system and renal organogenesis during embryonic life, and [...] 
The RET proto-oncogene has been well-studied. RET is involved in many different physiological and developmental functions. When altered, RET mutations influence disease in a variety of organ systems from Hirschsprung's disease and multiple endocrine neoplasia 2 (MEN2) to papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Changes in RET expression have been discovered in 30-70% of invasive breast cancers and 50-60% of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas in addition to colorectal adenocarcinoma, melanoma, small cell lung cancer, neuroblastoma, and small intestine neuroendocrine tumors. RET mutations have been associated with tumor proliferation, invasion, and migration. RET fusions or rearrangements are somatic juxtapositions of 5' sequences from other genes with 3' RET sequences encoding tyrosine kinase. RET rearrangements occur in approximately 2.5-73% of sporadic PTC and 1-3% of NSCLC patients. The most common RET fusions are CDCC6-RET and NCOA4-RET in PTC and KIF5B-RET in NSCLC. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are drugs that target kinases such as RET in RET-driven (RET-mutation or RET-fusion-positive) disease. Multikinase inhibitors (MKI) target various kinases and other receptors. Several MKIs are FDA-approved for cancer therapy (sunitinib, sorafenib, vandetanib, cabozantinib, regorafenib, ponatinib, lenvatinib, alectinib) and non-oncologic disease (nintedanib). Selective RET inhibitor drugs LOXO-292 (selpercatinib) and BLU-667 (pralsetinib) are also undergoing phase I/II and I clinical trials, respectively, with preliminary results demonstrating partial response and low incidence of serious adverse events. RET fusions provide a viable therapeutic target for oncologic treatment, and further study is warranted into the prevalence and pathogenesis of RET fusions as well as development of current and new tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
The review presents data on the basic molecular ge-netic mechanisms of formation of papillary thyroid carcinoma. The participation of ionizing radiation in the cancer pathogenesis was analyzed. The role of tu-mor microenvironment, inflammation and nuclear trans-cription factor NF-kappaB in the initiation and development of papillary thyroid carcinoma was shown.
The rearranged during transfection (RET) receptor tyrosine kinase is physiologically stimulated by growth factors belonging to the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family and by the growth differentiation factor-15 cytokine. RET plays a critical role in normal development as well as in various human tumors and developmental disorders. This review focuses on mechanisms of RET signaling and their alterations in human diseases.
Recently approved RET tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have shown promising therapeutic effects against RET-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) or RET-mutated thyroid cancer. However, resistance develops, limiting long-term efficacy. Although many RET-TKI resistance mechanisms, such as secondary mutations in RET or activation of bypass pathways, are known, some primary or acquired resistance mechanisms are unclear. Here, human genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screening was performed to identify genes related to drug-tolerant persister cells. Patient-derived cells with RET-fusion were introduced genome-wide sgRNA library and treated with RET-TKI for 9 days, resulting in the discovery of several candidate genes. Knockout of MED12 or MIG6 significantly increased residual drug-tolerant persister cells under RET-TKI treatment. MIG6 loss induced significant EGFR activation even with low concentrations of EGFR ligands and led to resistance to RET-TKIs. EGFR inhibition with afatinib or cetuximab in combination with RET TKIs was effective in addressing drug persistence. By contrast, a KIF5B-RET positive cells established from a RET-rearranged NSCLC patient, showed significant resistance to RET-TKIs and high dependence on EGFR bypass signaling. Consistently, knocking out EGFR or RET led to high sensitivity to RET or EGFR inhibitor respectively. Here, we have provided a comprehensive analysis of adaptive and acquired resistance against RET-rearranged NSCLC.
Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC), accounting for less than 2% of all thyroid cancer, is responsible for the majority of death from all thyroid malignancies and has a median survival of 6 months. The resistance of ATC to conventional thyroid cancer therapies, including radioiodine and thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression, contributes to the very poor prognosis of this malignancy. This review will cover several cellular signaling pathways and mechanisms, including RET/PTC, RAS, BRAF, Notch, p53, and histone deacetylase, which are identified to play roles in the transformation and dedifferentiation process, and therapies that target these pathways. Lastly, novel approaches and agents involving the Notch1 pathway, nuclear factor kappaB, Trk-fused gene, cancer stem-like cells, mitochondrial mutation, and tumor immune microenvironment are discussed. With a better understanding of the biological process and treatment modality, the hope is to improve ATC outcome in the future.
Ret receptor tyrosine kinase is a proto-oncogene that participates in development of various cancers. Several independent studies have recently identified Ret as a key player in breast cancer. Although Ret overexpression and function have been under investigation, mainly in estrogen receptor positive breast cancer, a more comprehensive analysis of the impact of recurring Ret alterations in breast cancer is needed. This review consolidates the current knowledge of Ret alterations and their potential effects in breast cancer. We discuss and integrate data on Ret changes in different breast cancer subtypes and potential function in progression, as well as the participation of distinct Ret network signaling partners in these processes. We propose that it will be essential to define a shared molecular feature of tumors with alteration in Ret receptor, be this at the genetic level or via overexpression in order to design effective therapies to target the Ret pathway. Here we review experimental evidence from basic research and pre-clinical studies concentrating on Ret alterations as potential biomarkers for recurrence, and we discuss the possibility that targeting the Ret pathway might in the future become a treatment for breast cancer.
Ten years ago, RET-fusions were discovered as oncogenic drivers and potential drug targets in approximately 1% of metastatic lung adenocarcinomas. Several multikinase inhibitors were tested in clinical trials, however, their antitumor activity was limited. Recently, two selective and potent RET-inhibitors were approved for the treatment of patients with metastatic RET-fusion-positive lung cancer (RET-NSCLC). Here, we discuss the two RET-inhibitors selpercatinib and pralsetinib, and the management of patients with RET-fusion positive NSCLC.
It has been twenty-five years since the discovery of oncogenic germline RET mutations as the cause of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2). Intensive work over the last two and a half decades on RET genetics, signaling and cell biology has provided the current bases for the genotype-phenotype and functional correlations within this cancer syndrome. On the contrary, the structural and molecular basis for RET tyrosine kinase domain activation and oncogenic deregulation has remained largely elusive. Recent studies with a strong crystallographic and biochemical focus have started to elucidate key insights into such molecular and atomic details revealing unexpected and private mechanisms of actions and molecular determinants not previously envisioned. This review focuses on the structure and function of the RET receptor, and in particular, on what a more detailed view of the protein itself and what the current structural and molecular information tell us about the genotype and phenotype relationships in the cancer syndrome MEN2.
The RET proto-oncogene encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase that is a main component of the signaling pathway activated by the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family ligands. Gene targeting studies revealed that signaling through RET plays a crucial role in neuronal and renal organogenesis. It is well-known that germline mutations in RET lead to the human inherited diseases, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) and Hirschsprung's disease, and that somatic rearrangements of RET cause papillary thyroid carcinoma. Due to marked advances in understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the development of MEN 2, a consensus on MEN 2 management associated with RET status is being reached and currently put into general use as a guideline. In this review, we summarize progress in the study of RET from bench to bedside, focusing on pathophysiology of neuroendocrine tumors.
Congenital anomalies of the kidneys or lower urinary tract (CAKUT) encompass a spectrum of anomalies that result from aberrations in spatio-temporal regulation of genetic, epigenetic, environmental, and molecular signals at key stages of urinary tract development. The Rearranged in Transfection (RET) tyrosine kinase signaling system is a major pathway required for normal development of the kidneys, ureters, peripheral and enteric nervous systems. In the kidneys, RET is activated by interaction with the ligand glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and coreceptor GFRalpha1. This activated complex regulates a number of downstream signaling cascades (PLCgamma, MAPK, and PI3K) that control proliferation, migration, renewal, and apoptosis. Disruption of these events is thought to underlie diseases arising from aberrant RET signaling. RET mutations are found in 5-30 % of CAKUT patients and a number of Ret mouse mutants show a spectrum of kidney and lower urinary tract defects reminiscent of CAKUT in humans. The remarkable similarities between mouse and human kidney development and in defects due to RET mutations has led to using RET signaling as a paradigm for determining the fundamental principles in patterning of the upper and lower urinary tract and for understanding CAKUT pathogenesis. In this review, we provide an overview of studies in vivo that delineate expression and the functional importance of RET signaling complex during different stages of development of the upper and lower urinary tracts. We discuss how RET signaling balances activating and inhibitory signals emanating from its docking tyrosines and its interaction with upstream and downstream regulators to precisely modulate different aspects of Wolffian duct patterning and branching morphogenesis. We outline the diversity of cellular mechanisms regulated by RET, disruption of which causes malformations ranging from renal agenesis to multicystic dysplastic kidneys in the upper tract and vesicoureteral reflux or ureteropelvic junction obstruction in the lower tract.
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), a ligand of RET tyrosine kinase, and its family ligands promote the survival and differentiation of a variety of neurons. Gene ablation studies have revealed that the GDNF-RET receptor system is essential for the development of kidney and peripheral neurons, including sympathetic, parasympathetic and enteric neurons. RET can activate various signaling pathways such as RAS/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways. These signaling pathways are activated via binding of adaptor proteins to intracellular tyrosine residues of RET phosphorylated by its own kinase activity. The RET is profoundly involved in the development of several human neuroendocrine diseases. The constitutive activation of the RET by somatic rearrangement with other partner genes or germ-line mutations causes a considerable population of human papillary thyroid carcinomas or multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 2A and 2B, respectively, whereas the dysfunction of RET by germ-line missense and/or nonsense mutations causes Hirschsprung's disease. Biological properties of mutant RET protein determine the disease phenotype. For example, the MEN 2B mutation alters the substrate specificity of RET tyrosine kinase and RET carrying the MEN 2B mutation hereby induces the different set of genes from that carrying the MEN 2A mutation. In this review, we describe the current knowledge about the molecular mechanism of RET activation in human neuroendocrine tumors as well as the physiological roles and signal transduction of RET tyrosine kinase.
Rearranged during transfection (RET) rearrangement oncoprotein-mediated Ras/MAPK signaling cascade is constitutively activated in cancers. Here, we demonstrate a unique signal niche. The niche is a ternary complex based on the chimeric RET liquid-liquid phase separation. The complex comprises the rearranged kinase (RET fusion); the adaptor (GRB2), and the effector (SHC1). Together, they orchestrate the Ras/MAPK signal cascade, which is dependent on tyrosine kinase. CCDC6-RET fusion undergoes LLPS requiring its kinase domain and its fusion partner. The CCDC6-RET fusion LLPS promotes the autophosphorylation of RET fusion, with enhanced kinase activity, which is necessary for the formation of the signaling niche. Within the signal niche, the interactions among the constituent components are reinforced, and the signal transduction efficiency is amplified. The specific RET fusion-related signal niche elucidates the mechanism of the constitutive activation of the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway. Beyond just focusing on RET fusion itself, exploration of the ternary complex potentially unveils a promising avenue for devising therapeutic strategies aimed at treating RET fusion-driven diseases.
Hirschsprung's disease is a congenital disorder that occurs in 1:5000 live births. It is characterised by an absence of enteric neurons along a variable region of the gastrointestinal tract. Hirschsprung's disease is classified as a multigenic disorder, because the same phenotype is associated with mutations in multiple distinct genes. Furthermore, the genetics of Hirschsprung's disease are highly complex and not strictly Mendelian. The phenotypic variability and incomplete penetrance observed in Hirschsprung's disease also suggests the involvement of modifier genes. Here, we summarise the current knowledge of the genetics underlying Hirschsprung's disease based on human and animal studies, focusing on the principal causative genes, their interactions, and the role of modifier genes.
Medullary thyroid cancer is a rare type of neuroendocrine tumour that arises from the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid gland. It accounts for 3%-5% of thyroid cancer cases. Close to 25% of cases are familial, and 75% are considered sporadic. Familial cases are associated with a germline RET mutation; 43%-65% of sporadic cases harbour a somatic event in the gene. Germline RET mutations are associated with the autosomal-dominant inherited multiple endocrine neoplasia (men) 2a and 2b syndromes and the isolated familial medullary thyroid cancer syndrome. More than 100 RET codon mutations have been reported to date, with genotype-phenotype correlations that include the extent and aggressiveness of the medullary thyroid cancer and the presence of other features of the men2 syndromes. The latter include pheochromocytoma-paraganglioma, hyperparathyroidism, cutaneous lichen amyloidosis, and Hirschsprung disease. In this narrative review, we focus on RET proto-oncogene physiology and pathogenesis induced by germline and somatic RET mutations, the genotype-phenotype correlation, and the management and follow-up of patients with germline-mutated medullary thyroid cancer.
Oncogenic activation of RET kinase has been found in several neoplastic diseases, like medullary thyroid carcinoma, multiple endocrine neoplasia, papillary thyroid carcinoma, and non-small-cell lung cancer. Currently approved RET inhibitors were not originally designed to be RET inhibitors, and their potency against RET kinase has not been optimized. Hence, novel compounds able to inhibit both wild-type RET ((wt) RET) and its mutants (e.g., (V804M) RET) are needed. Herein we present the development and the preliminary evaluation of a new sub-micromolar (wt) RET/(V804M) RET inhibitor, N-(2-fluoro-5-trifluoromethylphenyl)-N'-4'-[(2''-benzamido)pyridin-4''-ylamino]phenylurea (69), endowed with a 4-anilinopyridine structure, starting from our previously identified 4-anilinopyrimidine hit compound. Profiling against a panel of kinases indicated 69 as a multi cKIT/(wt) RET/(V804M) RET inhibitor.
The discovery in the late 1990s of the partnership between the RET receptor tyrosine kinase and the GFRalpha family of GPI-anchored co-receptors as mediators of the effects of GDNF family ligands galvanized the field of neurotrophic factors, firmly establishing a new molecular framework besides the ubiquitous neurotrophins. Soon after, however, it was realized that many neurons and brain areas expressed GFRalpha receptors without expressing RET. These observations led to the formulation of two new concepts in GDNF family signaling, namely, the non-cell-autonomous functions of GFRalpha molecules, so-called trans signaling, as well as cell-autonomous functions mediated by signaling receptors distinct from RET, which became known as RET-independent signaling. To date, the best studied RET-independent signaling pathway for GDNF family ligands involves the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM and its association with GFRalpha co-receptors. Among the many functions attributed to this signaling system are neuronal migration, neurite outgrowth, dendrite branching, spine formation, and synaptogenesis. This review summarizes our current understanding of this and other mechanisms of RET-independent signaling by GDNF family ligands and GFRalpha receptors, as well as their physiological importance.
After ligand binding induces dimerization, the RET receptor tyrosine kinase activates multiple signal transduction pathways. Constitutively activating mutations and chromosomal rearrangements are the primary oncogenic event in a significant number of medullary thyroid cancers (MTC) and papillary thyroid cancers (PTC), respectively. When specific germline mutations in RET are identified early, prophylactic thyroidectomy can be timed to remove at-risk tissue in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia 2 (MEN2) syndromes who would otherwise develop MTC. Conventional therapy for progressive metastatic MTC is limited. Small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors can target multiple kinases at nanomolar concentrations, including RET, and have shown efficacy against a variety of malignancies. Initial clinical evidence suggests that several of these inhibitors, including sorafenib, vandetanib, motesanib, sunitinib, and XL-184, may have some benefit in treating progressive MTC. Although initial success seen in these trials seems to be modest, it represents a major breakthrough in the treatment of patients with widespread metastatic MTC.
As reviewed in the present issue, we have now an important amount of experimental evidence that indicates that G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) oligomerization, including homo- and heteromerization, is a general phenomenon. Receptor heteromers possess unique biochemical characteristics that are demonstrably different from those of its individual components (protomers). Those properties include allosteric modulations between protomers, changes in ligand recognition, G protein-coupling and trafficking. The discovery of GPCR oligomers have been related to the parallel discovery and application of a variety of resonance energy transfer (RET) techniques, such as bioluminescence, fluorescence and sequential RET (BRET, FRET and SRET, respectively), time resolved FRET (T-FRET) and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) microscopy. However, RET techniques are difficult to implement in native tissues. For receptor heteromers, indirect approaches, such as the determination of a unique biochemical characteristic ('biochemical fingerprint'), are allowing their identification in native tissues and their use as targets for drug development. Dopamine and opioid receptor heteromers are being the focus of intense research, which is related to the possible multiple applications of their putative ligands in pathological conditions, which include basal ganglia disorders, schizophrenia, drug addiction and pain.
RET (rearranged during transfection) is a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in the development of neural crest derived cell lineages, kidney, and male germ cells. Different human cancers, including papillary and medullary thyroid carcinomas, lung adenocarcinomas, and myeloproliferative disorders display gain-of-function mutations in RET. Accordingly, RET protein has become a promising molecular target for cancer treatment.
Regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS proteins) comprise over 20 different proteins that have been classified into subfamilies on the basis of structural homology. The RZ/A family includes RGSZ2/RGS17 (the most recently discovered member of this family), GAIP/RGS19, RGSZ1/RGS20, and the RGSZ1 variant Ret-RGS. The RGS proteins are GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) that turn off G-proteins and thus negatively regulate the signaling of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). In addition, some RZ/A family RGS proteins are able to modify signaling through interactions with adapter proteins (such as GIPC and GIPN). The RZ/A proteins have a simple structure that includes a conserved amino-terminal cysteine string motif, RGS box and short carboxyl-terminal, which confer GAP activity (RGS box) and the ability to undergo covalent modification and interact with other proteins (amino-terminal). This review focuses on RGS17 and its RZ/A sibling proteins and discusses the similarities and differences among these proteins in terms of their palmitoylation, phosphorylation, intracellular localization and interactions with GPCRs and adapter proteins. The specificity of these RGS protein for different Galpha proteins and receptors, and the consequences for signaling are discussed. The tissue and brain distribution, and the evolving understanding of the roles of this family of RGS proteins in receptor signaling and brain function are highlighted.
