RPE-retinal G protein-coupled receptor; Receptor for all-trans- and 11-cis-retinal. Binds preferentially to the former and may catalyze the isomerization of the chromophore by a retinochrome-like mechanism.
The Growth Hormone Research Society (GRS) convened a Workshop in March 2019 to evaluate the diagnosis and therapy of short stature in children. Forty-six international experts participated at the invitation of GRS including clinicians, basic scientists, and representatives from regulatory agencies and the pharmaceutical industry. Following plenary presentations addressing the current diagnosis and therapy of short stature in children, breakout groups discussed questions produced in advance by the planning committee and reconvened to share the group reports. A writing team assembled one document that was subsequently discussed and revised by participants. Participants from regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies were not part of the writing process. Short stature is the most common reason for referral to the pediatric endocrinologist. History, physical examination, and auxology remain the most important methods for understanding the reasons for the short stature. While some long-standing topics of controversy continue to generate debate, including in whom, and how, to perform and interpret growth hormone stimulation tests, new research areas are changing the clinical landscape, such as the genetics of short stature, selection of patients for genetic testing, and interpretation of genetic tests in the clinical setting. What dose of growth hormone to start, how to adjust the dose, and how to identify and manage a suboptimal response are still topics to debate. Additional areas that are expected to transform the growth field include the development of long-acting growth hormone preparations and other new therapeutics and diagnostics that may increase adult height or aid in the diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency.
Botulinum toxin type A (BoNTA) products are widely used for therapeutic and aesthetic indications, but there is a need for longer-lasting treatments that maintain symptom relief between injections and reduce the frequency of re-treatment. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection (DAXI) is a novel BoNTA product containing highly purified 150-kDa core neurotoxin and is the first to be formulated with a proprietary stabilizing excipient peptide (RTP004) instead of human serum albumin. The positively charged RTP004 has been shown to enhance binding of the neurotoxin to neuronal surfaces, which may enhance the likelihood of neurotoxin internalization. DAXI produces robust, extended efficacy across both aesthetic and therapeutic indications. In an extensive glabellar lines clinical program, DAXI showed a high degree of efficacy, a consistent median time to loss of none or mild glabellar line severity of 24 weeks, and median time until return to baseline of up to 28 weeks. In adults with cervical dystonia, DAXI at 125 U and 250 U significantly improved Toronto Western Spasmodic Torticollis Rating Scale (TWSTRS) total scores, with a median duration of efficacy of 24 and 20 weeks, respectively, which compares favorably with the 12-14 weeks' duration reported for approved BoNTA products. Overall, DAXI was well tolerated, and the consistent extended duration of effect suggests that DAXI has the potential to improve the management of both aesthetic and therapeutic conditions.
BACKGROUND: No approved treatment for peanut allergy exists for children younger than 4 years of age, and the efficacy and safety of epicutaneous immunotherapy with a peanut patch in toddlers with peanut allergy are unknown. METHODS: We conducted this phase 3, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving children 1 to 3 years of age with peanut allergy confirmed by a double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge. Patients who had an eliciting dose (the dose necessary to elicit an allergic reaction) of 300 mg or less of peanut protein were assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive epicutaneous immunotherapy delivered by means of a peanut patch (intervention group) or to receive placebo administered daily for 12 months. The primary end point was a treatment response as measured by the eliciting dose of peanut protein at 12 months. Safety was assessed according to the occurrence of adverse events during the use of the peanut patch or placebo. RESULTS: Of the 362 patients who underwent randomization, 84.8% completed the trial. The primary efficacy end point result was observed in 67.0% of children in the intervention group as compared with 33.5% of those in the placebo group (risk difference, 33.4 percentage points; 95% confidence interval, 22.4 to 44.5; P<0.001). Adverse events that occurred during the use of the intervention or placebo, irrespective of relatedness, were observed in 100% of the patients in the intervention group and 99.2% in the placebo group. Serious adverse events occurred in 8.6% of the patients in the intervention group and 2.5% of those in the placebo group; anaphylaxis occurred in 7.8% and 3.4%, respectively. Serious treatment-related adverse events occurred in 0.4% of patients in the intervention group and none in the placebo group. Treatment-related anaphylaxis occurred in 1.6% in the intervention group and none in the placebo group. CONCLUSIONS: In this trial involving children 1 to 3 years of age with peanut allergy, epicutaneous immunotherapy for 12 months was superior to placebo in desensitizing children to peanuts and increasing the peanut dose that triggered allergic symptoms. (Funded by DBV Technologies; EPITOPE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03211247.).
PURPOSE: Proteopathy is believed to contribute to age-related macular degeneration (AMD). Much research indicates that AMD begins in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), which is associated with formation of extracellular drusen, a clinical hallmark of AMD. Human RPE produces a drusen-associated abnormal protein, the exon Ⅵ-skipping splice isoform of retinal G protein-coupled receptor (RGR-d). In this study, we investigate the detrimental effects of RGR-d on cultured cells and mouse retina. METHODS: ARPE-19 cells were stably infected by lentivirus overexpressing RGR or RGR-d and were treated with MG132, sometimes combined with or without endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducer, tunicamycin. RGR and RGR-d protein expression, degeneration pathway, and potential cytotoxicity were explored. Homozygous RGR-d mice aged 8 or 14 months were fed with a high-fat diet for 3 months and then subjected to ocular examination and histopathology experiments. RESULTS: We confirm that RGR-d is proteotoxic under various conditions. In ARPE-19 cells, RGR-d is misfolded and almost completely degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Unlike normal RGR, RGR-d increases ER stress, triggers the unfolded protein response, and exerts potent cytotoxicity. Aged RGR-d mice manifest disrupted RPE cell integrity, apoptotic photoreceptors, choroidal deposition of complement C3, and CD86+CD32+ proinflammatory cell infiltration into retina and RPE-choroid. Furthermore, the AMD-like phenotype of RGR-d mice can be aggravated by a high-fat diet. CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirmed the pathogenicity of the RGR splice isoform and corroborated a significant role of proteopathy in AMD. These findings may contribute to greater comprehension of the multifactorial causes of AMD.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: TMEM106B has been proposed as a modifier of disease risk in FTLD-TDP, particularly in GRN pathogenic variant carriers. Furthermore, TMEM106B has been investigated as a disease modifier in the context of healthy aging and across multiple neurodegenerative diseases. The objective of this study was to evaluate and compare the effect of TMEM106B on gray matter volume and cognition in each of the common genetic FTD groups and in patients with sporadic FTD. METHODS: Participants were enrolled through the ARTFL/LEFFTDS Longitudinal Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (ALLFTD) study, which includes symptomatic and presymptomatic individuals with a pathogenic variant in C9orf72, GRN, MAPT, VCP, TBK1, TARDBP, symptomatic nonpathogenic variant carriers, and noncarrier family controls. All participants were genotyped for the TMEM106B rs1990622 SNP. Cross-sectionally, linear mixed-effects models were fitted to assess an association between TMEM106B and genetic group interaction with each outcome measure (gray matter volume and UDS3-EF for cognition), adjusting for education, age, sex, and CDR+NACC-FTLD sum of boxes. Subsequently, associations between TMEM106B and each outcome measure were investigated within the genetic group. For longitudinal modeling, linear mixed-effects models with time by TMEM106B predictor interactions were fitted. RESULTS: The minor allele of TMEM106B rs1990622, linked to a decreased risk of FTD, associated with greater gray matter volume in GRN pathogenic variant carriers under the recessive dosage model (N = 82, beta = 3.25, 95% CI [0.37-6.19], p = 0.034). This was most pronounced in the thalamus in the left hemisphere (beta = 0.03, 95% CI [0.01-0.06], p = 0.006), with a retained association when considering presymptomatic GRN pathogenic variant carriers only (N = 42, beta = 0.03, 95% CI [0.01-0.05], p = 0.003). The minor allele of TMEM106B rs1990622 also associated with greater cognitive scores among all C9orf72 pathogenic variant carriers (N = 229, beta = 0.36, 95% CI [0.05-0.066], p = 0.021) and in presymptomatic C9orf72 pathogenic variant carriers (N = 106, beta = 0.33, 95% CI [0.03-0.63], p = 0.036), under the recessive dosage model. DISCUSSION: We identified associations of TMEM106B with gray matter volume and cognition in the presence of GRN and C9orf72 pathogenic variants. The association of TMEM106B with outcomes of interest in presymptomatic GRN and C9orf72 pathogenic variant carriers could additionally reflect TMEM106B's effect on divergent pathophysiologic changes before the appearance of clinical symptoms.
Angiogenesis is a process associated with the migration and proliferation of endothelial cells (EC) to form new blood vessels. It is involved in various physiological and pathophysiological conditions and is controlled by a wide range of proangiogenic and antiangiogenic molecules. The plasminogen activator-plasmin system plays a major role in the extracellular matrix remodeling process necessary for angiogenesis. Urokinase/tissue-type plasminogen activators (uPA/tPA) convert plasminogen into the active enzyme plasmin, which in turn activates matrix metalloproteinases and degrades the extracellular matrix releasing growth factors and proangiogenic molecules such as the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A). The plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is the main inhibitor of uPA and tPA, thereby an inhibitor of pericellular proteolysis and intravascular fibrinolysis, respectively. Paradoxically, PAI-1, which is expressed by EC during angiogenesis, is elevated in several cancers and is found to promote angiogenesis by regulating plasmin-mediated proteolysis and by promoting cellular migration through vitronectin. The urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) also induces EC cellular migration during angiogenesis via interacting with signaling partners. Understanding the molecular functions of the plasminogen activator plasmin system and targeting angiogenesis via blocking serine proteases or their interactions with other molecules is one of the major therapeutic strategies scientists have been attracted to in controlling tumor growth and other pathological conditions characterized by neovascularization.
Short, synthetic peptides that are displayed by major histocompatibility complex I (MHC I) can stimulate CD8 T cells in vivo to destroy virus-infected or cancer cells. The development of such peptides as vaccines that provide protective immunity, however, is limited by rapid proteolytic degradation. Introduction of unnatural amino acid residues can suppress MHC I antigen proteolysis, but the modified peptides typically display lower affinity for MHC I and/or diminished ability to activate CD8 T cells relative to native antigen. Here, we report a new strategy for modifying MHC I antigens to enhance resistance to proteolysis while preserving MHC I affinity and T cell activation properties. This approach, replacing backbone amide groups with thioamides, was evaluated in two well-characterized antigens presented by HLA-A2, a common human MHC I. For each antigen, singly modified thioamide analogues retained affinity for HLA-A2 and activated T cells specific for the native antigen, as measured via interferon-gamma secretion. In each system, we identified a highly potent triply substituted thioamide antigen ("thio-antigen") that displayed substantial resistance to proteolytic cleavage. Collectively, our results suggest that thio-antigens may represent a general and readily accessible source of potent vaccine candidates that resist degradation.
PURPOSE: ERBB2-amplified colorectal cancer is a distinct molecular subtype with expanding treatments. Implications of concurrent oncogenic RAS/RAF alterations are not known. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Dana-Farber and Foundation Medicine Inc. Colorectal cancer cohorts with genomic profiling were used to identify ERBB2-amplified cases [Dana-Farber, n = 47/2,729 (1.7%); FMI, n = 1857/49,839 (3.7%)]. Outcomes of patients receiving HER2-directed therapies are reported (Dana-Farber, n = 9; Flatiron Health-Foundation Medicine clinicogenomic database, FH-FMI CGDB, n = 38). Multisite HER2 IHC and genomic profiling were performed to understand HER2 intratumoral and interlesional heterogeneity. The impact of concurrent RAS comutations on the effectiveness of HER2-directed therapies were studied in isogenic colorectal cancer cell lines and xenografts. RESULTS: ERBB2 amplifications are enriched in left-sided colorectal cancer. Twenty percent of ERBB2-amplified colorectal cancers have co-occurring oncogenic RAS/RAF alterations. While RAS/RAF WT colorectal cancers typically have clonal ERBB2 amplification, colorectal cancers with co-occurring RAS/RAF alterations have lower level ERRB2 amplification, higher intratumoral heterogeneity, and interlesional ERBB2 discordance. These distinct genomic patterns lead to differential responsiveness and patterns of resistance to HER2-directed therapy. ERBB2-amplified colorectal cancer with RAS/RAF alterations are resistant to trastuzumab-based combinations, such as trastuzumab/tucatinib, but retain sensitivity to trastuzumab deruxtecan in in vitro and murine models. Trastuzumab deruxtecan shows clinical efficacy in cases with high-level ERBB2-amplified RAS/RAF coaltered colorectal cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Co-occurring RAS/RAF alterations define a unique subtype of ERBB2-amplified colorectal cancer that has increased intratumoral heterogeneity, interlesional discordance, and resistance to trastuzumab-based combinations. Further examination of trastuzumab deruxtecan in this previously understudied cohort of ERBB2-amplified colorectal cancer is warranted.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) therapy development is hamstrung by a lack of susceptibility, diagnostic, and prognostic biomarkers. Blood neurofilament light (NfL) shows promise as a biomarker, but studies have largely focused only on core FTD syndromes, often grouping patients with different diagnoses. To expedite the clinical translation of NfL, we avail ARTFL LEFFTDS Longitudinal Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (ALLFTD) study resources and conduct a comprehensive investigation of plasma NfL across FTD syndromes and in presymptomatic FTD mutation carriers. We find plasma NfL is elevated in all studied syndromes, including mild cases; increases in presymptomatic mutation carriers prior to phenoconversion; and associates with indicators of disease severity. By facilitating the identification of individuals at risk of phenoconversion, and the early diagnosis of FTD, plasma NfL can aid in participant selection for prevention or early treatment trials. Moreover, its prognostic utility would improve patient care, clinical trial efficiency, and treatment outcome estimations.
Methotrexate (MTX) is a tight-binding dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) inhibitor, used as both an antineoplastic and immunosuppressant therapeutic. MTX, like folate undergoes folylpolyglutamate synthetase-mediated gamma-glutamylation, which affects cellular retention and target specificity. Mechanisms of MTX resistance in cancers include a decrease in MTX poly-gamma-glutamylation and an upregulation of DHFR. Here, we report a series of potent MTX-based proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) to investigate DHFR degradation pharmacology and one-carbon biochemistry. These on-target, cell-active PROTACs show proteasome- and E3 ligase-dependent activity, and selective degradation of DHFR in multiple cancer cell lines. By comparison, treatment with MTX increases cellular DHFR protein expression. Importantly, these PROTACs produced distinct, less-lethal phenotypes compared to MTX. The chemical probe set described here should complement conventional DHFR inhibitors and serve as useful tools for studying one-carbon biochemistry and dissecting complex polypharmacology of MTX and related drugs. Such compounds may also serve as leads for potential autoimmune and antineoplastic therapeutics.
CONTEXT: Genetics plays a major role in determining an individual's height. Although there are many monogenic disorders that lead to perturbations in growth and result in short stature, there is still no consensus as to the role that genetic diagnostics should play in the evaluation of a child with short stature. EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A search of PubMed was performed, focusing on the genetic diagnosis of short stature as well as on specific diagnostic subgroups included in this article. Consensus guidelines were reviewed. EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: There are a multitude of rare genetic causes of severe short stature. There is no high-quality evidence to define the optimal approach to the genetic evaluation of short stature. We review genetic etiologies of a number of diagnostic subgroups and propose an algorithm for genetic testing based on these subgroups. CONCLUSION: Advances in genomic technologies are revolutionizing the diagnostic approach to short stature. Endocrinologists must become facile with the use of genetic testing in order to identify the various monogenic disorders that present with short stature.
The molecular profiling of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is a helpful tool not only in cancer treatment, but also in the early detection of relapse. However, the clinical interpretation of a ctDNA negative result remains challenging. The characterization of circulating nucleosomes (carrying cell-free DNA) and associated epigenetic modifications (playing a key role in the tumorigenesis of different cancers) may provide useful information for patient management, by supporting the contributive value of ctDNA molecular profiling. Significantly elevated concentrations of H3K27Me3 nucleosomes were found in plasmas at the diagnosis, and during the follow-up, of NSCLC patients, compared to healthy donors (p-value < 0.0001). By combining the H3K27Me3 level and the ctDNA molecular profile, we found that 25.5% of the patients had H3K27Me3 levels above the cut off, and no somatic alteration was detected at diagnosis. This strongly supports the presence of non-mutated ctDNA in the corresponding plasma. During the patient follow-up, a high H3K27Me3-nucleosome level was found in 15.1% of the sample, despite no somatic mutations being detected, allowing the identification of disease progression from 43.1% to 58.2% over molecular profiling alone. Measuring H3K27Me3-nucleosome levels in combination with ctDNA molecular profiling may improve confidence in the negative molecular result for cfDNA in lung cancer at diagnosis, and may also be a promising biomarker for molecular residual disease (MRD) monitoring, during and/or after treatment.
Oxidative stress (OS) is an important pathophysiological mechanism in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, clinical trials investigating compounds directly targeting OS in IBD yielded mixed results. The NRF2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2)/Keap1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1) pathway orchestrates cellular responses to OS, and dysregulation of this pathway has been implicated in IBD. Activation of the NRF2/Keap1 pathway may enhance antioxidant responses. Although this approach could help to attenuate OS and potentially improve clinical outcomes, an overview of human evidence for modulating the NRF2/Keap1 axis and more recent developments in IBD is lacking. This review explores the NRF2/Keap1 pathway as potential therapeutic target in IBD and presents compounds activating this pathway for future clinical applications.
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a progressive eye disease and the most common cause of blindness among the elderly. AMD is characterized by early atrophy of the choriocapillaris and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Although AMD is a multifactorial disease with many environmental and genetic risk factors, a hallmark of the disease is the origination of extracellular deposits, or drusen, between the RPE and Bruch membrane. Human retinal G-protein-coupled receptor (RGR) gene generates an exon-skipping splice variant of RGR-opsin (RGR-d; NP_001012740) that is a persistent component of small and large drusen. Herein, the findings show that abnormal RGR proteins, including RGR-d, are pathogenic in an animal retina with degeneration of the choriocapillaris, RPE, and photoreceptors. A frameshift truncating mutation resulted in severe retinal degeneration with a continuous band of basal deposits along the Bruch membrane. RGR-d produced less severe disease with choriocapillaris and RPE atrophy, including focal accumulation of abnormal RGR-d protein at the basal boundary of the RPE. Degeneration of the choriocapillaris was marked by a decrease in endothelial CD31 protein and choriocapillaris breakdown at the ultrastructural level. Fundus lesions with patchy depigmentation were characteristic of old RGR-d mice. RGR-d was mislocalized in cultured cells and caused a strong cell growth defect. These results uphold the notion of a potential hidden link between AMD and a high-frequency RGR allele.
A growing body of evidence suggests that the efficacy of cytokines in cancer therapy can be increased by targeting strategies based on conjugation with ligands that recognize receptors expressed by tumor cells or elements of the tumor microenvironment, including the tumor vasculature. The targeting approach is generally conceived to permit administration of low, yet pharmacologically active, doses of drugs, thereby avoiding toxic reactions. However, it is becoming clear that, in the case of cytokines, this strategy has another inherent advantage, i.e. the possibility of administering extremely low doses that do not activate systemic counter-regulatory mechanisms, which may limit their potential therapeutic effects. This review is focused on the use of tumor vasculature-homing peptides as vehicles for targeted delivery of cytokines to tumor blood vessel. In particular, we provide an overview of peptide-cytokine conjugates made with peptides containing the NGR, RGD, isoDGR or RGR sequences and describe, in more details, the biological and pharmacological properties of NGR-hTNF, a peptide-tumor necrosis factor-alpha conjugate that is currently being tested in phase II and III clinical studies. The results of preclinical and clinical studies performed with these products suggest that peptide-mediated vascular-targeting is indeed a viable strategy for delivering bioactive amounts of cytokines to tumor endothelial cells without causing the activation of counter-regulatory mechanisms and toxic reactions.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether neuronal and neuroaxonal injury, neuroinflammation, and synaptic dysfunction associate with clinical course and outcomes in antibody-mediated encephalitis (AME), we measured biomarkers of these processes in CSF from patients presenting with AME and cognitively normal individuals. METHODS: Biomarkers of neuronal (total tau, VILIP-1) and neuroaxonal damage (neurofilament light chain [NfL]), inflammation (YKL-40), and synaptic function (neurogranin, SNAP-25) were measured in CSF obtained from 45 patients at the time of diagnosis of NMDA receptor (n = 34) or LGI1/CASPR2 (n = 11) AME and 39 age- and sex-similar cognitively normal individuals. The association between biomarkers and modified Rankin Scale (mRS) scores were evaluated in a subset (n = 20) of longitudinally followed patients. RESULTS: Biomarkers of neuroaxonal injury (NfL) and neuroinflammation (YKL-40) were elevated in AME cases at presentation, whereas markers of neuronal injury and synaptic function were stable (total tau) or decreased (VILIP-1, SNAP-25, neurogranin). The log-transformed ratio of YKL-40/SNAP-25 optimally discriminated patients from cognitively normal individuals (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve 0.99; 95% confidence interval 0.97, >0.99). Younger age (rho = -0.56; p = 0.01), lower VILIP-1 (rho = -0.60; p < 0.01) and SNAP-25 (rho = -0.54; p = 0.01), and higher log(10)(YKL-40/SNAP-25) (rho = 0.48; p = 0.04) associated with greater disease severity (higher mRS score) in prospectively followed patients. Higher YKL-40 (rho = 0.60; p = 0.02) and neurogranin (rho = 0.55; p = 0.03) at presentation were associated with higher mRS scores 12 months following hospital discharge. CONCLUSIONS: CSF biomarkers suggest that neuronal integrity is acutely maintained in AME, despite neuroaxonal compromise. Low levels of biomarkers of synaptic function may reflect antibody-mediated internalization of cell surface receptors and may represent an acute correlate of antibody-mediated synaptic dysfunction, with the potential to inform disease severity and outcomes.
To uncover underlying mechanisms associated with failure of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) blockade in clinical trials, we conducted a pilot, window-of-opportunity clinical study in 17 patients with newly diagnosed advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer before their standard tumor debulking surgery. Patients were treated with the IDO1 inhibitor epacadostat, and immunologic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic characterization of the tumor microenvironment was undertaken in baseline and posttreatment tumor biopsies. IDO1 inhibition resulted in efficient blockade of the kynurenine pathway of tryptophan degradation and was accompanied by a metabolic adaptation that shunted tryptophan catabolism toward the serotonin pathway. This resulted in elevated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)), which reduced T cell proliferation and function. Because NAD(+) metabolites could be ligands for purinergic receptors, we investigated the impact of blocking purinergic receptors in the presence or absence of NAD(+) on T cell proliferation and function in our mouse model. We demonstrated that A2a and A2b purinergic receptor antagonists, SCH58261 or PSB1115, respectively, rescued NAD(+)-mediated suppression of T cell proliferation and function. Combining IDO1 inhibition and A2a/A2b receptor blockade improved survival and boosted the antitumor immune signature in mice with IDO1 overexpressing ovarian cancer. These findings elucidate the downstream adaptive metabolic consequences of IDO1 blockade in ovarian cancers that may undermine antitumor T cell responses in the tumor microenvironment.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the inherent clinical risks associated with the presence of cerebral microhemorrhages (CMHs) or cerebral microbleeds and characterize individuals at high risk for developing hemorrhagic amyloid-related imaging abnormality (ARIA-H), we longitudinally evaluated families with dominantly inherited Alzheimer disease (DIAD). METHODS: Mutation carriers (n = 310) and noncarriers (n = 201) underwent neuroimaging, including gradient echo MRI sequences to detect CMHs, and neuropsychological and clinical assessments. Cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses evaluated relationships between CMHs and neuroimaging and clinical markers of disease. RESULTS: Three percent of noncarriers and 8% of carriers developed CMHs primarily located in lobar areas. Carriers with CMHs were older, had higher diastolic blood pressure and Hachinski ischemic scores, and more clinical, cognitive, and motor impairments than those without CMHs. APOE epsilon4 status was not associated with the prevalence or incidence of CMHs. Prevalent or incident CMHs predicted faster change in Clinical Dementia Rating although not composite cognitive measure, cortical thickness, hippocampal volume, or white matter lesions. Critically, the presence of 2 or more CMHs was associated with a significant risk for development of additional CMHs over time (8.95 +/- 10.04 per year). CONCLUSION: Our study highlights factors associated with the development of CMHs in individuals with DIAD. CMHs are a part of the underlying disease process in DIAD and are significantly associated with dementia. This highlights that in participants in treatment trials exposed to drugs, which carry the risk of ARIA-H as a complication, it may be challenging to separate natural incidence of CMHs from drug-related CMHs.
Histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is increasingly recognized for its potential in targeted disease therapy. This study delves into the mechanistic and structural nuances of HDAC6 inhibition by difluoromethyl-1,3,4-oxadiazole (DFMO) derivatives, a class of non-hydroxamic inhibitors with remarkable selectivity and potency. Employing a combination of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) kinetic experiments, comprehensive enzymatic characterizations, and X-ray crystallography, we dissect the intricate details of the DFMO-HDAC6 interaction dynamics. More specifically, we find that the chemical structure of a DMFO and the binding mode of its difluoroacetylhydrazide derivative are crucial in determining the predominant hydrolysis mechanism. Our findings provide additional insights into two different mechanisms of DFMO hydrolysis, thus contributing to a better understanding of the HDAC6 inhibition by oxadiazoles in disease modulation and therapeutic intervention.
