Rhodopsin; Photoreceptor required for image-forming vision at low light intensity. Required for photoreceptor cell viability after birth. Light- induced isomerization of the chromophore 11-cis-retinal to all-trans- retinal triggers a conformational change that activates signaling via G-proteins. Subsequent receptor phosphorylation mediates displacement of the bound G-protein alpha subunit by the arrestin SAG and terminates signaling.
Glutamine synthetase, encoded by the gene GLUL, is an enzyme that converts glutamate and ammonia to glutamine. It is expressed by endothelial cells, but surprisingly shows negligible glutamine-synthesizing activity in these cells at physiological glutamine levels. Here we show in mice that genetic deletion of Glul in endothelial cells impairs vessel sprouting during vascular development, whereas pharmacological blockade of glutamine synthetase suppresses angiogenesis in ocular and inflammatory skin disease while only minimally affecting healthy adult quiescent endothelial cells. This relies on the inhibition of endothelial cell migration but not proliferation. Mechanistically we show that in human umbilical vein endothelial cells GLUL knockdown reduces membrane localization and activation of the GTPase RHOJ while activating other Rho GTPases and Rho kinase, thereby inducing actin stress fibres and impeding endothelial cell motility. Inhibition of Rho kinase rescues the defect in endothelial cell migration that is induced by GLUL knockdown. Notably, glutamine synthetase palmitoylates itself and interacts with RHOJ to sustain RHOJ palmitoylation, membrane localization and activation. These findings reveal that, in addition to the known formation of glutamine, the enzyme glutamine synthetase shows unknown activity in endothelial cell migration during pathological angiogenesis through RHOJ palmitoylation.
Therapeutic manipulation of the gut microbiota holds great potential for human health. The mechanisms bacteria use to colonize the gut therefore present valuable targets for clinical intervention. We now report that bacteria use phase separation to enhance fitness in the mammalian gut. We establish that the intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of the broadly and highly conserved transcription termination factor Rho is necessary and sufficient for phase separation in vivo and in vitro in the human commensal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. Phase separation increases transcription termination by Rho in an IDR-dependent manner. Moreover, the IDR is critical for gene regulation in the gut. Our findings expose phase separation as vital for host-commensal bacteria interactions and relevant for novel clinical applications.
Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) are capable of extensive self-renewal yet remain highly sensitive to environmental perturbations in vitro, posing challenges to their therapeutic use. There is an urgent need to advance strategies that ensure safe and robust long-term growth and functional differentiation of these cells. Here, we deployed high-throughput screening strategies to identify a small-molecule cocktail that improves viability of hPSCs and their differentiated progeny. The combination of chroman 1, emricasan, polyamines, and trans-ISRIB (CEPT) enhanced cell survival of genetically stable hPSCs by simultaneously blocking several stress mechanisms that otherwise compromise cell structure and function. CEPT provided strong improvements for several key applications in stem-cell research, including routine cell passaging, cryopreservation of pluripotent and differentiated cells, embryoid body (EB) and organoid formation, single-cell cloning, and genome editing. Thus, CEPT represents a unique poly-pharmacological strategy for comprehensive cytoprotection, providing a rationale for efficient and safe utilization of hPSCs.
Curcumin treatment was reported to delay the progression of OA, but its underlying mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we aimed to investigate the molecular mechanism underlying the role of curcumin in OA treatment. Accordingly, by conducting MTT and flow cytometry assays, we found that the exosomes derived from curcumin-treated MSCs helped to maintain the viability while inhibiting the apoptosis of model OA cells. Additionally, quantitative real-time PCR and Western blot assays showed that the exosomes derived from curcumin-treated MSCs significantly restored the down-regulated miR-143 and miR-124 expression as well as up-regulated NF-kB and ROCK1 expression in OA cells. Mechanistically, curcumin treatment decreased the DNA methylation of miR-143 and miR-124 promoters. In addition, the 3' UTRs of NF-kB and ROCK1 were proven to contain the binding sites for miR-143 and miR-124, respectively. Therefore, the up-regulation of miR-143 and miR-124 in cellular and mouse OA models treated with exosomes remarkably restored the normal expression of NF-kB and ROCK1. Consequently, the progression of OA was attenuated by the exosomes. Our results clarified the molecular mechanism underlying the therapeutic role of MSC-derived exosomes in OA treatment.
Rho GTPases comprise a family of molecular switches that control signal transduction pathways in eukaryotic cells. A conformational change induced upon binding GTP promotes an interaction with target (effector) proteins to generate a cellular response. A highly conserved function of Rho GTPases from yeast to humans is to control the actin cytoskeleton, although, in addition, they promote a wide range of other cellular activities. Changes in the actin cytoskeleton drive many dynamic aspects of cell behaviour, including morphogenesis, migration, phagocytosis and cytokinesis, and the dysregulation of Rho GTPases is associated with numerous human diseases and disorders.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a complex and widespread neurodegenerative disease characterized by depletion of midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons. Key issues are the development of therapies that can stop or reverse the disease progression, identification of dependable biomarkers, and better understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms of PD. RhoA-ROCK signals appear to have an important role in PD symptoms, making it a possible approach for PD treatment strategies. Activation of RhoA-ROCK (Rho-associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase) appears to stimulate various PD risk factors including aggregation of alpha-synuclein (alphaSyn), dysregulation of autophagy, and activation of apoptosis. This manuscript reviews current updates about the biology and function of the RhoA-ROCK pathway and discusses the possible role of this signaling pathway in causing the pathogenesis of PD. We conclude that inhibition of the RhoA-ROCK signaling pathway may have high translational potential and could be a promising therapeutic target in PD.
BACKGROUND: Cellular differentiation occurs in a complicated microenvironment containing multiple components including soluble factors and physical cues. In addition to biochemical composition, physical cues are also crucial in determining cellular behaviors. OBJECTIVE: To better understand the interaction between physical signals and cells, we discuss the effects of physical cues on cellular behaviors, especially chondrogenic differentiation in vitro. Furthermore, the mechanisms by which these physical signals are transmitted from the extracellular matrix into the cell are also considered. RESULTS: Physical cues can dramatically regulate specific cellular functions in cartilage tissue engineering. Integrin and FAs act as mechano-sensors to transmit physical cues from the ECM into cytoskeleton- signaling network. Meanwhile, the RhoA/ROCK signaling pathway and YAP/TAZ play indispensable roles in cell and ECM linkages. CONCLUSION: The investigation of physical cues clarifies cellular behaviors. This information can be applied to tissue engineering scaffold and biological material production in the future.
Nogo-A is one of several neurite growth inhibitory components present in oligodendrocytes and CNS myelin membranes. Nogo has a crucial role in restricting axonal regeneration and compensatory fibre growth in the injured adult mammalian CNS. Recent studies have shown that in vivo applications of Nogo neutralizing antibodies, peptides blocking the Nogo receptor subunit NgR, or blockers of the postreceptor components Rho-A and ROCK induce long-distance axonal regeneration and compensatory sprouting, accompanied by an impressive enhancement of functional recovery, in the rat and mouse spinal cord.
The P-Rex family are Dbl-type guanine-nucleotide exchange factors for Rac family small G proteins. They are distinguished from other Rac-GEFs through their synergistic mode of activation by the lipid second messenger phosphatidyl inositol (3,4,5) trisphosphate and the Gbetagamma subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins, thus acting as coincidence detectors for phosphoinositide 3-kinase and G protein coupled receptor signaling. Work in genetically-modified mice has shown that P-Rex1 has physiological importance in the inflammatory response and the migration of melanoblasts during development, whereas P-Rex2 controls the dendrite morphology of cerebellar Purkinje neurons as well as glucose homeostasis in liver and adipose tissue. Deregulation of P-Rex1 and P-Rex2 expression occurs in many types of cancer, and P-Rex2 is frequently mutated in melanoma. Both GEFs promote tumor growth or metastasis. This review critically evaluates the P-Rex literature and tools available and highlights exciting recent developments and open questions.
BACKGROUND: Notch3 (neurogenic locus notch homolog protein 3) is implicated in vascular diseases, including pulmonary hypertension (PH)/pulmonary arterial hypertension. However, molecular mechanisms remain elusive. We hypothesized increased Notch3 activation induces oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and downstream redox signaling, associated with procontractile pulmonary artery state, pulmonary vascular dysfunction, and PH development. METHODS: Studies were performed in TgNotch3(R169C) mice (harboring gain-of-function [GOF] Notch3 mutation) exposed to chronic hypoxia to induce PH, and examined by hemodynamics. Molecular and cellular studies were performed in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from pulmonary arterial hypertension patients and in mouse lung. Notch3-regulated genes/proteins, ER stress, ROCK (Rho-associated kinase) expression/activity, Ca(2+) transients and generation of reactive oxygen species, and nitric oxide were measured. Pulmonary vascular reactivity was assessed in the presence of fasudil (ROCK inhibitor) and 4-phenylbutyric acid (ER stress inhibitor). RESULTS: Hypoxia induced a more severe PH phenotype in TgNotch3(R169C) mice versus controls. TgNotch3(R169C) mice exhibited enhanced Notch3 activation and expression of Notch3 targets Hes Family BHLH Transcription Factor 5 (Hes5), with increased vascular contraction and impaired vasorelaxation that improved with fasudil/4-phenylbutyric acid. Notch3 mutation was associated with increased pulmonary vessel Ca(2+) transients, ROCK activation, ER stress, and increased reactive oxygen species generation, with reduced NO generation and blunted sGC (soluble guanylyl cyclase)/cGMP signaling. These effects were ameliorated by N-acetylcysteine. pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension recapitulated Notch3/Hes5 signaling, ER stress and redox changes observed in PH mice. CONCLUSIONS: Notch3 GOF amplifies vascular dysfunction in hypoxic PH. This involves oxidative and ER stress, and ROCK. We highlight a novel role for Notch3/Hes5-redox signaling and important interplay between ER and oxidative stress in PH.
In a variety of normal and pathological cell types, Rho-kinases I and II (ROCKI/II) play a pivotal role in the organization of the nonmuscle and smooth muscle cytoskeleton and adhesion plaques as well as in the regulation of transcription factors. Thus, ROCKI/II activity regulates cellular contraction, motility, morphology, polarity, cell division, and gene expression. Emerging evidence suggests that dysregulation of the Rho-ROCK pathways at different stages is linked to cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurodegenerative diseases as well as cancer. This review focuses on the current status of understanding the multiple functions of Rho-ROCK signaling pathways and various modes of regulation of Rho-ROCK activity, thereby orchestrating a concerted functional response.
The Rho-family proteins make up a major branch of the Ras superfamily of small GTPases. To date, 22 human genes encoding at least 25 proteins have been described. The best known 'classical' members are RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42. Highly related isoforms of these three proteins have not been studied as intensively, in part because it has been assumed that they are functionally identical to their better-studied counterparts. This now appears not to be the case. Variations in C-terminal-signaled modifications and subcellular targeting cause otherwise highly biochemically related isoforms (e.g. RhoA, RhoB and RhoC) to exhibit surprisingly divergent biological activities. Whereas the classical Rho GTPases are regulated by GDP/GTP cycling, other Rho GTPases are also regulated by other mechanisms, particularly by transcriptional regulation. Newer members of the family possess additional sequence elements beyond the GTPase domain, which suggests they exhibit yet other mechanisms of regulation.
The Vav family is a group of tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated signal transduction molecules hierarchically located downstream of protein tyrosine kinases. The main function of these proteins is to work as guanosine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for members of the Rho GTPase family. In addition, they can exhibit a variety of catalysis-independent roles in specific signaling contexts. Vav proteins play essential signaling roles for both the development and/or effector functions of a large variety of cell lineages, including those belonging to the immune, nervous, and cardiovascular systems. They also contribute to pathological states such as cancer, immune-related dysfunctions, and atherosclerosis. Here, I will provide an integrated view about the evolution, regulation, and effector properties of these signaling molecules. In addition, I will discuss the pros and cons for their potential consideration as therapeutic targets.
Vigorous transport of cytoplasmic components along axons over substantial distances is crucial for the maintenance of neuron structure and function. The transport of mitochondria, which serves to distribute mitochondrial functions in a dynamic and non-uniform fashion, has attracted special interest in recent years following the discovery of functional connections among microtubules, motor proteins and mitochondria, and their influences on neurodegenerative diseases. Although the motor proteins that drive mitochondrial movement are now well characterized, the mechanisms by which anterograde and retrograde movement are coordinated with one another and with stationary axonal mitochondria are not yet understood. In this Commentary, we review why mitochondria move and how they move, focusing particularly on recent studies of transport regulation, which implicate control of motor activity by specific cell-signaling pathways, regulation of motor access to transport tracks and static microtubule-mitochondrion linkers. A detailed mechanism for modulating anterograde mitochondrial transport has been identified that involves Miro, a mitochondrial Ca(2+)-binding GTPase, which with associated proteins, can bind and control kinesin-1. Elements of the Miro complex also have important roles in mitochondrial fission-fusion dynamics, highlighting questions about the interdependence of biogenesis, transport, dynamics, maintenance and degradation.
p120 catenin (p120ctn), a component of the cadherin-catenin complex, was the first member to be identified in a most interesting subfamily of the Armadillo family. Several p120ctn isoforms are generated by alternative splicing. These isoforms fulfill pleiotropic functions according to their subcellular localization: modulating the turnover rate of membrane-bound cadherins, regulating the activation of small Rho GTPases in the cytoplasm, and modulating nuclear transcription. Over the last two decades, knowledge of p120ctn has grown remarkably, and this has been achieved in part by using different animal models. At least in frog and mammals, p120ctn is essential for normal development and homeostasis. Here we will discuss the effects of different p120ctn isoforms on cadherin turnover and on signaling in the cytoplasm and the nucleus. We will also elaborate on the structure and function of other members of the p120ctn subfamily: ARVCF, p0071 and delta-catenin. Finally, we will overview the respective roles of p120ctn family members in pathological processes, and particularly in cancer as p120ctn is frequently.
p21-activated kinases (PAKs) were initially identified as effector proteins downstream from GTPases of the Rho family. To date, six members of the PAK family have been discovered in mammalian cells. PAKs play important roles in growth factor signalling, cytoskeletal remodelling, gene transcription, cell proliferation and oncogenic transformation. A large body of research has demonstrated that PAKs are up-regulated in several human cancers, and that their overexpression is linked to tumour progression and resistance to therapy. Structural and biochemical studies have revealed the mechanisms involved in PAK signalling, and opened the way to the development of PAK-targeted therapies for cancer treatment. Here we summarise recent findings from biological and clinical research on the role of PAKs in gastrointestinal cancer, and discuss the current status of PAK-targeted anticancer therapies.
The roles of Rho family guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) of plants (ROPs) in modulating plant growth and development have been well characterized. However, little is known about the roles of ROP signaling pathways in regulating plant autophagy and autophagosome formation. In this study, we identify a unique ROP signaling mechanism, which mediates developmental to autophagic transition under stress conditions in the model plant Arabidopsis. Loss-of-function mutants of ROP8 showed stress-induced hypersensitive phenotypes and compromised autophagic flux. Similar to other ROPs in the ROP/RAC family, ROP8 exhibits both plasma membrane and cytosolic punctate localization patterns. Upon autophagic induction, active ROP8 puncta colocalize with autophagosomal markers and are degraded inside the vacuole. In human cells, RalB, an RAS subfamily GTPase, engages its effector Exo84 for autophagosome assembly. However, a RalB counterpart is missing in the plant lineage. Intriguingly, we discovered that plant ROP8 promotes autophagy via its downstream effector Sec5. Live-cell super-resolution imaging showed that ROP8 and Sec5 reside on phagophores for autophagosome formation. Taken together, our findings highlight a previously unappreciated role of an ROP8-Sec5 signaling axis in autophagy promotion, providing new insights into how plants utilize versatile ROP signaling networks to coordinate developmental and autophagic responses depending on environmental changes.
Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a lipid mediator with a wide variety of biological actions, particularly as an inducer of cell proliferation, migration and survival. LPA binds to specific G-protein-coupled receptors and thereby activates multiple signal transduction pathways, including those initiated by the small GTPases Ras, Rho, and Rac. LPA signaling has been implicated in such diverse processes as wound healing, brain development, vascular remodeling and tumor progression. Knowledge of precisely how and where LPA is produced has long proved elusive. Excitingly, it has recently been discovered that LPA is generated from precursors by 'autotaxin', a once enigmatic exo-phosphodiesterase implicated in tumor cell motility. Exogenous phospholipases D can also produce LPA, which may contribute to their toxicity. Here we review recent progress in our understanding of LPA bioactivity, signaling and synthesis.
The Rho family of GTPases consists of several small proteins that have been described as molecular switches, playing important roles in a wide variety of fundamental cellular processes and in human diseases such as cancer. These proteins, active in the GTP conformation and inactive in the GDP form, are in turn regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), guanine nucleotide activating proteins (GAPs) and guanine dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). Two decades ago, Tiam1 (T-lymphoma invasion and metastasis) was identified as a GEF specific for Rac1 activation, but also for Cdc42 and in a lesser extent RhoA. Acting principally upstream of Rac1, Tiam1 is mainly involved in the regulation of Rac1 mediated signaling pathways including cytoskeletal activities, cell polarity, endocytosis and membrane trafficking, cell migration, adhesion and invasion, cell growth and survival, metastasis and carcinogenesis. However, given the large number of protein interaction domains found in its structure, it is possible that Tiam1 affects cellular processes in another way than through its GEF activity by interactions with other signaling proteins. Due to its functional diversity, Tiam1 is involved in multiple steps of tumorigenesis. As its name suggests, Tiam1 has been shown to increase T-cell lymphoma invasion and metastasis. It also promotes migration of fibroblasts, neuronal and cancer cells. On the contrary, Tiam1-induced cell adhesion has also been described, as opposed to cell migration. Moreover, studies indicate that Tiam1 is involved in both anti-apoptotic and pro-apoptotic mechanisms. While increasing evidence has demonstrated Tiam1's contribution to tumorigenesis and metastasis, others suggest that Tiam1 could have anti-cancer properties. In the present review, we discuss the current knowledge about the controversial roles of Tiam1 in cellular signaling. In particular, we will focus on Tiam1's regulation, its biological functions and implication in cancer.
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is an incurable disease with a dreadful survival rate. The disease is characterized by sustained vasoconstriction, progressive vascular remodeling, and irreversible right heart dysfunction. While hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction (HPV) is known to be the main pathophysiological factor causing the rise in pulmonary arterial pressure, biological mechanisms leading to HPV and vascular remodeling are multiple and complex and, as yet, incompletely understood. It is thought that molecular interactions and cross talks are involved in the pathogenesis of PH, perturbing the physiological balance between substances controlling vascular tone, cell growth and apoptosis. This balance is achieved by subtle interactions between factors acting as both vasodilators and inhibitors of cell growth like nitric oxide, prostacyclin, vasoactive intestinal peptide and molecules with potent vasoconstrictor and cell growth activities like endothelin-1. Recent in vivo studies showed that the Rho GTPase/RhoA pathway and its downstream effectors, the Rho-kinases (ROCK-1 and ROCK-2), had an important role in PH, due to its lasting effects on vasoconstriction and pulmonary cell proliferation leading to vascular remodeling. Beneficial effects obtained in vivo with Rho-kinase inhibitors (e.g.Y-27632 and fasudil) in experimental PH will hopefully lead to future clinical trials with new compounds selectively targeting this pathway, which is now proven to be detrimental when over-activated in both experimental animals and human patients.
