Rho-related GTP-binding protein RhoC; Regulates a signal transduction pathway linking plasma membrane receptors to the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers. Serves as a microtubule-dependent signal that is required for the myosin contractile ring formation during cell cycle cytokinesis. Regulates apical junction formation in bronchial epithelial cells.
Increased expression of branched-chain amino acid transaminase 1 or 2 (BCAT1 and BCAT2) has been associated with aggressive phenotypes of different cancers. Here we identify a gain of function of BCAT1 glutamic acid to alanine mutation at codon 61 (BCAT1(E61A)) enriched around 2.8% in clinical gastric cancer samples. We found that BCAT1(E61A) confers higher enzymatic activity to boost branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) catabolism, accelerate cell growth and motility and contribute to tumor development. BCAT1 directly interacts with RhoC, leading to elevation of RhoC activity. Notably, the BCAA-derived metabolite, branched-chain alpha-keto acid directly binds to the small GTPase protein RhoC and promotes its activity. BCAT1 knockout-suppressed cell motility could be rescued by expressing BCAT1(E61A) or adding branched-chain alpha-keto acid. We also identified that candesartan acts as an inhibitor of BCAT1(E61A), thus repressing RhoC activity and cancer cell motility in vitro and preventing peritoneal metastasis in vivo. Our study reveals a link between BCAA metabolism and cell motility and proliferation through regulating RhoC activation, with potential therapeutic implications for cancers.
Objective: This study aimed to explore the role of circular RNAs (circRNAs) in M2 macrophage (M2M)-derived small extracellular vesicles (SEVs) in myocardial fibrosis development. Methods: The regulatory role of M2M-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) was evaluated in a mouse model of acute myocardial infarction. Immunofluorescence, quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR), nanoparticle tracking analysis, Western blot analysis and electron microscopy were used to identify macrophages, large extracellular vesicles (LEVs) and SEVs. The circRNA expression profiles of M0 macrophages (M0Ms) and M2Ms were determined by microarray analysis. Bioinformatic analysis, cell coculture and cell proliferation assays were performed to investigate the expression, function, and regulatory mechanisms of circUbe3a in vitro. qPCR, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), dual-luciferase reporter assays, RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (RNA-FISH), Western blot analysis and a series of rescue experiments were used to verify the correlation among circUbe3a, miR-138-5p and RhoC. Results: CircUbe3a from M2M-derived SEVs triggered functional changes in cardiac fibroblasts (CFs). CircUbe3a was synthesized and loaded into SEVs during increased M2M infiltration after myocardial infarction. The fusion of the released SEVs with the plasma membrane likely caused the release of circUbe3a into the cytosol of CFs. Silencing or overexpressing circUbe3a altered CF proliferation, migration, and phenotypic transformation in vitro. We confirmed that circUbe3a plays a crucial role in enhancing functional changes in CFs by sponging miR-138-5p and then translationally repressing RhoC in vitro. In vivo, the addition of M2M-derived SEVs or overexpression of circUbe3a significantly exacerbated myocardial fibrosis after acute myocardial infarction, and these effects were partially abolished by circUbe3a-specific shRNA. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that M2M-derived circUbe3a-containing SEVs promote the proliferation, migration, and phenotypic transformation of CFs by directly targeting the miR-138-5p/RhoC axis, which may also exacerbate myocardial fibrosis after acute myocardial infarction.
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic disease that includes Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Although genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified many relevant genetic risk loci, the impact of these loci on protein abundance and their potential utility as clinical therapeutic targets remain uncertain. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the pathogenesis of IBD and identify effective therapeutic targets through a comprehensive and integrated analysis. We systematically integrated GWAS data related to IBD, UC and CD (N = 25,305) by the study of de Lange KM with the human blood proteome (N = 7213) by the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study. Proteome-wide association study (PWAS), mendelian randomisation (MR) and Bayesian colocalisation analysis were used to identify proteins contributing to the risk of IBD. Integrative analysis revealed that genetic variations in IBD, UC and CD affected the abundance of five (ERAP2, RIPK2, TALDO1, CADM2 and RHOC), three (VSIR, HGFAC and CADM2) and two (MST1 and FLRT3) cis-regulated plasma proteins, respectively (P < 0.05). Among the proteins identified via Bayesian colocalisation analysis, CADM2 was found to be an important common protein between IBD and UC. A drug and five druggable target genes were identified from DGIdb after Bayesian colocalisation analysis. Our study's findings from genetic and proteomic approaches have identified compelling proteins that may serve as important leads for future functional studies and potential drug targets for IBD (UC and CD).
Systemic metastasis is the dissemination of cancer cells from the primary tumor to distant organs and is the primary cause of death in cancer patients. How do cancer cells leave the primary tumor mass? The ability of the tumor cells to form different types of actin-rich protrusions including invasive protrusions (invadopodia) and locomotory protrusions (lamellipodia [2D] or pseudopodia [3D]), facilitate the invasion and dissemination of the tumor cells. Rho-family of p21 small GTPases plays a direct role in regulating the actin dynamics in these intracellular compartments. Recent studies have shown that the signaling molecules including RhoC/p190RhoGEF/p190RhoGAP acts as a "molecular compass"Â in order to direct the spatial and temporal dynamics of the formation of these invasive and locomotory protrusions leading to efficient invasion.
The Ras homologous (Rho) protein family of GTPases (RhoA, RhoB and RhoC) are the members of the Ras superfamily and regulate cellular processes such as cell migration, proliferation, polarization, adhesion, gene transcription and cytoskeletal structure. Rho GTPases function as molecular switches that cycle between GTP-bound (active state) and GDP-bound (inactive state) forms. Leukaemia-associated RhoGEF (LARG) is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that activates RhoA subfamily GTPases by promoting the exchange of GDP for GTP. LARG is selective for RhoA subfamily GTPases and is an essential regulator of cell migration and invasion. Here, we describe the mechanisms by which LARG is regulated to facilitate the understanding of how LARG mediates functions like cell motility and to provide insight for better therapeutic targeting of these functions.
As an important member of the RhoGTPase family, RhoC has various biological functions, such as regulating cytoskeleton reorganization, influencing cell adhesion, and migration. During recent decades, RhoC has been proven to be involved in the invasion and metastasis of malignant tumor and is thus a promising target of tumor therapy. This review focuses on the molecular mechanism of RhoC in invasion and metastasis of malignant tumors, as well as its research prospects as a potential target for tumor therapy.
The Rho-family of small GTPases are biological molecular switches that are best known for their regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Through their activation and stimulation of downstream effectors, the Rho-family control pathways involved in cellular morphology, which are commonly activated in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. While this makes them excellent potential therapeutic targets, a deeper understanding of the downstream signalling pathways they influence will be required for successful drug targeting. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are a family of transcription factors that are hyper-activated in most cancer types and while STATs are widely understood to be activated by the JAK family of kinases, many additional activators have been discovered. A growing number of examples of Rho-family driven STAT activation, largely of the oncogenic family members, STAT3 and STAT5, are being identified. Cdc42, Rac1, RhoA, RhoC and RhoH have all been implicated in STAT activation, contributing to Rho GTPase-driven changes in cellular morphology that lead to cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis. This highlights the importance and therapeutic potential of the Rho-family as regulators of non-canonical activation of STAT signalling.
Vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) consist of five molecules (VEGFA through D as well as placental growth factor) which are crucial for regulating key cellular and tissue functions. The role of VEGF and its intracellular signaling and downstream molecular pathways have been thoroughly studied. Activation of VEGF signal transduction can be initiated by the molecules' binding to two classes of transmembrane receptors: (1) the VEGF tyrosine kinase receptors (VEGF receptors 1 through 3) and (2) the neuropilins (NRP1 and 2). The involvement of Rho GTPases in modulating VEGFA signaling in both cancer cells and endothelial cells has also been well established. Additionally, different isoforms of Rho GTPases, namely, RhoA, RhoC, and RhoG, have been shown to regulate VEGF expression as well as blood vessel formation. This review article will explore how Rho GTPases modulate VEGF signaling and the consequences of such interaction on cancer progression.
RhoGTPases also known as molecular switches represent a family of GTP-binding proteins. They shuttle between "On" and "Off" states. In the "On" state, they activate plethora of molecules. These proteins perform a wide variety of functions involving cytoskeletal modeling, cell motility, migration, and mitosis. Members of this family are referred as master regulators of many cellular activities. Due to wide variety of portfolios attributed to RhoGTPases, their misbehavior leads to initiation and also progression of metastatic cancers. Many members of this family have been reported to be differentially regulated leading to spread of malignant cells from one site to other. These wandering cells find a comfortable site in accordance to Paget's soil and seed hypothesis and form secondary lesions. Out of multiple members of this family, RhoA and RhoC are important factors. RhoA is supposed to increase tumor proliferation when overexpressed while RhoC is responsible for tumor initiation. We searched publications on RhoGTPases, their functions and contribution in cancer development and metastasis on World Wide Web and PubMed. This review focuses on the role of Rac and Rho small GTPases in cell motility and granting the opportunistic motile behavior of aggressive cancer cells. To condense knowledge from existing literature about the roles played by these molecular switches, their structural and functional ramifications are introduced in the beginning followed by an account on their wrong behavior that leads to oncogenesis and oncoprogression. This piece of work highlights members of RhoGTPases as viable oncotargets.
Rho GTPases are well known to regulate cell motility through activation of a variety of downstream effector proteins, including enzymes, adaptor proteins and actin nucleators. The three closely related Rho GTPases RhoA, RhoB and RhoC all have the potential to interact with the same downstream effectors, yet they have substantially different effects on cell shape and migratory properties. Here I review the different ways in which RhoA, RhoB and RhoC expression is regulated in cancer and how they play distinct roles in cancer progression. I describe their main effectors known to contribute to cell motility. Recent results from our laboratory and others indicate that RhoA, RhoB and RhoC can be activated by specific stimuli and act through different effectors to control distinct aspects of cancer cell migration and invasion. This suggests that they each make unique contributions to cancer by participating in different protein complexes.
Cell adhesion and migration are regulated through the concerted action of cytoskeletal dynamics and adhesion proteins, the activity of which is governed by RhoGTPases. Specific RhoGTPase signaling requires spatio-temporal activation and coordination of subsequent protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions. The nature, location and duration of these interactions are dependent on polarized extracellular triggers, such as cell-cell contact, and intracellular modifying events, such as phosphorylation. RhoA, RhoB, and RhoC are highly homologous GTPases that, however, succeed in generating specific intracellular responses. Here, we discuss the key features that contribute to this specificity. These not only include the well-studied switch regions, the conformation of which is nucleotide-dependent, but also additional regions and seemingly small differences in primary sequence that also contribute to specific interactions. These differences translate into differential surface charge distribution, local exposure of amino acid side-chains and isoform-specific post-translational modifications. The available evidence supports the notion that multiple regions in RhoA/B/C cooperate to provide specificity in binding to regulators and effectors. These specific interactions are highly regulated in time and space. We therefore subsequently discuss current approaches means to visualize and analyze localized GTPase activation using biosensors that allow imaging of isoform-specific, localized regulation.
One of the main research areas in biology from the mid-1980s through the 1990s was the elucidation of signaling pathways governing cell responses. These studies brought, among other molecules, the small GTPase Rho to the epicenter. Rho signaling research has since expanded to all areas of biology and medicine. Here, we describe how Rho emerged as a key molecule governing cell morphogenesis and movement, how it was linked to actin reorganization, and how the study of Rho signaling has expanded from cultured cells to whole biological systems. We then give an overview of the current research status of Rho signaling in development, brain, cardiovascular system, immunity and cancer, and discuss the future directions of Rho signaling research, with emphasis on one Rho effector, ROCK*. *The Rho GTPase family. Rho family GTPases have now expanded to contain 20 members. Amino acid sequences of 20 Rho GTPases found in human were aligned and the phylogenetic tree was generated by ClustalW2 software (EMBL-EBI) based on NJ algorithm. The subfamilies of the Rho GTPases are highlighted by the circle and labeled on the right side. Rho cited in this review refers to the original members of Rho subfamily, RhoA, RhoB and RhoC, that are C3 substrates, and, unless specified, not to other members of the Rho subfamily such as Rac, Cdc42, and Rnd.
Malignant tumor cells display uncontrolled proliferation, loss of epithelial cell polarity, altered interactions with neighboring cells and the surrounding extracellular matrix, and enhanced migratory properties. Proteins of the Rho GTPase family regulate all these processes in cell culture and, for that reason, Rho GTPases, their regulators, and their effectors have been suggested to control tumor formation and progression in humans. However, while the tumor-relevant functions of Rho GTPases are very well documented in vitro, we are only now beginning to assess their contribution to cancer in human patients and in animal models. This review will give a very brief overview of Rho GTPase function in general and then focus on in vivo evidence for a role of Rho GTPases in malignant tumors, both in human patients and in genetically modified mice.
RhoB is a Rho family GTPase that is highly similar to RhoA and RhoC, yet has distinct functions in cells. Its unique C-terminal region is subject to specific post-translational modifications that confer different localization and functions to RhoB. Apart from the common role with RhoA and RhoC in actin organization and cell migration, RhoB is also implicated in a variety of other cellular processes including membrane trafficking, cell proliferation, DNA-repair and apoptosis. RhoB is not an essential gene in mice, but it is implicated in several physiological and pathological processes. Its multiple roles will be discussed in this review.
In a variety of normal and pathological cell types, Rho-kinases I and II (ROCKI/II) play a pivotal role in the organization of the nonmuscle and smooth muscle cytoskeleton and adhesion plaques as well as in the regulation of transcription factors. Thus, ROCKI/II activity regulates cellular contraction, motility, morphology, polarity, cell division, and gene expression. Emerging evidence suggests that dysregulation of the Rho-ROCK pathways at different stages is linked to cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurodegenerative diseases as well as cancer. This review focuses on the current status of understanding the multiple functions of Rho-ROCK signaling pathways and various modes of regulation of Rho-ROCK activity, thereby orchestrating a concerted functional response.
Rho GTPase is a master regulator controlling cytoskeleton in multiple contexts such as cell migration, adhesion and cytokinesis. Of several Rho GTPases in mammals, the best characterized is the Rho subfamily including ubiquitously expressed RhoA and its homologs RhoB and RhoC. Upon binding GTP, Rho exerts its functions through downstream Rho effectors, such as ROCK, mDia, Citron, PKN, Rhophilin and Rhotekin. Until recently, our knowledge about functions of Rho and Rho effectors came mostly from in vitro studies utilizing cultured cells, and their physiological roles in vivo were largely unknown. However, gene-targeting studies of Rho and its effectors have now unraveled their tissue- and cell-specific roles and provide deeper insight into the physiological function of Rho signaling in vivo. In this article, we briefly describe previous studies of the function of Rho and its effectors in vitro and then review and discuss recent studies on knockout mice of Rho and its effectors.
We could previously show that thromboxane A(2) receptor (TP) activation inhibits the angiogenic capacity of human endothelial cells, but the underlying mechanisms remained unclear. Therefore, the aim of this study was to elucidate TP signal transduction pathways relevant to angiogenic sprouting of human endothelial cells. To clarify this matter, we used RNAi-mediated gene silencing as well as pharmacological inhibition of potential TP downstream targets in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and VEGF-induced angiogenic sprouting of HUVEC spheroids in vitro as a functional read-out. In this experimental set-up, the TP agonist U-46619 completely blocked VEGF-induced angiogenic sprouting of HUVEC spheroids. Moreover, in live-cell analyses TP activation induced endothelial cell contraction, sprout retraction as well as endothelial cell tension and focal adhesion dysregulation of HUVEC. These effects were reversed by pharmacological TP inhibition or TP knockdown. Moreover, we identified a TP-G(alpha13)-RhoA/C-ROCK-LIMK2-dependent signal transduction pathway to be relevant for U-46619-induced inhibition of VEGF-mediated HUVEC sprouting. In line with these results, U-46619-mediated TP activation potently induced RhoA and RhoC activity in live HUVEC as measured by FRET biosensors. Interestingly, pharmacological inhibition of ROCK and LIMK2 also normalized U-46619-induced endothelial cell tension and focal adhesion dysregulation of HUVEC. In summary, our work reveals mechanisms by which the TP may disturb angiogenic endothelial function in disease states associated with sustained endothelial TP activation.
RhoA and RhoC GTPases are 92% identical but demonstrate unique regulation and function. Phosphorylation of Ser188 has widely been reported to inhibit RhoA activity. RhoC possesses Arg188 in place of Ser188 but retains a canonical upstream PKA recognition sequence. We report here that RhoC-R188S was a PKA substrate in vitro and exhibited less GTP loading compared to wild-type RhoC when expressed in cells. Transiently expressed RhoC was found to be significantly more membrane associated than RhoA. Membrane association of RhoC-R188S and RhoC-R188A were similar to each other and wild-type RhoA, suggesting that Arg188 directly promotes RhoC membrane binding. The positive influence of Arg188 on RhoC membrane association was evident in a constitutively active (Q63L) background. In accordance, RhoA-S188R was significantly more membrane associated than either RhoA or RhoA-S188A. Altogether, these data suggest that swapping residue 188 identity effectively flips the membrane binding profile of wild-type RhoA and RhoC through positive arginine contribution rather than negative phosphoserine regulation.
The RHO GTPase family has been suggested to play critical roles in cell growth, migration, and polarization. Regulators and effectors of RHO GTPases have been extensively explored in recent years. However, little attention has been given to RHO family interacting cell polarization regulators (RIPORs), a recently discovered protein family of RHO regulators. RIPOR proteins, namely, RIPOR1-3, bind directly to RHO proteins (A, B and C) via a RHO-binding motif and exert suppressive effects on RHO activity, thereby negatively influencing RHO-regulated cellular functions. In addition, RIPORs are phosphorylated by upstream protein kinases under chemokine stimulation, and this phosphorylation affects not only their subcellular localization but also their interaction with RHO proteins, altering the activation of RHO downstream targets and ultimately impacting cell polarity and migration. In this review, we provide an overview of recent studies on the function of RIPOR proteins in regulating RHO-dependent directional movement in immune responses and other pathophysiological functions.
Rho GTPases are highly conserved proteins that play critical roles in many cellular processes including actin dynamics, vesicular trafficking, gene transcription, cell-cycle progression, and cell adhesion. The main mode of regulation of Rho GTPases is through guanine nucleotide binding (cycling between an active GTP-bound form and an inactive GDP-bound form), but transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and post-translational modes of Rho regulation have also been described. In the present review, we summarize recent progress on the mechanisms that control the expression of the three members of the Rho-like subfamily (RhoA, RhoB, and RhoC) at the level of gene transcription as well as their post-transcriptional regulation by microRNAs. We also discuss the progress made in deciphering the mechanisms of cross-talk between Rho proteins and the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway and their implications for the pathogenesis of human diseases such as cancer metastasis and fibrosis.
