Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1; Serine-threonine kinase which is a key regulator of both cell death and cell survival. Exhibits kinase activity- dependent functions that trigger cell death and kinase-independent scaffold functions regulating inflammatory signaling and cell survival. Initiates ripoptocide which describes cell death that is dependent on RIPK1, be it apoptosis or necroptosis. Upon binding of TNF to TNFR1, RIPK1 is recruited to the TNF-R1 signaling complex (TNF-RSC also known as complex I) where it acts as a scaffold protein promoting cell survival, [...] 
Apoptosis is crucial for the normal development of the nervous system, whereas neurons in the adult CNS are relatively resistant to this form of cell death. However, under pathological conditions, upregulation of death receptor family ligands, such as tumour necrosis factor (TNF), can sensitize cells in the CNS to apoptosis and a form of regulated necrotic cell death known as necroptosis that is mediated by receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), RIPK3 and mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL). Necroptosis promotes further cell death and neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases, including multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease. In this Review, we outline the evidence implicating necroptosis in these neurological diseases and suggest that targeting RIPK1 might help to inhibit multiple cell death pathways and ameliorate neuroinflammation.
Regulated cell death mediated by dedicated molecular machines, known as programmed cell death, plays important roles in health and disease. Apoptosis, necroptosis and pyroptosis are three such programmed cell death modalities. The caspase family of cysteine proteases serve as key regulators of programmed cell death. During apoptosis, a cascade of caspase activation mediates signal transduction and cellular destruction, whereas pyroptosis occurs when activated caspases cleave gasdermins, which can then form pores in the plasma membrane. Necroptosis, a form of caspase-independent programmed necrosis mediated by RIPK3 and MLKL, is inhibited by caspase-8-mediated cleavage of RIPK1. Disruption of cellular homeostatic mechanisms that are essential for cell survival, such as normal ionic and redox balance and lysosomal flux, can also induce cell death without invoking programmed cell death mechanisms. Excitotoxicity, ferroptosis and lysosomal cell death are examples of such cell death modes. In this Review, we provide an overview of the major cell death mechanisms, highlighting the latest insights into their complex regulation and execution, and their relevance to human diseases.
Regulated cell death has essential functions in development and in adult tissue homeostasis. Necroptosis is a newly discovered pathway of regulated necrosis that requires the proteins RIPK3 and MLKL and is induced by death receptors, interferons, toll-like receptors, intracellular RNA and DNA sensors, and probably other mediators. RIPK1 has important kinase-dependent and scaffolding functions that inhibit or trigger necroptosis and apoptosis. Mouse-model studies have revealed important functions for necroptosis in inflammation and suggested that it could be implicated in the pathogenesis of many human inflammatory diseases. We discuss the mechanisms regulating necroptosis and its potential role in inflammation and disease.
Neuronal cell loss is a defining feature of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. We xenografted human or mouse neurons into the brain of a mouse model of AD. Only human neurons displayed tangles, Gallyas silver staining, granulovacuolar neurodegeneration (GVD), phosphorylated tau blood biomarkers, and considerable neuronal cell loss. The long noncoding RNA MEG3 was strongly up-regulated in human neurons. This neuron-specific long noncoding RNA is also up-regulated in AD patients. MEG3 expression alone was sufficient to induce necroptosis in human neurons in vitro. Down-regulation of MEG3 and inhibition of necroptosis using pharmacological or genetic manipulation of receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), RIPK3, or mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) rescued neuronal cell loss in xenografted human neurons. This model suggests potential therapeutic approaches for AD and reveals a human-specific vulnerability to AD.
Aging is a major risk factor for both genetic and sporadic neurodegenerative disorders. However, it is unclear how aging interacts with genetic predispositions to promote neurodegeneration. Here, we investigate how partial loss of function of TBK1, a major genetic cause for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) comorbidity, leads to age-dependent neurodegeneration. We show that TBK1 is an endogenous inhibitor of RIPK1 and the embryonic lethality of Tbk1(-/-) mice is dependent on RIPK1 kinase activity. In aging human brains, another endogenous RIPK1 inhibitor, TAK1, exhibits a marked decrease in expression. We show that in Tbk1(+/-) mice, the reduced myeloid TAK1 expression promotes all the key hallmarks of ALS/FTD, including neuroinflammation, TDP-43 aggregation, axonal degeneration, neuronal loss, and behavior deficits, which are blocked upon inhibition of RIPK1. Thus, aging facilitates RIPK1 activation by reducing TAK1 expression, which cooperates with genetic risk factors to promote the onset of ALS/FTD.
In the early 2000s, receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein kinase 1 (RIPK1), a molecule already recognized as an important regulator of cell survival, inflammation and disease, was attributed an additional function: the regulation of a novel cell death pathway that came to be known as necroptosis. Subsequently, the related kinase RIPK3 and its substrate mixed-lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) were also implicated in the necroptotic pathway, and links between this pathway and apoptosis were established. In this Timeline article, we outline the discoveries that have helped to identify the roles of RIPK1, RIPK3, MLKL and other regulators of necroptosis, and how they interact to determine cell fate.
RIPK1 kinase has emerged as a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of a wide range of human neurodegenerative, autoimmune, and inflammatory diseases. This was supported by extensive studies which demonstrated that RIPK1 is a key mediator of apoptotic and necrotic cell death as well as inflammatory pathways. Furthermore, human genetic evidence has linked the dysregulation of RIPK1 to the pathogenesis of ALS as well as other inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases. Importantly, unique allosteric small-molecule inhibitors of RIPK1 that offer high selectivity have been developed. These molecules can penetrate the blood-brain barrier, thus offering the possibility to target neuroinflammation and cell death which drive various neurologic conditions including Alzheimer's disease, ALS, and multiple sclerosis as well as acute neurological diseases such as stroke and traumatic brain injuries. We discuss the current understanding of RIPK1 regulatory mechanisms and emerging evidence for the pathological roles of RIPK1 in human diseases, especially in the context of the central nervous systems.
Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) is a key mediator of cell death and inflammation. The unique hydrophobic pocket in the allosteric regulatory domain of RIPK1 has enabled the development of highly selective small-molecule inhibitors of its kinase activity, which have demonstrated safety in preclinical models and clinical trials. Potential applications of these RIPK1 inhibitors for the treatment of monogenic and polygenic autoimmune, inflammatory, neurodegenerative, ischaemic and acute conditions, such as sepsis, are emerging. This article reviews RIPK1 biology and disease-associated mutations in RIPK1 signalling pathways, highlighting clinical trials of RIPK1 inhibitors and potential strategies to mitigate development challenges.
RIPK1 and RIPK3 (receptor-interacting serine/threonine protein kinases 1/3) interact by virtue of their RIP homotypic interaction motifs to mediate a form of cell death called necroptosis, although mice lacking these kinases have very different phenotypes. RIPK1-deficient mice die soon after birth, whereas RIPK3-deficient mice are healthy. Necroptosis involves cell rupture and is triggered by tumor necrosis factor (TNF), Toll-like receptors (TLRs), or the T cell receptor (TCR) when pro-apoptotic caspase-8 is inhibited. Various mouse models of disease are ameliorated by RIPK3 deficiency, suggesting that necroptosis contributes to pathology. Genetic rescue experiments now reveal why RIPK3-deficient are viable but RIPK1-deficient mice are not. These and other experiments indicate unexpected complexity in the regulation of both apoptosis and necroptosis by RIPK1 and RIPK3.
Steatotic donor livers are becoming more and more common in liver transplantation. However, the current use of steatotic grafts is less acceptable than normal grafts due to their higher susceptibility to ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. To investigate the mechanism underlying the susceptibility of steatotic liver to I/R injury, we detected cell death markers and inflammation in clinical donor livers and animal models. We found that caspase-8-mediated hepatic apoptosis is activated in steatotic liver I/R injury. However, ablation of caspase-8 only slightly mitigated steatotic liver I/R injury without affecting inflammation. We further demonstrated that RIPK1 kinase induces both caspase-8-mediated apoptosis and cell death-independent inflammation. Inhibition of RIPK1 kinase significantly protects against steatotic liver I/R injury by alleviating both hepatic apoptosis and inflammation. Additionally, we found that RIPK1 activation is induced by Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1) but not the canonical TNF-alpha pathway during steatotic liver I/R injury. Deletion of ZBP1 substantially decreases the steatotic liver I/R injury. Mechanistically, ZBP1 is amplified by palmitic acid-activated JNK pathway in steatotic livers. Upon I/R injury, excessive reactive oxygen species trigger ZBP1 activation by inducing its aggregation independent of the Z-nucleic acids sensing action in steatotic livers, leading to the kinase activation of RIPK1 and the subsequent aggravation of liver injury. Thus, ZBP1-mediated RIPK1-driven apoptosis and inflammation exacerbate steatotic liver I/R injury, which could be targeted to protect steatotic donor livers during transplantation.
Phase separation is a vital mechanism that mediates the formation of biomolecular condensates and their functions. Necroptosis is a lytic form of programmed cell death mediated by RIPK1, RIPK3, and MLKL downstream of TNFR1 and has been implicated in mediating many human diseases. However, whether necroptosis is regulated by phase separation is not yet known. Here, we show that upon the induction of necroptosis and recruitment by the adaptor protein TAX1BP1, PARP5A and its binding partner RNF146 form liquid-like condensates by multivalent interactions to perform poly ADP-ribosylation (PARylation) and PARylation-dependent ubiquitination (PARdU) of activated RIPK1 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. We show that PARdU predominantly occurs on the K376 residue of mouse RIPK1, which promotes proteasomal degradation of kinase-activated RIPK1 to restrain necroptosis. Our data demonstrate that PARdU on K376 of mouse RIPK1 provides an alternative cell death checkpoint mediated by phase separation-dependent control of necroptosis by PARP5A and RNF146.
Cell death and inflammation are closely linked arms of the innate immune response to combat infection and tissue malfunction. Recent advancements in our understanding of the intricate signals originating from dying cells have revealed that cell death serves as more than just an end point. It facilitates the exchange of information between the dying cell and cells of the tissue microenvironment, particularly immune cells, alerting and recruiting them to the site of disturbance. Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) is emerging as a critical stress sentinel that functions as a molecular switch, governing cellular survival, inflammatory responses and immunogenic cell death signalling. Its tight regulation involves multiple layers of post-translational modifications. In this Review, we discuss the molecular mechanisms that regulate RIPK1 to maintain homeostasis and cellular survival in healthy cells, yet drive cell death in a context-dependent manner. We address how RIPK1 mutations or aberrant regulation is associated with inflammatory and autoimmune disorders and cancer. Moreover, we tease apart what is known about catalytic and non-catalytic roles of RIPK1 and discuss the successes and pitfalls of current strategies that aim to target RIPK1 in the clinic.
Receptor interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) mediates cell death and inflammatory signaling and is increased in multiple sclerosis (MS) brain samples. Here, we investigate the role of glial RIPK1 kinase activity in mediating MS pathogenesis. We demonstrate RIPK1 levels correlate with MS disease progression. We find microglia are susceptible to RIPK1-mediated cell death and identify an inflammatory gene signature that may contribute to the neuroinflammatory milieu in MS patients. We uncover a distinct role for RIPK1 in astrocytes in regulating inflammatory signaling in the absence of cell death and confirm RIPK1-kinase-dependent regulation in human glia. Using a murine MS model, we show RIPK1 inhibition attenuates disease progression and suppresses deleterious signaling in astrocytes and microglia. Our results suggest RIPK1 kinase activation in microglia and astrocytes induces a detrimental neuroinflammatory program that contributes to the neurodegenerative environment in progressive MS.
RIPK1 is a multi-functional kinase that regulates cell death and inflammation and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases. RIPK1 acts in a kinase-dependent and kinase-independent manner to promote or suppress apoptosis and necroptosis, but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we show that a mutation (R588E) disrupting the RIPK1 death domain (DD) caused perinatal lethality induced by ZBP1-mediated necroptosis. Additionally, these mice developed postnatal inflammatory pathology, which was mediated by necroptosis-independent TNFR1, TRADD, and TRIF signaling, partially requiring RIPK3. Our biochemical mechanistic studies revealed that ZBP1- and TRIF-mediated activation of RIPK3 required RIPK1 kinase activity in wild-type cells but not in Ripk1(R588E/R588E) cells, suggesting that DD-dependent oligomerization of RIPK1 and its interaction with FADD determine the mechanisms of RIPK3 activation by ZBP1 and TRIF. Collectively, these findings revealed a critical physiological role of DD-dependent RIPK1 signaling that is important for the regulation of tissue homeostasis and inflammation.
Receptor interacting protein 1 (RIP1) kinase is a critical regulator of inflammation and cell death signaling, and plays a crucial role in maintaining immune responses and proper tissue homeostasis. Mounting evidence argues for the importance of RIP1 post-translational modifications in control of its function. Ubiquitination by E3 ligases, such as inhibitors of apoptosis (IAP) proteins and LUBAC, as well as the reversal of these modifications by deubiquitinating enzymes, such as A20 and CYLD, can greatly influence RIP1 mediated signaling. In addition, cleavage by caspase-8, RIP1 autophosphorylation, and phosphorylation by a number of signaling kinases can greatly impact cellular fate. Disruption of the tightly regulated RIP1 modifications can lead to signaling disbalance in TNF and/or TLR controlled and other inflammatory pathways, and result in severe human pathologies. This review will focus on RIP1 and its many modifications with an emphasis on ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and cleavage, and their functional impact on the RIP1's role in signaling pathways.
Mutations in the optineurin (OPTN) gene have been implicated in both familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). However, the role of this protein in the central nervous system (CNS) and how it may contribute to ALS pathology are unclear. Here, we found that optineurin actively suppressed receptor-interacting kinase 1 (RIPK1)-dependent signaling by regulating its turnover. Loss of OPTN led to progressive dysmyelination and axonal degeneration through engagement of necroptotic machinery in the CNS, including RIPK1, RIPK3, and mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL). Furthermore, RIPK1- and RIPK3-mediated axonal pathology was commonly observed in SOD1(G93A) transgenic mice and pathological samples from human ALS patients. Thus, RIPK1 and RIPK3 play a critical role in mediating progressive axonal degeneration. Furthermore, inhibiting RIPK1 kinase may provide an axonal protective strategy for the treatment of ALS and other human degenerative diseases characterized by axonal degeneration.
Activation of RIPK1 controls TNF-mediated apoptosis, necroptosis and inflammatory pathways(1). Cleavage of human and mouse RIPK1 after residues D324 and D325, respectively, by caspase-8 separates the RIPK1 kinase domain from the intermediate and death domains. The D325A mutation in mouse RIPK1 leads to embryonic lethality during mouse development(2,3). However, the functional importance of blocking caspase-8-mediated cleavage of RIPK1 on RIPK1 activation in humans is unknown. Here we identify two families with variants in RIPK1 (D324V and D324H) that lead to distinct symptoms of recurrent fevers and lymphadenopathy in an autosomal-dominant manner. Impaired cleavage of RIPK1 D324 variants by caspase-8 sensitized patients' peripheral blood mononuclear cells to RIPK1 activation, apoptosis and necroptosis induced by TNF. The patients showed strong RIPK1-dependent activation of inflammatory signalling pathways and overproduction of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines compared with unaffected controls. Furthermore, we show that expression of the RIPK1 mutants D325V or D325H in mouse embryonic fibroblasts confers not only increased sensitivity to RIPK1 activation-mediated apoptosis and necroptosis, but also induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF. By contrast, patient-derived fibroblasts showed reduced expression of RIPK1 and downregulated production of reactive oxygen species, resulting in resistance to necroptosis and ferroptosis. Together, these data suggest that human non-cleavable RIPK1 variants promote activation of RIPK1, and lead to an autoinflammatory disease characterized by hypersensitivity to apoptosis and necroptosis and increased inflammatory response in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, as well as a compensatory mechanism to protect against several pro-death stimuli in fibroblasts.
BACKGROUND: Receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) is a key mediator of regulated cell death (including apoptosis and necroptosis) and inflammation, both drivers of COPD pathogenesis. We aimed to define the contribution of RIPK1 kinase-dependent cell death and inflammation in the pathogenesis of COPD. METHODS: We assessed RIPK1 expression in single-cell RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from human and mouse lungs, and validated RIPK1 levels in lung tissue of COPD patients via immunohistochemistry. Next, we assessed the consequences of genetic and pharmacological inhibition of RIPK1 kinase activity in experimental COPD, using Ripk1 (S25D/S25D) kinase-deficient mice and the RIPK1 kinase inhibitor GSK'547. RESULTS: RIPK1 expression increased in alveolar type 1 (AT1), AT2, ciliated and neuroendocrine cells in human COPD. RIPK1 protein levels were significantly increased in airway epithelium of COPD patients compared with never-smokers and smokers without airflow limitation. In mice, exposure to cigarette smoke (CS) increased Ripk1 expression similarly in AT2 cells, and further in alveolar macrophages and T-cells. Genetic and/or pharmacological inhibition of RIPK1 kinase activity significantly attenuated airway inflammation upon acute and subacute CS exposure, as well as airway remodelling, emphysema, and apoptotic and necroptotic cell death upon chronic CS exposure. Similarly, pharmacological RIPK1 kinase inhibition significantly attenuated elastase-induced emphysema and lung function decline. Finally, RNA-seq on lung tissue of CS-exposed mice revealed downregulation of cell death and inflammatory pathways upon pharmacological RIPK1 kinase inhibition. CONCLUSIONS: RIPK1 kinase inhibition is protective in experimental models of COPD and may represent a novel promising therapeutic approach.
RIPK1 is a key regulator of innate immune signalling pathways. To ensure an optimal inflammatory response, RIPK1 is regulated post-translationally by well-characterized ubiquitylation and phosphorylation events, as well as by caspase-8-mediated cleavage(1-7). The physiological relevance of this cleavage event remains unclear, although it is thought to inhibit activation of RIPK3 and necroptosis(8). Here we show that the heterozygous missense mutations D324N, D324H and D324Y prevent caspase cleavage of RIPK1 in humans and result in an early-onset periodic fever syndrome and severe intermittent lymphadenopathy-a condition we term 'cleavage-resistant RIPK1-induced autoinflammatory syndrome'. To define the mechanism for this disease, we generated a cleavage-resistant Ripk1(D325A) mutant mouse strain. Whereas Ripk1(-/-) mice died postnatally from systemic inflammation, Ripk1(D325A/D325A) mice died during embryogenesis. Embryonic lethality was completely prevented by the combined loss of Casp8 and Ripk3, but not by loss of Ripk3 or Mlkl alone. Loss of RIPK1 kinase activity also prevented Ripk1(D325A/D325A) embryonic lethality, although the mice died before weaning from multi-organ inflammation in a RIPK3-dependent manner. Consistently, Ripk1(D325A/D325A) and Ripk1(D325A/+) cells were hypersensitive to RIPK3-dependent TNF-induced apoptosis and necroptosis. Heterozygous Ripk1(D325A/+) mice were viable and grossly normal, but were hyper-responsive to inflammatory stimuli in vivo. Our results demonstrate the importance of caspase-mediated RIPK1 cleavage during embryonic development and show that caspase cleavage of RIPK1 not only inhibits necroptosis but also maintains inflammatory homeostasis throughout life.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: In non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), hepatocytes can undergo necroptosis: a regulated form of necrotic cell death mediated by the receptor-interacting protein kinase (RIPK) 1. Herein, we assessed the potential for RIPK1 and its downstream effector mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein (MLKL) to act as therapeutic targets and markers of activity in NAFLD. METHODS: C57/BL6J-mice were fed a normal chow diet or a high-fat diet (HFD). The effect of RIPA-56, a highly specific inhibitor of RIPK1, was evaluated in HFD-fed mice and in primary human steatotic hepatocytes. RIPK1 and MLKL concentrations were measured in the serum of patients with NAFLD. RESULTS: When used as either a prophylactic or curative treatment for HFD-fed mice, RIPA-56 caused a downregulation of MLKL and a reduction of liver injury, inflammation and fibrosis, characteristic of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), as well as of steatosis. This latter effect was reproduced by treating primary human steatotic hepatocytes with RIPA-56 or necrosulfonamide, a specific inhibitor of human MLKL, and by knockout (KO) of Mlkl in fat-loaded AML-12 mouse hepatocytes. Mlkl-KO led to activation of mitochondrial respiration and an increase in beta-oxidation in steatotic hepatocytes. Along with decreased MLKL activation, Ripk3-KO mice exhibited increased activities of the liver mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes in experimental NASH. In patients with NAFLD, serum concentrations of RIPK1 and MLKL increased in correlation with activity. CONCLUSION: The inhibition of RIPK1 improves NASH features in HFD-fed mice and reverses steatosis via an MLKL-dependent mechanism that, at least partly, involves an increase in mitochondrial respiration. RIPK1 and MLKL are potential serum markers of activity and promising therapeutic targets in NAFLD. LAY SUMMARY: There are currently no pharmacological treatment options for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which is now the most frequent liver disease. Necroptosis is a regulated process of cell death that can occur in hepatocytes during NAFLD. Herein, we show that RIPK1, a gatekeeper of the necroptosis pathway that is activated in NAFLD, can be inhibited by RIPA-56 to reduce not only liver injury, inflammation and fibrosis, but also steatosis in experimental models. These results highlight the potential of RIPK1 as a therapeutic target in NAFLD.
