E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase NRDP1; Acts as E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase and regulates the degradation of target proteins. Polyubiquitinates MYD88. Negatively regulates MYD88-dependent production of proinflammatory cytokines. Can promote TRIF-dependent production of type I interferon and inhibits infection with vesicular stomatitis virus (By similarity). Promotes also activation of TBK1 and IRF3. Involved in the ubiquitination of erythropoietin (EPO) and interleukin-3 (IL-3) receptors. Thus, through maintaining basal levels of cytokine receptors, RNF41 is involved in the control of hemat [...] 
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most frequently diagnosed cancer with unfavorable clinical outcomes worldwide. circFNDC3B plays as a tumor suppressor in CRC, however, the mechanism of circFNDC3B in CRC remains ambiguous. The stem-like properties of CRC cells were detected by the evaluation of stemness markers, sphere formation assay and flow cytometry. qRT-PCR, FISH, IHC, and western blotting assessed the expression and localization of circFNDC3B, RNF41, ASB6, and stemness markers in CRC. The metastatic capabilities of CRC cells were examined by wound healing and Transwell assays, as well as in vivo liver metastasis model. Bioinformatics analysis, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), RNA pull-down assay and co-IP were used to detect the associations among circFNDC3B, FXR2, RNF41, and ASB6. Downregulated circFNDC3B was associated with unfavorite survival in CRC patients, and circFNDC3B overexpression suppressed CRC stemness and metastasis. Mechanistically, studies revealed that YTHDC1 facilitated cytoplasmic translocation of m(6)A-modified circFNDC3B, and circFNDC3B enhanced RNF41 mRNA stability and expression via binding to FXR2. circFNDC3B promoted ASB6 degradation through RNF41-mediated ubiquitination. Functional studies showed that silencing of RNF41 counteracted circFNDC3B-suppressed CRC stemness and metastasis, and ASB6 overexpression reversed circFNDC3B- or RNF41-mediated regulation of CRC stemness and metastasis. Elevated ASB6 was positively correlated with unfavorite survival in CRC patients. In vivo experiments further showed that circFNDC3B or RNF41 overexpression repressed tumor growth, stemness and liver metastasis via modulating ASB6. Taken together, m(6)A-modified circFNDC3B inhibited CRC stemness and metastasis via RNF41-dependent ASB6 degradation. These findings provide novel insights and important clues for targeted therapeutic strategies of CRC.
BRUCE/Apollon is a membrane-associated inhibitor of apoptosis protein that is essential for viability and has ubiquitin-conjugating activity. On initiation of apoptosis, the ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1/RNF41 promotes proteasomal degradation of BRUCE. Here we demonstrate that BRUCE together with the proteasome activator PA28gamma causes proteasomal degradation of LC3-I and thus inhibits autophagy. LC3-I on the phagophore membrane is conjugated to phosphatidylethanolamine to form LC3-II, which is required for the formation of autophagosomes and selective recruitment of substrates. SIP/CacyBP is a ubiquitination-related protein that is highly expressed in neurons and various tumors. Under normal conditions, SIP inhibits the ubiquitination and degradation of BRUCE, probably by blocking the binding of Nrdp1 to BRUCE. On DNA damage by topoisomerase inhibitors, Nrdp1 causes monoubiquitination of SIP and thus promotes apoptosis. However, on starvation, SIP together with Rab8 enhances the translocation of BRUCE into the recycling endosome, formation of autophagosomes, and degradation of BRUCE by optineurin-mediated autophagy. Accordingly, deletion of SIP in cultured cells reduces the autophagic degradation of damaged mitochondria and cytosolic protein aggregates. Thus, by stimulating proteasomal degradation of LC3-I, BRUCE also inhibits autophagy. Conversely, SIP promotes autophagy by blocking BRUCE-dependent degradation of LC3-I and by enhancing autophagosome formation and autophagic destruction of BRUCE. These actions of BRUCE and SIP represent mechanisms that link the regulation of autophagy and apoptosis under different conditions.
The ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1/RNF41 promotes the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of multiple important substrates, including BRUCE/BIRC6, a giant ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme inhibiting both apoptosis and autophagy. miR-183-5p is associated with various malignancies potentially by targeting dozens of genes. Here, we show that the lncRNA LINC00960 binds to the Nrdp1-targeting miR-183-5p and promotes apoptosis. Compared to other known miR-183-5p targets, Nrdp1 mRNA is among the few with top scores to complement miR-183-5p. miR-183-5p binds to the 3'UTR of Nrdp1 mRNA and downregulates Nrdp1 at both the mRNA and protein levels. The miR-183-5p mimics inhibit DNA damage-induced apoptosis probably by upregulating BRUCE level, whereas the miR-183-5p inhibitor suppresses the effects of miR-183-5p. LINC00960 is the noncoding RNA with the highest score to complement miR-183-5p. LINC00960 overexpression reduces, but its knockdown increases, the level of miR-183-5p, whereas LINC00960 overexpression increases, but its knockdown decreases, the level of Nrdp1 and apoptosis. Importantly, the expression of LINC00960, which is associated with multiple types of tumors, positively correlates with that of Nrdp1 in several tumors but inversely correlates with that of miR-183-5p in multiple human tumor cell lines, as analysed by quantitative PCR. Thus, miR-183-5p downregulates Nrdp1 expression and inhibits apoptosis, whereas LINC00960 upregulates Nrdp1 and promotes apoptosis by inhibiting miR-183-5p. These results may provide new ideas for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of apoptosis-related diseases, such as tumors and neurodegenerative diseases.
Prostate cancer bone metastasis is a predominant cause of death for prostate cancer (PCa) patients. However, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, we report that high levels of RNF41 are associated with metastatic human prostate cancer. RNF41 silencing inhibits prostate cancer cell growth, cell migration and invasion in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, we identify that RNF41 induces K27- and K63-linked noncanonical polyubiquitination of MYO1C to enhance its stability and induce actin remodeling, which promotes PCa bone metastasis. RNF41 was significantly upregulated in metastatic prostate cancer tissues and positively associated with MYO1C expression. Furthermore, we show in intraarterial injected-bone metastasis xenograft model that targeting MYO1C stability by inhibition of RNF41 markedly suppressed PCa bone metastasis. Collectively, our findings identify RNF41 is an important regulator of prostate cancer cell growth and metastasis and targeting RNF41/MYO1C could be a valuable strategy to ameliorate prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
CLEC16A is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates mitochondrial quality control through mitophagy and is associated with over 20 human diseases. CLEC16A forms a complex with another E3 ligase, RNF41, and a ubiquitin-specific peptidase, USP8; however, regions that regulate CLEC16A activity or the assembly of the tripartite mitophagy regulatory complex are unknown. Here, we report that CLEC16A contains an internal intrinsically disordered protein region (IDPR) that is crucial for CLEC16A function and turnover. IDPRs lack a fixed secondary structure and possess emerging yet still equivocal roles in protein stability, interactions, and enzymatic activity. We find that the internal IDPR of CLEC16A is crucial for its degradation. CLEC16A turnover was promoted by RNF41, which binds and acts upon the internal IDPR to destabilize CLEC16A. Loss of this internal IDPR also destabilized the ubiquitin-dependent tripartite CLEC16A-RNF41-USP8 complex. Finally, the presence of an internal IDPR within CLEC16A was confirmed using NMR and CD spectroscopy. Together, our studies reveal that an IDPR is essential to control the reciprocal regulatory balance between CLEC16A and RNF41, which could be targeted to improve mitochondrial health in disease.
The mechanisms controlling the steady-state cell surface levels of cytokine receptors, and consequently the cellular response to cytokines, remain poorly understood. The number of surface-exposed receptors is a dynamic balance of de novo synthesis, transport to the plasma membrane, internalization, recycling, degradation and ectodomain shedding. We previously reported that the E3 ubiquitin ligase RING finger protein 41 (RNF41) inhibits basal lysosomal degradation and enhances ectodomain shedding of JAK2-associated cytokine receptors. Ubiquitin-specific protease 8 (USP8), an RNF41-interacting deubiquitylating enzyme (DUB) stabilizes RNF41 and is involved in trafficking of various transmembrane proteins. The present study identifies USP8 as a substrate of RNF41 and reveals that loss of USP8 explains the aforementioned RNF41 effects. RNF41 redistributes and ubiquitylates USP8, and reduces USP8 levels. In addition, USP8 knockdown functionally matches the effects of RNF41 ectopic expression on the model leptin and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) receptors. Moreover, RNF41 indirectly destabilizes the ESCRT-0 complex through suppression of USP8. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that RNF41 controls JAK2-associated cytokine receptor trafficking by acting as a key regulator of USP8 and ESCRT-0 stability. Balanced reciprocal cross-regulation of RNF41 and USP8 thus determines whether receptors are sorted for lysosomal degradation or recycling, this way regulating basal cytokine receptor levels.
Because proteins are the main mediators of most cellular processes they are also prime therapeutic targets. Identifying physical links among proteins and between drugs and their protein targets is essential in order to understand the mechanisms through which both proteins themselves and the molecules they are targeted with act. Thus, there is a strong need for sensitive methods that enable mapping out these biomolecular interactions. Here we present a robust and sensitive approach to screen proteome-scale collections of proteins for binding to proteins or small molecules using the well validated MAPPIT (Mammalian Protein-Protein Interaction Trap) and MASPIT (Mammalian Small Molecule-Protein Interaction Trap) assays. Using high-density reverse transfected cell microarrays, a close to proteome-wide collection of human ORF clones can be screened for interactors at high throughput. The versatility of the platform is demonstrated through several examples. With MAPPIT, we screened a 15k ORF library for binding partners of RNF41, an E3 ubiquitin protein ligase implicated in receptor sorting, identifying known and novel interacting proteins. The potential related to the fact that MAPPIT operates in living human cells is illustrated in a screen where the protein collection is scanned for interactions with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in its unliganded versus dexamethasone-induced activated state. Several proteins were identified the interaction of which is modulated upon ligand binding to the GR, including a number of previously reported GR interactors. Finally, the screening technology also enables detecting small molecule target proteins, which in many drug discovery programs represents an important hurdle. We show the efficiency of MASPIT-based target profiling through screening with tamoxifen, a first-line breast cancer drug, and reversine, an investigational drug with interesting dedifferentiation and antitumor activity. In both cases, cell microarray screens yielded known and new potential drug targets highlighting the utility of the technology beyond fundamental biology.
HER3 is a member of the HER (EGFR/ErbB) receptor family consisting of four closely related type 1 transmembrane receptors (EGFR, HER2, HER3, and HER4). HER receptors are part of a complex signaling network intertwined with the Ras/Raf/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, JAK/STAT, and PKC signaling pathways. Aberrant activation of the HER receptors and downstream signaling molecules tips the balance on cellular events, leading to various types of cancers. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and small molecule inhibitors targeting EGFR and HER2 tyrosine kinase activities exhibit clinical benefits in the treatment of several types of cancers, but their clinical efficacy is limited by the occurrence of drug resistance. HER3 is the preferred dimerization partner of HER2 and it is well established that HER3 plays an important role in drug resistance to EGFR- and HER2-targeting therapies. Since HER3 has limited kinase activity, mAbs are being explored to target HER3 for cancer therapy. Currently, approximately a dozen of anti-HER3 mAbs are at different stages of clinical development. However, the lack of established biomarkers has made it more challenging to stratify cancer patients to whom HER3-targeting therapies can be more effective. In this review, we focus on the validation of HER3 as a cancer drug target, the recent development in biomarker discovery for anti-HER3 therapies, and the progress made in the clinical development of HER3-targeting mAbs.
Ring finger protein 41 (RNF41) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the ubiquitination and degradation of many proteins including ErbB3 receptors, BIRC6, and parkin. Next to this, RNF41 regulates the intracellular trafficking of certain JAK2-associated cytokine receptors by ubiquitinating and suppressing USP8, which, in turn, destabilizes the ESCRT-0 complex. To further elucidate the function of RNF41 we used different orthogonal approaches to reveal the RNF41 protein complex: affinity purification-mass spectrometry, BioID, and Virotrap. We combined these results with known data sets for RNF41 obtained with microarray MAPPIT and Y2H screens. This way, we establish a comprehensive high-resolution interactome network comprising 175 candidate protein partners. To remove potential methodological artifacts from this network, we distilled the data into a high-confidence interactome map by retaining a total of 19 protein hits identified in two or more of the orthogonal methods. AP2S1, a novel RNF41 interaction partner, was selected from this high-confidence interactome for further functional validation. We reveal a role for AP2S1 in leptin and LIF receptor signaling and show that RNF41 stabilizes and relocates AP2S1.
RNF41 (Ring Finger Protein 41) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the intracellular sorting and function of a diverse set of substrates. Next to BRUCE and Parkin, RNF41 can directly ubiquitinate ErbB3, IL-3, EPO and RARalpha receptors or downstream signaling molecules such as Myd88, TBK1 and USP8. In this way it can regulate receptor signaling and routing. To further elucidate the molecular mechanism behind the role of RNF41 in intracellular transport we performed an Array MAPPIT (Mammalian Protein-Protein Interaction Trap) screen using an extensive set of proteins derived from the human ORFeome collection. This paper describes the identification of VPS52, a subunit of the GARP (Golgi-Associated Retrograde Protein) and the EARP (Endosome-Associated Recycling Protein) complexes, as a novel interaction partner of RNF41. Through interaction via their coiled coil domains, RNF41 ubiquitinates and relocates VPS52 away from VPS53, a common subunit of the GARP and EARP complexes, towards RNF41 bodies.
INTRODUCTION: Immunotherapy is firmly established as a treatment regimen in various solid tumors, driven by its exceptional benefits in a selected group of patients. Despite widespread adoption of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) across diverse solid tumors, the quest for a clinically informative biomarker for long-term benefit remains unmet. METHODS: A total of 49 patients with metastatic NSCLC treated with ICB were included. Long-term (LTR) and short-term responders (STR) were defined as those with a response to ICB lasting more than 24 months or less than 6 months, respectively. Longitudinal blood specimens were collected before ICB treatment initiation and early-on treatment. Plasma ctDNA next-generation sequencing panel (NGS) and serum proteomics were performed. GeoMx DSP on baseline tumor tissue was performed in a subset of patients. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed specific characteristics of LTR compared with STR, namely higher PD-L1 in tumor cells (p = 0.005) and higher incidence of irAEs (p = 0.001). Genomic features associated with lack of benefit from ICB included co-occurring mutations in KRAS/STK11 and TP53/KMT2D (p < 0.05). At a baseline, LTR patients exhibited higher serum levels of proteins related with apoptosis (CASP8, PRKRA), chemotaxis, immune proteasome, processing of MHC class I (S100A4, PSMD9, RNF41) and immune homeostasis (HAVCR1, ARG1) (p < 0.05). Protein spatial profiling of tumor samples showed higher levels of proteins linked with the presence of immune cells (CD45), T cells (CD8), antigen presentation (HLA-DR) and immune regulation proteins (PD-L1, IDO1) within the tumor and tumor stroma component (p < 0.05) in LTR patients. Serum longitudinal analysis identified a set of proteins that presented distinct dynamics in LTR compared to STR, making them interesting candidates to evaluate as early predictors of treatment efficacy. CONCLUSIONS: Our multimodal analysis of patients with metastatic NSCLC treated with ICB identified clinicopathological and immunological features associated with long-term benefits. The presence of preexisting antitumor immunity emerged as a strong predictor of long-term benefits, providing insights for potential biomarkers and therapeutic strategies for enhancing ICB outcomes in metastatic NSCLC.
Vascular endothelial cells (VECs) are key players in the formation of neovessels and tumor metastasis, the ultimate cause of the majority of cancer-related human death. However, the crosstalk between VECs and metastasis remain greatly elusive. Based on our finding that tumor-associated VECs present significant decrease of Nrdp1 protein which is closely correlated with higher metastatic probability, herein we show that the conditional medium from hypoxia-incubated cancer cells induces extensive Nrdp1 downregulation in human and mouse VECs by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which activates CHIP, followed by Nrdp1 degradation in ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent way. More importantly, lung metastases of cancer cells significantly increase in conditional VECs Nrdp1 knockout mice. Mechanically, Nrdp1 promotes degradation of Fam20C, a secretory kinase involved in phosphorylating numerous secreted proteins. Reciprocally, deficiency of Nrdp1 in VECs (ecNrdp1) results in increased secretion of Fam20C, which induces degradation of extracellular matrix and disrupts integrity of vascular basement membrane, thus driving tumor metastatic dissemination. In addition, specific overexpression of ecNrdp1 by Nrdp1-carrying adeno-associated virus or chemical Nrdp1 activator ABPN efficiently mitigates tumor metastasis in mice. Collectively, we explore a new mechanism for VEGF to enhance metastasis and role of Nrdp1 in maintaining the integrity of vascular endothelium, suggesting that ecNrdp1-mediated signaling pathways might become potential target for anti-metastatic therapies.
Kinetochores link chromosomes to spindle microtubules and are essential for accurate chromosome segregation during cell division. Kinetochores assemble at the centromeric region of chromosomes as a multiprotein complex. However, the molecular mechanisms of kinetochore assembly have not yet been fully elucidated. In this study, we identified pleckstrin homology domain and leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase 1 (PHLPP1) as a regulatory phosphatase that facilitates proper kinetochore assembly. We found that PHLPP1 interacted with the essential outer-kinetochore protein SGT1 and stabilized its protein levels. Loss of PHLPP1 from cells led to SGT1 degradation and thereby caused defective kinetochore assembly. We also found that the ring finger protein 41 (RNF41) as an E3 ligase ubiquitinated and degraded SGT1 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. PHLPP1 dephosphorylated SGT1 at four conserved residues (Ser-17, Ser-249, Ser-289, and Thr-233) and thereby prevented SGT1 from associating with RNF41, in turn, countering SGT1 degradation. Importantly, depletion of RNF41 or expression of a non-phosphorylatable SGT1 mutant rescued the kinetochore defects caused by the loss of PHLPP1. Taken together, our results suggest that PHLPP1 plays an important role in the assembly of kinetochores by counteracting RNF41-mediated SGT1 degradation.
CONTEXT: Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) activation contributes to obesity-associated insulin resistance in skeletal muscles (SM). TLR4 signaling involves two pathways: the myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) leading to inflammatory cytokines production and the toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon (IFN) I (TRIF)-dependent pathways leading to type 1 interferon (IFNI) and interferon stimulated genes (ISG) expression. The E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF41 allows the preferential activation of the TRIF-IFNI pathway; however, its role in insulin response has not been reported. METHODS: We measured RNF41 level and IFNI pathway activation (ISG expression) in SM biopsies of obese insulin sensitive (OIS) and obese insulin resistant (OIR) women. Then we isolated and differentiated in myotubes, primary human SM cell progenitors from OIS and OIR SM biopsies. We modulated RNF41 and ISG expression in these myotubes and investigated their effects on insulin response. RESULTS: RNF41 expression is down-regulated in vivo in OIR SM and myotubes compared to OIS SM and myotubes. TLR4 activation with palmitate induces TRIF-IFNI pathway and ISG in OIS myotubes but not in OIR myotubes. Inhibition of RNF41 expression with siRNF41 in OIS myotubes treated with palmitate attenuates insulin response, IFNI pathway activation and ISG induction, mimicking OIR phenotype. Further, overexpression of RNF41 in OIR myotubes increases insulin response and ISG expression. Exposure to IFNI or to its inducer polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid, restores ISG expression and insulin sensitivity in OIR myotubes and OIS myotubes transfected with siRNF41. CONCLUSION: Our results identify RNF41 as essential to IFNI pathway activation in order to maintain muscle insulin sensitivity during human obesity.
The canonical function of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) system is to enforce quality control among membrane-associated proteins by targeting misfolded secreted, intra-organellar, and intramembrane proteins for degradation. However, increasing evidence suggests that ERAD additionally functions in maintaining appropriate levels of a subset of membrane-associated proteins. In this 'quantity control' capacity, ERAD responds to environmental cues to regulate the proteasomal degradation of specific ERAD substrates according to cellular need. In this review, we discuss in detail seven proteins that are targeted by the ERAD quantity control system. Not surprisingly, ERAD-mediated protein degradation is a key regulatory feature of a variety of ER-resident proteins, including HMG-CoA reductase, cytochrome P450 3A4, IP(3) receptor, and type II iodothyronine deiodinase. In addition, the ERAD quantity control system plays roles in maintaining the proper stoichiometry of multi-protein complexes by mediating the degradation of components that are produced in excess of the limiting subunit. Perhaps somewhat unexpectedly, recent evidence suggests that the ERAD quantity control system also contributes to the regulation of plasma membrane-localized signaling receptors, including the ErbB3 receptor tyrosine kinase and the GABA neurotransmitter receptors. For these substrates, a proportion of the newly synthesized yet properly folded receptors are diverted for degradation at the ER, and are unable to traffic to the plasma membrane. Given that receptor abundance or concentration within the plasma membrane plays key roles in determining signaling efficiency, these observations may point to a novel mechanism for modulating receptor-mediated cellular signaling.
Cytokines, such as interferons, erythropoietin, leptin and most interleukins, signal through type 1 cytokine receptors and activate the canonical JAK-STAT pathway. Aberrant cytokine signalling underlies numerous pathologies and adequate, temporary receptor activation is therefore under tight control. Negative-feedback mechanisms are very well studied, but cellular sensitivity also depends on the number of receptors exposed at the cell surface. This is determined by the equilibrium between receptor synthesis and transport to the plasma membrane, internalisation and recycling, degradation and ectodomain shedding, but the molecular basis of how cells establish steady state receptor levels is poorly understood. Here, we report that ring finger protein 41 (RNF41, also known as E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase Nrdp1) interacts with JAK2-associated cytokine receptor complexes and modulates their cell surface exposure and signalling. Moreover, ectopic expression of RNF41 affected turnover of leptin, leukaemia inhibitory factor and interleukin-6 receptor in a dual way: it blocked intracellular cathepsin-L-dependent receptor cleavage and concomitantly enhanced receptor shedding by metalloproteases of the ADAM family. Receptor degradation and shedding are thus interconnected phenomena with a single protein, RNF41, determining the balance.
The establishment and maintenance of cell polarity is an essential property governing organismal homeostasis, and loss of polarity is a common feature of cancer cells. The ability of epithelial cells to establish apical-basal polarity depends on intracellular signals generated from polarity proteins, such as the Par-1 family of proteins, as well as extracellular signals generated through cell contacts with the extracellular matrix (ECM). The Par-1 family has a well-established role in regulating cell-cell contacts in the form of tight junctions by phosphorylating Par-3. In addition, Par-1 has been shown to impact on cell-ECM interactions by regulating laminin receptor localization and laminin deposition on the basal surface of epithelial cells. Laminins are major structural and signaling components of basement membrane (BM), a sheet of specialized ECM underlying epithelia. In this study, we identify RNF41, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, as a novel Par-1b (also known as MARK2) effector in the cell-ECM pathway. Par-1b binds to and phosphorylates RNF41 on serine 254. Phosphorylation of RNF41 by Par-1b is required for epithelial cells to localize laminin-111 receptors to their basolateral surfaces and to properly anchor to laminin-111. In addition, phosphorylation of RNF41 is required for epithelial cells to establish apical-basal polarity. Our data suggests that phosphorylation of RNF41 by Par-1b regulates basolateral membrane targeting of laminin-111 receptors, thereby facilitating cell anchorage to laminin-111 and ultimately forming the cell-ECM contacts required for epithelial cells to establish apical-basal cell polarity.
Calcyclin-binding protein (CACYBP) is a multi-ligand protein implicated in the progression of various human cancers. However, its function in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unknown. Methods: The expression of CACYBP and RNF41 (RING finger protein 41) in HCC cancer and adjacent non-tumor tissues was detected by immunohistochemistry. CCK-8 assays, colony formation assays, flow cytometry detection and xenograft models were used to evaluate the impact of CACYBP expression on HCC cell growth, apoptosis and cell cycle regulation. Immunoprecipitation and ubiquitination assays were performed to determine how RNF41 regulates CACYBP. The regulatory mechanism of RNF41-CACYBP signaling axis on P27(Kip1) was investigated by western blotting and immunofluorescence. Results: CACYBP was highly expressed and associated with poor prognosis in HCC. CACYBP expression was required for HCC cell growth in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, we identified RNF41 as a specific binding partner of CACYBP at exogenous and endogenous levels. RNF41 recruited CACYBP by its C-terminal substrate binding domain, subsequently ubiquitinating CACYBP and promoting its degradation in both proteasome- and lysosome-dependent pathways. In HCC tissues, RNF41 expression was reduced and conferred a negative correlation with CACYBP expression. Mechanistically, CACYBP overexpression stimulated the Ser10, Thr157 and Thr198 phosphorylation of P27(Kip1) and its cytoplasmic retention, and RNF41 co-expression attenuated this phenomenon. CACYBP depletion led to decreased levels of cyclin D1, cyclin A2, CDK2 and CDK4, causing a typical cell cycle arrest at G1/S phase and increasing apoptosis in HCC cells. P27(Kip1)-S10D but not P27(Kip1)-S10A reconstitution rescued partially the cell cycle function and apoptotic feature after CACYBP depletion. Conclusion: Our findings provide novel insights into the functional role and regulatory mechanism of CACYBP in HCC.
BACKGROUND: Endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) remains the gold standard for acute cellular rejection (ACR) diagnosis in cardiac transplantation yet is subject to interobserver variability. A method that could avoid discordant EMB analysis would be desirable. The apoptosis rate in EMB correlates with ACR severity. Apollon inhibits apoptosis, and RNF41 catalyzes its degradation. Whether tissue Apollon/RNF41 could diagnose ACR is not known. This study addressed this issue. METHODS: Apollon/RNF41 messenger RNA (mRNA) was measured by real time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and apoptosis was quantified with TUNEL assays in EMBs of 268 transplant recipients. EMBs were obtained at 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 12, 24, and 52 posttransplant weeks. RESULTS: At all time points posttransplant, Apollon mRNA decreased significantly in EMBs with ACR grades 2R/3R combined (P<or=0.0010) compared with 0/1R combined, although RNF41 mRNA significantly increased in EMBs with ACR grade 1R (P<0.0001) or 2R/3R combined (P<0.0001) compared with 0. At the identified cut-off level of less than or equal to 168.2 arbitrary units, Apollon mRNA identified ACR grades 2R/3R with 100% sensitivity and 84% specificity, whereas RNF41 mRNA at the cut-off level of more than or equal to 51.8 identified ACR grades 1R-3R with 99% sensitivity and 95% specificity. Increased RNF41 (rs, 0.728; P<0.0001) and decreased Apollon (rs, -0.562; P<0.0001) expression correlated significantly with the degree of apoptosis in EMBs. CONCLUSIONS: Combined Apollon/RNF41 mRNA quantitatively and specifically identifies ACR associated with apoptosis in cardiac allografts and could validate ACR grading variability associated with histologic EMB analysis.
The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) is the major system responsible for degradation of intracellular proteins in eukaryotes. By controlling the levels of key proteins, it regulates almost all of the cellular activities, including cell cycle progression, DNA replication and repair, transcription, protein quality control, immune response, and apoptosis. UPP is composed of the ubiquitination system that marks proteins for degradation and the proteasome which degrades the ubiquitinated proteins. The 26S proteasome is a 2400 kDa complex consisting of more than 40 subunits. Following ubiquitination catalyzed by the ubiquitin activating enzyme (El), a ubiquitin-carrier protein (E2), and one of the cell's many ubiquitin-protein ligases (E3s), the protein substrates are targeted to the proteasome for degradation into small peptides. E3s regulate the degradation of protein substrates indirectly by determining both the specificity and timing of substrate ubiquitination, whereas the deubiquitinating enzymes can inhibit this process by releasing ubiquitin from substrates. In this review, we attempt to highlight the recent progress in research on UPP and its role in the regulation of apoptosis by focusing on several of its important components, including the ubiqutin ligase Nrdp 1, which regulates ErbB/EGFR family of receptor tyrosine kinases, the ubiquitin-carrier protein BRUCE/Apollon (an Inhibitor of Apoptosis Protein), and the novel proteasome subunit hRpnl3 (a binding site for the deubiquitinating enzyme, UCH37).
