Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is Pi turnover; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subfamily. CHRM1 sub-subfamily.
Peripherin 2 (Prph2) is a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein present in the outer segment (OS) rims of rod and cone photoreceptors. It shares many common features with other tetraspanins, including a large intradiscal loop which contains several cysteines. This loop enables Prph2 to associate with itself to form homo-oligomers or with its homologue, rod outer segment membrane protein 1 (Rom1) to form hetero-tetramers and hetero-octamers. Mutations in PRPH2 cause a multitude of retinal diseases including autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (RP) or cone dominant macular dystrophies. The importance of Prph2 for photoreceptor development, maintenance and function is underscored by the fact that its absence results in a failure to initialize OS formation in rods and formation of severely disorganized OS membranous structures in cones. Although the exact role of Rom1 has not been well studied, it has been concluded that it is not necessary for disc morphogenesis but is required for fine tuning OS disc size and structure. Pathogenic mutations in PRPH2 often result in complex and multifactorial phenotypes, involving not just photoreceptors, as has historically been reasoned, but also secondary effects on the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and retinal/choroidal vasculature. The ability of Prph2 to form complexes was identified as a key requirement for the development and maintenance of OS structure and function. Studies using mouse models of pathogenic Prph2 mutations established a connection between changes in complex formation and disease phenotypes. Although progress has been made in the development of therapeutic approaches for retinal diseases in general, the highly complex interplay of functions mediated by Prph2 and the precise regulation of these complexes made it difficult, thus far, to develop a suitable Prph2-specific therapy. Here we describe the latest results obtained in Prph2-associated research and how mouse models provided new insights into the pathogenesis of its related diseases. Furthermore, we give an overview on the current status of the development of therapeutic solutions.
To serve vision, vertebrate rod and cone photoreceptors must detect photons, convert the light stimuli into cellular signals, and then convey the encoded information to downstream neurons. Rods and cones are sensory neurons that each rely on specialized ciliary organelles to detect light. These organelles, called outer segments, possess elaborate architectures that include many hundreds of light-sensitive membranous disks arrayed one atop another in precise register. These stacked disks capture light and initiate the chain of molecular and cellular events that underlie normal vision. Outer segment organization is challenged by an inherently dynamic nature; these organelles are subject to a renewal process that replaces a significant fraction of their disks (up to  approximately 10%) on a daily basis. In addition, a broad range of environmental and genetic insults can disrupt outer segment morphology to impair photoreceptor function and viability. In this chapter, we survey the major progress that has been made for understanding the molecular basis of outer segment architecture. We also discuss key aspects of organelle lipid and protein composition, and highlight distributions, interactions, and potential structural functions of key OS-resident molecules, including: kinesin-2, actin, RP1, prominin-1, protocadherin 21, peripherin-2/rds, rom-1, glutamic acid-rich proteins, and rhodopsin. Finally, we identify key knowledge gaps and challenges that remain for understanding how normal outer segment architecture is established and maintained.
Mutations in peripherin 2 (PRPH2), also known as retinal degeneration slow/RDS, lead to various retinal degenerations including retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and macular/pattern dystrophy (MD/PD). PRPH2-associated disease is often characterized by a phenotypic variability even within families carrying the same mutation, raising interest in potential modifiers. PRPH2 oligomerizes with its homologue rod outer segment (OS) membrane protein 1 (ROM1), and non-pathogenic PRPH2/ROM1 mutations, when present together, lead to digenic RP. We asked whether ROM1 could modify the phenotype of a PRPH2 mutation associated with a high degree of intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity: Y141C. In vitro, Y141C-Prph2 showed signs of retention in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), however co-expression with Rom1 rescued this phenotype. In the heterozygous Y141C knockin mouse model (Prph2Y/+), Y141C-Prph2 and Rom1 formed abnormal complexes but were present at normal levels. Abnormal complexes were eliminated in the absence of Rom1 (Prph2Y/+/Rom1-/-) and total Prph2 levels were reduced to those found in the haploinsufficient Prph2+/- RP model. The biochemical changes had functional and structural consequences; while Prph2Y/+ animals exhibited a cone-rod electroretinogram defect, Prph2Y/+/Rom1-/- animals displayed a rod-dominant phenotype and OSs similar to those seen in the Prph2+/-. These data show that ablation of Rom1 results in the conversion of an MD/PD phenotype characterized by cone functional defects and the formation of abnormal Prph2/Rom1 complexes to an RP phenotype characterized by rod-dominant functional defects and reductions in total Prph2 protein. Thus one method by which ROM1 may act as a disease modifier is by contributing to the large variability in PRPH2-associated disease phenotypes.
Intervertebral disc degeneration (IVDD) has been considered a major cause of low back pain. Therefore, further molecular subtypes of IVDD and identification of potential critical genes are urgently needed. First, consensus clustering was used to classify patients with IVDD into two subtypes and key module genes for subtyping were identified using weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). Then, key module genes for the disease were identified by WGCNA. Subsequently, SVM and GLM were used to identify hub genes. Based on the above genes, a nomogram was constructed to predict the subtypes of IVDD. Finally, we find that ROM1 is lowered in IVDD and is linked to various cancer prognoses. The present work offers innovative diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers for molecular subtypes of IVDD.
Peripherin 2 (PRPH2) is a retina-specific tetraspanin protein essential for the formation of rod and cone photoreceptor outer segments (OS). Patients with mutations in PRPH2 exhibit severe retinal degeneration characterized by vast inter- and intra-familial phenotypic heterogeneity. To help understand contributors to this within-mutation disease variability, we asked whether the PRPH2 binding partner rod OS membrane protein 1 (ROM1) could serve as a phenotypic modifier. We utilized knockin and transgenic mouse models to evaluate the structural, functional and biochemical effects of eliminating one allele of Rom1 (Rom1+/-) in three different Prph2 models which mimic human disease: C213Y Prph2 (Prph2C/+), K153Del Prph2 (Prph2K/+) and R172W (Prph2R172W). Reducing Rom1 in the absence of Prph2 mutations (Rom1+/-) had no effect on retinal structure or function. However, the effects of reducing Rom1 in the presence of Prph2 mutations were highly variable. Prph2K/+/Rom1+/- mice had improved rod and cone function compared with Prph2K/+ as well as amelioration of K153Del-associated defects in PRPH2/ROM1 oligomerization. In contrast, Prph2R172W/Rom1+/- animals had worsened rod and cone function and exacerbated retinal degeneration compared with Prph2R172W animals. Removing one allele of Rom1 had no effect in Prph2C/+. Combined, our findings support a role for non-pathogenic ROM1 null variants in contributing to phenotypic variability in mutant PRPH2-associated retinal degeneration. Since the effects of Rom1 reduction are variable, our data suggest that this contribution is specific to the type of Prph2 mutation.
The two primary photoreceptor-specific tetraspanins are retinal degeneration slow (RDS) and rod outer segment membrane protein-1 (ROM-1). These proteins associate together to form different complexes necessary for the proper structure of the photoreceptor outer segment rim region. Mutations in RDS cause blinding retinal degenerative disease in both rods and cones by mechanisms that remain unknown. Tetraspanins are implicated in a variety of cellular processes and exert their function via the formation of tetraspanin-enriched microdomains. This review focuses on correlations between RDS and other members of the tetraspanin superfamily, particularly emphasizing protein structure, complex assembly, and post-translational modifications, with the goal of furthering our understanding of the structural and functional role of RDS and ROM-1 in outer segment morphogenesis and maintenance, and our understanding of the pathogenesis associated with RDS and ROM-1 mutations.
Some related reports indicate that the outer retinal membrane protein 1 (ROM1) functions importantly in the regulation of the biological process of tumor. Nevertheless, studies towards the role of ROM1 in lung cancer are few. Here, our data demonstrated that ROM1 displayed a relation with lung cancer tumorigenesis and development. In the Tumor Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort, reduced ROM1 level was observed in lung cancer tissues, instead of normal tissues. After bioinformatics analysis, the data revealed that ROM1 level was associated with the tumor stage. Additional results indicated that highly expressed ROM1 exhibited a positive correlation with the overall survival rate, and ROM1 was probably a promising prognostic biomarker of lung cancer. Additionally, our results indicated that knocking out ROM1 could promote cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Our data conclusively demonstrated that ROM1 modulated lung cancer tumorigenesis and development, as a prognosis and treatment biomarker.
PURPOSE: To measure the proportion of cases of retinitis pigmentosa (RP) caused by mutations in the peripherin/RDS (RDS) and ROM1 genes. METHODS: The single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) method was used to analyze 227 unrelated patients with dominant or recessive RP for mutations in the RDS gene and an overlapping set of 315 unrelated patients for mutations in the ROM1 gene (excluding patients with other known RP genes). Variant bands revealed by SSCP were studied further by polymerase chain reaction-based, direct genomic sequencing and, where possible, by cosegregation analysis in the families of the index cases. RESULTS: Four index patients were found to have RP as a result of one of four dominant mutations in the RDS gene, two of which are novel. Four other index patients were found to have digenic RP as a result of the combination of heterozygous mutations in both the RDS and the ROM1 gene, with one of the ROM1 mutations being novel. The digenic cases all had the same RDS mutation (the missense change Leu185Pro), but each had one of three different ROM1 mutations. The authors were unable to determine through cosegregation analysis whether three other changes encountered in the RDS gene and five in the ROM1 gene were pathogenic. CONCLUSIONS: The authors found mutations in the RDS gene as a cause of dominant or digenic RP and mutations in the ROM1 gene as a cause of digenic RP. No cases of RP caused by ROM1 mutations alone have been discovered thus far. Mutations in the RDS and ROM1 genes are infrequent causes of RP, together accounting for only a few percent of patients in the United States and Canada.
Over 1,500 variants in the ABCA4 locus cause phenotypes ranging from severe, early-onset retinal degeneration to very late-onset maculopathies. The resulting ABCA4/Stargardt disease is the most prevalent Mendelian eye disorder, although its underlying clinical heterogeneity, including penetrance of many alleles, are not well-understood. We hypothesized that a share of this complexity is explained by trans-modifiers, i.e., variants in unlinked loci, which are currently unknown. We sought to identify these by performing exome sequencing in a large cohort for a rare disease of 622 cases and compared variation in seven genes known to clinically phenocopy ABCA4 disease to cohorts of ethnically matched controls. We identified a significant enrichment of variants in 2 out of the 7 genes. Moderately rare, likely functional, variants, at the minor allele frequency (MAF) <0.005 and CADD>25, were enriched in ROM1, where 1.3% of 622 patients harbored a ROM1 variant compared to 0.3% of 10,865 controls (p = 2.41E04; OR 3.81 95% CI [1.77; 8.22]). More importantly, analysis of common variants (MAF>0.1) identified a frequent haplotype in PRPH2, tagged by the p.Asp338 variant with MAF = 0.21 in the matched general population that was significantly increased in the patient cohort, MAF 0.25, p = 0.0014. Significant differences were also observed between ABCA4 disease subgroups. In the late-onset subgroup, defined by the hypomorphic p.Asn1868Ile variant and including c.4253+43G>A, the allele frequency for the PRPH2 p.Asp338 variant was 0.15 vs 0.27 in the remaining cohort, p = 0.00057. Known functional data allowed suggesting a mechanism by which the PRPH2 haplotype influences the ABCA4 disease penetrance. These associations were replicated in an independent cohort of 408 patients. The association was highly statistically significant in the combined cohorts of 1,030 cases, p = 4.00E-05 for all patients and p = 0.00014 for the hypomorph subgroup, suggesting a substantial trans-modifying role in ABCA4 disease for both rare and common variants in two unlinked loci.
Peripherin 2 (PRPH2), also known as RDS (retinal degeneration slow) is a photoreceptor specific glycoprotein which is essential for normal photoreceptor health and vision. PRPH2/RDS is necessary for the proper formation of both rod and cone photoreceptor outer segments, the organelle specialized for visual transduction. When PRPH2/RDS is defective or absent, outer segments become disorganized or fail to form entirely and the photoreceptors subsequently degenerate. Multiple PRPH2/RDS disease-causing mutations have been found in humans, and they are associated with various blinding diseases of the retina such as macular degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa, the vast majority of which are inherited dominantly, though recessive LCA and digenic RP have also been associated with RDS mutations. Since its initial discovery, the scientific community has dedicated a considerable amount of effort to understanding the molecular function and disease mechanisms of PRPH2/RDS. This work has led to an understanding of how the PRPH2/RDS molecule assembles into complexes and functions as a necessary part of the machinery that forms new outer segment discs, as well as leading to fundamental discoveries about the mechanisms that underlie OS biogenesis. Here we discuss PRPH2/RDS-associated research and how experimental results have driven the understanding of the PRPH2/RDS protein and its role in human disease.
Some genetic diseases ("digenic traits") are due to the interaction between two DNA variants, which presumably reflects biochemical interactions. For example, certain forms of Retinitis Pigmentosa, a type of blindness, occur in the presence of two mutant variants, one each in the ROM1 and RDS genes, while the occurrence of only one such variant results in a normal phenotype. Detecting variant pairs underlying digenic traits by standard genetic methods is difficult and is downright impossible when individual variants alone have minimal effects. Frequent pattern mining (FPM) methods are known to detect patterns of items. We make use of FPM approaches to find pairs of genotypes (from different variants) that can discriminate between cases and controls. Our method is based on genotype patterns of length two, and permutation testing allows assigning p-values to genotype patterns, where the null hypothesis refers to equal pattern frequencies in cases and controls. We compare different interaction search approaches and their properties on the basis of published datasets. Our implementation of FPM to case-control studies is freely available.
PURPOSE: To identify the causative mutation leading to autosomal dominant macular dystrophy, cone dystrophy, and cone-rod dystrophy in a five-generation family and to explain the high intrafamilial phenotypic variation by identifying possible modifier genes. METHODS: Fifteen family members were investigated by detailed ophthalmic and electrophysiologic phenotyping. Mutation screening was initially performed with microarrays that detect known mutations in genes associated with retinal degeneration. Furthermore, the patients' genomic DNA was analyzed by sequencing analysis of PRPH2, ABCA4, and ROM1. RESULTS: Heterozygous mutations were identified in three genes and showed five different combinations within the studied family. All clearly affected family members carried the heterozygous PRPH2 mutation p.R172W. Patients with heterozygous sequence alterations only in ROM1 (p.R229H) or ABCA4 (p.V2050L) showed a mild ocular phenotype and were otherwise asymptomatic. The phenotypic severity of patients carrying the PRPH2 mutation increased with an additional mutation in ROM1. Patients carrying all three mutations were the most severely affected. CONCLUSIONS: Features of a PRPH2-associated phenotype might be modulated by additional mutations in other genes (in this family ABCA4 and/or ROM1) accounting for intrafamilial variability and resulting in a cumulative effect worsening the phenotype. Families showing a variable macular dystrophy phenotype caused by mutations in PRPH2 should be tested for additional mutations in ABCA4 and ROM1, as they may alter the progression of the PRPH2 phenotype. This testing will influence genetic counseling, as patients with additional mutations may be confronted with a faster progression of visual loss.
Peripherin and its homologue ROM1 are retina-specific members of the tetraspanin family of integral membrane proteins required for morphogenesis and maintenance of photoreceptor outer segments, regions that collect light stimuli. Over 100 pathogenic mutations in peripherin cause inherited rod- and cone-related dystrophies in humans. Peripherin and ROM1 interact in vivo and are predicted to form a core heterotetrameric complex capable of creating higher order oligomers. However, structural analysis of tetraspanin proteins has been hampered by their resistance to crystallization. Here we present a simplified methodology for high yield purification of peripherin-ROM1 from bovine retinas that permitted its biochemical and biophysical characterization. Using size exclusion chromatography and blue native gel electrophoresis, we confirmed that the core native peripherin-ROM1 complex exists as a tetramer. Peripherin, but not ROM1, is glycosylated and we examined the glycosylation site and glycan composition of ROM1 by liquid chromatographic tandem mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry was used to analyze the native complex in detergent micelles, demonstrating its tetrameric state. Our electron microscopy-generated structure solved to 18 A displayed the tetramer as an elongated structure with an apparent 2-fold symmetry. Finally, we demonstrated that peripherin-ROM1 tetramers induce membrane curvature when reconstituted in lipid vesicles. These results provide critical insights into this key retinal component with a poorly defined function.
Rom-1 and peripherin are related membrane proteins of the photoreceptor outer segments. Both proteins are located at the rims of the photoreceptor disks, where they may act jointly in disk biogenesis. Mutations in the gene (RDS) encoding peripherin cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, autosomal dominant punctata albescens and butterfly macular degeneration in man, and retinal degeneration slow in mice. To facilitate ROM1 mutation and linkage analysis in inherited retinal diseases, we cloned and characterized the human and murine ROM1 genes. In both species, the ROM1 coding region is contained within approximately 1.8 kb of genomic DNA and is interrupted by only two introns. The structures of the ROM1 and RDS genes are similar, with perfect conservation of the intron splice sites. Putative transcription regulatory regions of the ROM1 locus, 5' to an apparent transcription start site, were identified by cloning the mouse Rom-1 gene and comparing the sequence to the human homologue. Alignment of the human and murine rom-1 predicted protein sequences with the peripherin polypeptides of four species reveals a high degree of conservation (47% overall identity between the six proteins) in the central hydrophilic domain of the two family members. Despite this conservation of sequence, the predicted pI's of only this region of rom-1 and peripherin differ substantially, being 5.2 and 8.2, respectively. The charge difference in this region may mediate the non-covalent association of these two proteins in vivo. The conserved genomic structure and sequence of ROM1 and RDS indicates that these genes evolved from a common ancestor by duplication event.
PURPOSE: More than 200 different mutations in peripherin-2 (PRPH2) are associated with multiple subtypes of inherited retinal diseases (IRDs), including retinitis pigmentosa and cone or macular diseases. Our goal was to understand how the poorly characterized PRPH2 mutation p.Pro210Arg (P210R) affects visual function and retinal structure as well as gain insight into the mechanism driving the clinical pathology. METHODS: Eleven patients had clinical assessments including best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), full field and multifocal electroretinography (ERG), static (spot size V) and kinetic perimetry (Octopus 900), and dark-adapted chromatic (DAC; Medmont; spot size V) perimetry. Images were acquired with the Optos ultra-wide field camera and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). Molecular characteristics of the P210R mutant protein were evaluated in vitro. RESULTS: Patients with the P210R mutation had BCVA (Snellen) ranging from 20/15 to 20/80. Perimetry showed a reduction in sensitivity, while ERG findings suggested that cone function was more impaired than rod function. Scotomas were identified corresponding to atrophic retinal lesions. Imaging revealed heterogeneous outer retinal changes such as hyperfluorescent flecks, hypo-autofluorescence (AF) regions of atrophy, and thinning of the photoreceptor layer on SD-OCT. In vitro findings suggested that P210R-Prph2 retains the ability to interact with binding partner Rom1 but abnormally accumulates in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), suggesting the protein does not fold properly. CONCLUSIONS: Rod and cone sensitivities were decreased in subjects with the P210R mutation in PRPH2. There was scotomatous vision loss that occurred within the macula, likely due to atrophy that occurs after drusen have formed and have begun to resolve. This suggests that although rod and cone photoreceptors are dependent on PRPH2, preventing blindness in this specific subgroup of patients could involve therapeutics that impede the formation or lifecycle of drusen.
The cGMP-gated channel and the peripherin/rds-rom-1 complex are two oligomeric membrane proteins that play key roles in the structure and function of photoreceptor outer segments. The channel is localized on the plasma membrane where it controls the flow of Na+ and Ca2+ into the outer segment in response to light-induced changes in cGMP. The rod channel consists of two homologous subunits, designated alpha and beta, which assemble into a heterotetrameric complex. Both subunits contain a core structural unit consisting of six transmembrane segments, a pore region and a cGMP binding domain. The alpha subunit is the dominant functional subunit since it forms a functional channel by itself. The beta subunit does not assemble into a functional channel by itself, but modulates the activity of the channel. The peripherin/rds-rom-1 complex is localized along the rim region of disk membranes where it plays a crucial role in disk morphogenesis. This complex consists of two peripherin/rds and two rom-1 subunits that interact non-covalently to form a heterotetramer. Peripherin/rds is the dominant subunit since, in the absence of rom-1, it self-assembles into a homotetramer that effectively supports outer segment disk formation and structure. Rom-1 on its own does not initiate outer segment formation. Instead, it plays a minor role in fine tuning disk structure. Recently, peripherin/rds-containing tetramers have been shown to form disulfide-mediated higher-order oligomers. This novel oligomerization is suggested to play a central role in outer segment disk formation.
A cohort of 172 patients diagnosed clinically with nonsyndromic retinal dystrophies, from 110 families underwent full ophthalmologic examination, including retinal imaging, electrophysiology, and optical coherence tomography, when feasible. Molecular analysis was performed using targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS). Variants were filtered and prioritized according to the minimum allele frequency, and finally classified according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and array comparative genomic hybridization were performed to validate copy number variations identified by NGS. The diagnostic yield of this study was 62% of studied families. Thirty novel mutations were identified. The study found phenotypic intra- and interfamilial variability in families with mutations in C1QTNF5, CERKL, and PROM1; biallelic mutations in PDE6B in a unilateral retinitis pigmentosa patient; interocular asymmetry RP in 50% of the symptomatic RPGR-mutated females; the first case with possible digenism between CNGA1 and CNGB1; and a ROM1 duplication in two unrelated retinitis pigmentosa families. Ten unrelated cases were reclassified. This study highlights the clinical utility of targeted NGS for nonsyndromic inherited retinal dystrophy cases and the importance of full ophthalmologic examination, which allows new genotype-phenotype associations and expands the knowledge of this group of disorders. Identifying the cause of disease is essential to improve patient management, provide accurate genetic counseling, and take advantage of gene therapy-based treatments.
Mutations in peripherin 2 (PRPH2) have been associated with retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and macular/pattern dystrophies, but the origin of this phenotypic variability is unclear. The majority of Prph2 mutations are located in the large intradiscal loop (D2), a region that contains seven cysteines involved in intra- and intermolecular disulfide bonding and protein folding. A mutation at cysteine 213, which is engaged in an intramolecular disulfide bond, leads to butterfly-shaped pattern dystrophy in humans, in sharp contrast to mutations in the adjacent cysteine at position 214 which result in RP. To help understand this unexpected phenotypic variability, we generated a knockin mouse line carrying the C213Y disease mutation. The mutant Prph2 protein lost the ability to oligomerize with rod outer segment membrane protein 1 (Rom1), but retained the ability to form homotetramers. C213Y heterozygotes had significantly decreased overall Prph2 levels as well as decreased rod and cone function. Critically, supplementation with extra wild-type Prph2 protein elicited improvements in Prph2 protein levels and rod outer segment structure, but not functional rescue in rods or cones. These findings suggest that not all interruptions of D2 loop intramolecular disulfide bonding lead to haploinsufficiency-related RP, but rather that more subtle changes can lead to mutant proteins stable enough to exert gain-of-function defects in rods and cones. This outcome highlights the difficulty in targeting Prph2-associated gain-of-function disease and suggests that elimination of the mutant protein will be a pre-requisite for any curative therapeutic strategy.
The light-sensitive outer segment organelle of photoreceptor cells contains a stack of hundreds of flat, disc-shaped membranes called discs. The rims of these discs contain a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein peripherin-2 (also known as rds or PRPH2). Mutations in the PRPH2 gene lead to a wide variety of inherited retinal degenerations in humans. The vast majority of these mutations occur within a large, intradiscal loop of peripherin-2, known as the D2 loop. The D2 loop mediates well-established intermolecular interactions of peripherin-2 molecules among themselves and a homologous protein ROM1. These interactions lead to the formation of large, highly ordered oligomers. In this chapter, we discuss the supramolecular organization of peripherin-2/ROM1 complexes and their contribution to the process of outer segment disc morphogenesis and enclosure.
