Inactive tyrosine-protein kinase transmembrane receptor ROR1; Has very low kinase activity in vitro and is unlikely to function as a tyrosine kinase in vivo. Receptor for ligand WNT5A which activate downstream NFkB signaling pathway and may result in the inhibition of WNT3A-mediated signaling. In inner ear, crucial for spiral ganglion neurons to innervate auditory hair cells.
Since its initial identification in 1992 as a possible class 1 cell-surface receptor without a known parent ligand, receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) has stimulated research, which has made apparent its significance in embryonic development and cancer. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) was the first malignancy found to have distinctive expression of ROR1, which can help distinguish leukemia cells from most noncancer cells. Aside from its potential utility as a diagnostic marker or target for therapy, ROR1 also factors in the pathophysiology of CLL. This review is a report of the studies that have elucidated the expression, biology, and evolving strategies for targeting ROR1 that hold promise for improving the therapy of patients with CLL or other ROR1-expressing malignancies.
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is an uncommon subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in which immunochemotherapy, with or without high-dose therapy, and autologous stem cell transplantation remain standard frontline therapies. Despite their clear efficacy, patients inevitably relapse and require subsequent therapy. In this review, we discuss the key therapeutic approaches in the management of relapsed MCL, covering in depth the data supporting the use of covalent Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors at first or subsequent relapse. We describe the outcomes of patients progressing through BTK inhibitors and discuss the mechanisms of covalent BTKi resistance and treatment options after covalent treatment with BTKi. Options in this setting may depend on treatment availability, patient's and physician's preference, and the patient's age and comorbidity status. We discuss the rapid recent development of anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy, as well as the utility of allogenic stem cell transplantation and novel therapies, such as noncovalent, reversible BTK inhibitors; ROR1 antibody drug conjugates; and bispecific antibodies.
Cancer stemness, defined as the self-renewal and tumor-initiation potential of cancer stem cells (CSCs), is a cancer biology property featuring activation of CSC signaling networks. Canonical WNT signaling through Frizzled and LRP5/6 receptors is transmitted to the beta-catenin-TCF/LEF-dependent transcription machinery to up-regulate MYC, CCND1, LGR5, SNAI1, IFNG, CCL28, CD274 (PD-L1) and other target genes. Canonical WNT signaling causes expansion of rapidly cycling CSCs and modulates both immune surveillance and immune tolerance. In contrast, noncanonical WNT signaling through Frizzled or the ROR1/2 receptors is transmitted to phospholipase C, Rac1 and RhoA to control transcriptional outputs mediated by NFAT, AP-1 and YAP-TEAD, respectively. Noncanonical WNT signaling supports maintenance of slowly cycling, quiescent or dormant CSCs and promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition via crosstalk with TGFbeta (transforming growth factor-beta) signaling cascades, while the TGFbeta signaling network induces immune evasion. The WNT signaling network orchestrates the functions of cancer-associated fibroblasts, endothelial cells and immune cells in the tumor microenvironment and fine-tunes stemness in human cancers, such as breast, colorectal, gastric and lung cancers. Here, WNT-related cancer stemness features, including proliferation/dormancy plasticity, epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity and immune-landscape plasticity, will be discussed. Porcupine inhibitors, beta-catenin protein-protein interaction inhibitors, beta-catenin proteolysis targeting chimeras, ROR1 inhibitors and ROR1-targeted biologics are investigational drugs targeting WNT signaling cascades. Mechanisms of cancer plasticity regulated by the WNT signaling network are promising targets for therapeutic intervention; however, further understanding of context-dependent reprogramming trajectories might be necessary to optimize the clinical benefits of WNT-targeted monotherapy and applied combination therapy for patients with cancer.
Diversity within or between tumours and metastases (known as intra-patient tumour heterogeneity) that develops during disease progression is a serious hurdle for therapy(1-3). Metastasis is the fatal hallmark of cancer and the mechanisms of colonization, the most complex step in the metastatic cascade(4), remain poorly defined. A clearer understanding of the cellular and molecular processes that underlie both intra-patient tumour heterogeneity and metastasis is crucial for the success of personalized cancer therapy. Here, using transcriptional profiling of tumours and matched metastases in patient-derived xenograft models in mice, we show cancer-site-specific phenotypes and increased glucocorticoid receptor activity in distant metastases. The glucocorticoid receptor mediates the effects of stress hormones, and of synthetic derivatives of these hormones that are used widely in the clinic as anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents. We show that the increase in stress hormones during breast cancer progression results in the activation of the glucocorticoid receptor at distant metastatic sites, increased colonization and reduced survival. Our transcriptomics, proteomics and phospho-proteomics studies implicate the glucocorticoid receptor in the activation of multiple processes in metastasis and in the increased expression of kinase ROR1, both of which correlate with reduced survival. The ablation of ROR1 reduced metastatic outgrowth and prolonged survival in preclinical models. Our results indicate that the activation of the glucocorticoid receptor increases heterogeneity and metastasis, which suggests that caution is needed when using glucocorticoids to treat patients with breast cancer who have developed cancer-related complications.
NOTCH1, NOTCH2, NOTCH3 and NOTCH4 are transmembrane receptors that transduce juxtacrine signals of the delta‑like canonical Notch ligand (DLL)1, DLL3, DLL4, jagged canonical Notch ligand (JAG)1 and JAG2. Canonical Notch signaling activates the transcription of BMI1 proto‑oncogene polycomb ring finger, cyclin D1, CD44, cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1A, hes family bHLH transcription factor 1, hes related family bHLH transcription factor with YRPW motif 1, MYC, NOTCH3, RE1 silencing transcription factor and transcription factor 7 in a cellular context‑dependent manner, while non‑canonical Notch signaling activates NF‑kappaB and Rac family small GTPase 1. Notch signaling is aberrantly activated in breast cancer, non‑small‑cell lung cancer and hematological malignancies, such as T‑cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and diffuse large B‑cell lymphoma. However, Notch signaling is inactivated in small‑cell lung cancer and squamous cell carcinomas. Loss‑of‑function NOTCH1 mutations are early events during esophageal tumorigenesis, whereas gain‑of‑function NOTCH1 mutations are late events during T‑cell leukemogenesis and B‑cell lymphomagenesis. Notch signaling cascades crosstalk with fibroblast growth factor and WNT signaling cascades in the tumor microenvironment to maintain cancer stem cells and remodel the tumor microenvironment. The Notch signaling network exerts oncogenic and tumor‑suppressive effects in a cancer stage‑ or (sub)type‑dependent manner. Small‑molecule gamma‑secretase inhibitors (AL101, MRK‑560, nirogacestat and others) and antibody‑based biologics targeting Notch ligands or receptors [ABT‑165, AMG 119, rovalpituzumab tesirine (Rova‑T) and others] have been developed as investigational drugs. The DLL3‑targeting antibody‑drug conjugate (ADC) Rova‑T, and DLL3‑targeting chimeric antigen receptor‑modified T cells (CAR‑Ts), AMG 119, are promising anti‑cancer therapeutics, as are other ADCs or CAR‑Ts targeting tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 17, CD19, CD22, CD30, CD79B, CD205, Claudin 18.2, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)2, FGFR3, receptor‑type tyrosine‑protein kinase FLT3, HER2, hepatocyte growth factor receptor, NECTIN4, inactive tyrosine‑protein kinase 7, inactive tyrosine‑protein kinase transmembrane receptor ROR1 and tumor‑associated calcium signal transducer 2. ADCs and CAR‑Ts could alter the therapeutic framework for refractory cancers, especially diffuse‑type gastric cancer, ovarian cancer and pancreatic cancer with peritoneal dissemination. Phase III clinical trials of Rova‑T for patients with small‑cell lung cancer and a phase III clinical trial of nirogacestat for patients with desmoid tumors are ongoing. Integration of human intelligence, cognitive computing and explainable artificial intelligence is necessary to construct a Notch‑related knowledge‑base and optimize Notch‑targeted therapy for patients with cancer.
INTRODUCTION: Most breast cancer-related deaths arise from triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Molecular heterogeneity, aggressiveness and the lack of effective therapies are major hurdles to therapeutic progress. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells have emerged as a promising immunotherapeutic strategy in TNBC. This approach combines the antigen specificity of an antibody with the effector function of T cells. AREAS COVERED: This review examines the opportunities provided by CAR-T cell therapies in solid tumors. Emerging targets, ongoing clinical trials, and prospective clinical implications in TNBC are considered later. An emphasis is placed on the key challenges and possible solutions for this therapeutic approach. EXPERT OPINION: A challenge for CAR-T cell therapy is the selection of the optimal targets to minimize on-target/off-tumor toxicity. Tumor escape via antigen loss and intrinsic heterogeneity is a further hurdle. TROP2, GD2, ROR1, MUC1 and EpCAM are promising targets. Persistence and trafficking to tumor cells may be enhanced by the implementation of CARs with a chemokine receptor and/or constitutively activated interleukin receptors. Fourth-generation CARs (TRUCKs) may redirect T-cells for universal cytokine-mediated killing. Combinatorial approaches and the application of CARs to other immune cells could revert the suppressive immune environment that characterizes solid neoplasms.
Regulatable CAR platforms could circumvent toxicities associated with CAR-T therapy, but existing systems have shortcomings including leakiness and attenuated activity. Here, we present SNIP CARs, a protease-based platform for regulating CAR activity using an FDA-approved small molecule. Design iterations yielded CAR-T cells that manifest full functional capacity with drug and no leaky activity in the absence of drug. In numerous models, SNIP CAR-T cells were more potent than constitutive CAR-T cells and showed diminished T cell exhaustion and greater stemness. In a ROR1-based CAR lethality model, drug cessation following toxicity onset reversed toxicity, thereby credentialing the platform as a safety switch. In the same model, reduced drug dosing opened a therapeutic window that resulted in tumor eradication in the absence of toxicity. SNIP CARs enable remote tuning of CAR activity, which provides solutions to safety and efficacy barriers that are currently limiting progress in using CAR-T cells to treat solid tumors.
Purpose: This study examines cell surface ROR1 expression in human tumors and normal tissues. ROR1 is considered a promising target for cancer therapy due to putative tumor-specific expression, and multiple groups are developing antibodies and/or chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells to target ROR1. On-target, off-tumor toxicity is a challenge for most nonmutated tumor antigens; however, prior studies suggest that ROR1 is absent on most normal tissues.Experimental Design: Our studies show that published antibodies lack sensitivity to detect endogenous levels of cell surface ROR1 by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. We developed a ROR1-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) targeting the carboxy-terminus of ROR1 and evaluated its specificity and sensitivity in IHC.Results: The 6D4 mAb is a sensitive and specific reagent to detect cell surface ROR1 by IHC. The data show that ROR1 is homogenously expressed on a subset of ovarian cancer, triple-negative breast cancer, and lung adenocarcinomas. Contrary to previous findings, we found ROR1 is expressed on several normal tissues, including parathyroid; pancreatic islets; and regions of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. The 6D4 mAb recognizes rhesus ROR1, and ROR1 expression was similar in human and macaque tissues, suggesting that the macaque is a suitable model to evaluate safety of ROR1-targeted therapies.Conclusions: ROR1 is a promising immunotherapeutic target in many epithelial tumors; however, high cell surface ROR1 expression in multiple normal tissues raises concerns for on-target off-tumor toxicities. Clinical translation of ROR1-targeted therapies warrants careful monitoring of toxicities to normal organs and may require strategies to ensure patient safety. Clin Cancer Res; 23(12); 3061-71. (c)2016 AACR.
Diffuse infiltration is the main reason for therapeutic resistance and recurrence in glioblastoma (GBM). However, potential targeted therapies for GBM stem-like cell (GSC) which is responsible for GBM invasion are limited. Herein, we report Insulin-like Growth Factor-Binding Protein 5 (IGFBP5) is a ligand for Receptor tyrosine kinase like Orphan Receptor 1 (ROR1), as a promising target for GSC invasion. Using a GSC-derived brain tumor model, GSCs were characterized into invasive or non-invasive subtypes, and RNA sequencing analysis revealed that IGFBP5 was differentially expressed between these two subtypes. GSC invasion capacity was inhibited by IGFBP5 knockdown and enhanced by IGFBP5 overexpression both in vitro and in vivo, particularly in a patient-derived xenograft model. IGFBP5 binds to ROR1 and facilitates ROR1/HER2 heterodimer formation, followed by inducing CREB-mediated ETV5 and FBXW9 expression, thereby promoting GSC invasion and tumorigenesis. Importantly, using a tumor-specific targeting and penetrating nanocapsule-mediated delivery of CRISPR/Cas9-based IGFBP5 gene editing significantly suppressed GSC invasion and downstream gene expression, and prolonged the survival of orthotopic tumor-bearing mice. Collectively, our data reveal that IGFBP5-ROR1/HER2-CREB signaling axis as a potential GBM therapeutic target.
Mantle cell lymphoma is a rare B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma that is clinically and biologically heterogeneous. Risk stratification at the time of diagnosis is critical. One of the most powerful prognostic indices is the Mantle Cell Lymphoma International Prognostic Index-Combined, which integrates an estimate of proliferation (Ki67 index) with the standard Mantle Cell Lymphoma International Prognostic Index clinical factors. In addition, the presence of TP53 mutation is associated with suboptimal response to intensive chemoimmunotherapy and particularly dismal survival outcomes. Given their excellent activity in the relapsed/refractory setting, increasingly, biologically targeted therapeutics-such as covalent Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitors, lenalidomide, and venetoclax-are being incorporated into "chemotherapy-free" regimens and in combination with established chemoimmunotherapy backbones for treatment-naive mantle cell lymphoma. In addition, risk-adapted treatment programs are increasingly being studied. These programs tailor treatment according to baseline prognostic factors (e.g., presence of TP53 mutation) and may incorporate biomarkers of response such as minimal residual disease assessment. Although still investigational, these studies present an opportunity to move beyond the biology-agnostic, historical fitness-based treatment selection paradigm and toward a more personalized, tailored treatment approach in mantle cell lymphoma. After Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor failure, many promising standard or investigational therapies exist, including CAR T-cell therapy (including brexucabtagene autoleucel and lisocabtagene maraleucel), bispecific antibody therapy targeting CD20-CD3, zilovertamab vedotin (an antibody-drug conjugate that targets ROR1), and the noncovalent Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor pirtobrutinib. These new therapies show promising efficacy, even among high-risk patients, and will likely translate to improvements in survival outcomes for patients with progressive mantle cell lymphoma following treatment with a Bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
AIMS: Complex cellular communications between glial cells and neurons are critical for brain normal function and disorders, and single-cell level RNA-sequencing datasets display more advantages for analyzing cell communications. Therefore, it is necessary to systematically explore brain cell communications when considering factors such as sex and brain region. METHODS: We extracted a total of 1,039,459 cells derived from 28 brain single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) or single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) datasets from the GEO database, including 12 human and 16 mouse datasets. These datasets were further divided into 71 new sub-datasets when considering disease, sex, and region conditions. In the meanwhile, we integrated four methods to evaluate ligand-receptor interaction score among six major brain cell types (microglia, neuron, astrocyte, oligodendrocyte, OPC, and endothelial cell). RESULTS: For Alzheimer's disease (AD), disease-specific ligand-receptor pairs when compared with normal sub-datasets, such as SEMA4A-NRP1, were identified. Furthermore, we explored the sex- and region-specific cell communications and identified that WNT5A-ROR1 among microglia cells displayed close communications in male, and SPP1-ITGAV displayed close communications in the meninges region from microglia to neurons. Furthermore, based on the AD-specific cell communications, we constructed a model for AD early prediction and confirmed the predictive performance using multiple independent datasets. Finally, we developed an online platform for researchers to explore brain condition-specific cell communications. CONCLUSION: This research provided a comprehensive study to explore brain cell communications, which could reveal novel biological mechanisms involved in normal brain function and neurodegenerative diseases such as AD.
BACKGROUND: Treatment for osteosarcoma, a paediatric bone cancer with no therapeutic advances in over three decades, is limited by a lack of targeted therapies. Osteosarcoma frequently metastasises to the lungs, and only 20% of patients survive 5 years after the diagnosis of metastatic disease. We found that WNT5B is the most abundant WNT expressed in osteosarcoma tumours and its expression correlates with metastasis, histologic subtype and reduced survival. METHODS: Using tumor-spheroids to model cancer stem-like cells, we performed qPCR, immunoblotting, and immunofluorescence to monitor changes in gene and protein expression. Additionally, we measured sphere size, migration and forming efficiency to monitor phenotypic changes. Therefore, we characterised WNT5B's relevance to cancer stem-like cells, metastasis, and chemoresistance and evaluated its potential as a therapeutic target. RESULTS: In osteosarcoma cell lines and patient-derived spheres, WNT5B is enriched in stem cells and induces the expression of the stemness gene SOX2. WNT5B promotes sphere size, sphere-forming efficiency, and cell proliferation, migration, and chemoresistance to methotrexate (but not cisplatin or doxorubicin) in spheres formed from conventional cell lines and patient-derived xenografts. In vivo, WNT5B increased osteosarcoma lung and liver metastasis and inhibited the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronic acid via upregulation of hyaluronidase 1 (HYAL1), leading to changes in the tumour microenvironment. Further, we identified that WNT5B mRNA and protein correlate with the receptor ROR1 in primary tumours. Targeting WNT5B through inhibition of WNT/ROR1 signalling with an antibody to ROR1 reduced stemness properties, including chemoresistance, sphere size and SOX2 expression. CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data define WNT5B's role in driving osteosarcoma cancer stem cell expansion and methotrexate resistance and provide evidence that the WNT5B pathway is a promising candidate for treating osteosarcoma patients. KEY POINTS: WNT5B expression is high in osteosarcoma stem cells leading to increased stem cell proliferation and migration through SOX2. WNT5B expression in stem cells increases rates of osteosarcoma metastasis to the lungs and liver in vivo. The hyaluronic acid degradation enzyme HYAL1 is regulated by WNT5B in osteosarcoma contributing to metastasis. Inhibition of WNT5B with a ROR1 antibody decreases osteosarcoma stemness.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs), which have the potential for self-renewal, differentiation and de-differentiation, undergo epigenetic, epithelial-mesenchymal, immunological and metabolic reprogramming to adapt to the tumor microenvironment and survive host defense or therapeutic insults. Intra-tumor heterogeneity and cancer-cell plasticity give rise to therapeutic resistance and recurrence through clonal replacement and reactivation of dormant CSCs, respectively. WNT signaling cascades cross-talk with the FGF, Notch, Hedgehog and TGFbeta/BMP signaling cascades and regulate expression of functional CSC markers, such as CD44, CD133 (PROM1), EPCAM and LGR5 (GPR49). Aberrant canonical and non-canonical WNT signaling in human malignancies, including breast, colorectal, gastric, lung, ovary, pancreatic, prostate and uterine cancers, leukemia and melanoma, are involved in CSC survival, bulk-tumor expansion and invasion/metastasis. WNT signaling-targeted therapeutics, such as anti-FZD1/2/5/7/8 monoclonal antibody (mAb) (vantictumab), anti-LGR5 antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) (mAb-mc-vc-PAB-MMAE), anti-PTK7 ADC (PF-06647020), anti-ROR1 mAb (cirmtuzumab), anti-RSPO3 mAb (rosmantuzumab), small-molecule porcupine inhibitors (ETC-159, WNT-C59 and WNT974), tankyrase inhibitors (AZ1366, G007-LK, NVP-TNKS656 and XAV939) and beta-catenin inhibitors (BC2059, CWP232228, ICG-001 and PRI-724), are in clinical trials or preclinical studies for the treatment of patients with WNT-driven cancers. WNT signaling-targeted therapeutics are applicable for combination therapy with BCR-ABL, EGFR, FLT3, KIT or RET inhibitors to treat a subset of tyrosine kinase-driven cancers because WNT and tyrosine kinase signaling cascades converge to beta-catenin for the maintenance and expansion of CSCs. WNT signaling-targeted therapeutics might also be applicable for combination therapy with immune checkpoint blockers, such as atezolizumab, avelumab, durvalumab, ipilimumab, nivolumab and pembrolizumab, to treat cancers with immune evasion, although the context-dependent effects of WNT signaling on immunity should be carefully assessed. Omics monitoring, such as genome sequencing and transcriptome tests, immunohistochemical analyses on PD-L1 (CD274), PD-1 (PDCD1), ROR1 and nuclear beta-catenin and organoid-based drug screening, is necessary to determine the appropriate WNT signaling-targeted therapeutics for cancer patients.
PURPOSE: The adoptive transfer of T cells modified to express a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) comprised of an extracellular single-chain antibody (scFV) fragment specific for a tumor cell surface molecule, and linked to an intracellular signaling module, has activity in advanced malignancies. The receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) is a tumor-associated molecule expressed in prevalent B-lymphoid and epithelial cancers and is absent on normal mature B cells and vital tissues, making it a candidate for CAR T-cell therapy. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We constructed ROR1-CARs from scFVs with different affinities and containing extracellular IgG4-Fc spacer domains of different lengths, and evaluated the ability of T cells expressing each CAR to recognize ROR1(+) hematopoietic and epithelial tumors in vitro, and to eliminate human mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) engrafted into immunodeficient mice. RESULTS: ROR1-CARs containing a short "Hinge-only" extracellular spacer conferred superior lysis of ROR1(+) tumor cells and induction of T-cell effector functions compared with CARs with long "Hinge-CH2-CH3" spacers. CARs derived from a higher affinity scFV conferred maximum T-cell effector function against primary CLL and ROR1(+) epithelial cancer lines in vitro without inducing activation-induced T-cell death. T cells modified with an optimal ROR1-CAR were equivalently effective as CD19-CAR-modified T cells in mediating regression of JeKo-1 MCL in immunodeficient mice. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that customizing spacer design and increasing affinity of ROR1-CARs enhances T-cell effector function and recognition of ROR1(+) tumors. T cells modified with an optimized ROR1-CAR have significant antitumor efficacy in a preclinical model in vivo, suggesting they may be useful to treat ROR1(+) tumors in clinical applications.
Richter syndrome (RS) represents the transformation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), typically to an aggressive lymphoma. Treatment options for RS are limited and the disease is often fatal. Receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) is expressed on CLL cells and other cancers but not on healthy adult tissues, making it an attractive, tumor-specific therapeutic target. VLS-101 is being developed as an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) for therapy of ROR1-expressing (ROR1+) cancers. VLS-101 comprises UC-961 (a humanized immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody that binds an extracellular epitope of human ROR1), a maleimidocaproyl-valine-citrulline-para-aminobenzoate linker, and the antimicrotubule cytotoxin monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE). VLS-101 binding to ROR1 results in rapid cellular internalization and delivery of MMAE to induce tumor cell death. We studied 4 RS patient-derived xenografts (RS-PDXs) with varying levels of ROR1 expression (11%, 32%, 85%, and 99% of cells). VLS-101 showed no efficacy in the lowest-expressing RS-PDX but induced complete remissions in those with higher levels of ROR1 expression. Responses were maintained during the posttherapy period, particularly after higher VLS-101 doses. In systemic ROR1+ RS-PDXs, VLS-101 dramatically decreased tumor burden in all RS-colonized tissues and significantly prolonged survival. Animals showed no adverse effects or weight loss. Our results confirm ROR1 as a target in RS and demonstrate the therapeutic potential of using an ADC directed toward ROR1 for the treatment of hematological cancers. A phase 1 clinical trial of VLS-101 (NCT03833180) is ongoing in patients with RS and other hematological malignancies.
Adoptive therapy using chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells (CAR-T cells) is effective in hematologic but not epithelial malignancies, which cause the greatest mortality. In breast and lung cancer patients, CAR-T cells targeting the tumor-associated antigen receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) infiltrate tumors poorly and become dysfunctional. To test strategies for enhancing efficacy, we adapted the Kras(LSL-G12D/+);p53(f/f) autochthonous model of lung adenocarcinoma to express the CAR target ROR1. Murine ROR1 CAR-T cells transferred after lymphodepletion with cyclophosphamide (Cy) transiently control tumor growth but infiltrate tumors poorly and lose function, similar to what is seen in patients. Adding oxaliplatin (Ox) to the lymphodepletion regimen activates tumor macrophages to express T-cell-recruiting chemokines, resulting in improved CAR-T cell infiltration, remodeling of the tumor microenvironment, and increased tumor sensitivity to anti-PD-L1. Combination therapy with Ox/Cy and anti-PD-L1 synergistically improves CAR-T cell-mediated tumor control and survival, providing a strategy to improve CAR-T cell efficacy in the clinic.
BACKGROUND: Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy target receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) is broadly expressed in hematologic and solid tumors, however clinically-characterized ROR1-CAR T cells with single chain variable fragment (scFv)-R12 targeting domain failed to induce durable remissions, in part due to the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME). Herein, we describe the development of an improved ROR1-CAR with a novel, fully human scFv9 targeting domain, and augmented with TGFbetaRIIDN armor protective against a major TME factor, transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta). METHODS: CAR T cells were generated by lentiviral transduction of enriched CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells, and the novel scFv9-based ROR1-CAR-1 was compared with the clinically-characterized ROR1-R12-scFv-based CAR-2 in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: CAR-1 T cells exhibited greater CAR surface density than CAR-2 when normalized for %CAR(+), and produced more interferon (IFN)-gamma tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin (IL)-2 in response to hematologic (Jeko-1, RPMI-8226) and solid (OVCAR-3, Capan-2, NCI-H226) tumor cell lines in vitro. In vivo, CAR-1 and CAR-2 both cleared hematologic Jeko-1 lymphoma xenografts, however only CAR-1 fully rejected ovarian solid OVCAR-3 tumors, concordantly with greater expansion of CD8(+) and CD4(+)CAR T cells, and enrichment for central and effector memory phenotype. When equipped with TGFbeta-protective armor TGFbetaRIIDN, CAR-1 T cells resisted TGFbeta-mediated pSmad2/3 phosphorylation, as compared with CAR-1 alone. When co-cultured with ROR-1(+) AsPC-1 pancreatic cancer line in the presence of TGFbeta1, armored CAR-1 demonstrated improved recovery of killing function, IFN-gamma, TNF-alpha and IL-2 secretion. In mouse AsPC-1 pancreatic tumor xenografts overexpressing TGFbeta1, armored CAR-1, in contrast to CAR-1 alone, achieved complete tumor remissions, and yielded accelerated expansion of CAR(+) T cells, diminished circulating active TGFbeta1, and no apparent toxicity or weight loss. Unexpectedly, in AsPC-1 xenografts without TGFbeta overexpression, TGFbeta1 production was specifically induced by ROR-1-CAR T cells interaction with ROR-1 positive tumor cells, and the TGFbetaRIIDN armor conferred accelerated tumor clearance. CONCLUSIONS: The novel fully human TGFssRIIDN-armored ROR1-CAR-1 T cells are highly potent against ROR1-positive tumors, and withstand the inhibitory effects of TGFss in solid TME. Moreover, TGFbeta1 induction represents a novel, CAR-induced checkpoint in the solid TME, which can be circumvented by co-expressing the TGbetaRIIDN armor on T cells.
The diagnostic criteria for CLL rely on morphology and immunophenotype. Current approaches have limitations affecting reproducibility and there is no consensus on the role of new markers. The aim of this project was to identify reproducible criteria and consensus on markers recommended for the diagnosis of CLL. ERIC/ESCCA members classified 14 of 35 potential markers as "required" or "recommended" for CLL diagnosis, consensus being defined as >75% and >50% agreement, respectively. An approach to validate "required" markers using normal peripheral blood was developed. Responses were received from 150 participants with a diagnostic workload >20 CLL cases per week in 23/150 (15%), 5-20 in 82/150 (55%), and <5 cases per week in 45/150 (30%). The consensus for "required" diagnostic markers included: CD19, CD5, CD20, CD23, Kappa, and Lambda. "Recommended" markers potentially useful for differential diagnosis were: CD43, CD79b, CD81, CD200, CD10, and ROR1. Reproducible criteria for component reagents were assessed retrospectively in 14,643 cases from 13 different centers and showed >97% concordance with current approaches. A pilot study to validate staining quality was completed in 11 centers. Markers considered as "required" for the diagnosis of CLL by the participants in this study (CD19, CD5, CD20, CD23, Kappa, and Lambda) are consistent with current diagnostic criteria and practice. Importantly, a reproducible approach to validate and apply these markers in individual laboratories has been identified. Finally, a consensus "recommended" panel of markers to refine diagnosis in borderline cases (CD43, CD79b, CD81, CD200, CD10, and ROR1) has been defined and will be prospectively evaluated. (c) 2017 International Clinical Cytometry Society.
ROR1 for Lymphoid Cancers This editorial discusses the first-in-human, phase 1 clinical trial of a novel antibody-drug conjugate, zilovertamab vedotin, in patients with relapsed or refractory mature B-cell malignancies.
Many potential targets for CAR-T cells in solid tumors are expressed in some normal tissues, raising concern for off-tumor toxicity. Following lymphodepletion, CAR-T cells targeting the tumor-associated antigen ROR1 lysed tumors in mice but induced lethal bone marrow failure due to recognition of ROR1(+) stromal cells. To improve selectivity, we engineered T cells with synthetic Notch (synNotch) receptors specific for EpCAM or B7-H3, which are expressed on ROR1(+) tumor cells but not ROR1(+) stromal cells. SynNotch receptors induced ROR1 CAR expression selectively within the tumor, resulting in tumor regression without toxicity when tumor cells were segregated from, but not when co-localized with, normal ROR1(+) cells. This strategy, thus, permits safe targeting of tumors that are sufficiently separated from normal cells.
