Visual pigment-like receptor peropsin; May play a role in rpe physiology either by detecting light directly or by monitoring the concentration of retinoids or other photoreceptor-derived compounds.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed risk alleles for ulcerative colitis (UC). To understand their cell type specificities and pathways of action, we generate an atlas of 366,650 cells from the colon mucosa of 18 UC patients and 12 healthy individuals, revealing 51 epithelial, stromal, and immune cell subsets, including BEST4(+) enterocytes, microfold-like cells, and IL13RA2(+)IL11(+) inflammatory fibroblasts, which we associate with resistance to anti-TNF treatment. Inflammatory fibroblasts, inflammatory monocytes, microfold-like cells, and T cells that co-express CD8 and IL-17 expand with disease, forming intercellular interaction hubs. Many UC risk genes are cell type specific and co-regulated within relatively few gene modules, suggesting convergence onto limited sets of cell types and pathways. Using this observation, we nominate and infer functions for specific risk genes across GWAS loci. Our work provides a framework for interrogating complex human diseases and mapping risk variants to cell types and pathways.
AIMS: Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibition reduces the risk of hospitalization for heart failure and for death in patients with symptomatic heart failure. However, trials investigating the effects of this drug class in patients following acute myocardial infarction are lacking. METHODS AND RESULTS: In this academic, multicentre, double-blind trial, patients (n = 476) with acute myocardial infarction accompanied by a large creatine kinase elevation (>800 IU/L) were randomly assigned to empagliflozin 10 mg or matching placebo once daily within 72 h of percutaneous coronary intervention. The primary outcome was the N-terminal pro-hormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) change over 26 weeks. Secondary outcomes included changes in echocardiographic parameters. Baseline median (interquartile range) NT-proBNP was 1294 (757-2246) pg/mL. NT-proBNP reduction was significantly greater in the empagliflozin group, compared with placebo, being 15% lower [95% confidence interval (CI) -4.4% to -23.6%] after adjusting for baseline NT-proBNP, sex, and diabetes status (P = 0.026). Absolute left-ventricular ejection fraction improvement was significantly greater (1.5%, 95% CI 0.2-2.9%, P = 0.029), mean E/e' reduction was 6.8% (95% CI 1.3-11.3%, P = 0.015) greater, and left-ventricular end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes were lower by 7.5 mL (95% CI 3.4-11.5 mL, P = 0.0003) and 9.7 mL (95% CI 3.7-15.7 mL, P = 0.0015), respectively, in the empagliflozin group, compared with placebo. Seven patients were hospitalized for heart failure (three in the empagliflozin group). Other predefined serious adverse events were rare and did not differ significantly between groups. CONCLUSION: In patients with a recent myocardial infarction, empagliflozin was associated with a significantly greater NT-proBNP reduction over 26 weeks, accompanied by a significant improvement in echocardiographic functional and structural parameters. CLINICALTRIALS.GOV REGISTRATION: NCT03087773.
BACKGROUND: Transthyretin amyloidosis, also called ATTR amyloidosis, is associated with accumulation of ATTR amyloid deposits in the heart and commonly manifests as progressive cardiomyopathy. Patisiran, an RNA interference therapeutic agent, inhibits the production of hepatic transthyretin. METHODS: In this phase 3, double-blind, randomized trial, we assigned patients with hereditary, also known as variant, or wild-type ATTR cardiac amyloidosis, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive patisiran (0.3 mg per kilogram of body weight) or placebo once every 3 weeks for 12 months. A hierarchical procedure was used to test the primary and three secondary end points. The primary end point was the change from baseline in the distance covered on the 6-minute walk test at 12 months. The first secondary end point was the change from baseline to month 12 in the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire-Overall Summary (KCCQ-OS) score (with higher scores indicating better health status). The second secondary end point was a composite of death from any cause, cardiovascular events, and change from baseline in the 6-minute walk test distance over 12 months. The third secondary end point was a composite of death from any cause, hospitalizations for any cause, and urgent heart failure visits over 12 months. RESULTS: A total of 360 patients were randomly assigned to receive patisiran (181 patients) or placebo (179 patients). At month 12, the decline in the 6-minute walk distance was lower in the patisiran group than in the placebo group (Hodges-Lehmann estimate of median difference, 14.69 m; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.69 to 28.69; P = 0.02); the KCCQ-OS score increased in the patisiran group and declined in the placebo group (least-squares mean difference, 3.7 points; 95% CI, 0.2 to 7.2; P = 0.04). Significant benefits were not observed for the second secondary end point. Infusion-related reactions, arthralgia, and muscle spasms occurred more often among patients in the patisiran group than among those in the placebo group. CONCLUSIONS: In this trial, administration of patisiran over a period of 12 months resulted in preserved functional capacity in patients with ATTR cardiac amyloidosis. (Funded by Alnylam Pharmaceuticals; APOLLO-B ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03997383.).
BACKGROUND: Data are lacking on the long-term effect on cardiovascular events of adding sitagliptin, a dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor, to usual care in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind study, we assigned 14,671 patients to add either sitagliptin or placebo to their existing therapy. Open-label use of antihyperglycemic therapy was encouraged as required, aimed at reaching individually appropriate glycemic targets in all patients. To determine whether sitagliptin was noninferior to placebo, we used a relative risk of 1.3 as the marginal upper boundary. The primary cardiovascular outcome was a composite of cardiovascular death, nonfatal myocardial infarction, nonfatal stroke, or hospitalization for unstable angina. RESULTS: During a median follow-up of 3.0 years, there was a small difference in glycated hemoglobin levels (least-squares mean difference for sitagliptin vs. placebo, -0.29 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], -0.32 to -0.27). Overall, the primary outcome occurred in 839 patients in the sitagliptin group (11.4%; 4.06 per 100 person-years) and 851 patients in the placebo group (11.6%; 4.17 per 100 person-years). Sitagliptin was noninferior to placebo for the primary composite cardiovascular outcome (hazard ratio, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.88 to 1.09; P<0.001). Rates of hospitalization for heart failure did not differ between the two groups (hazard ratio, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.83 to 1.20; P=0.98). There were no significant between-group differences in rates of acute pancreatitis (P=0.07) or pancreatic cancer (P=0.32). CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with type 2 diabetes and established cardiovascular disease, adding sitagliptin to usual care did not appear to increase the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events, hospitalization for heart failure, or other adverse events. (Funded by Merck Sharp & Dohme; TECOS ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00790205.).
BACKGROUND: The cardiovascular effects of adding once-weekly treatment with exenatide to usual care in patients with type 2 diabetes are unknown. METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with type 2 diabetes, with or without previous cardiovascular disease, to receive subcutaneous injections of extended-release exenatide at a dose of 2 mg or matching placebo once weekly. The primary composite outcome was the first occurrence of death from cardiovascular causes, nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. The coprimary hypotheses were that exenatide, administered once weekly, would be noninferior to placebo with respect to safety and superior to placebo with respect to efficacy. RESULTS: In all, 14,752 patients (of whom 10,782 [73.1%] had previous cardiovascular disease) were followed for a median of 3.2 years (interquartile range, 2.2 to 4.4). A primary composite outcome event occurred in 839 of 7356 patients (11.4%; 3.7 events per 100 person-years) in the exenatide group and in 905 of 7396 patients (12.2%; 4.0 events per 100 person-years) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.91; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.83 to 1.00), with the intention-to-treat analysis indicating that exenatide, administered once weekly, was noninferior to placebo with respect to safety (P<0.001 for noninferiority) but was not superior to placebo with respect to efficacy (P=0.06 for superiority). The rates of death from cardiovascular causes, fatal or nonfatal myocardial infarction, fatal or nonfatal stroke, hospitalization for heart failure, and hospitalization for acute coronary syndrome, and the incidence of acute pancreatitis, pancreatic cancer, medullary thyroid carcinoma, and serious adverse events did not differ significantly between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with type 2 diabetes with or without previous cardiovascular disease, the incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events did not differ significantly between patients who received exenatide and those who received placebo. (Funded by Amylin Pharmaceuticals; EXSCEL ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01144338 .).
It is critical that those working with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities acknowledge and understand the impacts of trauma in order to engage in culturally safe practice. Recognising the role that historical and other traumas play in Indigenous people's communities and lives is a prerequisite for respectful and safe practice. Culturally safe, trauma-informed practice training makes cultural safety more achievable. Organisations that are serious about working and partnering with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are becoming 'trauma informed'. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are drawing immense strength and hope from understanding trauma and its impact on their lives. Sharing this knowledge with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations also has the potential to create safe healing spaces and interrupt trauma being passed on through generations. Trauma-informed cultural safety can allow profound change for individuals and the systems within which they practice.
BACKGROUND: The 20-year UK Prospective Diabetes Study showed major clinical benefits for people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes randomly allocated to intensive glycaemic control with sulfonylurea or insulin therapy or metformin therapy, compared with conventional glycaemic control. 10-year post-trial follow-up identified enduring and emerging glycaemic and metformin legacy treatment effects. We aimed to determine whether these effects would wane by extending follow-up for another 14 years. METHODS: 5102 patients enrolled between 1977 and 1991, of whom 4209 (82.5%) participants were originally randomly allocated to receive either intensive glycaemic control (sulfonylurea or insulin, or if overweight, metformin) or conventional glycaemic control (primarily diet). At the end of the 20-year interventional trial, 3277 surviving participants entered a 10-year post-trial monitoring period, which ran until Sept 30, 2007. Eligible participants for this study were all surviving participants at the end of the 10-year post-trial monitoring period. An extended follow-up of these participants was done by linking them to their routinely collected National Health Service (NHS) data for another 14 years. Clinical outcomes were derived from records of deaths, hospital admissions, outpatient visits, and accident and emergency unit attendances. We examined seven prespecified aggregate clinical outcomes (ie, any diabetes-related endpoint, diabetes-related death, death from any cause, myocardial infarction, stroke, peripheral vascular disease, and microvascular disease) by the randomised glycaemic control strategy on an intention-to-treat basis using Kaplan-Meier time-to-event and log-rank analyses. This study is registered with the ISRCTN registry, number ISRCTN75451837. FINDINGS: Between Oct 1, 2007, and Sept 30, 2021, 1489 (97.6%) of 1525 participants could be linked to routinely collected NHS administrative data. Their mean age at baseline was 50.2 years (SD 8.0), and 41.3% were female. The mean age of those still alive as of Sept 30, 2021, was 79.9 years (SD 8.0). Individual follow-up from baseline ranged from 0 to 42 years, median 17.5 years (IQR 12.3-26.8). Overall follow-up increased by 21%, from 66 972 to 80 724 person-years. For up to 24 years after trial end, the glycaemic and metformin legacy effects showed no sign of waning. Early intensive glycaemic control with sulfonylurea or insulin therapy, compared with conventional glycaemic control, showed overall relative risk reductions of 10% (95% CI 2-17; p=0.015) for death from any cause, 17% (6-26; p=0.002) for myocardial infarction, and 26% (14-36; p<0.0001) for microvascular disease. Corresponding absolute risk reductions were 2.7%, 3.3%, and 3.5%, respectively. Early intensive glycaemic control with metformin therapy, compared with conventional glycaemic control, showed overall relative risk reductions of 20% (95% CI 5-32; p=0.010) for death from any cause and 31% (12-46; p=0.003) for myocardial infarction. Corresponding absolute risk reductions were 4.9% and 6.2%, respectively. No significant risk reductions during or after the trial for stroke or peripheral vascular disease were observed for both intensive glycaemic control groups, and no significant risk reduction for microvascular disease was observed for metformin therapy. INTERPRETATION: Early intensive glycaemic control with sulfonylurea or insulin, or with metformin, compared with conventional glycaemic control, appears to confer a near-lifelong reduced risk of death and myocardial infarction. Achieving near normoglycaemia immediately following diagnosis might be essential to minimise the lifetime risk of diabetes-related complications to the greatest extent possible. FUNDING: University of Oxford Nuffield Department of Population Health Pump Priming.
BACKGROUND: Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) have emerged as a paramount treatment for patients with heart failure (HF), irrespective of underlying reduced or preserved ejection fraction. However, a definite cardiac mechanism of action remains elusive. Derangements in myocardial energy metabolism are detectable in all HF phenotypes, and it was proposed that SGLT2i may improve energy production. The authors aimed to investigate whether treatment with empagliflozin leads to changes in myocardial energetics, serum metabolomics, and cardiorespiratory fitness. METHODS: EMPA-VISION (Assessment of Cardiac Energy Metabolism, Function and Physiology in Patients With Heart Failure Taking Empagliflozin) is a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, mechanistic trial that enrolled 72 symptomatic patients with chronic HF with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF; n=36; left ventricular ejection fraction </=40%; New York Heart Association class >/=II; NT-proBNP [N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide] >/=125 pg/mL) and HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF; n=36; left ventricular ejection fraction >/=50%; New York Heart Association class >/=II; NT-proBNP >/=125 pg/mL). Patients were stratified into respective cohorts (HFrEF versus HFpEF) and randomly assigned to empagliflozin (10 mg; n=35: 17 HFrEF and 18 HFpEF) or placebo (n=37: 19 HFrEF and 18 HFpEF) once daily for 12 weeks. The primary end point was a change in the cardiac phosphocreatine:ATP ratio (PCr/ATP) from baseline to week 12, determined by phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy at rest and during peak dobutamine stress (65% of age-maximum heart rate). Mass spectrometry on a targeted set of 19 metabolites was performed at baseline and after treatment. Other exploratory end points were investigated. RESULTS: Empagliflozin treatment did not change cardiac energetics (ie, PCr/ATP) at rest in HFrEF (adjusted mean treatment difference [empagliflozin - placebo], -0.25 [95% CI, -0.58 to 0.09]; P=0.14) or HFpEF (adjusted mean treatment difference, -0.16 [95% CI, -0.60 to 0.29]; P=0.47]. Likewise, there were no changes in PCr/ATP during dobutamine stress in HFrEF (adjusted mean treatment difference, -0.13 [95% CI, -0.35 to 0.09]; P=0.23) or HFpEF (adjusted mean treatment difference, -0.22 [95% CI, -0.66 to 0.23]; P=0.32). No changes in serum metabolomics or levels of circulating ketone bodies were observed. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with either HFrEF or HFpEF, treatment with 10 mg of empagliflozin once daily for 12 weeks did not improve cardiac energetics or change circulating serum metabolites associated with energy metabolism when compared with placebo. Based on our results, it is unlikely that enhancing cardiac energy metabolism mediates the beneficial effects of SGLT2i in HF. REGISTRATION: URL: https://www. CLINICALTRIALS: gov; Unique identifier: NCT03332212.
Weight loss in overweight or obese individuals with Type 2 diabetes (T2D) can normalize hepatic fat metabolism, decrease fatty acid oversupply to beta cells and restore normoglycaemia. One in six people has BMI <27 kg/m2 at diagnosis, and their T2D is assumed to have different aetiology. The Personal Fat Threshold hypothesis postulated differing individual thresholds for lipid overspill and adverse effects on beta-cell function. To test this hypothesis, people with Type 2 diabetes and body mass index <27kg/m2 (n = 20) underwent repeated 5% weight loss cycles. Metabolic assessments were carried out at stable weight after each cycle and after 12 months. To determine how closely metabolic features returned to normal, 20 matched normoglycemic controls were studied once. Between baseline and 12 months: BMI fell (mean +/- SD), 24.8 +/- 0.4 to 22.5 +/- 0.4 kg/m2 (P<0.0001) (controls: 21.5 +/- 0.5); total body fat, 32.1 +/- 1.5 to 27.6 +/- 1.8% (P<0.0001) (24.6 +/- 1.5). Liver fat content and fat export fell to normal as did fasting plasma insulin. Post-meal insulin secretion increased but remained subnormal. Sustained diabetes remission (HbA1c < 48 mmol/mol off all glucose-lowering agents) was achieved by 70% (14/20) by initial weight loss of 6.5 (5.5-10.2)%. Correction of concealed excess intra-hepatic fat reduced hepatic fat export, with recovery of beta-cell function, glycaemic improvement in all and return to a non-diabetic metabolic state in the majority of this group with BMI <27 kg/m2 as previously demonstrated for overweight or obese groups. The data confirm the Personal Fat Threshold hypothesis: aetiology of Type 2 diabetes does not depend on BMI. This pathophysiological insight has major implications for management.
Cardiolipin (CL) is a unique dimeric phospholipid that exists almost exclusively in the inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) in eukaryotic cells. Two chiral carbons and four fatty acyl chains in CL result in a flexible body allowing interactions with respiratory chain complexes and mitochondrial substrate carriers. Due to its high content of unsaturated fatty acids, CL is particularly prone to reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced oxidative attacks. Under mild mitochondrial damage, CL is redistributed to the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) and serves as a recognition signal for dysfunctional mitochondria, which are rapidly sequestered by autophagosomes. However, peroxidation of CL is far greater in response to severe stress than under normal or mild-damage conditions. The accumulation of oxidized CL on the OMM results in recruitment of Bax and formation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP), which releases Cytochrome c (Cyt c) from mitochondria. Over the past decade, the significance of CL in the function of mitochondrial bioenergy has been explored. Moreover, approaches to analyzing CL have become more effective and accurate. In this review, we discuss the unique structural features of CL as well as the current understanding of CL-based molecular mechanisms of mitophagy and apoptosis.
Despite the record-breaking discovery, development and approval of vaccines and antiviral therapeutics such as Paxlovid, coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) remained the fourth leading cause of death in the world and third highest in the United States in 2022. Here, we report the discovery and characterization of PF-07817883, a second-generation, orally bioavailable, SARS-CoV-2 main protease inhibitor with improved metabolic stability versus nirmatrelvir, the antiviral component of the ritonavir-boosted therapy Paxlovid. We demonstrate the in vitro pan-human coronavirus antiviral activity and off-target selectivity profile of PF-07817883. PF-07817883 also demonstrated oral efficacy in a mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 model at plasma concentrations equivalent to nirmatrelvir. The preclinical in vivo pharmacokinetics and metabolism studies in human matrices are suggestive of improved oral pharmacokinetics for PF-07817883 in humans, relative to nirmatrelvir. In vitro inhibition/induction studies against major human drug metabolizing enzymes/transporters suggest a low potential for perpetrator drug-drug interactions upon single-agent use of PF-07817883.
Single-cell RNA sequencing has profiled hundreds of millions of human cells across organs, diseases, development and perturbations to date. Mining these growing atlases could reveal cell-disease associations, identify cell states in unexpected tissue contexts and relate in vivo biology to in vitro models. These require a common measure of cell similarity across the body and an efficient way to search. Here we develop SCimilarity, a metric-learning framework to learn a unified and interpretable representation that enables rapid queries of tens of millions of cell profiles from diverse studies for cells that are transcriptionally similar to an input cell profile or state. We use SCimilarity to query a 23.4-million-cell atlas of 412 single-cell RNA-sequencing studies for macrophage and fibroblast profiles from interstitial lung disease(1) and reveal similar cell profiles across other fibrotic diseases and tissues. The top scoring in vitro hit for the macrophage query was a 3D hydrogel system(2), which we experimentally demonstrated reproduces this cell state. SCimilarity serves as a foundation model for single-cell profiles that enables researchers to query for similar cellular states across the human body, providing a powerful tool for generating biological insights from the Human Cell Atlas.
BACKGROUND: Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists are a viable option for the prevention of Alzheimer's disease (AD) but the mechanisms of this potential disease modifying action are unclear. We investigated the effects of once-weekly exenatide (EQW) on AD associated proteomic clusters. METHODS: The Exenatide Study of Cardiovascular Event Lowering study compared the cardiovascular effects of EQW 2 mg with placebo in 13,752 people with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 4,979 proteins were measured (Somascan V0.4) on baseline and 1-year plasma samples of 3,973 participants. C-reactive protein (CRP), ficolin-2 (FCN2), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), soluble vascular cell adhesion protein 1 (sVCAM1) and 4 protein clusters were tested in multivariable mixed models. RESULTS: EQW affected FCN2 (Cohen's d -0.019), PAI-1 (Cohen's d -0.033), sVCAM-1 (Cohen's d 0.035) and a cytokine-cytokine cluster (Cohen's d 0.037) significantly compared with placebo. These effects were sustained in individuals over the age of 65 but not in those under 65. CONCLUSIONS: EQW treatment was associated with significant change in inflammatory proteins associated with AD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: EXSCEL is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01144338 on 10th of June 2010.
Non-insulin adjunct therapies in type 1 diabetes have been proposed as a means of improving glycaemic control and reducing risk of hypoglycaemia. Evidence to support this approach is, however, scant and few pharmacological agents have proved effective enough to become part of routine clinical care. Recent short-term Phase II trials and 24 week Phase III trials provide initial support for the use of sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT) inhibitors in type 1 diabetes. Two international, multicentre, randomised, controlled clinical trials, Dapagliflozin Evaluation in Patients with Inadequately Controlled Type 1 Diabetes (DEPICT-1) and inTandem3, have reported that SGLT inhibition with dapagliflozin and sotagliflozin, respectively, confer additional benefits in terms of a 5-6 mmol/mol (0.4-0.5%) reduction in HbA(1c) accompanied by weight loss and reductions in total daily insulin doses. The reduction in HbA(1c) does not come with a significantly increased risk of hypoglycaemia but does carry an increased risk of diabetic ketoacidosis and mycotic infections. These results suggest that SGLT inhibition will have a place in the management of type 1 diabetes. Longer-term clinical trials (>/=52 weeks) and observational cohort studies are needed to determine any additional benefits or adverse effects of this adjunct therapy and to determine which group of patients may benefit most from this approach. In addition, use of SGLT inhibitors in routine type 1 diabetes care will require specific patient and healthcare professional educational packages to ensure patient safety and to minimise risk.
INTRODUCTION: Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs), currently marketed for type 2 diabetes and obesity, may offer novel mechanisms to delay or prevent neurotoxicity associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The impact of semaglutide in amyloid positivity (ISAP) trial is investigating whether the GLP-1 RA semaglutide reduces accumulation in the brain of cortical tau protein and neuroinflammation in individuals with preclinical/prodromal AD. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: ISAP is an investigator-led, randomised, double-blind, superiority trial of oral semaglutide compared with placebo. Up to 88 individuals aged >/=55 years with brain amyloid positivity as assessed by positron emission tomography (PET) or cerebrospinal fluid, and no or mild cognitive impairment, will be randomised. People with the low-affinity binding variant of the rs6971 allele of the Translocator Protein 18 kDa (TSPO) gene, which can interfere with interpreting TSPO PET scans (a measure of neuroinflammation), will be excluded.At baseline, participants undergo tau, TSPO PET and MRI scanning, and provide data on physical activity and cognition. Eligible individuals are randomised in a 1:1 ratio to once-daily oral semaglutide or placebo, starting at 3 mg and up-titrating to 14 mg over 8 weeks. They will attend safety visits and provide blood samples to measure AD biomarkers at weeks 4, 8, 26 and 39. All cognitive assessments are repeated at week 26. The last study visit will be at week 52, when all baseline measurements will be repeated. The primary end point is the 1-year change in tau PET signal. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was approved by the West Midlands-Edgbaston Research Ethics Committee (22/WM/0013). The results of the study will be disseminated through scientific presentations and peer-reviewed publications. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN71283871.
Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) is a spectrum of both benign and malignant gestational tumors, including hydatidiform mole (complete and partial), invasive mole, choriocarcinoma, placental site trophoblastic tumor, and epithelioid trophoblastic tumor. The latter four entities are referred to as gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). These conditions are aggressive with a propensity to widely metastasize. GTN can result in significant morbidity and mortality if left untreated. Early diagnosis of GTD is essential for prompt and successful management while preserving fertility. Initial diagnosis of GTD is based on a multifactorial approach consisting of clinical features, serial quantitative human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) titers, and imaging findings. Ultrasonography (US) is the modality of choice for initial diagnosis of complete hydatidiform mole and can provide an invaluable means of local surveillance after treatment. The performance of US in diagnosing all molar pregnancies is surprisingly poor, predominantly due to the difficulty in differentiating partial hydatidiform mole from nonmolar abortion and retained products of conception. While GTN after a molar pregnancy is usually diagnosed with serial beta-hCG titers, imaging plays an important role in evaluation of local extent of disease and systemic surveillance. Imaging also plays a crucial role in detection and management of complications, such as uterine and pulmonary arteriovenous fistulas. Familiarity with the pathogenesis, classification, imaging features, and treatment of these tumors can aid in radiologic diagnosis and guide appropriate management. ((c))RSNA, 2017.
Metabolic mechanisms underlying the heterogeneity of major adverse cardiovascular (CV) event (MACE) risk in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) remain unclear. We hypothesized that circulating metabolites reflecting mitochondrial dysfunction predict incident MACE in T2D. Targeted mass-spectrometry profiling of 60 metabolites was performed on baseline plasma samples from the Trial Evaluating Cardiovascular Outcomes with Sitagliptin (TECOS; discovery cohort) and Exenatide Study of Cardiovascular Event Lowering (EXSCEL; validation cohort) biomarker substudy cohorts. A principal components analysis metabolite factor comprising medium-chain acylcarnitines (MCACs) was associated with MACE in TECOS and validated in EXSCEL, with higher levels associated with higher MACE risk. Meta-analysis showed that long-chain acylcarnitines (LCACs) and dicarboxylacylcarnitines were also associated with MACE. Metabolites remained associated with MACE in multivariate models and favorably changed with exenatide therapy. A third cohort (Cardiac Catheterization Genetics [CATHGEN]) with T2D was assessed to determine whether these metabolites improved discriminative capability of multivariate models for MACE. Nine metabolites (MCACs and LCACs and 1 dicarboxylacylcarnitine) were associated with time to MACE in the CATHGEN cohort. Addition of these metabolites to clinical models minimally improved the discriminative capability for MACE but did significantly down reclassify risk. Thus, metabolites reporting on dysregulated mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation are present in higher levels in individuals with T2D who experience subsequent MACE. These biomarkers may improve CV risk prediction models, be therapy responsive, and highlight emerging risk mechanisms.
There is increasing evidence that HFpEF is a heterogeneous clinical entity and distinct molecular pathways may contribute to pathophysiology. Leveraging unbiased proteomics to identify novel biomarkers, this study seeks to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of HFpEF. The discovery cohort consisted of HFpEF cases and non-HF controls from the CATHGEN study (N = 176); the validation cohort consisted of participants from the TECOS trial of patients with diabetes (N = 109). Proteins associated with HFpEF were included in a LASSO model to create a discriminative multi-protein model and assessed in the validation cohort. Survival models and meta-analysis were used to test the association of proteins with incident clinical outcomes, including HF hospitalization, mortality and HFpEF hospitalization in CATHGEN, TECOS and the Jackson Heart Study. In the derivation set, 190 proteins were associated with HFpEF in univariate analysis, of which 65 remained significant in the multivariate model. Twenty (30.8%) of these proteins validated in TECOS, including LCN2, U-PAR, IL-1ra, KIM1, CSTB and Gal-9 (OR 1.93-2.77, p < 0.01). LASSO regression yielded a 13-protein model which, when added to a clinical model inclusive of NT-proBNP, improved the AUC from 0.82 to 0.92 (p = 1.5 x 10(-4)). Five proteins were associated with incident HF hospitalization, four with HFpEF hospitalization and eleven with mortality (p < 0.05). We identified and validated multiple circulating biomarkers associated with HFpEF as well as HF outcomes. These biomarkers added incremental discriminative capabilities beyond clinical factors and NT-proBNP.
Pathological and genomic profiling have transformed breast cancer care by matching patients to targeted treatments. However, tumors evolve and evade therapeutic interventions often through the acquisition of genomic mutations. Here we examine patients profiled with tissue (TBx) and liquid biopsy (LBx) as part of routine clinical care, to characterize the tumor evolutionary landscape and identify potential vulnerabilities in the relapsed setting. Real-world evidence demonstrates that LBx is utilized later in care and identifies associations with intervening therapy. While driver events are frequently shared, acquired LBx alterations are detected in a majority of patients, with the highest frequency in ER+ disease and in patients with longer biopsy intervals. Acquired mutations are often polyclonal and present at lower allelic fractions, suggesting multi-clonal convergent evolution. In addition to well-characterized resistance mutations (e.g., ESR1, NF1, RB1, ERBB2), we observe a diversity of rarer but potentially targetable mutations (e.g., PIK3CA, HRAS/NRAS/KRAS, FGFR1/2/3, BRAF) and fusions (e.g., FGFR1/2, ERBB2, RET), as well as BRCA1/2 reversions through a variety of mechanisms, including splice alterations and structural deletions. This study provides insights on treatment and selection-driven tumor evolution and identifies potential combinatorial treatment options in advanced breast cancer.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted embedded inequities and fragmentation in our health systems. Traditionally, structural issues with health professional education perpetuate these. COVID-19 has highlighted inequities, but may also be a disruptor, allowing positive responses and system redesign. Examples from health professional schools in high and low- and middle-income countries illustrate pro-equity interventions of current relevance. We recommend that health professional schools and planners consider educational redesign to produce a health workforce well equipped to respond to pandemics and meet future need.
