Thymidylate synthase; Contributes to the de novo mitochondrial thymidylate biosynthesis pathway.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a standard treatment for glioblastoma (GBM) patients. However, TMZ has moderate therapeutic effects due to chemoresistance of GBM cells through less clarified mechanisms. Here, we demonstrate that TMZ-derived 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (AICA) is converted to AICA ribosyl-5-phosphate (AICAR) in GBM cells. This conversion is catalyzed by hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase 1 (HPRT1), which is highly expressed in human GBMs. As the bona fide activator of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), TMZ-derived AICAR activates AMPK to phosphorylate threonine 52 (T52) of RRM1, the catalytic subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR), leading to RNR activation and increased production of dNTPs to fuel the repairment of TMZ-induced-DNA damage. RRM1 T52A expression, genetic interruption of HPRT1-mediated AICAR production, or administration of 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP), a clinically approved inhibitor of HPRT1, blocks TMZ-induced AMPK activation and sensitizes brain tumor cells to TMZ treatment in mice. In addition, HPRT1 expression levels are positively correlated with poor prognosis in GBM patients who received TMZ treatment. These results uncover a critical bifunctional role of TMZ in GBM treatment that leads to chemoresistance. Our findings underscore the potential of combined administration of clinically available 6-MP to overcome TMZ chemoresistance and improve GBM treatment.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The highly heterogeneous cellular and molecular makeup of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) not only fosters exceptionally aggressive tumor biology, but contradicts the current concept of one-size-fits-all therapeutic strategies to combat PDAC. Therefore, we aimed to exploit the tumor biological implication and therapeutic vulnerabilities of a clinically relevant molecular PDAC subgroup characterized by SMAD4 deficiency and high expression of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (SMAD4(-/-)/NFATc1(High)). METHODS: Transcriptomic and clinical data were analyzed to determine the prognostic relevance of SMAD4(-/-)/NFATc1(High) cancers. In vitro and in vivo oncogenic transcription factor complex formation was studied by immunoprecipitation, proximity ligation assays, and validated cross model and species. The impact of SMAD4 status on therapeutically targeting canonical KRAS signaling was mechanistically deciphered and corroborated by genome-wide gene expression analysis and genetic perturbation experiments, respectively. Validation of a novel tailored therapeutic option was conducted in patient-derived organoids and cells and transgenic as well as orthotopic PDAC models. RESULTS: Our findings determined the tumor biology of an aggressive and chemotherapy-resistant SMAD4(-/-)/NFATc1(High) subgroup. Mechanistically, we identify SMAD4 deficiency as a molecular prerequisite for the formation of an oncogenic NFATc1/SMAD3/cJUN transcription factor complex, which drives the expression of RRM1/2. RRM1/2 replenishes nucleoside pools that directly compete with metabolized gemcitabine for DNA strand incorporation. Disassembly of the NFATc1/SMAD3/cJUN complex by mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling inhibition normalizes RRM1/2 expression and synergizes with gemcitabine treatment in vivo to reduce the proliferative index. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that PDAC characterized by SMAD4 deficiency and oncogenic NFATc1/SMAD3/cJUN complex formation exposes sensitivity to a mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling inhibition and gemcitabine combination therapy.
Approximately half of lung cancer patients present with metastases, and a large proportion will develop recurrent disease, with median survival to cisplatin-based chemotherapy of 11 months. No predictive factor of response to cisplatin-based chemotherapy is yet available in clinical practice. The nucleotide excision repair system plays a major role in repairing a variety of distorting lesions, notably platinum-induced DNA adducts. ERCC1 is a leading gene in repairing cisplatin DNA damage. We carried out three different studies examining individually the role of ERCC1, RRM1, and then both, mRNA expression in paraffin-embedded pretreatment bronchial biopsies from gemcitabine/cisplatin-treated advanced non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. Median survival was significantly prolonged in patients with low levels of ERCC1 or RRM1. BRCA1 is involved in homologous recombination repair, and we observed that low levels of BRCA1 mRNA significantly increased survival in gemcitabine/cisplatin-treated patients. Our observations lead us to recommend that tumors be regularly assessed for ERCC1 and BRCA1 mRNA expression in order to customize gemcitabine/cisplatin treatment.
RNA binding proteins, through control of mRNA fate and expression, are key players of organism development. The LARP family of RBPs sharing the La motif, are largely present in eukaryotes. They classify into five subfamilies which members acquired specific additional domains, including the RRM1 moiety which teams up with the La motif to form a versatile RNA binding unit. The LARP6 subfamily has had a peculiar history during plant evolution. While containing a single LARP6 in algae and non-vascular plants, they expanded and neofunctionalized into three subclusters in vascular plants. Studies from Arabidopsis thaliana, support that they acquired specific RNA binding properties and physiological roles. In particular LARP6C participates, through spatiotemporal control of translation, to male fertilization, a role seemingly conserved in maize. Interestingly, human LARP6 also acts in translation control and mRNA transport and similarly to LARP6C which is required for pollen tube guided elongation, is necessary to cell migration, through protrusion extension. This opens the possibility that some cellular and molecular functions of LARP6 were retained across eukaryote evolution. With their peculiar evolutionary history, plants provide a unique opportunity to uncover how La-module RNA binding properties evolved and identify species specific and basal roles of the LARP6 function. Deciphering of how LARP6, in particular LARP6C, acts at the molecular level, will foster novel knowledge on translation regulation and dynamics in changing cellular contexts. Considering the seemingly conserved function of LARP6C in male reproduction, it should fuel studies aimed at deriving crop species with improved seed yields.
Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) arise from cells distributed throughout the endocrine system. Although, NETs are heterogeneous in their behavior, they tend to be more aggressive when arising in the pancreas. Pancreatic NET (panNET) represents three percent of all primary pancreatic neoplasms. Symptomatic and progressive panNETs are generally treated with cytotoxic chemotherapy, whereas molecular targeted therapy is used for nonfunctional tumors without aggressive features. Pharmacogenetics has increasingly been used recently to better identify potential targets for therapy and help select patient-specific therapy. In this review, we discuss two abstracts (Abstracts #4113 and #e15169) presented at the ASCO Annual Meeting in Chicago this year, outlining the potential role of tumor gene and gene product profiling in disease management. We describe what is known about the pathogenesis of these tumors, role of decreased gene product expression (MGMT, RRM1, MET) and its application in cytotoxic therapy selection, as well as genetic mutations that can be used for molecular targeted therapy. With an overall shift towards personalized medicine, it has become ever more important to identify the molecular signature of a tumor as it appears to dictate the clinical behavior and response to therapy.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease of motor neurons. Neuronal superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) inclusion bodies are characteristic of familial ALS with SOD1 mutations, while a hallmark of sporadic ALS is inclusions containing aggregated WT TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43). We show here that co-expression of mutant or WT TDP-43 with SOD1 leads to misfolding of endogenous SOD1 and aggregation of SOD1 reporter protein SOD1(G85R)-GFP in human cell cultures and promotes synergistic axonopathy in zebrafish. Intriguingly, this pathological interaction is modulated by natively solvent-exposed tryptophans in SOD1 (tryptophan-32) and TDP-43 RNA-recognition motif RRM1 (tryptophan-172), in concert with natively sequestered TDP-43 N-terminal domain tryptophan-68. TDP-43 RRM1 intrabodies reduce WT SOD1 misfolding in human cell cultures, via blocking tryptophan-172. Tryptophan-68 becomes antibody-accessible in aggregated TDP-43 in sporadic ALS motor neurons and cell culture. 5-fluorouridine inhibits TDP-43-induced G85R-GFP SOD1 aggregation in human cell cultures and ameliorates axonopathy in zebrafish, via its interaction with SOD1 tryptophan-32. Collectively, our results establish a novel and potentially druggable tryptophan-mediated mechanism whereby two principal ALS disease effector proteins might directly interact in disease.
BACKGROUND: Ribonucleotide reductase subunit 1 (RRM1) is a potential prognostic factor for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). This study evaluates prognostic value of RRM1 in NSCLC patients by meta-analyzing outcomes reported in literature. METHOD: Data were acquired from research articles retrieved after literature search in online databases. Random effects meta-analyses were conducted by pooling hazard ratios (HR). Meta-analyses of standardized mean differences (SMD) were used to evaluate overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) between low and high RRM1 expression groups. Metaregression analyses were conducted to evaluate the factors that could affect prognostic relationship of RRM1 with treatment and survival outcomes. RESULTS: 23 studies (3148 patients) were included. RRM1 expression was not meaningfully associated with prognosis of NSCLC even when the reference (HR = 1) was either low RRM1 expression (0.918 [95% CI 0.833, 1.003]) or high RRM1 expression (0.834 [0.625, 1.043]). OS was significantly longer in low RRM1 expression group compared to high RRM1 expression group (SMD 0.73 [0.36, 1.09]; P < 0.0001). PFS was not significantly different between low and high RRM1 expression groups (SMD 0.08 [-0.29, 0.45]; p = 0.68). Age was inversely associated with HR (p = 0.001) even when reference was low RRMI (p = 0.027) or high RRM1 (p = 0.006). Age was positively associated with OS in both low and high RRM1 groups. CONCLUSION: In meta-analysis of studies which used gemcitabine-based therapies, higher RRM1 expression is found to associated with shorter OS but not PFS. HR depicting relationship between RRM1 expression and OS/PFS/treatment response could not demonstrate a prognostic role of RRM1 in NSCLC patients.
Ribonucleotide Reductase (RNR) is a rate-limiting enzyme in the production of deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs), which are essential substrates for DNA repair after radiation damage. We explored the radiosensitization property of RNR and investigated a selective RRM2 inhibitor, 3-AP, as a radiosensitizer in the treatment of metastatic pNETs. We investigated the role of RNR subunit, RRM2, in pancreatic neuroendocrine (pNET) cells and responses to radiation in vitro. We also evaluated the selective RRM2 subunit inhibitor, 3-AP, as a radiosensitizer to treat pNET metastases in vivo. Knockdown of RNR subunits demonstrated that RRM1 and RRM2 subunits, but not p53R3, play significant roles in cell proliferation. RRM2 inhibition activated DDR pathways through phosphorylation of ATM and DNA-PK protein kinases but not ATR. RRM2 inhibition also induced Chk1 and Chk2 phosphorylation, resulting in G1/S phase cell cycle arrest. RRM2 inhibition sensitized pNET cells to radiotherapy and induced apoptosis in vitro. In vivo, we utilized pNET subcutaneous and lung metastasis models to examine the rationale for RNR-targeted therapy and 3-AP as a radiosensitizer in treating pNETs. Combination treatment significantly increased apoptosis of BON (human pNET) xenografts and significantly reduced the burden of lung metastases. Together, our results demonstrate that selective RRM2 inhibition induced radiosensitivity of metastatic pNETs both in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, treatment with the selective RRM2 inhibitor, 3-AP, is a promising radiosensitizer in the therapeutic armamentarium for metastatic pNETs.
The mainstay of acute myeloid leukemia chemotherapy is the nucleoside analog cytarabine (ara-C). Numerous studies suggest that the intracellular concentrations of the ara-C active metabolite, ara-CTP, vary widely among patients and, in turn, are associated with variability in clinical response to acute myeloid leukemia treatment. Thus, genetic variation in key genes in the ara-C metabolic pathway--specifically, deoxycytidine kinase (a rate-limiting activating enzyme), 5 nucleotidase, cytidine deaminase and deoxycytidylate deaminase (all three are inactivating enzymes), human equilibrative nucleoside transporter (ara-C uptake transporter) and ribonucleotide reductase (RRM1 and RRM2--enzymes regulating intracellular deoxycytidine triphosphate pools)--form the molecular basis of the interpatient variability observed in intracellular ara-CTP concentrations and response to ara-C. Understanding genetic variants in the key candidate genes involved in the metabolic activation of ara-C, as well as the pharmacodynamic targets of ara-C, will provide an opportunity to identify patients at an increased risk of adverse reactions or decreased likelihood of response, based upon their genetic profile, which in future could help in dose optimization to reduce drug toxicity without compromising efficacy. The pharmacogenetic studies on ara-C would also be equally applicable to other nucleoside analogs, such as gemcitabine, decitabine, clofarabine and so on, which are metabolized by the same pathway.
BACKGROUND: Conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy (CCC) is the backbone of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treatment since decades and still represents a key element of the therapeutic armamentarium. Contrary to molecularly targeted therapies and immune therapies, for which predictive biomarkers of activity have been actively looked for and developed in parallel to the drug development process ('companion biomarkers'), no patient selection biomarker is currently available for CCC, precluding customizing treatment. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We reviewed preclinical and clinical studies that assessed potential predictive biomarkers of CCC used in NSCLC (platinum, antimetabolites, topoisomerase inhibitors, and spindle poisons). Biomarker evaluation method, analytical validity, and robustness are described and challenged for each biomarker. RESULTS: The best-validated predictive biomarkers for efficacy are currently ERCC1, RRM1, and TS for platinum agents, gemcitabine and pemetrexed, respectively. Other potential biomarkers include hENT1 for gemcitabine, class III beta-tubulin for spindle poisons, TOP2A expression and CEP17 duplication (mostly studied for predicting anthracyclines efficacy) whose applicability concerning etoposide would deserve further evaluation. However, none of these biomarkers has till now been validated prospectively in an appropriately designed and powered randomised trial, and none of them is currently ready for implementation in routine clinical practice. CONCLUSION: The search for predictive biomarkers to CCC has been proven challenging. If a plethora of biomarkers have been evaluated either in the preclinical or in the clinical setting, none of them is ready for clinical implementation yet. Considering that most mechanisms of resistance or sensitivity to CCC are multifactorial, a combinatorial approach might be relevant and further efforts are required.
BACKGROUND: Silencing of several genes is critical for cancer therapy. These genes may be apoptotic gene, cell proliferation gene, DNA synthesis gene, etc. The two subunits of Ribonucleotide Reductase (RR), RRM1 and RRM2, are critical for DNA synthesis. Hence, targeting the blockage of DNA synthesis at tumor site can be a smart mode of cancer therapy. Specific targeting of blockage of RRM2 is done effectively by SiRNA. The drawbacks of siRNA delivery in the body include the poor uptake by all kinds of cells, questionable stability under physiological condition, non-target effect and ability to trigger the immune response. These obstacles may be overcome by target delivery of siRNA at the tumor site. This review presents a holistic overview regarding the role of RRM2 in controlling cancer progression. The nanoparticles are more effective due to specific characteristics like cell membrane penetration capacity, less toxicity, etc. RRM2 have been found to be elevated in different types of cancer and identified as the prognostic and predictive marker of the disease. Reductase RRM1 and RRM2 regulate the protein and gene expression of E2F, which is critical for protein expression and progression of cell cycle and cancer. The knockdown of RRM2 leads to apoptosis via Bcl2 in cancer. Both Bcl2 and E2F are critical in the progression of cancer, hence a gene that can affect both in regulating DNA replication is essential for cancer therapy. AIM: The aim of the review is to identify the related gene whose silencing may inhibit cancer progression. CONCLUSION: In this review, we illuminate the critical link between RRM-E2F, RRM-Bcl2, RRM-HDAC for the therapy of cancer. Altogether, this review presents an overview of all types of SiRNA targeted for cancer therapy with special emphasis on RRM2 for controlling the tumor progression.
The quest for markers of sensitivity to cytotoxic agents has been ongoing for decades. In non-small-cell lung cancer, platinum compounds represent the cornerstone of systemic therapy. They target DNA and induce damage that cancer cells struggle to overcome. Somatic excision repair cross-complementing rodent repair deficiency, complementation group 1 (ERCC1), and ribonucleotide reductase M1 (RRM1) expression levels have been extensively explored as markers of DNA repair capacity in tumor cells. Although low ERCC1 and/or RRM1 expression is generally associated with sensitivity to platinum, the results published in retrospective and prospective studies are not always consistent. Against this background, we will examine in this review the function of these two biomarkers as well as the tools available for their assessment and the associated technical issues. Their prognostic and predictive values will be summarized and considered in terms of customizing systemic therapy according to biomarker (ERCC1 and RRM1) expression levels. We will also discuss why the use of both markers should at this point be restricted to clinical research and underline that functional readouts of DNA repair will help boost future strategies for biomarker discovery in the field.
The increased tameness to reduce avoidance of human in wild animals has been long proposed as the key step of animal domestication. The tameness is a complex behavior trait and largely determined by genetic factors. However, the underlying genetic mutations remain vague and how they influence the animal behaviors is yet to be explored. Behavior tests of a wild-domestic hybrid goat population indicate the locus under strongest artificial selection during domestication may exert a huge effect on the flight distance. Within this locus, only one missense mutation RRM1(I241V) which was present in the early domestic goat ~6500 years ago. Genome editing of RRM1(I241V) in mice showed increased tameness and sociability and reduced anxiety. These behavioral changes induced by RRM1(I241V) were modulated by the alternation of activity of glutamatergic synapse and some other synapse-related pathways. This study established a link between RRM1(I241V) and tameness, demonstrating that the complex behavioral change can be achieved by mutations under strong selection during animal domestication.
BACKGROUND: Aggressive pancreatobiliary tumors often require oxaliplatin-based therapies, instead of standard gemcitabine-based therapy and biomarker studies at diagnosis to decide the appropriate therapeutic regimen. The ribonucleotide Reductase catalytic subunit M1 (RRM1) and excision repair cross-complementing gene-1 (ERCC1) are related to DNA synthesis and repair and essential in this regard. However, apart from the therapeutic benefit, their prognostic implication is controversial. METHODS: In this retrospective study, paraffin-embedded tissue from 51 cases of pancreatic cancer and 29 cases of cholangiocarcinoma were evaluated for RRM1 and ERCC1 expression by immunohistochemical technique along with 18 control pancreatic and biliary tissues. The semiquantitatively H score was calculated based on stain distribution and stain intensities. RESULTS: Both RRM1 and ERCC1 expression were high in tumor epithelium than in controls (RRM1: the difference was statistically significant in cholangiocarcinoma (P = 0.008); ERCC1: the difference was statistically significant both in pancreatic and cholangiocarcinoma (P < 0.05)]. However, no correlation was noted between RRM1 and ERCC1-low and high tumors with histological markers of prognosis and overall survival in these patients. CONCLUSIONS: The present study adds further evidence against the controversy that if RRM1 and ERCC1 expression in pancreatic and biliary carcinomas have any prognostic significance apart from their proven therapeutic benefits in these tumors.
Ribonucleotide reductase M1 (RRM1) is a crucial gene in DNA repair. Recent studies have shown that RRM1 expression can be a powerful predictor of survival or chemotherapy sensitivity in patients presenting with carcinomas who are treated with adjuvant gemcitabine-based chemotherapy including lung cancer. However, the relationship between the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of RRM1 and the susceptibility of lung cancer to chemotherapy has not been well addressed. We detected six tag SNPs of RRM1 genotypes in a cohort of 1007 patients with primary lung cancer and 1007 age- and sex-matched population controls using SNaPshot detection technology. Logistic regression, odds ratios (OR), and 95% confidence intervals were calculated to estimate lung cancer risk associated with SNP genotypes and haplotypes, after adjusting for case-control matching factors. Compared with the T/T and A/T genotype of RRM1 *151A>T, the A/A genotype had an increased risk for overall lung cancer (adjusted OR, 1.33). Additionally, the T/T+T/C genotypes of RRM1 -756T>C were risk factors that increased the susceptibility to lung cancer (adjusted OR 1.54, as compared with the C/C genotype). While the T/T+G/T genotypes of RRM1 -585T>G behaved as protective factors to increase the susceptibility to lung cancer (adjusted OR 0.44, as compared with the C/C genotype). In summary, this is the first study to systematically identify the relationship between the polymorphisms of RRM1 and individual susceptibility to lung cancer. It is anticipated that the RRM1 *151A>T, RRM1 -756T>C, and RRM1 -585T>G polymorphisms will improve the predictive prognosis of lung cancer sensitivity.
Ebola virus (EBOV) belongs to Filoviridae family possessing single-stranded negative-sense RNA genome, which is a serious threat to human health. Nowadays, no therapeutics have been proven to be successful in efficiently decreasing the mortality rate. RNA binding proteins (RBPs) are reported to participate in maintaining cell integrity and regulation of viral replication. However, little is known about whether and how RBPs participate in regulating the life cycle of EBOV. In our study, we found that RNA binding motif protein 4 (RBM4) inhibited the replication of EBOV in HEK293T and Huh-7 cells by suppressing viral mRNA production. Such inhibition resulted from the direct interaction between the RRM1 domain of RBM4 and the "CU" enrichment elements located in the PE1 and TSS of the 3'-leader region within the viral genome. Simultaneously, RBM4 could upregulate the expression of some cytokines involved in the host innate immune responses to synergistically exert its antiviral function. The findings therefore suggest that RBM4 might serve as a novel target of anti-EBOV strategy.
PURPOSE: Pancreatic cancer (PC) remains a lethal disease, and gemcitabine resistance is prevalent. However, the biomarkers suggestive of gemcitabine resistance remain unclear. METHODS: Bioinformatic tools identified ribonucleotide reductase catalytic subunit M1 (RRM1) in gemcitabine-related datasets. A cox regression model revealed the predictive value of RRM1 with clinical features. An external clinical cohort confirmed the prognostic value of RRM1. RRM1 expression was validated in gemcitabine-resistant cells in vitro and in orthotopic PC model. CCK8, flow cytometry, transwell migration, and invasion assays were used to explore the effect of RRM1 on gemcitabine-resistant cells. The CIBERSORT algorithm investigated the impact of RRM1 on immune infiltration. RESULTS: The constructed nomogram based on RRM1 effectively predicted prognosis and was further validated. Moreover, patients with higher RRM1 had shorter overall survival. RRM1 expression was significantly higher in PC tissue and gemcitabine-resistant cells in vitro and in vivo. RRM1 knockdown reversed gemcitabine resistance, inhibited migration and invasion. The infiltration levels of CD4 + T cells, CD8 + T cells, neutrophils, and plasma cells correlated markedly with RRM1 expression, and communication between tumor and immune cells probably depends on NF-kappaB/mTOR signaling. CONCLUSION: RRM1 may be a potential marker for prognosis and a target marker for gemcitabine resistance in PC.
Gemcitabine is a nucleoside analog that is indicated in the treatment of pancreatic cancer. In order to provide a better use of this drug, the search for immunohistological markers is a hot topic in the field of pancreatic cancer. In particular, the use of nucleoside transporter hENT1 and the intracellular target of gemcitabine RRM1 are current subjects for discussion. We have analyzed the majority of studies of hENT1 and RRM1 on pancreatic cancer, and will discuss the further directions that might be followed in order to integrate these proteins in routine clinical practice. The data that is currently available would benefit from the completion of well-designed randomized trials in order to confirm the clinical value of hENT1 and RRM1 as biomarkers in pancreatic cancer patients.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is highly malignant and has a poor prognosis, without effective therapeutic targets in common gene mutations. Gemcitabine, a first-line chemotherapeutic for PDAC, confers <10 % 5-year survival rate because of drug resistance. Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1), associated with multidrug-resistance gene activation, remains unelucidated in PDAC gemcitabine resistance. In vivo and in vitro, we verified YBX1's promotional effects, especially gemcitabine resistance, in pancreatic cancer cells. YBX1-induced LRP1 transcription by binding to the LRP1 promoter region significantly altered the concentration and distribution of beta-catenin in pancreatic cancer cells. Through TCF3, beta-catenin bound to the promoter region of RRM1, a key gene for gemcitabine resistance, that promotes RRM1 expression. Combination therapy with the YBX1 inhibitor SU056 and gemcitabine effectively reduced gemcitabine resistance in in vivo and in vitro experiments. High YBX1 expression promoted pathogenesis and gemcitabine resistance in pancreatic cancer through the YBX1-LRP1-beta-catenin-RRM1 axis. Combining YBX1 inhibitors with gemcitabine may provide a new direction for combination chemotherapy to overcome gemcitabine resistance, which frequently occurs during chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer.
Nucleotide synthesis is a metabolically demanding process essential for DNA replication and other processes in the cell. Several anticancer drugs that inhibit nucleotide metabolism induce apoptosis. How inhibition of nucleotide metabolism impacts non-apoptotic cell death is less clear. Here, we report that inhibition of nucleotide metabolism by the p53 pathway is sufficient to suppress the non-apoptotic cell death process of ferroptosis. Mechanistically, stabilization of wild-type p53 and induction of the p53 target gene CDKN1A (p21) leads to decreased expression of the ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) subunits RRM1 and RRM2 RNR is the rate-limiting enzyme of de novo nucleotide synthesis that reduces ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides in a glutathione-dependent manner. Direct inhibition of RNR results in conservation of intracellular glutathione, limiting the accumulation of toxic lipid peroxides and preventing the onset of ferroptosis in response to cystine deprivation. These results support a mechanism linking p53-dependent regulation of nucleotide metabolism to non-apoptotic cell death.
