Relaxin-3 receptor 2; High affinity receptor for INSL5. Also acts as receptor for RLN3/relaxin-3, as well as bradykinin and kallidin. Binding of the ligand inhibit cAMP accumulation; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
There is no common consensus on the physiological role of insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5) and its cognate receptor, relaxin family peptide receptor 4 (RXFP4). The experimental data for INSL5-RXFP4 expression and function point to a potential role of the peptide hormone and receptor pair in linking energy availability, homeostasis, and inflammation. In this review, we summarize studies on the INSL5-RXFP4 system and propose that the current findings from diverse experimental settings point broadly to a role as a protective energy sensor (PES). Specifically, we review the evidence that (1) INSL5-RXFP4 could regulate immune response by decreasing the production of proinflammatory cytokines and may be involved in the stress response via the HPA axis; (2) INSL5-RXFP4 may signal through sensory neurons on the vagus nerve, transmitting signals to the CNS; and (3) INSL5-RXFP4 could have local autocrine/paracrine roles within the intestinal tract and immune cells. Further investigation and clarification of these proposed roles of INSL5-RXFP4 may prove a greater physiological relevance for the pair and add to existing evidence of INSL5-RXFP4 role as a PES.
There are seven human relaxin family peptides that have two chains (A and B) and three disulfide bonds. The target receptors for four of these peptides are known as relaxin family peptide receptors, RXFP1-RXFP4. Detailed structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies of relaxin family peptides have been reported over the years and have led to the design of new analogs with agonistic and antagonistic properties. This review briefly summarizes the SAR of human relaxin 2 (H2 relaxin) and human relaxin 3 (H3 relaxin) leading to the design and development of single-B-chain only agonists, B7-33 and peptide 5. The physiological functions of these new peptides agonists in cellular and animal models are also described.
Relaxin family peptide receptors (RXFPs) are the potential therapeutic targets for neurological, cardiovascular, and metabolic indications. Among them, RXFP3 and RXFP4 (formerly known as GPR100 or GPCR142) are homologous class A G protein-coupled receptors with short N-terminal domain. Ligands of RXFP3 or RXFP4 are only limited to endogenous peptides and their analogues, and no natural product or synthetic agonists have been reported to date except for a scaffold of indole-containing derivatives as dual agonists of RXFP3 and RXFP4. In this study, a new scaffold of tricyclic derivatives represented by compound 7a was disclosed as a selective RXFP4 agonist after a high-throughput screening campaign against a diverse library of 52,000 synthetic and natural compounds. Two rounds of structural modification around this scaffold were performed focusing on three parts: 2-chlorophenyl group, 4-hydroxylphenyl group and its skeleton including cyclohexane-1,3-dione and 1,2,4-triazole group. Compound 14b with a new skeleton of 7,9-dihydro-4H-thiopyrano[3,4-d][1,2,4]triazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-8(5H)-one was thus obtained. The enantiomers of 7a and 14b were also resolved with their 9-(S)-conformer favoring RXFP4 agonism. Compared with 7a, compound 9-(S)-14b exhibited 2.3-fold higher efficacy and better selectivity for RXFP4 (selective ratio of RXFP4 vs. RXFP3 for 9-(S)-14b and 7a were 26.9 and 13.9, respectively).
INTRODUCTION: Insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5) is a peptide hormone with proposed actions in glucose homeostasis and appetite regulation via its cognate receptor, relaxin family peptide receptor 4 (RXFP4). Here, we look for evidence for their involvement in the immune system using a mouse model. METHODS: In silico analyses: we queried public databases for evidence of expression of INSL5-RXFP4 in immune system tissues/cells (NCBI's SRA and GeoProfiles) and disorders (EMBO-EBI) and performed phylogenetic footprinting to look for evidence that they are regulated by immune-associated transcription factors (TFs). Experimental analyses: We characterized the expression and correlation of INSL5/RXFP4 and other immune system markers in central and peripheral immune organs from C57/bl6 mice in seven cohorts. We tested whether fluctuations in circulating INSL5 induce an immune response, by injecting mice with 30 mug/kg of INSL5 peptide in the peritoneum, and examining levels of immune markers and metabolic peptides in plasma. Lastly, we quantified the expression of Rxfp4 in T-cells, dendritic cells and cell lines derived from human and mouse and tested the hypothesis that co-incubation of ANA-1 cells in INSL5 and LPS alters cytokine expression. RESULTS: We find Insl5 expression only in thymus (in addition to colon) where its expression was highly correlated with Il-7, a marker of thymocyte development. This result is consistent with our in silico findings that Insl5 is highly expressed in thymic DP, DN thymocytes and cortical TEC's, and with evidence that it is regulated by thymocyte-associated TF's. We find Rxfp4 expression in all immune organs, and moderately high levels in DCs, particularly splenic DCs, and evidence that it is regulated by immune-associated TF's, such as STAT's and GATA. Systemic effects: We observed significantly elevated concentrations of blood GLP-1, GIP, GCG and PYY following intraperitoneal injection of INSL5, and significantly altered expression of cytokines IL-5, IL-7, M-CSF, IL-15, IL-27 and MIP-2. Immune cell effects: Incubation of ANA-1 cells with INSL5 impeded cell growth and led to a transient elevation of IL-15 and sustained reduction in IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNFalpha. CONCLUSION: We propose that INSL5-RXFP4 play a novel role in both central and peripheral immune cell signaling.
Members of the insulin superfamily regulate pleiotropic biological processes through two types of target-specific but structurally conserved peptides, insulin/insulin-like growth factors and relaxin/insulin-like peptides. The latter bind to the human relaxin family peptide receptors (RXFPs). Here, we report three cryo-electron microscopy structures of RXFP4-G(i) protein complexes in the presence of the endogenous ligand insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5) or one of the two small molecule agonists, compound 4 and DC591053. The B chain of INSL5 adopts a single alpha-helix that penetrates into the orthosteric pocket, while the A chain sits above the orthosteric pocket, revealing a peptide-binding mode previously unknown. Together with mutagenesis and functional analyses, the key determinants responsible for the peptidomimetic agonism and subtype selectivity were identified. Our findings not only provide insights into ligand recognition and subtype selectivity among class A G protein-coupled receptors, but also expand the knowledge of signaling mechanisms in the insulin superfamily.
There are seven relaxin family peptides that are all structurally related to insulin. Relaxin has many roles in female and male reproduction, as a neuropeptide in the central nervous system, as a vasodilator and cardiac stimulant in the cardiovascular system, and as an antifibrotic agent. Insulin-like peptide-3 (INSL3) has clearly defined specialist roles in male and female reproduction, relaxin-3 is primarily a neuropeptide involved in stress and metabolic control, and INSL5 is widely distributed particularly in the gastrointestinal tract. Although they are structurally related to insulin, the relaxin family peptides produce their physiological effects by activating a group of four G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), relaxin family peptide receptors 1-4 (RXFP1-4). Relaxin and INSL3 are the cognate ligands for RXFP1 and RXFP2, respectively, that are leucine-rich repeat containing GPCRs. RXFP1 activates a wide spectrum of signaling pathways to generate second messengers that include cAMP and nitric oxide, whereas RXFP2 activates a subset of these pathways. Relaxin-3 and INSL5 are the cognate ligands for RXFP3 and RXFP4 that are closely related to small peptide receptors that when activated inhibit cAMP production and activate MAP kinases. Although there are still many unanswered questions regarding the mode of action of relaxin family peptides, it is clear that they have important physiological roles that could be exploited for therapeutic benefit.
RXFP4 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) in the relaxin family. It has recently been recognised that this receptor and its cognate ligand INSL5 may have a role in the regulation of food intake, gut motility, and other functions relevant to metabolic health and disease. Recent data from reporter-mice showed co-location of Rxfp4 and serotonin (5-HT) in the lower gut. We used human single-cell RNA sequence data (scRNASeq) to show that RXFP4 is in a subset of gut enterochromaffin cells that produce 5-HT in humans. We also used RNAScope to show co-location of Rxfp4 mRNA and 5-HT in mouse colon, confirming prior findings. To understand whether RXFP4 might regulate serotonin production, we developed a cell model using Colo320, a human gut-derived immortalised cell line that produces and releases serotonin. Overexpression of RXFP4 in these cells resulted in a constitutive decrease in cAMP levels in both the basal state and in cells treated with forskolin. Treatment of cells with two RXFP4 agonists, INSL5 derived peptide INSL5-A13 and small molecule compound-4, further reduced cAMP levels. This was paralleled by a reduction in expression of mRNA for TPH1, the enzyme controlling the rate limiting step in the production of serotonin. Overexpression of RXFP4 also attenuated the cAMP-induced release of serotonin from Colo320 cells. Together this demonstrates that serotonin producing enterochromaffin cells are the major site of RXFP4 expression in the gut and that RXFP4 can have inhibitory functional impacts on cAMP production as well as TPH1 expression and serotonin release.
Relaxin family peptides perform a variety of biological functions by activating four G protein-coupled receptors, namely RXFP1-4. Among these receptors, RXFP3 lacks a specific natural or synthetic agonist at present. A previously designed chimeric R3/I5 peptide, consisting of the B-chain of relaxin-3 and the A-chain of INSL5, displays equal activity towards the homologous RXFP3 and RXFP4. To increase its selectivity towards RXFP3, in the present study we conducted extensive mutagenesis around the B-chain C-terminal region of R3/I5. Decreasing or increasing the peptide length around the B23-B25 position dramatically lowered the activation potency of R3/I5 towards both RXFP3 and RXFP4. Substitution of B23Gly with Ala or Ser converted R3/I5 from an efficient agonist to a strong antagonist for RXFP3, but the mutants retained considerable activation potency towards RXFP4. Substitution of B24Gly increased the selectivity of R3/I5 towards RXFP3 over the homologous RXFP4. The best mutant, [G(B24)S]R3/I5, displayed 20-fold higher activation potency towards RXFP3 than towards RXFP4, meanwhile retained full activation potency at RXFP3. Thus, [G(B24)S]R3/I5 is the best RXFP3-selective agonist known to date. It is a valuable tool for investigating the physiological functions of RXFP3, and also a suitable template for developing RXFP3-specific agonists in future.
INTRODUCTION: The neuropeptide relaxin-3/RXFP3 system belongs to the relaxin/insulin superfamily and is involved in many important physiological processes, such as stress responses, appetite control, and motivation for reward. Although relaxin-3 is the endogenous agonist for RXFP3, it can also bind to and activate RXFP1 and RXFP4. Consequently, research has been focused on the development of RXFP3-specific peptides and small-molecule ligands to validate the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system as a novel drug target. AREAS COVERED: This review provides an overview of patents on the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system covering ligand development and pharmacological studies since 2003. Related patents and literature reports were obtained from established sources including SciFinder, Google Patents, and Espacenet for patents and SciFinder, PubMed, and Google Scholar for literature reports. EXPERT OPINION: There has been an increasing amount of patent activities around relaxin-3/RXFP3, highlighting the importance of this novel neuropeptide system for drug discovery. The development of relaxin-3 derived peptides and small-molecule modulators, as well as behavioral studies in rodents, have shown that the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system is a promising drug target for treating various metabolic and neuropsychiatric diseases including obesity, anxiety, and alcohol addiction.
Relaxin-3 is a member of a superfamily of structurally-related peptides that includes relaxin and insulin-like peptide hormones. Soon after the discovery of the relaxin-3 gene, relaxin-3 was identified as an abundant neuropeptide in brain with a distinctive topographical distribution within a small number of GABAergic neuron populations that is well conserved across species. Relaxin-3 is thought to exert its biological actions through a single class-A GPCR - relaxin-family peptide receptor 3 (RXFP3). Class-A comprises GPCRs for relaxin-3 and insulin-like peptide-5 and other peptides such as orexin and the monoamine transmitters. The RXFP3 receptor is selectively activated by relaxin-3, whereas insulin-like peptide-5 is the cognate ligand for the related RXFP4 receptor. Anatomical and pharmacological evidence obtained over the last decade supports a function of relaxin-3/RXFP3 systems in modulating responses to stress, anxiety-related and motivated behaviours, circadian rhythms, and learning and memory. Electrophysiological studies have identified the ability of RXFP3 agonists to directly hyperpolarise thalamic neurons in vitro, but there are no reports of direct cell signalling effects in vivo. This article provides an overview of earlier studies and highlights more recent research that implicates relaxin-3/RXFP3 neural network signalling in the integration of arousal, motivation, emotion and related cognition, and that has begun to identify the associated neural substrates and mechanisms. Future research directions to better elucidate the connectivity and function of different relaxin-3 neuron populations and their RXFP3-positive target neurons in major experimental species and humans are also identified. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Recent Progress in the Understanding of Relaxin Family Peptides and their Receptors. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v174.10/issuetoc.
The gastrointestinal hormone, insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5), is found in large intestinal enteroendocrine cells (EEC). One of its functions is to stimulate nerve circuits that increase propulsive activity of the colon through its receptor, the relaxin family peptide 4 receptor (RXFP4). To investigate the mechanisms that link INSL5 to stimulation of propulsion, we have determined the localisation of cells expressing Rxfp4 in the mouse colon, using a reporter mouse to locate cells expressing the gene. The fluorescent signal indicating the location of Rxfp4 expression was in EEC, the greatest overlap of Rxfp4-dependent labelling being with cells containing 5-HT. In fact, > 90% of 5-HT cells were positive for Rxfp4 labelling. A small proportion of cells with Rxfp4-dependent labelling was 5-HT-negative, 11-15% in the distal colon and rectum, and 35% in the proximal colon. Of these, some were identified as L-cells by immunoreactivity for oxyntomodulin. Rxfp4-dependent fluorescence was also found in a sparse population of nerve endings, where it was colocalised with CGRP. We used the RXFP4 agonist, INSL5-A13, to activate the receptor and probe the role of the 5-HT cells in which it is expressed. INSL5-A13 administered by i.p. injection to conscious mice caused an increase in colorectal propulsion that was antagonised by the 5-HT(3) receptor blocker, alosetron, also given i.p. We conclude that stimuli that excite INSL5-containing colonic L-cells release INSL5 that, through RXFP4, excites 5-HT release from neighbouring endocrine cells, which in turn acts on 5-HT(3) receptors of enteric sensory neurons to elicit propulsive reflexes.
INSL5 and relaxin-3 are relaxin family peptides with important roles in gut and brain function, respectively. They mediate their actions through the class A GPCRs RXFP4 and RXFP3. RXFP4 has been proposed to be a therapeutic target for colon motility disorders whereas RXFP3 targeting could be effective for neurological conditions such as anxiety. Validation of these targets has been limited by the lack of specific ligands and the availability of robust ligand-binding assays for their development. In this study, we have utilized NanoBiT complementation to develop a SmBiT-conjugated tracer for use with LgBiT-fused RXFP3 and RXFP4. The low affinity between LgBiT:SmBiT should result in a low non-specific luminescence signal and enable the quantification of binding without the tedious separation of non-bound ligands. We used solid-phase peptide synthesis to produce a SmBiT-labelled RXFP3/4 agonist, R3/I5, where SmBiT was conjugated to the B-chain N-terminus via a PEG(12) linker. Both SmBiT-R3/I5 and R3/I5 were synthesized and purified in high purity and yield. Stable HEK293T cell lines expressing LgBiT-RXFP3 and LgBiT-RXFP4 were produced and demonstrated normal signaling in response to the synthetic R3/I5 peptide. Binding was first characterized in whole-cell binding kinetic assays validating that the SmBiT-R3/I5 bound to both cell lines with nanomolar affinity with minimal non-specific binding without bound and free SmBiT-R3/I5 separation. We then optimized membrane binding assays, demonstrating easy and robust analysis of both saturation and competition binding from frozen membranes. These assays therefore provide an appropriate rigorous binding assay for the high-throughput analysis of RXFP3 and RXFP4 ligands.
Recent studies have identified four receptors that are the physiological targets for relaxin family peptides. All are class I (rhodopsin like) G-protein-coupled receptors with LGR7 (RXFP1) and LGR8 (RXFP2) being type C leucine-rich repeat-containing receptors, whereas GPCR135 (RXFP3) and GPCR142 (RXFP4) resemble receptors that respond to small peptides such as somatostatin and angiotensin II. The cognate ligands for the receptors have been identified: relaxin for RXFP1; INSL3 for RXFP2; relaxin 3 for RXFP3 and INSL5 for RXFP4. RXFP1 and RXFP2 receptors produce increases in intracellular cAMP levels upon stimulation, although the response is complex and contains a component sensitive to PI-3-kinase inhibitors. There is also evidence that RXFP1 can activate Erk1/2 and nitric oxide synthase, and relaxin has been reported to enter cells and activate glucocorticoid receptors. In contrast, RXFP3 and RXFP4 couple to Gi by a pertussis toxin-sensitive mechanism to cause inhibition of cAMP production. Now that the receptors for relaxin family peptides and their cognate ligands have been identified, we suggest a nomenclature for both the peptides and the receptors that we hope will be helpful to researchers in this rapidly advancing field.
Insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5) was first identified through searches of the expressed sequence tags (EST) databases. Primary sequence analysis showed it to be a prepropeptide that was predicted to be processed in vivo to yield a two-chain sequence (A and B) that contained the insulin-like disulfide cross-links. The high affinity interaction between INSL5 and the receptor RXFP4 (GPCR142) coupled with their apparent coevolution and partially overlapping tissue expression patterns strongly suggest that INSL5 is an endogenous ligand for RXFP4. Given that the primary function of the INSL5-RXFP4 pair remains unknown, an effective means of producing sufficient quantities of this peptide and its analogues is needed to systematically investigate its structural and biological properties. A combination of solid-phase peptide synthesis methods together with regioselective disulfide bond formation were used to obtain INSL5. Both chains were unusually resistant to standard synthesis protocols and required highly optimized conditions for their acquisition. In particular, the use of a strong tertiary amidine, DBU, as N(alpha)-deprotection base was required for the successful assembly of the B chain; this highlights the need to consider incomplete deprotection rather than acylation as a cause of failed synthesis. Following sequential disulfide bond formation and chain combination, the resulting synthetic INSL5, which was obtained in good overall yield, was shown to possess a similar secondary structure to human relaxin-3 (H3 relaxin). The peptide was able to inhibit cAMP activity in SK-N-MC cells that expressed the human RXFP4 receptor with a similar activity to H3 relaxin. In contrast, it had no activity on the human RXFP3 receptor. Synthetic INSL5 demonstrates equivalent activity to the recombinant-derived peptide, and will be an important tool for the determination of its biological function.
The receptors for members of the relaxin peptide family have only recently been discovered and are G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Relaxin and insulin-like peptide 3 (INSL3) interact with the leucine-rich-repeat-containing GPCRs (LGRs) LGR7 and LGR8, respectively. These receptors show closest similarity to the glycoprotein hormone receptors and contain large ectodomains with 10 leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) but are unique members of the LGR family (class C) as they have an LDL class A (LDLa) module at their N-terminus. In contrast, relaxin-3 and INSL5 interact with another class of type I GPCRs which lack a large ectodomain, the peptide receptors GPCR135 and GPCR142, respectively. These receptors are now classified as relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors, RXFP1 (LGR7), RXFP2 (LGR8), RXFP3 (GPCR135) and RXFP4 (GPCR142). This review outlines the identification of the peptides and receptors, their expression profiles and physiological roles and the functional interactions of the peptides with their unique receptors.
Insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5) is a newly discovered gut hormone expressed in colonic enteroendocrine L-cells but little is known about its biological function. Here, we show using RT-qPCR and in situ hybridisation that Insl5 mRNA is highly expressed in the mouse colonic mucosa, colocalised with proglucagon immunoreactivity. In comparison, mRNA for RXFP4 (the cognate receptor for INSL5) is expressed in various mouse tissues, including the intestinal tract. We show that the human enteroendocrine L-cell model NCI-H716 cell line, and goblet-like colorectal cell lines SW1463 and LS513 endogenously express RXFP4. Stimulation of NCI-H716 cells with INSL5 produced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 (Thr(202)/Tyr(204)), AKT (Thr(308) and Ser(473)) and S6RP (Ser(235/236)) and inhibited cAMP production but did not stimulate Ca(2+) release. Acute INSL5 treatment had no effect on GLP-1 secretion mediated by carbachol or insulin, but modestly inhibited forskolin-stimulated GLP-1 secretion in NCI-H716 cells. However, chronic INSL5 pre-treatment (18 h) increased basal GLP-1 secretion and prevented the inhibitory effect of acute INSL5 administration. LS513 cells were found to be unresponsive to INSL5 despite expressing RXFP4 Another enteroendocrine L-cell model, mouse GLUTag cells did not express detectable levels of Rxfp4 and were unresponsive to INSL5. This study provides novel insights into possible autocrine/paracrine roles of INSL5 in the intestinal tract.
Although the hormone relaxin was discovered 80 years ago, only in the past 5 years have the receptors for relaxin and three other receptors that respond to related peptides been identified with all four receptors being G-protein-coupled receptors. In this review it is suggested that the receptors for relaxin (LGR7) and those for the related peptides insulin-like peptide 3 (LGR8), relaxin-3 (GPCR135), and insulin-like peptide 5 (LGPCR142) be named the relaxin family peptide receptors 1 through 4 (RXFP1-4). RXFP1 and RXFP2 are leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein-coupled receptors with complex binding characteristics involving both the large ectodomain and the transmembrane loops. RXFP1 activates adenylate cyclase, protein kinase A, protein kinase C, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and extracellular signaling regulated kinase (Erk1/2) and also interacts with nitric oxide signaling. RXFP2 activates adenylate cyclase in recombinant systems, but physiological responses are sensitive to pertussis toxin. RXFP3 and RXFP4 resemble more conventional peptide liganded receptors and both inhibit adenylate cyclase, and in addition RXFP3 activates Erk1/2 signaling. Physiological studies and examination of the phenotypes of transgenic mice have established that relaxin has roles as a reproductive hormone involved in uterine relaxation (some species), reproductive tissue growth, and collagen remodeling but also in the cardiovascular and renal systems and in the brain. The connective tissue remodeling properties of relaxin acting at RXFP1 receptors have potential for the development of agents effective for the treatment of cardiac and renal fibrosis, asthma, and scleroderma and for orthodontic remodelling. Agents acting at RXFP2 receptors may be useful for the treatment of cryptorchidism and infertility, whereas antagonists may be used as contraceptives. The brain distribution of RXFP3 receptors suggests that actions at these receptors have the potential for the development of antianxiety and antiobesity drugs.
Human relaxin-2 (hereafter simply defined as "relaxin") is a 6-kDa peptidic hormone best known for the physiological role played during pregnancy in the growth and differentiation of the reproductive tract and in the renal and systemic hemodynamic changes. This factor can also be involved in the pathophysiology of arterial hypertension and heart failure, in the molecular pathways of fibrosis and cancer, and in angiogenesis and bone remodeling. It belongs to the relaxin peptide family, whose members comprehensively exert numerous effects through interaction with different types of receptors, classified as relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors (RXFP1, RXFP2, RXFP3, RXFP4). Research looks toward the in-depth examination and complete understanding of relaxin in its various pleiotropic actions. The intent is to evaluate the likelihood of employing this substance for therapeutic purposes, for instance in diseases where a deficit could be part of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms, also avoiding any adverse effect. Relaxin is already being considered as a promising drug, especially in acute heart failure. A careful study of the different RXFPs and their receptors and the comprehension of all biological activities of these hormones will probably provide new drugs with a potential wide range of therapeutic applications in the near future.
Human insulin-like peptide 5 (INSL5) is a gut hormone produced by colonic L-cells, and its biological functions are mediated by Relaxin Family Peptide Receptor 4 (RXFP4). Our preliminary data indicated that RXFP4 agonists are potential drug leads for the treatment of constipation. More recently, we designed and developed a novel RXFP4 antagonist, A13-nR that was shown to block agonist-induced activity in cells and animal models. We showed that A13-nR was able to block agonist-induced increases in colon motility in mice of both genders that express the receptor, RXFP4. Our data also showed that colorectal propulsion induced by intracolonic administration of short-chain fatty acids was antagonized by A13-nR. Therefore, A13-nR is an important research tool and potential drug lead for the treatment of colon motility disorders, such as bacterial diarrhea. However, A13-nR acted as a partial agonist at high concentrations in vitro and demonstrated modest antagonist potency ( approximately 35 nM). Consequently, the primary objective of this study is to pinpoint novel modifications to A13-nR that eliminate partial agonist effects while preserving or augmenting antagonist potency. In this work, we detail the creation of a series of A13-nR-modified analogues, among which analogues 3, 4, and 6 demonstrated significantly improved RXFP4 affinity ( approximately 3 nM) with reduced partial agonist activity, enhanced antagonist potency ( approximately 10 nM) and maximum agonist inhibition ( approximately 80 %) when compared with A13-nR. These compounds have potential as candidates for further preclinical evaluations, marking a significant stride toward innovative therapeutics for colon motility disorders.
Relaxin, insulin-like peptide 3 (INSL3), relaxin-3, and INSL5 are the cognate ligands for the relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors 1-4, respectively. RXFP1 activates pleiotropic signaling pathways including the signalosome protein complex that facilitates high-sensitivity signaling; coupling to Galpha(s), Galpha(i), and Galpha(o) proteins; interaction with glucocorticoid receptors; and the formation of hetero-oligomers with distinctive pharmacological properties. In addition to relaxin-related ligands, RXFP1 is activated by Clq-tumor necrosis factor-related protein 8 and by small-molecular-weight agonists, such as ML290 [2-isopropoxy-N-(2-(3-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)phenylcarbamoyl)phenyl)benzamide], that act allosterically. RXFP2 activates only the Galpha(s)- and Galpha(o)-coupled pathways. Relaxin-3 is primarily a neuropeptide, and its cognate receptor RXFP3 is a target for the treatment of depression, anxiety, and autism. A variety of peptide agonists, antagonists, biased agonists, and an allosteric modulator target RXFP3. Both RXFP3 and the related RXFP4 couple to Galpha(i)/Galpha(o) proteins. INSL5 has the properties of an incretin; it is secreted from the gut and is orexigenic. The expression of RXFP4 in gut, adipose tissue, and beta-islets together with compromised glucose tolerance in INSL5 or RXFP4 knockout mice suggests a metabolic role. This review focuses on the many advances in our understanding of RXFP receptors in the last 5 years, their signal transduction mechanisms, the development of novel compounds that target RXFP1-4, the challenges facing the field, and current prospects for new therapeutics.
