Relaxin-3 receptor 1; Receptor for RNL3/relaxin-3. Binding of the ligand inhibit cAMP accumulation.
Relaxin-3 is a member of a superfamily of structurally-related peptides that includes relaxin and insulin-like peptide hormones. Soon after the discovery of the relaxin-3 gene, relaxin-3 was identified as an abundant neuropeptide in brain with a distinctive topographical distribution within a small number of GABAergic neuron populations that is well conserved across species. Relaxin-3 is thought to exert its biological actions through a single class-A GPCR - relaxin-family peptide receptor 3 (RXFP3). Class-A comprises GPCRs for relaxin-3 and insulin-like peptide-5 and other peptides such as orexin and the monoamine transmitters. The RXFP3 receptor is selectively activated by relaxin-3, whereas insulin-like peptide-5 is the cognate ligand for the related RXFP4 receptor. Anatomical and pharmacological evidence obtained over the last decade supports a function of relaxin-3/RXFP3 systems in modulating responses to stress, anxiety-related and motivated behaviours, circadian rhythms, and learning and memory. Electrophysiological studies have identified the ability of RXFP3 agonists to directly hyperpolarise thalamic neurons in vitro, but there are no reports of direct cell signalling effects in vivo. This article provides an overview of earlier studies and highlights more recent research that implicates relaxin-3/RXFP3 neural network signalling in the integration of arousal, motivation, emotion and related cognition, and that has begun to identify the associated neural substrates and mechanisms. Future research directions to better elucidate the connectivity and function of different relaxin-3 neuron populations and their RXFP3-positive target neurons in major experimental species and humans are also identified. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Recent Progress in the Understanding of Relaxin Family Peptides and their Receptors. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v174.10/issuetoc.
The nucleus incertus (NI) in the pontine tegmentum sends ascending projections to the midbrain, hypothalamus, amygdala, basal forebrain, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex, and has a postulated role in modulating several forebrain functions. A substantial population of GABAergic NI neurons expresses the neuropeptide, relaxin-3, which acts via the G(i/o) -protein-coupled receptor, RXFP3, present throughout the forebrain target regions. Broad and specific manipulations of these systems by activation or inhibition of the NI or modulating RXFP3 signaling have revealed key insights into the likely influence of the NI/relaxin-3/RXFP3 system on modalities including arousal, feeding, stress responses, anxiety and addiction, and attention and memory. This range of actions corresponds to a likely impact of NI/(relaxin-3) projections on multiple integrated circuits, but makes it difficult to draw conclusions about a generalized function for this network. This review will focus on the key physiological process of oscillatory theta rhythm and the neural circuits that promote it during behavioral activation, highlighting the ability of NI and relaxin-3/RXFP3 signaling systems to modulate these circuits. A better understanding of these mechanisms may provide a way to therapeutically adjust malfunction of forebrain activity present in several pathological conditions.
INTRODUCTION: The neuropeptide relaxin-3/RXFP3 system belongs to the relaxin/insulin superfamily and is involved in many important physiological processes, such as stress responses, appetite control, and motivation for reward. Although relaxin-3 is the endogenous agonist for RXFP3, it can also bind to and activate RXFP1 and RXFP4. Consequently, research has been focused on the development of RXFP3-specific peptides and small-molecule ligands to validate the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system as a novel drug target. AREAS COVERED: This review provides an overview of patents on the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system covering ligand development and pharmacological studies since 2003. Related patents and literature reports were obtained from established sources including SciFinder, Google Patents, and Espacenet for patents and SciFinder, PubMed, and Google Scholar for literature reports. EXPERT OPINION: There has been an increasing amount of patent activities around relaxin-3/RXFP3, highlighting the importance of this novel neuropeptide system for drug discovery. The development of relaxin-3 derived peptides and small-molecule modulators, as well as behavioral studies in rodents, have shown that the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system is a promising drug target for treating various metabolic and neuropsychiatric diseases including obesity, anxiety, and alcohol addiction.
Relaxin family peptides perform a variety of biological functions by activating four G protein-coupled receptors, namely RXFP1-4. Among these receptors, RXFP3 lacks a specific natural or synthetic agonist at present. A previously designed chimeric R3/I5 peptide, consisting of the B-chain of relaxin-3 and the A-chain of INSL5, displays equal activity towards the homologous RXFP3 and RXFP4. To increase its selectivity towards RXFP3, in the present study we conducted extensive mutagenesis around the B-chain C-terminal region of R3/I5. Decreasing or increasing the peptide length around the B23-B25 position dramatically lowered the activation potency of R3/I5 towards both RXFP3 and RXFP4. Substitution of B23Gly with Ala or Ser converted R3/I5 from an efficient agonist to a strong antagonist for RXFP3, but the mutants retained considerable activation potency towards RXFP4. Substitution of B24Gly increased the selectivity of R3/I5 towards RXFP3 over the homologous RXFP4. The best mutant, [G(B24)S]R3/I5, displayed 20-fold higher activation potency towards RXFP3 than towards RXFP4, meanwhile retained full activation potency at RXFP3. Thus, [G(B24)S]R3/I5 is the best RXFP3-selective agonist known to date. It is a valuable tool for investigating the physiological functions of RXFP3, and also a suitable template for developing RXFP3-specific agonists in future.
There are seven relaxin family peptides that are all structurally related to insulin. Relaxin has many roles in female and male reproduction, as a neuropeptide in the central nervous system, as a vasodilator and cardiac stimulant in the cardiovascular system, and as an antifibrotic agent. Insulin-like peptide-3 (INSL3) has clearly defined specialist roles in male and female reproduction, relaxin-3 is primarily a neuropeptide involved in stress and metabolic control, and INSL5 is widely distributed particularly in the gastrointestinal tract. Although they are structurally related to insulin, the relaxin family peptides produce their physiological effects by activating a group of four G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), relaxin family peptide receptors 1-4 (RXFP1-4). Relaxin and INSL3 are the cognate ligands for RXFP1 and RXFP2, respectively, that are leucine-rich repeat containing GPCRs. RXFP1 activates a wide spectrum of signaling pathways to generate second messengers that include cAMP and nitric oxide, whereas RXFP2 activates a subset of these pathways. Relaxin-3 and INSL5 are the cognate ligands for RXFP3 and RXFP4 that are closely related to small peptide receptors that when activated inhibit cAMP production and activate MAP kinases. Although there are still many unanswered questions regarding the mode of action of relaxin family peptides, it is clear that they have important physiological roles that could be exploited for therapeutic benefit.
Insulin-like peptide 7 (INSL7) or relaxin-3 is a member of the insulin superfamily that is recently discovered. This hormone interacts with relaxin family peptide receptor 3 (RXFP3). Although recent studies of INSL7 have focused on its function in the brain as a neuropeptide, spermatozoa may be a candidate target of INSL7 due to its detection in testes and contains binding sites. Therefore, this study aims to analyse the expression and localisation of RXFP3 on human spermatozoa and to assess the effect of INSL7 on human sperm motility. We have incubated normal semen samples in different doses of INSL7. Sperm motility was analysed by Computer Assisted Sperm Analysis. Moreover, localisation and expression of RXFP3 were assessed in human spermatozoa by immunofluorescence and RT-PCR respectively. This study indicated that RXFP3 mainly localised in the post-acrosomal region of sperm head and neck. However, we did not observe expression of RXFP3 mRNA in human spermatozoa. This study showed that INSL7 alleviated the natural decline in sperm motility after a 4-hr incubation period. This was particularly observed in the 1.8 pmol/L treated samples. These data suggested that most likely expression of RXFP3 arrested in spermiogenesis, but the RXFP3 peptide existed on the surface of mature spermatozoa.
The relaxin-3/RXFP3 system is one of several neuropeptidergic systems putatively implicated in regulating the behavioural alterations that characterise clinical depression and anxiety, making it a potential target for clinical translation. Accordingly, this systematic review identified published reports on the role of relaxin-3/RXFP3 signalling in these neuropsychiatric disorders and their behavioural endophenotypes, evaluating evidence from animal and human studies to ascertain any relationship. We searched PubMed, EMBASE, PsycINFO and Google Scholar databases up to February 2021, finding 609 relevant records. After stringent screening, 51 of these studies were included in the final synthesis. There was considerable heterogeneity in study designs and some inconsistency across study outcomes. However, experimental evidence is consistent with an ability of relaxin-3/RXFP3 signalling to promote arousal and suppress depressive- and anxiety-like behaviour. Moreover, meta-analyses of six to eight articles investigating food intake revealed that acute RXFP3 activation had strong orexigenic effects in rats. This appraisal also identified the lack of high-quality clinical studies pertinent to the relaxin-3/RXFP3 system, a gap that future research should attempt to bridge.
Relaxin-3 (RLN3) and its native receptor, relaxin family peptide 3 receptor (RXFP3), constitute a newly identified neuropeptide system enriched in mammalian brain. The distribution of RLN3/RXFP3 networks in rat brain and recent experimental studies suggest a role for this system in modulation of arousal, stress, metabolism, and cognition. In order to facilitate exploration of the biology of RLN3/RXFP3 in complementary murine models, this study mapped the neuroanatomical distribution of the RLN3/RXFP3 system in mouse brain. Adult, male wildtype and RLN3 knock-out (KO)/LacZ knock-in (KI) mice were used to map the central distribution of RLN3 gene expression and RLN3-like immunoreactivity (-LI). The distribution of RXFP3 mRNA and protein was determined using [(35)S]-oligonucleotide probes and a radiolabeled RXFP3-selective agonist ([(125)I]-R3/I5), respectively. High densities of neurons expressing RLN3 mRNA, RLN3-associated beta-galactosidase activity and RLN3-LI were detected in the nucleus incertus (or nucleus O), while smaller populations of positive neurons were observed in the pontine raphe, the periaqueductal gray and a region adjacent to the lateral substantia nigra. RLN3-LI was observed in nerve fibers/terminals in nucleus incertus and broadly throughout the pons, midbrain, hypothalamus, thalamus, septum, hippocampus, and neocortex, but was absent in RLN3 KO/LacZ KI mice. This RLN3 neural network overlapped the regional distribution of RXFP3 mRNA and [(125)I]-R3/I5 binding sites in wildtype and RLN3 KO/LacZ KI mice. These findings provide further evidence for the conserved nature of RLN3/RXFP3 systems in mammalian brain and the ability of RLN3/RXFP3 signaling to modulate "behavioral state" and an array of circuits involved in arousal, stress responses, affective state, and cognition.
The relaxin-3 gene was identified in 2001 by searching the human genome database for homologues of the relaxin hormone, and was subsequently discovered to encode a highly conserved neuropeptide in mammals and lower species. In the decade since its discovery there have been significant advances in our knowledge of the peptide, including the identification of its cognate receptor (a type 1 G-protein coupled receptor, GPCR135 or RXFP3), an understanding of its structure-activity and associated cellular signalling, and the elucidation of key neuroanatomical aspects of relaxin-3/RXFP3 networks in mammalian brain. The latter studies revealed that relaxin-3 is expressed within GABA neurons of the brainstem including an area known as the nucleus incertus, and that ascending relaxin-3 projections innervate a broad range of RXFP3-rich forebrain areas. These maps provided a foundation for pharmacological and physiological studies to elucidate the neurobiological nature of relaxin-3/RXFP3 signalling in vivo. Recent findings from our laboratory and others suggest the relaxin-3 neural network represents a newly identified ascending arousal system, able to modulate a range of interrelated functions including responses to stress, spatial and emotional memory, feeding and metabolism, motivation and reward, and circadian rhythm and sleep/wake states. More research is now required to discover further important facts about relaxin-3 neurons, such as their various regulatory inputs, and to characterise populations of RXFP3-positive neurons and determine their influence on particular neural circuits, physiology and complex behaviour.
The central relaxin-3/RXFP3 system plays important roles in stress responses, feeding, and motivation for reward. However, exploration of its therapeutic applications has been hampered by the lack of small molecule ligands and the cross-activation of RXFP1 in the brain and RXFP4 in the periphery. Herein, we report the first structure-activity relationship studies of a series of novel nonpeptide amidinohydrazone-based agonists, which were characterized by RXFP3 functional and radioligand binding assays. Several potent and efficacious RXFP3 agonists (e.g., 10d) were identified with EC(50) values <10 nM. These compounds also had high potency at RXFP4 but no agonist activity at RXFP1, demonstrating > 100-fold selectivity for RXFP3/4 over RXFP1. In vitro ADME and pharmacokinetic assessments revealed that the amidinohydrazone derivatives may have limited brain permeability. Collectively, our findings provide the basis for further optimization of lead compounds to develop a suitable agonist to probe RXFP3 functions in the brain.
Recent studies have identified four receptors that are the physiological targets for relaxin family peptides. All are class I (rhodopsin like) G-protein-coupled receptors with LGR7 (RXFP1) and LGR8 (RXFP2) being type C leucine-rich repeat-containing receptors, whereas GPCR135 (RXFP3) and GPCR142 (RXFP4) resemble receptors that respond to small peptides such as somatostatin and angiotensin II. The cognate ligands for the receptors have been identified: relaxin for RXFP1; INSL3 for RXFP2; relaxin 3 for RXFP3 and INSL5 for RXFP4. RXFP1 and RXFP2 receptors produce increases in intracellular cAMP levels upon stimulation, although the response is complex and contains a component sensitive to PI-3-kinase inhibitors. There is also evidence that RXFP1 can activate Erk1/2 and nitric oxide synthase, and relaxin has been reported to enter cells and activate glucocorticoid receptors. In contrast, RXFP3 and RXFP4 couple to Gi by a pertussis toxin-sensitive mechanism to cause inhibition of cAMP production. Now that the receptors for relaxin family peptides and their cognate ligands have been identified, we suggest a nomenclature for both the peptides and the receptors that we hope will be helpful to researchers in this rapidly advancing field.
Peptides and peptidomimetics are attractive drug candidates because of their high target specificity and low-toxicity profiles. Developing peptidomimetics using hydrocarbon (HC)-stapling or other stapling strategies has gained momentum because of their high stability and resistance to proteases; however, they have limitations. Here, we take advantage of the alpha-methyl group and an aromatic phenyl ring in a unique unnatural amino acid, alpha-methyl-l-phenylalanine (alphaF), and propose a novel, noncovalent stapling strategy to stabilize peptides. We utilized this strategy to create an alpha-helical B-chain mimetic of a complex insulin-like peptide, human relaxin-3 (H3 relaxin). Our comprehensive data set (in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo) confirmed that the new high-yielding B-chain mimetic, H3B10-27(13/17alphaF), is remarkably stable in serum and fully mimics the biological function of H3 relaxin. H3B10-27(13/17alphaF) is an excellent scaffold for further development as a drug lead and an important tool to decipher the physiological functions of the neuropeptide G protein-coupled receptor, RXFP3.
The receptors for members of the relaxin peptide family have only recently been discovered and are G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Relaxin and insulin-like peptide 3 (INSL3) interact with the leucine-rich-repeat-containing GPCRs (LGRs) LGR7 and LGR8, respectively. These receptors show closest similarity to the glycoprotein hormone receptors and contain large ectodomains with 10 leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) but are unique members of the LGR family (class C) as they have an LDL class A (LDLa) module at their N-terminus. In contrast, relaxin-3 and INSL5 interact with another class of type I GPCRs which lack a large ectodomain, the peptide receptors GPCR135 and GPCR142, respectively. These receptors are now classified as relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors, RXFP1 (LGR7), RXFP2 (LGR8), RXFP3 (GPCR135) and RXFP4 (GPCR142). This review outlines the identification of the peptides and receptors, their expression profiles and physiological roles and the functional interactions of the peptides with their unique receptors.
Human relaxin-2 (hereafter simply defined as "relaxin") is a 6-kDa peptidic hormone best known for the physiological role played during pregnancy in the growth and differentiation of the reproductive tract and in the renal and systemic hemodynamic changes. This factor can also be involved in the pathophysiology of arterial hypertension and heart failure, in the molecular pathways of fibrosis and cancer, and in angiogenesis and bone remodeling. It belongs to the relaxin peptide family, whose members comprehensively exert numerous effects through interaction with different types of receptors, classified as relaxin family peptide (RXFP) receptors (RXFP1, RXFP2, RXFP3, RXFP4). Research looks toward the in-depth examination and complete understanding of relaxin in its various pleiotropic actions. The intent is to evaluate the likelihood of employing this substance for therapeutic purposes, for instance in diseases where a deficit could be part of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms, also avoiding any adverse effect. Relaxin is already being considered as a promising drug, especially in acute heart failure. A careful study of the different RXFPs and their receptors and the comprehension of all biological activities of these hormones will probably provide new drugs with a potential wide range of therapeutic applications in the near future.
Relaxin-3 has been proposed to modulate emotional-behavioural functions such as arousal and behavioural activation, appetite regulation, stress responses, anxiety, memory, sleep and circadian rhythm. The nucleus incertus (NI), in the midline tegmentum close to the fourth ventricle, projects widely throughout the brain and is the primary site of relaxin-3 neurons. Over recent years, a number of preclinical studies have explored the function of the NI and relaxin-3 signalling, including reports of mRNA or peptide expression changes in the NI in response to behavioural or pharmacological manipulations, effects of lesions or electrical or pharmacological manipulations of the NI, effects of central microinfusions of relaxin-3 or related agonist or antagonist ligands on physiology and behaviour, and the impact of relaxin-3 gene deletion or knockdown. Although these individual studies reveal facets of the likely functional relevance of the NI and relaxin-3 systems for human physiology and behaviour, the differences observed in responses between species (e.g. rat vs. mouse), the clearly identified heterogeneity of NI neurons and procedural differences between laboratories are some of the factors that have prevented a precise understanding of their function. This review aims to draw attention to the current preclinical evidence available that suggests the relevance of the NI/relaxin-3 system to the pathology and/or symptoms of certain neuropsychiatric disorders and to provide cognizant directions for future research to effectively and efficiently uncover its therapeutic potential. LINKED ARTICLES: This article is part of a themed section on Recent Progress in the Understanding of Relaxin Family Peptides and their Receptors. To view the other articles in this section visit http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/bph.v174.10/issuetoc.
Relaxin family peptide receptors (RXFPs) are the potential therapeutic targets for neurological, cardiovascular, and metabolic indications. Among them, RXFP3 and RXFP4 (formerly known as GPR100 or GPCR142) are homologous class A G protein-coupled receptors with short N-terminal domain. Ligands of RXFP3 or RXFP4 are only limited to endogenous peptides and their analogues, and no natural product or synthetic agonists have been reported to date except for a scaffold of indole-containing derivatives as dual agonists of RXFP3 and RXFP4. In this study, a new scaffold of tricyclic derivatives represented by compound 7a was disclosed as a selective RXFP4 agonist after a high-throughput screening campaign against a diverse library of 52,000 synthetic and natural compounds. Two rounds of structural modification around this scaffold were performed focusing on three parts: 2-chlorophenyl group, 4-hydroxylphenyl group and its skeleton including cyclohexane-1,3-dione and 1,2,4-triazole group. Compound 14b with a new skeleton of 7,9-dihydro-4H-thiopyrano[3,4-d][1,2,4]triazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidin-8(5H)-one was thus obtained. The enantiomers of 7a and 14b were also resolved with their 9-(S)-conformer favoring RXFP4 agonism. Compared with 7a, compound 9-(S)-14b exhibited 2.3-fold higher efficacy and better selectivity for RXFP4 (selective ratio of RXFP4 vs. RXFP3 for 9-(S)-14b and 7a were 26.9 and 13.9, respectively).
Relaxin-3 or insulin-like peptide 7 (INSL7) is the most recently discovered relaxin/insulin-like family peptide. Mature relaxin-3 consists of an A chain and a B chain held by disulphide bonds. According to structure activity relationship studies, the relaxin-3 B chain is more important in binding and activating the receptor. RXFP3 (also known as Relaxin-3 receptor 1, GPCR 135, somatostatin- and angiotensin- like peptide receptor or SALPR) was identified as the cognate receptor for relaxin-3 by expression profiles and binding studies. Recent studies imply roles of this system in mediating stress and anxiety, feeding, metabolism and cognition. Stapling of peptides is a technique used to develop peptide drugs for otherwise undruggable targets. The main advantages of stapling include, increased activity due to reduced proteolysis, increased affinity to receptors and increased cell permeability. Stable agonists and antagonists of RXFP3 are crucial for understanding the physiological significance of this system. So far, agonists and antagonists of RXFP3 are peptides. In this study, for the first time, we have introduced stapling of the relaxin-3 B chain at 14th and 18th positions (14s18) and 18th and 22nd position (18s22). These stapled peptides showed greater helicity than the unstapled relaxin-3 B chain in circular dichroism analysis. Both stapled peptides bound RXFP3 and activated RXFP3 as observed in an inhibition of forskolin-induced cAMP assay and a ERK1/2 activation assay, although with different potencies. Therefore, we conclude that stapling of the relaxin3 B chain does not compromise its ability to activate RXFP3 and is a promising method for developing stable peptide agonists and antagonists of RXFP3 to aid relaxin-3/RXFP3 research.
DNA damage response (DDR) processes, often caused by oxidative stress, are important in aging and -related disorders. We recently showed that G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinase interacting protein 2 (GIT2) plays a key role in both DNA damage and oxidative stress. Multiple tissue analyses in GIT2KO mice demonstrated that GIT2 expression affects the GPCR relaxin family peptide 3 receptor (RXFP3), and is thus a therapeutically-targetable system. RXFP3 and GIT2 play similar roles in metabolic aging processes. Gaining a detailed understanding of the RXFP3-GIT2 functional relationship could aid the development of novel anti-aging therapies. We determined the connection between RXFP3 and GIT2 by investigating the role of RXFP3 in oxidative stress and DDR. Analyzing the effects of oxidizing (H(2)O(2)) and DNA-damaging (camptothecin) stressors on the interacting partners of RXFP3 using Affinity Purification-Mass Spectrometry, we found multiple proteins linked to DDR and cell cycle control. RXFP3 expression increased in response to DNA damage, overexpression, and Relaxin 3-mediated stimulation of RXFP3 reduced phosphorylation of DNA damage marker H2AX, and repair protein BRCA1, moderating DNA damage. Our data suggests an RXFP3-GIT2 system that could regulate cellular degradation after DNA damage, and could be a novel mechanism for mitigating the rate of age-related damage accumulation.
