Ryanodine receptor 1; Calcium channel that mediates the release of Ca(2+) from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytoplasm and thereby plays a key role in triggering muscle contraction following depolarization of T-tubules. Repeated very high-level exercise increases the open probability of the channel and leads to Ca(2+) leaking into the cytoplasm. Can also mediate the release of Ca(2+) from intracellular stores in neurons, and may thereby promote prolonged Ca(2+) signaling in the brain. Required for normal embryonic development of muscle fibers and skeletal muscle. Required for nor [...] 
Ryanodine receptor type 1-related myopathies (RYR1-RM) are the most common class of congenital myopathies. Historically, RYR1-RM classification and diagnosis have been guided by histopathologic findings on muscle biopsy. Main histological subtypes of RYR1-RM include central core disease, multiminicore disease, core-rod myopathy, centronuclear myopathy, and congenital fiber-type disproportion. A range of RYR1-RM clinical phenotypes has also emerged more recently and includes King Denborough syndrome, RYR1 rhabdomyolysis-myalgia syndrome, atypical periodic paralysis, congenital neuromuscular disease with uniform type 1 fibers, and late-onset axial myopathy. This expansion of the RYR1-RM disease spectrum is due, in part, to implementation of next-generation sequencing methods, which include the entire RYR1 coding sequence rather than being restricted to hotspot regions. These methods enhance diagnostic capabilities, especially given historic limitations of histopathologic and clinical overlap across RYR1-RM. Both dominant and recessive modes of inheritance have been documented, with the latter typically associated with a more severe clinical phenotype. As with all congenital myopathies, no FDA-approved treatments exist to date. Here, we review histopathologic, clinical, imaging, and genetic diagnostic features of the main RYR1-RM subtypes. We also discuss the current state of treatments and focus on disease-modulating (nongenetic) therapeutic strategies under development for RYR1-RM. Finally, perspectives for future approaches to treatment development are broached.
RYR1 encodes the type 1 ryanodine receptor, an intracellular calcium release channel (RyR1) on the skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). Pathogenic RYR1 variations can destabilize RyR1 leading to calcium leak causing oxidative overload and myopathy. However, the effect of RyR1 leak has not been established in individuals with RYR1-related myopathies (RYR1-RM), a broad spectrum of rare neuromuscular disorders. We sought to determine whether RYR1-RM affected individuals exhibit pathologic, leaky RyR1 and whether variant location in the channel structure can predict pathogenicity. Skeletal muscle biopsies were obtained from 17 individuals with RYR1-RM. Mutant RyR1 from these individuals exhibited pathologic SR calcium leak and increased activity of calcium-activated proteases. The increased calcium leak and protease activity were normalized by ex-vivo treatment with S107, a RyR stabilizing Rycal molecule. Using the cryo-EM structure of RyR1 and a new dataset of > 2200 suspected RYR1-RM affected individuals we developed a method for assigning pathogenicity probabilities to RYR1 variants based on 3D co-localization of known pathogenic variants. This study provides the rationale for a clinical trial testing Rycals in RYR1-RM affected individuals and introduces a predictive tool for investigating the pathogenicity of RYR1 variants of uncertain significance.
The RYR1 gene encodes the skeletal muscle isoform ryanodine receptor and is fundamental to the process of excitation-contraction coupling and skeletal muscle calcium homeostasis. Mapping to chromosome 19q13.2, the gene comprises 106 exons and encodes a protein of 5,038 amino acids. Mutations in the gene have been found in association with several diseases: the pharmacogenetic disorder, malignant hyperthermia (MH); and three congenital myopathies, including central core disease (CCD), multiminicore disease (MmD), and in an isolated case of a congenital myopathy characterized on histology by cores and rods. The majority of gene mutations reported are missense changes identified in cases of MH and CCD. In vitro analysis has confirmed that alteration of normal calcium homeostasis is a functional consequence of some of these changes. Genotype-phenotype correlation studies performed using data from MH and CCD patients have also suggested that mutations may be associated with a range of disease severity phenotypes. This review aims to summarize the current understanding of RYR1 mutations reported in association with MH and CCD and the present viewpoint on the use of mutation data to aid clinical diagnosis of these conditions.
PURPOSE: As a ClinGen Expert Panel (EP) we set out to adapt the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)/Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) pathogenicity criteria for classification of RYR1 variants as related to autosomal dominantly inherited malignant hyperthermia (MH). METHODS: We specified ACMG/AMP criteria for variant classification for RYR1 and MH. Proposed rules were piloted on 84 variants. We applied quantitative evidence calibration for several criteria using likelihood ratios based on the Bayesian framework. RESULTS: Seven ACMG/AMP criteria were adopted without changes, nine were adopted with RYR1-specific modifications, and ten were dropped. The in silico (PP3 and BP4) and hotspot criteria (PM1) were evaluated quantitatively. REVEL gave an odds ratio (OR) of 23:1 for PP3 and 14:1 for BP4 using trichotomized cutoffs of >/=0.85 (pathogenic) and </=0.5 (benign). The PM1 hotspot criterion had an OR of 24:1. PP3 and PM1 were implemented at moderate strength. Applying the revised ACMG/AMP criteria to 44 recognized MH variants, 29 were classified as pathogenic, 13 as likely pathogenic, and 2 as variants of uncertain significance. CONCLUSION: Curation of these variants will facilitate classification of RYR1/MH genomic testing results, which is especially important for secondary findings analyses. Our approach to quantitatively calibrating criteria is generalizable to other variant curation expert panels.
BACKGROUND: RYR1 mutations are typically associated with core myopathies and are the most common overall cause of congenital myopathy. Dominant mutations are most often associated with central core disease and malignant hyperthermia, and genotype-phenotype patterns have emerged from the study of these mutations that have contributed to the understanding of disease pathogenesis. The recent availability of genetic testing for the entire RYR1 coding sequence has led to a dramatic expansion in the identification of recessive mutations in core myopathies and other congenital myopathies. To date, no clear patterns have been identified in these recessive mutations, though no systematic examination has yet been performed. METHODS: In this study, we investigated genotype-phenotype correlations in a large combined cohort of unpublished (n = 14) and previously reported (n = 92) recessive RYR1 cases. RESULTS: Overall examination of this cohort revealed nearly 50% of cases to be non-core myopathy related. Our most significant finding was that hypomorphic mutations (mutations expected to diminish RyR1 expression) were enriched in patients with severe clinical phenotypes. We also determined that hypomorphic mutations were more likely to be encountered in non-central core myopathies. With analysis of the location of non-hypomorphic mutations, we found that missense mutations were generally enriched in the MH/CCD hotspots and specifically enriched in the selectivity filter of the channel pore. CONCLUSIONS: These results support a hypothesis that loss of protein function is a key predictive disease parameter. In addition, they suggest that decreased RyR1 expression may dictate non-core related pathology though, data on protein expression was limited and should be confirmed in a larger cohort. Lastly, the results implicate abnormal ion conductance through the channel pore in the pathogenesis in recessive core myopathies. Overall, our findings represent a comprehensive analysis of genotype-phenotype associations in recessive RYR1-myopathies.
Core myopathies are clinically, pathologically, and genetically heterogeneous muscle diseases. Their onset and clinical severity are variable. Core myopathies are diagnosed by muscle biopsy showing focally reduced oxidative enzyme activity and can be pathologically divided into central core disease, multiminicore disease, dusty core disease, and core-rod myopathy. Although RYR1-related myopathy is the most common core myopathy, an increasing number of other causative genes have been reported, including SELENON, MYH2, MYH7, TTN, CCDC78, UNC45B, ACTN2, MEGF10, CFL2, KBTBD13, and TRIP4. Furthermore, the genes originally reported to cause nemaline myopathy, namely ACTA1, NEB, and TNNT1, have been recently associated with core-rod myopathy. Genetic analysis allows us to diagnose each core myopathy more accurately. In this review, we aim to provide up-to-date information about core myopathies.
Myopathies related to variations in the RYR1 gene are genetic diseases for which the therapeutic options are sparse, in part because of the very large size of the gene and protein, and of the distribution of variations all along the sequence. Taking advantage of the progress made in the gene therapy field, different approaches can be applied to the different genetic variations, either at the mRNA level or directly at the DNA level, specifically with the new gene editing tools. Some of those have already been tested in cellulo and/or in vivo, and for the development of the most innovative gene editing technology, inspiration can be sought in other genetic diseases.
RyRs are large homotetrameric proteins that are approximately 4/5 cytoplasmic and approximately 1/5 transmembrane and luminal in mass. Mutations in RyRs produce human disease and many of these disease-causing mutations are in the cytoplasmic domains. To elucidate the mechanisms of a disease and to develop interventions, it is crucial to determine how the alterations in the cytoplasmic domains communicate with the transmembrane pore of this channel. One of the major activators of all three RyR isoforms is Ca2+ and some of the disease-causing mutations are thought to alter the sensitivity of the channels to Ca2+ activation. This review examines the current state of structural understanding of the RyR channel activation.
Several morphological phenotypes have been associated to RYR1-recessive myopathies. We recharacterized the RYR1-recessive morphological spectrum by a large monocentric study performed on 54 muscle biopsies from a large cohort of 48 genetically confirmed patients, using histoenzymology, immunohistochemistry, and ultrastructural studies. We also analysed the level of RyR1 expression in patients' muscle biopsies. We defined "dusty cores" the irregular areas of myofibrillar disorganisation characterised by a reddish-purple granular material deposition with uneven oxidative stain and devoid of ATPase activity, which represent the characteristic lesion in muscle biopsy in 54% of patients. We named Dusty Core Disease (DuCD) the corresponding entity of congenital myopathy. Dusty cores had peculiar histological and ultrastructural characteristics compared to the other core diseases. DuCD muscle biopsies also showed nuclear centralization and type1 fibre predominance. Dusty cores were not observed in other core myopathies and centronuclear myopathies. The other morphological groups in our cohort of patients were: Central Core (CCD: 21%), Core-Rod (C&R:15%) and Type1 predominance "plus" (T1P+:10%). DuCD group was associated to an earlier disease onset, a more severe clinical phenotype and a lowest level of RyR1 expression in muscle, compared to the other groups. Variants located in the bridge solenoid and the pore domains were more frequent in DuCD patients. In conclusion, DuCD is the most frequent histopathological presentation of RYR1-recessive myopathies. Dusty cores represent the unifying morphological lesion among the DuCD pathology spectrum and are the morphological hallmark for the recessive form of disease.
This Review provides an update on ryanodine receptors (RyRs) and their role in human diseases of heart, muscle, and brain. Calcium (Ca2+) is a requisite second messenger in all living organisms. From C. elegans to mammals, Ca2+ is necessary for locomotion, bodily functions, and neural activity. However, too much of a good thing can be bad. Intracellular Ca2+ overload can result in loss of function and death. Intracellular Ca2+ release channels evolved to safely provide large, rapid Ca2+ signals without exposure to toxic extracellular Ca2+. RyRs are intracellular Ca2+ release channels present throughout the zoosphere. Over the past 35 years, our knowledge of RyRs has advanced to the level of atomic-resolution structures revealing their role in the mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of human disorders of heart, muscle, and brain. Stress-induced RyR-mediated intracellular Ca2+ leak in the heart can promote heart failure and cardiac arrhythmias. In skeletal muscle, RyR1 leak contributes to muscle weakness in inherited myopathies, to age-related loss of muscle function and cancer-associated muscle weakness, and to impaired muscle function in muscular dystrophies, including Duchenne. In the brain, leaky RyR channels contribute to cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease, posttraumatic stress disorder, and Huntington's disease. Novel therapeutics targeting dysfunctional RyRs are showing promise.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: RYR1-related myopathy (RYR1-RM) is a group of myopathies caused by mutations in the RYR1 gene, which encodes the ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1). This review discusses recent advances in the clinical features, pathology, pathogenesis, and therapeutics of RYR1-RM. RECENT FINDINGS: Although treatments such as salbutamol, pyridostigmine, and N-acetylcysteine have been explored as potential therapies for RYR1-RM, none have been conclusively proven to be effective. However, recent clinical trials of Rycal ARM210 in patients with RYR1-RM have shown promising results, including reduced fatigue and improved proximal muscle strength.Recent advances in three-dimensional structural analysis of RYR1 channels, facilitated by cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), have elucidated the distinct molecular mechanisms underlying RYR1 functionality. Additionally, high-throughput screening methods, including FRET-based and endoplasmic reticulum Ca 2+ -based assays, have been successful in identifying potential candidates for the treatment of RYR1-RM. SUMMARY: Recent advances in clinical and pathological understanding have provided new insights into RYR1-RM. Novel pathomechanisms elucidated by cryo-EM and rapid screening methods have led to the identification of several promising drug candidates. We are hopeful about the potential of Rycal, other new drugs, and gene therapy, offering a promising outlook for the future.
Ryanodine receptors (RyR) are intracellular Ca2+-permeable channels that provide the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release required for skeletal and cardiac muscle contractions. RyR1 underlies skeletal muscle contraction, and RyR2 fulfills this role in cardiac muscle. Over the past 20 years, numerous mutations in both RyR isoforms have been identified and linked to skeletal and cardiac diseases. Malignant hyperthermia, central core disease, and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia have been genetically linked to mutations in either RyR1 or RyR2. Thus, RyR channelopathies are both of interest because they cause significant human diseases and provide model systems that can be studied to elucidate important structure-function relationships of these ion channels.
Ryanodine receptors (RyR) are the Ca2+ release channels of sarcoplasmic reticulum that provide the majority of the [Ca2+] necessary to induce contraction of cardiac and skeletal muscle cells. In their cellular environment, RyRs are exquisitely regulated by a variety of cytosolic factors and accessory proteins so that their output signal (Ca2+) induces cell contraction without igniting signaling pathways that eventually lead to contractile dysfunction or pathological cellular remodeling. Here we review how dysfunction of RyRs, most commonly expressed as enhanced Ca2+ release at rest (skeletal muscle) or during diastole (cardiac muscle), appears to be the fundamental mechanism underlying several genetic or acquired syndromes. In skeletal muscle, malignant hyperthermia and central core disease result from point mutations in RYR1, the skeletal isoform of RyRs. In cardiac muscle, RYR2 mutations lead to catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and other cardiac arrhythmias. Lastly, an altered phosphorylation of the RyR2 protein may be involved in some forms of congestive heart failure.
INTRODUCTION: Congenital myopathies include many genetically distinct diseases which have in common the early appearance of symptoms and characteristic morphological findings. AIM: To resume clinical, pathological and genetic findings of the most frequent myopathies in this group. DEVELOPMENT: The most severe of these group is myotubular myopathy; affected boys die frequently in the neonatal period due to respiratory failure. The altered protein, myotubularin, is involved in the metabolism of PI3P. The gene mutated is in Xq28 and more than 140 different mutations have been reported. Centronuclear myopathy is a genetically heterogeneous group, most frequently recessive but sometimes dominant and with a variable clinical course; childhood and adolescent cases usually present facial weakness and ophthalmoplegia together with proximal weakness, while adult forms show symptoms similar to limb girdle dystrophies. The protein responsible of the disease as well as the genetic locus involved are still unknown. Central core disease (CCD) is a scarcely progressive disease frequently associated with skeletal malformations. The inheritance is usually dominant. CCD has an important association with malignant hyperthermia and both diseases share the same gene in 19q13, locus of the RYR1 gene which encodes the ryanodine receptor. Minicore myopathy is a recessive disorder which shows four different phenotypes, the most frequent being the 'classical' one, with axial weakness, scoliosis and severe respiratory insufficiency; some of these cases have mutations in the selenoprotein N gene. Other phenotype with slowly progressive weakness and hand atrophy has a homozygous mutation in the RYR1 gene. Nemaline myopathy shows four different clinical and genetic types according to the age of beginning of symptoms and the type of inheritance. Several different genes have been identified: TPM3 in 1q21, NEB in 2q21 22, ACTA1, TPM2 and TNNT1.
The ryanodine receptor (RyR) is one of the primary targets of commercial insecticides. The diamide insecticide family, including flubendiamide, chlorantraniliprole, cyantraniliprole, etc., targets insect RyRs and can be used to control a wide range of destructive agricultural pests. The diamide insecticides are highly selective against lepidopteran and coleopteran pests with relatively low toxicity for non-target species, such as mammals, fishes, and beneficial insects. However, recently mutations identified on insect RyRs have emerged and caused resistance in several major agricultural pests throughout different continents. This review paper summarizes the recent findings on the structure and function of insect RyRs as insecticide targets. Specifically, we examine the structures of RyRs from target and non-target species, which reveals the molecular basis for insecticide action and selectivity. We also examine the structural and functional changes of RyR caused by the resistance mutations. Finally, we examine the progress in RyR structure-based insecticide design and discuss how this might help the development of a new generation of green insecticides.
Type 1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1) is an intracellular Ca(2+) release channel on the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle, and it plays a central role in excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling. Mutations in RyR1 are implicated in various muscle diseases including malignant hyperthermia, central core disease, and myopathies. Currently, no specific treatment exists for most of these diseases. Recently, high-throughput screening (HTS) assays have been developed for identifying potential candidates for treating RyR-related muscle diseases. Currently, two different methods, namely a FRET-based assay and an endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-based assay, are available. These assays identified several compounds as novel RyR1 inhibitors. In addition, the development of a reconstituted platform permitted HTS assays for E-C coupling modulators. In this review, we will focus on recent progress in HTS assays and discuss future perspectives of these promising approaches.
Mutations in RYR1 encoding the ryanodine receptor (RyR) skeletal muscle isoform (RyR1) are a common cause of inherited neuromuscular disorders. Despite its expression in a wide range of tissues, non-skeletal muscle manifestations associated with RYR1 mutations have only been rarely reported. Here, we report three patients with a diagnosis of Central Core Disease (CCD), King-Denborough Syndrome (KDS) and Malignant Hyperthermia Susceptibility (MHS), respectively, who in addition to their (putative) RYR1-related disorder also developed symptoms and signs of acute pancreatitis. In two patients, episodes were recurrent, with severe multisystem involvement and sequelae. RyR1-mediated calcium signalling plays an important role in normal pancreatic function but has also been critically implicated in the pathophysiology of acute pancreatitis, particularly in bile acid- and ethanol-induced forms. Findings from relevant animal models indicate that pancreatic damage in these conditions may be ameliorated through administration of the specific RyR1 antagonist dantrolene and other compounds modifying pancreatic metabolism including calcium signalling. These observations suggest that patients with RYR1 gain-of-function variants may be at increased risk of developing acute pancreatitis, a condition which should therefore be considered in the health surveillance of such individuals.
BACKGROUND: Decreased ryanodine receptor type 1 (RyR1) protein levels are a well-described feature of recessive RYR1-related myopathies. The aim of the present study was twofold: (1) to determine whether RyR1 content is also decreased in other myopathies and (2) to investigate the mechanisms by which decreased RyR1 protein triggers muscular disorders. METHODS: We used publicly available datasets, muscles from human inflammatory and mitochondrial myopathies, an inducible muscle-specific RYR1 recessive mouse model and RyR1 knockdown in C2C12 muscle cells to measure RyR1 content and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress markers. Proteomics, lipidomics, molecular biology and transmission electron microscopy approaches were used to decipher the alterations associated with the reduction of RyR1 protein levels. RESULTS: RYR1 transcripts were reduced in muscle samples of patients suffering from necrotizing myopathy (P = 0.026), inclusion body myopathy (P = 0.003), polymyositis (P < 0.001) and juvenile dermatomyositis (P < 0.001) and in muscle samples of myotonic dystrophy type 2 (P < 0.001), presymptomatic (P < 0.001) and symptomatic (P < 0.001) Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Becker muscular dystrophy (P = 0.004) and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (P = 0.004). RyR1 protein content was also significantly decreased in inflammatory myopathy (-75%, P < 0.001) and mitochondrial myopathy (-71%, P < 0.001) muscles. Proteomics data showed that depletion of RyR1 protein in C2C12 myoblasts leads to myotubes recapitulating the common molecular alterations observed in myopathies. Mechanistically, RyR1 protein depletion reduces ER-mitochondria contact length (-26%, P < 0.001), Ca(2+) transfer to mitochondria (-48%, P = 0.002) and the mitophagy gene Parkinson protein 2 transcripts (P = 0.037) and induces mitochondrial accumulation (+99%, P = 0.005) and dysfunction (P < 0.001). This was associated to the accumulation of deleterious sphingolipid species. Our data showed increased levels of the ER stress marker chaperone-binding protein/glucose regulated protein 78, GRP78-Bip, in RyR1 knockdown myotubes (+45%, P = 0.046), in mouse RyR1 recessive muscles (+58%, P = 0.001) and in human inflammatory (+96%, P = 0.006) and mitochondrial (+64%, P = 0.049) myopathy muscles. This was accompanied by increased protein levels of the pro-apoptotic protein CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein, CHOP-DDIT3, in RyR1 knockdown myotubes (+27%, P < 0.001), mouse RyR1 recessive muscles (+63%, P = 0.009), human inflammatory (+50%, P = 0.038) and mitochondrial (+51%, P = 0.035) myopathy muscles. In publicly available datasets, the decrease in RYR1 content in myopathies was also associated to increased ER stress markers and RYR1 transcript levels are inversely correlated with ER stress markers in the control population. CONCLUSIONS: Decreased RyR1 is commonly observed in myopathies and associated to ER stress in vitro, in mouse muscle and in human myopathy muscles, suggesting a potent role of RyR1 depletion-induced ER stress in the pathogenesis of myopathies.
Ryanodine receptors (RyRs) are calcium release channels expressed in the sarcoendoplasmic reticula of many cell types including cardiac and skeletal muscle cells. In recent years Ca(2+) leak through RyRs has been implicated as a major contributor to the development of diseases including heart failure, muscle myopathies, Alzheimer's disease, and diabetes, making it an important therapeutic target. Recent mammalian RyR1 cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of multiple functional states have clarified longstanding questions including the architecture of the transmembrane (TM) pore and cytoplasmic domains, the location and architecture of the channel gate, ligand-binding sites, and the gating mechanism. As we advance toward complete models of RyRs this new information enables the determination of domain-domain interfaces and the location and structural effects of disease-causing RyR mutations.
RyR1 is an intracellular Ca(2+) channel important in excitable cells such as neurons and muscle fibers. Ca(2+) activates it at low concentrations and inhibits it at high concentrations. Mg(2+) is the main physiological RyR1 inhibitor, an effect that is overridden upon activation. Despite the significance of Mg(2+)-mediated inhibition, the molecular-level mechanisms remain unclear. In this work we determined two cryo-EM structures of RyR1 with Mg(2+) up to 2.8 A resolution, identifying multiple Mg(2+) binding sites. Mg(2+) inhibits at the known Ca(2+) activating site and we propose that the EF hand domain is an inhibitory divalent cation sensor. Both divalent cations bind to ATP within a crevice, contributing to the precise transmission of allosteric changes within the enormous channel protein. Notably, Mg(2+) inhibits RyR1 by interacting with the gating helices as validated by molecular dynamics. This structural insight enhances our understanding of how Mg(2+) inhibition is overcome during excitation.
