Prostaglandin D2 receptor 2; Receptor for prostaglandin D2 (PGD2). Coupled to the G(i)- protein. Receptor activation may result in pertussis toxin-sensitive decreases in cAMP levels and Ca(2+) mobilization. PI3K signaling is also implicated in mediating PTGDR2 effects. PGD2 induced receptor internalization. CRTH2 internalization can be regulated by diverse kinases such as, PKC, PKA, GRK2, GPRK5/GRK5 and GRK6. Receptor activation is responsible, at least in part, in immune regulation and allergic/inflammation responses.
Cancers have been associated with a diverse array of genomic alterations. To help mechanistically understand such alterations in breast-invasive carcinoma, we applied affinity purification-mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer (BC) proteins, with and without relevant mutations, across three human breast cell lines. These networks identify cancer-specific protein-protein interactions (PPIs), interconnected and enriched for common and rare cancer mutations, that are substantially rewired by the introduction of key BC mutations. Our analysis identified BPIFA1 and SCGB2A1 as PIK3CA-interacting proteins, which repress PI3K-AKT signaling, and uncovered USP28 and UBE2N as functionally relevant interactors of BRCA1. We also show that the protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit spinophilin interacts with and regulates dephosphorylation of BRCA1 to promote DNA double-strand break repair. Thus, PPI landscapes provide a powerful framework for mechanistically interpreting disease genomic data and can identify valuable therapeutic targets.
BACKGROUND: The current study aimed to identify potential diagnostic and prognostic gene biomarkers for colorectal cancer (CRC) based on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset. METHODS: Microarray data of gene expression profiles of CRC from GEO and RNA-sequencing dataset of CRC from TCGA were downloaded. After screening overlapping differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by R software, functional enrichment analyses of the DEGs were performed using the DAVID database. Then, the STRING database and Cytoscape were used to construct a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and identify hub genes. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were conducted to assess the diagnostic values of the hub genes. Cox proportional hazards regression was performed to screen the potential prognostic genes. Kaplan-Meier curve and the time-dependent ROC curve were used to assess the prognostic values of the potential prognostic genes for CRC patients. RESULTS: Integrated analysis of GEO and TCGA databases revealed 207 common DEGs in CRC. A PPI network consisted of 70 nodes and 170 edges were constructed and top 10 hub genes were identified. The area under curve (AUC) of the ROC curves of the hub genes were 0.900, 0.927, 0.869, 0.863, 0.980, 0.682, 0.903, 0.790, 0.995, and 0.989 for CCL19, CXCL1, CXCL5, CXCL11, CXCL12, GNG4, INSL5, NMU, PYY, and SST, respectively. A prognostic gene signature consisted of 9 genes including SLC4A4, NFE2L3, GLDN, PCOLCE2, TIMP1, CCL28, SCGB2A1, AXIN2, and MMP1 was constructed with a good performance in predicting overall survivals of CRC patients. The AUC of the time-dependent ROC curve was 0.741 for 5-year survival. CONCLUSION: The results in this study might provide some directive significance for further exploring the potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis prediction of CRC patients.
Immunomodulatory peptides, while exhibiting potential antimicrobial, antifungal, and/or antiviral properties, can play a role in stimulating or suppressing the immune system, especially in pathological conditions like breast cancer (BC). Thus, deregulation of these peptides may serve as an immunotherapeutic strategy to enhance the immune response. In this meta-analysis, we utilized single-cell RNA sequencing data and known therapeutic peptides to investigate the deregulation of these peptides in malignant versus normal human breast epithelial cells. We corroborated our findings at the chromatin level using ATAC-seq. Additionally, we assessed the protein levels in various BC cell lines. Moreover, our in-house drug repositioning approach was employed to identify potential drugs that could positively impact the relapse-free survival of BC patients. Considering significantly deregulated therapeutic peptides and their role in BC pathology, our approach aims to downregulate B2M and SLPI, while upregulating PIGR, DEFB1, LTF, CLU, S100A7, and SCGB2A1 in BC epithelial cells through our drug repositioning pipeline. Leveraging the LINCS L1000 database, we propose BRD-A06641369 for B2M downregulation and ST-4070043 and BRD-K97926541 for SLPI downregulation without negatively affecting the MHC complex as a significantly correlated pathway with these two genes. Furthermore, we have compiled a comprehensive list of drugs for the upregulation of other selected immunomodulatory peptides. Employing an immunotherapeutic approach by integrating our drug repositioning pipeline with single-cell analysis, we proposed potential drugs and drug targets to fortify the immune system against BC.
Despite the high global prevalence of dry eye syndrome (DES), the fundamental processes underlying this pathology remain largely unexplored. Therefore, this study endeavoured to investigate in-depth the tear proteome of DES patients employing the mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic strategies. Eighty patients were recruited and subdivided into three major DES subgroups, which are the aqueous-deficient (DRYaq), evaporative (DRYlip) and a combination of the two (DRYaqlip), as well as healthy subjects (CTRL). Discovery proteomics strategy was employed to identify large number of significantly differentially expressed tear proteins in DRYlip vs. CTRL, DRYaq vs. CTRL and DRYaqlip vs. CTRL with 22, 58 and 67 proteins, respectively. Biological functional analysis demonstrated for the first time that various metabolic processes were highly expressed in DRYaq and DRYaqlip, which might modulate various other known processes, especially the inflammatory and immune processes. Targeted proteomics strategy verified that 13 major proteins were differentially expressed in specific DES subgroups, comprising of PRR4, ZG16B, SCGB2A1, DMBT1, PROL1, LACRT, ALDH3A1, ENO1, TF, S100A8, S100A9, PEBP1 and ORM1. In conclusion, this study had explored in-depth the pathology of DES by unravelling various new fundamental processes and the major proteins responsible for the maintenance of tear film stability.
We recently showed that liver metastatic tissue from patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) was a useful model for identifying novel, hypoxia-inducible genes and prognostic markers. We showed that the expression of secretoglobin, family 2A, member 1 (SCGB2A1) was a potential prognostic factor for CRC. Here, we further evaluated the prognostic impact and function of SCGB2A1 in 222 patients with CRC. The impact of SCGB2A1 expression on disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) was assessed with mRNA expression profiling. The function of SCGB2A1 was analyzed by evaluating mRNA expression profiles in cells derived from patients with CRC and by testing the effects of transfecting SCGB2A1 into different CRC-derived cell lines. We evaluated the effects of SCGB2A1 on proliferation, chemosensitivity, radiation sensitivity and sphere formation. Univariate and multivariate analyses indicated that the expression of SCGB2A1 was an independent prognostic factor for CRC (p<0.05), together with lymph node metastasis (p<0.05). Enforced expression of SCGB2A1 in CRC-derived cell lines promoted proliferation (DLD1, SW480 and LoVo cells; p<0.05), decreased chemosensitivity to 5-fluorouracil and oxaliplatin (DLD1 and SW480 cell lines; p<0.05), and significantly increased the viability of irradiated cells (DLD1, SW480 and LoVo cell lines; p<0.05). SCGB2A1 expression was also correlated to cancer stemness-related genes (Wnt, Zeb1 and Twist). Consistent with this correlation, SCGB2A1 expressing cells (SW480) showed increased sphere formation (p<0.05). These results indicated that SCGB2A1 represented a novel, prognostic factor for CRC, and that expression of SCGB2A1 correlated with chemoresistance, radioresistance and cancer cell stemness.
PURPOSE: Ovarian carcinomas are a group of distinct diseases classified by histotypes. As histotype-specific treatment evolves, accurate classification will become critical for optimal precision medicine approaches. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To uncover differences between the two most common histotypes, high-grade serous (HGSC) and endometrioid carcinoma, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics on freshly frozen tumor tissues (HGSC, n = 10; endometrioid carcinoma, n = 10). Eight candidate protein biomarkers specific to endometrioid carcinoma were validated by IHC using tissue microarrays representing 361 cases of either endometrioid carcinoma or HGSC. RESULTS: More than 500 proteins were differentially expressed (P < 0.05) between endometrioid carcinoma and HGSC tumor proteomes. A ranked set of 106 proteins was sufficient to correctly discriminate 90% of samples. IHC validated KIAA1324 as the most discriminatory novel biomarker for endometrioid carcinoma. An 8-marker panel was found to exhibit superior performance for discriminating endometrioid carcinoma from HGSC compared with the current standard of WT1 plus TP53 alone, improving the classification rate for HGSC from 90.7% to 99.2%. Endometrioid carcinoma-specific diagnostic markers such as PLCB1, KIAA1324, and SCGB2A1 were also significantly associated with favorable prognosis within endometrioid carcinoma suggesting biological heterogeneity within this histotype. Pathway analysis of proteomic data revealed differences between endometrioid carcinoma and HGSC pertaining to estrogen and interferon signalling. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, these findings support the use of multi-marker panels for the differential diagnosis of difficult cases resembling endometrioid carcinoma and HGSC.
Like telomere shortening, global DNA hypomethylation occurs progressively with cellular divisions or in vivo aging and functions as a mitotic clock to restrain malignant transformation/progression. Several DNA-methylation (DNAm) age clocks have been established to precisely predict chronological age using normal tissues, but show DNAm age drift in tumors, which suggests disruption of this mitotic clock during carcinogenesis. Little is known about DNAm age alterations and biological/clinical implications in endometrial cancer (EC). Here we address these issues by analyzing TCGA and GSE67116 cohorts of ECs. Horvath clock analysis of these tumors unexpectedly revealed that almost 90% of them exhibited DNAm age deceleration (DNAmad) compared to patient chronological age. Combined with an additional clock named Phenoage, we identified a subset of tumors (82/429) with high DNAmad (hDNAmad+) as assessed by both clocks. Clinically, hDNAmad+ tumors were associated with advanced diseases and shorter patient survival, compared to hDNAmad- ones. Genetically, hDNAmad+ tumors were characterized by higher copy number alterations (CNAs) whereas lower tumor mutation burden. Functionally, hDNAmad+ tumors were enriched with cell cycle and DNA mismatch repair pathways. Increased PIK3CA alterations and downregulation of SCGB2A1, the inhibitor of PI3K kinase, in hDNAmad+ tumors, might promote tumor growth/proliferation and stemness. In addition, the inactivation of aging drivers/tumor suppressors (TP53, RB1, and CDKN2A) while enhanced telomere maintenance occurred more frequently in hDNAmad+ tumors, which supports sustained tumor growth. Prominently, hDNAmad+ tumors were featured with immunoexclusion microenvironments, accompanied by significantly higher levels of VTCN1 expression while lower PD-L1 and CTLA4 expression, which indicates their poor response to immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI)-based immunotherapy. We further showed significantly higher levels of DNMT3A and 3B expression in hDNAmad+ than in hDNAmad- tumors. Thus, the tumor suppressive function of aging-like DNA hypomethylation is severely impaired in hDNAmad+ tumors, likely due to enhanced expression of DNMT3A/3B and dysregulated aging regulators. Our findings not only enrich biological knowledge of EC pathogenesis but also help improve EC risk stratification and precision ICI immunotherapy.
BACKGROUND: Radiotherapy (RT) is an important means of local treatment of solid tumors, and radioresistance is the main reason for RT failure for tumors, especially pancreatic cancer (PC). It is urgent to distinguish key genes and mechanisms of radioresistance in PC. METHODS: We acquired the data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), obtained the gene modules associated with radioresistance by weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA), and identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between normal and tumor samples. Radioresistance-related genes (RRRGs) were determined with the intersection of WGCNA and DEGs. The hub RRRGs associated with prognosis were distinguished by the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression. We established a risk score model using multivariate Cox regression. Immune cell infiltration and drug sensitivity were evaluated through the CIBERSORT algorithm and the "OncoPredict" software package, respectively. The association of the key gene RIC3 and PC clinical features was verified in public databases, and its biological behaviors were explored in vitro. RESULTS: The intersection of DEGs and WGCNA confirmed 14 RRRGs, then six hub RRRGs were identified using LASSO. A key four genes (DUSP4, ADORA2B, SCGB2A1, and RIC3) risk score model was constructed and proved to be capable of independently estimating the prognosis of PC. There is no significant difference between risk score groups in various immune cell infiltration and response to immunotherapy. Although the low-risk group seemed to exhibit greater sensitivity to antitumor drugs, the four drugs (5-fluorouracil [5-FU], leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin) currently used for PC patients had no statistical difference for the low- and high- group. The overexpression of RIC3 had a synergy effect with irradiation on inhibited malignant biological properties of PC cells, which was verified by detecting the proliferation ability, apoptosis rate, cell cycle distribution, and migration ability of PANC-1 cells. CONCLUSIONS: We herein presented signature genes correlated with radioresistance in PC and established a risk score model competent in estimating patients' clinical outcomes and response to antitumor drugs. The above evidence could contribute to comprehending the mechanisms of radioresistance and identifying the underlying therapy targeting.
The development of distant metastases is the major cause of death from breast cancer. In order to predict and prevent tumour spreading, many attempts are being made to detect small numbers of tumour cells that have shed from the primary lesions and have moved to lymph nodes, blood or bone marrow. This article presents the advantages and the limitations of techniques used for disseminated tumour cells (DTC) detection. DTC markers are listed and the most currently used of them (KRT19, CEACAM5, TACSTD1, MUC1, EGFR, ERBB2, SCGB2A2, SCGB2A1, SCGB1D2, PIP, SBEM, TFF1, TFF3, ANKRD30A, SPDEF, ESR1, SERPINB5 and GABRP) are discussed, notably on the basis of recent data on breast tumour portraits (luminal epithelial-like, basal/myoepithelial-like and ERBB2). The significance of DTC for the prognosis and prediction of response to therapy is examined. DTC viability, the notion of cell dormancy and the concept of breast cancer stem cells are also discussed.
The request of high specificity and selectivity sensors suitable for mass production is a constant demand in medical research. For applications in point-of-care diagnostics and therapy, there is a high demand for low cost and rapid sensing platforms. This paper describes the fabrication and functionalization of gold electrodes arrays for the detection of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in printed circuit board (PCB) technology. The process can be implemented to produce efficiently a large number of biosensors. We report an electrolytic plating procedure to fabricate low-density gold microarrays on PCB suitable for electrochemical DNA detection in research fields such as cancer diagnostics or pharmacogenetics, where biosensors are usually targeted to detect a small number of genes. PCB technology allows producing high precision, fast and low cost microelectrodes. The surface of the microarray is functionalized with self-assembled monolayers of mercaptoundodecanoic acid or thiolated DNA. The PCB microarray is tested by cyclic voltammetry in presence of 5 mM of the redox probe K3Fe(CN6) in 0.1 M KCl. The voltammograms prove the correct immobilization of both the alkanethiol systems. The sensor is tested for detecting relevant markers for breast cancer. Results for 5 nM of the target TACSTD1 against the complementary TACSTD1 and non-complementary GRP, MYC, SCGB2A1, SCGB2A2, TOP2A probes show a remarkable detection limit of 0.05 nM and a high specificity.
BACKGROUND: We studied the genetic fingerprints of ovarian cancer and validated the potential of Mammaglobin b (SCGB2A1), one of the top differentially expressed genes found in our analysis, as a novel ovarian tumour rejection antigen. METHODS: We profiled 70 ovarian carcinomas including 24 serous (OSPC), 15 clear-cell (CC), 24 endometrioid (EAC) and 7 poorly differentiated tumours, and 14 normal human ovarian surface epithelial (HOSE) control cell lines using the Human HG-U133 Plus 2.0 chip (Affymetrix). Quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry staining techniques were used to validate microarray data at RNA and protein levels for SCGB2A1. Full-length human-recombinant SCGB2A1 was used to pulse monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) to stimulate autologous SCGB2A1-specific cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses against chemo-naive and chemo-resistant autologous ovarian tumours. RESULTS: Gene expression profiling identified SCGB2A1 as a top differentially expressed gene in all histological ovarian cancer types tested. The CD8+ CTL populations generated against SCGB2A1 were able to consistently induce lysis of autologous primary (chemo-naive) and metastatic/recurrent (chemo-resistant) target tumour cells expressing SCGB2A1, whereas autologous HLA-identical noncancerous cells were not lysed. Cytotoxicity against autologous tumour cells was significantly inhibited by anti-HLA-class I (W6/32) monoclonal antibody. Intracellular cytokine expression measured by flow cytometry showed a striking type 1 cytokine profile (i.e., high IFN-gamma secretion) in SCGB2A1-specific CTLs. CONCLUSION: SCGB2A1 is a top differentially expressed gene in all major histological types of ovarian cancers and may represent a novel and attractive target for the immunotherapy of patients harbouring recurrent disease resistant to chemotherapy.
Secretoglobins (SCGB), such as mammaglobin 1 (MGB1, SCGB2A2), mammaglobin 2 (MGB2, SCGB2A1) and lipophilin B (LIPB, SCGB1D2), have been related to carcinogenesis. We profiled expression of MGB1, MGB2 and LIPB in human tissues and ovarian carcinoma and explored the impact of SCGB overexpression on cell proliferation. MGB1, MGB2 and LIPB mRNA are expressed at variable levels in most human tissues and we observed significant bilateral correlations between the different secretoglobins. Concerted overexpression of MGB1 and LIPB resulted in significant increase in cell proliferation. In clinical specimens of ovarian carcinoma we measured elevated concentrations of secretoglobin mRNA and for MGB1 this up-regulation was confirmed on the protein level. Overexpression of MGB1 positively correlated with the FIGO stage, the tumor grade and the mitotic index suggesting a patho-physiological role of the protein. Our data indicate that MGB1, MGB2 and LIPB mRNAs are expressed at low levels in human tissues but basal expression is upregulated in ovarian cancer. The in vivo correlation between nuclear MGB1 localization and the mitotic rate in ovarian cancer as well as the increased cell proliferation induced by secretoglobin overexpression in ovarian cancer cell lines suggest a pathophysiological role of these proteins in ovarian cancer.
The gene expression profile of breast cancer has been described as a great breakthrough on the way to comprehend differences in cancer origin, behavior and therapy. However, gene expression profile in histologically normal epithelium (HNEpi) which could harbor genetic abnormalities predisposing breast tissue to develop malignancy was minor scope for scientists in the past. Thus, we aimed to analyze gene expressions in HNEpi and breast cancer tissue (BCTis) in order to establish its value as potential diagnostic marker for cancer development. We evaluated a panel of disease-specific genes in luminal type (A/B) of breast cancer and tumor surrounding HNEpi by qRT-PCR Array in 32 microdissected samples. There was 20.2 and 2.4% deregulation rate in genes with at least 2-fold or 5-fold over-expression between luminal (A/B) type breast carcinomas and tumor surrounding HNEpi, respectively. The high-grade luminal carcinomas showed higher number of deregulated genes compared to low-grade cases (50.6 vs. 23.8% with at least 2-fold deregulation rate). The main overexpressed genes in HNEpi were KLK5, SCGB1D2, GSN, EGFR and NGFR. The significant differences in gene expression between BCTis and HNEpi samples were revealed for BAG1, C3, CCNA2, CD44, FGF1, FOSL1, ID2, IL6R, NGFB, NGFR, PAPPA, PLAU, SERPINB5, THBS1 and TP53 gene (p < 0.05) and BCL2L2, CTSB, ITGB4, JUN, KIT, KLF5, SCGB1D2, SCGB2A1, SERPINE1 (p < 0.01), and EGFR, GABRP, GSN, MAP2K7 and THBS2 (p < 0.001), and GSN, KLK5 (p < 0.0001). The ontological gene analyses revealed high deregulations in gene group directly associated with breast cancer prognosis and origin.
Ovarian cancer (OC) is a common cause of cancer death among women worldwide, so there is a pressing need to identify factors influencing OC mortality. Much OC patient clinical data is publicly accessible via the Broad Institute Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets which include patient age, cancer site, stage and subtype and patient survival, as well as OC gene transcription profiles. These allow studies correlating OC patient survival (and other clinical variables) with gene expression to identify new OC biomarkers to predict patient mortality. We integrated clinical and tissue transcriptome data from patients available from the TCGA portal. We determined OC mRNA expression levels (compared to normal ovarian tissue) of 41 genes already implicated in OC progression, and assessed how their OC tissue expression levels predicts patient survival. We employed Cox Proportional Hazard regression models to analyse clinical factors and transcriptomic information to determine the relative effects on survival that is associated with each factor. Multivariate analysis of combined data (clinical and gene mRNA expression) found age and ovary tumour site significantly correlated with patient survival. The univariate analysis also confirmed significant differences in patient survival time when altered transcription levels of TLR4, BSCL2, CDH1, ERBB2, and SCGB2A1 were evident, while multivariate analysis that considered the 41 genes simultaneously revealed a significant relationship of survival with TLR4, BSCL2, CDH1, ERBB2 and PTPRE genes. However, analyses that considered all 41 genes with clinical variables together identified genes TLR4, BSCL2, CDH1, ERBB2, BRCA2 and SCGB2A1 as independently related to survival in OC. These studies indicate that the latter genes influence OC patient survival, i.e., expression levels of these genes provide mechanistic and predictive information in addition to that of the clinical traits. Our study provides strong evidence that these genes are important prognostic indicators of patient survival that give clues to biological processes that underlie OC progression and mortality.
BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer continues to be one of the deadliest cancers in the world and therefore identification of new drugs targeting this type of cancer is thus of significant importance. The purpose of this study was to identify and validate a therapeutic agent which might improve the outcomes for gastric cancer patients in the future. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using microarray technology, we generated a gene expression profile of human gastric cancer-specific genes from human gastric cancer tissue samples. We used this profile in the Broad Institute's Connectivity Map analysis to identify candidate therapeutic compounds for gastric cancer. We found the histone deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat as the lead compound and thus a potential therapeutic drug for gastric cancer. Vorinostat induced both apoptosis and autophagy in gastric cancer cell lines. Pharmacological and genetic inhibition of autophagy however, increased the therapeutic efficacy of vorinostat, indicating that a combination of vorinostat with autophagy inhibitors may therapeutically be more beneficial. Moreover, gene expression analysis of gastric cancer identified a collection of genes (ITGB5, TYMS, MYB, APOC1, CBX5, PLA2G2A, and KIF20A) whose expression was elevated in gastric tumor tissue and downregulated more than 2-fold by vorinostat treatment in gastric cancer cell lines. In contrast, SCGB2A1, TCN1, CFD, APLP1, and NQO1 manifested a reversed pattern. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We showed that analysis of gene expression signature may represent an emerging approach to discover therapeutic agents for gastric cancer, such as vorinostat. The observation of altered gene expression after vorinostat treatment may provide the clue to identify the molecular mechanism of vorinostat and those patients likely to benefit from vorinostat treatment.
INTRODUCTION: Reconstruction of respiratory epithelium is critical for the fabrication of bioengineered airway implants. Epithelial differentiation is typically achieved using bovine pituitary extract (BPE). Due to the xenogenic nature and undefined composition of BPE, an alternative for human clinical applications, devoid of BPE, must be developed. The goal of this study was to develop two different BPE-free media, with and without select pituitary hormone (PH), which could initiate epithelial differentiation for use in human implantation. METHODS: The ability of the two BPE-free media to initiate epithelial differentiation of adherent, non-expanded stromal-vascular cells grown on porcine small intestinal submucosa was compared to traditional BPE-containing media (M1). Nanostring((R)) was used to measure differences in gene expression of stemness (MSC), basal cell (basal), and ciliated markers (muco-cil), and staining was performed support the gene data. RESULTS: Compared to baseline, both BPE-free media upregulated epithelial and stemness genes, however this was to a lower degree than BPE-containing media. In general, the expression of basal cell markers (COL17A1, DSG3, ITGA6, KRT6A, LOXL2) and secreted mucous proteins (PLUNC, MUC5B, SCGB2A1) was upregulated. The gene expression of ciliated markers C9orf24, TUBA3 and DNCL2B but not of the key transcription factor for cilagenesis FOXJ1 were upregulated, indicating that mucus-secreting cell differentiation occurs more rapidly than ciliogenesis. The ability of the adherent stromal vascular cells to upregulate gene expression of both epithelial and stemness markers suggests maintenance of the self-renewal capacity of undifferentiated and/or basal cell-like cells contributing to proliferation and ensuring a persisting source of cells for regenerative medicine applications. CONCLUSION: This study provides the initial step to defining a BPE-free epithelial differentiation medium for clinical translation. Thus, either of the proposed BPE-free medium are viable alternatives to BPE-containing medium for partial epithelial differentiation for human translational applications.
BACKGROUND: The involvement of secretoglobins (SCGBs) other than SCGB1A1 (Clara cell 10-kDa protein, CC10) in human airway diseases remains unexplored. Among those SCGBs, SCGB3A2 (uteroglobin-related protein 1, UGRP1) is particularly interesting, given its structure and function similarities with SCGB1A1 (CC10). The aim of this study was to investigate the expression regulation of SCGBs other than SCGB1A1 (CC10) in human upper airway, and their potential involvement, particularly that of SCGB3A2 (UGRP1), in chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) with nasal polyps (CRSwNP) and without nasal polyps (CRSsNP). METHODS: Eight SCGB family members including SCGB3A2 (UGRP1), SCGB1C1 (ligand binding protein RYD5), SCGB1D1 (lipophilin A), SCGB1D2 (lipophilin B), SCGB1D4 (interferon-gamma inducible SCGB), SCGB2A1 (mammaglobin 2), SCGB2A2 (mammaglobin 1), and SCGB3A1 (uteroglobin-related protein 2) were studied. The regulation of SCGBs mRNA expression in normal nasal mucosa by proinflammatory, Th1, and Th2 cytokines was studied through nasal explant culture. SCGBs mRNA expression levels in CRSsNP and CRSwNP patients and controls were compared. The mRNA levels were detected by means of quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The protein expression of SCGB3A2 (UGRP1) was analyzed using immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: The expression of SCGBs except SCGB1D2 (lipophilin B) could be found in upper airway and be differentially regulated by different cytokines. SCGB3A2 (UGRP1) mRNA expression was induced by Th1 cytokine, but suppressed by proinflammatory and Th2 cytokines. SCGBs mRNA expression was altered in CRS; particularly, SCGB3A2 (UGRP1) protein and mRNA expression was markedly decreased in both CRSsNP and CRSwNP and its protein levels inversely correlated with the number of total infiltrating cells, preoperative sinonasal CT scores, and postoperative endoscopy and symptom scores. CONCLUSION: SCGBs except SCGB1D2 (lipophilin B) are expressed in human upper airway and their expression can be differentially regulated by inflammatory cytokines. SCGBs mRNA expression is altered in CRS. Reduced production of UGRP1, which is likely due, at least in part, to a local cytokine environment, may contribute to the hyper-inflammation in CRS and correlates with response to surgery.
In this report, we have identified, sequenced, and characterized the expression pattern of a novel human gene, mammaglobin B. Mammaglobin B (MGB2) is highly homologous to mammaglobin (MGB1), a previously characterized human gene whose expression is limited to the mammary epithelium and frequently up-regulated in human breast cancer cells. Based upon amino acid sequence similarities, both mammaglobin and mammaglobin B may be considered members of a larger, mammalian multigene family that includes rabbit uteroglobin, human Clara Cell 10-kDa protein (CC10), and the multimeric rat prostatein protein. Together with the human CC10 gene, mammaglobin and mammaglobin B are closely linked on human chromosome 11q13. However, despite their primary sequence similarity and close chromosomal proximity, the expression of mammaglobin and mammaglobin B is nonconcordant in both nonmalignant and neoplastic tissue.
Mammaglobin B (MGB2) and mammaglobin A (MGB1) are proteins expressed in metastatic breast cancers. The early detection of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in breast cancer patients is crucial to decrease mortality rate. Herein, novel aptamers were successfully selected and characterized against MGB2 and MGB1 proteins using a hybrid SELEX approach. The potential use of the selected aptamers in breast CTC detection was studied using spiked breast cancer cells in whole blood lysate. The results obtained from this study showed that the selected aptamers (MAMB1 and MAMA2) bind to their target breast cancer cell lines with high affinity (low nanomolar K(d) values) and specificity. They also bind to their free recombinant target proteins and show minimal non-specific binding to normal and other cancer cell lines. Additionally, they were able to distinguish a low number of breast cancer cells spiked in whole blood lysate containing normal blood cells. The results obtained in this study indicate the great potential for the use of aptamers to detect MGB1 and MGB2 protein biomarkers, expressed on the surface of breast CTCs.
Secretory lipophilins are "lipid-loving" proteins that are major constituents of several mammalian secretions, including the prostatic fluid of rats and the tears of humans and rabbits. These proteins form covalent heterodimers that are stabilized by three intramolecular cystine disulfide bonds. The heterodimers, some of which are glycosylated, may undergo additional non-covalent assembly to form tetramers. The peptide components found in secretory lipophilins are from two subfamilies: lipophilins A/B and lipophilin C. The C subfamily members described in this report are three rabbit and one human lipophilin, plus human mammaglobin and the C3 subunit of rat prostatein. Human A/B and C lipophilins are expressed by many tissues and are especially prominent in endocrine-responsive organs. The gene for human lipophilin B resides at chromosome 10q22-23. This region harbors the PTEN/MMAC1 gene and is believed to contain additional tumor suppressor genes. Although the functions of secretory lipophilins are imperfectly understood, their abundance in glandular secretions and in hormone-responsive tissues suggests that they deserve considerably more attention than they have received to date.
