Sodium channel protein type 3 subunit alpha; Mediates the voltage-dependent sodium ion permeability of excitable membranes. Assuming opened or closed conformations in response to the voltage difference across the membrane, forms a sodium- selective channel through which Na(+) ions may pass in accordance with their electrochemical gradient. May contribute to the regulation of serotonin/5- hydroxytryptamine release by enterochromaffin cells (By similarity). In pancreatic endocrine cells, required for both glucagon and glucose- induced insulin secretion (By similarity). Belongs to the sod [...] 
IMPORTANCE: Polymicrogyria is the most commonly diagnosed cortical malformation and is associated with neurodevelopmental sequelae including epilepsy, motor abnormalities, and cognitive deficits. Polymicrogyria frequently co-occurs with other brain malformations or as part of syndromic diseases. Past studies of polymicrogyria have defined heterogeneous genetic and nongenetic causes but have explained only a small fraction of cases. OBJECTIVE: To survey germline genetic causes of polymicrogyria in a large cohort and to consider novel polymicrogyria gene associations. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This genetic association study analyzed panel sequencing and exome sequencing of accrued DNA samples from a retrospective cohort of families with members with polymicrogyria. Samples were accrued over more than 20 years (1994 to 2020), and sequencing occurred in 2 stages: panel sequencing (June 2015 to January 2016) and whole-exome sequencing (September 2019 to March 2020). Individuals seen at multiple clinical sites for neurological complaints found to have polymicrogyria on neuroimaging, then referred to the research team by evaluating clinicians, were included in the study. Targeted next-generation sequencing and/or exome sequencing were performed on probands (and available parents and siblings) from 284 families with individuals who had isolated polymicrogyria or polymicrogyria as part of a clinical syndrome and no genetic diagnosis at time of referral from clinic, with sequencing from 275 families passing quality control. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The number of families in whom genetic sequencing yielded a molecular diagnosis that explained the polymicrogyria in the family. Secondarily, the relative frequency of different genetic causes of polymicrogyria and whether specific genetic causes were associated with co-occurring head size changes were also analyzed. RESULTS: In 32.7% (90 of 275) of polymicrogyria-affected families, genetic variants were identified that provided satisfactory molecular explanations. Known genes most frequently implicated by polymicrogyria-associated variants in this cohort were PIK3R2, TUBB2B, COL4A1, and SCN3A. Six candidate novel polymicrogyria genes were identified or confirmed: de novo missense variants in PANX1, QRICH1, and SCN2A and compound heterozygous variants in TMEM161B, KIF26A, and MAN2C1, each with consistent genotype-phenotype relationships in multiple families. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study's findings reveal a higher than previously recognized rate of identifiable genetic causes, specifically of channelopathies, in individuals with polymicrogyria and support the utility of exome sequencing for families affected with polymicrogyria.
We report our results of 1000 diagnostic WES cases based on 2819 sequenced samples from 54 countries with a wide phenotypic spectrum. Clinical information given by the requesting physicians was translated to HPO terms. WES processes were performed according to standardized settings. We identified the underlying pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in 307 families (30.7%). In further 253 families (25.3%) a variant of unknown significance, possibly explaining the clinical symptoms of the index patient was identified. WES enabled timely diagnosing of genetic diseases, validation of causality of specific genetic disorders of PTPN23, KCTD3, SCN3A, PPOX, FRMPD4, and SCN1B, and setting dual diagnoses by detecting two causative variants in distinct genes in the same patient. We observed a better diagnostic yield in consanguineous families, in severe and in syndromic phenotypes. Our results suggest that WES has a better yield in patients that present with several symptoms, rather than an isolated abnormality. We also validate the clinical benefit of WES as an effective diagnostic tool, particularly in nonspecific or heterogeneous phenotypes. We recommend WES as a first-line diagnostic in all cases without a clear differential diagnosis, to facilitate personal medical care.
OBJECTIVE: Voltage-gated sodium channels (SCNs) share similar amino acid sequence, structure, and function. Genetic variants in the four human brain-expressed SCN genes SCN1A/2A/3A/8A have been associated with heterogeneous epilepsy phenotypes and neurodevelopmental disorders. To better understand the biology of seizure susceptibility in SCN-related epilepsies, our aim was to determine similarities and differences between sodium channel disorders, allowing us to develop a broader perspective on precision treatment than on an individual gene level alone. METHODS: We analyzed genotype-phenotype correlations in large SCN-patient cohorts and applied variant constraint analysis to identify severe sodium channel disease. We examined temporal patterns of human SCN expression and correlated functional data from in vitro studies with clinical phenotypes across different sodium channel disorders. RESULTS: Comparing 865 epilepsy patients (504 SCN1A, 140 SCN2A, 171 SCN8A, four SCN3A, 46 copy number variation [CNV] cases) and analysis of 114 functional studies allowed us to identify common patterns of presentation. All four epilepsy-associated SCN genes demonstrated significant constraint in both protein truncating and missense variation when compared to other SCN genes. We observed that age at seizure onset is related to SCN gene expression over time. Individuals with gain-of-function SCN2A/3A/8A missense variants or CNV duplications share similar characteristics, most frequently present with early onset epilepsy (<3 months), and demonstrate good response to sodium channel blockers (SCBs). Direct comparison of corresponding SCN variants across different SCN subtypes illustrates that the functional effects of variants in corresponding channel locations are similar; however, their clinical manifestation differs, depending on their role in different types of neurons in which they are expressed. SIGNIFICANCE: Variant function and location within one channel can serve as a surrogate for variant effects across related sodium channels. Taking a broader view on precision treatment suggests that in those patients with a suspected underlying genetic epilepsy presenting with neonatal or early onset seizures (<3 months), SCBs should be considered.
Nav1.3, encoded by the SCN3A gene, is a voltage-gated sodium channel on the cell membrane. It is expressed abundantly in the fetal brain but little in the normal adult brain. It is involved in the generation and conduction of action potentials in excitable cells. Nav1.3 plays an important role in many neurological diseases. The aim of this review is to summarize new findings about Nav1.3 in the field of neurology. Many mutations of SCN3A can lead to neuronal hyperexcitability and then cause epilepsy. The rapid recovery from inactivation and slow closed-state inactivation kinetics of Nav1.3 leads to a reduced activation threshold of the channel and a high frequency of firing of neurons. Hyperactivity of Nav1.3 also induces increased excitability of sensory neurons, a lower nociceptive threshold, and neuropathic pain. This review summarizes the structure and the function of Nav1.3 and focuses on its relationship with epilepsy and neuropathic pain.
OBJECTIVE: Loss-of-function variants in SCN1A cause Dravet syndrome, the most common genetic developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). However, emerging evidence suggests separate entities of SCN1A-related disorders due to gain-of-function variants. Here, we aim to refine the clinical, genetic, and functional electrophysiological features of a recurrent p.R1636Q gain-of-function variant, identified in four individuals at a single center. METHODS: Individuals carrying the recurrent SCN1A p.R1636Q variant were identified through diagnostic testing. Whole cell voltage-clamp electrophysiological recording in HEK-293 T cells was performed to compare the properties of sodium channels containing wild-type Na(v) 1.1 or Na(v) 1.1-R1636Q along with both Na(v) beta1 and Na(v) beta2 subunits, including response to oxcarbazepine. To delineate differences from other SCN1A-related epilepsies, we analyzed electronic medical records. RESULTS: All four individuals had an early onset DEE characterized by focal tonic seizures and additional seizure types starting in the first few weeks of life. Electrophysiological analysis showed a mixed gain-of-function effect with normal current density, a leftward (hyperpolarized) shift of steady-state inactivation, and slower inactivation kinetics leading to a prominent late sodium current. The observed functional changes closely paralleled effects of pathogenic variants in SCN3A and SCN8A at corresponding positions. Both wild type and variant exhibited sensitivity to block by oxcarbazepine, partially correcting electrophysiological abnormalities of the SCN1A p.R1636Q variant. Clinically, a single individual responded to treatment with oxcarbazepine. Across 51 individuals with SCN1A-related epilepsies, those with the recurrent p.R1636Q variants had the earliest ages at onset. SIGNIFICANCE: The recurrent SCN1A p.R1636Q variant causes a clinical entity with a wider clinical spectrum than previously reported, characterized by neonatal onset epilepsy and absence of prominent movement disorder. Functional consequences of this variant lead to mixed loss and gain of function that is partially corrected by oxcarbazepine. The recurrent p.R1636Q variant represents one of the most common causes of early onset SCN1A-related epilepsies with separate treatment and prognosis implications.
Mutations in SCN2A, the gene encoding alpha2 subunit of the neuronal sodium channel, are associated with a variety of epilepsies: benign familial neonatal-infantile seizures (BFNIS); genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+); Dravet syndrome (DS); and some intractable childhood epilepsies. More than 10 new mutations have been identified in BFNIS, all of them are missense. To date, only one nonsense mutation has been found in a patient with intractable childhood epilepsy and severe mental decline. Recently, microduplication of chromosome 2q24.3 (containing eight genes including SCN2A, SCN3A, and the 3' end of SCN1A) was reported in a family with dominantly inherited neonatal seizures and intellectual disability. Functional studies of SCN2A mutations show that they can cause divergent biophysical defects in Na(V)1.2 and impair cell surface expressions. There is no consistent relationship between genotype and phenotype.
Voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs) play a crucial role in generation of action potentials. Pathogenic variants in the five human brain expressed VGSC genes, SCN1A, SCN2A, SCN3A, SCN8A and SCN1B have been associated with a spectrum of epilepsy phenotypes and neurodevelopmental disorders. In the last decade, next generation sequencing techniques have revolutionized the way we diagnose these channelopathies, which is paving the way towards precision medicine. Knowing the functional effect (Loss-of-function versus Gain-of-function) of a variant is not only important for understanding the underlying pathophysiology, but it is particularly crucial to orient therapeutic decisions. Here we provide a review of the literature dealing with treatment options in epilepsy-related sodium channelopathies, including the current and emerging medications.
Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is a severe facial pain disease of unknown cause and unclear genetic background. To examine the existing knowledge about genetics in TN, we performed a systematic study asking about the prevalence of familial trigeminal neuralgia, and which genes that have been identified in human TN studies and in animal models of trigeminal pain. MedLine, Embase, Cochrane Library and Web of Science were searched from inception to January 2021. 71 studies were included in the systematic review. Currently, few studies provide information about the prevalence of familial TN; the available evidence indicates that about 1-2% of TN cases have the familial form. The available human studies propose the following genes to be possible contributors to development of TN: CACNA1A, CACNA1H, CACNA1F, KCNK1, TRAK1, SCN9A, SCN8A, SCN3A, SCN10A, SCN5A, NTRK1, GABRG1, MPZ gene, MAOA gene and SLC6A4. Their role in familial TN still needs to be addressed. The experimental animal studies suggest an emerging role of genetics in trigeminal pain, though the animal models may be more relevant for trigeminal neuropathic pain than TN per se. In summary, this systematic review suggests a more important role of genetic factors in TN pathogenesis than previously assumed.
There remains an urgent need for new therapies for treatment-resistant epilepsy. Sodium channel blockers are effective for seizure control in common forms of epilepsy, but loss of sodium channel function underlies some genetic forms of epilepsy. Approaches that provide bidirectional control of sodium channel expression are needed. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small noncoding RNAs which negatively regulate gene expression. Here we show that genome-wide miRNA screening of hippocampal tissue from a rat epilepsy model, mice treated with the antiseizure medicine cannabidiol, and plasma from patients with treatment-resistant epilepsy, converge on a single target-miR-335-5p. Pathway analysis on predicted and validated miR-335-5p targets identified multiple voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs). Intracerebroventricular injection of antisense oligonucleotides against miR-335-5p resulted in upregulation of Scn1a, Scn2a, and Scn3a in the mouse brain and an increased action potential rising phase and greater excitability of hippocampal pyramidal neurons in brain slice recordings, consistent with VGSCs as functional targets of miR-335-5p. Blocking miR-335-5p also increased voltage-gated sodium currents and SCN1A, SCN2A, and SCN3A expression in human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. Inhibition of miR-335-5p increased susceptibility to tonic-clonic seizures in the pentylenetetrazol seizure model, whereas adeno-associated virus 9-mediated overexpression of miR-335-5p reduced seizure severity and improved survival. These studies suggest modulation of miR-335-5p may be a means to regulate VGSCs and affect neuronal excitability and seizures. Changes to miR-335-5p may reflect compensatory mechanisms to control excitability and could provide biomarker or therapeutic strategies for different types of treatment-resistant epilepsy.
AIMS: Neuropathic pain is a common chronic pain disorder, which is largely attributed to spinal central sensitization. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II alpha (CaMKIIalpha) activation in the spinal dorsal horn (SDH) is a major contributor to spinal sensitization. However, the exact way that CaMKIIalpha-positive (CaMKIIalpha(+)) neurons in the SDH induce neuropathic pain is still unclear. This study aimed to explore the role of spinal CaMKIIalpha(+) neurons in neuropathic pain caused by chronic constriction injury (CCI) and investigate the potential epigenetic mechanisms involved in CaMKIIalpha(+) neuron activation. METHODS: CCI-induced neuropathic pain mice model, Sirt1(loxP/loxP) mice, and chemogenetic virus were used to investigate whether the activation of spinal CaMKIIalpha(+) neurons is involved in neuropathic pain and its involved mechanism. Transcriptome sequence, western blotting, qRT-PCR, and immunofluorescence analysis were performed to assay the expression of related molecules and activation of neurons. Co-immunoprecipitation was used to observe the binding relationship of protein. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-PCR was applied to analyze the acetylation of histone H3 in the Scn3a promoter region. RESULTS: The expression of sodium channel Nav1.3 was increased and the expression of SIRT1 was decreased in the spinal CaMKIIalpha(+) neurons of CCI mice. CaMKIIalpha neurons became overactive after CCI, and inhibiting their activation relieved CCI-induced pain. Overexpression of SIRT1 reversed the increase of Nav1.3 and alleviated pain, while knockdown of SIRT1 or overexpression of Nav1.3 promoted CaMKIIalpha(+) neuron activation and induced pain. By knocking down spinal SIRT1, the acetylation of histone H3 in the Scn3a (encoding Nav1.3) promoter region was increased, leading to an increased expression of Nav1.3. CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that an aberrant reduction of spinal SIRT1 after nerve injury epigenetically increases Nav1.3, subsequently activating CaMKIIalpha(+) neurons and causing neuropathic pain.
Voltage-gated sodium channels are essential proteins in brain physiology, as they generate the sodium currents that initiate neuronal action potentials. Voltage-gated sodium channels expression, localisation and function are regulated by a range of transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms. Here, we review our understanding of regulation of brain voltage-gated sodium channels, in particular SCN1A (NaV1.1), SCN2A (NaV1.2), SCN3A (NaV1.3) and SCN8A (NaV1.6), by transcription factors, by alternative splicing, and by post-translational modifications. Our focus is strongly centred on recent research lines, and newly generated knowledge.
Genetic variants in brain-expressed voltage-gated sodium channels (SCNs) have emerged as one of the most frequent causes of Mendelian forms of epilepsy and neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). This review explores the biological concepts that underlie sodium channel NDDs, explains their phenotypic heterogeneity, and appraises how this knowledge may inform clinical practice. We observe that excitatory/inhibitory neuronal expression ratios of sodium channels are important regulatory mechanisms underlying brain development, homeostasis, and neurological diseases. We hypothesize that a detailed understanding of gene expression, variant tolerance, location, and function, as well as timing of seizure onset can aid the understanding of how variants in SCN1A, SCN2A, SCN3A, and SCN8A contribute to seizure aetiology and inform treatment choice. We propose a model in which variant type, development-specific gene expression, and functions of SCNs explain the heterogeneity of sodium channel associated NDDs. Understanding of basic disease mechanisms and detailed knowledge of variant characteristics have increasing influence on clinical decision making, enabling us to stratify treatment and move closer towards precision medicine in sodium channel epilepsy and NDDs. WHAT THIS PAPER ADDS: Sodium-channel disorder heterogeneity is explained by variant-specific gene expression timing and function. Gene tolerance and location analyses aid sodium channel variant interpretation. Sodium-channel variant characteristics can contribute to clinical decision making.
SCN1A is part of the SCN1A-SCN2A-SCN3A gene cluster on chromosome 2q24 that encodes for alpha pore forming subunits of sodium channels. The 26 exons of SCN1A are spread over 100 kb of genomic DNA. Genetic defects in the coding sequence lead to generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and a range of childhood epileptic encephalopathies of varied severity (e.g., SMEI). All published mutations are collated. More than 100 novel mutations are spread throughout the gene with the more debilitating usually de novo. Some clustering of mutations is observed in the C-terminus and the loops between segments 5 and 6 of the first three domains of the protein. Functional studies so far show no consistent relationship between changes to channel properties and clinical phenotype. Of all the known epilepsy genes SCN1A is currently the most clinically relevant, with the largest number of epilepsy related mutations so far characterized.
Peripheral autonomic nervous system (P-ANS) dysfunction is a critical non-motor phenotype of Parkinson's disease (PD). The majority of PD cases are sporadic and lack identified PD-associated genes involved. Epidemiological and animal model studies suggest an association with pesticides and other environmental toxins. However, the cellular mechanisms underlying toxin induced P-ANS dysfunctions remain unclear. Here, we mapped the global transcriptome changes in human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived P-ANS sympathetic neurons during inhibition of the mitochondrial respiratory chain by the PD-related pesticide, rotenone. We revealed distinct transcriptome profiles between acute and chronic exposure to rotenone. In the acute stage, there was a down regulation of specific cation channel genes, known to mediate electrophysiological activity, while in the chronic stage, the human P-ANS neurons exhibited dysregulation of anti-apoptotic and Golgi apparatus-related pathways. Moreover, we identified the sodium voltage-gated channel subunit SCN3A/Nav1.3 as a potential biomarker in human P-ANS neurons associated with PD. Our analysis of the rotenone-altered coding and non-coding transcriptome of human P-ANS neurons may thus provide insight into the pathological signaling events in the sympathetic neurons during PD progression.
Mouse pancreatic beta- and alpha-cells are equipped with voltage-gated Na(+) currents that inactivate over widely different membrane potentials (half-maximal inactivation (V0.5) at -100 mV and -50 mV in beta- and alpha-cells, respectively). Single-cell PCR analyses show that both alpha- and beta-cells have Nav1.3 (Scn3) and Nav1.7 (Scn9a) alpha subunits, but their relative proportions differ: beta-cells principally express Nav1.7 and alpha-cells Nav1.3. In alpha-cells, genetically ablating Scn3a reduces the Na(+) current by 80%. In beta-cells, knockout of Scn9a lowers the Na(+) current by >85%, unveiling a small Scn3a-dependent component. Glucagon and insulin secretion are inhibited in Scn3a(-/-) islets but unaffected in Scn9a-deficient islets. Thus, Nav1.3 is the functionally important Na(+) channel alpha subunit in both alpha- and beta-cells because Nav1.7 is largely inactive at physiological membrane potentials due to its unusually negative voltage dependence of inactivation. Interestingly, the Nav1.7 sequence in brain and islets is identical and yet the V0.5 for inactivation is >30 mV more negative in beta-cells. This may indicate the presence of an intracellular factor that modulates the voltage dependence of inactivation.
AIM: Approximately a third of newly diagnosed epilepsy patients do not respond to antiepileptic drugs (AEDs). Evidence suggests that low penetrance variants in the genes of drug targets such as voltage-gated sodium channels may be involved in drug responsiveness. To examine this hypothesis, we compared data from two epilepsy cohorts from Malaysia and Hong Kong, as well as a meta-analysis from published data. MATERIALS & METHODS: Genotype analysis of 39 polymorphisms located in the SCN1A, SCN2A and SCN3A genes was performed on 1504 epilepsy patients from Malaysia and Hong Kong who were receiving AEDs. Meta-analysis was performed for pooled data of SCN1A rs3812718 and rs2298771, and SCN2A rs17183814 polymorphisms. RESULTS: Our data from the Hong Kong and Malaysia cohorts showed no significant allele, genotype and haplotype association of polymorphisms in the SCN1A, SCN2A, and SCN3A genes with drug responsiveness in epilepsy. This finding was supported by a meta-analysis for SCN1A rs3812718 and rs2298771, and for SCN2A rs17183814 polymorphisms. CONCLUSION: Our comprehensive study suggests that common polymorphisms in SCN1A, SCN2A and SCN3A do not play major roles in influencing response to AEDs. Original submitted 11 March 2013; Revision submitted 31 May 2013.
Abnormal expressions of sodium channel SCN1A and SCN3A genes alter neural excitability that are believed to contribute to the pathogenesis of epilepsy, a long-term risk of recurrent seizures. Ketogenic diet (KD), a high-fat and low-carbohydrate treatment for difficult-to-control (refractory) epilepsy in children, has been suggested to reverse gene expression patterns. Here, we reveal a novel role of GAPDH on the posttranscriptional regulation of mouse Scn1a and Scn3a expressions under seizure and KD conditions. We show that GAPDH binds to a conserved region in the 3' UTRs of human and mouse SCN1A and SCN3A genes, which decreases and increases genes' expressions by affecting mRNA stability through SCN1A 3' UTR and SCN3A 3' UTR, respectively. In seizure mice, the upregulation and phosphorylation of GAPDH enhance its binding to the 3' UTR, which lead to downregulation of Scn1a and upregulation of Scn3a. Furthermore, administration of KD generates beta-hydroxybutyric acid which rescues the abnormal expressions of Scn1a and Scn3a by weakening the GAPDH's binding to the element. Taken together, these data suggest that GAPDH-mediated expression regulation of sodium channel genes may be associated with epilepsy and the anticonvulsant action of KD.
Neuropathic pain is a characteristic feature of small fiber neuropathy (SFN), which in 18% of the cases is caused by genetic variants in voltage-gated sodium ion channels. In this study, we assessed the role of fifteen other ion channels in neuropathic pain. Patients with SFN (n = 414) were analyzed for ANO1, ANO3, HCN1, KCNA2, KCNA4, KCNK18, KCNN1, KCNQ3, KCNQ5, KCNS1, TRPA1, TRPM8, TRPV1, TRPV3 and TRPV4 variants by single-molecule molecular inversion probes-next-generation sequencing. These patients did not have genetic variants in SCN3A, SCN7A-SCN11A and SCN1B-SCN4B. In twenty patients (20/414, 4.8%), a potentially pathogenic heterozygous variant was identified in an ion-channel gene (ICG). Variants were present in seven genes, for two patients (0.5%) in ANO3, one (0.2%) in KCNK18, two (0.5%) in KCNQ3, seven (1.7%) in TRPA1, three (0.7%) in TRPM8, three (0.7%) in TRPV1 and two (0.5%) in TRPV3. Variants in the TRP genes were the most frequent (n = 15, 3.6%), partly in patients with high mean maximal pain scores VAS = 9.65 +/- 0.7 (n = 4). Patients with ICG variants reported more severe pain compared to patients without such variants (VAS = 9.36 +/- 0.72 vs. VAS = 7.47 +/- 2.37). This cohort study identified ICG variants in neuropathic pain in SFN, complementing previous findings of ICG variants in diabetic neuropathy. These data show that ICG variants are central in neuropathic pain of different etiologies and provides promising gene candidates for future research.
Neuroblastoma is a childhood malignancy with high morbidity and mortality. We identified key biomarkers associated with neuroblastoma risk and prognosis. The gene modules most associated with neuroblastoma risk were derived by WGCNA. Modular genes were intersected with differentially expressed genes between patients with high-risk (HR) and non-high-risk (NHR) to obtain risk genes, and enrichment analysis was performed. After incorporating risk genes into Cox regression analysis, LASSO algorithm, and K-M survival analysis, key genes were identified and introduced into four external datasets for validation. We performed short time-series expression miner analysis and single-sample genome enrichment analysis. Finally, we evaluated the difference in DNA methylation levels to identify meaningful methylation marks. We identified 5 key genes (ANO6, CPNE2, DST, PLXNC1, SCN3A) for neuroblastoma risk and prognosis, which correlated closely with known neuroblastoma biomarkers. All key genes showed a progressive downregulation trend with increasing risk levels of neuroblastoma. The immune infiltration of 14 immune cells was significantly different between HR-NB and NHR-NB, and most immune cells were negatively correlated with key genes. Furthermore, the expression of ANO6, CPNE2, DST, and PLXNC1 was modified by DNA methylation. This study identified 5 key genes for neuroblastoma risk and prognosis that were potential biomarkers.
