Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
Effective and sustained inhibition of non-enzymatic oncogenic driver proteins is a major pharmacological challenge. The clinical success of thalidomide analogues demonstrates the therapeutic efficacy of drug-induced degradation of transcription factors and other cancer targets(1-3), but a substantial subset of proteins are resistant to targeted degradation using existing approaches(4,5). Here we report an alternative mechanism of targeted protein degradation, in which a small molecule induces the highly specific, reversible polymerization of a target protein, followed by its sequestration into cellular foci and subsequent degradation. BI-3802 is a small molecule that binds to the Broad-complex, Tramtrack and Bric-a-brac (BTB) domain of the oncogenic transcription factor B cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) and leads to the proteasomal degradation of BCL6(6). We use cryo-electron microscopy to reveal how the solvent-exposed moiety of a BCL6-binding molecule contributes to a composite ligand-protein surface that engages BCL6 homodimers to form a supramolecular structure. Drug-induced formation of BCL6 filaments facilitates ubiquitination by the SIAH1 E3 ubiquitin ligase. Our findings demonstrate that a small molecule such as BI-3802 can induce polymerization coupled to highly specific protein degradation, which in the case of BCL6 leads to increased pharmacological activity compared to the effects induced by other BCL6 inhibitors. These findings open new avenues for the development of therapeutic agents and synthetic biology.
The structural integrity and functional stability of organelles are prerequisites for the viability and responsiveness of cells. Dysfunction of multiple organelles is critically involved in the pathogenesis and progression of various diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cardiovascular diseases, infection, and neurodegenerative diseases. In fact, those organelles synchronously present with evident structural derangement and aberrant function under exposure to different stimuli, which might accelerate the corruption of cells. Therefore, the quality control of multiple organelles is of great importance in maintaining the survival and function of cells and could be a potential therapeutic target for human diseases. Organelle-specific autophagy is one of the major subtypes of autophagy, selectively targeting different organelles for quality control. This type of autophagy includes mitophagy, pexophagy, reticulophagy (endoplasmic reticulum), ribophagy, lysophagy, and nucleophagy. These kinds of organelle-specific autophagy are reported to be beneficial for inflammatory disorders by eliminating damaged organelles and maintaining homeostasis. In this review, we summarized the recent findings and mechanisms covering different kinds of organelle-specific autophagy, as well as their involvement in various diseases, aiming to arouse concern about the significance of the quality control of multiple organelles in the treatment of inflammatory diseases.Abbreviations: ABCD3: ATP binding cassette subfamily D member 3; AD: Alzheimer disease; ALS: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; AMBRA1: autophagy and beclin 1 regulator 1; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; ARIH1: ariadne RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1; ATF: activating transcription factor; ATG: autophagy related; ATM: ATM serine/threonine kinase; BCL2: BCL2 apoptosis regulator; BCL2L11/BIM: BCL2 like 11; BCL2L13: BCL2 like 13; BECN1: beclin 1; BNIP3: BCL2 interacting protein 3; BNIP3L/NIX: BCL2 interacting protein 3 like; CALCOCO2/NDP52: calcium binding and coiled-coil domain 2; CANX: calnexin; CAT: catalase; CCPG1: cell cycle progression 1; CHDH: choline dehydrogenase; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CSE: cigarette smoke exposure; CTSD: cathepsin D; DDIT3/CHOP: DNA-damage inducible transcript 3; DISC1: DISC1 scaffold protein; DNM1L/DRP1: dynamin 1 like; EIF2AK3/PERK: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3; EIF2S1/eIF2alpha: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3; EMD: emerin; EPAS1/HIF-2alpha: endothelial PAS domain protein 1; ER: endoplasmic reticulum; ERAD: ER-associated degradation; ERN1/IRE1alpha: endoplasmic reticulum to nucleus signaling 1; FBXO27: F-box protein 27; FKBP8: FKBP prolyl isomerase 8; FTD: frontotemporal dementia; FUNDC1: FUN14 domain containing 1; G3BP1: G3BP stress granule assembly factor 1; GBA: glucocerebrosidase beta; HIF1A/HIF1: hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha; IMM: inner mitochondrial membrane; LCLAT1/ALCAT1: lysocardiolipin acyltransferase 1; LGALS3/Gal3: galectin 3; LIR: LC3-interacting region; LMNA: lamin A/C; LMNB1: lamin B1; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; MAPK8/JNK: mitogen-activated protein kinase 8; MAMs: mitochondria-associated membranes; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MFN1: mitofusin 1; MOD: multiple organelles dysfunction; MTPAP: mitochondrial poly(A) polymerase; MUL1: mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1; NBR1: NBR1 autophagy cargo receptor; NLRP3: NLR family pyrin domain containing 3; NUFIP1: nuclear FMR1 interacting protein 1; OMM: outer mitochondrial membrane; OPTN: optineurin; PD: Parkinson disease; PARL: presenilin associated rhomboid like; PEX3: peroxisomal biogenesis factor 3; PGAM5: PGAM family member 5; PHB2: prohibitin 2; PINK1: PTEN induced putative kinase 1; PRKN: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase; RB1CC1/FIP200: RB1 inducible coiled-coil 1; RETREG1/FAM134B: reticulophagy regulator 1; RHOT1/MIRO1: ras homolog family member T1; RIPK3/RIP3: receptor interacting serine/threonine kinase 3; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RTN3: reticulon 3; SEC62: SEC62 homolog, preprotein translocation factor; SESN2: sestrin2; SIAH1: siah E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1; SNCA: synuclein alpha; SNCAIP: synuclein alpha interacting protein; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; STING1: stimulator of interferon response cGAMP interactor 1; TAX1BP1: Tax1 binding protein 1; TBK1: TANK binding kinase 1; TFEB: transcription factor EB; TICAM1/TRIF: toll-like receptor adaptor molecule 1; TIMM23: translocase of inner mitochondrial membrane 23; TNKS: tankyrase; TOMM: translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane; TRIM: tripartite motif containing; UCP2: uncoupling protein 2; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase; UPR: unfolded protein response; USP10: ubiquitin specific peptidase 10; VCP/p97: valosin containing protein; VDAC: voltage dependent anion channels; XIAP: X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis; ZNHIT3: zinc finger HIT-type containing 3.
The dysregulation of the ubiquitin‑proteasome system will result in the abnormal accumulation and dysfunction of proteins, thus leading to severe diseases. Seven in absentia homolog 1 (Siah1), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, has attracted wide attention due to its varied functions in physiological and pathological conditions, and the numerous newly discovered Siah1 substrates. In cancer and nervous system diseases, the functions of Siah1 as a promoter or a suppressor of diseases are related to the change in cellular microenvironment and subcellular localization. At the same time, complex upstream regulations make Siah1 different from other E3 ubiquitin ligases. Understanding the molecular mechanism of Siah1 will help the study of various signaling pathways and benefit the therapeutic strategy of human diseases (e.g., cancer and nervous system diseases). In the present review, the functions and regulations of Siah1 are described. Moreover, novel substrates of Siah1 discovered in recent studies will be highlighted in cancer and nervous system diseases, providing ideas for future research and clinical targeted therapies using Siah1.
In this study, we report the experience of the only reference clinical next-generation sequencing lab in Saudi Arabia with the first 1000 families who span a wide-range of suspected Mendelian phenotypes. A total of 1019 tests were performed in the period of March 2016-December 2016 comprising 972 solo (index only), 14 duo (parents or affected siblings only), and 33 trio (index and parents). Multigene panels accounted for 672 tests, while whole exome sequencing (WES) represented the remaining 347 tests. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants that explain the clinical indications were identified in 34% (27% in panels and 43% in exomes), spanning 279 genes and including 165 novel variants. While recessive mutations dominated the landscape of solved cases (71% of mutations, and 97% of which are homozygous), a substantial minority (27%) were solved on the basis of dominant mutations. The highly consanguineous nature of the study population also facilitated homozygosity for many private mutations (only 32.5% of the recessive mutations are founder), as well as the first instances of recessive inheritance of previously assumed strictly dominant disorders (involving ITPR1, VAMP1, MCTP2, and TBP). Surprisingly, however, dual molecular diagnosis was only observed in 1.5% of cases. Finally, we have encountered candidate variants in 75 genes (ABHD6, ACY3, ADGRB2, ADGRG7, AGTPBP1, AHNAK2, AKAP6, ASB3, ATXN1L, C17orf62, CABP1, CCDC186, CCP110, CLSTN2, CNTN3, CNTN5, CTNNA2, CWC22, DMAP1, DMKN, DMXL1, DSCAM, DVL2, ECI1, EP400, EPB41L5, FBXL22, GAP43, GEMIN7, GIT1, GRIK4, GRSF1, GTRP1, HID1, IFNL1, KCNC4, LRRC52, MAP7D3, MCTP2, MED26, MPP7, MRPS35, MTDH, MTMR9, NECAP2, NPAT, NRAP, PAX7, PCNX, PLCH2, PLEKHF1, PTPN12, QKI, RILPL2, RIMKLA, RIMS2, RNF213, ROBO1, SEC16A, SIAH1, SIRT2, SLAIN2, SLC22A20, SMDT1, SRRT, SSTR1, ST20, SYT9, TSPAN6, UBR4, VAMP4, VPS36, WDR59, WDYHV1, and WHSC1) not previously linked to human phenotypes and these are presented to accelerate post-publication matchmaking. Two of these genes were independently mutated in more than one family with similar phenotypes, which substantiates their link to human disease (AKAP6 in intellectual disability and UBR4 in early dementia). If the novel candidate disease genes in this cohort are independently confirmed, the yield of WES will have increased to 83%, which suggests that most "negative" clinical exome tests are unsolved due to interpretation rather than technical limitations.
Ischemia may be the most common pathological occurrence to restrict nutrient availability and induce macroautophagy/autophagy. As a self-digestive process, autophagy helps sustain nutrient/energy and restrict damages in short-term scenarios, but it switches to a self-destructive process leading to cell death in long-term scenarios. Notably, ischemia has been used as one clinical application to treat cancer, particularly transarterial embolization (TAE) and chemoembolization (TACE) as the first-line treatments of intermediate-stage hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC, the predominant type of liver cancer). Partly due to the induced autophagy together with hypoxia-induced angiogenesis, TAE/TACE is not successful to treat HCC in many cases. Our recent work demonstrated that simultaneous treatments with sorafenib (a first-line therapeutic agent for advanced HCC) can sensitize HCC cells to cell death induced by glucose starvation via impairing mitophagy, a mitochondria-specific form of autophagy. Moreover, we identified SIAH1 as an important E3 ubiquitin ligase for mitophagic induction in HCC cells.
Tight control of the type I interferon (IFN) signaling pathway is critical for maintaining host innate immune responses, and the ubiquitination and deubiquitination of signaling molecules are essential for signal transduction. Deubiquitinase ubiquitin-specific protein 19 (USP19) is known to be involved in deubiquitinating Beclin1, TRAF3, and TRIF for downregulation of the type I IFN signaling. Here, we show that SIAH1, a cellular E3 ubiquitin ligase that is involved in multicellular pathway, is a potent positive regulator of virus-mediated type I IFN signaling that maintains homeostasis within the antiviral immune response by targeting USP19. In the early stages of virus infection, stabilized SIAH1 directly interacts with the USP19 and simultaneously mediates K27-linked ubiquitination of 489, 490, and 610 residues of USP19 for proteasomal degradation. Additionally, we found that USP19 specifically interacts with MAVS and deubiquitinates K63-linked ubiquitinated MAVS for negative regulation of type I IFN signaling. Ultimately, we identified that SIAH1-mediated degradation of USP19 reversed USP19-mediated deubiquitination of MAVS, Beclin1, TRAF3, and TRIF, resulting in the activation of antiviral immune responses. Taken together, these findings provide new insights into the molecular mechanism of USP19 and SIAH1, and suggest a critical role of SIAH1 in antiviral immune response and homeostasis.
BACKGROUND: Despite remarkable advancements in cancer immunotherapy, the overall response rate to anti-programmed cell death-1 (anti-PD-1) therapy in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients remains low. Our previous study has demonstrated the critical role of CacyBP/SIP (Calcyclin-Binding Protein and Siah-1 Interacting Protein) as a regulator of HCC development and progression. However, the possible impact of CacyBP on the tumor immune microenvironment has not yet been clarified. METHODS: The expressions of CacyBP and Myd88 in HCC cell lines and tissues was detected by bioinformatics analysis, real-time quantitative PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry. The interaction between CacyBP and Myd88 was measured using co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence. In vitro and in vivo assays were used to investigate the regulation of CacyBP on tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). RESULTS: We identified that CacyBP was positively correlated with Myd88, a master regulator of innate immunity, and Myd88 was a novel binding substrate downstream of CacyBP in HCC. Additionally, CacyBP protected Myd88 from Siah-1-mediated proteasome-dependent degradation by competitively binding to its Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain. Inhibition of CacyBP-Myd88 signaling subsequently diminished HDAC1-mediated H3K9ac and H3K27ac modifications on the CX3CL1 promoter and reduced its transcription and secretion in HCC cells. Moreover, by using in vitro and in vivo strategies, we demonstrated that depletion of CacyBP impaired the infiltration of TAMs and the immunosuppressive state of the tumor microenvironment, further sensitizing HCC-bearing anti-PD-1 therapy. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that targeting CacyBP may be a novel treatment strategy for improving the efficacy of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in HCC.
BACKGROUND: Primary aldosteronism is one of the most common causes of secondary hypertension. Patients with this endocrine syndrome are at increased cardiovascular risk, higher than hypertensive individuals with equal blood pressure levels. OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to thoroughly present and critically discuss the novel insights into the field of primary aldosteronism, focusing on the clinically meaningful aspects. METHOD: We meticulously evaluated existing data in the field of primary aldosteronism in order to summarize future perspectives in this narrative review. RESULTS: Novel data suggests that a subclinical form of primary aldosteronism might exist. Interesting findings might simplify the diagnostic procedure of the disease, especially for the localization of primary aldosteronism. The most promising progress has been noted in the field of the molecular basis of the disease, suggesting new potential therapeutic targets. CONCLUSION: Several significant aspects are at early stages of evaluation. Future research is essential to investigate these well-promising perspectives.
The E3 ligase SIAH1 is deregulated in human cancers and correlated with poor prognosis, but its contributions to chemoresistance in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) are not evident. Herein we found that SIAH1 was decreased in EOC tumour tissues and cell lines and negatively correlated with the RPS3 levels. SIAH1 overexpression suppressed tumour cell growth, colony formation, invasion, metastasis, and cisplatin resistance in vivo and in vitro. SIAH1 promoted RPS3 ubiquitination and degradation using the RING-finger domain, and these steps were required for RPS3 localization to the cytoplasm, which led to subsequent NF-kappaB inactivation and thereby conferred chemosensitivity. Moreover, ectopic expression of RPS3 or depletion of RPS3 ubiquitination mediated by SIAH1 via the K214R mutant significantly impaired cisplatin-induced tumour suppression in cells stably expressing SIAH1. Together, our findings reveal a tumour suppressor function of SIAH1 and provide evidence showing that the SIAH1-RPS3-NF-kappaB axis may act as an appealing strategy for tackling treatment resistance in EOC.
BACKGROUND: CacyBP/SIP (Calcyclin-Binding Protein and Siah-1 Interacting Protein) is a small modular protein implicated in a wide range of cellular processes. It is expressed in different tissues of mammals but homologs are also found in some lower organisms. In mammals, a high level of CacyBP/SIP is present in tumor cells and in neurons. CacyBP/SIP binds several target proteins such as members of the S100 family, components of a ubiquitin ligase complex, and cytoskeletal proteins. SCOPE OF REVIEW: CacyBP/SIP has been shown to be involved in protein de-phosphorylation, ubiquitination, cytoskeletal dynamics, regulation of gene expression, cell proliferation, differentiation, and tumorigenesis. This review focuses on very recent reports on CacyBP/SIP structure and function in these important cellular processes. MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: CacyBP/SIP is a multi-domain and multi-functional protein. Altered levels of CacyBP/SIP in several cancers implicate its involvement in the maintenance of cell homeostasis. Changes in CacyBP/SIP subcellular localization in neurons of AD brains suggest that this protein is strongly linked to neurodegenerative diseases. Elucidation of CacyBP/SIP structure and cellular function is leading to greater understanding of its role in normal physiology and disease pathologies. GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The available results suggest that CacyBP/SIP is a key player in multiple biological processes. Detailed characterization of the physical, biochemical and biological properties of CacyBP/SIP will provide better insight into the regulation of its diverse functions in vivo, and given the association with specific diseases, will help clarify the potential of therapeutic targeting of this protein.
The delicate balance between the synthesis and the degradation of proteins ensures cellular homeostasis. Proteases act in an irreversible manner and therefore have to be strictly regulated. The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is a major pathway for the proteolytic degradation of cellular proteins. As dysregulation of the UPS is observed in most cancers including leukemia, the UPS is a valid target for therapeutic intervention strategies. Ubiquitin-ligases selectively bind substrates to target them for poly-ubiquitinylation and proteasomal degradation. Therefore, pharmacological modulation of these proteins could allow a specific level of control. Increasing evidence accumulates that ubiquitin-ligases termed mammalian seven in absentia homologs (SIAHs) are not only critical for the pathogenesis of solid tumors but also for leukemogenesis. However, the relevance and therapeutic potential of SIAH-dependent processes has not been fully elucidated. Here, we summarize functions of SIAH ubiquitin-ligases in leukemias, how they select leukemia-relevant substrates for proteasomal degradation, and how the expression and activity of SIAH1 and SIAH2 can be modulated in vivo. We also discuss that epigenetic drugs belonging to the group of histone deacetylase inhibitors induce SIAH-dependent proteasomal degradation to accelerate the turnover of leukemogenic proteins. In addition, our review highlights potential areas for future research on SIAH proteins.
The ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation of proteins controls signaling and cellular survival. An increasing body of evidence suggests that the E3 ubiquitin ligases SIAH1 and SIAH2 are able to dictate the growth, development, and chemo-/radiosensitivity of breast and prostate cancer cells. Here we review the current knowledge on the impact of SIAHs on breast and prostate tumorigenesis. Furthermore, we summarize how stress, hormones, and cytokines regulate SIAH1 and SIAH2 in transformed mammalian cells.
Saudi Genome program is a revolutionary nationwide transformation initiative of Saudi Vision 2030. The program goals are to recognize and reduce the incidence of genetic diseases in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA). Accordingly, the program will establish the foundation for personalized and genomic medicine in the KSA. Epilepsy has a high prevalence in KSA reaching around 6.54 of 1000 individuals with a subsequent massive financial burden. One of the main risk factors for this high prevalence and associated with increased risk of epilepsy development is consanguinity marriage, which is traditional in KSA. In this review, we executed a comprehensive state-of-art literature review regarding epilepsy genetics to offer a perception into the genes associated with epilepsy recognized in Saudi epileptic patients. Several genes' mutations were incorporated in this review including AFG3L2, ASPM, ATN1, ATP1A2, BMP5, CCDC88A, C12orf57, DNAJA1, EML1, ERLIN2, FRRS1L, GABRG3, NRXN3, MDH1, KCNJ10, KCNMA1, KCNT1, KIAA0226, OPHN1, PCCA, PCCB, PEX, PGAP2, PI4K2A, PODXL, PRICKLE1, PNKP, RELN, SCN2A, SCN1B, SLC2A1, SLC19A3, SLC25, SIAH1, SYNJ1, SZT2, TBCK, TMX2, TSC1, TSC2, TSEN, WDR45B, WWOX, UBR, UGDH, and YIF1B. For each of these genes, we tried to explain a little about the gene associated proteins and their roles in epilepsy development.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the global leading cancer burden in women and the hormone receptor-positive (HR+) subtype is a major part of breast cancer. Though cyclin-dependent kinase 4 and 6 (CDK4/6) inhibitors are highly effective therapy for HR+ subtype, acquired resistance is inevitable in most cases. Herein, we investigated the paternally expressed gene 10 (PEG10)-associated mechanism of acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors. METHODS: Palbociclib-resistant cells were generated by exposing human HR+ breast cancer cell lines to palbociclib for 7-9 months. In vitro mechanistic study and in vivo xenograft assay were performed. For clinical relevance, public mRNA microarray data sets of early breast cancer were analyzed and PEG10 immunohistochemical staining was performed using pre-CDK4/6 inhibitor tumor samples. RESULTS: We observed that PEG10 was significantly upregulated in palbociclib-resistant cells. Ectopic overexpression of PEG10 in parental cells caused CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance and enhanced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). On the contrary, PEG10-targeting siRNA or antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) combined with palbociclib synergistically inhibited proliferation of palbociclib-resistant cells and growth of palbociclib-resistant xenograft in mice and suppressed EMT as well. The mechanistic study confirmed that high PEG10 expression suppressed p21, a natural CDK inhibitor, and SIAH1, a post-translational degrader of ZEB1, augmenting CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance. Then PEG10 siRNA combined with palbociclib suppressed cell cycle progression and EMT via activating p21 and SIAH1, respectively. Consequently, combined PEG10 inhibition and palbociclib overcame CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance. Furthermore, high PEG10 expression was significantly associated with a shorter recurrence-free survival (RFS) based on public mRNA expression data. In pre-CDK4/6 inhibitor treatment tissues, PEG10 positivity by IHC also showed a trend toward a shorter progression-free survival (PFS) with CDK4/6 inhibitor. These results support clinical relevance of PEG10 as a therapeutic target. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated a novel PEG10-associated mechanism of CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance. We propose PEG10 as a promising therapeutic target for overcoming PEG10-associated resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors.
Seven in absentia homolog 1 (Siah1) has been shown plays important roles in the pathogenesis and development of multiple cancers. However, the functions and mechanisms of Siah1 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain unclear. In our study, we found that knock down of Siah1 could inhibit the proliferation of NSCLC cells, while over-expression of Siah1 had the opposite effects. Molecularly, the bioinformatics analysis determined that notch receptor 1 (Notch1) might be the potential target of Siah1. Subsequently, we identified that Siah1 acted as an E3 ligase to promote the ubiquitination and stabilization of Notch1 through the proteasome pathway. Furthermore, the results showed that the Siah1 expression was directly correlated with CTR9 in human NSCLC tissues. Finally, Siah1 could promote Akt phosphorylation through regulating Notch1, thus promoting the proliferation of NSCLC cells. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that Siah1 acts as an oncogene, can ubiquitinate and stabilize Notch1 by proteasome pathway, which promotes Akt phosphorylation and ultimately leads to NSCLC cell proliferation.
Of the seven in absentia homologue (SIAH) family, three members have been identified in the human genome. In contrast to the E3 ubiquitin ligase encoding SIAH1 and SIAH2, little is known on the regulation and function of SIAH3 in tumorigenesis. In this study, we reveal that SIAH3 is frequently epigenetically silenced in different cancer entities, including cutaneous melanoma, lung adenocarcinoma and head and neck cancer. Low SIAH3 levels correlate with an impaired survival of cancer patients. Additionally, induced expression of SIAH3 reduces cell proliferation and induces cell death. Functionally, SIAH3 negatively affects cellular metabolism by shifting cells form aerobic oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis. SIAH3 is localized in the mitochondrion and interacts with proteins involved in mitochondrial ribosome biogenesis and translation. We also report that SIAH3 interacts with ubiquitin ligases, including SIAH1 or SIAH2, and is degraded by them. These results suggest that SIAH3 acts as an epigenetically controlled tumor suppressor by regulating cellular metabolism through the inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation.
SIAH1 has been reported to participate in several human cancers, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, the effect of SIAH1 on the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has not been reported in HCC cells. Here, we discovered the inhibitory effect of SIAH1 on HCC cell migration and invasion, which was related with regulating EMT. Molecularly, a yeast two-hybrid experiment indicated that Cln Three Requiring 9 (CTR9) was a potential interacting protein of SIAH1, which was further verified by co-immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore, SIAH1 inhibited the EMT of HCC cells through negatively regulating CTR9. Importantly, CTR9 was ubiquitinated and degraded by SIAH1 via the proteasome pathway in HCC cells. Additionally, it was showed that SIAH1 mainly mediated the K48-linked polyubiquitination on CTR9. Finally, the protein level of CTR9 was found to be inversely correlated with SIAH1 in human HCC tissues. Summed up all together, these findings reveal that SIAH1/CTR9 axis promotes the EMT of HCC cells and is a promising therapeutic target for HCC therapy.
Casein kinase 1epsilon (CK1epsilon) and axis inhibitor 1 (AXIN1) are crucial components of the beta-catenin destruction complex in canonical Wnt signaling. CK1epsilon has been shown to interact with AXIN1, but its physiological function and role in tumorigenesis remain unknown. In this study, we found that CK1delta/epsilon inhibitors significantly enhanced AXIN1 protein level in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells through targeting CK1epsilon. Mechanistically, CK1epsilon promoted AXIN1 degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway by promoting the interaction of E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase SIAH1 with AXIN1. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of CK1epsilon and knockdown of SIAH1 downregulated the expression of Wnt/beta-catenin-dependent genes, suppressed the viability of CRC cells, and restrained tumorigenesis and progression of CRC in vitro and in vivo. In summary, our results demonstrate that CK1epsilon exerted its oncogenic role in CRC occurrence and progression by regulating the stability of AXIN1. These findings reveal a novel mechanism by which CK1epsilon regulates the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and highlight the therapeutic potential of targeting the CK1epsilon/SIAH1 axis in CRC.
Seven in absentia homolog (SIAH) is a ubiquitin ligase that monoubiquitinates alpha-synuclein. Lewy bodies are characteristically rich in monoubiquitinated alpha-synuclein. We aimed to determine the effect of siRNA-SIAH1 on alpha-synuclein autophagy and UPS degradation in SH-SY5Y. SIAH1 expression was measured with real-time quantitative PCR and Western Blot. Cell proliferation was measured by CCK-8 assay; cell apoptosis assayed by flow cytometry. Relative protein expressions were measured by Western Blot. mRNA levels of relative protein were measured by real-time quantitative PCR. The expression of alpha-synuclein, LC3-II and SIAH1 were observed by confocal microscopy. We found: (1) Transfection efficiency of SIAH1-siRNA into SH-SY5 measured approximately 89% by flow cytometry. (2) siRNA silencing of SIAH1 promoted cellular proliferation and suppressed apoptosis. (3) Protein and mRNA expression of alpha-synuclein, LC3-II and p53 decreased after SIAH1 knockdown. E1 protein and mRNA levels increased after SIAH1 siRNA. These data show silencing SIAH1 increased cell proliferation and inhibited apoptosis in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. SIAH1 knockdown enhanced the clearance of non-aggregated alpha-synuclein by UPS. SIAH1 is a potential target for treatment of Parkinson's disease.
Proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs) show promise in tumor treatment. However, the E3 ligases VHL and CRBN, commonly used in PROTAC, are highly expressed in only a few tumors, thus limiting the application scope and efficacy of PROTAC drugs. Furthermore, the lack of tumor specificity in PROTAC drugs can result in toxic side effects. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop tumor-selective PROTAC drugs that do not rely on endogenous E3 ligases. In this study, we introduce the ClickRNA-PROTAC system, which involves the expression of a fusion protein of the E3 ubiquitin ligase SIAH1 and SNAPTag through mRNA transfection and recruits the protein of interest (POI) using bio-orthogonal click chemistry. ClickRNA-PROTAC can effectively degrade various proteins such as BRD4, KRAS, and NFkappaB simply by replacing the warhead molecules. By employing a tumor-specific mRNA-responsive translation strategy, ClickRNA-PROTAC can selectively degrade POIs in tumor cells. Furthermore, ClickRNA-PROTAC demonstrated strong efficacy in targeted cancer therapy in a xenograft mouse model of adrenocortical carcinoma. In conclusion, this approach offers several advantages, including independence from endogenous E3 ubiquitin ligases, tumor specificity, and programmability, thereby paving the way for the development of PROTAC drugs.
