Sodium-dependent noradrenaline transporter; Amine transporter. Terminates the action of noradrenaline by its high affinity sodium-dependent reuptake into presynaptic terminals. Belongs to the sodium:neurotransmitter symporter (SNF) (TC 2.A.22) family. SLC6A2 subfamily.
Obesity is associated with cognitive decline. Recent observations in mice propose an adipose tissue (AT)-brain axis. We identified 188 genes from RNA sequencing of AT in three cohorts that were associated with performance in different cognitive domains. These genes were mostly involved in synaptic function, phosphatidylinositol metabolism, the complement cascade, anti-inflammatory signaling, and vitamin metabolism. These findings were translated into the plasma metabolome. The circulating blood expression levels of most of these genes were also associated with several cognitive domains in a cohort of 816 participants. Targeted misexpression of candidate gene ortholog in the Drosophila fat body significantly altered flies memory and learning. Among them, down-regulation of the neurotransmitter release cycle-associated gene SLC18A2 improved cognitive abilities in Drosophila and in mice. Up-regulation of RIMS1 in Drosophila fat body enhanced cognitive abilities. Current results show previously unidentified connections between AT transcriptome and brain function in humans, providing unprecedented diagnostic/therapeutic targets in AT.
Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is an iatrogenic condition that encompasses a wide phenomenological spectrum of movement disorders caused by exposure to dopamine receptor blocking agents (DRBAs). TD may cause troublesome or disabling symptoms that impair quality of life. Due to frequent, often inappropriate, use of DRBAs, TD prevalence rates among patients exposed to DRBAs continue to be high. The judicious use of DRBAs is key to the prevention of TD, reduction of disease burden, and achieving lasting remission. Dopamine-depleting vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitors are considered the treatment of choice of TD.
Development of the human nervous system involves complex interactions among fundamental cellular processes and requires a multitude of genes, many of which remain to be associated with human disease. We applied whole exome sequencing to 128 mostly consanguineous families with neurogenetic disorders that often included brain malformations. Rare variant analyses for both single nucleotide variant (SNV) and copy number variant (CNV) alleles allowed for identification of 45 novel variants in 43 known disease genes, 41 candidate genes, and CNVs in 10 families, with an overall potential molecular cause identified in >85% of families studied. Among the candidate genes identified, we found PRUNE, VARS, and DHX37 in multiple families and homozygous loss-of-function variants in AGBL2, SLC18A2, SMARCA1, UBQLN1, and CPLX1. Neuroimaging and in silico analysis of functional and expression proximity between candidate and known disease genes allowed for further understanding of genetic networks underlying specific types of brain malformations.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article reviews the history, nosology, clinical features, epidemiology, and treatment of tardive syndromes. RECENT FINDINGS: The major advance in the field of tardive syndromes has been the development and US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of two vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitors, valbenazine and deutetrabenazine, for treating tardive syndromes. These medications are derivatives of tetrabenazine and reduce dyskinetic movements by reducing dopamine stimulation. Treatment is not curative, and the medications reduce, or "mask," symptoms but presumably without adding to the long-term risk of increased involuntary movements believed to accrue from suppressive treatment with dopamine receptor-blocking drugs. A confounding advance has been the accumulation of data finding that second-generation antipsychotics, also known as atypical antipsychotics, may not be safer than first-generation antipsychotics in causing tardive syndromes. The public health risk of tardive syndromes may actually have increased as some second-generation antipsychotics, widely promoted to both doctors and patients, are increasingly used as antidepressants. SUMMARY: Tardive syndromes remain a public health risk. Second-generation antipsychotics have not been proven to have less risk than first-generation drugs in causing tardive syndromes and are nevertheless being used more widely to treat depression, bipolar disease, and insomnia. Symptomatic treatment for tardive syndromes is available, although expensive.
Vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) accumulates monoamines in presynaptic vesicles for storage and exocytotic release, and has a vital role in monoaminergic neurotransmission(1-3). Dysfunction of monoaminergic systems causes many neurological and psychiatric disorders, including Parkinson's disease, hyperkinetic movement disorders and depression(4-6). Suppressing VMAT2 with reserpine and tetrabenazine alleviates symptoms of hypertension and Huntington's disease(7,8), respectively. Here we describe cryo-electron microscopy structures of human VMAT2 complexed with serotonin and three clinical drugs at 3.5-2.8 A, demonstrating the structural basis for transport and inhibition. Reserpine and ketanserin occupy the substrate-binding pocket and lock VMAT2 in cytoplasm-facing and lumen-facing states, respectively, whereas tetrabenazine binds in a VMAT2-specific pocket and traps VMAT2 in an occluded state. The structures in three distinct states also reveal the structural basis of the VMAT2 transport cycle. Our study establishes a structural foundation for the mechanistic understanding of substrate recognition, transport, drug inhibition and pharmacology of VMAT2 while shedding light on the rational design of potential therapeutic agents.
Monoamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin control important brain pathways, including movement, sleep, reward and mood(1). Dysfunction of monoaminergic circuits has been implicated in various neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric disorders(2). Vesicular monoamine transporters (VMATs) pack monoamines into vesicles for synaptic release and are essential to neurotransmission(3-5). VMATs are also therapeutic drug targets for a number of different conditions(6-9). Despite the importance of these transporters, the mechanisms of substrate transport and drug inhibition of VMATs have remained elusive. Here we report cryo-electron microscopy structures of the human vesicular monoamine transporter VMAT2 in complex with the antichorea drug tetrabenazine, the antihypertensive drug reserpine or the substrate serotonin. Remarkably, the two drugs use completely distinct inhibition mechanisms. Tetrabenazine binds VMAT2 in a lumen-facing conformation, locking the luminal gating lid in an occluded state to arrest the transport cycle. By contrast, reserpine binds in a cytoplasm-facing conformation, expanding the vestibule and blocking substrate access. Structural analyses of VMAT2 also reveal the conformational changes following transporter isomerization that drive substrate transport into the vesicle. These findings provide a structural framework for understanding the physiology and pharmacology of neurotransmitter packaging by synaptic vesicular transporters.
Parkinson's Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder. The pathological hallmark of PD is loss of dopaminergic neurons and the presence of aggregated alpha-synuclein, primarily in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) of the midbrain. However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie the pathology in different cell types is not currently understood. Here, we present a single nucleus transcriptome analysis of human post-mortem SNpc obtained from 15 sporadic Parkinson's Disease (PD) cases and 14 Controls. Our dataset comprises  approximately 84K nuclei, representing all major cell types of the brain, allowing us to obtain a transcriptome-level characterization of these cell types. Importantly, we identify multiple subpopulations for each cell type and describe specific gene sets that provide insights into the differing roles of these subpopulations. Our findings reveal a significant decrease in neuronal cells in PD samples, accompanied by an increase in glial cells and T cells. Subpopulation analyses demonstrate a significant depletion of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) enriched astrocyte, microglia and oligodendrocyte populations in PD samples, as well as TH enriched neurons, which are also depleted. Moreover, marker gene analysis of the depleted subpopulations identified 28 overlapping genes, including those associated with dopamine metabolism (e.g., ALDH1A1, SLC6A3 & SLC18A2). Overall, our study provides a valuable resource for understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in dopaminergic neuron degeneration and glial responses in PD, highlighting the existence of novel subpopulations and cell type-specific gene sets.
Huntington disease (HD) is a hereditary neurodegenerative disorder caused by an expanded cytosine-adenine-guanine triplet repeat in the huntingtin gene. The current diagnosis is based on the presence of typical motor signs in combination with a positive gene test. The motor onset of the disease is usually between 30 and 50 years of age, and the disease then progresses over around 20 more years. Nonmotor symptoms and signs such as cognitive decline, metabolic dysfunction, sleep disturbances, as well as psychiatric symptoms are common and can occur many years before motor onset. Psychiatric symptoms include irritability, apathy, depression, anxiety, and OCD. Although there exist no disease-modifying treatment, available pharmacologic drugs often offer significant symptom relief and improve quality of life. Today, there are only two drugs that are approved by the US Food and Drug Association for the treatment of HD. These are the dopamine-depleting drugs tetrabenazine and deutetrabenazine that both target motor symptoms. The current status of best clinical practice for HD is based on expert opinions as well as evidence and/or experience of treating similar symptoms in other conditions. In this chapter, we provide an overview of the complex clinical manifestations of HD and the commonly used psychopharmacologic treatments.
Pharmacogenetics (PGx) research over the past 2 decades has produced extensive evidence for the influence of genetic factors on the efficacy and tolerability of antipsychotic treatment. However, the application of these findings to optimize treatment outcomes for patients in clinical practice has been limited. This paper presents a meta-review of key PGx findings related to antipsychotic response and common adverse effects, including antipsychotic-induced weight gain, tardive dyskinesia (TD), and clozapine-induced agranulocytosis (CIAG), and highlights advances and challenges in clinical implementation. Most robust findings from candidate gene and genomewide association studies were reported for associations between polymorphisms in CYP2D6 and exposure and response to specific antipsychotics. As a result, product labels and guidelines from various PGx expert groups have provided selection and dosing recommendations based on CYP2D6 metabolizer phenotypes for commonly prescribed antipsychotics. Other interesting genetic targets include DRD2 for antipsychotic response, SLC18A2 for TD, and the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes, HLA-DQB1 and HLA-B, for CIAG. Well-designed studies using large, well-characterized samples that leverages international collaborations are needed to validate previous findings, as well as discover new genetic variants involved in antipsychotic response and adverse effects.
Chorea is defined as jerk-like movements that move randomly from one body part to another. It is due to a variety of disorders and although current symptomatic therapy is quite effective there are few etiology- or pathogenesis-targeted therapies. The aim of this review is to summarize our own experience and published evidence in the treatment of chorea. Areas covered: After evaluating current guidelines and clinical practices for chorea of all etiologies, PubMed was searched for the most recent clinical trials and reviews using the term 'chorea' cross referenced with specific drug names. Expert commentary: Inhibitors of presynaptic vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 (VMAT2) that cause striatal dopamine depletion, such as tetrabenazine, deutetrabenazine, and valbenazine, are considered the treatment of choice in patients with chorea. Some clinicians also use dopamine receptor blockers (e.g. antipsychotics) and other drugs, including anti-epileptics and anti-glutamatargics. 'Dopamine stabilizers' such as pridopidine and other experimental drugs are currently being investigated in the treatment of chorea. Deep brain stimulation is usually reserved for patients with disabling chorea despite optimal medical therapy.
Monoamine neurotransmitters such as serotonin and dopamine are loaded by vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) into synaptic vesicles for storage and subsequent release in neurons. Impaired VMAT2 function underlies various neuropsychiatric diseases. VMAT2 inhibitors reserpine and tetrabenazine are used to treat hypertension, movement disorders associated with Huntington's Disease and Tardive Dyskinesia. Despite its physiological and pharmacological significance, the structural basis underlying VMAT2 substrate recognition and its inhibition by various inhibitors remains unknown. Here we present cryo-EM structures of human apo VMAT2 in addition to states bound to serotonin, tetrabenazine, and reserpine. These structures collectively capture three states, namely the lumen-facing, occluded, and cytosol-facing conformations. Notably, tetrabenazine induces a substantial rearrangement of TM2 and TM7, extending beyond the typical rocker-switch movement. These functionally dynamic snapshots, complemented by biochemical analysis, unveil the essential components responsible for ligand recognition, elucidate the proton-driven exchange cycle, and provide a framework to design improved pharmaceutics targeting VMAT2.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review highlights recent advances in the investigation of genetic factors for antipsychotic response and side effects. RECENT FINDINGS: Antipsychotics prescribed to treat psychotic symptoms are variable in efficacy and propensity for causing side effects. The major side effects include tardive dyskinesia, antipsychotic-induced weight gain (AIWG), and clozapine-induced agranulocytosis (CIA). Several promising associations of polymorphisms in genes including HSPG2, CNR1, and DPP6 with tardive dyskinesia have been reported. In particular, a functional genetic polymorphism in SLC18A2, which is a target of recently approved tardive dyskinesia medication valbenazine, was associated with tardive dyskinesia. Similarly, several consistent findings primarily from genes modulating energy homeostasis have also been reported (e.g. MC4R, HTR2C). CIA has been consistently associated with polymorphisms in the HLA genes (HLA-DQB1 and HLA-B). The association findings between glutamate system genes and antipsychotic response require additional replications. SUMMARY: The findings to date are promising and provide us a better understanding of the development of side effects and response to antipsychotics. However, more comprehensive investigations in large, well characterized samples will bring us closer to clinically actionable findings.
Tardive syndrome (TS) is an iatrogenic, often persistent movement disorder caused by drugs that block dopamine receptors. It has a broad phenotype including movement (orobuccolingual stereotypy, dystonia, tics, and others) and nonmotor features (akathisia and pain). TS has garnered increased attention of late because of the Food and Drug Administration approval of the first therapeutic agents developed specifically for this purpose. This paper will begin with a discussion on pathogenesis, clinical features, and epidemiology. However, the main focus will be treatment options currently available for TS including a suggested algorithm based on current evidence. Recently, there have been significant advances in TS therapy, particularly with the development of 2 new vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitors for TS and with new data on the efficacy of deep brain stimulation. The discussion will start with switching antipsychotics and the use of clozapine monotherapy which, despite the lack of higher-level evidence, should be considered for the treatment of psychosis and TS. Anti-dyskinetic drugs are separated into 3 tiers: 1) vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 inhibitors, which have level A evidence, are approved for use in TS and are recommended first-choice agents; 2) drugs with lower level of evidence for efficacy including clonazepam, Ginkgo biloba, and amantadine; and 3) drugs that have the potential to be beneficial, but currently have insufficient evidence including levetiracetam, piracetam, vitamin B(6), melatonin, baclofen, propranolol, zolpidem, and zonisamide. Finally, the roles of botulinum toxin and surgical therapy will be examined. Current therapies, though improved, are symptomatic. Next steps should focus on the prevention and reversal of the pathogenic process.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Since the advent of next-generation sequencing, the number of genes associated with dystonia has been growing exponentially. We provide here a comprehensive review of the latest genetic discoveries in the field of dystonia and discuss how the growing knowledge of biology underlying monogenic dystonias may influence and challenge current classification systems. RECENT FINDINGS: Pathogenic variants in genes without previously confirmed roles in human disease have been identified in subjects affected by isolated or combined dystonia (KMT2B, VPS16, HPCA, KCTD17, DNAJC12, SLC18A2) and complex dystonia (SQSTM1, IRF2BPL, YY1, VPS41). Importantly, the classical distinction between isolated and combined dystonias has become harder to sustain since many genes have been shown to determine multiple dystonic presentations (e.g., ANO3, GNAL, ADCY5, and ATP1A3). In addition, a growing number of genes initially linked to other neurological phenotypes, such as developmental delay, epilepsy, or ataxia, are now recognized to cause prominent dystonia, occasionally in an isolated fashion (e.g., GNAO1, GNB1, SCN8A, RHOBTB2, and COQ8A). Finally, emerging analyses suggest biological convergence of genes linked to different dystonic phenotypes. While our knowledge on the genetic basis of monogenic dystonias has tremendously grown, their clinical boundaries are becoming increasingly blurry. The current phenotype-based classification may not reflect the molecular structure of the disease, urging the need for new systems based on shared biological pathways among dystonia-linked genes.
Tardive dyskinesia is a potentially irreversible, debilitating, hyperkinetic movement disorder that can result from dopamine receptor antagonists. Prompt recognition and resolution of symptoms are instrumental in preventing disease irreversibility, though current treatment options have fallen short of robust, effective, and long-term symptom control. In April 2017, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved 2 new vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) inhibitors, deutetrabenazine and valbenazine, for chorea related to Huntington's disease and tardive dyskinesia, respectively. These agents were pharmacologically modified from tetrabenazine, a VMAT2 inhibitor used off-label in the treatment of tardive dyskinesia. Despite FDA-labeled indications of deutetrabenazine and valbenazine, each agent was explored as a treatment option for those with tardive dyskinesia. In this study, the pharmacologic modifications of the 2 new VMAT2 inhibitors are described, with detailed explanation as to how these may impact clinical practice. The associated case series, observational studies, and clinical trials exploring their use in the treatment of tardive dyskinesia are reported with expert opinion on practice implication.
Tardive dyskinesia remains a significant, potentially stigmatizing or crippling adverse effect for any patient treated with an antipsychotic medication. While second- and third-generation antipsychotics have exhibited lower annual incidence rates for tardive dyskinesia than classic or first-generation agents, 3.9% versus 5.5%, the estimated incidence rate is only modestly lower. When coupled with the fact that second- and third-generation antipsychotic medications have come to be employed in treating a wider range of disorders (e.g., autism spectrum disorders, mood disorders, personality disorders, etc.), it is clear that the population of patients exposed to the risk of tardive dyskinesia has expanded. On April 3, 2017, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a deuterated version of tetrabenazine (Xenozine(R)) for the treatment of the involuntary choreic movements associated with Huntington's disease. More recent data, however, have indicated that deuterium tetrabenazine or deutetrabenazine (Austedo(R)) is effective in treating tardive dyskinesia. Moreover, like the other derivative of tetrabenazine, valbenazine (Ingrezza(R)), deutetrabenazine offers less frequent dosing and a better short-term adverse effect profile than that of tetrabenazine. Longer use in a broader range of patients, however, will be required to identify risks and benefits not found in short-term trials, as well as optimal use parameters for treatment of tardive dyskinesia.
Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a common, iatrogenic movement disorder affecting many individuals treated with dopamine-receptor blocking agents (DRBAs). Studying treatment of TD can be complex, as the symptoms can be affected by changes in either dosage or type of DRBA, as well as by the variable natural course of the disease. Historically many pharmacological therapies have been studied in TD, finding varying degrees of treatment success. Most recently, the VMAT2 inhibitors valbenazine and deutetrabenazine were rigorously studied in TD in large, phase III clinical trials, and were shown to be beneficial in this population. In this article, we will review various treatments of TD, including manipulation of the offending agent, VMAT2 inhibitors, other non-VMAT2-inhibiting medications, and non-pharmacological approaches.
Tardive dyskinesia (TD) is a serious and potentially irreversible side effect of long-term exposure to antipsychotic medication characterized by involuntary trunk, limb and orofacial muscle movements. Various mechanisms have been proposed for the etiopathophysiology of antipsychotic-induced TD in schizophrenia patients with genetic factors playing a prominent role. Earlier association studies have focused on polymorphisms in CYP2D6, dopamine-, serotonin-, GABA- and glutamate genes. This review highlights recent advances in the genetic investigation of TD. Recent promising findings were obtained with the HSPG2, DPP6, MTNR1A, SLC18A2, PIP5K2A and CNR1 genes. More research, including collection of well-characterized samples, enhancement of genome-wide strategies, gene-gene interaction and epigenetic analyses, is needed before genetic tests with clinical utility can be made available for TD.
Tardive dyskinesia (TD) occurs in patients receiving antipsychotic treatment with dopamine receptor antagonists. Despite the prevalence of TD and its negative impact on patients' lives, there has been a lack of approved treatments and limited evidence from controlled trials of pharmacological treatment. Areas covered: PubMed was searched for English-language papers published during 2007-2016 using terms 'tardive dyskinesia' or 'drug-induced movement disorder', and 'treatment'. Studies evaluating pharmacological agents for the treatment of TD were selected. A total of 26 studies (five meta-analyses, twelve randomized controlled trials, and nine open-label observational studies) are reviewed. Expert commentary: Treatment of TD necessitates a stepwise approach. Optimization of antipsychotic therapy should be considered before initiation of antidyskinetic therapies. Data from some recent studies indicate possible improvements in TD after switching antipsychotics or with the use of amantadine, levetiracetam, piracetam, zonisamide, propranolol, vitamin B(6), or certain unregulated herbal medicines; although significance of these improvements is unclear and require further investigation in randomized controlled trials. By contrast, recent evidence from Phase III trials of novel vesicular monoamine transporter-2 inhibitors demonstrates they could have a significant effect on TD symptom severity and suggests these agents may have the potential to transform treatment of TD in coming years.
INTRODUCTION: Assessing candidate gene sequence variations and expression helps to understand methamphetamine use disorder and inform potential treatments. We investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and gene expression in four candidate genes: SLC18A1, SLC18A2, BDNF, and FAAH, between controls and people with methamphetamine use disorder. METHODS: Fifty-nine participants (29 people with methamphetamine use disorder and 30 controls) completed a clinical interview, cognitive tasks, and provided a blood sample. SLC18A1, SLC18A2, BDNF, and FAAH SNPs were genotyped, and gene expression was assessed with real-time quantitative PCR. RESULTS: SLC18A1 Pro4Thr was associated with methamphetamine use disorder (OR = 6.22; p = .007). SLC18A2 variants, rs363227 and rs363387, were negatively associated with methamphetamine use severity (p = .003) and positively associated with inhibitory control performance (p = .006), respectively. BDNF Val66Met was associated with the severity of use (p = .008). SLC18A2 and FAAH mRNA levels were lower in people who use methamphetamine relative to controls (p = .021 and .010, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: SLC18A1 is identified for the first time to play a potential role in methamphetamine use disorder. Lower levels of blood SLC18A2 and FAAH mRNA in people with methamphetamine use disorder suggest reduced monoamine reuptake, recycling, or release, and higher anandamide levels in this clinical group, which may be potential therapeutic targets.
