Solute carrier family 22 member 1; Translocates a broad array of organic cations with various structures and molecular weights including the model compounds 1- methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP), tetraethylammonium (TEA), N-1- methylnicotinamide (NMN), 4-(4-(dimethylamino)styryl)-N- methylpyridinium (ASP), the endogenous compounds choline, guanidine, histamine, epinephrine, adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine, and the drugs quinine, and metformin. The transport of organic cations is inhibited by a broad array of compounds like tetramethylammonium (TMA), cocaine, lidocaine, NMDA recepto [...] 
The SLC22 transporter family consists of more than two dozen members, which are expressed in the kidney, the liver, and other tissues. Evolutionary analysis indicates that SLC22 transporters fall into at least six subfamilies: OAT (organic anion transporter), OAT-like, OAT-related, OCT (organic cation transporter), OCTN (organic cation/carnitine transporter), and OCT/OCTN-related. Some-including OAT1 [SLC22A6 or NKT (novel kidney transporter)] and OAT3 (SLC22A8), as well as OCT1 (SLC22A1) and OCT2 (SLC22A2)-are widely studied drug transporters. Nevertheless, analyses of knockout mice and other data indicate that SLC22 transporters regulate key metabolic pathways and levels of signaling molecules (e.g., gut microbiome products, bile acids, tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates, dietary flavonoids and other nutrients, prostaglandins, vitamins, short-chain fatty acids, urate, and ergothioneine), as well as uremic toxins associated with chronic kidney disease. Certain SLC22 transporters-such as URAT1 (SLC22A12) and OCTN2 (SLC22A5)-are mutated in inherited metabolic diseases. A new systems biology view of transporters is emerging. As proposed in the remote sensing and signaling hypothesis, SLC22 transporters, together with other SLC and ABC transporters, have key roles in interorgan and interorganism small-molecule communication and, together with the neuroendocrine, growth factor-cytokine, and other homeostatic systems, regulate local and whole-body homeostasis.
During the last decade, a greater focus has been given to impact of genetic variation in membrane transporters on the pharmacokinetics and toxicity of numerous therapeutic drugs. While the majority of transporter-related pharmacogenetic research has been in regards to classic genes encoding the outward-directed ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, such as ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein), ABCC2 (MRP2), and ABCG2 (BCRP), more studies have been conducted in recent years evaluating genes encoding solute carriers (SLC) that mediate the cellular uptake of drugs, such as SLCO1B1 (OATP1B1) and SLC22A1 (OCT1). The distribution of ABC and SLC transporters in tissues key to pharmacokinetics, such as intestine (absorption), blood-brain-barrier (distribution), liver (metabolism), and kidneys (excretion), strongly suggests that genetic variation associated with changes in protein expression or function of these transporters may have a substantial impact on systemic drug exposure and toxicity. In this current article, we will review recent advances in understanding the contribution of critical ABC and SLC transporters to interindividual pharmacokinetic and dynamic variability of substrate drugs.
A wide range of endogenous and xenobiotic organic ions require facilitated transport systems to cross the plasma membrane for their disposition. In mammals, organic cation transporter (OCT) subtypes 1 and 2 (OCT1 and OCT2, also known as SLC22A1 and SLC22A2, respectively) are polyspecific transporters responsible for the uptake and clearance of structurally diverse cationic compounds in the liver and kidneys, respectively. Notably, it is well established that human OCT1 and OCT2 play central roles in the pharmacokinetics and drug-drug interactions of many prescription medications, including metformin. Despite their importance, the basis of polyspecific cationic drug recognition and the alternating access mechanism for OCTs have remained a mystery. Here we present four cryo-electron microscopy structures of apo, substrate-bound and drug-bound OCT1 and OCT2 consensus variants, in outward-facing and outward-occluded states. Together with functional experiments, in silico docking and molecular dynamics simulations, these structures uncover general principles of organic cation recognition by OCTs and provide insights into extracellular gate occlusion. Our findings set the stage for a comprehensive structure-based understanding of OCT-mediated drug-drug interactions, which will prove critical in the preclinical evaluation of emerging therapeutics.
Contrasting results have been reported on the role of rs628031 and rs683369 polymorphisms of SLC22A1 and rs776746 of CYP3A5 on imatinib treatment response in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In the present study, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of published studies to estimate the impact of the above-mentioned gene variants on major molecular response (MMR) or complete cytogenetic response (CCyR) in imatinib-treated CML patients. We performed a comprehensive search through PubMed, Web of Knowledge, and Cochrane databases up to September 2017. The pooled analyses showed association between carriers of SLC22A1 rs628031A allele (GA + AA vs GG, OR: 0.58, 95% CI: 0.38-0.88, P = 0.011) or rs683369G allele (CG + GG vs CC, OR: 0.64, 95% CI: 0.42-0.96, P = 0.032) and a lower MMR rate. The combined analyses also revealed a correlation between the dominant (GG + AG vs AA, OR: 2.43, 95%CI: 1.12-5.27, P = 0.024) or the allelic model (G vs A, OR: 1.72, 95% CI: 1.09-2.72, P = 0.020) of CYP3A5 rs776746 with higher CCyR rates. The subsequent sensitivity analysis confirmed the statistical significance of CYP3A5 rs776746 among Asian CML patients (dominant model OR: 3.90; 95%CI: 2.47-6.14, P < 0.001; allelic model OR: 2.08; 95% CI: 1.47-2.95, P < 0.001). In conclusion, the present meta-analysis supports the association of SLC22A1 and CYP3A5 genotypes with clinical imatinib response rates of CML patients, nevertheless further large studies, particularly in Caucasians, are still warranted to provide conclusive evidences.
In recent years, our understanding of the importance of membrane transporters (MTs) in the disposition of and response to drugs has increased significantly. MTs are proteins that regulate the transport of endogenous molecules and xenobiotics across the cell membrane. In mammals, two super-families have been identified: ATP-binding cassette (ABC) and solute carrier (SLC) transporters. There is evidence that MTs might mediate polyamines (PA) transport. PA are ubiquitous polycations which are found in all living cells. In mammalian cells, three major PA are synthesised: putrescine, spermidine and spermine; whilst the decarboxylated arginine (agmatine) is not produced by mammals but is synthesised by plants and bacteria. In addition, research in the PA field suggests that PA are transported into cells via a specific transporter, the polyamine transport system(s) (PTS). Although the PTS has not been fully defined, there is evidence that some of the known MTs might be involved in PA transport. In this mini review, eight SLC transporters will be reviewed and their potential to mediate PA transport in human cells discussed. These transporters are SLC22A1, SLC22A2, SLC22A3, SLC47A1, SLC7A1, SLC3A2, SLC12A8A, and SLC22A16. Preliminary data from our laboratory have revealed that SLC22A1 might be involved in the PA uptake; in addition to one member of ABC superfamily (MDR1 protein) might also mediate the efflux of polyamine like molecules.
Metformin is recommended as first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes (T2D) by all major diabetes guidelines. With appropriate usage it is safe and effective overall, but its efficacy and tolerability show considerable variation between individuals. It is a substrate for several drug transporters and polymorphisms in these transporter genes have shown effects on metformin pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Areas covered: This article provides a review of the current status of the influence of transporter pharmacogenomics on metformin efficacy and tolerability. The transporter variants identified to have an important influence on the absorption, distribution, and elimination of metformin, particularly those in organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, gene SLC22A1), are reviewed. Expert opinion: Candidate gene studies have shown that genetic variations in SLC22A1 and other drug transporters influence the pharmacokinetics, glycemic responses, and gastrointestinal intolerance to metformin, although results are somewhat discordant. Conversely, genome-wide association studies of metformin response have identified signals in the pharmacodynamic pathways rather than the transporters involved in metformin disposition. Currently, pharmacogenomic testing to predict metformin response and tolerability may not have a clinical role, but with additional data from larger studies and availability of safe and effective alternative antidiabetic agents, this is likely to change.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most significant causes of cancer-related deaths in the worldwide. Currently, predicting the survival of patients with HCC and developing treatment drugs still remain a significant challenge. In this study, we employed prognosis-related genes to develop and externally validate a predictive risk model. Furthermore, the correlation between signaling pathways, immune cell infiltration, immunotherapy response, drug sensitivity, and risk score was investigated using different algorithm platforms in HCC. Our results showed that 11 differentially expressed genes including UBE2C, PTTG1, TOP2A, SPP1, FCN3, SLC22A1, ADH4, CYP2C8, SLC10A1, F9, and FBP1 were identified as being related to prognosis, which were integrated to construct a prediction model. Our model could accurately predict patients' overall survival using both internal and external datasets. Moreover, a strong correlation was revealed between the signaling pathway, immune cell infiltration, immunotherapy response, and risk score. Importantly, a novel potential drug candidate for HCC treatment was discovered based on the risk score and also validated through ex vivo experiments. Our finds offer a novel perspective on prognosis prediction and drug exploration for cancer patients.
Organic cation transporters (OCT) 1, 2 and 3 and novel organic cation transporters (OCTN) 1 and 2 of the solute carrier 22 (SLC22) family are involved in the cellular transport of endogenous compounds such as neurotransmitters, l-carnitine and ergothioneine. OCT/Ns have also been implicated in the transport of xenobiotics across various biological barriers, for example biguanides and histamine receptor antagonists. In addition, several drugs used in the treatment of respiratory disorders are cations at physiological pH and potential substrates of OCT/Ns. OCT/Ns may also be associated with the development of chronic lung diseases such as allergic asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and, thus, are possible new drug targets. As part of the Special Issue "Physiology, Biochemistry and Pharmacology of Transporters for Organic Cations", this review provides an overview of recent findings on the (patho)physiological and pharmacological functions of organic cation transporters in the lung.
"OCT1" is used in the literature to describe two distinct genes and their resulting proteins, namely organic cation transporter 1 (encoded by SLC22A1) and octamer binding transcription factor 1 (encoded by POU2F1). The interchangeable use of "OCT1" is misleading and could result in erroneous research data.
Dementia is an important issue in western societies, and in the following years, this problem will also rise in the developing regions, such as Africa and Asia. The most common types of dementia in adults are Alzheimer's Disease (AD), Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) and Vascular Dementia (VaD), of which, AD accounts for more than half of the cases. The most prominent symptom of AD is cognitive impairment, currently treated with four drugs: Donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine, enhancing cholinergic transmission; as well as memantine, protecting neurons against glutamate excitotoxicity. Despite ongoing efforts, no new drugs in the treatment of AD have been registered for the last ten years, thus multiple studies have been conducted on genetic factors affecting the efficacy of antidementia pharmacotherapy. The researchers investigate the effects of variants in multiple genes, such as ABCB1, ACE, CHAT, CHRNA7, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP3A7, NR1I2, NR1I3, POR, PPAR, RXR, SLC22A1/2/5, SLC47A1, UGT1A6, UGT1A9 and UGT2B7, associated with numerous pathways: the development of pathological proteins, formation and metabolism of acetylcholine, transport, metabolism and excretion of antidementia drugs and transcription factors regulating the expression of genes responsible for metabolism and transport of drugs. The most promising results have been demonstrated for APOE E4, dementia risk variant, BCHE-K, reduced butyrylcholinesterase activity variant, and CYP2D6 UM, ultrarapid hepatic metabolism. Further studies investigate the possibilities of the development of emerging drugs or genetic editing by CRISPR/Cas9 for causative treatment. In conclusion, the pharmacogenetic studies on dementia diseases may improve the efficacy of pharmacotherapy in some patients with beneficial genetic variants, at the same time, identifying the carriers of unfavorable alleles, the potential group of novel approaches to the treatment and prevention of dementia.
This study included 24 healthy volunteers who received a single 37.5 mg oral dose of tramadol. We analyzed 18 polymorphisms within CYP2D6, CYP2B6, CYP3A, COMT, ABCB1, SLC22A1 and OPRM1 genes by quantitative PCR, to study whether these polymorphisms affect its pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and safety. CYP2D6 intermediate metabolizers (n = 6) showed higher tramadol plasma concentrations and lower clearance compared with normal and ultrarapid metabolizers. CYP2B6 G516T T/T (n = 2) genotype was also associated to higher tramadol plasma levels. No other polymorphism affected tramadol pharmacokinetics. Three volunteers experienced a prolonged QTc not associated with the genetic variants studied or altered phamacokinetic parameters. The correlation of CYP2B6 genotype with higher tramadol concentrations is remarkable since its influence on its elimination is also relevant and has been less studied to date. However, given our small sample size, it is important to interpret our results with caution.
Aerobic glycolysis has pleiotropic roles in the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Emerging studies revealed key promoters of aerobic glycolysis, however, little is known about its negative regulators in HCC. In this study, an integrative analysis identifies a repertoire of differentially expressed genes (DNASE1L3, SLC22A1, ACE2, CES3, CCL14, GYS2, ADH4, and CFHR3) that are inversely associated with the glycolytic phenotype in HCC. ACE2, a member of the rennin-angiotensin system, is revealed to be downregulated in HCC and predicts a poor prognosis. ACE2 overexpression significantly inhibits the glycolytic flux as evidenced by reduced glucose uptake, lactate release, extracellular acidification rate, and the expression of glycolytic genes. Opposite results are noticed in loss-of-function studies. Mechanistically, ACE2 metabolizes Ang II to Ang-(1-7), which activates Mas receptor and leads to the phosphorylation of Src homology 2-containing inositol phosphatase 2 (SHP-2). SHP2 activation further blocks reactive oxygen species (ROS)-HIF1alpha signaling. Addition of Ang-(1-7) or the antioxidant N-acetylcysteine compromises in vivo additive tumor growth and aerobic glycolysis induced by ACE2 knockdown. Moreover, growth advantages afforded by ACE2 knockdown are largely glycolysis-dependent. In clinical settings, a close link between ACE2 expression and HIF1alpha or the phosphorated level of SHP2 is found. Overexpression of ACE2 significantly retards tumor growth in patient-derived xenograft model. Collectively, our findings suggest that ACE2 is a negative glycolytic regulator, and targeting the ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/Mas receptor/ROS/HIF1alpha axis may be a promising therapeutic strategy for HCC treatment.
The relationship between rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and early onset atherosclerosis is well depicted, each with an important inflammatory component. Glycoprotein acetyls (GlycA), a novel biomarker of inflammation, may play a role in the manifestation of these two inflammatory conditions. The present study examined a potential mediating role of GlycA within the RA-atherosclerosis relationship to determine whether it accounts for the excess risk of cardiovascular disease over that posed by lipid risk factors. The UK Biobank dataset was acquired to establish associations among RA, atherosclerosis, GlycA, and major lipid factors: total cholesterol (TC), high- and low-density lipoprotein (HDL, LDL) cholesterol, and triglycerides (TGs). Genome-wide association study summary statistics were collected from various resources to perform genetic analyses. Causality among variables was tested using Mendelian Randomization (MR) analysis. Genes of interest were identified using colocalization analysis and gene enrichment analysis. MR results appeared to indicate that the genetic relationship between GlycA and RA and also between RA and atherosclerosis was explained by horizontal pleiotropy (p-value = 0.001 and <0.001, respectively), while GlycA may causally predict atherosclerosis (p-value = 0.017). Colocalization analysis revealed several functionally relevant genes shared between GlycA and all the variables assessed. Two loci were apparent in all relationships tested and included the HLA region as well as SLC22A1. GlycA appears to mediate the RA-atherosclerosis relationship through several possible pathways. GlycA, although pleiotropically related to RA, appears to causally predict atherosclerosis. Thus, GlycA is suggested as a significant factor in the etiology of atherosclerosis development in RA.
Organic cation transporters (OCTs) of the solute carrier family (SLC) 22 are the subject of intensive research because they mediate the transport of many clinically-relevant drugs such as the antidiabetic agent metformin, the opioid tramadol, and the antimigraine agent sumatriptan. OCT1 (SLC22A1) and OCT2 (SLC22A2) are highly expressed in human liver and kidney, respectively, while OCT3 (SLC22A3) shows a broader tissue distribution. As suggested from studies using knockout mice, particularly OCT2 and OCT3 appear to be of relevance for brain physiological function and drug response. The knowledge of genetic factors and epigenetic modifications affecting function and expression of OCTs is important for a better understanding of disease mechanisms and for personalized treatment of patients. This review briefly summarizes the impact of genetic variants and epigenetic regulation of OCTs in general. A comprehensive overview is given on the consequences of OCT2 and OCT3 knockout in mice and the implications of genetic OCT2 and OCT3 variants on central nervous system function in humans.
Genome-wide association studies have identified a signal at the SLC22A1 locus for serum acylcarnitines, intermediate metabolites of mitochondrial oxidation whose plasma levels associate with metabolic diseases. Here, we refined the association signal, performed conditional analyses, and examined the linkage structure to find coding variants of SLC22A1 that mediate independent association signals at the locus. We also employed allele-specific expression analysis to find potential regulatory variants of SLC22A1 and demonstrated the effect of one variant on the splicing of SLC22A1. SLC22A1 encodes a hepatic plasma membrane transporter whose role in acylcarnitine physiology has not been described. By targeted metabolomics and isotope tracing experiments in loss- and gain-of-function cell and mouse models of Slc22a1, we uncovered a role of SLC22A1 in the efflux of acylcarnitines from the liver to the circulation. We further validated the impacts of human variants on SLC22A1-mediated acylcarnitine efflux in vitro, explaining their association with serum acylcarnitine levels. Our findings provide the detailed molecular mechanisms of the GWAS association for serum acylcarnitines at the SLC22A1 locus by functionally validating the impact of SLC22A1 and its variants on acylcarnitine transport.
Primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) have been the gold standard in vitro model for the human liver and are crucial to predict hepatic drug-drug interactions. The aim of this work was to assess the utility of 3D spheroid PHHs to study induction of important cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and drug transporters. The 3D spheroid PHHs from three different donors were treated for 4 days with rifampicin, dicloxacillin, flucloxacillin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, efavirenz, omeprazole, or beta-naphthoflavone. Induction of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, and transporters P-glycoprotein (P-gp)/ABCB1, multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2)/ABCC2, ABCG2, organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1)/SLC22A1, SLC22A7, SLCO1B1, and SLCO1B3 were evaluated at mRNA and protein levels. Enzyme activity of CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6 were also assessed. Induction of CYP3A4 protein and mRNA correlated well for all donors and compounds and had a maximal induction of five- to sixfold for rifampicin, which closely correlates to induction observed in clinical studies. Rifampicin induced the mRNA of CYP2B6 and CYP2C8 by 9- and 12-fold, whereas the protein levels of these CYPs reached 2- and 3-fold induction, respectively. Rifampicin induced CYP2C9 protein by 1.4-fold, whereas the induction of CYP2C9 mRNA was over 2-fold in all donors. Rifampicin induced ABCB1, ABCC2, and ABCG2 by 2-fold. In conclusion, 3D spheroid PHHs is a valid model to investigate mRNA and protein induction of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters, and this model provides a solid basis to study induction of CYPs and transporters, which translates to clinical relevance.
Beside drug metabolizing enzymes alsogenetically variable membrane transporters may substantially contribute to the interindividual variability in pharmacokinetics and efficacy of opioids and other analgesics. The organic cation transporter OCT1 is strongly expressed in the sinusoidal membrane of the human liver. It may affect hepatic uptake and thus limit metabolic rates. OCT1 is highly genetically variable. Genetic polymorphisms lead to substantially reduced OCT1 activity in up to 9% of the Europeans and the white Americans. This review summarize the data on the effect of OCT1 polymorphisms on pharmacokinetics and efficacy of opioids like morphine, codeine, and tramadol and of anti-migraine drugs. It discuss currently possible applications and perspectives for establishing OCT1 pharmacogenetics as a useful tool in personalized pain management.
The literature concerning the roles of metal transporting solute carriers in the development and progression of human cancer, and in the delivery of metal-containing anticancer drugs, chemical carcinogens and imaging agents, is reviewed. A range of different solute carrier families, including members from the SLC2A, SLC11A, SLC22A, SLC25A, SLC30A, SLC31A, SLC39A, SLC40A, SLC47A and SLCO1B families, and various metal substrates, including arsenic, copper, gadolinium, iron, platinum and zinc, have been implicated in these cancer-related transport processes. For example, the transport of platinum-based anticancer drugs has been reported to be influenced by the expression and activities of OCT1-3 (SLC22A1-3), OCTN1/2 (SLC22A4/5), CTR1/2 (SLC31A1/2) and MATE1/2 (SLC47A1/2) solute carriers. As another example, solute carriers mediate control over the availability of endogenous metal ions, such as copper, iron and zinc, may have key roles in regulating tumour angiogenesis, cell proliferation, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and aberrant MAPK and STAT-3 signal transduction in cancer. In conclusion, emerging mechanisms involving metal transporting solute carriers are being defined and seem likely to make major contributions to cancer development and progression, and to the delivery of anticancer and tumour imaging agents.
The SCL22A1 gene encodes the broad selectivity transporter hOCT1. hOCT1 is expressed in most epithelial barriers thereby contributing to drug pharmacokinetics. It is also expressed in different drug target cells, including immune system cells and others. Thus, this membrane protein might also contribute to drug pharmacodynamics. Up to 1000 hOCT1 polymorphisms have been identified so far, although only a small fraction of those have been mechanistically studied. A paradigm in the field of drug transporter pharmacogenetics is the impact of hOCT1 gene variability on metformin clinical parameters, affecting area under the concentration-time curve, Cmax and responsiveness. However, hOCT1 also mediates the translocation of a variety of drugs used as anticancer, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, antiemetic agents as well as drugs used in the treatment of neurological diseases among. This review focuses exclusively on those drugs for which some pharmacogenetic data are available, and aims at highlighting the need for further clinical research in this area.
