Solute carrier family 22 member 8; Plays an important role in the excretion/detoxification of endogenous and exogenous organic anions, especially from the brain and kidney. Involved in the transport basolateral of steviol, fexofenadine. Transports benzylpenicillin (PCG), estrone-3-sulfate (E1S), cimetidine (CMD), 2,4-dichloro-phenoxyacetate (2,4-D), p-amino-hippurate (PAH), acyclovir (ACV) and ochratoxin (OTA). Belongs to the major facilitator (TC 2.A.1) superfamily. Organic cation transporter (TC 2.A.1.19) family.
Introduction: Thyroid hormone transporters are essential for thyroid hormones to enter target cells. Monocarboxylate transporter (MCT) 8 is a key transporter and is expressed at the blood-brain barrier (BBB), in neural cells and many other tissues. Patients with MCT8 deficiency have severe neurodevelopmental delays because of cerebral hypothyroidism and chronic sequelae of peripheral thyrotoxicosis. The T3 analog 3,3',5-triiodothyroacetic acid (TRIAC) rescued neurodevelopmental features in animal models mimicking MCT8 deficiency and improved key metabolic features in patients with MCT8 deficiency. However, the identity of the transporter(s) that facilitate TRIAC transport are unknown. Here, we screened candidate transporters that are expressed at the human BBB and/or brain-cerebrospinal fluid barrier and known thyroid hormone transporters for TRIAC transport. Materials and Methods: Plasma membrane expression was determined by cell surface biotinylation assays. Intracellular accumulation of 1 nM TRIAC was assessed in COS-1 cells expressing candidate transporters in Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS)/0.1% glucose or Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) with or without 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Expression of Slc22a8 was determined by fluorescent in situ hybridization in brain sections from wild-type and Mct8/Oatp1c1 knockout mice at postnatal days 12, 21, and 120. Results: In total, 59 plasma membrane transporters were selected for screening of TRIAC accumulation (n = 40 based on expression at the human BBB and/or brain-cerebrospinal fluid barrier and having small organic molecules as substrates; n = 19 known thyroid hormone transporters). Screening of the selected transporter panel showed that 18 transporters facilitated significant intracellular accumulation of TRIAC in DPBS/0.1% glucose or DMEM in the absence of BSA. In the presence of BSA, substantial transport was noted for SLCO1B1 and SLC22A8 (in DPBS/0.1% glucose and DMEM) and SLC10A1, SLC22A6, and SLC22A24 (in DMEM). The zebrafish and mouse orthologs of these transporters similarly facilitated intracellular accumulation of TRIAC. Highest Slc22a8 mRNA expression was detected in mouse brain capillary endothelial cells and choroid plexus epithelial cells at early postnatal time points, but was reduced at P120. Conclusions: Human SLC10A1, SLCO1B1, SLC22A6, SLC22A8, and SLC22A24 as well as their mouse and zebrafish orthologs are efficient TRIAC transporters. These findings contribute to the understanding of TRIAC treatment in patients with MCT8 deficiency and animal models thereof.
The SLC22 transporter family consists of more than two dozen members, which are expressed in the kidney, the liver, and other tissues. Evolutionary analysis indicates that SLC22 transporters fall into at least six subfamilies: OAT (organic anion transporter), OAT-like, OAT-related, OCT (organic cation transporter), OCTN (organic cation/carnitine transporter), and OCT/OCTN-related. Some-including OAT1 [SLC22A6 or NKT (novel kidney transporter)] and OAT3 (SLC22A8), as well as OCT1 (SLC22A1) and OCT2 (SLC22A2)-are widely studied drug transporters. Nevertheless, analyses of knockout mice and other data indicate that SLC22 transporters regulate key metabolic pathways and levels of signaling molecules (e.g., gut microbiome products, bile acids, tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates, dietary flavonoids and other nutrients, prostaglandins, vitamins, short-chain fatty acids, urate, and ergothioneine), as well as uremic toxins associated with chronic kidney disease. Certain SLC22 transporters-such as URAT1 (SLC22A12) and OCTN2 (SLC22A5)-are mutated in inherited metabolic diseases. A new systems biology view of transporters is emerging. As proposed in the remote sensing and signaling hypothesis, SLC22 transporters, together with other SLC and ABC transporters, have key roles in interorgan and interorganism small-molecule communication and, together with the neuroendocrine, growth factor-cytokine, and other homeostatic systems, regulate local and whole-body homeostasis.
The coordinated movement of organic anions (e.g., drugs, metabolites, signaling molecules, nutrients, antioxidants, gut microbiome products) between tissues and body fluids depends, in large part, on organic anion transporters (OATs) [solute carrier 22 (SLC22)], organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) [solute carrier organic (SLCO)], and multidrug resistance proteins (MRPs) [ATP-binding cassette, subfamily C (ABCC)]. Depending on the range of substrates, transporters in these families can be considered multispecific, oligospecific, or (relatively) monospecific. Systems biology analyses of these transporters in the context of expression patterns reveal they are hubs in networks involved in interorgan and interorganismal communication. The remote sensing and signaling theory explains how the coordinated functions of drug transporters, drug-metabolizing enzymes, and regulatory proteins play a role in optimizing systemic and local levels of important endogenous small molecules. We focus on the role of OATs, OATPs, and MRPs in endogenous metabolism and how their substrates (e.g., bile acids, short chain fatty acids, urate, uremic toxins) mediate interorgan and interorganismal communication and help maintain and restore homeostasis in healthy and disease states.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is one of the most common renal malignancies worldwide. SLC22A8 plays a key role in renal excretion of organic anions. However, its role in ccRCC remains unclear; therefore, this study aimed to elucidate the relationship between SLC22A8 and ccRCC. The The Cancer Genome Atlas-kidney renal clear cell carcinoma cohort was included in this study. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test and logistic regression were used to analyze the relationship between SLC22A8 expression and clinicopathological characteristics. Multifactorial analysis and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were adopted for correlation between SLC22A8 expression and clinicopathological parameters and overall survival. Utilizing the UALCAN database, the correlation of the expression levels of SLC22A8 DNA methylation in ccRCC was explored. Immunological characterization of SLC22A8 regarding the ccRCC tumor microenvironment was carried out by the single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis algorithm and the CIBERSORT algorithm. With the CellMiner database, the analysis of the association between SLC22A8 gene expression and drug sensitivity was further performed. Eventually, gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genome enrichment analyses were applied to identify the functional and signaling pathways involved in SLC22A8. SLC22A8 expression is associated with age, grade, stage, and tumor status. SLC22A8 protein expression levels, phosphorylated protein levels, and DNA methylation expression levels were lower in ccRCC tissues than in normal tissues, and low methylation levels predicted poor overall survival. Comprehensive analysis of tumor immune infiltration and the tumor microenvironment indicated a higher level of overall immunity in the SLC22A8 low expression group. Gene Enrichment Analysis results showed that low expression of SLC22A8 was associated with immune pathways, such as phagocytosis recognition and humoral immune response. SLC22A8 expression was significantly correlated with survival and immune infiltration in ccRCC and can be used as a prognostic biomarker for ccRCC.
Cynomolgus macaques are used in preclinical studies in part because of their evolutionary closeness to humans. However, drug transporters [including solute carrier (SLC) transporters] essential for the absorption and excretion of drugs have not been fully investigated at the molecular level in cynomolgus macaques. We identified and characterized cynomolgus macaque SLC15A1, SLC15A2, SLC22A1, SLC22A2, SLC22A6, SLC22A8, SLC47A1, and SLC47A2, along with SLCO (formerly SLC21A) transporters SLCO1A2, SLCO1B1, SLCO1B3, and SLCO2B1. These cynomolgus SLC transporters had high amino acid sequence identities (92-97%) with their human orthologs and contained sequence motifs characteristic of SLC transporters. Phylogenetic analysis showed that these cynomolgus SLC transporters were more closely clustered with their human orthologs than with those of dogs, rats, or mice. Gene structure and genomic organization were similar in macaques and humans. Cynomolgus SLC transporter mRNAs showed distinct tissue expression patterns, being most abundantly expressed in jejunum (SLC15A1), liver (SLC22A1, SLCO1B1, and SLCO2B1), and kidney (SLC15A2, SLC22A2, SLC22A6, SLC22A8, SLC47A1, SLC47A2, and SLCO1A2). In contrast, cynomolgus SLCO2B1 mRNA was more ubiquitously expressed. Among these SLC mRNAs, the most abundant in liver was SLCO1B1, in jejunum SLC15A1, and in kidney SLC22A2. These results suggest similar characteristics of SLC transporters in cynomolgus macaques and humans.
The organic anion transporter (OAT) subfamily, which constitutes roughly half of the SLC22 (solute carrier 22) transporter family, has received a great deal of attention because of its role in handling of common drugs (antibiotics, antivirals, diuretics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), toxins (mercury, aristolochic acid), and nutrients (vitamins, flavonoids). Oats are expressed in many tissues, including kidney, liver, choroid plexus, olfactory mucosa, brain, retina, and placenta. Recent metabolomics and microarray data from Oat1 [Slc22a6, originally identified as NKT (novel kidney transporter)] and Oat3 (Slc22a8) knockouts, as well as systems biology studies, indicate that this pathway plays a central role in the metabolism and handling of gut microbiome metabolites as well as putative uremic toxins of kidney disease. Nuclear receptors and other transcription factors, such as Hnf4alpha and Hnf1alpha, appear to regulate the expression of certain Oats in conjunction with phase I and phase II drug metabolizing enzymes. Some Oats have a strong selectivity for particular signaling molecules, including cyclic nucleotides, conjugated sex steroids, odorants, uric acid, and prostaglandins and/or their metabolites. According to the "Remote Sensing and Signaling Hypothesis," which is elaborated in detail here, Oats may function in remote interorgan communication by regulating levels of signaling molecules and key metabolites in tissues and body fluids. Oats may also play a major role in interorganismal communication (via movement of small molecules across the intestine, placental barrier, into breast milk, and volatile odorants into the urine). The role of various Oat isoforms in systems physiology appears quite complex, and their ramifications are discussed in the context of remote sensing and signaling.
BACKGROUND: Methotrexate (MTX) is one of the leading chemotherapeutic agents with the bestdemonstrated efficacies against childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Due to the narrow therapeutic range, significant inter- and intra-patient variabilities of MTX, non-effectiveness and/or toxicity occur abruptly to cause chemotherapeutic interruption or discontinuation. The relationship between clinical outcome and the systemic concentration of MTX has been well established, making the monitoring of plasma MTX levels critical in the treatment of ALL. Besides metabolizing enzymes, multiple transporters are also involved in determining the intracellular drug levels. In this mini-review, we focused on the genetic polymorphisms of MTX-disposition related transporters and the potential association between the discussed genetic variants and MTX pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and toxicity in the context of MTX treatment. METHODS: We searched PubMed for citations published in English using the terms "methotrexate", "transporter", "acute lymphoblastic leukemia", "polymorphisms", and "therapeutic drug monitoring". The retrieval papers were critically reviewed and summarized according to the aims of this mini-review. RESULTS: Solute carrier (SLC) transporters (SLC19A1, SLCO1A2, SLCO1B1, and SLC22A8) and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters (ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCC3, ABCC4, ABCC5, and ABCG2) mediate MTX disposition. Of note, the influences of polymorphisms of SLC19A1, SLCO1B1 and ABCB1 genes on the clinical outcome of MTX have been extensively studied. CONCLUSION: Overall, the data critically reviewed in this mini-review article confirmed that polymorphisms in the genes encoding SLC and ABC transporters confer higher sensitivity to altered plasma levels, MTX-induced toxicity, and therapeutic response in pediatric patients with ALL. Pre-emptive determination may be helpful in individualizing treatment.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Uric acid homeostasis in the body is mediated by a number of SLC and ABC transporters in the kidney and intestine, including several multispecific 'drug' transporters (e.g., OAT1, OAT3, and ABCG2). Optimization of uric acid levels can be viewed as a 'systems biology' problem. Here, we consider uric acid transporters from a systems physiology perspective using the framework of the 'Remote Sensing and Signaling Hypothesis.' This hypothesis explains how SLC and ABC 'drug' and other transporters mediate interorgan and interorganismal communication (e.g., gut microbiome and host) via small molecules (e.g., metabolites, antioxidants signaling molecules) through transporters expressed in tissues lining body fluid compartments (e.g., blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid). RECENT FINDINGS: The list of uric acid transporters includes: SLC2A9, ABCG2, URAT1 (SLC22A12), OAT1 (SLC22A6), OAT3 (SLC22A8), OAT4 (SLC22A11), OAT10 (SLC22A13), NPT1 (SLC17A1), NPT4 (SLC17A3), MRP2 (ABCC2), MRP4 (ABCC4). Normally, SLC2A9, - along with URAT1, OAT1 and OAT3, - appear to be the main transporters regulating renal urate handling, while ABCG2 appears to regulate intestinal transport. In chronic kidney disease (CKD), intestinal ABCG2 becomes much more important, suggesting remote organ communication between the injured kidney and the intestine. SUMMARY: The remote sensing and signaling hypothesis provides a useful systems-level framework for understanding the complex interplay of uric acid transporters expressed in different tissues involved in optimizing uric acid levels under normal and diseased (e.g., CKD, gut microflora dysbiosis) conditions.
The OAT1 (SLC22A6) and OAT3 (SLC22A8) urate transporters are located on the basolateral membrane of the proximal renal tubules, where they ensure the uptake of uric acid from the urine back into the body. In a cohort of 150 Czech patients with primary hyperuricemia and gout, we examined the coding regions of both genes using PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing. Variants p.P104L (rs11568627) and p.A190T (rs146282438) were identified in the gene for solute carrier family 22 member 6 (SLC22A6) and variants p.R149C (rs45566039), p.V448I (rs11568486) and p.R513Q (rs145474422) in the gene solute carrier family 22 member 8 (SLC22A8). We performed a functional study of these rare non-synonymous variants using the HEK293T cell line. We found that only p.R149C significantly reduced uric acid transport in vitro. Our results could deepen the understanding of uric acid handling in the kidneys and the molecular mechanism of uric acid transport by the OAT family of organic ion transporters.
The organic anion transporter (OAT) family encoded by SLC22A mediates the absorption, distribution, and excretion of a diverse array of environmental toxins, and clinically important drugs, including anti-HIV therapeutics, anti-tumor drugs, antibiotics, anti-hypertensives, and anti-inflammatories, and therefore is critical for the survival of mammalian species. Several OATs have been identified: OAT1 (SLC22A6), OAT2 (SLC22A7), OAT3 (SLC22A8), OAT4 (SLC22A11), OAT5 (SLC22A19) OAT6 (SLC22A20) and URAT1 (SLC22A12). The expressions of these OATs have been detected in key organs such as kidney, liver, brain and placenta. OAT dysfunction in these organs may contribute to the renal, hepatic, neurological and fetal toxicity and diseases. In this review, we summarize, according to the work done by our laboratory as well as by others, the most updated molecular studies on these OAT members, especially on the aspect of their structure-function relationships. The functional roles of N-glycosylation, transmembrane domains and individual amino acids, cell surface assembly, as well as associating proteins will be discussed. In addition, we will show the recent analyses of coding region polymorphisms of OATs, which give us information on the genetic variants of OATs and their potential effects on OAT functions.
Identifying the genetic determinants of inter-individual variation in lipid species (lipidome) may provide deeper understanding and additional insight into the mechanistic effect of complex lipidomic pathways in CVD risk and progression beyond simple traditional lipids. Previous studies have been largely population based and thus only powered to discover associations with common genetic variants. Founder populations represent a powerful resource to accelerate discovery of previously unknown biology associated with rare population alleles that have risen to higher frequency due to genetic drift. We performed a genome-wide association scan of 355 lipid species in 650 individuals from the Amish founder population including 127 lipid species not previously tested. To the best of our knowledge, we report for the first time the lipid species associated with two rare-population but Amish-enriched lipid variants: APOB_rs5742904 and APOC3_rs76353203. We also identified novel associations for 3 rare-population Amish-enriched loci with several sphingolipids and with proposed potential functional/causal variant in each locus including GLTPD2_rs536055318, CERS5_rs771033566, and AKNA_rs531892793. We replicated 7 previously known common loci including novel associations with two sterols: androstenediol with UGT locus and estriol with SLC22A8/A24 locus. Our results show the double power of founder populations and detailed lipidome to discover novel trait-associated variants.
Many anatomical regions in the kidney, including proximal tubules, differ between males and females. While such differences in renal structures and functions under various physiological and pharmacological conditions have been identified, information relating to molecular mechanisms behind this gender disparity remain unknown. To understand gene expression differences in proximal tubules from human male and female kidneys, we reported on kidney cellular landscape using single-cell RNA sequencing. Differential gene expression profiles were observed in proximal tubules, between the sexes. Interestingly, the SLC22 family of anion transporters, including SLC22A6 and SLC22A8, had different expression profiles between male and female proximal tubule clusters but not sex-dependent abundance at the protein level. Moreover, in different species, we revealed a shared and species-specific differential gene expression between human and mouse kidney proximal tubules. Taken together, at single-cell resolution, this transcriptomic map represents a baseline description of gender biased genes in human kidney proximal tubules, which provide important insights for further studies of physiological differences in kidney.
Kynurenic acid (KYNA) is an antioxidant degradation product of tryptophan that has been shown to have a variety of cytoprotective, neuroprotective and neuronal signalling properties. However, mammalian transporters and receptors display micromolar binding constants; these are consistent with its typically micromolar tissue concentrations but far above its serum/plasma concentration (normally tens of nanomolar), suggesting large gaps in our knowledge of its transport and mechanisms of action, in that the main influx transporters characterized to date are equilibrative, not concentrative. In addition, it is a substrate of a known anion efflux pump (ABCC4), whose in vivo activity is largely unknown. Exogeneous addition of L-tryptophan or L-kynurenine leads to the production of KYNA but also to that of many other co-metabolites (including some such as 3-hydroxy-L-kynurenine and quinolinic acid that may be toxic). With the exception of chestnut honey, KYNA exists at relatively low levels in natural foodstuffs. However, its bioavailability is reasonable, and as the terminal element of an irreversible reaction of most tryptophan degradation pathways, it might be added exogenously without disturbing upstream metabolism significantly. Many examples, which we review, show that it has valuable bioactivity. Given the above, we review its potential utility as a nutraceutical, finding it significantly worthy of further study and development.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Rhubarb is a well-known traditional Chinese medicine and has been used in China for thousands of years. Anthraquinone derivatives including rhein, emodin, aloe-emodin, chrysophanol and physcion are the important components in rhubarb. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here we studied the interaction of five anthraquinone derivatives with human renal organic anion transporter 1 (hOAT1) and hOAT3 stably expressed in cells, and interaction of rhein or rhubarb extract (RE) with furosemide (FS, substrate of OATs) in rats. RESULTS: Uptake of 6-carboxyl fluorescein via hOAT1 and fluorescein via hOAT3 were markedly inhibited by rhein, emodin and aloe-emodin, and slightly inhibited by chrysophanol and physcion. The estimated IC(5)(0) values for rhein, emodin, aloe-emodin and probenecid (typical inhibitor of hOAT1 and hOAT3) were 0.23, 0.61, 2.29 and 18.34 muM for hOAT1, and 0.08, 1.22, 5.37 and 5.83 muM for hOAT3, respectively. Furthermore, the data from the cellular accumulation assay indicated that these five compounds were not substrates of hOAT1 or hOAT3. Pharmacokinetic interaction between rhein and FS in rats showed that area under the curve (AUC(0)-t) for FS was increased by 65% when coadministrated with rhein. RE was also used to interact with FS in rats and results showed that AUC(0)-t of FS was increased by 32% and by 52% when coadministrated with single-dose or multiple-dose of RE, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggested that five anthraquinones inhibited hOAT1 and hOAT3, but these compounds were not transported by hOAT1 or hOAT3. Furthermore, rhein or RE, might cause drug-drug interaction when coadministrated with substrates of OAT1 or OAT3 in vivo.
The human organic anion transporter, OAT3 (SLC22A8), plays a critical role in renal drug elimination, by mediating the entry of a wide variety of organic anions, including a number of commonly used pharmaceuticals, into the renal proximal tubular cells. To understand the nature and extent of genetic variation in OAT3, and to determine whether such variation affects its function, we identified OAT3 variants in a large, ethnically diverse sample population and studied their transport activities in cellular assays. We identified a total of 10 distinct coding-region variants, which altered the encoded amino acid sequence, in DNA samples from 270 individuals (80 African-Americans, 80 European-Americans, 60 Asian-Americans, and 50 Mexican-Americans). The overall prevalence of these OAT3 variants was relatively low among the screened population, with only three variants having allele frequencies of >1% in a particular ethnic group. Clones of each variant were created by site-directed mutagenesis, expressed in HEK-293 cells, and tested for function using the model substrates, estrone sulfate (ES) and cimetidine (CIM). The results revealed a high degree of functional heterogeneity among OAT3 variants, with three variants (p. Arg149Ser, p. Gln239Stop, and p. Ile260Arg) that resulted in complete loss of function, and several others with significantly reduced function. One of the more common variants (p. Ile305Phe), found in 3.5% of Asian-Americans, appeared to have altered substrate specificity. This variant exhibited a reduced ability to transport ES, but a preserved ability to transport CIM. These data suggest that genetic variation in OAT3 may contribute to variation in the disposition of drugs.
PURPOSE: Pemetrexed transport by human organic anion transporters, hOAT1 (SLC22A6) and hOAT3 (SLC22A8), were characterized in comparison with methotrexate. METHODS: Accumulation of pemetrexed and methotrexate in hOAT1- and hOAT3-expressing cells were evaluated. Pemetrexed and methotrexate were determined by HPLC. Kinetic parameters were calculated by Eadie-Hofstee plot. RESULTS: When HEK-hOAT3 and -hOAT1 cells were incubated with 100 microM pemetrexed for 30 min, pemetrexed was accumulated at 14- and 1.7-fold greater than that in control cells, respectively. Pemetrexed and methotrexate transport by hOAT3 was saturated at high concentrations with apparent Km values 28.2 microM and 76.6 microM, respectively. In addition, intrinsic activity (Vmax/Km) of pemetrexed and methotrexate transport by hOAT3 was 4.82 and 0.42 microl/min/mg protein, respectively, suggesting 11-fold higher transport of pemetrexed than methotrexate by hOAT3. Furthermore, loxoprofen, ibuprofen, pravastatin, and cefazolin, transport substrates of hOAT3, inhibited pemetrexed transport by hOAT3 with IC50 values, 34.2, 27.9, 76.3 and 650 microM, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Pemetrexed is a superior substrate to methotrexate for hOAT3. Loxoprofen, ibuprofen, and cefazolin could cause drug-drug interactions when attaining high blood concentrations.
Previous in vitro and clinical research have indicated that a wide variety of drug transporters as well as metabolic enzymes dominate the pharmacokinetics of drugs and that some drugs modified the expression/function of drug transporters in humans, which lead to the altered pharmacokinetics and subsequent pharmacological/toxicological effects. Thus, regulatory authorities in US and EU have recently emphasized the needs to evaluate the risk of transporter-mediated drug-drug interactions (DDIs) in the (draft) guidance for pharmaceutical industries. The revised guidance includes the key transporters governing pharmacokinetics of drugs and decision trees to determine whether NMEs are substrates or inhibitors of each key transporter and when an in vivo clinical study is needed. In the evaluation of the potency of clinical DDIs, estimation of the inhibitor concentration at the target site is essential, but difficult since its direct measurement is almost impossible. Thus, people are now discussing what kind of inhibitor concentration should be used and how much is the appropriate cutoff value of the ratio of plasma AUC in the presence of inhibitor drugs to that in its absence (AUCR) to avoid false-negative predictions and maximize prediction accuracy. This minireview briefly summarizes the current status of the criteria for risk management of transporter-mediated DDIs in the regulatory guidelines, and describes scientific achievements that may affect regulatory decisions. Target transporters include OATP1B1 (SLCO1B1) and OATP1B3 (SLCO1B3) in the liver, and OAT1 (SLC22A6), OAT3 (SLC22A8), OCT2 (SLC22A2), MATE1 (SLC47A1), and MATE2-K (SLC47A2) in the kidney, and MDR1 (ABCB1) in the intestine.
In vitro and in vivo studies have established the organic anion transporters OAT1 (SLC22A6, NKT) and OAT3 (SLC22A8) among the main multi-specific "drug" transporters. They also transport numerous endogenous metabolites, raising the possibility of drug-metabolite interactions (DMI). To help understand the role of these drug transporters on metabolism across scales ranging from organ systems to organelles, a formal multi-scale analysis was performed. Metabolic network reconstructions of the omics-alterations resulting from Oat1 and Oat3 gene knockouts revealed links between the microbiome and human metabolism including reactions involving small organic molecules such as dihydroxyacetone, alanine, xanthine, and p-cresol-key metabolites in independent pathways. Interestingly, pairwise organ-organ interactions were also disrupted in the two Oat knockouts, with altered liver, intestine, microbiome, and skin-related metabolism. Compared to older models focused on the "one transporter-one organ" concept, these more sophisticated reconstructions, combined with integration of a multi-microbial model and more comprehensive metabolomics data for the two transporters, provide a considerably more complex picture of how renal "drug" transporters regulate metabolism across the organelle (e.g. endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, peroxisome), cellular, organ, inter-organ, and inter-organismal scales. The results suggest that drugs interacting with OAT1 and OAT3 can have far reaching consequences on metabolism in organs (e.g. skin) beyond the kidney. Consistent with the Remote Sensing and Signaling Theory (RSST), the analysis demonstrates how transporter-dependent metabolic signals mediate organ crosstalk (e.g., gut-liver-kidney) and inter-organismal communication (e.g., gut microbiome-host).
