Solute carrier family 22 member 9; Sodium-independent organic anion transporter which exhibits high specificity for sulfated conjugates of xenobiotics and steroid hormones. It is also specifically activated by 3 to 5 carbons- containing short-chain fatty acids/SCFAs, including propionate, butyrate and valerate. May operate the exchange of sulfated organic components against short-chain fatty acids/SCFAs at the sinusoidal membrane of hepatocytes; Belongs to the major facilitator (TC 2.A.1) superfamily. Organic cation transporter (TC 2.A.1.19) family.
Background: 3,5,3'-Triiodothyroacetic acid (TRIAC) is a T(3)-receptor agonist pharmacologically used in patients to mitigate T(3) resistance. It is additionally explored to treat some symptoms of patients with inactivating mutations in the thyroid hormone (TH) transporter monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8, SLC16A2). MCT8 is expressed along the blood-brain barrier, on neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. Hence, pathogenic variants in MCT8 limit the access of TH into and their functions within the brain. TRIAC was shown to enter the brain independently of MCT8 and to modulate expression of TH-dependent genes. The aim of the study was to identify transporters that facilitate TRIAC uptake into cells. Methods: We performed a whole-genome RNAi screen in HepG2 cells stably expressing a T(3)-receptor-dependent luciferase reporter gene. Validation of hits from the primary and confirmatory secondary screen involved a counter screen with siRNAs and compared the cellular response to TRIAC to the effect of T(3), in order to exclude siRNAs targeting the gene expression machinery. MDCK1 cells were stably transfected with cDNA encoding C-terminally myc-tagged versions of the identified TRIAC-preferring transporters. Several individual clones were selected after immunocytochemical characterization for biochemical characterization of their (125)I-TRIAC transport activities. Results: We identified SLC22A9 and SLC29A2 as transporters mediating cellular uptake of TRIAC. SLC22A9 encodes the organic anion transporter 7 (OAT7), a sodium-independent organic anion transporter expressed in the plasma membrane in brain, pituitary, liver, and other organs. Competition with the SLC22A9/OAT7 substrate estrone-3-sulfate reduced (125)I-TRIAC uptake. SLC29A2 encodes the equilibrative nucleoside transporter 2 (ENT2), which is ubiquitously expressed, including pituitary and brain. Coincubation with the SLC29A2/ENT2 inhibitor nitrobenzyl-6-thioinosine reduced (125)I-TRIAC uptake. Moreover, ABCD1, an ATP-dependent peroxisomal pump, was identified as a (125)I-TRIAC exporter in transfected MDCK1 cells. Conclusions: Knowledge of TRIAC transporter expression patterns, also during brain development, may thus in the future help to interpret observations on TRIAC effects, as well as understand why TRIAC may not show a desirable effect on cells or organs not expressing appropriate transporters. The identification of ABCD1 highlights the sensitivity of our established screening assay, but it may not hold significant relevance for patients undergoing TRIAC treatment.
Thyroid hormones (THs) are key regulators of cellular growth, development, and metabolism. The thyroid gland secretes two THs, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), into the plasma where they are almost all bound reversibly to plasma proteins. Free forms of THs are metabolically active, however, they represent a very small fraction of total TH levels. No genome-wide studies have been performed to date on total TH levels, comprising of protein-bound and free forms of THs. To detect genetic variants associated with total TH levels, we carried out the first GWAS meta-analysis of total T4 levels in 1121 individuals from two Croatian cohorts (Split and Korcula). We also performed GWAS analyses of total T3 levels in 577 individuals and T3/T4 ratio in 571 individuals from the Split cohort. The top association in GWAS meta-analysis of total T4 was detected for an intronic variant within SLC22A9 gene (rs12282281, P = 4.00 x 10(-7)). Within the same region, a genome-wide significant variant (rs11822642, P = 2.50 x 10(-8)) for the T3/T4 ratio was identified. SLC22A9 encodes for an organic anion transporter protein expressed predominantly in the liver and belongs to the superfamily of solute carriers (SLC), a large group of transport membrane proteins. The transport of THs across the plasma membrane in peripheral tissues is facilitated by the membrane proteins, and all TH transport proteins known to date belong to the same SLC superfamily as SLC22A9. These results suggest a potential role for SLC22A9 as a novel transporter protein of THs.
Speech and language disorders are known to have a substantial genetic contribution. Although frequently examined as components of other conditions, research on the genetic basis of linguistic differences as separate phenotypic subgroups has been limited so far. Here, we performed an in-depth characterization of speech and language disorders in 52 143 individuals, reconstructing clinical histories using a large-scale data-mining approach of the electronic medical records from an entire large paediatric healthcare network. The reported frequency of these disorders was the highest between 2 and 5 years old and spanned a spectrum of 26 broad speech and language diagnoses. We used natural language processing to assess the degree to which clinical diagnoses in full-text notes were reflected in ICD-10 diagnosis codes. We found that aphasia and speech apraxia could be retrieved easily through ICD-10 diagnosis codes, whereas stuttering as a speech phenotype was coded in only 12% of individuals through appropriate ICD-10 codes. We found significant comorbidity of speech and language disorders in neurodevelopmental conditions (30.31%) and, to a lesser degree, with epilepsies (6.07%) and movement disorders (2.05%). The most common genetic disorders retrievable in our analysis of electronic medical records were STXBP1 (n = 21), PTEN (n = 20) and CACNA1A (n = 18). When assessing associations of genetic diagnoses with specific linguistic phenotypes, we observed associations of STXBP1 and aphasia (P = 8.57 x 10-7, 95% confidence interval = 18.62-130.39) and MYO7A with speech and language development delay attributable to hearing loss (P = 1.24 x 10-5, 95% confidence interval = 17.46-infinity). Finally, in a sub-cohort of 726 individuals with whole-exome sequencing data, we identified an enrichment of rare variants in neuronal receptor pathways, in addition to associations of UQCRC1 and KIF17 with expressive aphasia, MROH8 and BCHE with poor speech, and USP37, SLC22A9 and UMODL1 with aphasia. In summary, our study outlines the landscape of paediatric speech and language disorders, confirming the phenotypic complexity of linguistic traits and novel genotype-phenotype associations. Subgroups of paediatric speech and language disorders differ significantly with respect to the composition of monogenic aetiologies.
Bone production, maintenance, and modeling are a well-balanced process involving mineralization by osteoblasts and resorption by osteoclasts. Sex steroid hormones, including their conjugated forms, contribute majorly to maintaining this balance. Recently, variants in the SLC22A9 gene have been associated with osteoporosis in Korean females. We had recently shown that SLC22A9, encoding organic anion transporter 7 (OAT7), is an uptake transporter of estrone sulfate and identified several genetic variants in Europeans leading to functional consequences in vitro. We therefore hypothesized that SLC22A9 genetic variants may contribute to the pathophysiology of osteoporosis in Europeans. To test this hypothesis, we examined the associations of SLC22A9 variants with bone quality, fractures, and bone turnover markers. We genotyped SLC22A9 variants in 5,701 (2,930 female) subjects (age range, 20-93 years) extracted from the population-based Study of Health in Pomerania (SHIP and SHIP-TREND) covered by the Illumina Infinium HumanExome BeadChip version v1.0 (Exome Chip). Descriptive data (e.g., history of fractures), ultrasonography of the calcaneus, as well as serum concentrations of carboxy-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen, amino-terminal propeptide of type I procollagen, and vitamin D were determined. Comprehensive statistical analyses revealed no association between low-frequency and rare SLC22A9 variants and bone quality, fractures, and bone turnover markers. Our results indicate that single genetic SLC22A9 variants do not have a major impact on osteoporosis risk prediction in Europeans, yet findings need to be replicated in larger-scale studies.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an important social health problem characterized by a decrease in the kidney glomerular filtration rate (GFR). In this study, we analyzed genome-wide association studies for kidney disease-related traits using data from a Korean adult health screening cohort comprising 7,064 participants. Kidney disease-related traits analyzed include blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine, estimated GFR, and uric acid levels. We detected two genetic loci (SLC14A2 and an intergenic region) and 8 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with BUN, 3 genetic loci (BCAS3, C17orf82, ALDH2) and 6 SNPs associated with serum creatinine, 3 genetic loci (BCAS3, C17orf82/TBX2, LRP2) and 7 SNPs associated with GFR, and 14 genetic loci (3 in ABCG2/PKD2, 2 in SLC2A9, 3 in intergenic regions on chromosome 4; OTUB1, NRXN2/SLC22A12, CDC42BPG, RPS6KA4, SLC22A9, and MAP4K2 on chromosome 11) and 84 SNPs associated with uric acid levels. By comparing significant genetic loci associated with serum creatinine levels and GFR, rs9895661 in BCAS3 and rs757608 in C17orf82 were simultaneously associated with both traits. The SNPs rs11710227 in intergenic regions on chromosome 3 showing significant association with BUN is newly discovered. Genetic variations of multiple gene loci are associated with kidney disease-related traits, and differences in associations between kidney disease-related traits and genetic variation are dependent on the population. The meanings of the mutations identified in this study will need to be reaffirmed in other population groups in the future.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to develop and validate a prediction model for renal urate underexcretion (RUE) in male gout patients. METHODS: Men with gout enrolled from multicenter cohorts in China were analyzed as the development and validation data sets. The RUE phenotype was defined as fractional excretion of uric acid (FE(UA)) <5.5%. Candidate genetic and clinical features were screened by the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) with 10-fold cross-validation. Machine learning algorithms (stochastic gradient descent (SGD), logistic regression, support vector machine) were performed to construct a predictive classifier of RUE. Models were assessed by the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) and the precision-recall curve (PRC). RESULTS: One thousand two hundred thirty-eight and two thousand twenty-three patients were enrolled as the development and validation cohorts, with 1220 and 754 randomly chosen patients genotyped, respectively. Rs3775948.GG of SLC2A9/GLUT9, rs504915.AA of NRXN2/URAT1, and 7 clinical features (age, hypertension, nephrolithiasis, blood glucose, serum urate, urea nitrogen, and creatinine) were generated by LASSO. Two additional SNP variants (rs2231142.GG of ABCG2 and rs11231463.GG of SLC22A9/OAT7) were selected based on their contributions to gout in the development cohort and their reported effects on renal urate handling. The optimized classifiers yielded AUCs of ~0.914 and PRCs of ~0.980 using these 11 variables. The SGD model was conducted in the validation cohort with an AUC of 0.899 and the PRC of 0.957. CONCLUSIONS: A prediction model for RUE composed of four SNPs and readily accessible clinical features was established with acceptable accuracy for men with gout.
The SLC22 family of OATs, OCTs, and OCTNs is emerging as a central hub of endogenous physiology. Despite often being referred to as "drug" transporters, they facilitate the movement of metabolites and key signaling molecules. An in-depth reanalysis supports a reassignment of these proteins into eight functional subgroups, with four new subgroups arising from the previously defined OAT subclade: OATS1 (SLC22A6, SLC22A8, and SLC22A20), OATS2 (SLC22A7), OATS3 (SLC22A11, SLC22A12, and Slc22a22), and OATS4 (SLC22A9, SLC22A10, SLC22A24, and SLC22A25). We propose merging the OCTN (SLC22A4, SLC22A5, and Slc22a21) and OCT-related (SLC22A15 and SLC22A16) subclades into the OCTN/OCTN-related subgroup. Using data from GWAS, in vivo models, and in vitro assays, we developed an SLC22 transporter-metabolite network and similar subgroup networks, which suggest how multiple SLC22 transporters with mono-, oligo-, and multi-specific substrate specificity interact to regulate metabolites. Subgroup associations include: OATS1 with signaling molecules, uremic toxins, and odorants, OATS2 with cyclic nucleotides, OATS3 with uric acid, OATS4 with conjugated sex hormones, particularly etiocholanolone glucuronide, OCT with neurotransmitters, and OCTN/OCTN-related with ergothioneine and carnitine derivatives. Our data suggest that the SLC22 family can work among itself, as well as with other ADME genes, to optimize levels of numerous metabolites and signaling molecules, involved in organ crosstalk and inter-organismal communication, as proposed by the remote sensing and signaling theory.
Many drugs are largely hydrophobic molecules; a transporter might conceivably insert these into the plasma membrane. At least 18 transporters from diverse families have been reported to transport the model compound estrone sulfate alias estrone-3-sulfate (E3S). Out of these, we recently examined SLC22A11 (OAT4). We concluded from a comparison of E3S and uric acid transport that SLC22A11 does not translocate E3S into the cytosol, but into the plasma membrane. Here we present a hyperosmolarity alias hypertonicity assay to differentiate transport mechanisms. Human transporters were expressed heterologously in 293 cells. Solute uptake into intact cells was measured by LC-MS. Addition of mannitol or sucrose led to rapid cell shrinkage, but cell viability after 60 min in hyperosmolar buffer was not impaired. A decrease in substrate accumulation with increasing osmolarity as observed here for several substrates and the transporters SLC22A11, ETT (SLC22A4), OCT2 (SLC22A2), OAT3 (SLC22A8), and MATE1 (SLC47A1) suggests regular substrate translocation into the cytosol. An increase as observed for E3S transport by SLC22A11, OAT3, MATE1, SLC22A9, and SLC10A6 implies insertion into the membrane. In marked contrast to the other E3S transporters, the bile acid transporter SLC10A1 (NTCP, Na(+) taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide) showed a decrease in the accumulation of E3S in hyperosmolar buffer; the same was observed with taurocholic acid. Indeed, our data from several functional assays strongly suggest that the transport mechanism is identical for both substrates. Apparently, a unique transport mechanism has been established for SLC10A1 by evolution that ensures the transport of amphipathic, detergent-like molecules into the cytosol.
High serum urate is a prerequisite for gout and associated with metabolic disease. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have reported dozens of loci associated with serum urate control; however, there has been little progress in understanding the molecular basis of the associated loci. Here, we employed trans-ancestral meta-analysis using data from European and East Asian populations to identify 10 new loci for serum urate levels. Genome-wide colocalization with cis-expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) identified a further five new candidate loci. By cis- and trans-eQTL colocalization analysis, we identified 34 and 20 genes, respectively, where the causal eQTL variant has a high likelihood that it is shared with the serum urate-associated locus. One new locus identified was SLC22A9 that encodes organic anion transporter 7 (OAT7). We demonstrate that OAT7 is a very weak urate-butyrate exchanger. Newly implicated genes identified in the eQTL analysis include those encoding proteins that make up the dystrophin complex, a scaffold for signaling proteins and transporters at the cell membrane; MLXIP that, with the previously identified MLXIPL, is a transcription factor that may regulate serum urate via the pentose-phosphate pathway and MRPS7 and IDH2 that encode proteins necessary for mitochondrial function. Functional fine mapping identified six loci (RREB1, INHBC, HLF, UBE2Q2, SFMBT1 and HNF4G) with colocalized eQTL containing putative causal SNPs. This systematic analysis of serum urate GWAS loci identified candidate causal genes at 24 loci and a network of previously unidentified genes likely involved in control of serum urate levels, further illuminating the molecular mechanisms of urate control.
The liver plays an important role in the elimination of endogenous and exogenous lipophilic organic compounds from the body, which is mediated by various carrier proteins that differ in substrate specificity and kinetic properties. Here, we have characterized a novel member of the organic anion transporter family (SLC22) isolated from human liver. The transporter named organic anion transporter 7 (OAT7/ SLC22A9) showed 35% to 46% identities to those of other organic anion transporters of SLC22 family. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes, OAT7 mediated Na(+)-independent, high-affinity transport of sulfate-conjugated steroids, estrone sulfate (ES; K(m) = 8.7 microM), and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (K(m) = 2.2 microM). In addition, OAT7 interacted with negatively charged sulfobromophthalein, indocyanine green, and several sulfate-conjugated xenobiotics. In contrast, glucuronide and glutathione conjugates exhibited no inhibitory effects on OAT7-mediated [(3)H]ES transport. OAT7-mediated [(3)H]ES transport was trans-stimulated by three-carbon to five-carbon (C3 to C5) short-chain fatty acids. The efflux of [(14)C]butyrate (C4) via OAT7 was significantly trans-stimulated by extracellular ES. Furthermore, OAT7 mediated [(14)C]butyrate uptake and [(3)H]ES efflux in exchange for extracellular butyrate both in Xenopus oocytes and OAT7-stably expressing cells. OAT7 protein was localized in the sinusoidal membrane of hepatocytes by immunohistochemical analysis. CONCLUSION: OAT7 is the first liver-specific transporter among members of the organic anion transporters of SLC22 family. Our findings suggest a new class of substrates for organic anion transporters and provide evidence for the transport of anionic substances such as sulfate-conjugates in exchange for butyrate in hepatocytes.
Human organic anion transporter 7 (OAT7, SLC22A9) is a hepatic transport protein poorly characterized so far. We therefore sought to identify novel OAT7 substrates and factors contributing to variable hepatic OAT7 expression. Using OAT7-expressing cells, pravastatin was identified as a substrate. Hepatic SLC22A9/OAT7 mRNA and protein expression varied 28-fold and 15-fold, respectively, in 126 Caucasian liver samples. Twenty-four variants in SLC22A9 were genotyped, including three rare missense variants (rs377211288, rs61742518, rs146027075), which occurred only heterozygously. No variant significantly affected hepatic SLC22A9/OAT7 expression. The three missense variants, however, showed functional consequences when expressed in vitro. Hepatic nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4alpha) emerged as a major transcriptional regulator of SLC22A9 by a series of in silico and in vitro analyses. In conclusion, pravastatin is the first identified OAT7 drug substrate. Substantial inter-individual variability in hepatic OAT7 expression, majorly driven by HNF4alpha, may contribute to pravastatin drug disposition and might affect response.The Pharmacogenomics Journal advance online publication, 4 August 2015; doi:10.1038/tpj.2015.55.
Organic anion transporters (OATs) are anion exchangers that transport small hydrophilic anions and diuretics, antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, antiviral nucleoside analogs, and antitumor drugs across membrane barriers of epithelia of diverse organs. Three OATs are present in human liver: OAT2, OAT5, and OAT7. Given that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) has previously been shown to regulate the expression of several hepatocellular transporter genes, we investigated whether the liver-specific human OAT genes are also regulated by HNF-1alpha. Short interfering RNAs targeting HNF-1alpha reduced endogenous expression of OAT5 and OAT7, but not OAT2, in human liver-derived Huh7 cells. Luciferase reporter gene constructs containing the OAT5 (SLC22A10) and OAT7 (SLC22A9) promoter regions were transactivated by HNF-1alpha in HepG2 cells. Two putative HNF-1alpha binding elements in the proximal OAT5 promoter, located at nucleotides -68/-56 and -173/-160, and one element in the OAT7 promoter, located at nucleotides -14/-2 relative to the transcription start site, were shown to bind HNF-1alpha in electromobility shift assays, and these promoter regions also interacted with HNF-1alpha in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. A correlation between HNF-1alpha and OAT5 (r = 0.134, P < 0.05) or OAT7 (r = 0.461, P < 0.001) mRNA expression levels in surgical liver biopsies from 75 patients further supported an important role of HNF-1alpha in the regulation of OAT gene expression.
Life-threatening drug interactions are known to occur between methotrexate and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), probenecid, and penicillin G. The purpose of this study was to characterize methotrexate transport, as well as to determine the site and the mechanism of drug interactions in the proximal tubule. Mouse proximal tubule cells stably expressing basolateral human organic anion transporters (hOAT1 and hOAT3) and apical hOAT (hOAT4) were established. The K(m) values for hOAT1-, hOAT3-, and hOAT4-mediated methotrexate uptake were 553.8 microM, 21.1 microM, and 17.8 microM, respectively. NSAIDs (salicylate, ibuprofen, ketoprofen, phenylbutazone, piroxicam, and indomethacin), probenecid, and penicillin G dose dependently inhibited methotrexate uptake mediated by hOAT1, hOAT3, and hOAT4. Kinetic analysis of inhibitory effects of these drugs on hOAT3-mediated methotrexate uptake revealed that these inhibitions were competitive. The K(i) values for the effects of salicylate, phenylbutazone, indomethacin, and probenecid on hOAT3-mediated methotrexate uptake were comparable with therapeutically relevant plasma concentrations of unbound drugs. In addition, in the presence of human serum albumin, the K(i) values were comparable with therapeutically relevant total plasma concentrations of drugs. In conclusion, these results suggest that methotrexate is taken up via hOAT3 and hOAT1 at the basolateral side of the proximal tubule and effluxed or taken up at the apical side via hOAT4. In addition, hOAT1, hOAT3, and hOAT4 are the sites of drug interactions between methotrexate and NSAIDs, probenecid, and penicillin G. Furthermore, it was predicted that hOAT3 is the site of drug interactions between methotrexate and salicylate, phenylbutazone, indomethacin, and probenecid in vivo.
Targeted protein quantification using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry with stable isotope-labeled standards is recognized as the gold standard of practice for protein quantification. Such assays, however, can only cover a limited number of proteins, and developing targeted methods for larger numbers of proteins requires substantial investment. Alternatively, large-scale global proteomic experiments along with computational methods such as the "total protein approach" (TPA) have the potential to provide extensive protein quantification. In this study, we compared the TPA-based quantitation of seven major hepatic uptake transporters in four human liver tissue samples using global proteomic data obtained from two multiplexed tandem mass tag experiments (performed in two independent laboratories) to the quantitative data from targeted proteomic assays. The TPA-based quantitation of these hepatic transporters [sodium-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (NTCP/SLC10A1), organic anion transporter 2 (OAT2/SLC22A7), OAT7/SLC22A9, organic anion-transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1/SLCO1B1), OATP1B3/SLCO1B3, OATP2B1/SLCO2B1, and organic cation transporter (OCT1/SLC22A1)] showed good-to-excellent correlations (Pearson r = 0.74-1.00) to the targeted data. In addition, the values were similar to those measured by targeted proteomics with 71% and 86% of the data sets falling within 3-fold of the targeted data. A comparison of the TPA-based quantifications of enzyme abundances to available literature data showed that the majority of the enzyme quantifications fell within the reference data intervals. In conclusion, these results demonstrate the capability of multiplexed global proteomic experiments to detect differences in protein expression between samples and provide reasonable estimations of protein expression levels.
Organic anion transporter (OAT) 4, which is localized at the apical membrane of human renal proximal tubules, transports olmesartan, an angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB). Many ARBs, including olmesartan, undergo partial tubular secretion as active forms, and inhibit OAT4-mediated uptake activity. Here, we examined the substrate recognition of various ARBs by OAT4 in order to assess whether OAT4 might be involved in the renal handling of ARBs. Concentration-dependent OAT4-mediated uptake of azilsartan, candesartan, carboxylosartan, losartan, and valsartan was observed with K(m) values of 6.6, 31, 7.2, 13, and 1.7 muM, respectively, in the absence of extracellular Cl(-). In the presence of extracellular Cl(-), OAT4-mediated uptake of dianionic ARBs (azilsartan, candesartan, carboxylosartan, and valsartan) was lower and reached a steady state faster than in the absence of extracellular Cl(-). Thus, OAT4 is proposed to use extracellular Cl(-) as a counterpart for anion efflux. Our results suggest that OAT4 may play a role in the excretion of azilsartan, candesartan, carboxylosartan, and valsartan, as well as olmesartan. In contrast, OAT4-mediated uptake of losartan, a monoanionic ARB, was little affected by extracellular Cl(-), suggesting that only OAT4-mediated dianion transport is Cl(-)-sensitive.
The pharmacokinetics of cetirizine, a nonsedating antihistamine, is profoundly affected by transporter-mediated membrane transport in the kidney. In this study, we aimed to investigate the transport mechanism of levocetirizine, the pharmacologically active enantiomer of cetirizine, via human organic anion transporter 4 (OAT4) expressed in the apical membrane of renal proximal tubules and the basal plasma membrane of placental syncytiotrophoblasts. In cells expressing human OAT4 under the control of tetracycline, levocetirizine uptake was increased by tetracycline treatment. On the other hand, OAT4 expression did not facilitate efflux of preloaded levocetirizine from the cells, either in the presence or absence of extracellular Cl(-). The OAT4-mediated levocetirizine uptake was concentration-dependent with a K(m) of 38 muM. The uptake rate of levocetirizine via OAT4 was approximately twice that of racemic cetirizine, indicating stereoselective uptake of levocetirizine. On the other hand, OAT4-mediated [(3)H]dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate uptake was inhibited by dextrocetirizine and levocetirizine. Overall, our findings indicate that OAT4 mediates levocetirizine uptake but is unlikely to mediate the efflux.
17alpha-Ethinylestradiol (EE2), a synthetic and potent estrogen receptor agonist, is extensively metabolized in both intestine and liver and is largely excreted in bile and urine as the 3-O-sulfate (EE2-Sul) and 3-O-glucuronide. In the present study, EE2-Sul was evaluated as a substrate of various transporters known to be expressed in the kidney. Uptake studies were performed with human epithelial cells [human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293] that contained individually expressed organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2), organic anion transporter (OAT) forms 3 and 4, and multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 (MATE1). The transporter phenotyping studies were extended to include insect cell (Sf9) membrane vesicles that expressed multidrug resistance-associated protein 4 (MRP4) and Madin-Darby canine kidney cells that expressed OAT1. Based on the results obtained, we concluded that EE2-Sul serves as a substrate of OAT3 and OAT4, but not OCT2, OAT1, MATE1, and MRP4. First, EE2-Sul uptake was highly increased in OAT3/HEK-293 cells (versus mock/HEK-293 cells) and was inhibited by OAT3 inhibitors such as bromosulfophthalein (BSP), cimetidine, and probenecid. OAT3-mediated uptake also conformed to single-K(m) (Michaelis constant) kinetics (K(m) = 21.1 microM). Second, EE2-Sul uptake was also significantly higher in OAT4/HEK-293 cells and was inhibited by BSP, methotrexate, and probenecid. In contrast to OAT3, OAT4-dependent uptake was characterized by a two-K(m) model (K(m1) = 1.6 microM; K(m2) = 195 microM). Based on the results of this study, we hypothesize that EE2-Sul is taken up into renal proximal tubule cells by OAT3, and OAT4 plays a role in its secretion into the renal brush border lumen.
Cephalosporin antibiotics are thought to be excreted into the urine via organic anion transporters (OATs). The purpose of this study was to elucidate the interaction of human-OATs with various cephalosporin antibiotics, using proximal tubule cells stably expressing human-OAT1, human-OAT3 and human-OAT4. Human-OAT1 and human-OAT3 are localized to the basolateral side of the proximal tubule, whereas human-OAT4 is localized to the apical side. The cephalosporin antibiotics tested were cephalothin, cefoperazone, cefazolin, ceftriaxone, cephaloridine, cefotaxime, cefadroxil and cefamandole. All of these cephalosporin antibiotics significantly inhibited organic anion uptake mediated by human-OAT1, human-OAT3 and human-OAT4. Kinetic analysis revealed that these inhibitions were competitive. The inhibition constant (K(i)) values of cefoperazone, cefazolin, ceftriaxone and cephaloridine for human-OAT1 were much lower than those for human-OAT3 and human-OAT4, whereas the K(i) values of cephalothin and cefotaxime for human-OAT3 were much lower than those for human-OAT1 and human-OAT4. Human-OAT4 mediated the bidirectional transport of estrone sulfate, an optimal substrate for human-OAT4. These results suggest that human-OAT1, human-OAT3 and human-OAT4 interact with various cephalosporin antibiotics, and that human-OAT1 and human-OAT3 play a distinct role in the basolateral uptake of cephalosporin antibiotics. Since the K(i) value of cephaloridine for human-OAT4-mediated organic uptake was much higher than that for human-OAT1, the results indicate the possibility that human-OAT4 limits the efflux of cephaloridine, leading to the accumulation of cephaloridine and the induction of nephrotoxicity.
Organic cation transporters (OCTs) and organic anion transporters (OATs) (SLC22A family) play crucial roles in the renal secretion of various drugs. Messengar ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression of transporters can be a key factor regulating interindividual differences in drug pharmacokinetics. However, the source of variations in mRNA levels of transporters is unclear. In this study, we focused on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the promoter region [regulatory SNPs (rSNPs)] as candidates for the factor regulating mRNA levels of SLC22A. We sequenced the promoter regions of OCT2 and OAT1-4 in 63 patients and investigated the effects of the identified rSNPs on transcriptional activities and mRNA expression. In the OCT2 promoter region, one deletion polymorphism (-578_-576delAAG) was identified; -578_-576delAAG significantly reduced OCT2 promoter activity (p < 0.05), and carriers of -578_-576delAAG tend to have lower OCT2 mRNA levels, but the difference is not significant. There was no rSNP in the OAT1 and OAT2 genes. The five rSNPs of OAT3 and one rSNP of OAT4 were unlikely to influence mRNA expression and promoter activity. This is the first study to investigate the influences of rSNPs on mRNA expression of SLC22A in the kidney and to identify a regulatory polymorphism affecting OCT2 promoter activity.
