Solute carrier family 22 member 7; Mediates sodium-independent multispecific organic anion transport. Transport of prostaglandin E2, prostaglandin F2, tetracycline, bumetanide, estrone sulfate, glutarate, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, allopurinol, 5-fluorouracil, paclitaxel, L-ascorbic acid, salicylate, ethotrexate, and alpha- ketoglutarate.
Age-related (AR) hearing loss (HL) is a prevalent sensory deficit in the elderly population. Several studies showed that common variants increase ARHL susceptibility. Here, we demonstrate that rare-variants play a crucial role in ARHL etiology. We analyzed exome and imputed data from white-European UK Biobank volunteers, performing both single-variant and rare-variant aggregate association analyses using self-reported ARHL phenotypes. We identified and replicated associations between ARHL and rare-variants in KLHDC7B, PDCD6, MYO6, SYNJ2, and TECTA. PUS7L and EYA4 also revealed rare-variant associations with ARHL. EYA4, MYO6, and TECTA are all known to underline Mendelian nonsyndromic HL. PDCD6, a new HL gene, plays an important role in apoptosis and has widespread inner ear expression, particularly in the inner hair cells. An unreplicated common variant association was previously observed for KHLDC7B, here we demonstrate that rare-variants in this gene also play a role in ARHL etiology. Additionally, the first replicated association between SYNJ2 and ARHL was detected. Analysis of common variants revealed several previously reported, i.e., ARHGEF28, and new, i.e., PIK3R3, ARHL associations, as well as ones we replicate here for the first time, i.e., BAIAP2L2, CRIP3, KLHDC7B, MAST2, and SLC22A7. It was also observed that the odds ratios for rare-variant ARHL associations, were higher than those for common variants. In conclusion, we demonstrate the vital role rare-variants, including those in Mendelian nonsyndromic HL genes, play in the etiology of ARHL.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent advances in genome technology have provided us with a list of molecules affecting urate handling in humans, many of which are unlikely to be identified through traditional physiological approach alone. Although this article is focused on urate, this can be viewed as a successful model of genomics-physiology collaboration. RECENT FINDINGS: URATv1/GLUT9 (SLC2A9) is shown to play a critical role in urate reabsorption at the proximal tubule, probably more prominent than its partner URAT1 (SLC22A12). The major site of action of ABCG2 (ABCG2), an influential urate secretion transporter, has been shown to be the intestine rather than the kidney proximal tubule. Accordingly, hypofunction of ABCG2 leads to increased fractional excretion of urate, a finding traditionally interpreted as overproduction hyperuricemia. Some SLC17 family members secrete urate in the kidney or intestine. OAT2 (SLC22A7) may take up urate from blood to the proximal tubular cell. In addition, how a common single-nucleotide polymorphisms in ABCG2 affects its function has been elucidated. SUMMARY: A finer grained picture of urate handling in the human body is now emerging, which will help choosing novel targets for urate-lowering therapy.
Observed variations in drug responses among patients may result from differences in heritable genetic traits or from alterations in the epigenetic regulation of drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters (DMETs). MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of small non-coding RNAs, provide an epigenetic mechanism for fine-tuning the expression of targeted DMET genes by regulating the efficiency of protein translation and by decreasing mRNA stability via enhanced degradation. In the current study we systematically screened 374 important genes encoding DMETs for potential response elements to hsa-miR-29a-3p, a highly abundant miRNA in human liver. RNA electrophoresis mobility shift assays displayed direct interactions between hsa-miR-29a-3p and its cognate targets within the mRNA transcripts for the ABCC6, SLC22A7 and ALDH5A1 genes. The expression of luciferase reporter genes containing the 3'-UTRs of SLC22A7 or ALDH5A1 and the expression of endogenous SLC22A7 and ALDH5A1 were each suppressed by transfection with hsa-miR-29a-3p mimics. Importantly, chemically-induced up-regulation of hsa-miR-29a-3p correlated inversely with the expression of SLC22A7 and ALDH5A1. However, our studies failed to detect suppressive effects of hsa-miR-29a-3p on ABCC6 expression, which might be explained by the notion that the interaction of hsa-miR-29a-3p and ABCC6 mRNA was unable to recruit ribonucleoproteins to form a RNA-induced silencing complex.
As a member of the solute carrier 22A (SLC22A) family, organic anion transporter 2 (OAT2; SLC22A7) is emerging as an important drug transporter because of its expression in both the liver and kidney, two major eliminating organs, and its ability to transport not only a wide variety of xenobiotics but also numerous physiologically important endogenous compounds, like creatinine and cGMP. However, OAT2 has received relatively little attention compared with other OATs and solute carriers (SLCs), like organic cation transporters, sodium-dependent taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide, multidrug and toxin extrusion proteins, and organic anion-transporting polypeptides. Overall, the literature describing OAT2 is rapidly evolving, with numerous publications contradicting each other regarding the transport mechanism, tissue distribution, and transport of creatinine and cGMP, two important endogenous OAT2 substrates. Despite its status as a liver and kidney SLC, tools for assessing its activity and inhibition are lacking, and its role in drug disposition and elimination remains to be defined. The current review focuses on the available and emerging literature describing OAT2. We envision that OAT2 will gain more prominence as its expression, substrate, and inhibitor profile is investigated further and compared with other SLCs.
AIMS: Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity (ACT) occurs in 57% of treated patients and remains an important limitation of anthracycline-based chemotherapy. In various genetic association studies, potential genetic risk markers for ACT have been identified. Therefore, we developed evidence-based clinical practice recommendations for pharmacogenomic testing to further individualize therapy based on ACT risk. METHODS: We followed a standard guideline development process, including a systematic literature search, evidence synthesis and critical appraisal, and the development of clinical practice recommendations with an international expert group. RESULTS: RARG rs2229774, SLC28A3 rs7853758 and UGT1A6 rs17863783 variants currently have the strongest and the most consistent evidence for association with ACT. Genetic variants in ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCC5, ABCB1, ABCB4, CBR3, RAC2, NCF4, CYBA, GSTP1, CAT, SULT2B1, POR, HAS3, SLC22A7, SCL22A17, HFE and NOS3 have also been associated with ACT, but require additional validation. We recommend pharmacogenomic testing for the RARG rs2229774 (S427L), SLC28A3 rs7853758 (L461L) and UGT1A6*4 rs17863783 (V209V) variants in childhood cancer patients with an indication for doxorubicin or daunorubicin therapy (Level B - moderate). Based on an overall risk stratification, taking into account genetic and clinical risk factors, we recommend a number of management options including increased frequency of echocardiogram monitoring, follow-up, as well as therapeutic options within the current standard of clinical practice. CONCLUSIONS: Existing evidence demonstrates that genetic factors have the potential to improve the discrimination between individuals at higher and lower risk of ACT. Genetic testing may therefore support both patient care decisions and evidence development for an improved prevention of ACT.
BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma is the most common bone tumor in children and adolescents. Despite multiagent chemotherapy, only 71% of patients survives and these survivors often experience long-term toxicities. The main objective of this systematic review is to provide an overview of the discovery of novel associations of germline polymorphisms with treatment response and/or chemotherapy-induced toxicities in osteosarcoma.  METHODS: MEDLINE and Embase were systematically searched (2010-July 2022). Genetic association studies were included if they assessed > 10 germline genetic variants in > 5 genes in relevant drug pathways or if they used a genotyping array or other large-scale genetic analysis. Quality was assessed using adjusted STrengthening the REporting of Genetic Association studies (STREGA)-guidelines. To find additional evidence for the identified associations, literature was searched to identify replication studies. RESULTS: After screening 1999 articles, twenty articles met our inclusion criteria. These range from studies focusing on genes in relevant pharmacokinetic pathways to whole genome sequencing. Eleven articles reported on doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy. For seven genetic variants in CELF4, GPR35, HAS3, RARG, SLC22A17, SLC22A7 and SLC28A3, replication studies were performed, however without consistent results. Ototoxicity was investigated in one study. Five small studies reported on mucosistis or bone marrow, nephro- and/or hepatotoxicity. Six studies included analysis for treatment efficacy. Genetic variants in ABCC3, ABCC5, FasL, GLDC, GSTP1 were replicated in studies using heterogeneous efficacy outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Despite that results are promising, the majority of associations were poorly reproducible due to small patient cohorts. For the future, hypothesis-generating studies in large patient cohorts will be necessary, especially for cisplatin-induced ototoxicity as these are largely lacking. In order to form large patient cohorts, national and international collaboration will be essential.
Primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) have been the gold standard in vitro model for the human liver and are crucial to predict hepatic drug-drug interactions. The aim of this work was to assess the utility of 3D spheroid PHHs to study induction of important cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes and drug transporters. The 3D spheroid PHHs from three different donors were treated for 4 days with rifampicin, dicloxacillin, flucloxacillin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, efavirenz, omeprazole, or beta-naphthoflavone. Induction of CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, and transporters P-glycoprotein (P-gp)/ABCB1, multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2)/ABCC2, ABCG2, organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1)/SLC22A1, SLC22A7, SLCO1B1, and SLCO1B3 were evaluated at mRNA and protein levels. Enzyme activity of CYP3A4, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6 were also assessed. Induction of CYP3A4 protein and mRNA correlated well for all donors and compounds and had a maximal induction of five- to sixfold for rifampicin, which closely correlates to induction observed in clinical studies. Rifampicin induced the mRNA of CYP2B6 and CYP2C8 by 9- and 12-fold, whereas the protein levels of these CYPs reached 2- and 3-fold induction, respectively. Rifampicin induced CYP2C9 protein by 1.4-fold, whereas the induction of CYP2C9 mRNA was over 2-fold in all donors. Rifampicin induced ABCB1, ABCC2, and ABCG2 by 2-fold. In conclusion, 3D spheroid PHHs is a valid model to investigate mRNA and protein induction of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters, and this model provides a solid basis to study induction of CYPs and transporters, which translates to clinical relevance.
Introduction: Transporters and enzymes play an important role in absorption, distribution, clearance and elimination of drugs.Areas covered: This review provides an overview of the extended clearance concept and usefulness of extended clearance classification system (ECCS) in early identification of predominant clearance mechanisms. Clinical studies demonstrating transporter-enzyme interplay, challenges in scaling clearance from in vitro systems, utility of animal models and modeling approaches for evaluating hepatic clearance and drug-drug interactions are reviewed.Expert opinion: Clinical evidence exists supporting organic anion transporting peptide (OATP)1B and drug metabolizing enzymes involvement in clearance of ECCS class 1B drugs. Emerging evidence point toward contribution of organic cation transporter (OCT)1 to hepatic uptake of cationic drugs. Although, limited clinical evidence is presented, preclinical studies and modeling suggests organic anion transporter (OAT)2-enzyme interplay in clearance of class 1A drugs. Data from in vitro assays and preclinical models coupled with physiologically based modeling approaches are key for understanding transporter-enzyme interplay, enabling prediction of pharmacokinetics, tissue exposure and drug interactions. Current methodologies incur limitations and emphasis should be placed on the development of physiologically relevant in vitro models and characterize in vivo animal models to inform mechanistic modeling and improve confidence in prospective predictions.
AIM: To identify novel variants associated with anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and to assess these in a genotype-guided risk prediction model. PATIENTS & METHODS: Two cohorts treated for childhood cancer (n = 344 and 218, respectively) were genotyped for 4578 SNPs in drug ADME and toxicity genes. RESULTS: Significant associations were identified in SLC22A17 (rs4982753; p = 0.0078) and SLC22A7 (rs4149178; p = 0.0034), with replication in the second cohort (p = 0.0071 and 0.047, respectively). Additional evidence was found for SULT2B1 and several genes related to oxidative stress. Adding the SLC22 variants to the prediction model improved its discriminative ability (AUC 0.78 vs 0.75 [p = 0.029]). CONCLUSION: Two novel variants in SLC22A17 and SLC22A7 were significantly associated with anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and improved a genotype-guided risk prediction model, which could improve patient risk stratification.
In patients with CKD, not only renal but also, nonrenal clearance of drugs is altered. Uremic toxins could modify the expression and/or activity of drug transporters in the liver. We tested whether the uremic toxin indoxyl sulfate (IS), an endogenous ligand of the transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon receptor, could change the expression of the following liver transporters involved in drug clearance: SLC10A1, SLC22A1, SLC22A7, SLC47A1, SLCO1B1, SLCO1B3, SLCO2B1, ABCB1, ABCB11, ABCC2, ABCC3, ABCC4, ABCC6, and ABCG2 We showed that IS increases the expression and activity of the efflux transporter P-glycoprotein (P-gp) encoded by ABCB1 in human hepatoma cells (HepG2) without modifying the expression of the other transporters. This effect depended on the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway. Presence of human albumin at physiologic concentration in the culture medium did not abolish the effect of IS. In two mouse models of CKD, the decline in renal function associated with the accumulation of IS in serum and the specific upregulation of Abcb1a in the liver. Additionally, among 109 heart or kidney transplant recipients with CKD, those with higher serum levels of IS needed higher doses of cyclosporin, a P-gp substrate, to obtain the cyclosporin target blood concentration. This need associated with serum levels of IS independent of renal function. These findings suggest that increased activity of P-gp could be responsible for increased hepatic cyclosporin clearance. Altogether, these results suggest that uremic toxins, such as IS, through effects on drug transporters, may modify the nonrenal clearance of drugs in patients with CKD.
The present study was conducted to characterise the transporter(s) responsible for the uptake of cyclic nucleotides to human erythrocytes. Western blotting showed that hRBC expressed OAT2 (SLC22A7), but detection of OAT1 (SLC22A6), or OAT3 (SLC22A8) was not possible. Intact hRBC were employed to clarify the simultaneous cyclic nucleotide egression and uptake. Both these opposing processes were studied. The K(m) -values for high affinity efflux was 3.5 +/- 0.1 and 39.4 +/- 5.7 muM for cGMP and cAMP, respectively. The respective values for low affinity efflux were 212 +/- 11 and 339 +/- 42 muM. The uptake was characterised with apparently low affinity and similar K(m) -values for cGMP (2.2 mM) and cAMP (0.89 mM). Using an iterative approach in order to balance uptake with efflux, the predicted real K(m) -values for uptake were 100-200 muM for cGMP and 50-150 muM for cAMP. The established OAT2-substrate indomethacin showed a competitive interaction with cyclic nucleotide uptake. Creatinine, also an OAT2 substrate, showed saturable uptake with a K(m) of 854 +/- 98 muM. Unexpectedly, co-incubation with cyclic nucleotides showed an uncompetitive inhibition. The observed K(m) -values were 399 +/- 44 and 259 +/- 30 muM for creatinine, in the presence of cGMP and cAMP, respectively. Finally, the OAT1-substrate para-aminohippurate (PAH) showed some uptake (K(m) -value of 2.0 +/- 0.4 mM) but did not interact with cyclic nucleotide or indomethacin transport.
Several SLC22 transporters in the human kidney and other tissues are thought to regulate endogenous small antioxidant molecules such as uric acid, ergothioneine, carnitine, and carnitine derivatives. These transporters include those from the organic anion transporter (OAT), OCTN/OCTN-related, and organic cation transporter (OCT) subgroups. In mammals, it has been difficult to show a clear in vivo role for these transporters during oxidative stress. Ubiquitous knockdowns of related Drosophila SLC22s-including transporters homologous to those previously identified by us in mammals such as the "Fly-Like Putative Transporters" FLIPT1 (SLC22A15) and FLIPT2 (SLC22A16)-have shown modest protection against oxidative stress. However, these fly transporters tend to be broadly expressed, and it is unclear if there is an organ in which their expression is critical. Using two tissue-selective knockdown strategies, we were able to demonstrate much greater and longer protection from oxidative stress compared to previous whole fly knockdowns as well as both parent and WT strains (CG6126: p < 0.001, CG4630: p < 0.01, CG16727: p < 0.0001 and CG6006: p < 0.01). Expression in the Malpighian tubule and likely other tissues as well (e.g., gut, fat body, nervous system) appear critical for managing oxidative stress. These four Drosophila SLC22 genes are similar to human SLC22 transporters (CG6126: SLC22A16, CG16727: SLC22A7, CG4630: SLC22A3, and CG6006: SLC22A1, SLC22A2, SLC22A3, SLC22A6, SLC22A7, SLC22A8, SLC22A11, SLC22A12 (URAT1), SLC22A13, SLC22A14)-many of which are highly expressed in the kidney. Consistent with the Remote Sensing and Signaling Theory, this indicates an important in vivo role in the oxidative stress response for multiple SLC22 transporters within the fly renal system, perhaps through interaction with SLC22 counterparts in non-renal tissues. We also note that many of the human relatives are well-known drug transporters. Our work not only indicates the importance of SLC22 transporters in the fly renal system but also sets the stage for in vivo studies by examining their role in mammalian oxidative stress and organ crosstalk.
The organic anion transporter (OAT) family encoded by SLC22A mediates the absorption, distribution, and excretion of a diverse array of environmental toxins, and clinically important drugs, including anti-HIV therapeutics, anti-tumor drugs, antibiotics, anti-hypertensives, and anti-inflammatories, and therefore is critical for the survival of mammalian species. Several OATs have been identified: OAT1 (SLC22A6), OAT2 (SLC22A7), OAT3 (SLC22A8), OAT4 (SLC22A11), OAT5 (SLC22A19) OAT6 (SLC22A20) and URAT1 (SLC22A12). The expressions of these OATs have been detected in key organs such as kidney, liver, brain and placenta. OAT dysfunction in these organs may contribute to the renal, hepatic, neurological and fetal toxicity and diseases. In this review, we summarize, according to the work done by our laboratory as well as by others, the most updated molecular studies on these OAT members, especially on the aspect of their structure-function relationships. The functional roles of N-glycosylation, transmembrane domains and individual amino acids, cell surface assembly, as well as associating proteins will be discussed. In addition, we will show the recent analyses of coding region polymorphisms of OATs, which give us information on the genetic variants of OATs and their potential effects on OAT functions.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common lethal subtype of renal cancer, and changes in tumor metabolism play a key role in its development. Solute carriers (SLCs) are important in the transport of small molecules in humans, and defects in SLC transporters can lead to serious diseases. The expression patterns and prognostic values of SLC family transporters in the development of ccRCC are still unclear. The current study analyzed the expression levels of SLC family members and their correlation with prognosis in ccRCC patients with data from Oncomine, Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), cBioPortal, the Human Protein Atlas (HPA), the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). We found that the mRNA expression levels of SLC22A6, SLC22A7, SLC22A13, SLC25A4, SLC34A1, and SLC44A4 were significantly lower in ccRCC tissues than in normal tissues and the protein expression levels of SLC22A6, SLC22A7, SLC22A13, and SLC34A1 were also significantly lower. Except for SLC22A7, the expression levels of SLC22A6, SLC22A13, SLC25A4, SLC34A1, and SLC44A4 were correlated with the clinical stage of ccRCC patients. The lower the expression levels of SLC22A6, SLC22A13, SLC25A4, SLC34A1, and SLC44A4 were, the later the clinical stage of ccRCC patients was. Further experiments revealed that the expression levels of SLC22A6, SLC22A7, SLC22A13, SLC25A4, SLC34A1, and SLC44A4 were significantly associated with overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) in ccRCC patients. High SLC22A6, SLC22A7, SLC22A13, SLC25A4, SLC34A1, and SLC44A4 expression predicted improved OS and DFS. Finally, GSE53757 and ICGC were used to revalidate the differential expression and clinical prognostic value. This study suggests that SLC22A6, SLC22A7, SLC22A13, SLC25A4, SLC34A1, and SLC44A4 may be potential targets for the clinical diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of ccRCC patients.
Measures of information processing speed vary between individuals and decline with age. Studies of aging twins suggest heritability may be as high as 67%. The Illumina HumanExome Bead Chip genotyping array was used to examine the association of rare coding variants with performance on the Digit-Symbol Substitution Test (DSST) in community-dwelling adults participating in the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium. DSST scores were available for 30,576 individuals of European ancestry from nine cohorts and for 5758 individuals of African ancestry from four cohorts who were older than 45 years and free of dementia and clinical stroke. Linear regression models adjusted for age and gender were used for analysis of single genetic variants, and the T5, T1, and T01 burden tests that aggregate the number of rare alleles by gene were also applied. Secondary analyses included further adjustment for education. Meta-analyses to combine cohort-specific results were carried out separately for each ancestry group. Variants in RNF19A reached the threshold for statistical significance (p = 2.01 x 10(-6)) using the T01 test in individuals of European descent. RNF19A belongs to the class of E3 ubiquitin ligases that confer substrate specificity when proteins are ubiquitinated and targeted for degradation through the 26S proteasome. Variants in SLC22A7 and OR51A7 were suggestively associated with DSST scores after adjustment for education for African-American participants and in the European cohorts, respectively. Further functional characterization of its substrates will be required to confirm the role of RNF19A in cognitive function.
BACKGROUND: Recurrence determines the postoperative prognosis with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It is unknown how the liver dysfunction involving organic anion transporter failure causes the occurrence of HCCs. This study was designed to elucidate the link between liver dysfunction and multicentric occurrence (MO) after radical hepatectomy. METHODS: Forty-nine samples of noncancerous liver tissue from HCC patients within the Milan criteria who were treated at our institution between January 2004 and August 2008 were examined as a training set by using genome-wide gene expression analysis. Using the independent 2-institutional cohort of 134 patients between September 2008 and December 2009, we performed a validation study using tissue microarray analysis. Cox proportional hazard regression analyses for MFS were performed to estimate the risk factors. RESULTS: In the Gene Ontology database (GO:0015711), SLC22A7 expression was the best predictor of MO-free survival [MFS] (Fold, 0.726; P = 0.001). High SLC22A7 gene expression prevented the occurrence of HCC after hepatectomy (odds ratio [OR], 0.2; P = 0.004). Multivariate analyses identified SLC22A7 expression as an independent risk factor (OR, 0.3; P = 0.043). In the validation study, multivariate analyses of MFS identified SLC22A7 expression as an independent risk factor (OR, 0.5; P = 0.012). As judged by gene set enrichment analysis, SLC22A7 down regulation was associated with mitochondrion (P = 0.008) and oxidoreductase activity (P = 0.006). Sirtuin 3 as a regulator of mitochondrial metabolism also determined MFS (P = 0.018). CONCLUSIONS: The mitochondrial pathways may affect SLC 22A7 function to promote the occurrence of HCC. (Word count: 246).
OATS/Oats are transmembrane proteins that transport a variety of drugs, environmental toxins and endogenous metabolites into the cell. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) has seven OAT orthologs: Oat1, Oat2a-e and Oat3. In this study we specifically address Oat2 (Slc22a7) family. Conserved synteny analysis showed localization of zebrafish oat2 genes on two chromosomes, 11 and 17. All five zebrafish Oats were localized by live cell imaging in membranes of transiently transfected HEK293-T cells, and Oat2a, b, d, and e were confirmed using western blot analysis. Functional studies using the HEK293T cells overexpressing zebrafish Oats revealed two model fluorescent substrates of three Oats: Lucifer yellow for Oat2a and Oat2d (Km 122, and 49.7muM), and 6-carboxyfluorescein for Oat2b and Oat2d (Km 199.7, and 266.9muM). The initial screening of a series of diverse endo- and xenobiotics showed interaction with a number of compounds, including cGMP and diclofenac (IC50 27.74, and 19.14muM) with Oat2a; estrone-3-sulfate and diclofenac (IC50 30.96, and 12.6muM) with Oat2b; and fumarate and indomethacin (IC50 68.24, and 20.41muM) with Oat2d. This study provides the first comprehensive data set on Oat2 in zebrafish and offers an important basis for more detailed molecular and (eco)toxicological characterizations of these transporters.
Renal proximal tubules secrete diverse organic anions (OA) including widely prescribed anionic drugs. Here, we review the molecular properties of cloned transporters involved in uptake of OA from blood into proximal tubule cells and provide extensive lists of substrates handled by these transport systems. Where tested, transporters have been immunolocalized to the basolateral cell membrane. The sulfate anion transporter 1 (sat-1) cloned from human, rat and mouse, transported oxalate and sulfate. Drugs found earlier to interact with sulfate transport in vivo have not yet been tested with sat-1. The Na(+)-dicarboxylate cotransporter 3 (NaDC-3) was cloned from human, rat, mouse and flounder, and transported three Na(+) with one divalent di- or tricarboxylate, such as citric acid cycle intermediates and the heavy metal chelator 2,3-dimercaptosuccinate (succimer). The organic anion transporter 1 (OAT1) cloned from several species was shown to exchange extracellular OA against intracellular alpha-ketoglutarate. OAT1 translocated, e.g., anti-inflammatory drugs, antiviral drugs, beta-lactam antibiotics, loop diuretics, ochratoxin A, and p-aminohippurate. Several OA, including probenecid, inhibited OAT1. Human, rat and mouse OAT2 transported selected anti-inflammatory and antiviral drugs, methotrexate, ochratoxin A, and, with high affinities, prostaglandins E(2) and F(2alpha). OAT3 cloned from human, rat and mouse showed a substrate specificity overlapping with that of OAT1. In addition, OAT3 interacted with sulfated steroid hormones such as estrone-3-sulfate. The driving forces for OAT2 and OAT3, the relative contributions of all OA transporters to, and the impact of transporter regulation by protein kinases on renal drug excretion in vivo must be determined in future experiments.
The physiological function of organic anion transporter OAT2 (SLC22A7) remains unclear, but since OAT2 transports purine derivatives, it may be involved in renal handling of uric acid, the final metabolite of purine derivatives. In the present study, we studied uric acid transport in stably OAT2-expressing HEK293 cells (HEK293/OAT2). OAT2 mediated uptake, but not efflux, of [(14)C]uric acid. Uric acid transport was saturable with K(m) of 1168+/-335 muM (mean and S.E.M.) and V(max) of 2.57+/-0.350 nmol/min/mg protein. The [(14)C]uric acid uptake was sensitive to Cl(-) and was enhanced at acidic pH. In cis-inhibition assay, [(14)C]uric acid uptake was inhibited by several mono- or dicarboxylic acids, but it was not trans-stimulated by any of the compounds tested. The pattern of inhibition of OAT2-mediated uric acid transport by various drugs was different from that of OAT1- or OAT3-mediated transport. Furthermore, OAT2-mediated transport of uric acid was inhibited by an antiuricosuric drug, pyrazinecarboxylic acid. These results revealed distinct characteristics of uric acid transport via OAT2 compared with other uric acid transporters, suggesting that OAT2 plays a role in renal uric acid uptake from blood as a first step of tubular secretion. OAT2 may therefore be a potential target for regulating serum uric acid level.
