Carbonic anhydrase 2; Essential for bone resorption and osteoclast differentiation (By similarity). Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. Can hydrate cyanamide to urea. Involved in the regulation of fluid secretion into the anterior chamber of the eye. Contributes to intracellular pH regulation in the duodenal upper villous epithelium during proton- coupled peptide absorption. Stimulates the chloride-bicarbonate exchange activity of SLC26A6.
The androgen receptor signaling inhibitor (ARSI) enzalutamide (Enz) has shown critical efficacy in the treatment of advanced prostate cancer (PCa). However, the development of drug resistance is a significant factor contributing to mortality in PCa patients. We aimed to explore the key mechanisms of Enz-resistance. Through analysis of GEO databases, we identified SLC4A4 as a novel driver in Enz resistance. Long-term Enz treatment leads to the up-regulation of SLC4A4, which in turn mediates P53 lactylation via the NF-kappaB/STAT3/SLC4A4 axis, ultimately leading to the development of Enz resistance and progression of PCa. SLC4A4 knockdown overcomes Enz resistance both in vitro and in vivo. Hence, our results suggest that targeting SLC4A4 could be a promising therapeutic strategy for Enz resistance. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: SLC4A4 is a novel driver of enzalutamide resistance.
Cation-coupled HCO3(-) transport was initially identified in the mid-1970s when pioneering studies showed that acid extrusion from cells is stimulated by CO2/HCO3(-) and associated with Na(+) and Cl(-) movement. The first Na(+)-coupled bicarbonate transporter (NCBT) was expression-cloned in the late 1990s. There are currently five mammalian NCBTs in the SLC4-family: the electrogenic Na,HCO3-cotransporters NBCe1 and NBCe2 (SLC4A4 and SLC4A5 gene products); the electroneutral Na,HCO3-cotransporter NBCn1 (SLC4A7 gene product); the Na(+)-driven Cl,HCO3-exchanger NDCBE (SLC4A8 gene product); and NBCn2/NCBE (SLC4A10 gene product), which has been characterized as an electroneutral Na,HCO3-cotransporter or a Na(+)-driven Cl,HCO3-exchanger. Despite the similarity in amino acid sequence and predicted structure among the NCBTs of the SLC4-family, they exhibit distinct differences in ion dependency, transport function, pharmacological properties, and interactions with other proteins. In epithelia, NCBTs are involved in transcellular movement of acid-base equivalents and intracellular pH control. In nonepithelial tissues, NCBTs contribute to intracellular pH regulation; and hence, they are crucial for diverse tissue functions including neuronal discharge, sensory neuron development, performance of the heart, and vascular tone regulation. The function and expression levels of the NCBTs are generally sensitive to intracellular and systemic pH. Animal models have revealed pathophysiological roles of the transporters in disease states including metabolic acidosis, hypertension, visual defects, and epileptic seizures. Studies are being conducted to understand the physiological consequences of genetic polymorphisms in the SLC4-members, which are associated with cancer, hypertension, and drug addiction. Here, we describe the current knowledge regarding the function, structure, and regulation of the mammalian cation-coupled HCO3(-) transporters of the SLC4-family.
SLC4A gene family proteins include bicarbonate transporters that move HCO(3)(-) across the plasma membrane and regulate intracellular pH and transepithelial movement of acid-base equivalents. These transporters are Cl/HCO(3) exchangers, electrogenic Na/HCO(3) cotransporters, electroneutral Na/HCO(3) cotransporters, and Na(+)-driven Cl/HCO(3) exchanger. Studies of the bicarbonate transporters in vitro and in vivo have demonstrated their physiological importance for acid-base homeostasis at the cellular and systemic levels. Recent advances in structure/function analysis have also provided valuable information on domains or motifs critical for regulation, ion translocation, and protein topology. This chapter focuses on the molecular mechanisms of ion transport along with associated structural aspects from mutagenesis of particular residues and from chimeric constructs. Structure/function studies have helped to understand the mechanism by which ion substrates are moved via the transporters. This chapter also describes some insights into the structure of SLC4A1 (AE1) and SLC4A4 (NBCe1) transporters. Finally, as some SLC4A transporters exist in concert with other proteins in the cells, the structural features associated with protein-protein interactions are briefly discussed.
Acid-base balance is critical for normal life. Acute and chronic disturbances impact cellular energy metabolism, endocrine signaling, ion channel activity, neuronal activity, and cardiovascular functions such as cardiac contractility and vascular blood flow. Maintenance and adaptation of acid-base homeostasis are mostly controlled by respiration and kidney. The kidney contributes to acid-base balance by reabsorbing filtered bicarbonate, regenerating bicarbonate through ammoniagenesis and generation of protons, and by excreting acid. This review focuses on acid-base disorders caused by renal processes, both inherited and acquired. Distinct rare inherited monogenic diseases affecting acid-base handling in the proximal tubule and collecting duct have been identified. In the proximal tubule, mutations of solute carrier 4A4 (SLC4A4) (electrogenic Na(+)/HCO(3)(-)-cotransporter Na(+)/bicarbonate cotransporter e1 [NBCe1]) and other genes such as CLCN5 (Cl(-)/H(+)-antiporter), SLC2A2 (GLUT2 glucose transporter), or EHHADH (enoyl-CoA, hydratase/3-hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase) causing more generalized proximal tubule dysfunction can cause proximal renal tubular acidosis resulting from bicarbonate wasting and reduced ammoniagenesis. Mutations in adenosine triphosphate ATP6V1 (B1 H(+)-ATPase subunit), ATPV0A4 (a4 H(+)-ATPase subunit), SLC4A1 (anion exchanger 1), and FOXI1 (forkhead transcription factor) cause distal renal tubular acidosis type I. Carbonic anhydrase II mutations affect several nephron segments and give rise to a mixed proximal and distal phenotype. Finally, mutations in genes affecting aldosterone synthesis, signaling, or downstream targets can lead to hyperkalemic variants of renal tubular acidosis (type IV). More common forms of renal acidosis are found in patients with advanced stages of chronic kidney disease and are owing, at least in part, to a reduced capacity for ammoniagenesis.
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is a hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis characterized by a normal anion gap and normal (or near normal) glomerular filtration rate in the absence of diarrhoea. Inherited isolated forms of renal tubular acidosis are not common. However, they can also be a part of a more generalized tubule defect, like in Fanconi syndrome. In recent years more and more gene mutations have been found which are associated with RTA (mutations in the gene SLC4A4, encoding a Na(+)-HCO(3)(-) cotransporter (NBC-1); in the gene SLC4A1, encoding Cl(-)/HCO3(-) exchanger (AE1); in the gene ATP6B1, encoding B1 subunit of H(+)-ATPase; in the gene CA2 encoding carbonic anhydrase II; and others) and allow better understanding of underlying processes of bicarbonate and H(+) transport. Isolated renal tubular acidosis can be frequently acquired due to use of certain drug groups, autoimmune disease or kidney transplantation. As the prevalence of acquired forms of RTA is common, new therapeutic options for the currently used supplementation of oral alkali, are awaited.
BACKGROUND: The current study aimed to identify potential diagnostic and prognostic gene biomarkers for colorectal cancer (CRC) based on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset. METHODS: Microarray data of gene expression profiles of CRC from GEO and RNA-sequencing dataset of CRC from TCGA were downloaded. After screening overlapping differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by R software, functional enrichment analyses of the DEGs were performed using the DAVID database. Then, the STRING database and Cytoscape were used to construct a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network and identify hub genes. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were conducted to assess the diagnostic values of the hub genes. Cox proportional hazards regression was performed to screen the potential prognostic genes. Kaplan-Meier curve and the time-dependent ROC curve were used to assess the prognostic values of the potential prognostic genes for CRC patients. RESULTS: Integrated analysis of GEO and TCGA databases revealed 207 common DEGs in CRC. A PPI network consisted of 70 nodes and 170 edges were constructed and top 10 hub genes were identified. The area under curve (AUC) of the ROC curves of the hub genes were 0.900, 0.927, 0.869, 0.863, 0.980, 0.682, 0.903, 0.790, 0.995, and 0.989 for CCL19, CXCL1, CXCL5, CXCL11, CXCL12, GNG4, INSL5, NMU, PYY, and SST, respectively. A prognostic gene signature consisted of 9 genes including SLC4A4, NFE2L3, GLDN, PCOLCE2, TIMP1, CCL28, SCGB2A1, AXIN2, and MMP1 was constructed with a good performance in predicting overall survivals of CRC patients. The AUC of the time-dependent ROC curve was 0.741 for 5-year survival. CONCLUSION: The results in this study might provide some directive significance for further exploring the potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis prediction of CRC patients.
BACKGROUND: Long-read whole genome sequencing (lrWGS) has the potential to address the technical limitations of exome sequencing in ways not possible by short-read WGS. However, its utility in autosomal recessive Mendelian diseases is largely unknown. METHODS: In a cohort of 34 families in which the suspected autosomal recessive diseases remained undiagnosed by exome sequencing, lrWGS was performed on the Pacific Bioscience Sequel IIe platform. RESULTS: Likely causal variants were identified in 13 (38%) of the cohort. These include (1) a homozygous splicing SV in TYMS as a novel candidate gene for lethal neonatal lactic acidosis, (2) a homozygous non-coding SV that we propose impacts STK25 expression and causes a novel neurodevelopmental disorder, (3) a compound heterozygous SV in RP1L1 with complex inheritance pattern in a family with inherited retinal disease, (4) homozygous deep intronic variants in LEMD2 and SNAP91 as novel candidate genes for neurodevelopmental disorders in two families, and (5) a promoter SNV in SLC4A4 causing non-syndromic band keratopathy. Surprisingly, we also encountered causal variants that could have been identified by short-read exome sequencing in 7 families. The latter highlight scenarios that are especially challenging at the interpretation level. CONCLUSIONS: Our data highlight the continued need to address the interpretation challenges in parallel with efforts to improve the sequencing technology itself. We propose a path forward for the implementation of lrWGS sequencing in the setting of autosomal recessive diseases in a way that maximizes its utility.
Astrocytes play vital roles in blood-brain barrier (BBB) maintenance, yet how they support BBB integrity under normal or pathological conditions remains poorly defined. Recent evidence suggests that ion homeostasis is a cellular mechanism important for BBB integrity. In the current study, we investigated the function of an astrocyte-specific pH regulator, Slc4a4, in BBB maintenance and repair. We show that astrocytic Slc4a4 is required for normal astrocyte morphological complexity and BBB function. Multi-omics analyses identified increased astrocytic secretion of CCL2 coupled with dysregulated arginine-NO metabolism after Slc4a4 deletion. Using a model of ischemic stroke, we found that loss of Slc4a4 exacerbates BBB disruption, which was rescued by pharmacological or genetic inhibition of the CCL2-CCR2 pathway in vivo. Together, our study identifies the astrocytic Slc4a4-CCL2 and endothelial CCR2 axis as a mechanism controlling BBB integrity and repair, while providing insights for a therapeutic approach against BBB-related CNS disorders.
IRBIT (IP(3)Rs binding protein released with IP(3)) is a protein originally identified by the Mikoshiba group as an inhibitor of IP(3) receptors function. Subsequently it was found to have multiple functions and regulate the activity of diverse proteins, including regulation of HCO(3)(-) transporters to coordinate epithelial HCO(3)(-) secretion and to determine localization of the Fip1 subunit of the CPSF complex to regulate mRNA processing. This review highlights the remarkably divers functions of IRBIT that are likely only a fraction of all the potential functions of this protein.
The copious metabolic acid production and -extrusion by cancer cells render poorly vascularized regions of solid tumors highly acidic. A growing list of proton - and bicarbonate transporters has been suggested to contribute to net acid extrusion from cancer cells, and/or been shown to be dysregulated and favor malignant development in various cancers. The great majority of these roles have been studied at the level of the cancer cells. However, recent advances in understanding of the cellular and physicochemical heterogeneity of solid tumors both enable and necessitate a reexamination of the regulation and roles of acid-base transporters in such malignancies. This review will briefly summarize the state-of-the-art, with a focus on the SLC9A and SLC4A families, for which most evidence is available. This is followed by a discussion of key concepts and open questions arising from recent insights and of the challenges that need to be tackled to address them. Finally, opportunities and challenges in therapeutic targeting of the acid-base transportome in cancers will be addressed.
The kidney maintains systemic acid-base homeostasis through proximal tubular reclamation of filtered bicarbonate, and excretion of the daily mineral acid load by collecting duct type A intercalated cells. Impairment of either process produces renal tubular acidosis (RTA). This article will provide an overview of familial forms of proximal and distal renal tubular acidosis (pRTA and dRTA). Recessive pRTA with ocular and central nervous system abnormalities is caused by loss-of-function mutations in basolateral membrane Na-HCO3- cotransporter NBCe1/ SLC4A4. Recessive dRTA with deafness is caused by loss-of-function mutations in either of 2 subunits of the vacuolar H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) of intercalated cells; the B1 subunit of the V1 cytoplasmic ATPase complex, and the a4 subunit of the V0 transmembrane pore complex. Dominant and recessive forms of dRTA are also caused by loss-of-function mutations in the basolateral membrane AE1 Cl-/HCO3- exchanger of the type A intercalated cell. The dominant AE1 dRTA mutations are accompanied by mild or asymptomatic erythroid changes, while the erythroid dyscrasias accompanying recessive AE1 dRTA mutations can be mild or severe. Recessive mixed proximal-distal RTA is caused by loss-of-function mutations of the cytoplasmic carbonic anhydrase II. Hyperkalemic RTA accompanied by hypertension (pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2 [PHA2]) is caused by dominant gain-of-function mutations in the kinases WNK1 and WNK4. Hyperkalemic RTA accompanied by volume depletion is caused by loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding the mineralocorticoid receptor or the epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC) subunits. Additional RTA genes identified in knockout mice may lead to identification of additional human RTA genes.
BACKGROUND: Altered expression and activity of solute carrier family 4 member 4 (SLC4A4) could affect the growth, survival and metastasis of tumor cells. Currently, the role of SLC4A4 in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) immunotherapy and prognosis was not entirely clear. METHODS: We analyzed SLC4A4 expression in LUAD tissues and cell lines using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. The effects of SLC4A4 overexpression on angiogenesis, cell migration, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition were examined. Public databases helped construct a risk model evaluating SLC4A4's expression on LUAD prognosis and immunotherapy response. Additionally, a xenograft model, flow cytometry, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay further explored SLC4A4's role in tumor immune microenvironment infiltration. RESULTS: Upregulation of SLC4A4 promoted apoptosis in the LUAD cell line and significantly inhibited the migration and invasive ability of cancer cells (P<0.01). A total of 10 key genes (including SIGLEC6, RHOV, PIR, MOB3B, MIR3135B, LPAR6, KRT8, ITGA2, CPS1, and C6) were screened according to SLC4A4 expression, immune score and stromal score, and a prognostic model with good outcome was constructed (AUC values of which in the training cohort at 1,3, and 5 years reached 0.73, 0.73, and 0.72, respectively). Importantly, we demonstrated that high expression of SLC4A4 was able to increase the proliferation level and cytokine secretion of CD8+ T cells for the purpose of promoting the immune system response to LUAD. CONCLUSION: Our study revealed that SLC4A4 can serve as a prognostic indicator for LUAD, providing new insights into the treatment and diagnosis of LUAD.
BACKGROUND: There is increased recognition of duodenal disturbances (inflammation, altered mucosal protein expression, and chemosensitivity) in functional dyspepsia (FD). Besides sensorimotor functions, enteric submucosal neurons also regulate epithelial ion transport. We hypothesized that duodenal mucosal ion transport and expression of associated genes are altered in FD. METHODS: Duodenal mucosal ion transport (basal and acetylcholine- and glucose-evoked changes in short-circuit current [Isc]) and expression of associated genes and regulatory miRNAs were evaluated in 40 FD patients and 24 healthy controls. RESULTS: Basal Isc (FD: 88.2 [52.6] muA/cm(2) vs healthy: 20.3 [50.2] muA/cm(2) ; P </= .0001), acetylcholine-evoked Isc (FD: Emax 50.4 [35.8] muA/cm(2) vs healthy: 16.6 [15] muA/cm(2) ; P </= .001), and glucose-evoked Isc responses (FD: E(max) 69.8 [42.1] muA/cm(2) vs healthy: 40.3 [24.6] muA/cm(2) ; P = .02) were greater in FD than in controls. The Emax for glucose was greater in FD patients on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In FD, the mRNA expression of SLC4A7 and SLC4A4, which transport bicarbonate into cells at the basolateral surface, and the apical anion exchanger SLC26A3 were reduced (false discovery rate <0.05), the serotonin receptor HTR4 was increased, and the serotonin transporter SLC6A4 was decreased. Selected miRNAs (hsa-miR-590-3p, hsa-miR-32-5p) that target genes associated with ionic transport were upregulated in FD. CONCLUSIONS: Compared to controls, FD patients had greater baseline and agonist-evoked duodenal mucosal secretory responses. These findings may be explained by reduced gene expression, which would be anticipated to reduce luminal bicarbonate secretion. The upregulated miRNAs may partly explain the downregulation of these genes in FD.
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) represents a group of diseases characterized by (1) a normal anion gap metabolic acidosis; (2) abnormalities in renal HCO(3)(-) absorption or new renal HCO(3)(-) generation; (3) changes in renal NH(4)(+), Ca(2+), K(+), and H(2)O homeostasis; and (4) extrarenal manifestations that provide etiologic diagnostic clues. The focus of this review is to give a general overview of the pathogenesis of the various clinical syndromes causing RTA with a particular emphasis on type I (hypokalemic distal RTA) and type II (proximal) RTA while reviewing their pathogenesis from a physiological "bottom-up" approach. In addition, the factors involved in the generation of metabolic acidosis in both type I and II RTA are reviewed highlighting the importance of altered renal ammonia production/partitioning and new HCO(3)(-) generation. Our understanding of the underlying tubular transport and extrarenal abnormalities has significantly improved since the first recognition of RTA as a clinical entity because of significant advances in clinical acid-base chemistry, whole tubule and single-cell H(+)/base transport, and the molecular characterization of the various transporters and channels that are functionally affected in patients with RTA. Despite these advances, additional studies are needed to address the underlying mechanisms involved in hypokalemia, altered ammonia production/partitioning, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, cystic abnormalities, and CKD progression in these patients.
IRBIT (also called AHCYL1) was originally identified as a binding protein of the intracellular Ca(2+) channel inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) receptor and functions as an inhibitory regulator of this receptor. Unexpectedly, many functions have subsequently been identified for IRBIT including the activation of multiple ion channels and ion transporters, such as the Na(+)/HCO3(-) co-transporter NBCe1-B, the Na(+)/H(+) exchanger NHE3, the Cl(-) channel cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and the Cl(-)/HCO3(-) exchanger Slc26a6. The characteristic serine-rich region in IRBIT plays a critical role in the functions of this protein. In this review, we describe the evolution, domain structure, expression pattern, and physiological roles of IRBIT and discuss the potential molecular mechanisms underlying the coordinated regulation of these diverse ion channels/transporters through IRBIT. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Calcium signaling in health and disease. Guest Editors: Geert Bultynck, Jacques Haiech, Claus W. Heizmann, Joachim Krebs, and Marc Moreau.
BACKGROUND SLC4A4 is differentially expressed in a variety of tumors, but its significance in colon adenocarcinoma has not been determined. MATERIAL AND METHODS Transcriptomes of two cohorts, GSE41258 and GSE32323, contained in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) were analysed to determine differences in SLC4A4 expression between tumor and normal tissue and their correlations with overall survival. The relationships between SLC4A4 expression and clinical characteristics were determined by COX regression analysis and logistic regression analysis, and correlations of SLC4A4 levels with tumor infiltrating immune cells (TIICs) and genes with high mutation frequency were evaluated by Pearson correlation analysis. Molecular functions and signaling pathways that might be affected by changes in SLC4A4 expression were determined by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). The overall distribution of TIICs was determined by two web servers: tumor immune estimation resource (TIMER) and CIBERSORT. RESULTS SLC4A4 expression was lower in colon adenocarcinoma than in normal colon tissue, suggesting that SLC4A4 was associated with poor prognosis. Reduced SLC4A4 expression was also associated with lymph node invasion and distant metastasis and was moderately correlated with increased expression of MUC4 and SMAD4, two genes with high mutation frequency in colon adenocarcinoma. GSEA indicated that changes in SLC4A4 expression affects several biological processes, including mismatch repair, base excision repair, and DNA replication. Eight TIICs in the tumor microenvironment differed significantly in groups with low and high expression of SLC4A4. CONCLUSIONS SLC4A4 may be a novel biomarker predicting prognosis in patients with colon adenocarcinoma. TIICs differed significantly in samples with higher and lower expression of SLC4A4.
A serine/threonine kinase Akt is a key mediator in various signaling pathways including regulation of renal tubular transport. In proximal tubules, Akt mediates insulin signaling via insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2) and stimulates sodium-bicarbonate cotransporter (NBCe1), resulting in increased sodium reabsorption. In insulin resistance, the IRS2 in kidney cortex is exceptionally preserved and may mediate the stimulatory effect of insulin on NBCe1 to cause hypertension in diabetes via sodium retention. Likewise, in distal convoluted tubules and cortical collecting ducts, insulin-induced Akt phosphorylation mediates several hormonal signals to enhance sodium-chloride cotransporter (NCC) and epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) activities, resulting in increased sodium reabsorption. Serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase 1 (SGK1) mediates aldosterone signaling. Insulin can stimulate SGK1 to exert various effects on renal transporters. In renal cortical collecting ducts, SGK1 regulates the expression level of ENaC through inhibition of its degradation. In addition, SGK1 and Akt cooperatively regulate potassium secretion by renal outer medullary potassium channel (ROMK). Moreover, sodium-proton exchanger 3 (NHE3) in proximal tubules is possibly activated by SGK1. This review focuses on recent advances in understanding of the roles of Akt and SGK1 in the regulation of renal tubular transport.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are known to affect the occurrence and progression of cancer. We therefore evaluated the involvement of miR-223-3p in renal cell cancer. MiR-223-3p was highly expressed in clear cell renal cell cancer tissues. Clear cell renal cell cancer patients with higher miR-223-3p expression had higher tumor stages and grades and poorer prognoses. In renal cancer cells, overexpression of miR-223-3p enhanced cell proliferation and metastasis, while inhibition of miR-223-3p reduced the malignant capacity of the cells. MiR-223-3p was found to bind directly to solute carrier family 4, member 4 (SLC4A4) mRNA, thereby reducing SLC4A4 mRNA and protein expression. SLC4A4 overexpression restrained cell proliferation and metastasis by suppressing Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene (KRAS) expression in renal cancer cells. SLC4A4 expression correlated negatively with miR-223-3p expression in patient samples. Given that miR-223-3p suppressed the SLC4A4/KRAS axis, miR-223-3p gene therapy could be an effective treatment for renal cancer.
Breast cancer heterogeneity in histology and molecular subtype influences metabolic and proliferative activity and hence the acid load on cancer cells. We hypothesized that acid-base transporters and intracellular pH (pH(i)) dynamics contribute inter-individual variability in breast cancer aggressiveness and prognosis. We show that Na(+),HCO(3)(-) cotransport and Na(+)/H(+) exchange dominate cellular net acid extrusion in human breast carcinomas. Na(+)/H(+) exchange elevates pH(i) preferentially in estrogen receptor-negative breast carcinomas, whereas Na(+),HCO(3)(-) cotransport raises pH(i) more in invasive lobular than ductal breast carcinomas and in higher malignancy grade breast cancer. HER2-positive breast carcinomas have elevated protein expression of Na(+)/H(+) exchanger NHE1/SLC9A1 and Na(+),HCO(3)(-) cotransporter NBCn1/SLC4A7. Increased dependency on Na(+),HCO(3)(-) cotransport associates with severe breast cancer: enlarged CO(2)/HCO(3)(-)-dependent rises in pH(i) predict accelerated cell proliferation, whereas enhanced CO(2)/HCO(3)(-)-dependent net acid extrusion, elevated NBCn1 protein expression, and reduced NHE1 protein expression predict lymph node metastasis. Accordingly, we observe reduced survival for patients suffering from luminal A or basal-like/triple-negative breast cancer with high SLC4A7 and/or low SLC9A1 mRNA expression. We conclude that the molecular mechanisms of acid-base regulation depend on clinicopathological characteristics of breast cancer patients. NBCn1 expression and dependency on Na(+),HCO(3)(-) cotransport for pH(i) regulation, measured in biopsies of human primary breast carcinomas, independently predict proliferative activity, lymph node metastasis, and patient survival.
Bicarbonate transport is a pre-existing mechanism of pH regulation in pancreatic ductal cells. In a recent study, Cappellesso et al. demonstrated that pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma metabolic rewiring creates an acidic environment, enhanced by bicarbonate import into cancer cells via SLC4A4. This acidity favours protumourigenic immunosuppression. Targeting SLC4A4 neutralises environmental pH and restores antitumour immunity, sensitising tumours to immune checkpoint blockade.
