Multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1; Solute transporter for tetraethylammonium (TEA), 1-methyl-4- phenylpyridinium (MPP), cimetidine, N-methylnicotinamide (NMN), metformin, creatinine, guanidine, procainamide, topotecan, estrone sulfate, acyclovir, ganciclovir and also the zwitterionic cephalosporin, cephalexin and cephradin. Seems to also play a role in the uptake of oxaliplatin (a new platinum anticancer agent). Able to transport paraquat (PQ or N,N-dimethyl-4-4'-bipiridinium); a widely used herbicid. Responsible for the secretion of cationic drugs across the brush border membranes.
Copper is an essential trace element in biological systems, maintaining the activity of enzymes and the function of transcription factors. However, at high concentrations, copper ions show increased toxicity by inducing regulated cell death, such as apoptosis, paraptosis, pyroptosis, ferroptosis, and cuproptosis. Furthermore, copper ions can trigger macroautophagy/autophagy, a lysosome-dependent degradation pathway that plays a dual role in regulating the survival or death fate of cells under various stress conditions. Pathologically, impaired copper metabolism due to environmental or genetic causes is implicated in a variety of human diseases, such as rare Wilson disease and common cancers. Therapeutically, copper-based compounds are potential chemotherapeutic agents that can be used alone or in combination with other drugs or approaches to treat cancer. Here, we review the progress made in understanding copper metabolic processes and their impact on the regulation of cell death and autophagy. This knowledge may help in the design of future clinical tools to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment.Abbreviations: ACSL4, acyl-CoA synthetase long chain family member 4; AIFM1/AIF, apoptosis inducing factor mitochondria associated 1; AIFM2, apoptosis inducing factor mitochondria associated 2; ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; ALOX, arachidonate lipoxygenase; AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; APAF1, apoptotic peptidase activating factor 1; ATF4, activating transcription factor 4; ATG, autophagy related; ATG13, autophagy related 13; ATG5, autophagy related 5; ATOX1, antioxidant 1 copper chaperone; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATP7A, ATPase copper transporting alpha; ATP7B, ATPase copper transporting beta; BAK1, BCL2 antagonist/killer 1; BAX, BCL2 associated X apoptosis regulator; BBC3/PUMA, BCL2 binding component 3; BCS, bathocuproinedisulfonic acid; BECN1, beclin 1; BID, BH3 interacting domain death agonist; BRCA1, BRCA1 DNA repair associated; BSO, buthionine sulphoximine; CASP1, caspase 1; CASP3, caspase 3; CASP4/CASP11, caspase 4; CASP5, caspase 5; CASP8, caspase 8; CASP9, caspase 9; CCS, copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase; CD274/PD-L1, CD274 molecule; CDH2, cadherin 2; CDKN1A/p21, cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1A; CDKN1B/p27, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B; COMMD10, COMM domain containing 10; CoQ10, coenzyme Q 10; CoQ10H2, reduced coenzyme Q 10; COX11, cytochrome c oxidase copper chaperone COX11; COX17, cytochrome c oxidase copper chaperone COX17; CP, ceruloplasmin; CYCS, cytochrome c, somatic; DBH, dopamine beta-hydroxylase; DDIT3/CHOP, DNA damage inducible transcript 3; DLAT, dihydrolipoamide S-acetyltransferase; DTC, diethyldithiocarbamate; EIF2A, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2A; EIF2AK3/PERK, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 alpha kinase 3; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ESCRT-III, endosomal sorting complex required for transport-III; ETC, electron transport chain; FABP3, fatty acid binding protein 3; FABP7, fatty acid binding protein 7; FADD, Fas associated via death domain; FAS, Fas cell surface death receptor; FASL, Fas ligand; FDX1, ferredoxin 1; GNAQ/11, G protein subunit alpha q/11; GPX4, glutathione peroxidase 4; GSDMD, gasdermin D; GSH, glutathione; HDAC, histone deacetylase; HIF1, hypoxia inducible factor 1; HIF1A, hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha; HMGB1, high mobility group box 1; IL1B, interleukin 1 beta; IL17, interleukin 17; KRAS, KRAS proto-oncogene, GTPase; LOX, lysyl oxidase; LPCAT3, lysophosphatidylcholine acyltransferase 3; MAP1LC3, microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAP2K1, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1; MAP2K2, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 2; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinases; MAPK14/p38, mitogen-activated protein kinase 14; MEMO1, mediator of cell motility 1; MT-CO1/COX1, mitochondrially encoded cytochrome c oxidase I; MT-CO2/COX2, mitochondrially encoded cytochrome c oxidase II; MTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MTs, metallothioneins; NAC, N-acetylcysteine; NFKB/NF-Kappab, nuclear factor kappa B; NLRP3, NLR family pyrin domain containing 3; NPLOC4/NPL4, NPL4 homolog ubiquitin recognition factor; PDE3B, phosphodiesterase 3B; PDK1, phosphoinositide dependent protein kinase 1; PHD, prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain; PIK3C3/VPS34, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PMAIP1/NOXA, phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate-induced protein 1; POR, cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase; PUFA-PL, PUFA of phospholipids; PUFAs, polyunsaturated fatty acids; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SCO1, synthesis of cytochrome C oxidase 1; SCO2, synthesis of cytochrome C oxidase 2; SLC7A11, solute carrier family 7 member 11; SLC11A2/DMT1, solute carrier family 11 member 2; SLC31A1/CTR1, solute carrier family 31 member 1; SLC47A1, solute carrier family 47 member 1; SOD1, superoxide dismutase; SP1, Sp1 transcription factor; SQSTM1/p62, sequestosome 1; STEAP4, STEAP4 metalloreductase; TAX1BP1, Tax1 binding protein 1; TEPA, tetraethylenepentamine; TFEB, transcription factor EB; TM, tetrathiomolybdate; TP53/p53, tumor protein p53; TXNRD1, thioredoxin reductase 1; UCHL5, ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L5; ULK1, Unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; ULK1, unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; ULK2, unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 2; USP14, ubiquitin specific peptidase 14; VEGF, vascular endothelial gro wth factor; XIAP, X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis.
Ferroptosis is a type of regulated necrosis caused by unrestricted lipid peroxidation and subsequent plasma membrane rupture. However, the lipid remodeling mechanism that determines sensitivity to ferroptosis remains poorly understood. Here, we report a previously unrecognized role for the lipid flippase solute carrier family 47 member 1 (SLC47A1) as a regulator of lipid remodeling and survival during ferroptosis. Among 49 phospholipid scramblases, flippases, and floppases we analyzed, only SLC47A1 had mRNA that was selectively upregulated in multiple cancer cells exposed to ferroptotic inducers. Large-scale lipidomics and functional analyses revealed that the silencing of SLC47A1 increased RSL3- or erastin-induced ferroptosis by favoring ACSL4-SOAT1-mediated production of polyunsaturated fatty acid cholesterol esters. We identified peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPARA) as a transcription factor that transactivates SLC47A1. The depletion of PPARA and SLC47A1 similarly sensitized cells to ferroptosis induction, whereas transfection-enforced re-expression of SLC47A1 restored resistance to ferroptosis in PPARA-deficient cells. Pharmacological or genetic blockade of the PPARA-SLC47A1 pathway increased the anticancer activity of a ferroptosis inducer in mice. These findings establish a direct molecular link between ferroptosis and lipid transporters, which may provide metabolic targets for overcoming drug resistance.
More than 800 million people suffer from kidney disease, yet the mechanism of kidney dysfunction is poorly understood. In the present study, we define the genetic association with kidney function in 1.5 million individuals and identify 878 (126 new) loci. We map the genotype effect on the methylome in 443 kidneys, transcriptome in 686 samples and single-cell open chromatin in 57,229 kidney cells. Heritability analysis reveals that methylation variation explains a larger fraction of heritability than gene expression. We present a multi-stage prioritization strategy and prioritize target genes for 87% of kidney function loci. We highlight key roles of proximal tubules and metabolism in kidney function regulation. Furthermore, the causal role of SLC47A1 in kidney disease is defined in mice with genetic loss of Slc47a1 and in human individuals carrying loss-of-function variants. Our findings emphasize the key role of bulk and single-cell epigenomic information in translating genome-wide association studies into identifying causal genes, cellular origins and mechanisms of complex traits.
Drug-drug interactions are a serious clinical issue. An important mechanism underlying drug-drug interactions is induction or inhibition of drug transporters that mediate the cellular uptake and efflux of xenobiotics. Especially drug transporters of the small intestine, liver and kidney are major determinants of the pharmacokinetic profile of drugs. Transporter-mediated drug-drug interactions in these three organs can considerably influence the pharmacokinetics and clinical effects of drugs. In this article, we focus on probe drugs lacking significant metabolism to highlight mechanisms of interactions of selected intestinal, hepatic and renal drug transporters (e.g., organic anion transporting polypeptide [OATP] 1A2, OATP2B1, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, P-gp, organic anion transporter [OAT] 1, OAT3, breast cancer resistance protein [BCRP], organic cation transporter [OCT] 2 and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein [MATE] 1). Genotype-dependent drug-drug interactions are also discussed.
CONTEXT: Although metformin is the first-line treatment for type 2 diabetes, the blood sugar-lowering effect of metformin varies among populations. SLC47A1 plays an important role in metformin pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. OBJECTIVE: We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the association between SLC47A1 rs2289669 (G > A) and the metformin response in drug-naive patients with type 2 diabetes. METHODS: Studies published until January 27, 2022, were retrieved from Cochrane CENTRAL, Embase, PubMed, and Web of Science. Two reviewers independently screened titles, abstracts, and full-text articles. Studies conducted in newly diagnosed or drug-naive patients with type 2 diabetes who received metformin monotherapy were included. A total of 6 studies involving 953 patients were included in this meta-analysis. We extracted the study characteristics and changes in glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels before and after treatment according to the SLC47A1 rs2289669 genotype. Changes in HbA1c levels were analyzed using mean differences (MDs) and 95% CIs. SLC47A1 rs2289669 was associated with changes in HbA1c levels (A carrier vs GG; MD = -0.55; 95% CI, -0.91 to - 0.20; I(2) = 63%). The sensitivity analysis yielded similar results to the main analysis (MD range, -0.64 to -0.37). When comparing all 3 genotypes, there were significant differences in HbA1c level changes between AA vs GG and GA vs GG, but not in GA vs AA. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis showed that SLC47A1 rs2289669 is associated with the glycemic response to metformin in drug-naive patients with type 2 diabetes.
In recent years, our understanding of the importance of membrane transporters (MTs) in the disposition of and response to drugs has increased significantly. MTs are proteins that regulate the transport of endogenous molecules and xenobiotics across the cell membrane. In mammals, two super-families have been identified: ATP-binding cassette (ABC) and solute carrier (SLC) transporters. There is evidence that MTs might mediate polyamines (PA) transport. PA are ubiquitous polycations which are found in all living cells. In mammalian cells, three major PA are synthesised: putrescine, spermidine and spermine; whilst the decarboxylated arginine (agmatine) is not produced by mammals but is synthesised by plants and bacteria. In addition, research in the PA field suggests that PA are transported into cells via a specific transporter, the polyamine transport system(s) (PTS). Although the PTS has not been fully defined, there is evidence that some of the known MTs might be involved in PA transport. In this mini review, eight SLC transporters will be reviewed and their potential to mediate PA transport in human cells discussed. These transporters are SLC22A1, SLC22A2, SLC22A3, SLC47A1, SLC7A1, SLC3A2, SLC12A8A, and SLC22A16. Preliminary data from our laboratory have revealed that SLC22A1 might be involved in the PA uptake; in addition to one member of ABC superfamily (MDR1 protein) might also mediate the efflux of polyamine like molecules.
Dofetilide is a rapid delayed rectifier potassium current inhibitor widely used to prevent the recurrence of atrial fibrillation and flutter. The clinical use of this drug is associated with increases in QTc interval, which predispose patients to ventricular cardiac arrhythmias. The mechanisms involved in the disposition of dofetilide, including its movement in and out of cardiomyocytes, remain unknown. Using a xenobiotic transporter screen, we identified MATE1 (SLC47A1) as a transporter of dofetilide and found that genetic knockout or pharmacological inhibition of MATE1 in mice was associated with enhanced retention of dofetilide in cardiomyocytes and increased QTc prolongation. The urinary excretion of dofetilide was also dependent on the MATE1 genotype, and we found that this transport mechanism provides a mechanistic basis for previously recorded drug-drug interactions of dofetilide with various contraindicated drugs, including bictegravir, cimetidine, ketoconazole, and verapamil. The translational significance of these observations was examined with a physiologically-based pharmacokinetic model that adequately predicted the drug-drug interaction liabilities in humans. These findings support the thesis that MATE1 serves a conserved cardioprotective role by restricting excessive cellular accumulation and warrant caution against the concurrent administration of potent MATE1 inhibitors and cardiotoxic substrates with a narrow therapeutic window.
Several solute carriers and ATP-binding cassette transporters have been implicated in the influx or efflux of platinum-based chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin. Given that many of these proteins are highly polymorphic, the genetic status of these proteins could be an important contributor to the extensive interindividual pharmacokinetic variability associated with the clinical use of these agents. In this review article, we provide an updated overview of the various transporters that have shown promise in animal models or patient populations in facilitating the movement of platinum-based agents across cell membranes, and how their function is associated with drug disposition or pharmacodynamic effects.
INTRODUCTION: Membrane transporters are now widely recognized for their role in the absorption, distribution, clearance, and elimination of drugs. The organic cation transporters (OCTs, SLC22A) are expressed in the intestine, liver, and kidneys and are of importance in determining systemic pharmacokinetics (PK) and tissue-specific exposure of drugs and metabolites. AREAS COVERED: An overview of the role of OCTs in drug disposition is presented. Genetic variation in OCTs and the effects on PK and drug response were discussed. EXPERT OPINION: Clinical studies demonstrated significance of OCT1 and OCT2 in the hepatic uptake and renal secretion of drug, respectively. These mechanisms are important in determining the systemic PK and tissue exposure and thus pharmacodynamics of several drugs (e.g. metformin, morphine, sumatriptan). Emerging pharmacogenomic data also suggests multidrug and toxin extrusion pump (MATE1, SLC47A1) contribution to PK and response of drugs like metformin and cisplatin. Considerations to genotyping of functional and common variants of OCTs should be given, particularly for cationic drugs with hepatic elimination or renal secretion being major clearance pathways, in the clinical development. While the current evidence indicate that pharmacokinetic variability associated with known genotypes of OCTs/MATEs is relatively small, they may be of relevance in the tissue-specific effects and for drugs with low therapeutic index.
Dementia is an important issue in western societies, and in the following years, this problem will also rise in the developing regions, such as Africa and Asia. The most common types of dementia in adults are Alzheimer's Disease (AD), Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) and Vascular Dementia (VaD), of which, AD accounts for more than half of the cases. The most prominent symptom of AD is cognitive impairment, currently treated with four drugs: Donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine, enhancing cholinergic transmission; as well as memantine, protecting neurons against glutamate excitotoxicity. Despite ongoing efforts, no new drugs in the treatment of AD have been registered for the last ten years, thus multiple studies have been conducted on genetic factors affecting the efficacy of antidementia pharmacotherapy. The researchers investigate the effects of variants in multiple genes, such as ABCB1, ACE, CHAT, CHRNA7, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP3A7, NR1I2, NR1I3, POR, PPAR, RXR, SLC22A1/2/5, SLC47A1, UGT1A6, UGT1A9 and UGT2B7, associated with numerous pathways: the development of pathological proteins, formation and metabolism of acetylcholine, transport, metabolism and excretion of antidementia drugs and transcription factors regulating the expression of genes responsible for metabolism and transport of drugs. The most promising results have been demonstrated for APOE E4, dementia risk variant, BCHE-K, reduced butyrylcholinesterase activity variant, and CYP2D6 UM, ultrarapid hepatic metabolism. Further studies investigate the possibilities of the development of emerging drugs or genetic editing by CRISPR/Cas9 for causative treatment. In conclusion, the pharmacogenetic studies on dementia diseases may improve the efficacy of pharmacotherapy in some patients with beneficial genetic variants, at the same time, identifying the carriers of unfavorable alleles, the potential group of novel approaches to the treatment and prevention of dementia.
Interindividual variation is important in the response to metformin as the first-line therapy for type-2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Considering that OCT1 and MATE1 transporters determine the metformin pharmacokinetics, this study aimed to investigate the influence of SLC22A1 and SLC47A1 variants on the steady-state pharmacokinetics of metformin and the glycemic response. This research used the prospective-cohort study design for 81 patients with T2DM who received 500 mg metformin twice a day from six primary healthcare centers. SLC22A1 rs628031 A>G (Met408Val) and Met420del genetic variants in OCT1 as well as SLC47A1 rs2289669 G>A genetic variant in MATE1 were examined through the PCR-RFLP method. The bioanalysis of plasma metformin was performed in the validated reversed-phase HPLC-UV detector. The metformin steady-state concentration was measured for the trough concentration (Cssmin) and peak concentration (Cssmax). The pharmacodynamic parameters of metformin use were the fasting blood glucose (FBG) and glycated albumin (GA). Only SLC22A1 Met420del alongside estimated-glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) affected both Cssmax and Cssmin with an extremely weak correlation. Meanwhile, SLC47A1 rs2289669 and FBG were correlated. This study also found that there was no correlation between the three SNPs studied and GA, so only eGFR and Cssmax influenced GA. The average Cssmax in patients with the G allele of SLC22A1 Met408Val, reaching 1.35-fold higher than those with the A allele, requires further studies with regard to metformin safe dose in order to avoid exceeding the recommended therapeutic range.
Familial non-medullary thyroid cancer (FNMTC) is a well-differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) of follicular cell origin in two or more first-degree relatives. Patients typically demonstrate an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with incomplete penetrance. While known genes and chromosomal loci account for some FNMTC, the molecular basis for most FNMTC remains elusive. To identify the variation(s) causing FNMTC in an extended consanguineous family consisting of 16 papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) cases, we performed whole exome sequence (WES) analysis of six family patients. We demonstrated an association of ARHGEF28, FBXW10, and SLC47A1 genes with FNMTC. The variations in these genes may affect the structures of their encoded proteins and, thus, their function. The most promising causative gene is ARHGEF28, which has high expression in the thyroid, and its protein-protein interactions (PPIs) suggest predisposition of PTC through ARHGEF28-SQSTM1-TP53 or ARHGEF28-PTCSC2-FOXE1-TP53 associations. Using DNA from a patient's thyroid malignant tissue, we analyzed the possible cooperation of somatic variations with these genes. We revealed two somatic heterozygote variations in XRCC1 and HRAS genes known to implicate thyroid cancer. Thus, the predisposition by the germline variations and a second hit by somatic variations could lead to the progression to PTC.
Transporters contribute to renal elimination of drugs; therefore drug disposition can be impacted if transporters are inhibited by comedicant drugs. Regulatory agencies have provided guidelines to assess potential drug-drug interaction (DDI) risk for renal organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2) and multidrug and toxin extrusion 1 and 2-K (MATE1/2-K) transporters. Despite this, there are challenges with translating in vitro data using currently available tools to obtain a quantitative assessment of DDI risk in the clinic. Given the high number of drugs and new molecular entities showing in vitro inhibition toward OCT2 and/or MATE1/2-K and the lack of translation to clinically significant effects, it is reasonable to question whether the current in vitro assay design and modeling practice has led to unnecessary clinical evaluation. The aim of this review is to assess and discuss available in vitro and clinical data along with prediction models intended to provide clinical context of risk, including static models proposed by regulatory agencies and physiologically-based pharmacokinetic models, in order to identify best practices and areas of future opportunity. This analysis highlights that different in vitro assay designs, including substrate and cell systems used, strongly influence the derived concentration of drug producing 50% inhibition values and contribute to high variability observed across laboratories. Furthermore, the lack of sensitive index substrates coupled with specific inhibitors for individual transporters necessitates the use of complex models to evaluate clinical DDI risk.
Abemaciclib, an inhibitor of cyclin dependent kinases 4 and 6, is indicated for metastatic breast cancer treatment. Reversible increases in serum creatinine levels of ~15-40% over baseline have been observed following abemaciclib dosing. This study assessed the in vitro and clinical inhibition of renal transporters by abemaciclib and its metabolites using metformin (a clinically relevant transporter substrate), in a clinical study that quantified glomerular filtration and iohexol clearance. In vitro, abemaciclib inhibited metformin uptake by organic cation transporter 2, multidrug and toxin extrusion (MATE)1, and MATE2-K transporters with a half-maximal inhibitory concentration of 0.4-3.8 muM. Clinically, abemaciclib significantly increased metformin exposure but did not significantly affect measured glomerular filtration rate, serum neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), serum cystatin-C, or the urinary markers of kidney tubular injury, NGAL and kidney injury molecule-1.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a worldwide epidemic with considerable health and economic consequences. T2DM patients are often treated with more than one drug, including oral antidiabetic drugs (OAD) and drugs used to treat diabetic complications, such as dyslipidemia and hypertension. If genetic testing could be employed to predict treatment outcome, appropriate measures could be taken to treat T2DM more efficiently. Here we provide a review of pharmacogenetic studies focused on OAD and a role of common drug-metabolizing enzymes (DME) and drug-transporters (DT) variants in therapy outcomes. For example, genetic variations of several membrane transporters, including SLC2A1/2 and SLC47A1/2 genes, are implicated in the highly variable glycemic response to metformin, a first-line drug used to treat newly diagnosed T2DM. Furthermore, cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are implicated in variation of sulphonylurea and meglitinide metabolism. Additional variants related to drug target and diabetes risk genes have been also linked to interindividual differences in the efficacy and toxicity of OAD. Thus, in addition to promoting safe and cost-effective individualized diabetes treatment, pharmacogenomics has a great potential to complement current efforts to optimize treatment of diabetes and lead towards its effective and personalized care.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Trifluridine/tipiracil, registered for the treatment of patients with metastatic gastric and colorectal cancer, is a substrate and inhibitor for the organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2) and the multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1 (MATE1), which raises the potential for drug-drug interactions with other OCT2/MATE1 modulators. Therefore, we prospectively examined the effect of an OCT2/MATE1 inhibitor (cimetidine) and substrate (metformin) on the pharmacokinetics of trifluridine. METHODS: In this three-phase crossover study, patients with metastatic colorectal or gastric cancer were sequentially treated with trifluridine/tipiracil alone (phase A), trifluridine/tipiracil concomitant with metformin (phase B) and trifluridine/tipiracil concomitant with cimetidine (phase C). The primary endpoint was the relative difference in exposure of trifluridine assessed by the area under the curve from timepoint zero to infinity. A > 30% change in exposure was considered clinically relevant. A p-value of < 0.025 was considered significant because of a Bonferroni correction. RESULTS: Eighteen patients were included in the analysis. Metformin did not significantly alter the exposure to trifluridine (- 12.6%; 97.5% confidence interval - 25.0, 1.8; p = 0.045). Cimetidine did alter the exposure to trifluridine significantly (+ 18.0%; 97.5% confidence interval 4.5, 33.3; p = 0.004), but this increase did not meet our threshold for clinical relevance. Metformin trough concentrations were not influenced by trifluridine/tipiracil. CONCLUSIONS: Our result suggests that the OCT2/MATE1 modulators cimetidine and metformin can be co-administered with trifluridine/tipiracil without clinically relevant effects on drug exposure. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: NL8067 (registered 04-10-2019).
The literature concerning the roles of metal transporting solute carriers in the development and progression of human cancer, and in the delivery of metal-containing anticancer drugs, chemical carcinogens and imaging agents, is reviewed. A range of different solute carrier families, including members from the SLC2A, SLC11A, SLC22A, SLC25A, SLC30A, SLC31A, SLC39A, SLC40A, SLC47A and SLCO1B families, and various metal substrates, including arsenic, copper, gadolinium, iron, platinum and zinc, have been implicated in these cancer-related transport processes. For example, the transport of platinum-based anticancer drugs has been reported to be influenced by the expression and activities of OCT1-3 (SLC22A1-3), OCTN1/2 (SLC22A4/5), CTR1/2 (SLC31A1/2) and MATE1/2 (SLC47A1/2) solute carriers. As another example, solute carriers mediate control over the availability of endogenous metal ions, such as copper, iron and zinc, may have key roles in regulating tumour angiogenesis, cell proliferation, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and aberrant MAPK and STAT-3 signal transduction in cancer. In conclusion, emerging mechanisms involving metal transporting solute carriers are being defined and seem likely to make major contributions to cancer development and progression, and to the delivery of anticancer and tumour imaging agents.
