Sodium- and chloride-dependent GABA transporter 2; Sodium-dependent GABA and taurine transporter. In presynaptic terminals, regulates GABA signaling termination through GABA uptake. May also be involved in beta-alanine transport.
The purpose of this review is to highlight recent evidence in support of a 3 Na(+): 1 Cl(-): 1 GABA coupling stoichiometry for plasma membrane GABA transporters (SLC6A1 , SLC6A11 , SLC6A12 , SLC6A13 ) and how the revised stoichiometry impacts our understanding of the contribution of GABA transporters to GABA homeostasis in synaptic and extrasynaptic regions in the brain under physiological and pathophysiological states. Recently, our laboratory probed the GABA transporter stoichiometry by analyzing the results of six independent measurements, which included the shifts in the thermodynamic transporter reversal potential caused by changes in the extracellular Na(+), Cl(-), and GABA concentrations, as well as the ratio of charge flux to substrate flux for Na(+), Cl(-), and GABA under voltage-clamp conditions. The shifts in the transporter reversal potential for a tenfold change in the external concentration of Na(+), Cl(-), and GABA were 84 +/- 4, 30 +/- 1, and 29 +/- 1 mV, respectively. Charge flux to substrate flux ratios were 0.7 +/- 0.1 charges/Na(+), 2.0 +/- 0.2 charges/Cl(-), and 2.1 +/- 0.1 charges/GABA. We then compared these experimental results with the predictions of 150 different transporter stoichiometry models, which included 1-5 Na(+), 0-5 Cl(-), and 1-5 GABA per transport cycle. Only the 3 Na(+): 1 Cl(-): 1 GABA stoichiometry model correctly predicts the results of all six experimental measurements. Using the revised 3 Na(+): 1 Cl(-): 1 GABA stoichiometry, we propose that the GABA transporters mediate GABA uptake under most physiological conditions. Transporter-mediated GABA release likely takes place under pathophysiological or extreme physiological conditions.
Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease would be very valuable because blood is a more accessible biofluid and is suitable for repeated sampling. However, currently there are no robust and reliable blood-based biomarkers for practical diagnosis. In this study we used a knowledge-based protein feature pool and two novel support vector machine embedded feature selection methods to find panels consisting of two and three biomarkers. We validated these biomarker sets using another serum cohort and an RNA profile cohort from the brain. Our panels included the proteins ECH1, NHLRC2, HOXB7, FN1, ERBB2, and SLC6A13 and demonstrated promising sensitivity (>87%), specificity (>91%), and accuracy (>89%).
Guanidinoacetic acid (GAA) is a natural amino acid derivative that is well-recognized for its central role in the biosynthesis of creatine, an essential compound involved in cellular energy metabolism. GAA (also known as glycocyamine or betacyamine) has been investigated as an energy-boosting dietary supplement in humans for more than 70 years. GAA is suggested to effectively increase low levels of tissue creatine and improve clinical features of cardiometabolic and neurological diseases, with GAA often outcompeting traditional bioenergetics agents in maintaining ATP status during stress. This perhaps happens due to a favorable delivery of GAA through specific membrane transporters (such as SLC6A6 and SLC6A13), previously dismissed as un-targetable carriers by other therapeutics, including creatine. The promising effects of dietary GAA might be countered by side-effects and possible toxicity. Animal studies reported neurotoxic and pro-oxidant effects of GAA accumulation, with exogenous GAA also appearing to increase methylation demand and circulating homocysteine, implying a possible metabolic burden of GAA intervention. This mini-review summarizes GAA toxicity evidence in human nutrition and outlines functional GAA safety through benefit-risk assessment and multi-criteria decision analysis.
ɣ-aminobutyric-acid (GABA) functions as the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Imbalances in GABAergic neurotransmission are involved in the pathophysiology of various neurological diseases such as epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease and stroke. GABA transporters (GATs) facilitate the termination of GABAergic signaling by transporting GABA together with sodium and chloride from the synaptic cleft into presynaptic neurons and surrounding glial cells. Four different GATs have been identified that all belong to the solute carrier 6 (SLC6) transporter family: GAT1-3 (SLC6A1, SLC6A13, SLC6A11) and betaine/GABA transporter 1 (BGT1, SLC6A12). BGT1 has emerged as an interesting target for treating epilepsy due to animal studies that reported anticonvulsant effects for the GAT1/BGT1 selective inhibitor EF1502 and the BGT1 selective inhibitor RPC-425. However, the precise involvement of BGT1 in epilepsy remains elusive because of its controversial expression levels in the brain and the lack of highly selective and potent tool compounds. This review gathers the current structural and functional knowledge on BGT1 with emphasis on brain relevance, discusses all available compounds, and tries to shed light on the molecular determinants driving BGT1 selectivity. This article is part of the issue entitled 'Special Issue on Neurotransmitter Transporters'.
Creatine (Cr) is needed to maintain high energy levels in cells. Since Cr plays reportedly a critical role in neurodevelopment and the immune system, Cr dynamics should be strictly regulated to control these physiological events. This review focuses on the role of transporters that recognize Cr and/or Cr precursors. Our previous studies revealed physiological roles of SLC6A and SLC16A family transporters in Cr dynamics. Creatine transporter (CRT/SLC6A8) contributes to the influx transport of Cr in Cr distribution. gamma-Aminobutyric acid transporter 2 (GAT2/SLC6A13) mediates incorporation of guanidinoacetate (GAA), a Cr precursor, in the process of Cr biosynthesis. Monocarboxylate transporter 12 (MCT12/SLC16A12) functions as an efflux transporter for Cr and GAA, and contributes to the process of Cr biosynthesis. Accordingly, the SLC6A and SLC16A family of transporters play important roles in the process of Cr biosynthesis and distribution via permeation of Cr and Cr precursors across the plasma membrane.
METHODS: Differentially transcription factors (DETFs) were identified from differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in GSE62232 and transcription factors. Then, they were analyzed by regulatory networks, prognostic risk model, and overall survival analyses to identify the key DETF. Combined with the regulatory networks and binding site analysis, the target mRNA of key DETF was determined, and its prognostic value in HCC was evaluated by survival, clinical characteristics analyses, and experiments. Finally, the expressions and functions of the key DETF on the DEmRNAs were investigated in HCC cells. RESULTS: Through multiple bioinformatics analyses, ASCL1 was identified as the key DETF, and SLC6A13 was predicted to be its target mRNA with the common binding site of CCAGCAACTGGCC, both downregulated in HCC. In survival analysis, high SLC6A13 was related to better HCC prognosis, and SLC6A13 was differentially expressed in HCC patients with clinical characteristics. Furthermore, cell experiments showed the mRNA expressions of ASCL1 and SLC6A13 were both reduced in HCC, and their overexpressions suppressed the growth, invasion, and migration of HCC cells. Besides, over-ASCL1 could upregulate SLC6A13 expression in HCC cells. CONCLUSION: This study identifies two suppressor genes in HCC progression, ASCL1 and SLC6A13, and the key transcription factor ASCL1 suppresses HCC progression by targeting SLC6A13 mRNA. They are both potential treatment targets and prognostic biomarkers for HCC patients, which provides new clues for HCC research.
Tissues with high-energy output, such as the brain and skeletal muscle, suffer the most from impaired or depleted energy levels, with innovative nutritional approaches needed to effectively tackle metabolic deficits in bioenergetics. Here, we highlight the role of guanidinoacetic acid in the control and provision of cellular energy by its interaction with cellular transporters for taurine (SLC6 A6) and gamma-aminobutyric acid (SLC6 A13), previously dismissed as "untargetable" carriers by other bioenergetics therapeutics.
Guanidinoacetate (GAA) is a biosynthetic precursor of creatine, which plays a critical role in homeostasis of high-energy phosphates in the brain, but cerebral accumulation of GAA leads to neurological complications, such as epilepsy and seizures. The purpose of the present study was to clarify the contribution of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) transport systems to GAA transport in astrocytes by means of uptake studies in rat brain slices, primary astrocyte cultures and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing human GABA transporters (GATs). GAA uptake by rat brain slices was Na(+)- and Cl(-)-dependent, and GABA-sensitive. The inhibitory effect of GABA, a common substrate of GATs, on GAA uptake by the brain slices was similar to that of beta-alanine, a selective substrate of GAT2/Slc6a13, GAT3/Slc6a11, and taurine transporter (TauT)/Slc6a6. Taurine, a high-affinity substrate of TauT/Slc6a6, exhibited a lesser inhibitory effect. In contrast, betaine, a substrate of betaine-GABA transporter 1 (BGT1)/Slc6a12, and creatine, a substrate of creatine transporter (CRT)/Slc6a8, had little inhibitory effect. A similar inhibition profile was observed in primary-cultured astrocytes. CHO cells expressing human GAT2/SLC6A13, GAT3/SLC6A11 and BGT1/SLC6A12 exhibited GAA transport, whereas CHO cells expressing GAT1/SLC6A1 did not. The Michaelis-Menten values in CHO cells expressing GAT2/SLC6A13 and GAT3/SLC6A11 were similar to those in primary-cultured astrocytes. Overall, our results suggest that astrocytic GAT2/Slc6a13 and GAT3/Slc6a11 play major roles in GAA uptake as regulatory mechanisms of GAA in rat brain, while TauT/Slc6a6, BGT1/Slc6a12, and CRT/Slc6a8 make relatively small contributions.
GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain and GABA re- uptake from the synaptic cleft is one important mechanism in the regulation of GABA activity. Inhibition of the re-uptake of GABA by potent and selective inhibitors of the GABA transporter enhances GABA activity. This property can be used therapeutically in for instance epilepsy or psychiatric disorders. In this paper putative structures of the GABA transporter, its mechanism of action, the progress made in the search for its amino acids involved in the binding of substrates and the SAR of inhibitors acting at the transporter will be discussed. To date only highly selective GAT-1 inhibitors are available. These compounds are lipophilic derivatives of (R)-nipecotic acid and guvacine. The most potent inhibitors of the cloned human GAT-1 are NNC-711 (IC50 = 0.04 mM) and tiagabine (IC50 = 0.07 mM). A diheteroarylvinyloxy analogue of tiagabine, 5 times more potent than tiagabine, has been reported recently. For the GAT-2, GAT-3 and BGT-1 subtypes only compounds with a small preference for one of the subtypes have been published.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is an increasing global public health concern, particularly among populations of African ancestry. We performed an interrogation of known renal loci, genome-wide association (GWA), and IBC candidate-gene SNP association analyses in African Americans from the CARe Renal Consortium. In up to 8,110 participants, we performed meta-analyses of GWA and IBC array data for estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), CKD (eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m(2)), urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (UACR), and microalbuminuria (UACR >30 mg/g) and interrogated the 250 kb flanking region around 24 SNPs previously identified in European Ancestry renal GWAS analyses. Findings were replicated in up to 4,358 African Americans. To assess function, individually identified genes were knocked down in zebrafish embryos by morpholino antisense oligonucleotides. Expression of kidney-specific genes was assessed by in situ hybridization, and glomerular filtration was evaluated by dextran clearance. Overall, 23 of 24 previously identified SNPs had direction-consistent associations with eGFR in African Americans, 2 of which achieved nominal significance (UMOD, PIP5K1B). Interrogation of the flanking regions uncovered 24 new index SNPs in African Americans, 12 of which were replicated (UMOD, ANXA9, GCKR, TFDP2, DAB2, VEGFA, ATXN2, GATM, SLC22A2, TMEM60, SLC6A13, and BCAS3). In addition, we identified 3 suggestive loci at DOK6 (p-value = 5.3x10(-7)) and FNDC1 (p-value = 3.0x10(-7)) for UACR, and KCNQ1 with eGFR (p = 3.6x10(-6)). Morpholino knockdown of kcnq1 in the zebrafish resulted in abnormal kidney development and filtration capacity. We identified several SNPs in association with eGFR in African Ancestry individuals, as well as 3 suggestive loci for UACR and eGFR. Functional genetic studies support a role for kcnq1 in glomerular development in zebrafish.
We studied the genetic associations of a previously developed Metabolomic Risk Score (MRS) for Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and beta-aminoisobutyric acid metabolite (BAIBA)-the metabolite highlighted by results from a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of the MCI-MRS, and assessed their association with MCI in datasets of diverse race/ethnicities. We first performed a GWAS for the MCI-MRS and BAIBA, in Hispanic/Latino adults (n = 3890) from the Hispanic Community Health Study/Study of Latinos (HCHS/SOL). We identified ten independent genome-wide significant (p value <5 x 10(-8)) variants associated with MCI-MRS or BAIBA. Variants associated with the MCI-MRS are located in the Alanine-Glyoxylate Aminotransferase 2 (AGXT2 gene), which is known to be associated with BAIBA metabolism. Variants associated with BAIBA are located in the AGXT2 gene and in the SLC6A13 gene. Next, we tested the variants' association with MCI in independent datasets of n = 3178 HCHS/SOL older individuals, n = 3775 European Americans, and n = 1032 African Americans from the Atherosclerosis Risk In Communities (ARIC) study. Variants were considered associated with MCI if their p value <0.05 in the meta-analysis of the three datasets and their direction of association was consistent with expectation. Rs16899972 and rs37369 from the AGXT2 region were associated with MCI. Mediation analysis supported the mediation effect of BAIBA between the two genetic variants and MCI (p value = 0.004 for causal mediated effect). In summary, genetic variants in the AGXT2 region are associated with MCI in Hispanic/Latino, African, and European American populations in the USA, and their effect is likely mediated by changes in BAIBA levels.
Phenotypes proximal to gene action generally reflect larger genetic effect sizes than those that are distant. The human metabolome, a result of multiple cellular and biological processes, are functional intermediate phenotypes proximal to gene action. Here, we present a genome-wide association study of 308 untargeted metabolite levels among African Americans from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study. Nineteen significant common variant-metabolite associations were identified, including 13 novel loci (p<1.6 x 10(-10)). These loci were associated with 7-50% of the difference in metabolite levels per allele, and the variance explained ranged from 4% to 20%. Fourteen genes were identified within the nineteen loci, and four of them contained non-synonymous substitutions in four enzyme-encoding genes (KLKB1, SIAE, CPS1, and NAT8); the other significant loci consist of eight other enzyme-encoding genes (ACE, GATM, ACY3, ACSM2B, THEM4, ADH4, UGT1A, TREH), a transporter gene (SLC6A13) and a polycystin protein gene (PKD2L1). In addition, four potential disease-associated paths were identified, including two direct longitudinal predictive relationships: NAT8 with N-acetylornithine, N-acetyl-1-methylhistidine and incident chronic kidney disease, and TREH with trehalose and incident diabetes. These results highlight the value of using endophenotypes proximal to gene function to discover new insights into biology and disease pathology.
delta-Aminolevulinic acid (ALA)-induced protoporphyrin accumulation is widely used in the treatment of cancer, as photodynamic therapy (PDT). To clarify the mechanisms of ALA uptake by tumor cells, we have examined the ALA-induced accumulation of protoporphyrin by the treatment of colon cancer DLD-1 and epithelial cancer HeLa cells with gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-related compounds. When the cells were treated with GABA, taurine and beta-alanine, the level of protoporphyrin was decreased, suggesting that plasma membrane transporters involved in the transport of neurotransmitters contribute to the uptake of ALA. By transfection with neurotransmitter transporters SLC6A6, SLC6A8 and SLC6A13 cDNA, the ALA- and ALA methylester-dependent accumulation of protoporphyrin markedly increased in HEK293T cells, dependent on an increase in the uptake of ALA. When ALA-treated cells were exposed to white light, the extent of photodamage increased in SLC6A6- and SLC6A13-expressing cells. Conversely, knockdown of SLC6A6 or SLC6A13 with siRNAs in DLD-1 and HeLa cells decreased the ALA-induced accumulation. The expression of SLC6A6 and SLC6A13 was found in some cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemical studies revealed that the presence of these transporters was elevated in colon cancerous cells. These results indicated that neurotransmitter transporters including SLC6A6 and SLC6A13 mediate the uptake of ALA and can play roles in the enhancement of ALA-induced accumulation of protoporphyrin in cancerous cells.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the most common primary liver cancer, typically arises from chronic liver conditions such as hepatitis, cirrhosis, or other chronic liver diseases, and is characterized by its aggressive nature and poor prognosis. The purpose of this research was to clarify the function of achaete-scute family bHLH transcription factor 1 (ASCL1) and solute carrier family 6 member 13 (SLC6A13) in influencing tumor cell behavior, inflammatory responses, and the regulation of inflammasomes. We analyzed the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the Cancer Genome Atlas-Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (TCGA-LIHC) database, as well as in the GSE14520 and GSE67764 datasets, to identify the expression changes of SLC6A13 in liver cancer. The prognostic significance of SLC6A13 in LIHC was assessed through Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis. Transcriptional regulation of SLC6A13 by ASCL1 was explored using the Joint Annotation of the Human Genome and other species by the Systematic Pipeline for the Annotation of Regulatory Regions (JASPAR) database and dual-luciferase assays. In vitro experiments investigated the impact of ASCL1 and SLC6A13 overexpression on HCC cell growth. Additionally, the effects of ethanol treatment and glycine modulation on the inflammatory response in HCC cell lines were evaluated. HCC samples showed reduced levels of SLC6A13, which correlates with a better prognosis for liver metastases. Elevated SLC6A13 expression correlated with improved overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), recurrence-free survival (RFS), and disease-specific survival (DSS). ASCL1 upregulated SLC6A13 and inhibited proliferation, migration, and invasion of HCC cells. Ethanol induced the production of inflammatory cytokines, which was enhanced by overexpression of SLC6A13 but counteracted by glycine. This study highlighted elevated expression of SLC6A13 in LIHC which has been correlated with improved OS, PFS, RFS, and DSS. Overexpression of SLC6A13 and ASCL1 in HCC cells enhanced inflammasome activation, which was exacerbated by ethanol and attenuated by glycine.
The termination of chemical neurotransmission in the central nervous system (CNS) involves the rapid removal of neurotransmitter from synapses. This is fulfilled by specific transport systems in neurons and glia, including those for gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), the main inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. Glial cells express the cloned Na(+)/Cl(-)-dependent, high-affinity GABA transporters (GATs) GAT1, GAT2, and GAT3, as well as the low-affinity transporter BGT1. In situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry have revealed that each transporter shows distinct regional distribution in the brain and the retina. The neuronal vs. glial localization of the different transporters is not clear-cut, and variations according to species, neighboring excitatory synapses, and developmental stage have been reported. The localization, stoichiometry, and regulation of glial GATs are outlined, and the participation of these structures in development, osmoregulation, and neuroprotection are discussed. A decrease in GABAergic neurotransmission has been implicated in the pathophysiology of several CNS disorders, particularly in epilepsy. Since drugs which selectively inhibit glial but not neuronal GABA uptake exert anticonvulsant activity, clearly the establishment of the molecular mechanisms controlling GATs in glial cells will be an aid in the chemical treatment of several CNS-related diseases.
Esketamine (ESK) is the S-enantiomer of ketamine racemate (a new psychoactive substance) that can result in illusions, and alter hearing, vision, and proprioception in human and mouse. Up to now, the neurotoxicity caused by ESK at environmental level in fish is still unclear. This work studied the effects of ESK on behaviors and transcriptions of genes in dopamine and GABA pathways in zebrafish larvae at ranging from 12.4 ng L(- 1) to 11141.1 ng L(- 1) for 7 days post fertilization (dpf). The results showed that ESK at 12.4 ng L(- 1) significantly reduced the touch response of the larvae at 48 hpf. ESK at 12.4 ng L(- 1) also reduced the time and distance of larvae swimming at the outer zone during light period, which implied that ESK might potentially decrease the anxiety level of larvae. In addition, ESK increased the transcription of th, ddc, drd1a, drd3 and drd4a in dopamine pathway. Similarly, ESK raised the transcription of slc6a1b, slc6a13 and slc12a2 in GABA pathway. This study suggested that ESK could affect the heart rate and behaviors accompanying with transcriptional alterations of genes in DA and GABA pathways at early-staged zebrafish, which resulted in neurotoxicity in zebrafish larvae.
Congenital sideroblastic anemia (CSA) is a hereditary disorder characterized by microcytic anemia and bone marrow sideroblasts. The most common form of CSA is attributed to mutations in the X-linked gene 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase 2 (ALAS2). ALAS2 is a mitochondrial enzyme, which utilizes glycine and succinyl-CoA to form 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA), a crucial precursor in heme synthesis. Therefore, ALA supplementation could be an effective therapeutic strategy to restore heme synthesis in CSA caused by ALAS2 defects. In a preclinical study, we examined the effects of ALA in human erythroid cells, including K562 cells and human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived erythroid progenitor (HiDEP) cells. ALA treatment resulted in significant dose-dependent accumulation of heme in the K562 cell line. Concomitantly, the treatment substantially induced erythroid differentiation as assessed using benzidine staining. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis confirmed significant upregulation of heme-regulated genes, such as the globin genes [hemoglobin alpha (HBA) and hemoglobin gamma (HBG)] and the heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1) gene, in K562 cells. Next, to investigate the mechanism by which ALA is transported into erythroid cells, quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed on previously identified ALA transporters, including solute carrier family 15 (oligopeptide transporter), member (SLC15A) 1, SLC15A2, solute carrier family 36 (proton/amino acid symporter), member (SLC36A1), and solute carrier family 6 (neurotransmitter transporter), member 13 (SLC6A13). Our analysis revealed that SLC36A1 was abundantly expressed in erythroid cells. Thus, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) was added to K562 cells to competitively inhibit SLC36A1-mediated transport. GABA treatment significantly impeded the ALA-mediated increase in the number of hemoglobinized cells as well as the induction of HBG, HBA, and HMOX1. Finally, small-interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of ALAS2 in HiDEP cells considerably decreased the expression of HBA, HBG, and HMOX1, and these expression levels were rescued with ALA treatment. In summary, ALA appears to be transported into erythroid cells mainly by SLC36A1 and is utilized to generate heme. ALA may represent a novel therapeutic option for CSA treatment, particularly for cases harboring ALAS2 mutations.
Cumulative studies showed that taurine (2-aminoethanesulfonic acid) contributes to a variety of physiological events. Transport study suggested the cellular taurine transport in an Na(+)- and Cl(-)-dependent manner, and the several members of SLC6A family have been shown as taurine transporter. At the inner blood-retinal barrier (BRB), taurine transporter (TauT/SLC6A) is involved in the transport of taurine to the retina from the circulating blood. The involvement of TauT is also suggested in gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) transport at the inner BRB, and its role is assumed in the elimination of GABA from the retinal interstitial fluid. In the retina, taurine is thought to be a major organic osmolyte, and its influx and efflux through TauT and volume-sensitive organic osmolyte and anion channel (VSOAC) in Muller cells regulate the osmolarity in the retinal microenvironment to maintain a healthy retina. In the liver, hepatocytes take up taurine via GABA transporter 2 (GAT2/SLC6A13, the orthologue of mouse GAT3) expressed at the sinusoidal membrane of periportal hepatocytes, contributing to the metabolism of bile acid. Site-directed mutagenesis study suggests amino acid residues that are crucial in the recognition of substrates by GATs and TauT. The evidence suggests the physiological impact of taurine transporters in tissues.
