Sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter SLC6A17; Functions as a sodium-dependent vesicular transporter selective for proline, glycine, leucine and alanine. In contrast to other members of this neurotransmitter transporter family, does not appear to be chloride-dependent (By similarity).
Human skin color is largely determined by genetic factors. Recent GWASs have reported several genetic variants associated with skin color, mostly in European and African populations. In this study, we performed GWAS in 17,019 Korean women to identify genetic variants associated with facial skin color, quantitatively measured as CIELAB color index. We identified variants in three, one, and six genomic loci associated with facial skin color index L *, a *, and b * values, respectively, and replicated the associations (combined analysis P-value < 5.0 x 10(-8)). The significant loci included variants in known genes (OCA2 rs74653330, BNC2 rs16935073, rs72620727 near KITLG, and SLC6A17 rs6689641) and to our knowledge previously unreported genes (SCARB1 rs10846744, SYN2 rs12629034, and LINC00486 rs6543678). This is GWAS to elucidate genetic variants of facial skin color in a Korean female population. Further functional characterizations of the investigated genes are warranted to elucidate their contribution to skin pigmentation-related traits.
Human mutations in the gene encoding the solute carrier (SLC) 6A17 caused intellectual disability (ID). The physiological role of SLC6A17 and pathogenesis of SLC6A17-based-ID were both unclear. Here, we report learning deficits in Slc6a17 knockout and point mutant mice. Biochemistry, proteomic, and electron microscopy (EM) support SLC6A17 protein localization in synaptic vesicles (SVs). Chemical analysis of SVs by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) revealed glutamine (Gln) in SVs containing SLC6A17. Virally mediated overexpression of SLC6A17 increased Gln in SVs. Either genetic or virally mediated targeting of Slc6a17 reduced Gln in SVs. One ID mutation caused SLC6A17 mislocalization while the other caused defective Gln transport. Multidisciplinary approaches with seven types of genetically modified mice have shown Gln as an endogenous substrate of SLC6A17, uncovered Gln as a new molecule in SVs, established the necessary and sufficient roles of SLC6A17 in Gln transport into SVs, and suggested SV Gln decrease as the key pathogenetic mechanism in human ID.
Using radiogenomics methods, the differences between tumor imaging data and genetic data in Chinese and Western breast cancer (BC) patients were analyzed, and the correlation between phenotypic data and genetic data was explored. In this paper, we analyzed BC patients' image characteristics and transcriptome data separately, then correlated the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) phenotype with the transcriptome data through a computational method to develop a radiogenomics feature. The data was fed into the designed random forest (RF) model, which used the area under the receiver operating curve (AUC) as the evaluation index. Next, we analyzed the hub genes in the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and obtained seven hub genes, which may cause Chinese and Western BC patients to behave differently in the clinic. We demonstrated that combining relevant genetic data and imaging features could better classify Chinese and Western patients than using genes or imaging characteristics alone. The AUC values of 0.74, 0.81, and 0.95 were obtained separately using the image characteristics, DEGs, and radiogenomics features. We screened SYT4, GABRG2, CHGA, SLC6A17, NEUROG2, COL2A1, and MATN4 and found that these genes were positively or negatively correlated with certain imaging characteristics. In addition, we found that the SLC6A17, NEUROG2, CHGA, and MATN4 genes were associated with clinical features.
We report on Dutch and Iranian families with affected individuals who present with moderate to severe intellectual disability and additional phenotypes including progressive tremor, speech impairment, and behavioral problems in certain individuals. A combination of exome sequencing and homozygosity mapping revealed homozygous mutations c.484G>A (p.Gly162Arg) and c.1898C>G (p.Pro633Arg) in SLC6A17. SLC6A17 is predominantly expressed in the brain, encodes a synaptic vesicular transporter of neutral amino acids and glutamate, and plays an important role in the regulation of glutamatergic synapses. Prediction programs and 3D modeling suggest that the identified mutations are deleterious to protein function. To directly test the functional consequences, we investigated the neuronal subcellular localization of overexpressed wild-type and mutant variants in mouse primary hippocampal neuronal cells. Wild-type protein was present in soma, axons, dendrites, and dendritic spines. p.Pro633Arg altered SLC6A17 was found in soma and proximal dendrites but did not reach spines. p.Gly162Arg altered SLC6A17 showed a normal subcellular distribution but was associated with an abnormal neuronal morphology mainly characterized by the loss of dendritic spines. In summary, our genetic findings implicate homozygous SLC6A17 mutations in autosomal-recessive intellectual disability, and their pathogenic role is strengthened by genetic evidence and in silico and in vitro functional analyses.
The SLC6 family of structurally related, Na(+)-dependent transporter proteins is responsible for presynaptic reuptake of the majority of neurotransmitters. Within this family are a number of orphan transporters, including NTT4/XT1 (SLC6A17), a protein first identified over 15 years ago. NTT4/XT1 is expressed exclusively in the nervous system and specifically on synaptic vesicles in glutamatergic and some GABAergic neurons. Despite extensive efforts by a number of groups, no substrate has been reported for NTT4/XT1. Here we use a combination of molecular manipulations to increase expression of the NTT4/XT1 protein at the plasma membrane and to directly demonstrate that it catalyzes neutral amino acid transport. The substrate profile of the NTT4/XT1-dependent activity is similar to that of the closely related B(0)AT2/SBAT1 (SLC6A15), including a submillimolar apparent affinity for proline and leucine and a low millimolar apparent affinity for glutamine. The transport activity is Na(+)-dependent and Cl(-)-independent and is inhibited by low pH as is SLC6A15, suggesting redundant roles for these proteins. This characterization of NTT4/XT1 offers important insights into neurotransmitter metabolism as well as the mechanistic differences among the structurally related, but functionally divergent, SLC6 proteins.
The solute carrier 6 (SLC6) gene family, functioning as neurotransmitter transporters, plays the crucial roles in neurotransmission, cellular and organismal homeostasis. In this study, we found an expansion of SLC6 family gene in the genome of chordate invertebrate Ciona savignyi. A total of 40 candidate genes including 29 complete and 11 putative genes were identified as SLC6 family gene homologs. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that most of these Ciona SLC6 genes were highly conserved with the vertebrate ones, although gene duplication and gene losses did exist. Four genes were selected from SLC6 subfamilies to be further investigated for their functional characteristics on cell growth and migration through overexpression approach in cultured cell lines. The results showed both SLC6A7 and SLC6A17 from amino acid transporters AA1 and AA2 sub-families, respectively, significantly suppressed the cell proliferation and migration. While SLC6A1 and SLC6A4, which were classified into GABA and monoamine transporters, respectively, did not affect the cell proliferation and migration in HEK293T, HeLa, and MCF7 cells. The whole set of C. savignyi SLC6 genes identified in this study provides an important genomic resource for future biochemical, physiological, and phylogenetic studies on SLC6 gene family. Our experimental data demonstrated that Ciona amino acid transporters, such as SLC6A7 and SLC6A17, were essential for cell physiology and behaviors, indicating their crucially potential roles in the control of cell proliferation and migration during ascidian embryogenesis.
Rxt1/NTT4 (SLC6A17) belongs to a gene family of "orphan transporters" whose substrates and consequently functions remain unidentified. Although Rxt1/NTT4 was previously thought to function as a sodium-dependent plasma membrane transporter, recent studies localized the protein to synaptic vesicles of glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons. Here, we provide evidence indicating that Rxt1/NTT4 functions as a vesicular transporter selective for proline, glycine, leucine, and alanine. Using Western blot, immunoprecipitation, immunocytochemistry, and polymerase chain reaction approaches, we demonstrate that PC12 cells express the Rxt1/NTT4 gene and protein. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of Rxt1/NTT4 in PC12 cells resulted in selective reductions in uptake levels for proline, glycine, leucine, and alanine. Likewise, gas chromatography analysis of amino acid content in an enriched synaptic vesicle fraction from wild-type and siRNA-Rxt1/NTT4 PC12 cells revealed that proline, glycine, leucine, and alanine levels were decreased in siRNA-treated cells compared with wild-type cells. Furthermore, Rxt1/NTT4-transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells exhibited significant uptake increases of these amino acids compared with mock-transfected CHO cells. Finally, proline uptake in both PC12 cells and Rxt1/NTT4-transfected CHO cells was dependent on the electrochemical gradient maintained by the vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase. These data indicate that the orphan Rxt1/NTT4 protein functions as a vesicular transporter for proline, glycine, leucine, and alanine, further suggesting its important role in synaptic transmission.
Tremendous amount of primary sequence information has been made available from the genome sequencing projects, although a complete annotation and identification of all genes is still far from being complete. Here, we present the identification of two new human genes from the pharmacologically important family of transporter proteins, solute carriers family 6 (SLC6). These were named SLC6A17 and SLC6A18 by HUGO. The human repertoire of SLC6 proteins now consists of 19 functional members and four pseudogenes. We also identified the corresponding orthologues and additional genes from mouse and rat genomes. Detailed phylogenetic analysis of the entire family of SLC6 proteins in mammals shows that this family can be divided into four subgroups. We used Hidden Markov Models for these subgroups and identified in total 430 unique SLC6 proteins from 10 animal, one plant, two fungi, and 196 bacterial genomes. It is evident that SLC6 proteins are present in both animals and bacteria, and that three of the four subfamilies of mammalian SLC6 proteins are present in Caenorhabditis elegans, showing that these subfamilies are evolutionary very ancient. Moreover, we performed tissue localization studies on the entire family of SLC6 proteins on a panel of 15 rat tissues and further, the expression of three of the new genes was studied using quantitative real-time PCR showing expression in multiple central and peripheral tissues. This paper presents an overall overview of the gene repertoire of the SLC6 gene family and its expression profile in rats.
In neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease (PD), the potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to produce neurorestoration via trans-differentiation has garnered much interest. We believe, however, that the paracrine effects of MSCs may have greater utility. MSCs release neurotrophic factors, including glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF). The benefits conferred by MSC GDNF release could potentially apply to all degenerating monoaminergic fibre types, throughout the brains of patients with PD, rather than solely affording protection to the dopaminergic neurones of the nigro-striatal pathway alone. Using an in vitro approach, we have investigated the neuroprotective properties of unmodified human MSCs on rat catecholaminergic and serotonergic cell cultures exposed to the damaging effects of nitric oxide. We have shown that post oxidative and inflammatory stress, soluble factors produced by native human MSCs, requiring no direct cell-cell contact or genetic or other manipulation, confer protection not only of cultured monoaminergic perikarya, but also of monoamine neurotransmitter transporter function. Furthermore, we have confirmed that, in part, this MSC mediated neuroprotective effect is due to MSC GDNF release and that such protection is diminished when the action of GDNF is blocked. Trophic factor release may afford a way by which intravenously infused MSCs can offer protection to all of the dopaminergic, noradrenergic and serotonergic fibre types degenerating widely throughout the brains of patients with PD.
We have isolated a cDNA (bv7-3) encoding a member of the Na+,Cl(-)-dependent transporter family and its short splicing variant (bv7-3s) by screening a bovine retina cDNA library. Sequence analysis revealed that bv7-3 encodes a protein of 729 amino acids and is a bovine homologue of the rat orphan transporter v7-3-2. bv7-3s contains 265 amino acids, sharing 252 N-terminal amino acids with bv7-3. Both mRNAs for bv7-3 and bv7-3s were detected in nervous system by Northern blot analysis. In immunofluorescence analysis in transfected HEK 293T cells, myc-tagged bv7-3 was mainly detected on the plasma membrane, whereas myc-tagged bv7-3s showed a pattern of intracellular membrane staining.
