Sodium-dependent noradrenaline transporter; Amine transporter. Terminates the action of noradrenaline by its high affinity sodium-dependent reuptake into presynaptic terminals. Belongs to the sodium:neurotransmitter symporter (SNF) (TC 2.A.22) family. SLC6A2 subfamily.
The noradrenaline transporter has a pivotal role in regulating neurotransmitter balance and is crucial for normal physiology and neurobiology(1). Dysfunction of noradrenaline transporter has been implicated in numerous neuropsychiatric diseases, including depression and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder(2). Here we report cryo-electron microscopy structures of noradrenaline transporter in apo and substrate-bound forms, and as complexes with six antidepressants. The structures reveal a noradrenaline transporter dimer interface that is mediated predominantly by cholesterol and lipid molecules. The substrate noradrenaline binds deep in the central binding pocket, and its amine group interacts with a conserved aspartate residue. Our structures also provide insight into antidepressant recognition and monoamine transporter selectivity. Together, these findings advance our understanding of noradrenaline transporter regulation and inhibition, and provide templates for designing improved antidepressants to treat neuropsychiatric disorders.
The cellular mechanism(s) linking macrophages to norepinephrine (NE)-mediated regulation of thermogenesis have been a topic of debate. Here we identify sympathetic neuron-associated macrophages (SAMs) as a population of cells that mediate clearance of NE via expression of solute carrier family 6 member 2 (SLC6A2), an NE transporter, and monoamine oxidase A (MAOA), a degradation enzyme. Optogenetic activation of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) upregulates NE uptake by SAMs and shifts the SAM profile to a more proinflammatory state. NE uptake by SAMs is prevented by genetic deletion of Slc6a2 or inhibition of the encoded transporter. We also observed an increased proportion of SAMs in the SNS of two mouse models of obesity. Genetic ablation of Slc6a2 in SAMs increases brown adipose tissue (BAT) content, causes browning of white fat, increases thermogenesis, and leads to substantial and sustained weight loss in obese mice. We further show that this pathway is conserved, as human sympathetic ganglia also contain SAMs expressing the analogous molecular machinery for NE clearance, which thus constitutes a potential target for obesity treatment.
The noradrenaline transporter (also known as norepinephrine transporter) (NET) has a critical role in terminating noradrenergic transmission by utilizing sodium and chloride gradients to drive the reuptake of noradrenaline (also known as norepinephrine) into presynaptic neurons(1-3). It is a pharmacological target for various antidepressants and analgesic drugs(4,5). Despite decades of research, its structure and the molecular mechanisms underpinning noradrenaline transport, coupling to ion gradients and non-competitive inhibition remain unknown. Here we present high-resolution complex structures of NET in two fundamental conformations: in the apo state, and bound to the substrate noradrenaline, an analogue of the chi-conotoxin MrlA (chi-MrlA(EM)), bupropion or ziprasidone. The noradrenaline-bound structure clearly demonstrates the binding modes of noradrenaline. The coordination of Na(+) and Cl(-) undergoes notable alterations during conformational changes. Analysis of the structure of NET bound to chi-MrlA(EM) provides insight into how conotoxin binds allosterically and inhibits NET. Additionally, bupropion and ziprasidone stabilize NET in its inward-facing state, but they have distinct binding pockets. These structures define the mechanisms governing neurotransmitter transport and non-competitive inhibition in NET, providing a blueprint for future drug design.
Norepinephrine transporter (NET; encoded by SLC6A2) reuptakes the majority of the released noradrenaline back to the presynaptic terminals, thereby affecting the synaptic noradrenaline level(1). Genetic mutations and dysregulation of NET are associated with a spectrum of neurological conditions in humans, making NET an important therapeutic target(1). However, the structure and mechanism of NET remain unclear. Here we provide cryogenic electron microscopy structures of the human NET (hNET) in three functional states-the apo state, and in states bound to the substrate meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) or the orthosteric inhibitor radafaxine. These structures were captured in an inward-facing conformation, with a tightly sealed extracellular gate and an open intracellular gate. The substrate MIBG binds at the centre of hNET. Radafaxine also occupies the substrate-binding site and might block the structural transition of hNET for inhibition. These structures provide insights into the mechanism of substrate recognition and orthosteric inhibition of hNET.
Paroxetine is a potent and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) with some neuropharmacologic properties unique among this class of compounds. The findings of early in vitro studies demonstrated the potency of paroxetine at inhibiting 5-HT uptake in rat synaptosomes. Paroxetine also has been shown to be a potent and selective inhibitor of the human serotonin transporter (SERT) and has recently been demonstrated to have moderate affinity for the norepinephrine transporter (NET). Because of the affinity and in vitro selectivity of this SSRI, tritiated paroxetine is now widely used as a marker for SERT in laboratory settings, and its use has advanced our understanding of neurotransmitter function in the brain and periphery. The in vivo pharmacologic properties of paroxetine are well characterized, especially following acute administration. However, the pharmacologic effects of chronically administered paroxetine remain an active area of study. Paroxetine administration in laboratory animals has been shown to be associated with decreased SERT density and function, maintenance of normal firing rates and release of 5-HT, and increased activation of postsynaptic 5-HT receptors. Using a novel ex vivo assay, we have demonstrated that paroxetine exhibits dose-related inhibition of the NET in patients treated for depression. At usual clinical doses (ie, 20 mg/d), paroxetine is a potent and selective inhibitor of the SERT; however, at higher doses (ie, 40 mg/d), paroxetine can exhibit marked NET inhibition. The application of these findings of in vivo NET inhibition by paroxetine in the treatment of mood and anxiety disorders will be informed by further clinical studies.
Post-translational modifications are an important mechanism in the regulation of protein expression, function, and degradation. Well-known post-translational modifications are phosphorylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. However, lipid modifications, including myristoylation, prenylation, and palmitoylation, are poorly studied. Since the early 2000s, researchers have become more interested in lipid modifications, especially palmitoylation. The number of articles in PubMed increased from about 350 between 2000 and 2005 to more than 600 annually during the past ten years. S-palmitoylation, where the 16-carbon saturated (C16:0) palmitic acid is added to free cysteine residues of proteins, is a reversible protein modification that can affect the expression, membrane localization, and function of the modified proteins. Various diseases like Huntington's and Alzheimer's disease have been linked to changes in protein palmitoylation. In humans, the addition of palmitic acid is mediated by 23 palmitoyl acyltransferases, also called DHHC proteins. The modification can be reversed by a few thioesterases or hydrolases. Numerous soluble and membrane-attached proteins are known to be palmitoylated, but among the approximately 400 solute carriers that are classified in 66 families, only 15 found in 8 families have so far been documented to be palmitoylated. Among the best-characterized transporters are the glucose transporters GLUT1 (SLC2A1) and GLUT4 (SLC2A4), the three monoamine transporters norepinephrine transporter (NET; SLC6A2), dopamine transporter (DAT; SLC6A3), and serotonin transporter (SERT; SLC6A4), and the sodium-calcium exchanger NCX1 (SLC8A1). While there is evidence from recent proteomics experiments that numerous solute carriers are palmitoylated, no details beyond the 15 transporters covered in this review are available.
Noradrenaline, also known as norepinephrine, has a wide range of activities and effects on most brain cell types(1). Its reuptake from the synaptic cleft heavily relies on the noradrenaline transporter (NET) located in the presynaptic membrane(2). Here we report the cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of the human NET in both its apo state and when bound to substrates or antidepressant drugs, with resolutions ranging from 2.5 A to 3.5 A. The two substrates, noradrenaline and dopamine, display a similar binding mode within the central substrate binding site (S1) and within a newly identified extracellular allosteric site (S2). Four distinct antidepressants, namely, atomoxetine, desipramine, bupropion and escitalopram, occupy the S1 site to obstruct substrate transport in distinct conformations. Moreover, a potassium ion was observed within sodium-binding site 1 in the structure of the NET bound to desipramine under the KCl condition. Complemented by structural-guided biochemical analyses, our studies reveal the mechanism of substrate recognition, the alternating access of NET, and elucidate the mode of action of the four antidepressants.
Anxiety and depression coexist with cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease along with other concomitant disorders (>60%), which require multipurpose treatments. Polypharmaceutical regimens cause drug-drug interactions and adverse drug reactions, potentially avoidable in number and severity with the implementation of pharmacogenetic procedures. The accumulation of defective variants (>30 genes per patient in more than 50% of cases) in pharmagenes (pathogenic, mechanistic, metabolic, transporter, pleiotropic) influences the therapeutic response to antidementia, antidepressant and anxiolytic drugs in polyvalent regimens. APOE, CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP4F2, COMT, MAOB, CHAT, GSTP1, NAT2, SLC30A8, SLCO1B1, ADRA2A, ADRB2, BCHE, GABRA1, HMGCR, HTR2C, IFNL3, NBEA, UGT1A1, ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCG2, SLC6A2, SLC6A3, SLC6A4, MTHFR and OPRM1 variants affect anxiety and depression in Alzheimer's disease.
BACKGROUND: There is insufficient replicated data to establish a relationship between the polymorphisms of SLC6A2 and CYP2D6 and the treatment responses of atomoxetine (ATX) in ADHD. We focused on evaluating the effect of top-line single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in SLC6A2 and CYP2D6 on the ATX treatment response in attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). METHODS: Of 160 patient records, 34 patients who met the inclusion criteria were evaluated to determine the relationship between genotypes of ten SNPs (six of SLC6A2 and four of CYP2D6) and ATX treatment response. Additionally, the connection between SNPs of CYP2D6 and the severity of side effects associated with ATX was analyzed in 37 patients, including the 34 study patients, and three patients discontinued because of ATX-dependent side effects. RESULTS: All six polymorphisms we studied in SLC6A2 were associated with the treatment response of ATX. Clinical improvement in oppositional defiant disorder symptoms of patients with ADHD was only observed in carriers of the homozygous "C" allele of rs3785143 (p(odd) = 0.026). We detected an association between higher CGI-side-effect severity scores and the "TT" genotype of rs1065852 polymorphism in CYP2D6 (p = 0.043). CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study suggest that genotypes of polymorphisms within the SLC6A2 and CYP2D6 may play an influential role in treatment response or the severity of side effects associated with ATX in ADHD patients.
Recent evidence enriches our understanding of the molecular sites of action of cocaine reward and locomotor stimulation. Dopamine transporter blockade by cocaine appears a sufficient explanation for cocaine-induced locomotion. Variation in DAT appears to cause differences in locomotion without drug stimulation. However, previously-held views that DAT blockade was the sole site for cocaine reward have been replaced by a richer picture of multitransporter involvement with the rewarding and aversive actions of cocaine. These new insights, derived from studies of knockout mice with simultaneous deletions and/or blockade of multiple transporters, provide a novel model for the rewarding action of this heavily-abused substance and implicate multiple monoamine systems in cocaine's hedonic activities.
INTRODUCTION: The use of psychostimulants has been present in common medical practice since the 20th century and has undergone an exponential growth in terms of the number of prescriptions. AIM: To review the current state of knowledge about the side effects of psychostimulants in the child and teen populations. DEVELOPMENT: A review was performed by searching in different databases and included clinical analyses, observational prospective studies and systematic reviews. A minimum increase in blood pressure and heart rate are observed, but some studies highlight an underestimation of the long-term risk. As regards appetite and growth, almost all the current literature points to a slowing of the rate of growth, which is regained on interrupting treatment. One important factor, as is the parallel evolution of bone age, has not been evaluated in most of the studies carried out to date. No significant worsening of sleep was noted in patients treated with psychostimulants with respect to those who are not being treated. With regard to the central nervous system, there does not seem to be any evidence of an increased risk of the appearance or exacerbation of tics following introduction of the treatment. Affect and emotion are areas that have been barely explored. CONCLUSIONS: It is important to have more evidence on the safety of these drugs. It is therefore essential to have access to studies that cover a period of time consistent with the duration of these treatments.
Aminergic signalling in the CNS is terminated by clearance of neurotransmitters from the synapse via high affinity transporter molecules in the presynaptic membrane. Relatively recent sequence identification of these molecules has now permitted the initiation of studies of regulation of transporter function at the cellular and systems levels. In vitro studies provide evidence that the transporters for dopamine, serotonin, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) may be substrates for regulation by protein kinase C and protein kinase A signalling. Changes in energy balance and metabolic status, such as starvation, result in major shifts in hormonal output. It is now recognized that metabolic hormones such as insulin or the adrenal steroids can have significant acute and chronic effects on several aspects of CNS function. Data from this laboratory and others now provide evidence that insulin and adrenal and gonadal steroid hormones may regulate the synthesis and activity of the transporters. Future studies should permit elucidation of the cellular basis for endocrine regulation of neurotransmitter clearance, and thus, the role of endocrines in the maintenance of normal CNS aminergic signalling. The potential relevance of transporter regulation for the ketogenic diet is discussed.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is the leading cause of disability worldwide and is associated with high rates of suicide and medical comorbidities. Current antidepressant medications are suboptimal, as most MDD patients fail to achieve complete remission from symptoms. At present, clinicians are unable to predict which antidepressant is most effective for a particular patient, exposing patients to multiple medication trials and side effects. Since MDD's etiology includes interactions between genes and environment, the epigenome is of interest for predictive utility and treatment monitoring. Epigenetic mechanisms of antidepressant medications are incompletely understood. Differences in epigenetic profiles may impact treatment response. A systematic literature search yielded 24 studies reporting the interaction between antidepressants and eight genes (BDNF, MAOA, SLC6A2, SLC6A4, HTR1A, HTR1B, IL6, IL11) and whole genome methylation. Methylation of certain sites within BDNF, SLC6A4, HTR1A, HTR1B, IL11, and the whole genome was predictive of antidepressant response. Comparing DNA methylation in patients during depressive episodes, during treatment, in remission, and after antidepressant cessation would help clarify the influence of antidepressant medications on DNA methylation. Individuals' unique methylation profiles may be used clinically for personalization of antidepressant choice in the future.
OBJECTIVES: To assess if ubiquitinated proteins potentially present in neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) can modify cellular responses and induce inflammatory mechanisms in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and healthy subjects. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied 74 subjects with SLE and 77 healthy controls. Neutrophils and low-density granulocytes were isolated, and NETs were induced. Ubiquitin content was quantified in NETs by western blot analysis, ELISA and immunofluorescence microscopy, while ubiquitination of NET proteins was assessed by immunoprecipitation. Monocyte-derived macrophages from SLE and controls were isolated and stimulated with NETs or ubiquitin. Calcium flux and cytokine synthesis were measured following these stimuli. RESULTS: NETs contain ubiquitinated proteins, with a lower expression of polyubiquitinated proteins in subjects with SLE than in controls. Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is present in ubiquitinated form in NETs. Patients with SLE develop antiubiquitinated MPO antibodies, and titres positively correlate with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Disease Activity Index (SLEDAI) score (P<0.01), and negatively correlate with complement components (P<0.01). Stimulation of monocyte-derived macrophages with NETs or with ubiquitin led to enhanced calcium flux. In addition, stimulation with NETs led to enhanced cytokine (tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-10) production in macrophages from patients with SLE when compared with controls, which was hampered by inhibition of NET internalisation by macrophages. CONCLUSION: This is the first study to find ubiquitinated proteins in NETs, and evidence for adaptive immune responses directed towards ubiquitinated NET proteins in SLE. The distinct differences in ubiquitin species profile in NETs compared with healthy controls may contribute to dampened anti-inflammatory responses observed in SLE. These results also support a role for extracellular ubiquitin in inflammation in SLE.
We aimed to investigate the associations between genetic variants of the norepinephrine transporter gene (NET, also known as SLC6A2) and diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. In addition, we examined the relationship between the genetic variants and manic and psychotic symptoms in patients with bipolar I disorder. The three SNPs rs28386840, rs2242446, and rs5569 were genotyped in 326 patients: patients with bipolar I disorder (n = 160) and a control group (n = 166). Subsequently, multivariate logistic regression analysis adjusting for age and sex was conducted to identify independent influences of the SNPs on diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. A possible association between manic and psychotic symptoms and variants of SLC6A2 was also investigated in patients with bipolar I disorder. The rs28836840 SNP in the 5'-UTR of SLC6A2 was significantly associated with bipolar I disorder and with severity of manic and psychotic symptoms in this disorder. Individuals carrying a T allele in the rs28836840 SNP were likely to have a lower risk of bipolar I disorder or lower severity of manic and psychotic symptoms in patients with bipolar I disorder (bipolar I disorder diagnosis: OR = 0.643, 95% Cl = 0.468-0.883, p = 0.006; manic symptoms: beta = -2.457, 95% Cl = -4.674 ~ -0.239, p = 0.031; psychotic symptoms: beta = -2.501, 95% Cl = -4.700 ~ -0.301, p = 0.027). For the rs2242446 and rs5569 SNPs, there were no significant differences between patients with bipolar I disorder and those without. Our results revealed associations of the rs28386840 SNP with bipolar I disorder diagnosis and with severity of manic and psychotic symptoms. However, the findings reported here require replication in larger samples and various ethnic groups.
BACKGROUND: Vasomotor symptoms are the most common complaints for which menopausal women seek medical care. Eighty per cent of all menopausal women will have hot flushes and night sweats, and of these 9% will have severe symptoms impacting their quality of life. Ideally, treatment should target the group most severely afflicted, and options for treatment should be tailored to each woman, since, for most women, vasomotor symptoms spontaneously resolve in 3 - 5 years. Recommendation at this time is for the shortest duration of therapy, which means that episodic review of therapy is indicated. OBJECTIVE: To review the latest literature investigating therapies for vasomotor symptoms and to discuss their effectiveness with emphasis on placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trials. METHODS: A literature search in PubMed for 'vasomotor symptoms', 'menopause symptoms', 'hot flushes', 'hot flashes' and 'night sweats' from 2003 to the present was performed. CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen remains the gold standard for treating vasomotor symptoms. As investigations into the physiology of hot flushes continue, centrally active drugs (selective serotonin or norepinephrine-serotonin reuptake inhibitors and gabapentin) have increased in use. The benefit from dietary herbal supplements is still inconclusive; however, recent studies have shown some mild response to soy and black cohosh.
As heritability is high in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), genetic factors must play a significant role in the development and course of this disorder. In recent years a large number of studies on different candidate genes for ADHD have been published, most have focused on genes involved in the dopaminergic neurotransmission system, such as DRD4, DRD5, DAT1/SLC6A3, DBH, DDC. Genes associated with the noradrenergic (such as NET1/SLC6A2, ADRA2A, ADRA2C) and serotonergic systems (such as 5-HTT/SLC6A4, HTR1B, HTR2A, TPH2) have also received considerable interest. Additional candidate genes related to neurotransmission and neuronal plasticity that have been studied less intensively include SNAP25, CHRNA4, NMDA, BDNF, NGF, NTF3, NTF4/5, GDNF. This review article provides an overview of these candidate gene studies, and summarizes findings from recently published genome-wide association studies (GWAS). GWAS is a relatively new tool that enables the identification of new ADHD genes in a hypothesis-free manner. Although these latter studies could be improved and need to be replicated they are starting to implicate processes like neuronal migration and cell adhesion and cell division as potentially important in the aetiology of ADHD and have suggested several new directions for future ADHD genetics studies.
BACKGROUND: Although several studies have investigated possible associations between norepinephrine neurotransmitter transporter gene (SLC6A2) polymorphisms and depression, few studies have examined associations between SLC6A2 polymorphisms and suicide. METHODS: Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs2242446, rs28386840, and rs5569) were measured in 550 patients: 201 with major depressive disorder (MDD) and suicide attempt/s, 160 with MDD without suicide attempts, and 189 healthy controls. Analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotype was conducted for the three groups. Subsequently, multivariate logistic regression analysis adjusting for age and gender was conducted to identify independent influences of each SNP. A possible association between suicide lethality and SLC6A2 polymorphisms was also investigated. RESULTS: In the genotype and allele frequency analysis, there were significant differences in rs28386840 between suicidal MDD patients and healthy controls. In the haplotype analysis, TAA (rs2242446-rs28386840-rs5569, from left to right) was associated with suicide attempts in MDD, although the significance (p=0.043) disappeared after Bonferroni correction. There were no relationships between lethality scores and SLC6A2 polymorphisms in suicidal MDD. LIMITATIONS: Modest sample size and a single type of neurotransmitter analyzed (norepinephrine) are the primary limitations. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that SLC6A2 polymorphisms were associated with suicide risk in patients with MDD. Future studies are warranted to elucidate possible mechanisms by which SLC6A2 polymorphisms influence suicide risk.
PURPOSE: The European Society of Cardiology recommends that beta-blockers should be considered for treating all patients with stable, mild, moderate, or severe heart failure (HF) who are receiving standard treatment, unless there is a contraindication. Despite the significant benefit of the drug, there is widespread recognition of patient-to-patient variability in drug response. The genetic determinants of responses to drugs have important implications for the clinical course and management of HF. Pharmacogenetics (PGt) has drawn great attention for its potential to redirect personal care and public health paradigms. The aim of this review was to gather information on PGt of beta-blockers in HF treatment. METHODS: We searched for articles related to PGt of beta-blockers in the PubMed database and attempted to cover all related articles. RESULTS: Several genetic polymorphisms affecting proteins in the beta-adrenergic receptor signaling pathway have been proposed as modifiers of HF risk. The most relevant of these to this review is the pharmacogenetic interactions between the genetic variants of catecholamine receptors or their effectors and beta-blockade for the treatment of HF. CONCLUSIONS: Interindividual variability of responsiveness to beta-blockers can be explained by PGt data of adrenaline-related genes. To demonstrate that pharmacogenetic intervention produces successful individualized beta-blocker treatment for HF patients, prospective, randomized, and pharmacogenomics (PGx)-based clinical trials are required. Our assessment is that we are already at a turning point in the history of clinical pharmacology.
Repair of the pulmonary vascular bed and the origin of new vasculature remain underexplored despite the critical necessity to meet oxygen demands after injury. Given their critical role in angiogenesis in other settings, we investigated the role of venous endothelial cells in endothelial regeneration after adult lung injury. Here we identified Slc6a2 as a marker of pulmonary venous endothelial cells and generated a venous-specific, inducible Cre mouse line. We observed that venous endothelial cells proliferate into the adjacent capillary bed upon influenza injury and hyperoxia injury. Imaging analysis demonstrated that venous endothelial cells proliferate and differentiate into general capillary and aerocyte capillary endothelial cells after infection, thus contributing to repair of the capillary plexus vital for gas exchange. Our studies thus establish that venous endothelial cells exhibit demonstrable progenitor capacity upon respiratory viral injury and sterile injury, contributing to repair of the alveolar capillary bed responsible for pulmonary function.
