Sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1; Transporter that mediates resorption of neutral amino acids across the apical membrane of renal and intestinal epithelial cells. This uptake is sodium-dependent and chloride-independent. Requires CLTRN in kidney or ACE2 in intestine for cell surface expression and amino acid transporter activity.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Administration of tryptophan and some of its metabolites reduces the severity of colitis in mice, whereas removing tryptophan from the diet increases susceptibility to colitis. Transfer of the intestinal microbiome transfers the colitogenic phenotype from tryptophan starved animals to normally nourished mice. We aimed to systematically evaluate serum levels of tryptophan and its metabolites in patients with inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), and study their association with clinical and serologic features. METHODS: We studied 535 consecutive patients with IBD (211 with ulcerative colitis [UC], 234 with Crohn's disease [CD]; 236 male), enrolled in Germany from August 2013 through April 2014 and followed until July 2016. Serum samples were collected from patients and 291 matched individuals without IBD (controls); levels of tryptophan were measured using high-performance liquid chromatography. Metabolites of tryptophan were measured in serum from 148 patients and 100 controls by mass spectrometry. We measured levels of interleukin 22 in serum from 28 patients by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Paired stool and serum samples were collected from a subset of patients with active UC (n = 10) or CD (n = 8) to investigate associations between serum levels of tryptophan and composition of the fecal microbiota, analyzed by 16S ribosomal DNA amplicon sequencing. We used real-time polymerase chain reaction to measure levels of messenger RNAs in colonic biopsies from 60 patients with UC, 50 with CD, and 30 controls. We collected information on patients' disease activity scores, medications, laboratory assessments, and clinical examinations during recruitment and follow-up visits. RESULTS: Serum levels of tryptophan were significantly lower in patients with IBD than in controls (P = 5.3 x 10(-6)) with a stronger reduction in patients with CD (vs control; P = 1.1 x 10(-10)) than UC (vs control; P = 2.8 x 10(-3)). We found a negative correlation between serum levels of tryptophan and disease activity or levels of C-reactive protein. Levels of messenger RNAs encoding tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase-2 and solute carrier family 6 member 19 (also called B0AT1) were significantly decreased in colonic biopsies from patients with IBD compared with controls, whereas level of messenger RNA encoding indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase-1 was significantly increased. The composition of the fecal microbiota associated with serum levels of tryptophan. Analysis of tryptophan metabolites revealed activation of the kynurenine pathway, based on high levels of quinolinic acid, in patients with IBD compared with controls. Serum concentration of interleukin 22 associated with disease activity in patients with IBD; there was an inverse association between levels of interleukin 22 and serum levels of tryptophan. CONCLUSIONS: In an analysis of serum samples from more than 500 patients with IBD, we observed a negative correlation between serum levels of tryptophan and disease activity. Increased levels of tryptophan metabolites-especially of quinolinic acid-indicated a high activity of tryptophan degradation in patients with active IBD. Tryptophan deficiency could contribute to development of IBD or aggravate disease activity. Interventional clinical studies are needed to determine whether modification of intestinal tryptophan pathways affects the severity of IBD.
ACE2 is a type I membrane protein with extracellular carboxypeptidase activity displaying a broad tissue distribution with highest expression levels at the brush border membrane (BBM) of small intestine enterocytes and a lower expression in stomach and colon. In small intestinal mucosa, ACE2 mRNA expression appears to increase with age and to display higher levels in patients taking ACE-inhibitors (ACE-I). There, ACE2 protein heterodimerizes with the neutral amino acid transporter Broad neutral Amino acid Transporter 1 (B0AT1) (SLC6A19) or the imino acid transporter Sodium-dependent Imino Transporter 1 (SIT1) (SLC6A20), associations that are required for the surface expression of these transport proteins. These heterodimers can form quaternary structures able to function as binding sites for SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoproteins. The heterodimerization of the carboxypeptidase ACE2 with B0AT1 is suggested to favor the direct supply of substrate amino acids to the transporter, but whether this association impacts the ability of ACE2 to mediate viral infection is not known. B0AT1 mutations cause Hartnup disorder, a condition characterized by neutral aminoaciduria and, in some cases, pellagra-like symptoms, such as photosensitive rash, diarrhea, and cerebellar ataxia. Correspondingly, the lack of ACE2 and the concurrent absence of B0AT1 expression in small intestine causes a decrease in l-tryptophan absorption, niacin deficiency, decreased intestinal antimicrobial peptide production, and increased susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in mice. Thus, the abundant expression of ACE2 in small intestine and its association with amino acid transporters appears to play a crucial role for the digestion of peptides and the absorption of amino acids and, thereby, for the maintenance of structural and functional gut integrity.
The epithelial neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 (SLC6A19) is the major transporter for the absorption of neutral amino acids in the intestine and their reabsorption in the kidney. Mouse models have demonstrated that lack of B(0)AT1 can normalize elevated plasma amino acids in rare disorders of amino acid metabolism such as phenylketonuria and urea-cycle disorders, implying a pharmacological approach for their treatment. Here we employ a medicinal chemistry approach to generate B(0)AT1 inhibitors with IC(50)-values of 31-90 nM. High-resolution cryo-EM structures of B(0)AT1 in the presence of two compounds from this series identified an allosteric binding site in the vestibule of the transporter. Mechanistically, binding of these inhibitors prevents a movement of TM1 and TM6 that is required for the transporter to make a conformational change from an outward open state to the occluded state.
The neutral amino acid transporter subfamily that consists of six members, consecutively SLC6A15-SLC620, also called orphan transporters, represents membrane, sodium-dependent symporter proteins that belong to the family of solute carrier 6 (SLC6). Primarily, they mediate the transport of neutral amino acids from the extracellular milieu toward cell or storage vesicles utilizing an electric membrane potential as the driving force. Orphan transporters are widely distributed throughout the body, covering many systems; for instance, the central nervous, renal, or intestinal system, supplying cells into molecules used in biochemical, signaling, and building pathways afterward. They are responsible for intestinal absorption and renal reabsorption of amino acids. In the central nervous system, orphan transporters constitute a significant medium for the provision of neurotransmitter precursors. Diseases related with aforementioned transporters highlight their significance; SLC6A19 mutations are associated with metabolic Hartnup disorder, whereas altered expression of SLC6A15 has been associated with a depression/stress-related disorders. Mutations of SLC6A18-SLCA20 cause iminoglycinuria and/or hyperglycinuria. SLC6A18-SLC6A20 to reach the cellular membrane require an ancillary unit ACE2 that is a molecular target for the spike protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. SLC6A19 has been proposed as a molecular target for the treatment of metabolic disorders resembling gastric surgery bypass. Inhibition of SLC6A15 appears to have a promising outcome in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. SLC6A19 and SLC6A20 have been suggested as potential targets in the treatment of COVID-19. In this review, we gathered recent advances on orphan transporters, their structure, functions, related disorders, and diseases, and in particular their relevance as therapeutic targets. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The following review systematizes current knowledge about the SLC6A15-SLCA20 neutral amino acid transporter subfamily and their therapeutic relevance in the treatment of different diseases.
Near complete reabsorption of filtered amino acids is a main specialized transport function of the kidney proximal tubule. This evolutionary conserved task is carried out by a subset of luminal and basolateral transporters that together form the transcellular amino acid transport machinery similar to that of small intestine. A number of other amino acid transporters expressed in the basolateral membrane of proximal kidney tubule cells subserve either specialized metabolic functions, such as the production of ammonium, or are part of the cellular housekeeping equipment. A new finding is that the luminal Na(+)-dependent neutral amino acid transporters of the SLC6 family require an associated protein for their surface expression as shown for the Hartnup transporter B(0)AT1 (SLC6A19) and suggested for the L: -proline transporter SIT1 (IMINO(B), SLC6A20) and for B(0)AT3 (XT2, SLC6A18). This accessory subunit called collectrin (TMEM27) is homologous to the transmembrane anchor region of the renin-angiotensin system enzyme ACE2 that we have shown to function in small intestine as associated subunit of the luminal SLC6 transporters B(0)AT1 and SIT1. Some mutations of B(0)AT1 differentially interact with these accessory subunits, providing an explanation for differential intestinal phenotypes among Hartnup patients. The basolateral efflux of numerous amino acids from kidney tubular cells is mediated by heteromeric amino acid transporters that function as obligatory exchangers. Thus, other transporters within the same membrane need to mediate the net efflux of exchange substrates, controlling thereby the net basolateral amino transport and thus the intracellular amino acid concentration.
Isolated hyperglycinuria is a rare disorder that is associated with osteoporosis and renal calculi. We report findings in a middle-aged, black woman who presented for renal function evaluation with a history of transient hypobicarbonataemia associated with topiramate therapy. She displayed the full triad of high urinary glycine, early-onset osteopenia despite normal reproductive hormones, and renal calculus with high urinary oxalate, phosphate and uric acid. Parathyroid hormone and fibroblast growth factor 23 were both normal. Formal genetic testing did not reveal mutations in SLC6A20, SLC6A18, SLC6A19, SLC36A2, the known genes associated with glycinuria; however, black individuals are poorly represented in the genetic databases. It may well be that otherwise unidentified mutations may be present or that topiramate may result in a lingering proximal tubule defect even after cessation of the drug.
Neutral amino acid transporters of the SLC6 family are expressed at the apical membrane of kidney and/or small intestine, where they (re-)absorb amino acids into the body. In this review we present the results concerning the dependence of their apical expression with their association to partner proteins. We will in particular focus on the situation of B0AT1 and B0AT3, that associate with members of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), namely Tmem27 and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), in a tissue specific manner. The role of this association in relation to the formation of a functional unit related to Na+ or amino acid transport will be assessed. We will conclude with some remarks concerning the relevance of this association to Hartnup disorder, where some mutations have been shown to differentially interact with the partner proteins.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is a key metabolite synthesised from vitamin B3 or tryptophan. Disruption of genes encoding NAD synthesis enzymes reduces NAD levels and causes congenital NAD deficiency disorder (CNDD), characterised by multiple congenital malformations. SLC6A19 (encoding B0AT1, a neutral amino acid transporter), represents the main transporter for free tryptophan in the intestine and kidney. Here, we tested whether Slc6a19 heterozygosity in mice limits the tryptophan available for NAD synthesis during pregnancy and causes adverse pregnancy outcomes. Pregnant Slc6a19+/- mice were fed diets depleted of vitamin B3, so that tryptophan was the source of NAD during gestation. This perturbed the NAD metabolome in pregnant Slc6a19+/- females, resulting in reduced NAD levels and increased rates of embryo loss. Surviving embryos were small and exhibited specific combinations of CNDD-associated malformations. Our results show that genes not directly involved in NAD synthesis can affect NAD metabolism and cause CNDD. They also suggest that human female carriers of a SLC6A19 loss-of-function allele might be susceptible to adverse pregnancy outcomes unless sufficient NAD precursor amounts are available during gestation. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.
BACKGROUND: In acute kidney injury (AKI), proximal tubules are a primary site of injury, resulting in significant alterations in amino acid transport and metabolism. However, little is known about the therapeutic potential of targeting amino acid transporters. Here, we briefly review the first experimental evidence that targeting the sodium-coupled amino acid transporter SLC6A19 (B0AT1) can improve AKI outcome. SUMMARY: SLC6A19 is expressed in the small intestine and early proximal tubules, where it absorbs and reabsorbs most of the ingested and filtered neutral amino acids, respectively. Systemic SLC6A19 deficiency alleviates renal cellular senescence and suppresses subsequent inflammation and fibrosis in a murine model of aristolochic acid-induced nephropathy, which targets the proximal tubule. The underlying mechanisms remain to be determined, but potentially may include reduced tubular workload, an inhibitory effect on SGLT2, downstream shift in transport and preconditioning of late proximal tubules, and induction of a fasting-like phenotype and lowering tubular accumulation of branched-chain amino acids, which all can promote tubular health.
Amino acids are increasingly recognised as modulators of nutrient disposal, including their role in regulating blood glucose through interactions with insulin signalling. More recently, cellular membrane transporters of amino acids have been shown to form a pivotal part of this regulation as they are primarily responsible for controlling cellular and circulating amino acid concentrations. The availability of amino acids regulated by transporters can amplify insulin secretion and modulate insulin signalling in various tissues. In addition, insulin itself can regulate the expression of numerous amino acid transporters. This review focuses on amino acid transporters linked to the regulation of insulin secretion and signalling with a focus on those of the small intestine, pancreatic beta-islet cells and insulin-responsive tissues, liver and skeletal muscle. We summarise the role of the amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 (SLC6A19) and peptide transporter PEPT1 (SLC15A1) in the modulation of global insulin signalling via the liver-secreted hormone fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21). The role of vesicular vGLUT (SLC17) and mitochondrial SLC25 transporters in providing glutamate for the potentiation of insulin secretion is covered. We also survey the roles SNAT (SLC38) family and LAT1 (SLC7A5) amino acid transporters play in the regulation of and by insulin in numerous affective tissues. We hypothesise the small intestine amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 represents a crucial nexus between insulin, FGF21 and incretin hormone signalling pathways. The aim is to give an integrated overview of the important role amino acid transporters have been found to play in insulin-regulated nutrient signalling.
Recent success in the molecular cloning and identification of apical neutral amino acid transporters has shed a new light on inherited neutral amino acidurias, such as Hartnup disorder and Iminoglycinuria. Hartnup disorder is caused by mutations in the neutral amino acid transporter B(0) AT1 (SLC6A19). The transporter is found in kidney and intestine, where it is involved in the resorption of all neutral amino acids. The molecular defect underlying Iminoglycinuria has not yet been identified. However, two transporters, the proton amino acid transporter PAT1 (SLC36A1) and the IMINO transporter (SLC6A20) appear to play key roles in the resorption of glycine and proline. A model is presented, involving all three transporters that can explain the phenotypic variability of iminoglycinuria.
The Na(+)-dependent transport of neutral amino acids in epithelial cells and neurons is mediated by B(0)-type neutral amino acid transporters. Two B(0)-type amino acid transporters have been identified in the neurotransmitter transporter family SLC6, namely B(0)AT1 (SLC6A19) and B(0)AT2 (SLC6A15). In contrast to other members of this family, B(0)-like transporters are chloride-independent. B(0)AT1 and B(0)AT2 preferentially bind the substrate prior to the Na(+)-ion. The Na(+)-concentration affects the K ( m ) of the substrate and vice versa. A kinetic scheme is proposed that is consistent with the experimental data. An overlapping binding site of substrate and cosubstrate has been demonstrated in the bacterial orthologue LeuT( Aa ) from Aquifex aeolicus, which elegantly explains the mutual effect of substrate and cosubstrate on each other's K ( m )-value. LeuT( Aa ) is sequence-related to transporters of the SLC6 family, allowing homology modeling of B(0)-like transporters along its structure.
Heteromeric amino acid transporters (HATs) are composed of a heavy (SLC3 family) and a light (SLC7 family) subunit. Mutations in system b(0,+) (rBAT-b(0,+)AT) and in system y(+)L (4F2hc-y(+)LAT1) cause the primary inherited aminoacidurias (PIAs) cystinuria and lysinuric protein intolerance, respectively. Recent developments [including the identification of the first Hartnup disorder gene (B0AT1; SLC6A19)] and knockout mouse models have begun to reveal the basis of renal and intestinal reabsorption of amino acids in mammals.
Hartnup disorder is an autosomal recessive abnormality of renal and gastrointestinal neutral amino acid transport. A corresponding transport activity has been characterized in kidney and intestinal cells and named system B(0). The failure to resorb amino acids in this disorder is thought to be compensated by a protein-rich diet. However, in combination with a poor diet and other factors, more severe symptoms can develop in Hartnup patients, including a photosensitive pellagra-like skin rash, cerebellar ataxia and other neurological symptoms. Homozygosity mapping in a Japanese family and linkage analysis on six Australian pedigrees placed the Hartnup disorder gene at a locus on chromosome 5p15. This fine mapping facilitated a candidate gene approach within the interval, which resulted in the cloning and characterization of a novel member of the sodium-dependent neurotransmitter transporter family (B(0)AT1, SLC6A19) from mouse and human kidney, which shows all properties of system B(0). Flux experiments and electrophysiological recording showed that the transporter is Na(+) dependent and Cl(-) independent, electrogenic and actively transports most neutral amino acids. In situ hybridization showed strong expression in intestinal villi and in the proximal tubule of the kidney. Expression of B(0)AT1 was restricted to kidney, intestine and skin. A total of ten mutations have been identified in SLC6A19 that co-segregate with disease in the predicted recessive manner, with the majority of affected individuals being compound heterozygotes. These mutations lead to altered neutral amino acid transport function compared to the wild-type allele in vitro. One of the mutations occurs in members of the original Hartnup family described in 1956, thereby defining SLC6A19 as the 'Hartnup'-gene.
The neutral amino acid transporter SLC6A19 (B(0)AT1) plays a decisive role in transport of neutral amino acids in the kidney and intestine. Recently, mutations in SLC6A19 were identified that result in severe neutral aminoaciduria known as Hartnup disorder. SLC6A19 expression and function is controlled by the brush-border angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Beyond that the mechanisms regulating SLC6A19 function are unknown. The SLC6A19 sequence contains a conserved putative phosphorylation site for the serum and glucocorticoid inducible kinase isoforms SGK1-3, kinases known to regulate a variety of channels and transporters. The present study explored the role of SGK1-3 in the regulation of SLC6A19. As shown by two-electrode voltage clamp in the Xenopus oocyte expression system, leucine-induced currents in SLC6A19 expressing oocytes were activated by the protein kinases SGK1-3. The putative phosphorylation site on the transporter is not essential for SLC6A19 regulation by the kinases. As determined by quantitative immunoassay and electrophysiology, the kinases increase SLC6A19 currents by increasing the cell surface expression of the protein without altering the affinity of the carrier. Following inhibition of carrier insertion into the cell membrane by treatment with brefeldin A (BFA), the leucine-induced current declined significantly slower in Xenopus oocytes expressing SLC6A19 together with SGK1 than in oocytes expressing SLC6A19 alone, a finding pointing to SGK-mediated transporter stabilization in the plasma membrane. Coexpression of ACE2 markedly increased leucine-induced currents in SLC6A19 expressing oocytes that were further enhanced by SGK1-3 kinases. In conclusion, SGK isoforms are novel potent stimulators of SLC6A19 and may thus participate in the regulation of neutral amino acid transport in vivo.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has been highlighted for its role as a receptor for SARS-CoV-2, responsible for the current COVID-19 pandemic. This review summarizes current knowledge about ACE2 as a multifunctional protein, focusing on its relevance in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). As an enzyme, ACE2 may be protective in IBD because it favors the counter-regulatory arm of the renin-angiotensin system or deleterious because it metabolizes other anti-inflammatory/repairing elements. Meanwhile, as a receptor for SARS-CoV-2, the impact of ACE2 expression/activity on infection is still under debate because no direct evidence has been reported and, again, both protective and deleterious pathways are possible. Research has shown that ACE2 regulates the expression of the neutral amino acid transporter B0AT1, controlling tryptophan-associated intestinal inflammation and nutritional status. Finally, intact membrane-bound or shed soluble ACE2 can also trigger integrin signaling, modulating the response to anti-integrin biologic drugs used to treat IBD (such as vedolizumab) and fibrosis, a long-term complication of IBD. As such, future studies on ACE2 expression/activity in IBD can improve monitoring of the disease and explore an alternative pharmacological target.
Hartnup disorder (OMIM 234500) is an autosomal recessive disorder, which was first described in 1956 as an aminoaciduria of neutral amino acids accompanied by a variety of symptoms, such as a photo-sensitive skin-rash and cerebellar ataxia. The disorder is caused by mutations in the neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1 (SLC6A19). To date 21 mutations have been identified in more than twenty families. SLC6A19 requires either collectrin or angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 for surface expression in the kidney and intestine, respectively. This ties SLC6A19 together with more complex functions such as blood-pressure control, glomerular structure, and exocytosis.
In December 2019, an atypical pneumonia invaded the city of Wuhan, China, and the causative agent of this disease turned out to be a new coronavirus. In January 2020, the World Health Organization named the new coronavirus 2019-nCoV and subsequently it is referred to as SARS-CoV2 and the related disease as CoViD-19 (Lai et al., 2020). Very quickly, the epidemic led to a pandemic and it is now a worldwide emergency requiring the creation of new antiviral therapies and a related vaccine. The purpose of this article is to review and investigate further the molecular mechanism by which the SARS-CoV2 virus infection proceeds via the formation of a hetero-trimer between its protein S, the ACE2 receptor and the B0AT1 protein, which is the "entry receptor" for the infection process involving membrane fusion (Li et al., 2003). A reverse engineering process uses the formalism of the Hill function to represent the functions related to the dynamics of the biochemical interactions of the viral infection process. Then, using a logical evaluation of viral density that measures the rate at which the cells are hijacked by the virus (and they provide a place for the virus to replicate) and considering the "time delay" given by the interaction between cell and virus, the expected duration of the incubation period is predicted. The conclusion is that the density of the virus varies from the "exposure time" to the "interaction time" (virus-cells). This model can be used both to evaluate the infectious condition and to analyze the incubation period. BACKGROUND: The ongoing threat of the new coronavirus SARS-CoV2 pandemic is alarming and strategies for combating infection are highly desired. This RNA virus belongs to the beta-coronavirus genus and is similar in some features to SARS-CoV. Currently, no vaccine or approved medical treatment is available. The complex dynamics of the rapid spread of this virus can be demonstrated with the aid of a computational framework. METHODS: A mathematical model based on the principles of cell-virus interaction is developed in this manuscript. The amino acid sequence of S proein and its interaction with the ACE-2 protein is mimicked with the aid of Hill function. The mathematical model with delay is solved with the aid of numerical solvers and the parametric values are obtained with the help of MCMC algorithm. RESULTS: A delay differential equation model is developed to demonstrate the dynamics of target cells, infected cells and the SARS-CoV2. The important parameters and coefficients are demonstrated with the aid of numerical computations. The resulting thresholds and forecasting may prove to be useful tools for future experimental studies and control strategies. CONCLUSIONS: From the analysis, I is concluded that control strategy via delay is a promising technique and the role of Hill function formalism in control strategies can be better interpreted in an inexpensive manner with the aid of a theoretical framework.
Glutamine has many important functions in mammalian cells, and glutamine transport across cell membranes has accordingly been extensively studied. In the past few years a number of important glutamine transport proteins have been sequenced and their molecular properties have been characterised. In general, four major transporters are important physiologically. These are known as (i) SNAT3 (System N) which is important in glutamine uptake in periportal cells in liver and in across the basolateral membrane of renal proximal tubule cells and is also involved in glutamine release by liver perivenous cells and by astrocytes; a variant of this protein catalyses glutamine release from skeletal muscle. (ii) SNAT1 (a specific System A sub-type) which is important in glutamine uptake by neuronal cells (iii) ASCT2 which is essential for glutamine uptake by rapidly growing epithelial cells and tumour cells in culture and (iv) the recently discovered brush border membrane transporter B0 AT1 (SLC6A19). Recent studies considered both the importance of ASCT2 in tumour cell growth and the regulation of ASCT2 expression. In SK-Hep hepatoma cells, knockdown of ASCT2 using antisense mRNA has been shown to cause apoptosis. Expression of the ASCT2 transporter in HepG2 hepatoma cells is stimulated by glutamine by a pathway involving the promoter element AGGTGAATGACTT which binds FXR/RXR dimers.
BACKGROUNDThe toxic accumulation of phenylalanine (Phe) in the brain underlies the neurological presentation of phenylketonuria (PKU). Solute carrier family 6 member 19 (SLC6A19) is the major transporter responsible for the (re)absorption of Phe in the kidney and intestine. Here, we describe the characterization of the first small molecule SLC6A19 inhibitor to enter clinical development for the treatment of PKU.METHODSC57Bl/6J WT and Pahenu2 mice were dosed with an inhibitor of SLC6A19 to investigate the effects on urinary amino acids and plasma Phe. In a phase 1 study, healthy human volunteers were dosed with JNT-517, an investigational oral inhibitor of SLC6A19. The primary objective of the study was safety. Secondary objectives included pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies.RESULTSInhibition of SLC6A19 increased the urinary excretion of Phe in a mouse model of PKU, thereby reducing plasma Phe levels. JNT-517, an investigational oral SLC6A19 inhibitor, was found to be safe and well tolerated and increased the urinary excretion of Phe in a phase 1 healthy volunteer study.CONCLUSIONSThese data indicate that pharmacological inhibition of SLC6A19 presents a promising approach to lower toxic elevated levels of amino acids found in PKU and related amino acid metabolism disorders by facilitating their renal elimination.TRIAL REGISTRATIONAustralian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR), ACTRN12622001222730.FUNDINGThe studies in this paper were funded by Jnana Therapeutics.
