Sodium-dependent dopamine transporter; Amine transporter. Terminates the action of dopamine by its high affinity sodium-dependent reuptake into presynaptic terminals.
The adult form of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder has a prevalence of up to 5% and is the most severe long-term outcome of this common disorder. Family studies in clinical samples as well as twin studies suggest a familial liability and consequently different genes were investigated in association studies. Pharmacotherapy with methylphenidate (MPH) seems to be the first-line treatment of choice in adults with attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) and some studies were conducted on the genes influencing the response to this drug. Finally some peripheral biomarkers were identified in ADHD adult patients. We believe this work is the first systematic review and meta-analysis of candidate gene association studies, pharmacogenetic and biochemical (metabolomics) studies performed in adults with ADHD to identify potential genetic, predictive and peripheral markers linked specifically to ADHD in adults. After screening 5129 records, we selected 87 studies of which 61 were available for candidate gene association studies, 5 for pharmacogenetics and 21 for biochemical studies. Of these, 15 genetic, 2 pharmacogenetic and 6 biochemical studies were included in the meta-analyses. We obtained an association between adult ADHD and the gene BAIAP2 (brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor 1-associated protein 2), even after Bonferroni correction, with any heterogeneity in effect size and no publication bias. If we did not apply the Bonferroni correction, a trend was found for the carriers allele 9R of dopamine transporter SLC6A3 40 bp variable tandem repeat polymorphism (VNTR) and for 6/6 homozygotes of SLC6A3 30 bp VNTR. Negative results were obtained for the 9-6 haplotype, the dopamine receptor DRD4 48 bp VNTR, and the enzyme COMT SNP rs4680. Concerning pharmacogenetic studies, no association was found for the SLC6A3 40 bp and response to MPH with only two studies selected. For the metabolomics studies, no differences between ADHD adults and controls were found for salivary cortisol, whereas lower serum docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) levels were found in ADHD adults. This last association was significant even after Bonferroni correction and in absence of heterogeneity. Other polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) such as AA (arachidonic acid), EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DyLA (dihomogammalinolenic acid) levels were not different between patients and controls. No publication biases were observed for these markers. Genes linked to dopaminergic, serotoninergic and noradrenergic signaling, metabolism (DBH, TPH1, TPH2, DDC, MAOA, MAOB, BCHE and TH), neurodevelopment (BDNF and others), the SNARE system and other forty genes/proteins related to different pathways were not meta-analyzed due to insufficient data. In conclusion, we found that there were not enough genetic, pharmacogenetic and biochemical studies of ADHD in adults and that more investigations are needed. Moreover we confirmed a significant role of BAIAP2 and DHA in the etiology of ADHD exclusively in adults. Future research should be focused on the replication of these findings and to assess their specificity for ADHD.
Post-translational modifications are an important mechanism in the regulation of protein expression, function, and degradation. Well-known post-translational modifications are phosphorylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. However, lipid modifications, including myristoylation, prenylation, and palmitoylation, are poorly studied. Since the early 2000s, researchers have become more interested in lipid modifications, especially palmitoylation. The number of articles in PubMed increased from about 350 between 2000 and 2005 to more than 600 annually during the past ten years. S-palmitoylation, where the 16-carbon saturated (C16:0) palmitic acid is added to free cysteine residues of proteins, is a reversible protein modification that can affect the expression, membrane localization, and function of the modified proteins. Various diseases like Huntington's and Alzheimer's disease have been linked to changes in protein palmitoylation. In humans, the addition of palmitic acid is mediated by 23 palmitoyl acyltransferases, also called DHHC proteins. The modification can be reversed by a few thioesterases or hydrolases. Numerous soluble and membrane-attached proteins are known to be palmitoylated, but among the approximately 400 solute carriers that are classified in 66 families, only 15 found in 8 families have so far been documented to be palmitoylated. Among the best-characterized transporters are the glucose transporters GLUT1 (SLC2A1) and GLUT4 (SLC2A4), the three monoamine transporters norepinephrine transporter (NET; SLC6A2), dopamine transporter (DAT; SLC6A3), and serotonin transporter (SERT; SLC6A4), and the sodium-calcium exchanger NCX1 (SLC8A1). While there is evidence from recent proteomics experiments that numerous solute carriers are palmitoylated, no details beyond the 15 transporters covered in this review are available.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Tremor is an important phenotypic feature of dystonia with wide variability in the reported prevalence ranging from 14 to 86.67%. This variability may be due to the types of dystonia patients reported in different studies. This article reviews research articles reporting tremor in primary monogenic dystonia. RECENT FINDINGS: We searched the MDS gene data and selected all research articles reporting tremor in primary monogenic dystonia. Tremor was reported in nine dystonia genes, namely DYT-HPCA, DYT-ANO3, DYT-KCTD17, DYT-THAP1, DYT-PRKRA, DYT-GNAL, DYT-TOR1A, DYT-KMT2B, and DYT-SGCE in the descending order of its frequency. HPCA gene mutation is rare, but all reported patients had tremor. Similarly, tremor was reported in eight genes associated with dystonia parkinsonism, namely DYT-SLC6A3, DYT-TH, DYT-SPR, DYT-PTS, DYT-GCH1, DYT-TAF1, DYT-QDPR, and DYT-SCL30A10 in the descending order of its prevalence. DYT-HPCA and DYT-ANO3 gene showed the highest prevalence of tremor in isolated dystonia, and DYT-SLC6A3 has the highest prevalence of tremor in combined dystonia.
The dopamine transporter (DAT) is one of the most relevant and investigated neurotransmitter transporters. DAT is a plasma membrane protein which plays a homeostatic role, controlling both extracellular and intracellular concentrations of dopamine (DA). Since unbalanced DA levels are known to be involved in numerous mental disorders, a wealth of investigations has provided valuable insights concerning DAT role into normal brain functioning and pathological processes. Briefly, this extensive but non-systematic review discusses what is recently known about the role of SLC6A3 gene which encodes the dopamine transporter in psychiatric phenotypes. DAT protein, SLC6A3 gene, animal models, neuropsychology, and neuroimaging investigations are also concisely discussed. To conclude, current challenges are reviewed in order to provide perspectives for future studies.
The human genome encodes 19 genes of the solute carrier 6 (SLC6) family; non-synonymous changes in the coding sequence give rise to mutated transporters, which are misfolded and thus cause diseases in the affected individuals. Prominent examples include mutations in the transporters for dopamine (DAT, SLC6A3), for creatine (CT1, SLC6A8), and for glycine (GlyT2, SLC6A5), which result in infantile dystonia, mental retardation, and hyperekplexia, respectively. Thus, there is an obvious unmet medical need to identify compounds, which can remedy the folding deficit. The pharmacological correction of folding defects was originally explored in mutants of the serotonin transporter (SERT, SLC6A4), which were created to study the COPII-dependent export from the endoplasmic reticulum. This led to the serendipitous discovery of the pharmacochaperoning action of ibogaine. Ibogaine and its metabolite noribogaine also rescue several disease-relevant mutants of DAT. Because the pharmacology of DAT and SERT is exceptionally rich, it is not surprising that additional compounds have been identified, which rescue folding-deficient mutants. These compounds are not only of interest for restoring DAT function in the affected children. They are also likely to serve as useful tools to interrogate the folding trajectory of the transporter. This is likely to initiate a virtuous cycle: if the principles underlying folding of SLC6 transporters are understood, the design of pharmacochaperones ought to be facilitated.
The gene coding for the dopamine transporter (DAT), SLC6A3, contains a 40-base pair variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism (rs28363170) in its 3' untranslated region. This VNTR has been associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and has been investigated in relation to cognition and brain function. Here, we report the results of a comprehensive meta-analysis with meta-regression examining the association of the VNTR with different domains of cognition in healthy adults. We extracted data from 28 independent studies and carried out meta-analyses for associations with working memory (k=10 samples, N=1193 subjects), inhibition (k=8 samples, N=829 subjects), executive functions including inhibition (k=10 samples, N=984 subjects), attention (k=6 samples, N=742 subjects) and declarative long-term memory (k=5 samples, N=251 subjects). None of the investigated dimensions showed significant associations with the VNTR (all p>0.26). Meta-regression including year of publication, gender, age, ethnicity and percentage of 10R-homozygotes similarly did not attain significance. We conclude that there is no evidence that rs28363170 may be a significant predictor of cognitive function in healthy adults.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The article provides an update on new insights of factors altering inherited maternal epigenome that ultimately affect fetal and neonatal growth. RECENT FINDINGS: A number of new publications have identified mechanisms through which maternal nutrition, environmental exposures such as stress and toxic substances altering expression of imprinted genes during pregnancy can influence fetal and neonatal phenotype and susceptibility to disease development later in life. The possible causes of metabolic syndrome by in-utero epigenetic alterations of genes involved in energy metabolism (PPARgamma and PPARalpha), microRNAs, arginine methyltransferases, lysine demethylases, and histone deacetylaces have been elucidated. Moreover associations between methylation of key genes (NRC31, HSD11beta1/2, GFI1) involved in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis have been identified. Alcohol exposure during pregnancy was found to alter methylation patterns of several imprinted genes (H19, SLC22A18, SLC6A3, DRD4). Finally alterations in vulnerable epigenetic marks of imprinted genes such as H19/IGF2, during early stages of embryonic development result in intrauterine growth restriction. SUMMARY: All these investigations continue to provide new insights for improved clinical management of in-utero development.
Dopamine was first identified as a neurotransmitter localized to the midbrain over 50 years ago. The dopamine transporter (DAT; SLC6A3) and the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2; SLC18A2) are regulators of dopamine homeostasis in the presynaptic neuron. DAT transports dopamine from the extracellular space into the cytosol of the presynaptic terminal. VMAT2 then packages this cytosolic dopamine into vesicular compartments for subsequent release upon neurotransmission. Thus, DAT and VMAT2 act in concert to move the transmitter efficiently throughout the neuron. Accumulation of dopamine in the neuronal cytosol can trigger oxidative stress and neurotoxicity, suggesting that the proper compartmentalization of dopamine is critical for neuron function and risk of disease. For decades, studies have examined the effects of reduced transporter function in mice (e.g. DAT-KO, VMAT2-KO, VMAT2-deficient). However, we have only recently been able to assess the effects of elevated transporter expression using BAC transgenic methods (DAT-tg, VMAT2-HI mice). Complemented with in vitro work and neurochemical techniques to assess dopamine compartmentalization, a new focus on the importance of transporter proteins as both models of human disease and potential drug targets has emerged. Here, we review the importance of DAT and VMAT2 function in the delicate balance of neuronal dopamine.
OBJECTIVES: Elucidating the biological mechanisms involved in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) has been challenging. Relatively unexplored is the fact that these mechanisms can differ with age. METHODS: We present an overview on the major differences between children and adults with ADHD, describing several studies from genomics to metabolomics performed in ADHD children and in adults (cADHD and aADHD, respectively). A systematic search (up until February 2016) was conducted. RESULTS: From a PRISMA flow-chart, a total of 350 and 91 genomics and metabolomics studies were found to be elligible for cADHD and aADHD, respectively. For children, associations were found for genes belonging to dopaminergic (SLC6A3, DRD4 and MAOA) and neurodevelopmental (LPHN3 and DIRAS2) systems and OPRM1 (Yates corrected P = 0.016; OR = 2.27 95%CI: 1.15-4.47). Studies of adults have implicated circadian rhythms genes, HTR2A, MAOB and a more generic neurodevelopmental/neurite outgrowth network (BCHE, SNAP25, BAIAP2, NOS1/NO, KCNIP4 and SPOCK3; Yates corrected P = 0.007; OR = 3.30 95%CI: 1.33-8.29). In common among cADHD and aADHD, the most significant findings are for oxidative stress proteins (MAD, SOD, PON1, ARES, TOS, TAS and OSI), and, in the second level, DISC1, DBH, DDC, microRNA and adiponectin. CONCLUSIONS: Through a convergent functional genomics, this review contributes to clarification of which genetic/biological mechanisms differ with age. The effects of some genes do not change throughout the lifetime, whereas others are linked to age-specific stages. Additional research and further studies are needed to generate firmer conclusions that might someday be useful for predicting the remission and persistence of the disorder. Despite the limitations, some of these genes/proteins could be potential useful biomarkers to discriminate cADHD from aADHD.
The human dopamine transporter gene SLC6A3 has been consistently implicated in several neuropsychiatric diseases but the disease mechanism remains elusive. In this risk synthesis, we have concluded that SLC6A3 represents an increasingly recognized risk with a growing number of familial mutants associated with neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders. At least five loci were related to common and severe diseases including alcohol use disorder (high activity variant), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (low activity variant), autism (familial proteins with mutated networking) and movement disorders (both regulatory variants and familial mutations). Association signals depended on genetic markers used as well as ethnicity examined. Strong haplotype selection and gene-wide epistases support multimarker assessment of functional variations and phenotype associations. Inclusion of its promoter region's functional markers such as DNPi (rs67175440) and 5'VNTR (rs70957367) may help delineate condensate-based risk action, testing a locus-pathway-phenotype hypothesis for one gene-multidisease etiology.
Recent evidence enriches our understanding of the molecular sites of action of cocaine reward and locomotor stimulation. Dopamine transporter blockade by cocaine appears a sufficient explanation for cocaine-induced locomotion. Variation in DAT appears to cause differences in locomotion without drug stimulation. However, previously-held views that DAT blockade was the sole site for cocaine reward have been replaced by a richer picture of multitransporter involvement with the rewarding and aversive actions of cocaine. These new insights, derived from studies of knockout mice with simultaneous deletions and/or blockade of multiple transporters, provide a novel model for the rewarding action of this heavily-abused substance and implicate multiple monoamine systems in cocaine's hedonic activities.
Many of the individual differences in cognition, motivation, and learning-and the disruption of these processes in neurological conditions-are influenced by genetic factors. We provide an integrative synthesis across human and animal studies, focusing on a recent spate of evidence implicating a role for genes controlling dopaminergic function in frontostriatal circuitry, including COMT, DARPP-32, DAT1, DRD2, and DRD4. These genetic effects are interpreted within theoretical frameworks developed in the context of the broader cognitive and computational neuroscience literature, constrained by data from pharmacological, neuroimaging, electrophysiological, and patient studies. In this framework, genes modulate the efficacy of particular neural computations, and effects of genetic variation are revealed by assays designed to be maximally sensitive to these computations. We discuss the merits and caveats of this approach and outline a number of novel candidate genes of interest for future study.
The uptake and efflux of solutes across a plasma membrane is controlled by transporters. There are two main superfamilies of transporters, adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) binding cassettes (ABCs) and solute carriers (SLCs). In the brain, SLC transporters are involved in transporting various solutes across the blood-brain barrier, blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, astrocytes, neurons, and other brain cell types including oligodendrocytes and microglial cells. SLCs play an important role in maintaining normal brain function. Hence, mutations in the genes that encode SLC transporters can cause a variety of neurological disorders. We identified the following SLC gene variants in 25 patients in our cohort: SLC1A2, SLC2A1, SLC5A1, SLC6A3, SLC6A5, SLC6A8, SLC9A6, SLC9A9, SLC12A6, SLC13A5, SLC16A1, SLC17A5, SLC19A3, SLC25A12, SLC25A15, SLC27A4, SLC45A1, SLC46A1, and SLC52A3. Eight patients harbored pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutations (SLC5A1, SLC9A6, SLC12A6, SLC16A1, SLC19A3, and SLC52A3), and 12 patients were found to have variants of unknown clinical significance (VOUS); these variants occurred in 11 genes (SLC1A2, SLC2A1, SLC6A3, SLC6A5, SLC6A8, SLC9A6, SLC9A9, SLC13A5, SLC25A12, SLC27A4, and SLC45A1). Five patients were excluded as they were carriers. In the remaining 20 patients with SLC gene variants, we identified 16 possible distinct neurological disorders. Based on the clinical presentation, we categorized them into genes causing intellectual delay (ID) or autism spectrum disorder (ASD), those causing epilepsy, those causing vitamin-related disorders, and those causing other neurological diseases. Several variants were detected that indicated possible personalized therapies: SLC2A1 led to dystonia or epilepsy, which can be treated with a ketogenic diet; SLC6A3 led to infantile parkinsonism-dystonia 1, which can be treated with levodopa; SLC6A5 led to hyperekplexia 3, for which unnecessary treatment with antiepileptic drugs should be avoided; SLC6A8 led to creatine deficiency syndrome type 1, which can be treated with creatine monohydrate; SLC16A1 led to monocarboxylate transporter 1 deficiency, which causes seizures that should not be treated with a ketogenic diet; SLC19A3 led to biotin-thiamine-responsive basal ganglia disease, which can be treated with biotin and thiamine; and SLC52A3 led to Brown-Vialetto-Van-Laere syndrome 1, which can be treated with riboflavin. The present study examines the prevalence of SLC gene mutations in our cohort of children with epilepsy and other neurological disorders. It highlights the diverse phenotypes associated with mutations in this large family of SLC transporter proteins, and an opportunity for personalized genomics and personalized therapeutics.
Cell proliferation and invasion are characteristic of many tumors, including ameloblastoma, and are important features to target in possible future therapeutic applications. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was the identification of key genes and inhibitory drugs related to the cell proliferation and invasion of ameloblastoma using bioinformatic analysis. METHODS: The H10KA_07_38 gene profile database was analyzed by Rstudio and ShinyGO Gene Ontology enrichment. String, Cytoscape-MCODE, and Kaplan-Meier plots were generated, which were subsequently validated by RT-qPCR relative expression and immunoexpression analyses. To propose specific inhibitory drugs, a bioinformatic search using Drug Gene Budger and DrugBank was performed. RESULTS: A total of 204 significantly upregulated genes were identified. Gene ontology enrichment analysis identified four pathways related to cell proliferation and cell invasion. A total of 37 genes were involved in these pathways, and 11 genes showed an MCODE score of >/=0.4; however, only SLC6A3, SOX10, and LRP5 were negatively associated with overall survival (HR = 1.49 (p = 0.0072), HR = 1.55 (p = 0.0018), and HR = 1.38 (p = 0.025), respectively). The RT-qPCR results confirmed the significant differences in expression, with overexpression of >2 for SLC6A3 and SOX10. The immunoexpression analysis indicated positive LRP5 and SLC6A3 expression. The inhibitory drugs bioinformatically obtained for the above three genes were parthenolide and vorinostat. CONCLUSIONS: We identify LRP5, SLC6A3, and SOX10 as potentially important genes related to cell proliferation and invasion in the pathogenesis of ameloblastomas, along with both parthenolide and vorinostat as inhibitory drugs that could be further investigated for the development of novel therapeutic approaches against ameloblastoma.
Dopamine neurotransmission has been a key player in attempts to identify genetic factors involved in alcohol dependence. The dopamine transporter terminates dopaminergic neurotransmission, making the gene encoding the transporter (SLC6A3/DAT1) an attractive candidate in clinical studies on alcohol dependence. We conducted a systematic review of 18 studies examining associations between polymorphisms in DAT1 and alcohol dependence. The DAT1 variable number tandem repeat, the most frequent studied polymorphism in DAT1, did not show a direct association with alcohol dependence in general. Several, but not all, studies found that the DAT1 variable number tandem repeat (9-repeat allele) was associated with alcohol-withdrawal symptoms, such as seizures and delirium tremens. We discuss shortcomings, such as lack of power and disregarding moderating variables, as well as future challenges of gene association studies.
The catecholamine dopamine (DA) plays an important role as a neurotransmitter in the brain in circuits linked to motor function, reward, and cognition. The presynaptic DA transporter (DAT) inactivates DA following release and provides a route for non-exocytotic DA release (efflux) triggered by amphetamines. The synaptic role of DATs first established through antagonist studies and more recently validated through mouse gene-knockout experiments, raises questions as to whether altered DAT structure or regulation support clinical disorders linked to compromised DA signaling, including drug abuse, schizophrenia, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). As ADHD appears to have highly heritable components and the most commonly prescribed therapeutics for ADHD target DAT, studies ranging from brain imaging to genomic and genetic analyses have begun to probe the DAT gene and its protein for possible contributions to the disorder and/or its treatment. In this review, after a brief overview of ADHD prevalence and diagnostic criteria, we examine the rationale and experimental findings surrounding a role for human DAT in ADHD. Based on the available evidence from our lab and labs of workers in the field, we suggest that although a common variant within the human DAT (hDAT) gene (SLC6A3) is unlikely to play a major role in the ADHD, contributions of hDAT to risk maybe most evident in phenotypic subgroups. The in vitro and in vivo validation of functional variants, pursued for contributions to endophenotypes in a within family approach, may help elucidate DAT and DA contributions to ADHD and its treatment.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a prevalent neuropsychiatric disorder, with 5% of school age children affected. Up to 80% of the phenotypic variance can be explained by genetic factors. The intermediate or endophenotype approach allows for mapping of the effect of individual risk genes on neurobiological parameters, such as brain structure, chemistry and, ultimately, function. There are two obvious advantages of applying such an approach to complex disorders: first, these measures are causally closer to genes and gene expression than behavior, meaning that gene effects should be magnified. Second, neuroimaging provides a means to uncover the neurobiological mechanisms by which gene variants impact the brain. To date, only fourteen studies have applied an imaging genetics approach to ADHD. Eight of these used MRI, four SPECT and two EEG. These imaging modalities have afforded us a window on the brain, permitting a glimpse of how genetic changes can affect brain structure, chemistry and function. The studies to date have often focused on two prime candidate genes in the dopamine system, the DRD4 and DAT1 genes. However, the effects of neither are yet fully understood. Imaging genetics in ADHD is in its infancy. While attempts to integrate the findings to date are hinting at how genes may impact various aspects of neural functioning, studies testing clear model-based hypotheses, using multimodal approaches may provide a means to link various windows on the brain.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Dopamine has been implicated in the pathophysiology of migraine, although its exact role remains unclear. Recent data offer some new perspective on a possible role for dopaminergic mechanisms in migraine. This review aims to summarize our current understanding of dopamine in migraine. RECENT FINDINGS: Direct application of dopamine and dopamine receptor agonists onto trigeminocervical complex neurons inhibits their activation after nociceptive stimulation. The dopaminergic A11 nucleus of the hypothalamus has been identified as the likely source of this dopamine. Recent evidence has shown that the genes for dopamine beta-hydroxylase and the dopamine transporter SLC6A3 may play a role in migraine pathophysiology, and dopamine has also been implicated in menstrual migraine. SUMMARY: Dopamine is currently considered to contribute to the pathophysiology of migraine, and dopamine receptor antagonists are prescribed in the treatment of acute migraine. Laboratory data suggest that the role of dopamine in migraine is more complex, perhaps due to the multiple receptors and levels of the brain involved in the disorder. These data suggest a reappraisal of dopaminergic therapeutic targets in migraine as our understanding of the role of this important biogenic amine is better characterized.
The human dopamine transporter gene SLC6A3 is involved in substance use disorders (SUDs) among many other common neuropsychiatric illnesses but allelic association results including those with its classic genetic markers 3'VNTR or Int8VNTR remain mixed and unexplainable. To better understand the genetics for reproducible association signals, we report the presence of recombination hotspots based on sequencing of the entire 5' promoter regions in two small SUDs cohorts, 30 African Americans (AAs) and 30 European Americans (EAs). Recombination rate was the highest near the transcription start site (TSS) in both cohorts. In addition, each cohort carried 57 different promoter haplotypes out of 60 and no haplotypes were shared between the two ethnicities. A quarter of the haplotypes evolved in an ethnicity-specific manner. Finally, analysis of five hundred subjects of European ancestry, from the 1000 Genome Project, confirmed the promoter recombination hotspots and also revealed several additional ones in non-coding regions only. These findings provide an explanation for the mixed results as well as guidance for selection of effective markers to be used in next generation association validation (NGAV), facilitating the delineation of pathogenic variation in this critical neuropsychiatric gene.
A promoter can be regulated by various cis-acting elements so that delineation of the regulatory modes among them may help understand developmental, environmental and genetic mechanisms in gene activity. Here we report that the human dopamine transporter gene SLC6A3 carries a 5' distal 5-kb super enhancer (5KSE) which upregulated the promoter by 5-fold. Interestingly, 5KSE is able to prevent 3' downstream variable number tandem repeats (3'VNTRs) from silencing the promoter. This new enhancer consists of a 5'VNTR and three repetitive sub-elements that are conserved in primates. Two of 5KSE's sub-elements, E-9.7 and E-8.7, upregulate the promoter, but only the later could continue doing so in the presence of 3'VNTRs. Finally, E-8.7 is activated by novel dopaminergic transcription factors including SRP54 and Nfe2l1. Together, these results reveal a multimodal regulatory mechanism in SLC6A3.
