Syntaxin-1A; Plays an essential role in hormone and neurotransmitter calcium-dependent exocytosis and endocytosis. Part of the SNARE (Soluble NSF Attachment Receptor) complex composed of SNAP25, STX1A and VAMP2 which mediates the fusion of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic plasma membrane. STX1A and SNAP25 are localized on the plasma membrane while VAMP2 resides in synaptic vesicles. The pairing of the three SNAREs from the N-terminal SNARE motifs to the C-terminal anchors leads to the formation of the SNARE complex, which brings membranes into close proximity and results in final [...] 
PURPOSE: Congenital primary hypothyroidism (CH) is a state of inadequate thyroid hormone production detected at birth, caused either by absent, underdeveloped or ectopic thyroid gland (dysgenesis), or by defected thyroid hormone biosynthesis (dyshormonogenesis). A genetic component has been identified in many cases of CH. This review summarizes the clinical and biochemical features of the genetic causes of primary CH. METHODS: A literature review was conducted of gene defects causing congenital hypothyroidism. RESULTS: Mutations in five genes have predominantly been implicated in thyroid dysgenesis (TSHR, FOXE1, NKX2-1, PAX8, and NKX2-5), the primary cause of CH (85%), and mutations in seven genes in thyroid dyshormonogenesis (SLC5A5, TPO, DUOX2, DUOXA2, SLC6A4, Tg, and DEHAL1). These genes encode for proteins that regulate genes expressed during the differentiation of the thyroid, such as TPO and Tg genes, or genes that regulate iodide organification, thyroglobulin synthesis, iodide transport, and iodotyrosine deiodination. Besides thyroid dysgenesis and dyshormonogenesis, additional causes of congenital hypothyroidism, such as iodothyronine transporter defects and resistance to thyroid hormones, have also been associated with genetic mutations. CONCLUSION: The identification of the underlying genetic defects of CH is important for genetic counseling of families with an affected member, for identifying additional clinical characteristics or the risk for thyroid neoplasia and for diagnostic and management purposes.
Emotion is critical to most aspects of human behavior, and individual differences in systems recruited to process emotional stimuli, expressed as variation in emotionality, are characteristic of several neuropsychiatric disorders. We examine the genetic origins of individual differences in emotion processing by focusing on functional variants at five genes: catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), serotonin transporter (SLC6A4), neuropeptide Y (NPY), a glucocorticoid receptor-regulating co-chaperone of stress proteins (FKBP5) and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide receptor (ADCYAP1R1). These represent a range of effects of genes on emotion as well as the variety of mechanisms and factors, such as stress, that modify these effects. The new genomic era of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and deep sequencing may yield a wealth of new loci modulating emotion. The effects of these genes can be validated by neuroimaging, neuroendocrine and other studies accessing intermediate phenotypes, deepening our understanding of mechanisms of emotion and variation in emotionality.
Post-translational modifications are an important mechanism in the regulation of protein expression, function, and degradation. Well-known post-translational modifications are phosphorylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. However, lipid modifications, including myristoylation, prenylation, and palmitoylation, are poorly studied. Since the early 2000s, researchers have become more interested in lipid modifications, especially palmitoylation. The number of articles in PubMed increased from about 350 between 2000 and 2005 to more than 600 annually during the past ten years. S-palmitoylation, where the 16-carbon saturated (C16:0) palmitic acid is added to free cysteine residues of proteins, is a reversible protein modification that can affect the expression, membrane localization, and function of the modified proteins. Various diseases like Huntington's and Alzheimer's disease have been linked to changes in protein palmitoylation. In humans, the addition of palmitic acid is mediated by 23 palmitoyl acyltransferases, also called DHHC proteins. The modification can be reversed by a few thioesterases or hydrolases. Numerous soluble and membrane-attached proteins are known to be palmitoylated, but among the approximately 400 solute carriers that are classified in 66 families, only 15 found in 8 families have so far been documented to be palmitoylated. Among the best-characterized transporters are the glucose transporters GLUT1 (SLC2A1) and GLUT4 (SLC2A4), the three monoamine transporters norepinephrine transporter (NET; SLC6A2), dopamine transporter (DAT; SLC6A3), and serotonin transporter (SERT; SLC6A4), and the sodium-calcium exchanger NCX1 (SLC8A1). While there is evidence from recent proteomics experiments that numerous solute carriers are palmitoylated, no details beyond the 15 transporters covered in this review are available.
Conduct disorder (CD) is a moderately heritable psychiatric disorder of childhood and adolescence characterized by aggression toward people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft, and serious violation of rules. Genome-wide scans using linkage and association methods have identified a number of suggestive genomic regions that are pending replication. A small number of candidate genes (e.g., GABRA2, MAOA, SLC6A4, AVPR1A) are associated with CD related phenotypes across independent studies; however, failures to replicate also exist. Studies of gene-environment interplay show that CD genetic predispositions also contribute to selection into higher-risk environments, and that environmental factors can alter the importance of CD genetic factors and differentially methylate CD candidate genes. The field's understanding of CD etiology will benefit from larger, adequately powered studies in gene identification efforts; the incorporation of polygenic approaches in gene-environment interplay studies; attention to the mechanisms of risk from genes to brain to behavior; and the use of genetically informative data to test quasi-causal hypotheses about purported risk factors.
Migraine is a common neurological disorder that affects 11% of adults worldwide. This disease most likely has a neurovascular origin. Migraine with aura (MA) and more common form - migraine without aura (MO) - are the two main clinical subtypes of disease. The exact pathomechanism of migraine is still unknown, but it is thought that both genetic and environmental factors are involved in this pathological process. The first genetic studies of migraine were focused on the rare subtype of MA: familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM). The genes analysed in familial and sporadic migraine are: MTHFR, KCNK18, HCRTR1, SLC6A4, STX1A, GRIA1 and GRIA3. It is possible that migraine is a multifactorial disease with polygenic influence.Recent studies have shown that the pathomechanisms of migraine involves both factors responsible for immune response and oxidative stress such as: cytokines, tyrosine metabolism, homocysteine; and factors associated with pain transmission and emotions e.g.: serotonin, hypocretin-1, calcitonin gene-related peptide, glutamate. The correlations between genetic variants of the HCRTR1 gene, the polymorphism 5-HTTLPR and hypocretin-1, and serotonin were observed. It is known that serotonin inhibits the activity of hypocretin neurons and may affect the appearance of the aura during migraine attack.The understanding of the molecular mechanisms of migraine, including genotype-phenotype correlations, may contribute to finding markers important for the diagnosis and treatment of this disease.
Activation of brown adipose tissue (BAT) in humans is a strategy to treat obesity and metabolic disease. Here we show that the serotonin transporter (SERT), encoded by SLC6A4, prevents serotonin-mediated suppression of human BAT function. RNA sequencing of human primary brown and white adipocytes shows that SLC6A4 is highly expressed in human, but not murine, brown adipocytes and BAT. Serotonin decreases uncoupled respiration and reduces uncoupling protein 1 via the 5-HT(2B) receptor. SERT inhibition by the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) sertraline prevents uptake of extracellular serotonin, thereby potentiating serotonin's suppressive effect on brown adipocytes. Furthermore, we see that sertraline reduces BAT activation in healthy volunteers, and SSRI-treated patients demonstrate no (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake by BAT at room temperature, unlike matched controls. Inhibition of BAT thermogenesis may contribute to SSRI-induced weight gain and metabolic dysfunction, and reducing peripheral serotonin action may be an approach to treat obesity and metabolic disease.
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is a chronic gastrointestinal disorder characterized by periods of activity and remission. IBD includes Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), and even though IBD has not been considered as a heritable disease, there are genetic variants associated with increased risk for the disease. 5-Hydroxytriptamine (5-HT), or serotonin, exerts a wide range of gastrointestinal effects under both normal and pathological conditions. Furthermore, Serotonin Transporter (SERT) coded by Solute Carrier Family 6 Member 4 (SLC6A4) gene (located in the 17q11.1-q12 chromosome), possesses genetic variants, such as Serotonin Transporter Gene Variable Number Tandem Repeat in Intron 2 (STin2-VNTR) and Serotonin-Transporter-linked promoter region (5-HTTLPR), which have an influence over the functionality of SERT in the re-uptake and bioavailability of serotonin. The intestinal microbiota is a crucial actor in normal human gut physiology, exerting effects on serotonin, SERT function, and inflammatory processes. As a consequence of abnormal serotonin signaling and SERT function under these inflammatory processes, the use of selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) has been seen to improve disease activity and extraintestinal manifestations, such as depression and anxiety. The aim of this study is to integrate scientific data linking the intestinal microbiota as a regulator of gut serotonin signaling and re-uptake, as well as its role in the pathogenesis of IBD. We performed a narrative review, including a literature search in the PubMed database of both review and original articles (no date restriction), as well as information about the SLC6A4 gene and its genetic variants obtained from the Ensembl website. Scientific evidence from in vitro, in vivo, and clinical trials regarding the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors as an adjuvant therapy in patients with IBD is also discussed. A total of 194 articles were used between reviews, in vivo, in vitro studies, and clinical trials.
The adrenal glands are key components of the mammalian endocrine system, helping maintain physiological homeostasis and the coordinated response to stress. Each adrenal gland has two morphologically and functionally distinct regions, the outer cortex and inner medulla. The cortex is organized into three concentric zones which secrete steroid hormones, including aldosterone and cortisol. Neural crest-derived chromaffin cells in the medulla are innervated by preganglionic sympathetic neurons and secrete catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine) and neuropeptides into the bloodstream, thereby functioning as the neuroendocrine arm of the sympathetic nervous system. In this article we review serotonin (5-HT) and the serotonin transporter (SERT; SLC6A4) in the adrenal gland. In the adrenal cortex, 5-HT, primarily sourced from resident mast cells, acts as a paracrine signal to stimulate aldosterone and cortisol secretion through 5-HT(4)/5-HT(7) receptors. Medullary chromaffin cells contain a small amount of 5-HT due to SERT-mediated uptake and express 5-HT(1A) receptors which inhibit secretion. The atypical mechanism of the 5-HT(1A) receptors and interaction with SERT fine tune this autocrine pathway to control stress-evoked catecholamine secretion. Receptor-independent signaling by SERT/intracellular 5-HT modulates the amount and kinetics of transmitter release from single vesicle fusion events. SERT might also influence stress-evoked upregulation of tyrosine hydroxylase transcription. Transient signaling via 5-HT(3) receptors during embryonic development can limit the number of chromaffin cells found in the mature adrenal gland. Together, this emerging evidence suggests that the adrenal medulla is a peripheral hub for serotonergic control of the sympathoadrenal stress response.
The microbiota-gut-brain axis is a bidirectional homeostatic route of communication between both of the organs direct via receptors of the CNS or via epigenetic mechanisms of divers metabolites e.g. SCFA, GABA, beta-hydroxybutyrate. Thus, a modulation of gut microbiota via nutrition, lifestyle etc. might be effective for emotional status and depressive disorders. The dietary composition has an influence on gut microbiota composition, microbial metabolite profile and the according consequences on emotional status and depression within a system biologic approach. There are changes in gut microbiota composition and gut microbial profile (butyrate, GABA, beta-hydroxybutyrate) effecting epigenetic regulation (histone acetylation, DNA methylation) and gene expression of receptors and mediators (SLC6A4, BDNF, GABA, GPRs) involved in depressive disorders.
As one of the most common psychiatric disorders, depression has been a major public health problem. Growing evidence suggests that epigenetic modification is essential in biological processes of depression. Recently, DNA methylation has been regarded as a potential link between environment and depression. In this review, we reviewed current studies of the association between DNA methylation and depression. The association between DNA methylation of seven genes, including BDNF, SLC6A4, NR3C1, 5-HTR (1A, 2A, and 3A), FKBP5, MAO-A and OXTR, and depression were reviewed in this study. Most studies showed BDNF and NR3C1 gene methylation levels were correlated with depression while the connection of SLC6A4 and depression was conflicting. Although evidence provided insights to epigenetic processes in depression, the findings were inconsistent. Therefore, longitudinal studies in animal models and in patients with depression are needed to further investigate the diagnostic predictive value of DNA methylation reliably.
The human genome encodes 19 genes of the solute carrier 6 (SLC6) family; non-synonymous changes in the coding sequence give rise to mutated transporters, which are misfolded and thus cause diseases in the affected individuals. Prominent examples include mutations in the transporters for dopamine (DAT, SLC6A3), for creatine (CT1, SLC6A8), and for glycine (GlyT2, SLC6A5), which result in infantile dystonia, mental retardation, and hyperekplexia, respectively. Thus, there is an obvious unmet medical need to identify compounds, which can remedy the folding deficit. The pharmacological correction of folding defects was originally explored in mutants of the serotonin transporter (SERT, SLC6A4), which were created to study the COPII-dependent export from the endoplasmic reticulum. This led to the serendipitous discovery of the pharmacochaperoning action of ibogaine. Ibogaine and its metabolite noribogaine also rescue several disease-relevant mutants of DAT. Because the pharmacology of DAT and SERT is exceptionally rich, it is not surprising that additional compounds have been identified, which rescue folding-deficient mutants. These compounds are not only of interest for restoring DAT function in the affected children. They are also likely to serve as useful tools to interrogate the folding trajectory of the transporter. This is likely to initiate a virtuous cycle: if the principles underlying folding of SLC6 transporters are understood, the design of pharmacochaperones ought to be facilitated.
Recent major findings from studies of SLC6A4 and its corresponding protein, the serotonin (5-HT) transporter (SERT) in humans, rodents and non-human primates indicate that combinations of SLC6A4 non-coding 5', 3' UTRs and intronic regions plus coding variants acting together can change 5HT transport as much as 40-fold in vitro. In vivo, SLC6A4 variants in humans and other species lead to marked physiological changes, despite mitigating neurodevelopmental adaptations in 5-HT receptors plus compensatory alterations in 5-HT synthesis and metabolism. Polymorphisms in SLC6A4 are associated with differences in emotional, endocrine, and personality characteristics as well as many diseases. This gene, in combinations with genexgene (GxG) and genexenvironment (GxE) interactions nonetheless remains incompletely understood, with some association findings remaining controversial. Considering its primary importance in the regulation and function of the entire serotonergic system (as evidenced by the consequences of SERT-mediated reuptake inhibition by SRIs like fluoxetine in humans and of genetically engineered changes in mice and rats), it seems likely that SLC6A4 and SERT will remain areas of high interest in our field's attempts to better understand and treat 5-HT-related disorders.
Objectives: Multiple, chronic and repeated trauma exposure in childhood is associated with adverse mental health outcomes in adulthood. In this paper we synthesise the literature on epigenetic modifications in childhood trauma (CT) and the mediating effects of differential epigenetic mechanisms on the association between CT and the later onset of psychiatric disorders.Methods: We reviewed the literature up to March 2018 in four databases: PubMed, Web of Science, EBSCOhost and SCOPUS. Non-human studies were excluded. All studies investigating CT exposure both in healthy adults (18 years and older) and adults with psychiatric disorders were included.Results: Thirty-six publications were included. For mood disorders, methylation of the glucocorticoid receptor NR3C1 gene, specifically at the NGFI-A binding site in exon 1F, and correlation with CT was a robust finding. Several studies documented differential methylation of SLC6A4, BDNF, OXTR and FKBP5 in association with CT. Common pathways identified include neuronal functioning and maintenance, immune and inflammatory processes, chromatin and histone modification, and transcription factor binding.Conclusions: A variety of epigenetic mediators that lie on a common pathway between CT and psychiatric disorders have been identified, although longitudinal studies and consistency in methodological approach are needed to disentangle cause and effect associations.
5HTTLPR, which is the trivial name for a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism mapped to the 5' region of the SLC6A4 (serotonin transporter protein) gene, is one of the most studied variants with respect to psychiatric traits. It is also widely studied in the context of intermediate phenotypes such as neuroimaging measures, and gene-by-environment interaction, the latter generally in the context of affective and anxiety phenotypes. In this article, the author discusses the importance of the variant in the context of a population genetics article published in Human Genetics sixteen years ago.
Aggressive behavior can have adaptive value in certain environmental contexts, but when extreme or executed inappropriately, can also lead to maladaptive outcomes. Neurogenetic studies performed in nonhuman primates have shown that genetic variation that impacts reward sensitivity, impulsivity, and anxiety can contribute to individual differences in aggressive behavior. Genetic polymorphisms in the coding or promoter regions of the Mu-Opioid Receptor (OPRM1), Corticotropin Releasing Hormone (CRH), Monoamine Oxidase A (MAOA), Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4), and Serotonin Transporter (SLC6A4) genes have been shown to be functionally similar in humans and rhesus macaques and have been demonstrated to contribute to individual differences in aggression. This body of literature suggests mechanisms by which genetic variation that promotes aggressivity could simultaneously increase evolutionary success while making modern humans more vulnerable to psychopathology.
There is growing interest in integrating cognitive and genetic models of depression risk. We review two ways in which these models can be meaningfully integrated. First, information-processing biases may represent intermediate phenotypes for specific genetic influences. These genetic influences may represent main effects on specific cognitive processes or may moderate the impact of environmental influences on information-processing biases. Second, cognitive and genetic influences may combine to increase reactivity to environmental stressors, increasing risk for depression in a genexcognitionxenvironment model of risk. There is now growing support for both of these ways of integrating cognitive and genetic models of depression risk. Specifically, there is support for genetic influences on information-processing biases, particularly the link between 5-HTTLPR and attentional biases, from both genetic association and genexenvironment (GxE) studies. There is also initial support for genexcognitionxenvironment models of risk in which specific genetic influences contribute to increased reactivity to environmental influences. We review this research and discuss important areas of future research, particularly the need for larger samples that allow for a broader examination of genetic and epigenetic influences as well as the combined influence of variability across a number of genes.
INTRODUCTION: Serotonin is highly implicated in the regulation of emotional state and the execution of cognitive tasks, so much so that the serotonin transporter genes (5-HTT, SLC6A4) and the serotonin receptor genes (HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A) have become the perfect candidates when studying the effects that these genes and their polymorphic variations have on depression characteristics. OBJECTIVE: A review of research reports that have studied the effects of variations in the serotonin transporter and receptor genes on different clinical features of depression. METHODS: A search of the Scopus, Web of Science and PubMed databases was conducted using the keywords ("depression" AND "polymorphism"). CONCLUSIONS: According to the review of 54 articles, the short allele of the 5-HTTLPR polymorphism was found to be the most reported risk factor related to the development of depression and its severity. Variations in the genes studied (SLC6A4, HTR1A, HTR2A) can generate morphological alterations of brain structures.
Mutations in the human creatine transporter 1 (CRT1/SLC6A8) cause the creatine transporter deficiency syndrome, which is characterized by intellectual disability, epilepsy, autism, and developmental delay. The vast majority of mutations cause protein misfolding and hence reduce cell surface expression. Hence, it is important to understand the molecular machinery supporting folding and export of CRT1 from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). All other SLC6 members thus far investigated rely on a C-terminal motif for binding the COPII-component SEC24 to drive their ER export; their N-termini are dispensable. Here, we show that, in contrast, in CRT1 the C-terminal ER-export motif is cryptic and it is the N-terminus, which supports ER export. This conclusion is based on the following observations: (i) siRNA-induced depletion of individual SEC24 isoforms revealed that CRT1 relied on SEC24C for ER export. However, mutations of the C-terminal canonical ER-export motif of CRT1 did not impair its cell surface delivery. (ii) Nevertheless, the C-terminal motif of CRT1 was operational in a chimeric protein comprising the serotonin transporter (SERT/SLC6A4) and the C-terminus of CRT1. (iii) Tagging of the N-terminus-but not the C-terminus-with yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) resulted in ER retention. (iv) Serial truncations of the N-terminus showed that removal of >/=51 residues of CRT1 impaired surface delivery, because the truncated CRT1 were confined to the ER. (v) Mutation of P51 to alanine also reduced cell surface delivery of CRT1 and relieved its dependence on SEC24C. Thus, the ER-export motif in the N-terminus of CRT1 overrides the canonical C-terminal motif.
Recent evidence enriches our understanding of the molecular sites of action of cocaine reward and locomotor stimulation. Dopamine transporter blockade by cocaine appears a sufficient explanation for cocaine-induced locomotion. Variation in DAT appears to cause differences in locomotion without drug stimulation. However, previously-held views that DAT blockade was the sole site for cocaine reward have been replaced by a richer picture of multitransporter involvement with the rewarding and aversive actions of cocaine. These new insights, derived from studies of knockout mice with simultaneous deletions and/or blockade of multiple transporters, provide a novel model for the rewarding action of this heavily-abused substance and implicate multiple monoamine systems in cocaine's hedonic activities.
DNA methylation is a fundamental epigenetic modification in the human genome; pivotal in development, genomic imprinting, X inactivation, chromosome stability, gene expression and methylation aberrations are involved in an array of human diseases. Methylation at promoters is associated with transcriptional repression, whereas gene body methylation is generally associated with gene expression. Extrinsic factors such as age, diets and lifestyle affect DNA methylation which consequently alters gene expression. Stress, anxiety, depression, life satisfaction, emotion among numerous other psychological factors also modify DNA methylation patterns. This correlation is frequently investigated in four candidate genes; NR3C1, SLC6A4, BDNF and OXTR, since regulation of these genes directly impact responses to social situations, stress, threats, behaviour and neural functions. Such studies underpin the hypothesis that DNA methylation is involved in deviant human behaviour, psychological and psychiatric conditions. These candidate genes may be targeted in future to assess the correlation between methylation, social experiences and long-term behavioural phenotypes in humans; and may potentially serve as biomarkers for therapeutic intervention.
