Sodium- and chloride-dependent glycine transporter 1; Terminates the action of glycine by its high affinity sodium- dependent reuptake into presynaptic terminals. May play a role in regulation of glycine levels in NMDA receptor-mediated neurotransmission.
Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) is the most common form of spinal deformity, affecting millions of adolescents worldwide, but it lacks a defined theory of etiopathogenesis. Because of this, treatment of AIS is limited to bracing and/or invasive surgery after onset. Preonset diagnosis or preventive treatment remains unavailable. Here, we performed a genetic analysis of a large multicenter AIS cohort and identified disease-causing and predisposing variants of SLC6A9 in multigeneration families, trios, and sporadic patients. Variants of SLC6A9, which encodes glycine transporter 1 (GLYT1), reduced glycine-uptake activity in cells, leading to increased extracellular glycine levels and aberrant glycinergic neurotransmission. Slc6a9 mutant zebrafish exhibited discoordination of spinal neural activities and pronounced lateral spinal curvature, a phenotype resembling human patients. The penetrance and severity of curvature were sensitive to the dosage of functional glyt1. Administration of a glycine receptor antagonist or a clinically used glycine neutralizer (sodium benzoate) partially rescued the phenotype. Our results indicate a neuropathic origin for "idiopathic" scoliosis, involving the dysfunction of synaptic neurotransmission and central pattern generators (CPGs), potentially a common cause of AIS. Our work further suggests avenues for early diagnosis and intervention of AIS in preadolescents.
Metabolites in the tumor microenvironment are a critical factor for tumor progression. However, the lack of knowledge about the metabolic profile in the bone marrow (BM) microenvironment of multiple myeloma (MM) limits our understanding of MM progression. Here, we show that the glycine concentration in the BM microenvironment is elevated due to bone collagen degradation mediated by MM cell-secreted matrix metallopeptidase 13 (MMP13), while the elevated glycine level is linked to MM progression. MM cells utilize the channel protein solute carrier family 6 member 9 (SLC6A9) to absorb extrinsic glycine subsequently involved in the synthesis of glutathione (GSH) and purines. Inhibiting glycine utilization via SLC6A9 knockdown or the treatment with betaine suppresses MM cell proliferation and enhances the effects of bortezomib on MM cells. Together, we identify glycine as a key metabolic regulator of MM, unveil molecular mechanisms governing MM progression, and provide a promising therapeutic strategy for MM treatment.
OBJECTIVE: Suicidal behavior is heritable and is a major cause of death worldwide. Two large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWASs) recently discovered and cross-validated genome-wide significant (GWS) loci for suicide attempt (SA). The present study leveraged the genetic cohorts from both studies to conduct the largest GWAS meta-analysis of SA to date. Multi-ancestry and admixture-specific meta-analyses were conducted within groups of significant African, East Asian, and European ancestry admixtures. METHODS: This study comprised 22 cohorts, including 43,871 SA cases and 915,025 ancestry-matched controls. Analytical methods across multi-ancestry and individual ancestry admixtures included inverse variance-weighted fixed-effects meta-analyses, followed by gene, gene-set, tissue-set, and drug-target enrichment, as well as summary-data-based Mendelian randomization with brain expression quantitative trait loci data, phenome-wide genetic correlation, and genetic causal proportion analyses. RESULTS: Multi-ancestry and European ancestry admixture GWAS meta-analyses identified 12 risk loci at p values <5x10(-8). These loci were mostly intergenic and implicated DRD2, SLC6A9, FURIN, NLGN1, SOX5, PDE4B, and CACNG2. The multi-ancestry SNP-based heritability estimate of SA was 5.7% on the liability scale (SE=0.003, p=5.7x10(-80)). Significant brain tissue gene expression and drug set enrichment were observed. There was shared genetic variation of SA with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, smoking, and risk tolerance after conditioning SA on both major depressive disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder. Genetic causal proportion analyses implicated shared genetic risk for specific health factors. CONCLUSIONS: This multi-ancestry analysis of suicide attempt identified several loci contributing to risk and establishes significant shared genetic covariation with clinical phenotypes. These findings provide insight into genetic factors associated with suicide attempt across ancestry admixture populations, in veteran and civilian populations, and in attempt versus death.
The glycine transporter 1 (GlyT1) plays a crucial role in the regulation of both inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmission by removing glycine from the synaptic cleft. Given its close association with glutamate/glycine co-activated NMDA receptors (NMDARs), GlyT1 has emerged as a central target for the treatment of schizophrenia, which is often linked to hypofunctional NMDARs. Here, we report the cryo-EM structures of GlyT1 bound with substrate glycine and drugs ALX-5407, SSR504734, and PF-03463275. These structures, captured at three fundamental states of the transport cycle-outward-facing, occluded, and inward-facing-enable us to illustrate a comprehensive blueprint of the conformational change associated with glycine reuptake. Additionally, we identified three specific pockets accommodating drugs, providing clear insights into the structural basis of their inhibitory mechanism and selectivity. Collectively, these structures offer significant insights into the transport mechanism and recognition of substrate and anti-schizophrenia drugs, thus providing a platform to design small molecules to treat schizophrenia.
Mechanistic and structural studies of membrane proteins require their stabilization in specific conformations. Single domain antibodies are potent reagents for this purpose, but their generation relies on immunizations, which impedes selections in the presence of ligands typically needed to populate defined conformational states. To overcome this key limitation, we developed an in vitro selection platform based on synthetic single domain antibodies named sybodies. To target the limited hydrophilic surfaces of membrane proteins, we designed three sybody libraries that exhibit different shapes and moderate hydrophobicity of the randomized surface. A robust binder selection cascade combining ribosome and phage display enabled the generation of conformation-selective, high affinity sybodies against an ABC transporter and two previously intractable human SLC transporters, GlyT1 and ENT1. The platform does not require access to animal facilities and builds exclusively on commercially available reagents, thus enabling every lab to rapidly generate binders against challenging membrane proteins.
Glycine transporters (GlyTs) are Na(+)/Cl(-)-dependent neurotransmitter transporters, responsible for l-glycine uptake into the central nervous system. GlyTs are members of the solute carrier family 6 (SLC6) and comprise glycine transporter type 1 (SLC6A9; GlyT1) and glycine transporter type 2 (SLC6A5; Glyt2). GlyT1 and GlyT2 are expressed on both astrocytes and neurons, but their expression pattern in brain tissue is foremost related to neurotransmission. GlyT2 is markedly expressed in brainstem, spinal cord and cerebellum, where it is responsible for glycine uptake into glycinergic and GABAergic terminals. GlyT1 is abundant in neocortex, thalamus and hippocampus, where it is expressed in astrocytes, and involved in glutamatergic neurotransmission. Consequently, inhibition of GlyT1 transporters can modulate glutamatergic neurotransmission through NMDA receptors, suggesting an alternative therapeutic strategy. In this review, we focus on recent progress in the understanding of GlyTs role in brain function and in various diseases, such as epilepsy, hyperekplexia, neuropathic pain, drug addiction, schizophrenia and stroke, as well as in neurodegenerative disorders.
Glycine encephalopathy with normal serum glycine (MIM #617301), also known as GLYT1 encephalopathy, is an extremely rare disorder caused by biallelic variants in SLC6A9 and characterised by facial dysmorphic features, skeletal findings including contractures, knee hyperextension, and joint dislocations and seizures. To date, only ten patients from five families have been reported and only two of them could survive until childhood. In this study, we report on a consanguineous Turkish couple with a history of six pregnancies with three habitual abortions and three postpartum exitus. While in three pregnancies the babies were born prematurely at 32nd gestational week by emergency ceserean section due to hydrops and fetal distress, the other pregnancy was medically terminated at 16th gestational week due to absent fetal heart activity. The product of all these three pregnancies exhibited similar phenotype including short neck, thoracic kyphosis, hypertrichosis, joint contractures and dislocations, hypertonia, knee hyperextension and facial dysmorphic features. Trio exome sequencing was performed prenatally during the last pregnancy and a novel VUS variant in SLC6A9 and a likely pathogenic variant in MTOR gene were detected. DNA isolation was performed from frozen muscle and adrenal tissue of previously autopsied fetuses with similar clinical features, and the same variants were confirmed in both of them. Our data suggest that SLC6A9 and MTOR variants may be responsible for this extremely lethal phenotype in this family.
The human glycine transporter 1 (GlyT1) regulates glycine-mediated neuronal excitation and inhibition through the sodium- and chloride-dependent reuptake of glycine(1-3). Inhibition of GlyT1 prolongs neurotransmitter signalling, and has long been a key strategy in the development of therapies for a broad range of disorders of the central nervous system, including schizophrenia and cognitive impairments(4). Here, using a synthetic single-domain antibody (sybody) and serial synchrotron crystallography, we have determined the structure of GlyT1 in complex with a benzoylpiperazine chemotype inhibitor at 3.4 A resolution. We find that the inhibitor locks GlyT1 in an inward-open conformation and binds at the intracellular gate of the release pathway, overlapping with the glycine-release site. The inhibitor is likely to reach GlyT1 from the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane. Our results define the mechanism of inhibition and enable the rational design of new, clinically efficacious GlyT1 inhibitors.
The aim of the investigation was to test whether genetic variants predicted to impair the functionality of SLC6A9, which codes for the GlyT-1 glycine transporter, are protective against schizophrenia. In an exome sequenced sample of 4225 schizophrenia cases and 5834 controls, variants occurring in SLC6A9 were annotated and weights were assigned using GENEVARASSOC. Genotype counts were compared using SCOREASSOC. Variants predicted to be deleterious by SIFT and damaging by PolyPhen were examined. Genotypes at 1:44466494-G/A seemed likely to be erroneous. If these were ignored then there were 15 damaging variants in controls and five in cases. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that variants which damage SLC6A9 are protective against schizophrenia but a larger sample would be required to confirm this.
Although early clinical observations implicated dopamine dysfunction in the neuropathology of schizophrenia, accumulating evidence suggests that multiple neurotransmitter pathways are dysregulated. The psychotomimetic actions of NMDA receptor antagonists point to an imbalance of glutamatergic signaling. Encouragingly, numerous preclinical and clinical studies have elucidated several potential targets for increasing NMDA receptor function and equilibrating glutamatergic tone, including the metabotropic glutamate receptors 2, 3 and 5, the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors M(1) and M(4), and the glycine transporter GlyT1. Highly specific allosteric and orthosteric ligands have been developed that modify the activity of these novel target proteins, and in this review we summarize both the glutamatergic mechanisms and the novel compounds that are increasing the promise for a multifaceted pharmacological approach to treat schizophrenia.
INTRODUCTION: Numerous research groups have developed GlyT-1 inhibitors in the pursuit of providing a novel antipsychotic treatment for schizophrenia. Despite multiple compounds advancing into clinical trials, a GlyT-1 inhibitor has yet to emerge to treat patients. However, the approach remains heavily investigated as it presents potential therapeutic utility for several other CNS and non-CNS-related indications. AREAS COVERED: This review discusses various GlyT-1 inhibitor chemotypes identified and provides an overview of patent applications filed and published during the period of 2011-2016. The review largely focuses on composition of matter patent applications, although two recently disclosed method of use patents are discussed. Clinical reports are also disseminated. EXPERT OPINION: Mounting clinical failures with schizophrenic patients have blunted enthusiasm for GlyT-1 inhibition as an approach to treat the disease. However, research in the area remains quite active, as therapeutic potential for several additional indications has emerged. There are numerous and diverse GlyT-1 chemotypes now available that exhibit differentiating modes of binding and ligand-target binding kinetics, and this rich diversity of chemical matter may help further elucidate the target's pharmacological role in various indications and lead to the identification of a compound with optimal properties that may someday become a drug.
GLYT1 encephalopathy is a form of glycine encephalopathy caused by disturbance of glycine transport. The phenotypic spectrum of the disease has not yet been completely described, as only four unrelated families with the disorder have been reported to date. Common features of affected patients include neonatal hypotonia, respiratory failure, encephalopathy, myoclonic jerks, dysmorphic features, and musculoeskeletal anomalies. All reported affected patients harbor biallelic genetic variants in SLC6A9. SNP array together with Sanger sequencing were performed in a newborn with arthrogryposis and severe neurological impairment. The novel genetic variant c.997delC in SLC6A9 was detected in homozygous state in the patient. At protein level, the predicted change is p.(Arg333Alafs*3), which most probably results in a loss of protein function. The variant cosegregated with the disease in the family. A subsequent pregnancy with ultrasound anomalies was also affected. The proband presented the core phenotypic features of GLYT1 encephalopathy, but also a burst suppression pattern on the electroencephalogram, a clinical feature not previously associated with the disorder. Our results suggest that the appearance of this pattern correlates with higher cerebrospinal fluid glycine levels and cerebrospinal fluid/plasma glycine ratios. A detailed discussion on the possible pathophysiological mechanisms of the disorder is also provided.
Skin is one of the most exposed organs to external stress. Namely, UV rays are the most harmful stress that could induce important damage leading to skin aging and cancers. At the cellular level, senescence is observed in several skin cell types and contributes to skin aging. However, the origin of skin senescent cells is still unclear but is probably related to exposure to stresses. In this work, we developed an in vitro model of UVB-induced premature senescence in normal human epidermal keratinocytes. UVB-induced senescent keratinocytes display a common senescent phenotype resulting in an irreversible cell cycle arrest, an increase in the proportion of senescence-associated beta-galactosidase‒positive cells, unrepaired DNA damage, and a long-term DNA damage response activation. Moreover, UVB-induced senescent keratinocytes secrete senescence-associated secretory phenotype factors that influence cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma cell migration. Finally, a global transcriptomic study highlighted that senescent keratinocytes present a decrease in the expression of several amino acid transporters, which is associated with reduced intracellular levels of glycine, alanine, and leucine. Interestingly, the chemical inhibition of the glycine transporter SLC6A9/Glyt1 triggers senescence features.
AIM: We previously identified a quantitative trait locus (QTL) on rat chromosome 5 that appeared to be primarily controlled by the sympathetic nervous system. Because sympathetic overactivity is related to hypertension, solute carrier family 6, member 9 (SLC6A9) is a candidate gene for the connection of this QTL with blood pressure regulation. In the present study, we therefore explored the role of SLC6A9 genetic variations in human essential hypertension (EH). METHODS: We evaluated three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs2286245, rs3791124 and rs2486001) in 758 essential hypertension patients and 726 controls. Polymorphism-related genotypes were determined with TaqMan assays. RESULTS: The allelic frequency of rs2286245 (C versus T, p=0.032) showed significant differences between EH and normotensive controls (NT) groups. The genotypic distribution of rs3791124 in its dominant model (AA+GA versus GG, p=0.027) also showed significant differences between EH and NT groups. The genotype and allele distributions of rs2486001 did not exhibit any significant differences. CONCLUSION: We found an association between SLC6A9 gene polymorphisms and essential hypertension in a Japanese population, suggesting that SLC6A9 is a susceptibility locus for essential hypertension.
Differentiating the aetiology of thrombocytosis is limited yet crucial in patients with essential thrombocythaemia (ET). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate haematopoiesis and lineage commitment; aberrant expression of miRNAs plays an important role in myeloproliferative neoplasms. However, the miRNA profile has been poorly explored in ET patients compared to patients with reactive thrombocytosis (RT). A total of 9 samples, including 5 ET patient samples, 2 RT patient samples, and 2 healthy control samples, were analysed in this study. We produced 81.43 million reads from transcripts and 59.60 million reads from small RNAs. We generated a comprehensive miRNA-mRNA regulatory network and identified unique 14 miRNA expression patterns associated with ET. Among the 14 miRNAs, miR-1268a was downregulated in ET and showed an inverse correlation with its 8 putative target genes, including genes associated with thrombus formation and platelet activation (CDH6, EHD2, FUT1, KIF26A, LINC00346, PTPRN, SERF1A, and SLC6A9). Principal component analysis (PCA) showed ET and non-ET groups well clustered in space, suggesting each group had a distinctive expression pattern of mRNAs and miRNAs. These results suggest that the significant dysregulation of miR-1268a and its 8 target genes could be a unique expression of platelet mi-RNAs and miRNA/mRNA regulatory network in ET patients.
Glycine acts as an inhibitory neurotransmitter at glycine receptor (GlyR)-enriched synapses and as an obligatory co-agonist at the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, where it facilitates neuronal excitation. Two high-affinity and substrate selective transporters, glycine transporter-1 and glycine transporter-2 (GlyT-1 and GlyT-2), regulate extracellular glycine concentrations within the CNS and as such, play critical roles in maintaining a balance between inhibitory and excitatory neurotransmission. GlyT-1 inhibition has been extensively examined as a potential means by which to treat several CNS disorders that include schizophrenia, depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), and addiction. More recently, preclinical studies have emerged that indicate the approach may also promote neuroprotection, provide a pharmacotherapeutic strategy for autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), and treat symptomology associated with pain, Parkinson's disease, and epilepsy. This review examines the pharmacological aspects of GlyT-1 inhibition and describes drug discovery and development efforts toward the identification of novel inhibitors.
Recent studies have indicated that long non-coding RNAs play crucial roles in numerous cancers, including thyroid cancer, while their function in the mechanism of thyroid cancer 131I resistance has not been elucidated to date. The present study identified a functional long non-coding RNA, SLC6A9-5:2, which was involved in the radioactive therapy resistance of thyroid cancer. We demonstrated that SLC6A9-5:2 was remarkably downregulated in 131I-resistant thyroid cancer cell lines and 131I-insensitive patients and was positively correlated with Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) expression and its activation. After downregulating SLC6A9 or blocking PARP-1 artificially, the sensitive thyroid cancer cells mostly displayed a tolerant phenotype under 131I exposure. Furthermore, SLC6A9-5:2 overexpression was positively correlated with PARP-1 mRNA and protein levels, which restored the sensitivity of resistant thyroid cancer cells. The present study further revealed that cancer cell death was primarily caused by ATP exhaustion in excessive DNA repair with high PARP-1 activity. In patients with thyroid cancer, a positive correlation between SLC6A9-5:2 and PARP-1 was identified, and low SLC6A9-5:2 expression was associated with a worse prognosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Hence, our data provide a new lncRNA-mediated regulatory mechanism implying that SLC6A9-5:2 can be used as a novel therapeutic target for 131I-resistant thyroid cancer.
Molecular biomarkers for antipsychotic treatments have been conceptually linked to the measurements of dopamine functions, mostly D(2) receptor occupancy, either by imaging using selective PET/SPECT radioactive tracers or by assessing plasma prolactin levels. A quest for novel biomarkers was recently proposed by various academic, health service, and industrial institutions driven by the need for better treatments of psychoses. In this review we conceptualize biomarkers within the Translational Medicine paradigm whose goal was to provide support to critical decision-making in drug discovery. At first we focused on biomarkers as outcome measure of clinical studies by searching into the database clinicaltrial.gov. The results were somewhat disappointing, showing that out of 1,659 antipsychotic trials only 18 used a biomarker as an outcome measure. Several of these trials targeted plasma lipids as sentinel marker for metabolic adverse effects associated with the use of atypical antipsychotics, while only few studies were aimed to new disease specific biological markers. As an example of a mechanistic biomarker, we described the work done to progress the novel class of glycine transporter inhibitors as putative treatment for negative symptoms of schizophrenia. We also review how large-scale multiplex biological assays were applied to samples from tissues of psychiatric patients, so to learn from changes of numerous analytes (metabolic products, lipids, proteins, RNA transcripts) about the substrates involved in the disease. We concluded that a stringent implementation of these techniques could contribute to the endophenotypic characterization of patients, helping in the identification of key biomarkers to drive personalized medicine and new treatment development.
Glycine constitutes a major inhibitory neurotransmitter predominantly in caudal regions of the CNS. The extracellular glycine concentration is regulated synergistically by two high affinity, large capacity transporters GlyT1 and GlyT2. Both proteins are encoded by single genes SLC6A9 and SLC6A5, respectively. Mutations within the SLC6A5 gene encoding for GlyT2 have been demonstrated to be causative for hyperekplexia (OMIM #614618), a complex neuromuscular disease, in humans. In contrast, mutations within the SLC6A9 gene encoding for GlyT1 have been associated with GlyT1 encephalopathy (OMIM #601019), a disease causing severe postnatal respiratory deficiency, muscular hypotonia and arthrogryposis. The consequences of the respective GlyT1 mutations on the function of the transporter protein, however, have not yet been analysed. In this study we present the functional characterisation of three previously published GlyT1 mutations, two mutations predicted to cause truncation of GlyT1 (GlyT1(Q573)* and GlyT1(K310F+fs)*(31)) and one predicted to cause an amino acid exchange within transmembrane domain 7 of the transporter (GlyT1(S407G)), that are associated with GlyT1 encephalopathy. Additionally, the characterization of a novel mutation predicted to cause an amino acid exchange within transmembrane domain 1 (GlyT1(V118M)) identified in two fetuses showing increased nuchal translucency and arthrogryposis in routine ultrasound scans is demonstrated. We show that in recombinant systems the two presumably truncating mutations resulted in an intracellular retained GlyT1 protein lacking the intracellular C-terminal domain. In both cases this truncated protein did not show any residual transport activity. The point mutations, hGlyT1(S407G) and hGlyT1(V118M), were processed correctly, but showed severely diminished activity, thus constituting a functional knock-out in-vivo. Taken together our data demonstrate that all analysed mutations of GlyT1 that have been identified in GlyT1 encephalopathy patients cause severe impairment of transporter function. This is consistent with the idea that loss of GlyT1 function is indeed causal for the disease phenotype.
The earliest stages of preimplantation embryos are particularly sensitive to increased osmolarity, even within the physiological range. This sensitivity contributed to persistent developmental arrest, even when embryos were cultured in vitro in older, conditioned culture media, and seems to arise when embryos at the 1- and 2-cell stages accumulate inorganic ions used for cell volume homeostasis at too high a level, through activation of coupled Na(+)/H(+) and HCO(3)-/Cl(-) exchange. Such accumulation of inorganic ions can be disruptive since, above a certain level, the increased ionic strength disrupts cellular biochemistry and macromolecular functions and alters membrane potential. To counter this, embryos have evolved mechanisms of cell volume regulation that are unique to early preimplantation embryogenesis. The primary role of these is glycine accumulation via the GLYT1 transporter, with a secondary contribution by betaine accumulation via the SIT1 transporter. Independent cell-volume regulation first arises in the oocyte only after ovulation is triggered, when the strong oocyte-zona pellucida adhesion present in germinal vesicle stage oocytes in the ovarian follicle is released and GLYT1 becomes activated to begin accumulating glycine. Open questions still remain regarding how these processes are regulated.
