Inactive sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT3; Does not show neutral amino acid transporter activity.
The neutral amino acid transporter subfamily that consists of six members, consecutively SLC6A15-SLC620, also called orphan transporters, represents membrane, sodium-dependent symporter proteins that belong to the family of solute carrier 6 (SLC6). Primarily, they mediate the transport of neutral amino acids from the extracellular milieu toward cell or storage vesicles utilizing an electric membrane potential as the driving force. Orphan transporters are widely distributed throughout the body, covering many systems; for instance, the central nervous, renal, or intestinal system, supplying cells into molecules used in biochemical, signaling, and building pathways afterward. They are responsible for intestinal absorption and renal reabsorption of amino acids. In the central nervous system, orphan transporters constitute a significant medium for the provision of neurotransmitter precursors. Diseases related with aforementioned transporters highlight their significance; SLC6A19 mutations are associated with metabolic Hartnup disorder, whereas altered expression of SLC6A15 has been associated with a depression/stress-related disorders. Mutations of SLC6A18-SLCA20 cause iminoglycinuria and/or hyperglycinuria. SLC6A18-SLC6A20 to reach the cellular membrane require an ancillary unit ACE2 that is a molecular target for the spike protein of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. SLC6A19 has been proposed as a molecular target for the treatment of metabolic disorders resembling gastric surgery bypass. Inhibition of SLC6A15 appears to have a promising outcome in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. SLC6A19 and SLC6A20 have been suggested as potential targets in the treatment of COVID-19. In this review, we gathered recent advances on orphan transporters, their structure, functions, related disorders, and diseases, and in particular their relevance as therapeutic targets. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: The following review systematizes current knowledge about the SLC6A15-SLCA20 neutral amino acid transporter subfamily and their therapeutic relevance in the treatment of different diseases.
Isolated hyperglycinuria is a rare disorder that is associated with osteoporosis and renal calculi. We report findings in a middle-aged, black woman who presented for renal function evaluation with a history of transient hypobicarbonataemia associated with topiramate therapy. She displayed the full triad of high urinary glycine, early-onset osteopenia despite normal reproductive hormones, and renal calculus with high urinary oxalate, phosphate and uric acid. Parathyroid hormone and fibroblast growth factor 23 were both normal. Formal genetic testing did not reveal mutations in SLC6A20, SLC6A18, SLC6A19, SLC36A2, the known genes associated with glycinuria; however, black individuals are poorly represented in the genetic databases. It may well be that otherwise unidentified mutations may be present or that topiramate may result in a lingering proximal tubule defect even after cessation of the drug.
Near complete reabsorption of filtered amino acids is a main specialized transport function of the kidney proximal tubule. This evolutionary conserved task is carried out by a subset of luminal and basolateral transporters that together form the transcellular amino acid transport machinery similar to that of small intestine. A number of other amino acid transporters expressed in the basolateral membrane of proximal kidney tubule cells subserve either specialized metabolic functions, such as the production of ammonium, or are part of the cellular housekeeping equipment. A new finding is that the luminal Na(+)-dependent neutral amino acid transporters of the SLC6 family require an associated protein for their surface expression as shown for the Hartnup transporter B(0)AT1 (SLC6A19) and suggested for the L: -proline transporter SIT1 (IMINO(B), SLC6A20) and for B(0)AT3 (XT2, SLC6A18). This accessory subunit called collectrin (TMEM27) is homologous to the transmembrane anchor region of the renin-angiotensin system enzyme ACE2 that we have shown to function in small intestine as associated subunit of the luminal SLC6 transporters B(0)AT1 and SIT1. Some mutations of B(0)AT1 differentially interact with these accessory subunits, providing an explanation for differential intestinal phenotypes among Hartnup patients. The basolateral efflux of numerous amino acids from kidney tubular cells is mediated by heteromeric amino acid transporters that function as obligatory exchangers. Thus, other transporters within the same membrane need to mediate the net efflux of exchange substrates, controlling thereby the net basolateral amino transport and thus the intracellular amino acid concentration.
Cri-du-chat (CdC) is a 5p chromosomal deletion syndrome. CdC has numerous systemic associations but only a few ocular manifestations have been documented. In this report we present novel ocular findings of peripheral avascular retina and retinal hemorrhages in a full-term female infant, born to non-consanguineous parents, who had clinical features of cri-du-chat syndrome and genetic confirmation. The retinal hemorrhages resolved. However, the temporal avascular retina in our full-term patient remained. Further analysis of the 5p locus showed 3 genes: CTNND2, SEMA5A and SLC6A18 that not only fit our patient's external phenotype and ophthalmoscopic findings of retinal hemorrhages, but were also key in proper ocular development and neurogenesis, suggesting a genetic contribution by the short-arm of chromosome 5 to proper retinal maturation. Given these findings and their association with cri-du-chat, special attention on screening examinations should include a thorough evaluation of retinal vascularization in CdC patients, even in full-term neonates.
Prostate adenocarcinoma is one of the leading adult malignancies. Identification of multiple causative biomarkers is necessary and helpful for determining the occurrence and prognosis of prostate adenocarcinoma. We aimed to identify the potential prognostic genes in the prostate adenocarcinoma microenvironment and to estimate the causal effects simultaneously. We obtained the gene expression data of prostate adenocarcinoma from TCGA project and identified the differentially expressed genes based on immune-stromal components. Among these genes, 68 were associated with biochemical recurrence at 3 years after prostatectomy in prostate adenocarcinoma. After adjusting for the minimal sets of confounding covariates, 14 genes (TNFRSF4, ZAP70, ERMN, CXCL5, SPINK6, SLC6A18, CHRM2, TG, CLLU1OS, POSTN, CTSG, NETO1, CEACAM7, and IGLV3-22) related to the microenvironment were identified as prognostic biomarkers using the targeted maximum likelihood estimation. Both the average and individual causal effects were obtained to measure the magnitude of the effect. CIBERSORT and gene set enrichment analyses showed that these prognostic genes were mainly associated with immune responses. POSTN and NETO1 were correlated with androgen receptor expression, a main driver of prostate adenocarcinoma progression. Finally, five genes were validated in another prostate adenocarcinoma cohort (GEO: GSE70770). These findings might lead to the improved prognosis of prostate adenocarcinoma.
BACKGROUND: Urea is the major end-product of protein metabolism in mammals. In carnivores and omnivores, a large load of urea is excreted daily in urine, with a concentration that is 30-100 times above that in plasma. This is important for the sake of water economy. Too little attention has been given to the existence of energy-dependent urea transport that plays an important role in this concentrating activity. SUMMARY: This review first presents functional evidence for an energy-dependent urea secretion that occurs exclusively in the straight part of the proximal tubule (PST). Second, it proposes a candidate transmembrane transporter responsible for this urea secretion in the PST. SLC6A18 is expressed exclusively in the PST and has been identified as a glycine transporter, based on findings in SLC6A18 knockout mice. We propose that it is actually a glycine/urea antiport, secreting urea into the lumen in exchange for glycine and Na. Glycine is most likely recycled back into the cell via a transporter located in the brush border. Urea secretion in the PST modifies the composition of the tubular fluid in the thick ascending limb and, thus, contributes, indirectly, to influence the "signal" at the macula densa that plays a crucial role in the regulation of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) by the tubulo-glomerular feedback. KEY MESSAGES: Taking into account this secondary active secretion of urea in the mammalian kidney provides a new understanding of the influence of protein intake on GFR, of the regulation of urea excretion, and of the urine-concentrating mechanism.
While genetic factors in all likelihood contribute to stress fracture (SF) pathogenesis, a few studies focusing on candidate genes have previously been reported. The objective of this study is to gain better understanding on the genetic basis of SF in a gene-naive manner. Exome sequence capture followed by massive parallel sequencing of two pooled DNA samples from Israeli combat soldiers was employed: cases with high grade SF and ethnically matched healthy controls. The resulting sequence variants were individually verified using the Sequenom platform and the contribution of the genetic alterations was validated in a second cohort of cases and controls. In the discovery set that included DNA pool of cases (n = 34) and controls (n = 60), a total of 1174 variants with >600 reads/variant/DNA pool were identified, and 146 (in 127 genes) of these exhibited statistically significant (P < 0.05) different rates between SF cases and controls after multiple comparisons correction. Subsequent validation of these 146 sequence variants individually in a total of 136 SF cases and 127 controls using the Sequenom platform validated 20/146 variants. Of these, three missense mutations (rs7426114, rs4073918, rs3752135 in the NEB, SLC6A18 and SIGLEC12 genes, respectively) and three synonymous mutations (rs2071856, rs2515941, rs716745 in the ELFN2, GRK4, LRRC55 genes) displayed significant different rates in SF cases compared with controls. Exome sequencing seemingly unravelled novel candidate genes as involved in SF pathogenesis and predisposition.
The brush-border membrane of the small intestine and kidney proximal tubule are the major sites for the absorption and re-absorption of nutrients in the body respectively. Transport of amino acids is mediated through the action of numerous secondary active transporters. In the mouse, neutral amino acids are transported by B(0)AT1 [broad neutral ((0)) amino acid transporter 1; SLC6A19 (solute carrier family 6 member 19)] in the intestine and by B(0)AT1 and B(0)AT3 (SLC6A18) in the kidney. Immunoprecipitation and Blue native electrophoresis of intestinal brush-border membrane proteins revealed that B(0)AT1 forms complexes with two peptidases, APN (aminopeptidase N/CD13) and ACE2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2). Physiological characterization of B(0)AT1 expressed together with these peptidases in Xenopus laevis oocytes revealed that APN increased the substrate affinity of the transporter up to 2.5-fold and also increased its surface expression (V(max)). Peptide competition experiments, in silico modelling and site-directed mutagenesis of APN suggest that the catalytic site of the peptidase is involved in the observed changes of B(0)AT1 apparent substrate affinity, possibly by increasing the local substrate concentration. These results provide evidence for the existence of B(0)AT1-containing digestive complexes in the brush-border membrane, interacting differentially with various peptidases, and responding to the dynamic needs of nutrient absorption in the intestine and kidney.
OBJECTIVE: SLC6A18 (solute carrier family 6, member 18) acts as a specific transporter for neurotransmitters, amino acids and osmolytes such as betaine, taurine and creatine. The aim of the present study was to investigate the relationship between the human SLC6A18 gene and myocardial infarction (MI) in a Japanese population. METHODS: Using 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms in the SLC6A18 gene (rs7728646, rs4975625, rs12522796, rs4975623 and rs7447815) we performed a case-control study based on each SNP and haplotype in 289 MI patients and 223 controls. RESULTS: Logistic regression analysis revealed that the frequency of the CC+CG genotype of rs7447815 was significantly higher in all patients and the male MI patients than in controls (P=0.005, P=0.036, respectively). The frequency of the T-C haplotype (rs7728646-rs7447815) was significantly higher for the MI patients when compared with controls (P=0.037). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that SLC6A18 or neighboring genes are associated with increased susceptibility to MI.
The orphan transporter Slc6a18 (XT2) is highly expressed at the luminal membrane of kidney proximal tubules and displays approximately 50% identity with Slc6a19 (B(0)AT1), which is the main neutral amino acid transporter in both kidney and small intestine. As yet, the amino acid transport function of XT2 has only been experimentally supported by the urinary glycine loss observed in xt2 null mice. We report here that in Xenopus laevis oocytes, co-expressed ACE2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) associates with XT2 and reveals its function as a Na(+)- and Cl(-)-de pend ent neutral amino acid transporter. In contrast to its association with ACE2 observed in Xenopus laevis oocytes, our experiments with ace2 and collectrin null mice demonstrate that in vivo it is Collectrin, a smaller homologue of ACE2, that is required for functional expression of XT2 in kidney. To assess the function of XT2 in vivo, we reanalyzed its knock-out mouse model after more than 10 generations of backcrossing into C57BL/6 background. In addition to the previously published glycinuria, we observed a urinary loss of several other amino acids, in particular beta-branched and small neutral ones. Using telemetry, we confirmed the previously described link of XT2 absence with hypertension but only in physically restrained animals. Taken together, our data indicate that the formerly orphan transporter XT2 functions as a sodium and chloride-de pend ent neutral amino acid transporter that we propose to rename B(0)AT3.
We report here the distribution of VNTRs (variable number of tandem repeats; minisatellites) and polymorphic analysis of SLC6A18, which is a member of the SLC6 Na(+)- and Cl(-)-dependent neurotransmitter transporter family. In this study, DNA was obtained from 300 unrelated individuals and 205 patients with essential hypertension (EH). We then analyzed the VNTRs in the genomic DNA by searching for minisatellites of SLC6A18 using the Tandem Repeat Finder program. Eight novel VNTRs were identified: five of which were polymorphic minisatellites (SLC6A18-MS1, -MS2, -MS4, -MS5, and -MS6) and three of which were monomorphic minisatellites (SLC6A18-MS3, -MS7, and -MS8). Next, we investigated the relationship between EH and four of the polymorphic minisatellites (SLC6A18-MS1, -MS2, -MS4, and -MS6). We excluded SLC6A18-MS5 from the common/rare allele analysis, because most individuals were heterozygous and hypervariable for this locus. There were no significant differences observed in the overall distribution of these minisatellites, which indicates that these polymorphisms are not responsible for EH susceptibility in the Korean population. A segregation analysis of the minisatellites in SLC6A18 was then conducted by analyzing genomic DNA obtained from two generations of five families and from three generations of two families. The five polymorphic minisatellites were transmitted through meiosis following Mendelian inheritance, which suggests that polymorphic minisatellites could be useful markers for paternity mapping and DNA fingerprinting. In summary, we discovered five novel VNTR polymorphisms in SLC6A18; however, these variations were not associated with EH.
Chromosomal imbalances resulting in altered gene dosage play a role in the molecular pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but the target genes remain to be identified. To identify early-stage genetic events that drive progression of NSCLC, we conducted a high-resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) study, using an array of 4,046 bacterial artificial chromosome clones to screen for DNA copy number changes associated with individual genes in 36 tumors obtained from patients in early stages of NSCLC. Multiple early genetic events occurring on chromosome 5p were identified, with a minimal detection region at 5p15.33 approximately 12. The most frequent finding involved gain of 5p15.33, observed in 15 of 19 stage I (A+B) cancers (79%) and in 28 of the total 36 NSCLC cases (78%). This locus harbors the genes TERT, SLC6A19, and SLC6A18 and is a telomeric boundary at bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone 91_J20. Other potential candidate genes evidencing high numbers of genomic copy number changes (> or =40% of patients) included the following genes, encountered in >50% of 19 stage I (A+B) cancers: CEP72 and TPPP (14 of 19; 74%); AHRR, EXOC3 (previously SEC6L1), SLC9A3, LOC442126, ZDHHC11, BRD9, and TRIP13 (13/19; 68%); and CLPTM1L (alias CRR9), SLC6A3 (previously DAT1), and LOC401169 (10/19; 53%). Fluorescence in situ hybridization validated the array CGH findings. The gain of 5p15.33 is thus one of the most consistent alterations in the early stages of lung cancer, and a series of genes in the critical 5p15.33 region may be used as novel biomarkers for the early detection and classification of lung cancer.
Myopia is one of the most common ocular disorders in the world, yet the genetic etiology of the disease remains poorly understood. Specialized founder populations, such as the Pennsylvania Amish, provide the opportunity to utilize exclusive genomic architecture, like unique haplotypes, to better understand the genetic causes of myopia. We perform genetic linkage analysis on Pennsylvania Amish families that have a strong familial history of myopia to map any potential causal variants and genes for the disease. 293 individuals from 25 extended families were genotyped on the Illumina ExomePlus array and merged with previous microsatellite data. We coded myopia affection as a binary phenotype; myopia was defined as having a mean spherical equivalent (MSE) of less than or equal to - 1 D (diopters). Two-point and multipoint parametric linkage analyses were performed under an autosomal dominant model. When allowing for locus heterogeneity, we identified two novel genome-wide significantly linked variants at 12q15 (heterogeneity LOD, HLOD = 3.77) in PTPRB and at 8q21.3 (HLOD = 3.35) in CNGB3. We identified further three genome-wide significant variants within a single family. These three variants were located in exons of SLC6A18 at 5p15.33 (LODs ranged from 3.51 to 3.37). Multipoint analysis confirmed the significant signal at 5p15.33 with six genome-wide significant variants (LODs ranged from 3.6 to 3.3). Further suggestive evidence of linkage was observed in several other regions of the genome. All three novel linked regions contain strong candidate genes, especially CNGB3 on 8q21.3, which has been shown to affect photoreceptors and cause complete color blindness. Whole genome sequencing on these regions is planned to conclusively elucidate the causal variants.
BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence suggests that DNA methylation is crucial in the mental disorder pathophysiology. The current study attempted to identify the dysregulation of DNA methylation patterns in adolescent patients suffering from depressive episodes (DE) while considering the impact of various subtypes, including psychotic symptoms and a history of childhood trauma. METHODS: The study included 67 patients with DE and 30 healthy controls (HCs) subjects. Severe depressive episode (SDE) patients were grouped according to psychotic symptoms, such as SDE with vs. SDE without psychotic symptoms (cases 29 vs. 21). The Childhood Trauma Questionnaire-Short Form helped assess childhood trauma among all patients. Thus, all the patients were divided into adolescent DE experiencing >/= two trauma types vs. experiencing </= one trauma type (cases, 50 vs. 17). Methylome-wide analysis was conducted on peripheral blood to identify methylation differences in CpG sites for three comparisons: DE vs. HCs, SDE patients with vs. without psychotic symptoms, and DE patients having 0-1 type of childhood trauma vs. those having >/=two types of childhood trauma. RESULTS: Adolescent DE patients demonstrated a predominant trend of lower methylation levels than HCs, with 259 hypermethylated and 3956 hypomethylated sites. Differentially hypomethylated sites involve related genes such as FKBP5, BDNF, NR3C1, GABRB3, SHANK1, SLC38A1, SLC6A18, CHRNB1, CTNNA2, CTTNBP2, etc. All these genes could be involved in DE pathogenesis. Significant DNA methylation differences could be observed in SDE subgroups with and without psychotic symptoms (e.g., genes like DTNB, CNTN1, CTNNA2), along with those DE patients having 0-1 type of childhood trauma compared to those with >/=2 types (e.g., VWA3B, SYT10, SDK2, CAMSAP3). Many significant methylated sites were associated with genes involved in brain development, highlighting the potential pathophysiological mechanisms linked with DE and its subtypes, such as psychotic symptoms and childhood trauma. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that differential DNA methylation is associated with the pathophysiology of DE, as well as the presence of psychotic symptoms and a history of childhood trauma. These blood-based methylation patterns may serve as biomarkers for DE and shed light on underlying mechanisms across these subtypes.
Most neutral l-amino acid acids are transported actively across the luminal brush-border membrane of small intestine and kidney proximal tubule epithelial cells by a Na(+) cotransport system named B(0) that has been recently molecularly identified (B(0)AT1, SLC6A19). We show here that the opossum kidney-derived cell line OK also displays a Na(+)-dependent B(0)-type neutral l-amino acid transport, although with a slightly differing substrate selectivity. We tested the hypothesis that one of the two B(0)AT1-related transporters, SLC6A18 (ortholog of orphan transporter XT2) or SLC6A20 (ortholog of the recently identified mammalian imino acid transporter SIT1), mediates this transport. Anti-sense RNA to OK SIT1 (oSIT1) but not to OK XT2 (oXT2) inhibited Na(+)-dependent neutral amino acid transport induced by OK mRNA injected in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Furthermore, inhibition of oSIT1 gene expression in OK cells by transfection of siRNA and expression of shRNA selectively reduced the Na(+)-dependent uptake of neutral l-amino acids. Finally, expression of OK cell oSIT1 cRNA in X. laevis oocytes induced besides the transport of the l-imino acid l-Pro also that of neutral l-amino acids. Taken together, the data indicate that in OK cells SIT1 (SLC6A20) is not only an apical imino acid transporter but also plays a major role as Na(+)-dependent neutral l-amino acid transporter. A similar double role could be envisaged for SIT1 in mammalian kidney proximal tubule and small intestine.
Iminoglycinuria (IG) is an autosomal recessive abnormality of renal transport of glycine and the imino acids proline and hydroxyproline, but the specific genetic defect(s) have not been determined. Similarly, although the related disorder hyperglycinuria (HG) without iminoaciduria has been attributed to heterozygosity of a putative defective glycine, proline, and hydroxyproline transporter, confirming the underlying genetic defect(s) has been difficult. Here we applied a candidate gene sequencing approach in 7 families first identified through newborn IG screening programs. Both inheritance and functional studies identified the gene encoding the proton amino acid transporter SLC36A2 (PAT2) as the major gene responsible for IG in these families, and its inheritance was consistent with a classical semidominant pattern in which 2 inherited nonfunctional alleles conferred the IG phenotype, while 1 nonfunctional allele was sufficient to confer the HG phenotype. Mutations in SLC36A2 that retained residual transport activity resulted in the IG phenotype when combined with mutations in the gene encoding the imino acid transporter SLC6A20 (IMINO). Additional mutations were identified in the genes encoding the putative glycine transporter SLC6A18 (XT2) and the neutral amino acid transporter SLC6A19 (B0AT1) in families with either IG or HG, suggesting that mutations in the genes encoding these transporters may also contribute to these phenotypes. In summary, although recognized as apparently simple Mendelian disorders, IG and HG exhibit complex molecular explanations depending on a major gene and accompanying modifier genes.
Tremendous amount of primary sequence information has been made available from the genome sequencing projects, although a complete annotation and identification of all genes is still far from being complete. Here, we present the identification of two new human genes from the pharmacologically important family of transporter proteins, solute carriers family 6 (SLC6). These were named SLC6A17 and SLC6A18 by HUGO. The human repertoire of SLC6 proteins now consists of 19 functional members and four pseudogenes. We also identified the corresponding orthologues and additional genes from mouse and rat genomes. Detailed phylogenetic analysis of the entire family of SLC6 proteins in mammals shows that this family can be divided into four subgroups. We used Hidden Markov Models for these subgroups and identified in total 430 unique SLC6 proteins from 10 animal, one plant, two fungi, and 196 bacterial genomes. It is evident that SLC6 proteins are present in both animals and bacteria, and that three of the four subfamilies of mammalian SLC6 proteins are present in Caenorhabditis elegans, showing that these subfamilies are evolutionary very ancient. Moreover, we performed tissue localization studies on the entire family of SLC6 proteins on a panel of 15 rat tissues and further, the expression of three of the new genes was studied using quantitative real-time PCR showing expression in multiple central and peripheral tissues. This paper presents an overall overview of the gene repertoire of the SLC6 gene family and its expression profile in rats.
We investigated the possible association of solute carrier family 6 member 18 (SLC6A18) with hypertension and blood pressure in Japanese, since the homologous murine XT2 gene was recently reported to be associated with hypertension. The entire coding region of SLC6A18 was sequenced in 30 unrelated Japanese subjects. The deleterious effects of the observed nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the phenotype were predicted using bioinformatics software. We tested the associations of one deleterious SNP (Y319X) with blood pressure and hypertension in a general population of 1,004 subjects in one area of Japan. Both quantitative and qualitative analyses adjusting for age and body mass index (BMI) as covariates were undertaken. Four synonymous (P7P, T32T, G37G and V387V), three missense (S12C, I32T and L478P) and one nonsense (Y319X: g1230757 C > G) polymorphisms were found. One of the synonymous polymorphisms was novel (V387V) by reference to the dbSNP database. The Y319X genotype distribution of CC:CG:GG in this population showed frequencies of 0.382, 0.461 and 0.156, respectively, which followed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The nonsense polymorphism had odds ratios of 0.83 (confidence interval [CI] = 0.59-1.15, p = 0.26) in males and 0.96 (CI = 0.72-1.29, p = 0.80) in females with hypertension or current medication for hypertension. For the quantitative analysis, we excluded the current medication subgroup. The nonsense allele was not a significant predictor for systolic or diastolic blood pressure. This is the first report showing that a single polymorphism in SLC6A18 is not associated with hypertension or blood pressure in Japanese.
The B degrees transport system mediates the Na(+)-driven uptake of a broad range of neutral amino acids into epithelial cells of small intestine and kidney proximal tubule. A corresponding transporter was identified in 2004 (A. Broer, K. Klingel, S. Kowalczuk, J. E. Rasko, J. Cavanaugh, and S. Broer. J Biol Chem 279: 24467-24476, 2004) within the SLC6 family and named B degrees AT1 (SLC6A19). A phylogenetically related transporter known as XT3 in human (SLC6A20) and XT3s1 in mouse was shown to function as an imino acid transporter, to localize also to kidney and small intestine and renamed SIT1 or Imino(B). Besides these two transporters with known functions, there are two other gene products belonging to the same phylogenetic B degrees AT-cluster, XT2 (SLC6A18) and rodent XT3 that are still "orphans." Quantitative real-time RT-PCR showed that the mRNAs of the four B degrees AT-cluster members are abundant in kidney, whereas only those of B degrees AT1 and XT3s1/SIT1 are elevated in small intestine. In brain, the XT3s1/SIT1 mRNA is more abundant than the other B degrees AT-cluster mRNAs. We show here by immunofluorescence that all four mouse B degrees AT-cluster transporters localize, with differential axial gradients, to the brush-border membrane of proximal kidney tubule and, with the possible exception of XT3, also of intestine. Deglycosylation and Western blotting of brush-border proteins demonstrated the glycosylation and confirmed the luminal localization of B degrees AT1, XT2, and XT3. In summary, this study shows the luminal brush-border localization of the Na(+)-dependent amino and imino acid transporters B degrees AT1 and XT3s1/SIT1 in kidney and intestine. It also shows that the structurally highly similar orphan transporters XT2 and XT3 have the same luminal but a slightly differing axial localization along the kidney proximal tubule.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Transforming Growth Factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) and its downstream effector Connective Tissue Growth Factor (CTGF/CCN2), are well known fibrogenic activators and we previously showed that the Rho/ROCK pathway controls CTGF expression in intestinal smooth muscle cells isolated from patients with delayed radiation enteritis. The aim of the present work was to investigate the balance between Smad and Rho signalling pathways in the TGF-beta1 CTGF induction and modulation of radiation-induced fibrogenic differentiation after addition of pravastatin, an inhibitor of Rho isoprenylation. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Primary human smooth muscle cells isolated from normal (N-SMC) or radiation enteritis (RE-SMC) biopsies were incubated with TGF-beta1 (10 ng/ml). Induction of CTGF, as well as nucleo-cytoplasmic distribution of phospho-Smad2/3, Smad2/3 and Smad4 were analysed by Western blot and immunocytochemistry. Smad DNA binding was assessed by EMSA and Rho activation was measured by pull-down assay. RESULTS: After TGF-beta1 addition, Smads were translocated to the nucleus in both cell types. Nuclear accumulation of Smad as well as their DNA-binding activity were higher in N-SMC than in RE-SMC, whereas the opposite was observed for Rho activation, suggesting a main involvement of Rho pathway in sustained fibrogenic differentiation. This hypothesis was further supported by the antifibrotic effect observed in vitro after cell treatment with pravastatin (i.e. decreased expression of CTGF, TGF-beta1 and Collagen Ialpha2). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that TGF-beta1-induced CTGF transactivation mainly depends on the Smad pathway in N-SMC, whereas in RE-SMC, Smad and Rho pathways are involved. Inhibition of Rho activity by pravastatin alters fibrogenic differentiation in vitro which opens up new therapeutic perspectives.
