Alpha-synuclein; Neuronal protein that plays several roles in synaptic activity such as regulation of synaptic vesicle trafficking and subsequent neurotransmitter release. Participates as a monomer in synaptic vesicle exocytosis by enhancing vesicle priming, fusion and dilation of exocytotic fusion pores. Mechanistically, acts by increasing local Ca(2+) release from microdomains which is essential for the enhancement of ATP-induced exocytosis. Acts also as a molecular chaperone in its multimeric membrane-bound state, assisting in the folding of synaptic fusion components called SNAREs  [...] 
alpha-Synuclein (alpha-Syn) has been extensively studied for its structural and biophysical properties owing to its pathophysiological role in Parkinson's disease (PD). Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites are the pathological hallmarks of PD and contain alpha-Syn aggregates as their major component. It was therefore hypothesized that alpha-Syn aggregation is actively associated with PD pathogenesis. The central role of alpha-Syn aggregation in PD is further supported by the identification of point mutations in alpha-Syn protein associated with rare familial forms of PD. However, the correlation between aggregation propensities of alpha-Syn mutants and their association with PD phenotype is not straightforward. Recent evidence suggested that oligomers, formed during the initial stages of aggregation, are the potent neurotoxic species causing cell death in PD. However, the heterogeneous and unstable nature of these oligomers limit their detailed characterization. alpha-Syn fibrils, on the contrary, are shown to be the infectious agents and propagate in a prion-like manner. Although alpha-Syn is an intrinsically disordered protein, it exhibits remarkable conformational plasticity by adopting a range of structural conformations under different environmental conditions. In this review, we focus on the structural and functional aspects of alpha-Syn and role of potential factors that may contribute to the underlying mechanism of synucleinopathies. This information will help to identify novel targets and develop specific therapeutic strategies to combat Parkinson's and other protein aggregation related neurodegenerative diseases.
Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the abnormal intracellular accumulation of SNCA/alpha-synuclein. While the exact mechanisms underlying SNCA pathology are not fully understood, increasing evidence suggests the involvement of autophagy as well as lysosomal deficiencies. Because CTSD (cathepsin D) has been proposed to be the major lysosomal protease involved in SNCA degradation, its deficiency has been linked to the presence of insoluble SNCA conformers in the brain of mice and humans as well as to the transcellular transmission of SNCA aggregates. We here postulate that SNCA degradation can be enhanced by the application of the recombinant human proform of CTSD (rHsCTSD). Our results reveal that rHsCTSD is efficiently endocytosed by neuronal cells, correctly targeted to lysosomes and matured to an enzymatically active protease. In dopaminergic neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) of PD patients harboring the A53T mutation within the SNCA gene, we confirm the reduction of insoluble SNCA after treatment with rHsCTSD. Moreover, we demonstrate a decrease of pathological SNCA conformers in the brain and within primary neurons of a ctsd-deficient mouse model after dosing with rHsCTSD. Boosting lysosomal CTSD activity not only enhanced SNCA clearance in human and murine neurons as well as tissue, but also restored endo-lysosome and autophagy function. Our findings indicate that CTSD is critical for SNCA clearance and function. Thus, enzyme replacement strategies utilizing CTSD may also be of therapeutic interest for the treatment of PD and other synucleinopathies aiming to decrease the SNCA burden.Abbreviations: aa: amino acid; SNCA/alpha-synuclein: synuclein alpha; APP: amyloid beta precursor protein; BBB: blood brain barrier; BF: basal forebrain; CBB: Coomassie Brilliant Blue; CLN: neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis; CNL10: neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 10; Corr.: corrected; CTSD: cathepsin D; CTSB: cathepsin B; DA: dopaminergic; DA-iPSn: induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons; dox: doxycycline; ERT: enzyme replacement therapy; Fx: fornix, GBA/beta-glucocerebrosidase: glucosylceramidase beta; h: hour; HC: hippocampus; HT: hypothalamus; i.c.: intracranially; IF: immunofluorescence; iPSC: induced pluripotent stem cell; KO: knockout; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; LSDs: lysosomal storage disorders; MAPT: microtubule associated protein tau; M6P: mannose-6-phosphate; M6PR: mannose-6-phosphate receptor; MB: midbrain; mCTSD: mature form of CTSD; neurofil.: neurofilament; PD: Parkinson disease; proCTSD: proform of CTSD; PRNP: prion protein; RFU: relative fluorescence units; rHsCTSD: recombinant human proCTSD; SAPC: Saposin C; SIM: structured illumination microscopy; T-insol: Triton-insoluble; T-sol: Triton-soluble; TEM: transmission electron microscopy, TH: tyrosine hydroxylase; Thal: thalamus.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder with a lifetime incidence of approximately 2 percent. A pattern of familial aggregation has been documented for the disorder, and it was recently reported that a PD susceptibility gene in a large Italian kindred is located on the long arm of human chromosome 4. A mutation was identified in the alpha-synuclein gene, which codes for a presynaptic protein thought to be involved in neuronal plasticity, in the Italian kindred and in three unrelated families of Greek origin with autosomal dominant inheritance for the PD phenotype. This finding of a specific molecular alteration associated with PD will facilitate the detailed understanding of the pathophysiology of the disorder.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disease with no approved disease-modifying therapies. Multiplications, mutations, and single nucleotide polymorphisms in the SNCA gene, encoding alpha-synuclein (aSyn) protein, either cause or increase risk for PD. Intracellular accumulations of aSyn are pathological hallmarks of PD. Taken together, reduction of aSyn production may provide a disease-modifying therapy for PD. We show that antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) reduce production of aSyn in rodent preformed fibril (PFF) models of PD. Reduced aSyn production leads to prevention and removal of established aSyn pathology and prevents dopaminergic cell dysfunction. In addition, we address the translational potential of the approach through characterization of human SNCA-targeting ASOs that efficiently suppress the human SNCA transcript in vivo. We demonstrate broad activity and distribution of the human SNCA ASOs throughout the nonhuman primate brain and a corresponding decrease in aSyn cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) levels. Taken together, these data suggest that, by inhibiting production of aSyn, it may be possible to reverse established pathology; thus, these data support the development of SNCA ASOs as a potential disease-modifying therapy for PD and related synucleinopathies.
Tunnelling Nanotubes (TNTs) facilitate contact-mediated intercellular communication over long distances. Material transfer via TNTs can range from ions and intracellular organelles to protein aggregates and pathogens. Prion-like toxic protein aggregates accumulating in several neurodegenerative pathologies, such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases, have been shown to spread via TNTs not only between neurons, but also between neurons-astrocytes, and neurons-pericytes, indicating the importance of TNTs in mediating neuron-glia interactions. TNT-like structures were also reported between microglia, however, their roles in neuron-microglia interaction remain elusive. In this work, we quantitatively characterise microglial TNTs and their cytoskeletal composition, and demonstrate that TNTs form between human neuronal and microglial cells. We show that alpha-Synuclein (alpha-Syn) aggregates increase the global TNT-mediated connectivity between cells, along with the number of TNT connections per cell pair. Homotypic TNTs formed between microglial cells, and heterotypic TNTs between neuronal and microglial cells are furthermore shown to be functional, allowing movement of both alpha-Syn and mitochondria. Quantitative analysis shows that alpha-Syn aggregates are transferred predominantly from neuronal to microglial cells, possibly as a mechanism to relieve the burden of accumulated aggregates. By contrast, microglia transfer mitochondria preferably to alpha-Syn burdened neuronal cells over the healthy ones, likely as a potential rescue mechanism. Besides describing novel TNT-mediated communication between neuronal and microglial cells, this work allows us to better understand the cellular mechanisms of spreading neurodegenerative diseases, shedding light on the role of microglia.
alpha-Synucleinopathies are neurodegenerative disorders that range pathologically from the demise of select groups of nuclei to pervasive degeneration throughout the neuraxis. Although mounting evidence suggests that alpha-synuclein lesions lead to neurodegeneration, this remains controversial. To explore this issue, we generated transgenic mice expressing wild-type and A53T human alpha-synuclein in CNS neurons. Mice expressing mutant, but not wild-type, alpha-synuclein developed a severe and complex motor impairment leading to paralysis and death. These animals developed age-dependent intracytoplasmic neuronal alpha-synuclein inclusions paralleling disease onset, and the alpha-synuclein inclusions recapitulated features of human counterparts. Moreover, immunoelectron microscopy revealed that the alpha-synuclein inclusions contained 10-16 nm wide fibrils similar to human pathological inclusions. These mice demonstrate that A53T alpha-synuclein leads to the formation of toxic filamentous alpha-synuclein neuronal inclusions that cause neurodegeneration.
Presynaptic nerve terminals release neurotransmitters repeatedly, often at high frequency, and in relative isolation from neuronal cell bodies. Repeated release requires cycles of soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE)-complex assembly and disassembly, with continuous generation of reactive SNARE-protein intermediates. Although many forms of neurodegeneration initiate presynaptically, only few pathogenic mechanisms are known, and the functions of presynaptic proteins linked to neurodegeneration, such as alpha-synuclein, remain unclear. Here, we show that maintenance of continuous presynaptic SNARE-complex assembly required a nonclassical chaperone activity mediated by synucleins. Specifically, alpha-synuclein directly bound to the SNARE-protein synaptobrevin-2/vesicle-associated membrane protein 2 (VAMP2) and promoted SNARE-complex assembly. Moreover, triple-knockout mice lacking synucleins developed age-dependent neurological impairments, exhibited decreased SNARE-complex assembly, and died prematurely. Thus, synucleins may function to sustain normal SNARE-complex assembly in a presynaptic terminal during aging.
The autophagy-lysosome pathway plays a fundamental role in the clearance of aggregated proteins and protection against cellular stress and neurodegenerative conditions. Alterations in autophagy processes, including macroautophagy and chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), have been described in Parkinson disease (PD). CMA is a selective autophagic process that depends on LAMP2A (lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2A), a mammal and bird-specific membrane glycoprotein that translocates cytosolic proteins containing a KFERQ-like peptide motif across the lysosomal membrane. Drosophila reportedly lack CMA and use endosomal microautophagy (eMI) as an alternative selective autophagic process. Here we report that neuronal expression of human LAMP2A protected Drosophila against starvation and oxidative stress, and delayed locomotor decline in aging flies without extending their lifespan. LAMP2A also prevented the progressive locomotor and oxidative defects induced by neuronal expression of PD-associated human SNCA (synuclein alpha) with alanine-to-proline mutation at position 30 (SNCA(A30P)). Using KFERQ-tagged fluorescent biosensors, we observed that LAMP2A expression stimulated selective autophagy in the adult brain and not in the larval fat body, but did not increase this process under starvation conditions. Noteworthy, we found that neurally expressed LAMP2A markedly upregulated levels of Drosophila Atg5, a key macroautophagy initiation protein, and that it increased the density of Atg8a/LC3-positive puncta, which reflects the formation of autophagosomes. Furthermore, LAMP2A efficiently prevented accumulation of the autophagy defect marker Ref(2)P/p62 in the adult brain under acute oxidative stress. These results indicate that LAMP2A can potentiate autophagic flux in the Drosophila brain, leading to enhanced stress resistance and neuroprotection. ABBREVIATIONS: Act5C: actin 5C; a.E.: after eclosion; Atg5: autophagy-related 5; Atg8a/LC3: autophagy-related 8a; CMA: chaperone-mediated autophagy; DHE: dihydroethidium; elav: embryonic lethal abnormal vision; eMI: endosomal microautophagy; ESCRT: endosomal sorting complexes required for transport; GABARAP: GABA typeA receptor-associated protein; Hsc70-4: heat shock protein cognate 4; HSPA8/Hsc70: heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 8; LAMP2: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2; MDA: malondialdehyde; PA-mCherry: photoactivable mCherry; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; PD: Parkinson disease; Ref(2)P/p62: refractory to sigma P; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RpL32/rp49: ribosomal protein L32; RT-PCR: reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; SING: startle-induced negative geotaxis; SNCA/alpha-synuclein: synuclein alpha; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TBS: Tris-buffered saline; UAS: upstream activating sequence.
Alpha-synuclein is an abundant neuronal protein that has been linked both to normal synaptic function and to neurodegeneration. Most significantly, mutations in the gene encoding for alpha-synuclein are responsible for Parkinson's disease (PD) in rare familial cases, and the aggregated protein is a major component of Lewy bodies found in sporadic PD. Here we review recent data regarding the structure, the regulation at the transcriptional and posttranslational level, and the physiologic and aberrant functions of alpha-synuclein. We focus in particular on the fibrilization potential of alpha-synuclein and on its link with defects in protein degradation.
Although best understood as a degradative pathway, recent evidence demonstrates pronounced involvement of the macroautophagic/autophagic molecular machinery in cellular secretion. With either overexpression or inhibition of autophagy mediators, dramatic alterations in the cellular secretory profile occur. This affects secretion of a plethora of factors ranging from cytokines, to granule contents, and even viral particles. Encompassing a wide range of secreted factors, autophagy-dependent secretion is implicated in diseases ranging from cancer to neurodegeneration. With a growing body of evidence shedding light onto the molecular mediators, this review delineates the molecular machinery involved in selective targeting of the autophagosome for either degradation or secretion. In addition, we summarize the current understanding of factors and cargo secreted through this unconventional route, and describe the implications of this pathway in both health and disease. Abbreviations: BECN1, beclin 1; CAF, cancer associated fibroblast; CUPS, compartment for unconventional protein secretion; CXCL, C-X-C motif chemokine ligand; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FGF2, fibroblast growth factor 2; HMGB1, high mobility group box 1; IDE, insulin degrading enzyme; IL, Interleukin; MAP1LC3/LC3, microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAPS, misfolding associated protein secretion; MEF, mouse embryonic fibroblast; MTORC1, MTOR complex I; PtdIns, phosphatidyl inositol; SEC22B, SEC22 homolog B, vesicle trafficking protein (gene/pseudogene); SFV, Semliki forest virus; SNCA, synuclein alpha; SQSTM1, sequestosome 1; STX, Syntaxin; TASCC, TOR-associated spatial coupling compartment; TGFB, transforming growth factor beta; TRIM16, tripartite motif containing 16; UPS, unconventional protein secretion; VWF, von Willebrand factor.
Mutations in the SNCA gene, which encodes the alpha-synuclein protein, were the first discovered genetic causes of familial parkinsonism with Lewy pathology. To date, six different SNCA missense mutations as well as multiplications are known to cause parkinsonism. For this review, we performed a literature search to identify all published cases of SNCA-related parkinsonism to provide an updated summary of the clinical and neuropathological features of parkinsonism due to SNCA mutations. Familial parkinsonism associated with SNCA is rare, but alpha-synuclein aggregation is a core feature of sporadic parkinsonism, including Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy. Research into alpha-synuclein and parkinsonism has impacted how we define the pathology and understand the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease and related neurodegenerative disorders. We briefly discuss some of the lessons we have learned from research into the physiological role of alpha-synuclein and its pathological links to neurodegeneration and parkinsonism.
The synuclein gene family recently came into the spotlight, when one of its members, alpha-synuclein, was found to be mutated in several families with autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). A peptide of the alpha-synuclein protein had been characterized previously as a major component of amyloid plaques in brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The mechanism by which this presynaptic protein is involved in the two most common neurodegenerative disorders, AD and PD, remains unclear. Remarkably, another member of this gene family, gamma-synuclein, has been shown to be overexpressed in breast carcinomas and may also be overexpressed in ovarian cancer. The possible involvement of the synuclein proteins in the etiology of common human diseases has raised exciting questions and is the subject of intense investigation. Details of the properties of any member of the synuclein family may provide useful information for understanding the characteristics and function of other family members. The present review offers a synopsis of the current state of knowledge of all synuclein family members in different species.
Accumulation of the neuronal protein SNCA/alpha-synuclein and of the oligodendroglial phosphoprotein TPPP/p25A within the glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) represents the key histophathological hallmark of multiple system atrophy (MSA). Even though the levels/distribution of both oligodendroglial SNCA and TPPP/p25A proteins are critical for disease pathogenesis, the proteolytic mechanisms involved in their turnover in health and disease remain poorly understood. Herein, by pharmacological and molecular modulation of the autophagy-lysosome pathway (ALP) and the proteasome we demonstrate that the endogenous oligodendroglial SNCA and TPPP/p25A are degraded mainly by the ALP in murine primary oligodendrocytes and oligodendroglial cell lines under basal conditions. We also identify a KFERQ-like motif in the TPPP/p25A sequence that enables its effective degradation via chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) in an in vitro system of rat brain lysosomes. Furthermore, in a MSA-like setting established by addition of human recombinant SNCA pre-formed fibrils (PFFs) as seeds of pathological SNCA, we thoroughly characterize the contribution of CMA and macroautophagy in particular, in the removal of the exogenously added and the seeded oligodendroglial SNCA pathological assemblies. We also show that PFF treatment impairs autophagic flux and that TPPP/p25A exerts an inhibitory effect on macroautophagy, while at the same time CMA is upregulated to remove the pathological SNCA species formed within oligodendrocytes. Finally, augmentation of CMA or macroautophagy accelerates the removal of the engendered pathological SNCA conformations further suggesting that autophagy targeting may represent a successful approach for the clearance of pathological SNCA and/or TPPP/p25A in the context of MSA.Abbreviations: 3MA: 3-methyladenine; ACTB: actin, beta; ALP: autophagy-lysosome pathway; ATG5: autophagy related 5; AR7: atypical retinoid 7; CMA: chaperone-mediated autophagy; CMV: cytomegalovirus; CTSD: cathepsin D; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DMEM: Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium; Epox: epoxomicin; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GCIs: glial cytoplasmic inclusions; GFP: green fluorescent protein; HMW: high molecular weight; h: hours; HSPA8/HSC70: heat shock protein 8; LAMP1: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1; LAMP2A: lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2A; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; mcherry: monomeric cherry; MFI: mean fluorescence intensity; mRFP: monomeric red fluorescent protein; MSA: multiple system atrophy; OLN: oligodendrocytes; OPCs: oligodendroglial progenitor cells; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PC12: pheochromocytoma cell line; PD: Parkinson disease; PFFs: pre-formed fibrils; PIs: protease inhibitors; PSMB5: proteasome (prosome, macropain) subunit, beta type 5; Rap: rapamycin; RFP: red fluorescent protein; Scr: scrambled; SDS: sodium dodecyl sulfate; SE: standard error; siRNAs: small interfering RNAs; SNCA: synuclein, alpha; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TPPP: tubulin polymerization promoting protein; TUBA: tubulin, alpha; UPS: ubiquitin-proteasome system; WT: wild type.
OBJECTIVE: This article provides an overview of the current understanding of the genetic and pathologic features of neurodegenerative dementias, with an emphasis on Alzheimer disease and related dementias. LATEST DEVELOPMENTS: In recent years, there has been substantial progress in genetic research, contributing significant knowledge to our understanding of the molecular risk factors involved in neurodegenerative dementia syndromes. Several genes have been linked to monogenic forms of dementia (eg, APP, PSEN1, PSEN2, SNCA, GRN, C9orf72, MAPT) and an even larger number of genetic variants are known to influence susceptibility for developing dementia. As anti-amyloid therapies for patients with early-stage Alzheimer disease have entered the clinical arena, screening for the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 high-risk allele has come into focus, emphasizing the importance of genetic counseling. Similarly, advances in the pathologic classifications of neurodegenerative dementia syndromes and molecular pathology highlight their heterogeneity and overlapping features and provide insights into the pathogenesis of these conditions. ESSENTIAL POINTS: Recent progress in neurogenetics and molecular pathology has improved our understanding of the complex pathogenetic changes associated with neurodegenerative dementias, facilitating improved disease modeling, enhanced diagnostics, and individualized counseling. The hope is that this knowledge will ultimately pave the way for the development of novel therapeutics.
Synucleinopathies are a group of disorders characterized by the accumulation of inclusions rich in the a-synuclein (aSyn) protein. This group of disorders includes Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), multiple systems atrophy, and pure autonomic failure (PAF). In addition, genetic alterations (point mutations and multiplications) in the gene encoding for aSyn (SNCA) are associated with familial forms of Parkinson's disease, the most common synucleinopathy. The Synuclein Meetings are a series that has been taking place every 2 years for about 12 years. The Synuclein Meetings bring together leading experts in the field of Synuclein and related human conditions with the goal of discussing and advancing the research. In 2019, the Synuclein meeting took place in Ofir, a city in the outskirts of Porto, Portugal. The meeting, entitled "Synuclein Meeting 2019: Where we are and where we need to go", brought together >300 scientists studying both clinical and molecular aspects of synucleinopathies. The meeting covered a many of the open questions in the field, in a format that prompted open discussions between the participants, and underscored the need for additional research that, hopefully, will lead to future therapies for a group of as of yet incurable disorders. Here, we provide a summary of the topics discussed in each session and highlight what we know, what we do not know, and what progress needs to be made in order to enable the field to continue to advance. We are confident this systematic assessment of where we stand will be useful to steer the field and contribute to filling knowledge gaps that may form the foundations for future therapeutic strategies, which is where we need to go.
Accumulation of alpha-synuclein is a pathological feature in several neurological diseases. Its characterization has allowed for a re-grouping of diseases according to the expected pathology. The clinical syndrome of PD can now be classified into forms with and without alpha-synuclein pathology. DLB and PDD are synucleinopathies, and MSA shows alpha-synuclein pathology with glial inclusions. ADHD symptoms commonly occur in persons that will subsequently develop DLB. A similar phenomenon may be the early personality changes and frontotemporal atrophy in patients with SNCA multiplication. RLS is not known to have alpha-synuclein pathology, but as PD and ADHD, involves a hypodopaminergic state. Furthermore, PD and RLS co-occur in families in a way that suggests common inheritance. A proportion of patients with ET have brainstem Lewy body pathology. Gaucher disease and other lysosomal storage disorders also have alpha-synuclein pathology. Alpha-synuclein is a naturally unfolded protein. Non-fibrillar oligomeres may be the toxic species, and Lewy body formation may in fact be protective. Inhibiting alpha-synuclein toxicity seems to be an attractive novel treatment strategy and several approaches are being developed. When such treatments become available, clinicians will need to be familiar with the clinical features that distinguish the synucleinopathies from their look-alikes.
Neurotransmission relies on the tight spatial and temporal regulation of the synaptic vesicle (SV) cycle. Nerve terminals contain hundreds of SVs that form tight clusters. These clusters represent a distinct liquid phase in which one component of the phase are SVs and the other synapsin 1, a highly abundant synaptic protein. Another major family of disordered proteins at the presynapse includes synucleins, most notably alpha-synuclein. The precise physiological role of alpha-synuclein in synaptic physiology remains elusive, albeit its role has been implicated in nearly all steps of the SV cycle. To determine the effect of alpha-synuclein on the synapsin phase, we employ the reconstitution approach using natively purified SVs from rat brains and the heterologous cell system to generate synapsin condensates. We demonstrate that synapsin condensates recruit alpha-synuclein, and while enriched into these synapsin condensates, alpha-synuclein still maintains its high mobility. The presence of SVs enhances the rate of synapsin/alpha-synuclein condensation, suggesting that SVs act as catalyzers for the formation of synapsin condensates. Notably, at physiological salt and protein concentrations, alpha-synuclein alone is not able to cluster isolated SVs. Excess of alpha-synuclein disrupts the kinetics of synapsin/SV condensate formation, indicating that the molar ratio between synapsin and alpha-synuclein is important in assembling the functional condensates of SVs. Understanding the molecular mechanism of alpha-synuclein interactions at the nerve terminals is crucial for clarifying the pathogenesis of synucleinopathies, where alpha-synuclein, synaptic proteins and lipid organelles all accumulate as insoluble intracellular inclusions.
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is characterized by glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) containing aggregated alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) in oligodendrocytes. The origin of alpha-syn accumulation in GCIs is unclear, in particular whether abnormal alpha-syn aggregates result from the abnormal elevation of endogenous alpha-syn expression in MSA or ingested from the neuronal source. Tubulin polymerization promoting protein (TPPP) has been reported to play a crucial role in developing GCI pathology. Here, the total cell body, nucleus, and cytoplasmic area density of SNCA and TPPP transcripts in neurons and oligodendrocytes with and without various alpha-syn pathologies in the pontine base in autopsy cases of MSA (n = 4) and controls (n = 2) were evaluated using RNAscope with immunofluorescence. Single-nucleus RNA-sequencing data for TPPP was evaluated using control frontal cortex (n = 3). SNCA and TPPP transcripts were present in the nucleus and cytoplasm of oligodendrocytes in both controls and diseased, with higher area density in GCIs and glial nuclear inclusions in MSA. Area densities of SNCA and TPPP transcripts were lower in neurons showing cytoplasmic inclusions in MSA. Indeed, TPPP transcripts were unexpectedly found in neurons, while the anti-TPPP antibody failed to detect immunoreactivity. Single-nucleus RNA-sequencing revealed significant TPPP transcript expression predominantly in oligodendrocytes, but also in excitatory and inhibitory neurons. This study addressed the unclear origin of accumulated alpha-syn in GCIs, proposing that the elevation of SNCA transcripts may supply templates for misfolded alpha-syn. In addition, the parallel behavior of TPPP and SNCA transcripts in GCI development highlights their potential synergistic contribution to inclusion formation. In conclusion, this study advances our understanding of MSA pathogenesis, offers insights into the dynamics of SNCA and TPPP transcripts in inclusion formation, and proposes regulating their transcripts for future molecular therapy to MSA.
Parkinson's disease (PD), dementia with Lewy body (DLB), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and multiple system atrophy (MSA) belong to a group of neurodegenerative diseases called parkinsonian syndromes. They share several clinical, neuropathological and genetic features. Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the progressive dysfunction of specific populations of neurons, determining clinical presentation. Neuronal loss is associated with extra- and intracellular accumulation of misfolded proteins. The parkinsonian diseases affect distinct areas of the brain. PD and MSA belong to a group of synucleinopathies that are characterized by the presence of fibrillary aggregates of alpha-synuclein protein in the cytoplasm of selected populations of neurons and glial cells. PSP is a tauopathy associated with the pathological aggregation of the microtubule associated tau protein. Although PD is common in the world's aging population and has been extensively studied, the exact mechanisms of the neurodegeneration are still not fully understood. Growing evidence indicates that parkinsonian disorders to some extent share a genetic background, with two key components identified so far: the microtubule associated tau protein gene (MAPT) and the alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA). The main pathways of parkinsonian neurodegeneration described in the literature are the protein and mitochondrial pathways. The factors that lead to neurodegeneration are primarily environmental toxins, inflammatory factors, oxidative stress and traumatic brain injury.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is typically a sporadic late-onset disorder, which has made it difficult to model in mice. Several transgenic mouse models bearing mutations in SNCA, which encodes alpha-Synuclein (alpha-Syn), have been made, but these lines do not express SNCA in a physiologically accurate spatiotemporal pattern, which limits the ability of the mice to recapitulate the features of human PD. Here, we generated knock-in mice bearing the G51D SNCA mutation. After establishing that their motor symptoms begin at 9 mo of age, we then sought earlier pathologies. We assessed the phosphorylation at Serine 129 of alpha-Syn in different tissues and detected phospho-alpha-Syn in the olfactory bulb and enteric nervous system at 3 mo of age. Olfactory deficit and impaired gut transit followed at 6 mo, preceding motor symptoms. The Snca(G51D) mice thus parallel the progression of human PD and will enable us to study PD pathogenesis and test future therapies.
