Platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for homodimeric PDGFB and PDGFD and for heterodimers formed by PDGFA and PDGFB, and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, chemotaxis and migration. Plays an essential role in blood vessel development by promoting proliferation, migration and recruitment of pericytes and smooth muscle cells to endothelial cells. Plays a role in the migration of vascular smooth muscle cells and the formation of neointima at v [...] 
Cortactin is a cytoskeletal protein and src kinase substrate that is frequently overexpressed in cancer. Animal studies suggest that cortactin overexpression increases tumor aggressiveness, possibly through promotion of tumor invasion and metastasis. Recently, many studies have documented a role for cortactin in promoting cell motility and invasion, including a critical role in invadopodia, actin rich-subcellular protrusions associated with degradation of the extracellular matrix by cancer cells. Here, I review the evidence and potential mechanisms for cortactin as a critical mediator of tumor cell invasion.
The regulation of adipose tissue expansion by adipocyte hypertrophy and/or hyperplasia is the topic of extensive investigations given the potential differential contribution of the 2 processes to the development of numerous chronic diseases associated with obesity. We recently discovered that the loss-of-function of the Src homology domain-containing protein Nck2 in mice promotes adiposity accompanied with adipocyte hypertrophy and impaired function, and enhanced adipocyte differentiation in vitro. Moreover, in severely-obese human's adipose tissue, we found that Nck2 expression is markedly downregulated. In this commentary, our goal is to expand upon additional findings providing further evidence for a unique Nck2-dependent mechanism regulating adipogenesis. We propose that Nck2 should be further investigated as a regulator of the reliance of white adipose tissue on hyperplasia versus hypertrophy during adipose tissue expansion, and hence, as a potential novel molecular target in obesity.
The proto-oncogene vav is expressed solely in cells of hematopoietic origin regardless of their differentiation lineage. However, recently an homologue of vav, which is widely expressed (vav2) has been identified. Vav is a complicated and interesting molecule that contains a number of structural features found in proteins involved in cell signaling. Vav has a leucine-rich region, a leucine-zipper, a calponin homology domain, an acidic domain, a Dbl-homology domain, a pleckstrin homology domain, a cysteine-rich domain, two Src homology 3 domains, with a proline-rich region in the amino-SH3 domain, and finally an Src homology 2 domain. These domains have been implicated in protein protein interactions and strongly suggest that vav is involved in signaling events. vav is also rapidly and transiently tyrosine phosphorylated through the activation of multiple receptors on hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, vav is tyrosine phosphorylated upon the activation of several cytokines and growths factors. Recently, the generation of nice vav-/- showed that vav has an essential role in proliferation/activation of T and B cells. The purpose of this review is to summarize the current knowledge on vav and to evaluate the roles of vav in cellular functions.
Import of proteins into peroxisomes depends on PEX5, PEX13 and PEX14. By combining biochemical methods and structural biology, we show that the C-terminal SH3 domain of PEX13 mediates intramolecular interactions with a proximal FxxxF motif. The SH3 domain also binds WxxxF peptide motifs in the import receptor PEX5, demonstrating evolutionary conservation of such interactions from yeast to human. Strikingly, intramolecular interaction of the PEX13 FxxxF motif regulates binding of PEX5 WxxxF/Y motifs to the PEX13 SH3 domain. Crystal structures reveal how FxxxF and WxxxF/Y motifs are recognized by a non-canonical surface on the SH3 domain. The PEX13 FxxxF motif also mediates binding to PEX14. Surprisingly, the potential PxxP binding surface of the SH3 domain does not recognize PEX14 PxxP motifs, distinct from its yeast ortholog. Our data show that the dynamic network of PEX13 interactions with PEX5 and PEX14, mediated by diaromatic peptide motifs, modulates peroxisomal matrix import.
The Vav family is a group of tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated signal transduction molecules hierarchically located downstream of protein tyrosine kinases. The main function of these proteins is to work as guanosine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for members of the Rho GTPase family. In addition, they can exhibit a variety of catalysis-independent roles in specific signaling contexts. Vav proteins play essential signaling roles for both the development and/or effector functions of a large variety of cell lineages, including those belonging to the immune, nervous, and cardiovascular systems. They also contribute to pathological states such as cancer, immune-related dysfunctions, and atherosclerosis. Here, I will provide an integrated view about the evolution, regulation, and effector properties of these signaling molecules. In addition, I will discuss the pros and cons for their potential consideration as therapeutic targets.
Src family kinases (SFKs) play a central role in mediating the rapid response of platelets to vascular injury. They transmit activation signals from a diverse repertoire of platelet surface receptors, including the integrin alphaIIbbeta3, the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif-containing collagen receptor complex GPVI-FcR gamma-chain, and the von Willebrand factor receptor complex GPIb-IX-V, which are essential for thrombus growth and stability. Ligand-mediated clustering of these receptors triggers an increase in SFK activity and downstream tyrosine phosphorylation of enzymes, adaptors, and cytoskeletal proteins that collectively propagate the signal and coordinate platelet activation. A growing body of evidence has established that SFKs also contribute to Gq- and Gi-coupled receptor signaling that synergizes with primary activation signals to maximally activate platelets and render them prothrombotic. Interestingly, SFKs concomitantly activate inhibitory pathways that limit platelet activation and thrombus size. In this review, we discuss past discoveries that laid the foundation for this fundamental area of platelet signal transduction, recent progress in our understanding of the distinct and overlapping functions of SFKs in platelets, and new avenues of research into mechanisms of SFK regulation. We also highlight the thrombotic and hemostatic consequences of targeting platelet SFKs.
Nck is an adaptor protein composed of three N-terminal Src Homology (SH) 3 domains followed by a unique C‑terminal SH2 domain. Like other SH2/SH3 domains-containing adaptor proteins, Nck mediates signal transduction from activated cell surface receptors by directing the flow of information to elicit properly orchestrated cell responses. In this way, Nck appears to be unique in its contribution to a wide variety of cellular processes. Moreover, in addition to the typical signal/pY-SH2/SH3-effectors mode of signaling, Nck also transduces signals through an inverse mode of -signaling (signal-SH3/SH2-pY/effectors) and from various cell compartments. Since Nck contributes to important morphogenic and mitogenic processes, deregulated expression of Nck could be detrimental to cellular homeostasis. In agreement, Nck expression has been found upregulated in numerous types of cancer. In this paper we delineate the main molecular -signaling -complexes associated with Nck, focusing on those involved in cancer progression.
Recent advances in understanding the activity and selectivity of kinase inhibitors and their relationships to protein structure are presented. Conformational selection in kinases is studied from empirical, data-driven and simulation approaches. Ligand binding and its affinity are, in many cases, determined by the predetermined active and inactive conformation of kinases. Binding affinity and selectivity predictions highlight the current state of the art and advances in computational chemistry as it applies to kinase inhibitor discovery. Kinome wide inhibitor profiling and cell panel profiling lead to a better understanding of selectivity and allow for target validation and patient tailoring hypotheses. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Inhibitors of Protein Kinases.
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) make up the largest and most diverse family of membrane receptors in the human genome, relaying information about the presence of diverse extracellular stimuli to the cell interior. All known GPCRs share a common architecture of seven membrane-spanning helices connected by intra- and extracellular loops. Most GPCR-mediated cellular responses result from the receptor acting as a ligand-activated guanine nucleotide exchange factor for heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding (G) proteins whose dissociated subunits activate effector enzymes or ion channels. GPCR signaling is subject to extensive negative regulation through receptor desensitization, sequestration, and down regulation, termination of G protein activation by GTPase-activation proteins, and enzymatic degradation of second messengers. Additional protein-protein interactions positively modulate GPCR signaling by influencing ligand-binding affinity and specificity, coupling between receptors, G proteins and effectors, or targeting to specific subcellular locations. These include the formation of GPCR homo- and heterodimers, the interaction of GPCRs with receptor activity-modifying proteins, and the binding of various scaffolding proteins to intracellular receptor domains. In some cases, these processes appear to generate signals in conjunction with, or even independent of, G protein activation.
In this issue of Cell, report that the C2 domain of the serine/threonine protein kinase Cdelta is a phosphotyrosine binding domain and present the crystal structure of this C2 domain bound to a peptide containing phosphotyrosine. Prior to this work, C2 domains were thought to bind only to phospholipids or to unphosphorylated proteins, and the SH2 and PTB domains were the only signaling domains known to recognize phosphotyrosine. This new role for the C2 domain links phosphotyrosine recognition directly to serine/threonine kinase activity and reveals an unexpected mechanism for crosstalk between distinct signaling pathways.
The non-receptor tyrosine kinase Csk serves as an indispensable negative regulator of the Src family tyrosine kinases (SFKs) by specifically phosphorylating the negative regulatory site of SFKs, thereby suppressing their oncogenic potential. Csk is primarily regulated through its SH2 domain, which is required for membrane translocation of Csk via binding to scaffold proteins such as Cbp/PAG1. The binding of scaffolds to the SH2 domain can also upregulate Csk kinase activity. These regulatory features have been elucidated by analyses of Csk structure at the atomic levels. Although Csk itself may not be mutated in human cancers, perturbation of the regulatory system consisting of Csk, Cbp/PAG1, or other scaffolds, and certain tyrosine phosphatases may explain the upregulation of SFKs frequently observed in human cancers. This review focuses on the molecular bases for the function, structure, and regulation of Csk as a unique regulatory tyrosine kinase for SFKs.
Ponatinib is a multi-target tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets ABL, SRC, FGFR, and so on. It was designed to overcome the resistance of BCR-ABL mutation to imatinib, especially the gatekeeper mutation ABL(T315I). The molecular mechanism by which ponatinib overcomes mutations of BCR-ABL and some other targets has been explained, but little information is known about the characteristics of ponatinib binding to SRC. Here, we showed that ponatinib inhibited wild type SRC kinase but failed to inhibit SRC gatekeeper mutants in both biochemical and cellular assays. We determined the crystal structure of ponatinib in complex with the SRC kinase domain. In addition, by structural analysis, we provided a possible explanation for why ponatinib showed different effects on SRC and other kinases with gatekeeper mutations. The resistance mechanism of SRC gatekeeper mutations to ponatinib may provide meaningful information for designing inhibitors against SRC family kinases in the future.
Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is a novel cysteine-rich, secreted peptide, which is implicated in human atherosclerosis and fibrotic disorders such as systemic scleroderma. CTGF is a member of the peptide family that includes serum-induced immediate early gene products, a v-src-induced peptide, and a putative proto-oncogene. The CTGF gene family is a modular protein and is conserved throughout evolution. CTGF mRNA has been found in the human, mouse, chicken, frog, and fly. The functions of the CTGF gene family include embryogenesis, wound healing, and regulation of extracellular matrix production. Human CTGF is undetectable in normal blood vessels but overexpressed in atherosclerotic lesions, suggesting an important role in atherogenesis.
The Hsp70 and Hsp90 molecular chaperone systems are critical regulators of protein homeostasis (proteostasis) in eukaryotes under normal and stressed conditions. The Hsp70 and Hsp90 systems physically and functionally interact to ensure cellular proteostasis. Co-chaperones interact with Hsp70 and Hsp90 to regulate and to promote their molecular chaperone functions. Mammalian Hop, also called Stip1, and its budding yeast ortholog Sti1 are eukaryote-specific co-chaperones, which have been thought to be essential for substrate ("client") transfer from Hsp70 to Hsp90. Substrate transfer is facilitated by the ability of Hop to interact simultaneously with Hsp70 and Hsp90 as part of a ternary complex. Intriguingly, in prokaryotes, which lack a Hop ortholog, the Hsp70 and Hsp90 orthologs interact directly. Recent evidence shows that eukaryotic Hsp70 and Hsp90 can also form a prokaryote-like binary chaperone complex in the absence of Hop, and that this binary complex displays enhanced protein folding and anti-aggregation activities. The canonical Hsp70-Hop-Hsp90 ternary chaperone complex is essential for optimal maturation and stability of a small subset of clients, including the glucocorticoid receptor, the tyrosine kinase v-Src, and the 26S/30S proteasome. Whereas many cancers have increased levels of Hop, the levels of Hop decrease in the aging human brain. Since Hop is not essential in all eukaryotic cells and organisms, tuning Hop levels or activity might be beneficial for the treatment of cancer and neurodegeneration.
The signaling machinery in cells is a complex, multi-factorial network of cross-talking proteins that enables dynamic communication between upstream causal factors and downstream effectors. Non-receptor tyrosine kinases, including Src, are the intermediates of information transfer, controlling pathways as diverse as cell growth, migration, death, and genome maintenance. When expressed as viral genes these proteins are potent carcinogens, yet analogous genetic alterations are rarely observed in human tumors. In seeking to characterize the role of the non-receptor tyrosine kinase Src in neoplasia, arguments can be made that the consequences of mutation, or perturbations in the activity or expression of this protein is a determinative factor in clinical prognosis and pathogenicity. In a variety of tumor types including those derived from the colon and breast, the Src non-receptor tyrosine kinase is either overexpressed or constitutively active in a large percentage of the tumors. Increased expression or activity of Src correlates with the stage and metastatic potential of some neoplasia.
Phosphoprotein associated with glycosphingolipid-enriched microdomains (PAG), also known as Csk-binding protein (Cbp), is a ubiquitously expressed transmembrane adaptor protein present in lipid rafts and involved in a number of signaling pathways. It helps recruit cytoplasmic C-terminal Src kinase (Csk) to lipid raft-associated Src kinases, mediates a link to actin cytoskeleton and interacts with several other important cytoplasmic and plasma membrane-associated proteins. In recent years, PAG has been implicated in various aspects of cancer cell biology. Our review covers all so far published data on this interesting protein.
The Grb7 family is a rapidly emerging group of Src homology (SH)2 domain-containing signalling proteins that currently contains three members, Grb7, 10 and 14. These proteins possess a conserved multidomain structure, including a central region exhibiting significant homology to the Caenorhabditis elegans protein Mig10. Differences in tissue expression and SH2 binding selectivity suggest that these adaptor proteins function in a tissue-specific manner to link specific receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) and other tyrosine phosphorylated proteins to as yet uncharacterised downstream effectors. Interestingly, Grb7 proteins exhibit differential expression amongst a variety of human cancers and cancer cell lines. Consequently, these proteins not only are likely to perform a fundamental signalling role, but may also modulate RTK signalling in cancer cells.
The crosstalk between growth factor and adhesion receptors is key for cell growth and migration. In pathological settings, these receptors are drivers of cancer. Yet, how growth and adhesion signals are spatially organized and integrated is poorly understood. Here we use quantitative fluorescence and electron microscopy to reveal a mechanism where flat clathrin lattices partition and activate growth factor signals via a coordinated response that involves crosstalk between epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the adhesion receptor beta5-integrin. We show that ligand-activated EGFR, Grb2, Src, and beta5-integrin are captured by clathrin coated-structures at the plasma membrane. Clathrin structures dramatically grow in response to EGF into large flat plaques and provide a signaling platform that link EGFR and beta5-integrin through Src-mediated phosphorylation. Disrupting this EGFR/Src/beta5-integrin axis prevents both clathrin plaque growth and dampens receptor signaling. Our study reveals a reciprocal regulation between clathrin lattices and two different receptor systems to coordinate and enhance signaling. These findings have broad implications for the regulation of growth factor signaling, adhesion, and endocytosis.
Autoinflammatory diseases include a number of monogenic systemic inflammatory diseases, as well as acquired autoinflammatory diseases such as gout. Here, we show that the myeloid Src-family kinases Hck, Fgr, and Lyn are critical for experimental models of gout, as well as for genetically determined systemic inflammation in the Ptpn6me-v/me-v (motheaten viable) mouse model. The Hck-/-Fgr-/-Lyn-/- mutation abrogated various monosodium urate (MSU) crystal-induced pro-inflammatory responses of neutrophils, and protected mice from the development of gouty arthritis. The Src-family inhibitor dasatinib abrogated MSU crystal-induced responses of human neutrophils and reduced experimental gouty arthritis in mice. The Hck-/-Fgr-/-Lyn-/- mutation also abrogated spontaneous inflammation and prolonged the survival of the Ptpn6me-v/me-v mice. Spontaneous adhesion and superoxide release of Ptpn6me-v/me-v neutrophils were also abolished by the Hck-/-Fgr-/-Lyn-/- mutation. Excessive activation of tyrosine phosphorylation pathways in myeloid cells may characterize a subset of autoinflammatory diseases.
Signal transduction molecules translate extracellular inputs into their corresponding intracellular responses. Given the complexity and number of signaling pathways present in the eukaryotic cell, it is not surprising that the functions of signaling molecules are often tightly regulated. Autoinhibition is a prevalent mechanism for governing the function of signaling molecules. The relationship between the viral, oncogenic form of Src (v-Src) and the corresponding cellular proto-oncogene (c-Src) highlights the importance of inhibitory intramolecular interactions. Src provides an example of the dramatic cellular consequences arising from the loss of autoregulation.
