Processed sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2; Transcriptional activator required for lipid homeostasis. Regulates transcription of the LDL receptor gene as well as the cholesterol and to a lesser degree the fatty acid synthesis pathway (By similarity). Binds the sterol regulatory element 1 (SRE-1) (5'- ATCACCCCAC-3') found in the flanking region of the LDRL and HMG-CoA synthase genes.
The metabolic and signaling pathways regulating aggressive mesenchymal colorectal cancer (CRC) initiation and progression through the serrated route are largely unknown. Although relatively well characterized as BRAF mutant cancers, their poor response to current targeted therapy, difficult preneoplastic detection, and challenging endoscopic resection make the identification of their metabolic requirements a priority. Here, we demonstrate that the phosphorylation of SCAP by the atypical PKC (aPKC), PKClambda/iota promotes its degradation and inhibits the processing and activation of SREBP2, the master regulator of cholesterol biosynthesis. We show that the upregulation of SREBP2 and cholesterol by reduced aPKC levels is essential for controlling metaplasia and generating the most aggressive cell subpopulation in serrated tumors in mice and humans. Since these alterations are also detected prior to neoplastic transformation, together with the sensitivity of these tumors to cholesterol metabolism inhibitors, our data indicate that targeting cholesterol biosynthesis is a potential mechanism for serrated chemoprevention.
Glutamine is critical for tumor progression, and restriction of its availability is emerging as a potential therapeutic strategy. The metabolic plasticity of tumor cells helps them adapting to glutamine restriction. However, the role of cholesterol metabolism in this process is relatively unexplored. Here, we reported that glutamine deprivation inhibited cholesterol synthesis in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Reactivation of cholesterol synthesis enhanced glutamine-deprivation-induced cell death of HCC cells, which is partially duo to augmented NADPH depletion and lipid peroxidation. Mechanistically, glutamine deprivation induced lipophagy to transport cholesterol from lipid droplets (LDs) to endoplasmic reticulum (ER), leading to inhibit SREBF2 maturation and cholesterol synthesis, and maintain redox balance for survival. Glutamine deprivation decreased mTORC1 activity to induce lipophagy. Importantly, administration of U18666A, CQ, or shTSC2 viruses further augmented GPNA-induced inhibition of xenograft tumor growth. Clinical data supported that glutamine utilization positively correlated with cholesterol synthesis, which is associated with poor prognosis of HCC patients. Collectively, our study revealed that cholesterol synthesis inhibition is required for the survival of HCC under glutamine-restricted tumor microenvironment.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by the presence of amyloid beta (Abeta) plaques, tau tangles, inflammation, and loss of cognitive function. Genetic variation in a cholesterol transport protein, apolipoprotein E (apoE), is the most common genetic risk factor for sporadic AD. In vitro evidence suggests that apoE links to Abeta production through nanoscale lipid compartments (lipid clusters), but its regulation in vivo is unclear. Here, we use superresolution imaging in the mouse brain to show that apoE utilizes astrocyte-derived cholesterol to specifically traffic neuronal amyloid precursor protein (APP) in and out of lipid clusters, where it interacts with beta- and gamma-secretases to generate Abeta-peptide. We find that the targeted deletion of astrocyte cholesterol synthesis robustly reduces amyloid and tau burden in a mouse model of AD. Treatment with cholesterol-free apoE or knockdown of cholesterol synthesis in astrocytes decreases cholesterol levels in cultured neurons and causes APP to traffic out of lipid clusters, where it interacts with alpha-secretase and gives rise to soluble APP-alpha (sAPP-alpha), a neuronal protective product of APP. Changes in cellular cholesterol have no effect on alpha-, beta-, and gamma-secretase trafficking, suggesting that the ratio of Abeta to sAPP-alpha is regulated by the trafficking of the substrate, not the enzymes. We conclude that cholesterol is kept low in neurons, which inhibits Abeta accumulation and enables the astrocyte regulation of Abeta accumulation by cholesterol signaling.
Rationale: Metastasis, the development of secondary malignant growth at a distance from a primary tumor, is the main cause of cancer-associated death. However, little is known about how metastatic cancer cells adapt to and colonize in the new organ environment. Here we sought to investigate the functional mechanism of cholesterol metabolic aberration in colorectal carcinoma (CRC) liver metastasis. Methods: The expression of cholesterol metabolism-related genes in primary colorectal tumors (PT) and paired liver metastases (LM) were examined by RT-PCR. The role of SREBP2-dependent cholesterol biosynthesis pathway in cell growth and CRC liver metastasis were determined by SREBP2 silencing in CRC cell lines and experimental metastasis models including, intra-splenic injection models and liver orthotropic injection model. Growth factors treatment and co-culture experiment were performed to reveal the mechanism underlying the up-regulation of SREBP2 in CRC liver metastases. The in vivo efficacy of inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis pathway by betulin or simvastatin were evaluated in experimental metastasis models. Results: In the present study, we identify a colorectal cancer (CRC) liver metastasis-specific cholesterol metabolic pathway involving the activation of SREBP2-dependent cholesterol biosynthesis, which is required for the colonization and growth of metastatic CRC cells in the liver. Inhibiting this cholesterol biosynthesis pathway suppresses CRC liver metastasis. Mechanically, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) from liver environment activates SREBP2-dependent cholesterol biosynthesis pathway by activating c-Met/PI3K/AKT/mTOR axis in CRC cells. Conclusion: Our findings support the notion that CRC liver metastases show a specific cholesterol metabolic aberration. Targeting this cholesterol biosynthesis pathway could be a promising treatment for CRC liver metastasis.
Aberrant activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a common molecular event in a variety of pathological settings, including genetic tumor syndromes, cancer, and obesity. However, the cell-intrinsic consequences of mTORC1 activation remain poorly defined. Through a combination of unbiased genomic, metabolomic, and bioinformatic approaches, we demonstrate that mTORC1 activation is sufficient to stimulate specific metabolic pathways, including glycolysis, the oxidative arm of the pentose phosphate pathway, and de novo lipid biosynthesis. This is achieved through the activation of a transcriptional program affecting metabolic gene targets of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF1alpha) and sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP1 and SREBP2). We find that SREBP1 and 2 promote proliferation downstream of mTORC1, and the activation of these transcription factors is mediated by S6K1. Therefore, in addition to promoting protein synthesis, mTORC1 activates specific bioenergetic and anabolic cellular processes that are likely to contribute to human physiology and disease.
BACKGROUND: Migraine is a common neurological disorder with a strong genetic component. Despite the identification of over 100 loci associated with migraine susceptibility through genome-wide association studies (GWAS), the underlying causative genes and biological mechanisms remain predominantly elusive. METHODS: The FinnGen R10 dataset, consisting of 333,711 subjects (20,908 cases and 312,803 controls), was utilized in conjunction with the Genotype-Tissue Expression Project (GTEx) v8 EQTls files to conduct cross-tissue transcriptome association studies (TWAS). Functional Summary-based Imputation (FUSION) was employed to validate these findings in single tissues. Additionally, candidate susceptibility genes were screened using Gene Analysis combined with Multi-marker Analysis of Genomic Annotation (MAGMA). Subsequent Mendelian randomization (MR) and colocalization analyses were conducted. Furthermore, GeneMANIA analysis was employed to enhance our understanding of the functional implications of these susceptibility genes. RESULTS: We identified a total of 19 susceptibility genes associated with migraine in the cross-tissue TWAS analysis. Two novel susceptibility genes, REV1 and SREBF2, were validated through both single tissue TWAS and MAGMA analysis. Mendelian randomization and colocalization analyses further confirmed these findings. REV1 may reduce the migraine risk by regulating DNA damage repair, while SREBF2 may increase the risk of migraine by regulating cholesterol metabolism. CONCLUSION: Our study identified two novel genes whose predicted expression was associated with the risk of migraine, providing new insights into the genetic framework of migraine.
Macrophage cholesterol homeostasis is crucial for health and disease and has been linked to the lipid-peroxidizing enzyme arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase type B (ALOX15B), albeit molecular mechanisms remain obscure. We performed global transcriptome and immunofluorescence analysis in ALOX15B-silenced primary human macrophages and observed a reduction of nuclear sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP) 2, the master transcription factor of cellular cholesterol biosynthesis. Consequently, SREBP2-target gene expression was reduced as were the sterol biosynthetic intermediates desmosterol and lathosterol as well as 25- and 27-hydroxycholesterol. Mechanistically, suppression of ALOX15B reduced lipid peroxidation in primary human macrophages and thereby attenuated activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase ERK1/2, which lowered SREBP2 abundance and activity. Low nuclear SREBP2 rendered both, ALOX15B-silenced and ERK1/2-inhibited macrophages refractory to SREBP2 activation upon blocking the NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter 1. These studies suggest a regulatory mechanism controlling macrophage cholesterol homeostasis based on ALOX15B-mediated lipid peroxidation and concomitant ERK1/2 activation.
The de novo synthesis of fatty acids has emerged as a therapeutic target for various diseases, including cancer. Because cancer cells are intrinsically buffered to combat metabolic stress, it is important to understand how cells may adapt to the loss of de novo fatty acid biosynthesis. Here, we use pooled genome-wide CRISPR screens to systematically map genetic interactions (GIs) in human HAP1 cells carrying a loss-of-function mutation in fatty acid synthase (FASN), whose product catalyses the formation of long-chain fatty acids. FASN-mutant cells show a strong dependence on lipid uptake that is reflected in negative GIs with genes involved in the LDL receptor pathway, vesicle trafficking and protein glycosylation. Further support for these functional relationships is derived from additional GI screens in query cell lines deficient in other genes involved in lipid metabolism, including LDLR, SREBF1, SREBF2 and ACACA. Our GI profiles also identify a potential role for the previously uncharacterized gene C12orf49 (which we call LUR1) in regulation of exogenous lipid uptake through modulation of SREBF2 signalling in response to lipid starvation. Overall, our data highlight the genetic determinants underlying the cellular adaptation associated with loss of de novo fatty acid synthesis and demonstrate the power of systematic GI mapping for uncovering metabolic buffering mechanisms in human cells.
OBJECTIVE: Increased de novo fatty acid (FA) synthesis and cholesterol biosynthesis have been independently described in many tumour types, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). DESIGN: We investigated the functional contribution of fatty acid synthase (Fasn)-mediated de novo FA synthesis in a murine HCC model induced by loss of Pten and overexpression of c-Met (sgPten/c-Met) using liver-specific Fasn knockout mice. Expression arrays and lipidomic analysis were performed to characterise the global gene expression and lipid profiles, respectively, of sgPten/c-Met HCC from wild-type and Fasn knockout mice. Human HCC cell lines were used for in vitro studies. RESULTS: Ablation of Fasn significantly delayed sgPten/c-Met-driven hepatocarcinogenesis in mice. However, eventually, HCC emerged in Fasn knockout mice. Comparative genomic and lipidomic analyses revealed the upregulation of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis, as well as decreased triglyceride levels and increased cholesterol esters, in HCC from these mice. Mechanistically, loss of Fasn promoted nuclear localisation and activation of sterol regulatory element binding protein 2 (Srebp2), which triggered cholesterogenesis. Blocking cholesterol synthesis via the dominant negative form of Srebp2 (dnSrebp2) completely prevented sgPten/c-Met-driven hepatocarcinogenesis in Fasn knockout mice. Similarly, silencing of FASN resulted in increased SREBP2 activation and hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase (HMGCR) expression in human HCC cell lines. Concomitant inhibition of FASN-mediated FA synthesis and HMGCR-driven cholesterol production was highly detrimental for HCC cell growth in culture. CONCLUSION: Our study uncovers a novel functional crosstalk between aberrant lipogenesis and cholesterol biosynthesis pathways in hepatocarcinogenesis, whose concomitant inhibition might represent a therapeutic option for HCC.
As the most prevalent epitranscriptomic modification, N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) shows important roles in a variety of diseases through regulating the processing, stability and translation of target RNAs. However, the potential contributions of m(6)A to RNA functions are unclear. Here, we identified a functional and prognosis-related m(6)A-modified RNA SREBF2-AS1 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The expression of SREBF2-AS1 and SREBF2 in HCC tissues and cells was measured by RT-qPCR. m(6)A modification level of SREBF2-AS1 was measured by methylated RNA immunoprecipitation assay. The roles of SREBF2-AS1 in HCC progression and sorafenib resistance were investigated by proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and cell viability assays. The regulatory mechanisms of SREBF2-AS1 on SREBF2 were investigated by Chromatin isolation by RNA purification, RNA immunoprecipitation, CUT&RUN, and bisulfite DNA sequencing assays. Our findings showed that the expression of SREBF2-AS1 was increased in HCC tissues and cells, and positively correlated with poor survival of HCC patients. m(6)A modification level of SREBF2-AS1 was also increased in HCC and positively correlated with poor prognosis of HCC patients. METTL3 and METTL14-induced m(6)A modification upregulated SREBF2-AS1 expression through increasing SREBF2-AS1 transcript stability. Functional assays showed that only m(6)A-modified, but not non-modified SREBF2-AS1 promoted HCC progression and sorafenib resistance. Mechanistic investigations revealed that m(6)A-modified SREBF2-AS1 bound and recruited m(6)A reader FXR1 and DNA 5-methylcytosine dioxygenase TET1 to SREBF2 promoter, leading to DNA demethylation at SREBF2 promoter and the upregulation of SREBF2 transcription. Functional rescue assays showed that SREBF2 was the critical mediator of the oncogenic roles of SREBF2-AS1 in HCC. Together, this study showed that m(6)A-modified SREBF2-AS1 exerted oncogenic roles in HCC through inducing DNA demethylation and transcriptional activation of SREBF2, and suggested m(6)A-modified SREBF2-AS1 as a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for HCC.
Intestinal stem cell (ISC) is a promising therapeutic target for inflammatory bowel disease. Cholesterol availability is critical for ISC stemness. Low plasma cholesterol is a typical feature of Crohn's disease (CD); however, its impact on mucosal healing remains unclear. Here, we identified an essential role of sorting nexin 10 (SNX10) in maintaining the stemness of ISCs. SNX10 expression in intestinal tissues positively correlates with the severity of human CD and mouse colitis. Conditional SNX10 knockout in intestinal epithelial cells or ISCs promotes intestinal mucosal repair by maintaining the ISC population associated with increased intracellular cholesterol synthesis. Disassociation of ERLIN2 with SCAP by SNX10 deletion enhances the activation of SREBP2, resulting in increased cholesterol biosynthesis. DC-SX029, a small-molecule inhibitor of SNX10, was used to verify the druggable potential of SNX10 for the treatment of patients with CD. Our study provides a strategy for mucosal healing through SREBP2-mediated stemness restoration of ISCs.
Osteoclasts are multinucleated bone-resorbing cells, and their formation is tightly regulated to prevent excessive bone loss. However, the mechanisms by which osteoclast formation is restricted remain incompletely determined. Here, we found that sterol regulatory element binding protein 2 (SREBP2) functions as a negative regulator of osteoclast formation and inflammatory bone loss. Cholesterols and SREBP2, a key transcription factor for cholesterol biosynthesis, increased in the late phase of osteoclastogenesis. The ablation of SREBP2 in myeloid cells resulted in increased in vivo and in vitro osteoclastogenesis, leading to low bone mass. Moreover, deletion of SREBP2 accelerated inflammatory bone destruction in murine inflammatory osteolysis and arthritis models. SREBP2-mediated regulation of osteoclastogenesis is independent of its canonical function in cholesterol biosynthesis but is mediated, in part, by its downstream target, interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). Taken together, our study highlights a previously undescribed role of the SREBP2-IRF7 regulatory circuit as a negative feedback loop in osteoclast differentiation and represents a novel mechanism to restrain pathological bone destruction.
BACKGROUND: Glioblastomas (GBMs) display striking dysregulation of metabolism to promote tumor growth. Glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs) adapt to regions of heterogeneous nutrient availability, yet display dependency on de novo cholesterol biosynthesis. The transcription factor Sterol Regulatory Element-Binding Protein 2 (SREBP2) regulates cholesterol biosynthesis enzymes and uptake receptors. Here, we investigate adaptive behavior of GSCs under different cholesterol supplies. METHODS: In silico analysis of patient tumors demonstrated enrichment of cholesterol synthesis associated with decreased angiogenesis. Comparative gene expression of cholesterol biosynthesis enzymes in paired GBM specimens and GSCs were performed. In vitro and in vivo loss-of-function genetic and pharmacologic assays were conducted to evaluate the effect of SREBP2 on GBM cholesterol biosynthesis, proliferation, and self-renewal. Chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative real-time PCR was leveraged to map the regulation of SREBP2 to cholesterol biosynthesis enzymes and uptake receptors in GSCs. RESULTS: Cholesterol biosynthetic enzymes were expressed at higher levels in GBM tumor cores than in invasive margins. SREBP2 promoted cholesterol biosynthesis in GSCs, especially under starvation, as well as proliferation, self-renewal, and tumor growth. SREBP2 governed the balance between cholesterol biosynthesis and uptake in different nutrient conditions. CONCLUSIONS: SREBP2 displays context-specific regulation of cholesterol biology based on its availability in the microenvironment with induction of cholesterol biosynthesis in the tumor core and uptake in the margin, informing a novel treatment strategy for GBM.
Atherosclerosis is a cardiovascular disease caused by cholesterol-laden arterial plaques. This study evaluated the correlation between interleukin-6 (IL-6), its receptors (IL6R/CD126), and glycoprotein 130 (gp130) alongside atherosclerosis biomarkers in a cohort of 142 subjects, equally divided between lean and obese individuals. Subsequent analyses used THP-1-derived macrophages to assess the biochemical impact of inhibiting IL-6 receptors. IL-6 secretion increased with atherosclerosis in obese subjects, while IL6R/CD126 and gp130 on monocytes decreased. Pharmacological gp130 inhibition altered lipid metabolism, increasing LDLR gene expression and cholesterol synthesis via SREBF2 and mevalonate kinase, along with HMG-CoA reductase at protein levels. gp130-deficient cells produced more cholesterol and had lower ABCA1 levels, suggesting hindered cholesterol efflux. Filipin III staining confirmed cholesterol retention in gp130-inhibited cells. Ex-vivo investigation on lean PBMCs further defined the impact of gp130 inhibition on the reduction of cholesterol efflux. Our results indicates gp130 is crucial for macrophage reverse cholesterol transport and may be a target for atherosclerosis treatments.
Site-one protease (S1P) conducts the first of two cleavage events in the Golgi to activate Sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs) and upregulate lipogenic transcription. S1P is also required for a wide array of additional signaling pathways. A zymogen serine protease, S1P matures through autoproteolysis of two pro-domains, with one cleavage event in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the other in the Golgi. We recently identified the SREBP regulating gene, (SPRING), which enhances S1P maturation and is necessary for SREBP signaling. Here, we report the cryo-EM structures of S1P and S1P-SPRING at sub-2.5 A resolution. SPRING activates S1P by dislodging its inhibitory pro-domain and stabilizing intra-domain contacts. Functionally, SPRING licenses S1P to cleave its cognate substrate, SREBP2. Our findings reveal an activation mechanism for S1P and provide insights into how spatial control of S1P activity underpins cholesterol homeostasis.
Mutations in the MAPT gene that encodes tau lead to frontotemporal dementia (FTD) with pathology evident in both cerebral neurons and glia. Human cerebral organoids (hCOs) from individuals harboring pathogenic tau mutations can reveal the earliest downstream effects on molecular pathways within a developmental context, generating interacting neurons and glia. We found that in hCOs carrying the V337M and R406W tau mutations, the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway in astrocytes was the top upregulated gene set compared with isogenic controls by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq). The 15 upregulated genes included HMGCR, ACAT2, STARD4, LDLR, and SREBF2. This result was confirmed in a homozygous R406W mutant cell line by immunostaining and sterol measurements. Cholesterol abundance in the brain is tightly regulated by efflux and cholesterol biosynthetic enzyme levels in astrocytes, and dysregulation can cause aberrant phosphorylation of tau. Our findings suggest that cholesterol dyshomeostasis is an early event in the etiology of neurodegeneration caused by tau mutations.
AIMS: Atherosclerosis, the leading cause of cardiovascular diseases, is driven by high blood cholesterol levels and chronic inflammation. Low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLR) play a critical role in regulating blood cholesterol levels by binding to and clearing LDLs from the circulation. The disruption of the interaction between proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin 9 (PCSK9) and LDLR reduces blood cholesterol levels. It is not well known whether other members of the LDLR superfamily may be targets of PCSK9. The aim of this work was to determine if LDLR-related protein 5 (LRP5) is a PCSK9 target and to study the role of PCSK9 and LRP5 in foam cell formation and lipid accumulation. METHODS AND RESULTS: Primary cultures of human inflammatory cells (monocytes and macrophages) were silenced for LRP5 or PCSK9 and challenged with LDLs. We first show that LRP5 is needed for macrophage lipid uptake since LRP5-silenced macrophages show less intracellular CE accumulation. In macrophages, internalization of LRP5-bound LDL is already highly evident after 5 h of LDL incubation and lasts up to 24 h; however, in the absence of both LRP5 and PCSK9, there is a strong reduction of CE accumulation indicating a role for both proteins in lipid uptake. Immunoprecipitation experiments show that LRP5 forms a complex with PCSK9 in lipid-loaded macrophages. Finally, PCSK9 participates in TLR4/NFkB signalling; a decreased TLR4 protein expression levels and a decreased nuclear translocation of NFkappaB were detected in PCSK9 silenced cells after lipid loading, indicating a downregulation of the TLR4/NFkappaB pathway. CONCLUSION: Our results show that both LRP5 and PCSK9 participate in lipid uptake in macrophages. In the absence of LRP5, there is a reduced release of PCSK9 indicating that LRP5 also participates in the mechanism of release of soluble PCSK9. Furthermore, PCSK9 up-regulates TLR4/NFkappaB favouring inflammation.
The sterol regulatory element-binding factor-2 (SREBF2) gene is a bifunctional locus encoding SREBP-2, a well-known transcriptional regulator of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis, and microRNA-33a, which has recently been shown to reduce expression of proteins involved in export of cholesterol and beta-oxidation of fatty acids, thus adding an unexpected layer of complexity and fine-tuning to regulation of lipid homeostasis.
BACKGROUND: Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) is a serine-glycine-one-carbon metabolic enzyme in which SHMT1 and SHMT2 encode the cytoplasmic and mitochondrial isoenzymes, respectively. SHMT1 and SHMT2 are key players in cancer metabolic reprogramming, and thus are attractive targets for cancer therapy. However, the role of SHMT in patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has not been fully elucidated. We aimed to systematically analyze the expression, gene regulatory network, prognostic value, and target prediction of SHMT1 and SHMT2 in patients with kidney chromophobe (KICH), kidney renal clear cell carcinoma (KIRC), and kidney renal papillary cell carcinoma (KIRP); elucidate the association between SHMT expression and RCC; and identify potential new targets for clinical RCC treatment. METHODS: Several online databases were used for the analysis, including cBioPortal, TRRUST, GeneMANIA, GEPIA, Metascape, UALCAN, LinkedOmics, and TIMER. RESULTS: SHMT1 and SHMT2 transcript levels were significantly down- and upregulated, respectively, in patients with KICH, KIRC, and KIRP, based on sample type, individual cancer stage, sex, and patient age. Compared to men, women with KIRC and KIRP showed significantly up- and downregulated SHMT1 transcript levels, respectively. However, SHMT2 transcript levels were significantly upregulated in the patients mentioned above. KIRC and KIRP patients with high SHMT1 expression had longer survival periods than those with low SHMT1 expression. In patients with KIRC, the findings were similar to those mentioned above. However, in KICH patients, the findings were the opposite regarding SHMT2 expression. SHMT1 versus SHMT2 were altered by 9% versus 3% (n = 66 KICH patients), 4% versus 4% (n = 446 KIRC patients), and 6% versus 7% (n = 280 KIRP patients). SHMT1 versus SHMT2 promoter methylation levels were significantly up- and downregulated in patients with KIRP versus KIRC and KIRP, respectively. SHMT1, SHMT2, and their neighboring genes (NG) formed a complex network of interactions. The molecular functions of SHMT1 and its NG in patients with KICH, KIRC, and KIRP, included clathrin adaptor, metalloendopeptidase, and GTPase regulator activities; lipid binding, active transmembrane transporter activity, and lipid transporter activity; and type I interferon receptor binding, integrin binding, and protein heterodimerization, respectively. Their respective Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were involved in lysosome activity, human immunodeficiency virus 1 infection, and endocytosis; coronavirus disease 2019 and neurodegeneration pathways (multiple diseases); and RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathway, cell cycle, and actin cytoskeleton regulation. The molecular functions of SHMT2 and its NG in patients with KICH, KIRC, and KIRP included cell adhesion molecule binding and phospholipid binding; protein domain-specific binding, enzyme inhibitor activity, and endopeptidase activity; and hormone activity, integrin binding, and protein kinase regulator activity, respectively. For patients with KIRC versus KIRP, the KEGG pathways were involved in cAMP and calcium signaling pathways versus microRNAs (MiRNAs) in cancer cells and neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions, respectively. We identified the key transcription factors of SHMT1 and its NG. CONCLUSIONS: SHMT1 and SHMT2 expression levels were different in patients with RCC. SHMT1 and SHMT2 may be potential therapeutic and prognostic biomarkers in these patients. Transcription factor (MYC, STAT1, PPARG, AR, SREBF2, and SP3) and miRNA (miR-17-5P, miR-422, miR-492, miR-137, miR-30A-3P, and miR-493) regulations may be important strategies for RCC treatment.
An increased lipopolysaccharide (LPS) level in patients with cirrhosis induced the dysregulation of sterol regulatory element-binding transcription factor 2 (SREBF2), which participated in the modulation of tumor inflammatory microenvironment. However, the role of SREBF2 in the LPS-induced injury of portal vein endothelium was scarcely reported. This study aimed to investigate the effects of SREBF2 on the LPS-induced injury to endothelial cells (ECs) in vitro and in vivo and explore the underlying mechanism. In this study, we found that LPS increased SREBF2 expression through activating the TLR4/JNK/c-Jun pathway and suppressed UBE2I-mediated SREBF2 sumoylation to enhance its transcriptional activity. The dysregulation of SREBF2 induced ER stress by increasing the intracellular cholesterol level and facilitated Bax expression to cause additional damage to LPS-induced ECs. As a potential intervention, miR590-3p negatively regulated SREBF2 expression and upregulated UBE2I expression by targeting TLR4, thus alleviating LPS-induced injury. These results suggest that LPS-induced SREBF2 triggered ER stress and promoted Bax expression to injure ECs, which was reversed by miR590-3p. The mechanisms of SREBF2 mediated LPS-induced endothelial injury of portal vein, which might be the therapeutic target for PVT development in cirrhosis patients. 1. LPS promoted SREBF2 expression by activating the TLR4/JNK/c-Jun pathway and suppressed UBE2I-mediated SREBF2 sumoylation to upregulate SREBF2 transcriptional activity 2. SREBF2-mediated ER stress and Bax expression involved in LPS-induced EC injury 3. miR590-3p decreased SREBF2 expression by targeting TLR4 and mitigated LPS-induced EC injury.
