SRSF protein kinase 2 C-terminal; Serine/arginine-rich protein-specific kinase which specifically phosphorylates its substrates at serine residues located in regions rich in arginine/serine dipeptides, known as RS domains and is involved in the phosphorylation of SR splicing factors and the regulation of splicing. Promotes neuronal apoptosis by up-regulating cyclin-D1 (CCND1) expression. This is done by the phosphorylation of SRSF2, leading to the suppression of p53/TP53 phosphorylation thereby relieving the repressive effect of p53/TP53 on cyclin-D1 (CCND1) expression. Phosphorylates  [...] 
O-linked beta-N-acetyl glucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is attached to proteins under glucose-replete conditions; this posttranslational modification results in molecular and physiological changes that affect cell fate. Here we show that posttranslational modification of serine/arginine-rich protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) by O-GlcNAc regulates de novo lipogenesis by regulating pre-mRNA splicing. We found that O-GlcNAc transferase O-GlcNAcylated SRPK2 at a nuclear localization signal (NLS), which triggers binding of SRPK2 to importin alpha. Consequently, O-GlcNAcylated SRPK2 was imported into the nucleus, where it phosphorylated serine/arginine-rich proteins and promoted splicing of lipogenic pre-mRNAs. We determined that protein nuclear import by O-GlcNAcylation-dependent binding of cargo protein to importin alpha might be a general mechanism in cells. This work reveals a role of O-GlcNAc in posttranscriptional regulation of de novo lipogenesis, and our findings indicate that importin alpha is a "reader" of an O-GlcNAcylated NLS.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Lipid accumulation induced by alcohol consumption is not only an early pathophysiological response but also a prerequisite for the progression of alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD). Alternative splicing regulates gene expression and protein diversity; dysregulation of this process is implicated in human liver diseases. However, how the alternative splicing regulation of lipid metabolism contributes to the pathogenesis of ALD remains undefined. APPROACH AND RESULTS: Serine-arginine-rich protein kinase 2 (SRPK2), a key kinase controlling alternative splicing, is activated in hepatocytes in response to alcohol, in mice with chronic-plus-binge alcohol feeding, and in patients with ALD. Such induction activates sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1 and promotes lipogenesis in ALD. Overexpression of FGF21 in transgenic mice abolishes alcohol-mediated induction of SRPK2 and its associated steatosis, lipotoxicity, and inflammation; these alcohol-induced pathologies are exacerbated in FGF21 knockout mice. Mechanistically, SRPK2 is required for alcohol-mediated impairment of serine-arginine splicing factor 10, which generates exon 7 inclusion in lipin 1 and triggers concurrent induction of lipogenic regulators-lipin 1beta and sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1. FGF21 suppresses alcohol-induced SRPK2 accumulation through mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 inhibition-dependent degradation of SRPK2. Silencing SRPK2 rescues alcohol-induced splicing dysregulation and liver injury in FGF21 knockout mice. CONCLUSIONS: These studies reveal that (1) the regulation of alternative splicing by SRPK2 is implicated in lipogenesis in humans with ALD; (2) FGF21 is a key hepatokine that ameliorates ALD pathologies largely by inhibiting SRPK2; and (3) targeting SRPK2 signaling by FGF21 may offer potential therapeutic approaches to combat ALD.
Obesity is a global epidemic and a major predisposing factor for cancer. Increasing evidence shows that obesity-associated stress is a key driver of cancer risk and progression. Previous work has identified the phase-separation organelles, stress granules (SG), as mutant KRAS-dependent mediators of stress adaptation. However, the dependence of tumorigenesis on these organelles is unknown. Here, we establish a causal link between SGs and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Importantly, we uncover that dependence on SGs is drastically heightened in obesity-associated PDAC. Furthermore, we identify a previously unknown regulator and component of SGs, namely, the serine/arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2), as a specific determinant of SG formation in obesity-associated PDAC. We show that SRPK2-mediated SG formation in obesity-associated PDAC is driven by hyperactivation of the IGF1/PI3K/mTOR/S6K1 pathway and that S6K1 inhibition selectively attenuates SGs and impairs obesity-associated PDAC development. SIGNIFICANCE: : We show that stress adaptation via the phase-separation organelles SGs mediates PDAC development. Moreover, preexisting stress conditions such as obesity are a driving force behind tumor SG dependence, and enhanced SG levels are key determinants and a chemopreventive target for obesity-associated PDAC. This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1825.
The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a master regulator of cell growth that stimulates macromolecule synthesis through transcription, RNA processing, and post-translational modification of metabolic enzymes. However, the mechanisms of how mTORC1 orchestrates multiple steps of gene expression programs remain unclear. Here, we identify family with sequence similarity 120A (FAM120A) as a transcription co-activator that couples transcription and splicing of de novo lipid synthesis enzymes downstream of mTORC1-serine/arginine-rich protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) signaling. The mTORC1-activated SRPK2 phosphorylates splicing factor serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1), enhancing its binding to FAM120A. FAM120A directly interacts with a lipogenic transcription factor SREBP1 at active promoters, thereby bridging the newly transcribed lipogenic genes from RNA polymerase II to the SRSF1 and U1-70K-containing RNA-splicing machinery. This mTORC1-regulated, multi-protein complex promotes efficient splicing and stability of lipogenic transcripts, resulting in fatty acid synthesis and cancer cell proliferation. These results elucidate FAM120A as a critical transcription co-factor that connects mTORC1-dependent gene regulation programs for anabolic cell growth.
Lipid metabolism is the key to ferroptosis susceptibility. However, little is known about the underlying mechanisms in osteosarcoma cells. Functional restriction of bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) reduced the susceptibility to erastin-induced ferroptosis of osteosarcoma cells both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanically, BRD4 controls the splicing efficiency of the RNA precursor (pre-mACSL3) of ACSL3 (ACSL3) by recruiting serinerich/threonine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) to assemble the splicing catalytic platform. Moreover, the AMP-binding domain of ACSL3 significantly influences arachidonic acid synthesis and thus determines the susceptibility to erastin-induced ferroptosis. Overall, we found a BRD4-mediated pre-mACSL3 splicing influences erastin-induced ferroptosis by affecting arachidonic acid synthesis in osteosarcoma cells. Data in this study fills some of the gap in understanding the post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms of ACSL3 and provides new insights into the mechanisms of lipid metabolism regulation and its effect on susceptibility to ferroptosis in osteosarcoma cells.
Serine-arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) is aberrantly expressed in human malignancies including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms, and the role of SRPK2 in chemosensitivity remains unexplored in CRC. We recently showed that SRPK2 promotes pancreatic cancer progression by down-regulating Numb and p53. Therefore, we investigated the cooperation between SRPK2, Numb and p53 in the cell migration, invasion and chemosensitivity of CRC in vitro. Here, we showed that SRPK2 expression was higher in CRC tumors than in nontumor tissues. SRPK2 expression was positively associated with clinicopathological characteristics of CRC patients, including tumor differentiation, T stage, N stage and UICC stage. Additionally, SRPK2 had no association with mutant p53 (mtp53) in SW480 and SW620 cells, but negatively regulated Numb and wild-type p53 (wtp53) in response to 5-fluorouracil or cisplatin treatment in HCT116 cells. Moreover, SRPK2, Numb and p53 coimmunoprecipitated into a triple complex with or without the treatment of 5-fluorouracil in HCT116 cells, and p53 knockdown reversed the up-regulation of wtp53 induced by SRPK2 silencing with chemical agent treatment. Furthermore, overexpression of SRPK2 increased cell migration and invasion and decreased chemosensitivity to 5-fluorouracil or cisplatin in HCT116 cells. Conversely, SRPK2 silencing decreased cell migration and invasion and increased chemosensitivity to 5-fluorouracil or cisplatin, yet these effects could be reversed by p53 knockdown under chemical agent treatment. These results thus reveal a novel role of SRPK2-Numb-p53 signaling in the progression of CRC and demonstrate that SRPK2 is a potential therapeutic target for CRC clinical therapy.
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) characterized by difficulties in social interaction and communication, repetitive behavior, and restricted interests. ASD has proven to have a strong genetic component. However, defining causal genes is still one of the main challenges in GWAS, since the vast majority (>90%) of detected signals lie within the non-coding genome. Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) colocalization analysis determines whether a specific variant is responsible for both a local eQTL and GWAS association and has helped leverage data and rendering gene discovery for a wide array of diseases. Here we further mine the largest ASD GWAS performed to date (18,381 cases and 27,969 controls) altogether with GWAS summary statistics from the main PGC studies (Schizophrenia, MD (Major Depression) and ADHD (Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder)), by using eQTpLot, a newly developed tool that illustrates the colocalization of GWAS and eQTL signals in a locus, and the enrichment of and correlation between the candidate gene eQTLs and trait-significant variants. This analysis points up 8 genes with a significant eQTL colocalization signal in ASD (CRHR1, KANSL1, MANBA, MAPT, MMP12, NKX2-2, PTPRE and WNT3) and one gene (SRPK2) with a marginally significant colocalization signal (r = 0.69, p < 1 x 10(-6)), and specifically highlights the potentially causal role of MAPT (r = 0.76, p < 1 x 10(-6)), NKX2-2 (r = 0.71, p-value = 2.26(-02)) and PTPRE (r = 0.97, p-value = 2.63(-04)) when restricting the analysis to brain tissue.
mTORC1 is a signal integrator and master regulator of cellular anabolic processes linked to cell growth and survival. Here, we demonstrate that mTORC1 promotes lipid biogenesis via SRPK2, a key regulator of RNA-binding SR proteins. mTORC1-activated S6K1 phosphorylates SRPK2 at Ser494, which primes Ser497 phosphorylation by CK1. These phosphorylation events promote SRPK2 nuclear translocation and phosphorylation of SR proteins. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis reveals that lipid biosynthetic enzymes are among the downstream targets of mTORC1-SRPK2 signaling. Mechanistically, SRPK2 promotes SR protein binding to U1-70K to induce splicing of lipogenic pre-mRNAs. Inhibition of this signaling pathway leads to intron retention of lipogenic genes, which triggers nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of SRPK2 blunts de novo lipid synthesis, thereby suppressing cell growth. These results thus reveal a novel role of mTORC1-SRPK2 signaling in post-transcriptional regulation of lipid metabolism and demonstrate that SRPK2 is a potential therapeutic target for mTORC1-driven metabolic disorders.
The serine/arginine-rich protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) has been reported as upregulated in several cancer types, with roles in hallmarks such as cell migration, growth, and apoptosis. These findings have indicated that SRPK2 is a promising emerging target in drug discovery initiatives. Although high-resolution models are available for SRPK2 (PDB 2X7G), they have been obtained with a heavily truncated recombinant protein version (~50% of the primary structure), due to the presence of long intrinsically unstructured regions. In the present work, we sought to characterize the structure of a full-length recombinant version of SRPK2 in solution. Low-resolution Small-Angle X-ray Scattering data were obtained for both versions of SRPK2. The truncated DeltaNDeltaS-SRPK2 presented a propensity to dimerize at higher concentrations whereas the full-length SRPK2 was mainly found as dimers. The hydrodynamic behavior of the full-length SRPK2 was further investigated by analytical size exclusion chromatography and sedimentation velocity analytical ultracentrifugation experiments. SRPK2 behaved as a monomer-dimer equilibrium and both forms have an elongated shape in solution, pointing to a stretched-to-closed tendency among the conformational plasticity observed. Taken together, these findings allowed us to define unique structural features of the SRPK2 within SRPK family, characterized by its flexible regions outside the bipartite kinase domain.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether specific immune response plasma proteins can predict an elevated risk of developing Long COVID symptoms or fatigue severity after SARS-CoV-2 infection. METHODS: This study was based on 257 outpatients with test-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection between February 2020 and January 2021. At least 12 weeks after the acute infection, 92 plasma proteins were measured using the Olink Target 96 immune response panel (median time between acute infection and venous blood sampling was 38.8 [IQR: 24.0-48.0] weeks). The presence of Long COVID symptoms and fatigue severity was assessed 115.8 [92.5-118.6] weeks after the acute infection by a follow-up postal survey. Long COVID (yes/no) was defined as having one or more of the following symptoms: fatigue, shortness of breath, concentration or memory problems. The severity of fatigue was assessed using the Fatigue Assessment Scale (FAS). In multivariable-adjusted logistic and linear regression models the associations between each plasma protein (exposure) and Long COVID (yes/no) or severity of fatigue were investigated. RESULTS: Nine plasma proteins were significantly associated with Long COVID before, but not after adjusting for multiple testing (FDR-adjustment): DFFA, TRIM5, TRIM21, HEXIM1, SRPK2, PRDX5, PIK3AP1, IFNLR1 and HCLS1. Moreover, a total of 10 proteins were significantly associated with severity of fatigue before FDR-adjustment: SRPK2, ITGA6, CLEC4G, HEXIM1, PPP1R9B, PLXNA4, PRDX5, DAPP1, STC1 and HCLS1. Only SRPK2 and ITGA6 remained significantly associated after FDR-adjustment. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that certain immune response plasma proteins might play an important role in the pathophysiology of Long COVID and severity of fatigue after SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Colon cancer is one of the major causes of cancer-related death in the world. Understanding the molecular mechanism underlying this malignancy will facilitate the diagnosis and treatment. Serine-arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) has been reported to be upregulated in several cancer types. However, its expression and functions in colon cancer remains unknown. In this study, it was found that the expression of SRPK2 was up-regulated in the clinical colon cancer samples. Overexpression of SRPK2 promoted the growth and migration of colon cancer cells, while knocking down the expression of SRPK2 inhibited the growth, migration and tumorigenecity of colon cancer cells. Molecular mechanism studies revealed that SRPK2 activated ERK signaling in colon cancer cells. Taken together, our study demonstrated the tumor promoting roles of SRPK2 in colon cancer cells and SRPK2 might be a promising therapeutic target for colon cancer.
BACKGROUND: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is a deadly cancer with no clinically ideal biomarkers for early diagnosis. The objective of this study was to develop and validate a user-friendly diagnostic tool for early ESCC detection. METHODS: The study encompassed three phases: discovery, verification, and validation, comprising a total of 1309 individuals. Serum autoantibodies were profiled using the HuProt(TM) human proteome microarray, and autoantibody levels were measured using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Twelve machine learning algorithms were employed to construct diagnostic models, and evaluated using the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). The model application was facilitated through R Shiny, providing a graphical interface. RESULTS: Thirteen autoantibodies targeting TAAs (CAST, FAM131A, GABPA, HDAC1, HDGFL1, HSF1, ISM2, PTMS, RNF219, SMARCE1, SNAP25, SRPK2, and ZPR1) were identified in the discovery phase. Subsequent verification and validation phases identified five TAAbs (anti-CAST, anti-HDAC1, anti-HSF1, anti-PTMS, and anti-ZPR1) that exhibited significant differences between ESCC and control subjects (P < 0.05). The support vector machine (SVM) model demonstrated robust performance, with AUCs of 0.86 (95% CI: 0.82-0.89) in the training set and 0.83 (95% CI: 0.78-0.88) in the test set. For early-stage ESCC, the SVM model achieved AUCs of 0.83 (95% CI: 0.79-0.88) in the training set and 0.83 (95% CI: 0.77-0.90) in the test set. Notably, promising results were observed for high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia, with an AUC of 0.87 (95% CI: 0.77-0.98). The web-based implementation of the early ESCC diagnostic tool is publicly accessible at https://litdong.shinyapps.io/ESCCPred/ . CONCLUSION: This study provides a promising and easy-to-use diagnostic prediction model for early ESCC detection. It holds promise for improving early detection strategies and has potential implications for public health.
BACKGROUND: Serine-arginine protein kinase (SRPK) is a regulator of alternative splicing events via phosphorylation of splicing factor proteins. Oncogenic roles of SRPK1 and SRPK2 have been reported in various types of cancer. To date, only SRPK1/2 specific inhibitors and small interfering RNA (siRNA) have been used for halting their function momentarily; however, there is no attempt to generate SRPK1/2 stable knockout cancer cells as a tool to investigate their roles in tumorigenesis. AIM: Our objective is therefore to establish a nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell line with stable SRPK1 or SRPK2 knockout and SRPK1/2 double knockout as a model to investigate their potential roles in NPC. METHODS AND RESULTS: CNE1 was selected as a representative of NPC cell lines to create single and double knockout of SRPK1/2 proteins. SRPK1/2 KO plasmid with cas9, green fluorescent protein (GFP), and gRNA expression was cotransfected with SRPK1/2 homology-directed repair (HDR) plasmid containing puromycin resistance, red fluorescent protein (RFP), and 5' and 3' arm sequence for homologous recombination to CNE1 cells. The transfected CNE1 cells with GFP and RFP expression were sorted through fluorescence-activated cell sorting for further treatment with puromycin containing medium. This step generated stable single knockout of SRPK1 and SRPK2. The SRPK2 knockout NPC cells were used as a precursor for double knockout generation via transfection with Cre plasmid for excision of inserted material to generate puromycin-sensitive SRPK2 knockout clone. The puromycin-sensitive SRPK2 knockout cells were transfected with SRPK1 KO/HDR plasmid and treated with puromycin-containing medium. The puromycin-resistant cells of SRPK1/2 stable double knockout were expanded, and the corresponding protein expression was confirmed by western immunoblotting analysis. CONCLUSION: Single and double knockout of SRPK1/2 were established using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/ CRISPR-associated 9 (Cas9) system in an NPC cell line as a model for investigation of their splicing mechanism in NPC.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Gliomas are primary malignancies of the central nervous system (CNS). High-grade gliomas are associated with poor prognosis and modest survival rates despite intensive multimodal treatment strategies. Targeting gene fusions is an emerging therapeutic approach for gliomas that allows application of personalized medicine principles. The aim of this study was to identify detectable fusion oncogenes that could serve as predictors of currently available or newly developed targeted therapeutics in cross-sectional samples from glioma patients using next-generation sequencing (NGS). PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 637 patients with glial and glioneuronal tumours of the CNS who underwent tumour resection between 2017 and 2020 were enrolled. Detection of fusion transcripts in FFPE tumour tissue was performed by a TruSight Tumour 170 assay and two FusionPlex kits, Solid Tumour and Comprehensive Thyroid and Lung. RESULTS: Oncogene fusions were identified in 33 patients. The most common fusion was the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion, detected in 13 patients, followed by FGFR fusions (FGFR1-TACC1, FGFR2-CTNNA3, FGFR3-TACC3, FGFR3-CKAP5, FGFR3-AMBRA1), identified in 10 patients. Other oncogene fusions were also infrequently diagnosed, including MET fusions (SRPK2-MET and PTPRZ1-MET) in 2 patients, C11orf95-RELA fusions in 2 patients, EGFR-SEPT14 fusion in 2 patients, and individual cases of SRGAP3-BRAF, RAF1-TRIM2, EWSR1-PALGL1 and TERT-ALK fusions. CONCLUSION: The introduction of NGS techniques provides additional information about tumour molecular alterations that can aid the multimodal management of glioma patients. Patients with gliomas positive for particular targetable gene fusions may benefit from experimental therapeutics, enhancing their quality of life and prolonging survival rates.
Neutrophils display functional heterogeneity upon responding diversely to physiological and pathological stimulations. During type 2 diabetes (T2D), hyperglycemia constitutively activates neutrophils, leading to reduced response to infections and on the other hand, elevated metabolic intermediates such as homocysteine induce bidirectional activation of platelets and neutrophils leading to thrombosis. Hence, in the context of T2D-associated complications, we examined the influence of high glucose, homocysteine, and LPS representing effector molecules of hyperglycemia, thrombosis, and infection, respectively, on human neutrophil activation to identify distinct signaling pathways by quantitative phosphoproteomics approach. High glucose activated C-Jun-N-Terminal Kinase, NTRK1, SYK, and PRKACA kinases associated with Rho GTPase signaling and phagocytosis, whereas LPS induced AKT1, SRPK2, CSNK2A1, and TTN kinases involved in cytokine signaling and inflammatory response. Homocysteine treatment led to activatation of  LRRK2, FGR, MAPK3, and PRKCD kinases which are associated with neutrophil degranulation and cytoskeletal remodeling. Diverse inducers differentially modulated phosphorylation of proteins associated with neutrophil functions such as oxidative burst, degranulation, extracellular traps, and phagocytosis. Further validation of phosphoproteomics data on selected kinases revealed neutrophils pre-cultured under high glucose showed impeded response to LPS to phosphorylate p-ERK1/2(Thr202/Tyr204), p-AKT(Ser473), and C-Jun-N-Terminal Kinase(Ser63) kinases. Our study provides novel phosphoproteome signatures that may be explored to understand neutrophil biology in T2D-associated complications.
BACKGROUND: Previously, we reported the expression of DLX4 isoforms (BP1 and DLX7) in myeloid leukemia, but the functional role of DLX4 isoforms remains poorly understood. In the work described herein, we further determined the underlying role of DLX4 isoforms in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) leukemogenesis. METHODS: The expression and methylation of DLX4 isoforms were detected by real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and real-time quantitative methylation-specific PCR (RT-qMSP) in patients with CML. The functional role of DLX4 isoforms was determined in vitro and in vivo. The molecular mechanism of DLX4 isoforms in leukemogenesis was identified based on chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-Seq)/assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-Seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq). RESULTS: BP1 expression was increased in patients with CML with unmethylated promoter, but DLX7 expression was decreased with hypermethylated promoter. Functionally, overexpression of BP1 increased the proliferation rate of K562 cells with S/G2 promotion, whereas DLX7 overexpression reduced the proliferation rate of K562 cells with G1 arrest. Moreover, K562 cells with BP1 overexpression increased the tumorigenicity in NCG mice, whereas K562 cells with DLX7 overexpression decreased the tumorigenicity. Mechanistically, a total of 91 genes including 79 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) and 12 long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) were discovered by ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq as direct downstream targets of BP1. Among the downstream genes, knockdown of RREB1 and SGMS1-AS1 partially revived the proliferation caused by BP1 overexpression in K562 cells. Similarly, using ATAC-Seq and RNA-Seq, a total of 282 genes including 151 mRNA and 131 lncRNAs were identified as direct downstream targets of DLX7. Knockdown of downstream genes PTPRB and NEAT1 partially revived the proliferation caused by DLX7 overexpression in K562 cells. Finally, we also identified and validated a SGMS1-AS1/miR-181d-5p/SRPK2 competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network caused by BP1 overexpression in K562 cells. CONCLUSIONS: The current findings reveal that DNA methylation-mediated differential expression of DLX4 isoforms BP1 and DLX7 plays opposite functions in leukemogenesis. BP1 plays an oncogenic role in leukemia development, whereas DLX7 acts as a tumor suppressor gene. These results suggest DLX4 as a therapeutic target for antileukemia therapy.
The causal link between long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposon-derived lncRNAs and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains elusive and whether these cancer-exclusive lncRNAs contribute to the effectiveness of current HCC therapies is yet to explore. Here, we investigated the activation of LTR retrotransposon-derived lncRNAs in a broad range of liver diseases. We found that LTR retrotransposon-derived lncRNAs are mainly activated in HCC and is correlated with the proliferation status of HCC. Furthermore, we discovered that an LTR retrotransposon-derived lncRNA, LINC01446, exhibits specific expression in HCC. HCC patients with higher LINC01446 expression had shorter overall survival times. In vitro and in vivo assays showed that LINC01446 promoted HCC growth and angiogenesis. Mechanistically, LINC01446 bound to serine/arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) and activated its downstream target, serine/arginine splicing factor 1 (SRSF1). Furthermore, activation of the SRPK2-SRSF1 axis increased the splicing and expression of VEGF isoform A(165) (VEGFA(165)). Notably, inhibiting LINC01446 expression dramatically impaired tumor growth in vivo and resulted in better therapeutic outcomes when combined with antiangiogenic agents. In addition, we found that the transcription factor MESI2 bound to the cryptic MLT2B3 LTR promoter and drove LINC01446 transcription in HCC cells. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that LTR retrotransposon-derived LINC01446 promotes the progression of HCC by activating the SRPK2/SRSF1/VEGFA(165) axis and highlight targeting LINC01446 as a potential therapeutic strategy for HCC patients.
Serine-arginine protein kinase (SRPK) belongs to a class of cell cycle regulating kinases that can phosphorylate proteins containing serine/arginine-Rich (SR) regions. SR proteins are a family of RNA binding phosphoproteins that control both constitutive and alternative pre-mRNA splicing events. However, little is known about their role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In the present study, we found that serine-arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) expression was upregulated in NSCLC tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues. Kaplan-Meier curve analyses showed that the overall survival time of NSCLC patients with high SRPK2 expression was shorter than those with low SRPK2 expression. Overexpression of SRPK2 promoted NSCLC cell proliferation and cell cycle arrest, while knockdown of SRPK2 inhibited proliferation and promoted cell cycle arrest in NSCLC cell lines. SRPK2 promoted the transcriptional regulation of E2F1 on downstream cell cycle related genes through phosphorylation of SC35. Xenograft model showed that SRPK2 promoted tumor growth in vivo. SRPK2 phosphorylated SC35 and phosphorylated SC35 activated E2F1 transcription of cyclin-related proteins, thereby promoting the cycle progression of NSCLC. Our findings demonstrated that SRPK2 may be a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC clinical therapy, which plays an important role in the progression of NSCLC.
Genomic instability is frequently caused by nucleic acid structures termed R-loops that are formed during transcription. Despite their harmful potential, mechanisms that sense, signal, and suppress these structures remain elusive. Here, we report that oscillations in transcription dynamics are a major sensor of R-loops. We show that pausing of RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) initiates a signaling cascade whereby the serine/arginine protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) phosphorylates the DDX23 helicase, culminating in the suppression of R-loops. We show that in the absence of either SRPK2 or DDX23, accumulation of R-loops leads to massive genomic instability revealed by high levels of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Importantly, we found DDX23 mutations in several cancers and detected homozygous deletions of the entire DDX23 locus in 10 (17%) adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) samples. Our results unravel molecular details of a link between transcription dynamics and RNA-mediated genomic instability that may play important roles in cancer development.
Serine/Arginine-Rich Protein-Specific Kinase-2 (SRSF protein kinase-2, SRPK2) is up-regulated in multiple human tumors. However, the expression, function and clinical significance of SRPK2 in prostate cancer (PCa) has not yet been understood. We therefore aimed to determine the association of SRPK2 with tumor progression and metastasis in PCa patients in our present study. The expression of SRPK2 was detected by some public datasets and validated using a clinical tissue microarray (TMA) by immunohistochemistry. The association of SRPK2 expression with various clinicopathological characteristics of PCa patients was subsequently statistically analyzed based on the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset and clinical TMA. The effects of SRPK2 on cancer cell proliferation, migration, invasion, cell cycle progression, apoptosis and tumor growth were then respectively investigated using in vitro and in vivo experiments. First, public datasets showed that SRPK2 expression was greater in PCa tissues when compared with non-cancerous tissues. Statistical analysis demonstrated that high expression of SRPK2 was significantly correlated with a higher Gleason Score, advanced pathological stage and the presence of tumor metastasis in the TCGA Dataset (all P < 0.01). Similar correlations between SRPK2 and a higher Gleason Score or advanced pathological stage were also identified in the TMA (P < 0.05). Kaplan-Meier curve analyses showed that the biochemical recurrence (BCR)-free time of PCa patients with SRPK2 high expression was shorter than for those with SRPK2 low expression (P < 0.05). Second, cell function experiments in PCa cell lines revealed that enhanced SRPK2 expression could promote cell proliferation, migration, invasion and cell cycle progression but suppress tumor cell apoptosis in vitro. Xenograft experiments showed that SRPK2 promoted tumor growth in vivo. In conclusion, our data demonstrated that SRPK2 may play an important role in the progression and metastasis of PCa, which suggests that it might be a potential therapeutic target for PCa clinical therapy.
