Delta-type opioid receptor; G-protein coupled receptor that functions as receptor for endogenous enkephalins and for a subset of other opioids. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling leads to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity. Inhibits neurotransmitter release by reducing calcium ion currents and increasing potassium ion conductance. Plays a role in the perception of pain and in opiate-mediated analgesia.  [...] 
Neuropeptides are key signaling molecules in the endocrine and nervous systems that regulate many critical physiological processes. Understanding the functions of neuropeptides in vivo requires the ability to monitor their dynamics with high specificity, sensitivity, and spatiotemporal resolution. However, this has been hindered by the lack of direct, sensitive, and noninvasive tools. We developed a series of GRAB (G protein-coupled receptor activation‒based) sensors for detecting somatostatin (SST), corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF), cholecystokinin (CCK), neuropeptide Y (NPY), neurotensin (NTS), and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). These fluorescent sensors, which enable detection of specific neuropeptide binding at nanomolar concentrations, establish a robust tool kit for studying the release, function, and regulation of neuropeptides under both physiological and pathophysiological conditions.
CONTEXT: Primary aldosteronism is a form of low-renin hypertension characterized by dysregulated aldosterone production. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the contributions of renin-independent aldosteronism and ACTH-mediated aldosteronism in individuals with a low-renin phenotype representing the entire continuum of blood pressure. DESIGN/PARTICIPANTS: Human physiology study of 348 participants with a low-renin phenotype with severe and/or resistant hypertension, hypertension with hypokalemia, elevated blood pressure and stage I/II hypertension, and normal blood pressure. SETTING: 4 international centers. INTERVENTIONS/MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The saline suppression test (SST) to quantify the magnitude of renin-independent aldosteronism; dexamethasone suppression and ACTH-stimulation tests to quantify the magnitude of ACTH-mediated aldosteronism; adrenal venous sampling to determine lateralization. RESULTS: There was a continuum of nonsuppressible and renin-independent aldosterone production following SST that paralleled the magnitude of the blood pressure continuum and transcended conventional diagnostic thresholds. In parallel, there was a full continuum of ACTH-mediated aldosteronism wherein post-SST aldosterone levels were strongly correlated with ACTH-stimulated aldosterone production (r = 0.75, P < .0001) and nonsuppressible aldosterone production postdexamethasone (r = 0.40, P < .0001). Beyond participants who met the criteria for primary aldosteronism (post-SST aldosterone of >/=10 ng/dL or >/=277 pmol/L), the continuum of nonsuppressible and renin-independent aldosterone production persisted below this diagnostic threshold, wherein 15% still had lateralizing aldosteronism amenable to surgical adrenalectomy and the remainder were treated with mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. CONCLUSION: In the context of a low-renin phenotype, there is a continuum of primary aldosteronism and dysregulated aldosterone production that is prominently influenced by ACTH. A large proportion of individuals with low renin may benefit from aldosterone-directed therapy.
In 1972, Brazeau et al. isolated somatostatin (somatotropin release-inhibiting factor, SRIF), a cyclic polypeptide with two biologically active isoforms (SRIF-14 and SRIF-28). This event prompted the successful quest for SRIF receptors. Then, nearly a quarter of a century later, it was announced that a neuropeptide, to be named cortistatin (CST), had been cloned, bearing strong resemblance to SRIF. Evidence of special CST receptors never emerged, however. CST rather competed with both SRIF isoforms for specific receptor binding. And binding to the known subtypes with affinities in the nanomolar range, it has therefore been acknowledged to be a third endogenous ligand at SRIF receptors. This review goes through mechanisms of signal transduction, pharmacology, and anatomical distribution of SRIF receptors. Structurally, SRIF receptors belong to the superfamily of G protein-coupled (GPC) receptors, sharing the characteristic seven-transmembrane-segment (STMS) topography. Years of intensive research have resulted in cloning of five receptor subtypes (sst(1)-sst(5)), one of which is represented by two splice variants (sst(2A) and sst(2B)). The individual subtypes, functionally coupled to the effectors of signal transduction, are differentially expressed throughout the mammalian organism, with corresponding differences in physiological impact. It is evident that receptor function, from a physiological point of view, cannot simply be reduced to the accumulated operations of individual receptors. Far from being isolated functional units, receptors co-operate. The total receptor apparatus of individual cell types is composed of different-ligand receptors (e.g. SRIF and non-SRIF receptors) and co-expressed receptor subtypes (e.g. sst(2) and sst(5) receptors) in characteristic proportions. In other words, levels of individual receptor subtypes are highly cell-specific and vary with the co-expression of different-ligand receptors. However, the question is how to quantify the relative contributions of individual receptor subtypes to the integration of transduced signals, ultimately the result of collective receptor activity. The generation of knock-out (KO) mice, intended as a means to define the contributions made by individual receptor subtypes, necessarily marks but an approximation. Furthermore, we must now take into account the stunning complexity of receptor co-operation indicated by the observation of receptor homo- and heterodimerisation, let alone oligomerisation. Theoretically, this phenomenon adds a novel series of functional megareceptors/super-receptors, with varied pharmacological profiles, to the catalogue of monomeric receptor subtypes isolated and cloned in the past. SRIF analogues include both peptides and non-peptides, receptor agonists and antagonists. Relatively long half lives, as compared to those of the endogenous ligands, have been paramount from the outset. Motivated by theoretical puzzles or the shortcomings of present-day diagnostics and therapy, investigators have also aimed to produce subtype-selective analogues. Several have become available.
Altered transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of brain cell types may contribute to cognitive changes with advanced age. Using single-nucleus multi-omic DNA methylation and transcriptome sequencing (snmCT-seq) in frontal cortex from young adult and aged donors, we found widespread age- and sex-related variation in specific neuron types. The proportion of inhibitory SST- and VIP-expressing neurons was reduced in aged donors. Excitatory neurons had more profound age-related changes in their gene expression and DNA methylation than inhibitory cells. Hundreds of genes involved in synaptic activity, including EGR1, were less expressed in aged adults. Genes located in subtelomeric regions increased their expression with age and correlated with reduced telomere length. We further mapped cell-type-specific sex differences in gene expression and X-inactivation escape genes. Multi-omic single-nucleus epigenomes and transcriptomes provide new insight into the effects of age and sex on human neurons.
The expression of somatostatin receptors (ssts) on human tumours is the basis for the successful therapeutic and diagnostic application of (radiolabelled) somatostatin analogues. Manipulation (up-regulation) of sst expression might improve the uptake of radioligand in in vivo scintigraphy of human sst-positive tumours, as well as the potential success of radiotherapy using radiolabelled SRIF analogues. In colonal pituitary cell lines, agonist exposure (SRIF-14, SRIF-28, octreotide) has been shown to either reduce or increase sst (subtype) expression, suggesting cell-type-specific responsiveness. In addition, glucocorticoids and oestrogens were shown to down- and up-regulate, respectively, sst numbers. So far, little information is available with respect to sst (subtype) regulation in non-pituitary-derived cell types. We have found that sst expression in the model of the transplantable prolactin (PRL)-secreting rat pituitary tumour 7315b is mainly dependent upon the presence of oestradiol (E2), both in vivo and in vitro. This tumour is sst negative in vivo. In vitro, the addition of E2 induces sst expression (sst2 and sst3 subtypes). The in vivo administration of E2 (20 micrograms/day subcutaneously) to 7315b-tumour-bearing rats induces sst2 mRNA expression. The absence of sst expression in 7315b tumours in vivo may be due to the inhibition of ovarian E2 production by the high circulating PRL levels in the 7315b-prolactinoma-bearing rats. Indeed, no detectable E2 levels were found in the serum of 7315b-tumour-bearing rats. Taken together, our data suggest that the 7315b rat prolactinoma can indirectly manipulate (down-regulate) its own sst expression, in vivo, via its host. This experimental 7315b prolactinoma model might be representative for most untreated female prolactinoma patients. Clinically, patients with microprolactinomas do not benefit from octreotide treatment.
Empathy, crucial for social interaction, is impaired across various neuropsychiatric conditions. However, the genetic and neural underpinnings of empathy variability remain elusive. By combining forward genetic mapping with transcriptome analysis, we discover that aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT2) is a key driver modulating observational fear, a basic form of affective empathy. Disrupted ARNT2 expression in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) reduces affect sharing in mice. Specifically, selective ARNT2 ablation in somatostatin (SST)-expressing interneurons leads to decreased pyramidal cell excitability, increased spontaneous firing, aberrant Ca(2+) dynamics, and disrupted theta oscillations in the ACC, resulting in reduced vicarious freezing. We further demonstrate that ARNT2-expressing SST interneurons govern affective state discrimination, uncovering a potential mechanism by which ARNT2 polymorphisms associate with emotion recognition in humans. Our findings advance our understanding of the molecular mechanism controlling empathic capacity and highlight the neural substrates underlying social affective dysfunctions in psychiatric disorders.
Cortical interneurons originating in the embryonic medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) diverge into a range of different subtypes found in the adult mouse cerebral cortex. The mechanisms underlying this divergence and the timing when subtype identity is set up remain unclear. We identify the highly conserved transcriptional co-factor MTG8 as being pivotal in the development of a large subset of MGE cortical interneurons that co-expresses Somatostatin (SST) and Neuropeptide Y (NPY). MTG8 interacts with the pan-MGE transcription factor LHX6 and together the two factors are sufficient to promote expression of critical cortical interneuron subtype identity genes. The SST-NPY cortical interneuron fate is initiated early, well before interneurons migrate into the cortex, demonstrating an early onset specification program. Our findings suggest that transcriptional co-factors and modifiers of generic lineage specification programs may hold the key to the emergence of cortical interneuron heterogeneity from the embryonic telencephalic germinal zones.
Prefrontal cortical GABAergic interneurons (INs) and their innervations are essential for the execution of complex behaviors such as working memory, social behavior, and fear expression. These behavior regulations are highly dependent on primary long-range afferents originating from the subcortical structures such as mediodorsal thalamus (MD), ventral hippocampus (vHPC), and basolateral amygdala (BLA). In turn, the regulatory effects of these inputs are mediated by activation of parvalbumin-expressing (PV) and/or somatostatin expressing (SST) INs within the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Here we review how each of these long-range afferents from the MD, vHPC, or BLA recruits a subset of the prefrontal interneuron population to exert precise control of specific PFC-dependent behaviors. Specifically, we first summarize the anatomical connections of different long-range inputs formed on prefrontal GABAergic INs, focusing on PV versus SST cells. Next, we elaborate on the role of prefrontal PV- and SST- INs in regulating MD afferents-mediated cognitive behaviors. We also examine how prefrontal PV- and SST- INs gate vHPC afferents in spatial working memory and fear expression. Finally, we discuss the possibility that prefrontal PV-INs mediate fear conditioning, predominantly driven by the BLA-mPFC pathway. This review will provide a broad view of how multiple long-range inputs converge on prefrontal interneurons to regulate complex behaviors and novel future directions to understand how PFC controls different behaviors.
The neuropeptide somatostatin (SST) is highly expressed in brain regions associated with seizures. In hippocampus, SST expression and release is regulated by seizures, and SST-containing neurons within the hilus of the dentate gyrus are sensitive to seizure-induced death. In vivo and in vitro studies suggest that the loss of SST function in the dentate could contribute to epileptogenesis and seizure susceptibility. SST also has inhibitory actions in the CA1 and CA3 hippocampus indicating this peptide is an important homeostatic regulator throughout the hippocampus. In vivo studies show SST has robust antiepileptic properties with the major site of action being hippocampus. In rodents, somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (SST(2)) and SST(4) appear to mediate the majority of the antiepileptic actions of SST, with SST(2) predominate in rat and SST(4) in mouse. Thus SST receptors may be appropriate targets for new antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), although validation in human tissue is lacking.
Somatostatin (SRIF) is a neuropeptide that acts as an important regulator of both endocrine and exocrine secretion and modulates neurotransmission in the central nervous system (CNS). SRIF also regulates cell proliferation in normal tissues and tumors. The physiological actions of SRIF are mediated by a family of five G protein-coupled receptors, called somatostatin receptor (SST) SST(1), SST(2), SST(3), SST(4), SST(5). These five receptors share similar molecular structure and signaling pathways but they display marked differences in their anatomical distribution, subcellular localization and intracellular trafficking. The SST subtypes are widely distributed in the CNS and peripheral nervous system, in many endocrine glands and tumors, particularly of neuroendocrine origin. In this review, we focus on the agonist-dependent internalization and recycling of the different SST subtypes in vivo in the CNS, peripheral organs and tumors. We also discuss the physiological, pathophysiological and potential therapeutic effects of the intracellular trafficking of SST subtypes.
The pancreatic islets contain beta-cells and alpha-cells, which are responsible for secreting two principal gluco-regulatory hormones; insulin and glucagon, respectively. However, they also contain delta-cells, a relatively sparse cell type that secretes somatostatin (SST). These cells have a complex morphology allowing them to establish an extensive communication network throughout the islet, despite their scarcity. Delta-cells are electrically excitable cells, and SST secretion is released in a glucose- and K(ATP)-dependent manner. SST hyperpolarises the alpha-cell membrane and suppresses exocytosis. In this way, islet SST potently inhibits glucagon release. Recent studies investigating the activity of delta-cells have revealed they are electrically coupled to beta-cells via gap junctions, suggesting the delta-cell is more than just a paracrine inhibitor. In this Review, we summarize delta-cell morphology, function, and the role of SST signalling for regulating islet hormonal output. A distinguishing feature of this Review is that we attempt to use the discovery of this gap junction pathway, together with what is already known about delta-cells, to reframe the role of these cells in both health and disease. In particular, we argue that the discovery of gap junction communication between delta-cells and beta-cells provides new insights into the contribution of delta-cells to the islet hormonal defects observed in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. This reappraisal of the delta-cell is important as it may offer novel insights into how the physiology of this cell can be utilised to restore islet function in diabetes.
Urocortin 3 (UCN3) is a peptide hormone expressed in pancreatic islets of Langerhans of both human alpha and human beta cells and solely in murine beta cells. UCN3 signaling acts locally within the islet to activate its cognate receptor, corticotropin releasing hormone receptor 2 (CRHR2), which is expressed by delta cells, to potentiate somatostatin (SST) negative feedback to reduce islet cell hormone output. The functional importance of UCN3 signaling in the islet is to modulate the amount of SST tone allowing for finely tuned regulation of insulin and glucagon secretion. UCN3 signaling is a hallmark of functional beta cell maturation, increasing the beta cell glucose threshold for insulin secretion. In doing so, UCN3 plays a relevant functional role in accurately maintaining blood glucose homeostasis. Additionally, UCN3 acts as an indicator of beta cell maturation and health, as UCN3 is not expressed in immature beta cells and is downregulated in dedifferentiated and dysfunctional beta cell states. Here, we review the mechanistic underpinnings of UCN3 signaling, its net effect on islet cell hormone output, as well as its value as a marker for beta cell maturation and functional status.
Numerous peptide receptors have recently been reported to be expressed or overexpressed in various human cancers. For instance, somatostatin receptors are particularly frequently expressed in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NET), including both primaries and metastases. The density is often high, and the distribution is usually homogenous. While various somatostatin receptor subtypes can be expressed in these tumors, the sst(2) is clearly predominant. These receptors represent the molecular basis for a number of clinical applications, including symptomatic therapy with octreotide in hormone-secreting GEP-NET, in vivo diagnostic with radiolabeled diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid octreotide (Octreoscan) to evaluate the extend of the disease, and (90)Y- or (177)Lu-[(90)Y-DOTA]-D: -Phe(1)-Tyr(3) octreotide radiotherapy. GEP-NET can, however, express peptide receptors other than somatostatin receptor: Insulinomas have more glucagon-like peptide 1 receptors than somatostatin receptors; gastrinomas express very high levels of secretin receptors. GEP-NET may also express cholecystokinin 2, bombesin, neuropeptide Y, or vasoactive intestinal peptide receptors. Often, several of these peptide receptors are expressed simultaneously in GEP-NET, providing a molecular basis for in vivo multireceptor targeting of those tumors.
Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), especially SSTR subtype 2, are found expressed at relatively higher levels in many tumor cells and in tumoral blood vessels relative to normal tissues. This creates an opportunity for developing various cytotoxic SST conjugates that selectively target SSTR2-specific sites. Accordingly, some potent chemotherapeutic agents such as camptothecin (CPT), methotrexate (MTX), paclitaxel (PTX) and doxorubicin (DOX) have been coupled to SSTR2-preferential somatostatin (SST) analogs. These new cytotoxic SST conjugates display significant SSTR-selective anti-tumor abilities in many different types of tumors. For instance, the CPT-SST conjugate JF-10-81, in which CPT is coupled to the N-terminus of a SSTR2-specific SST analog (JF-07-69), had wide ranging anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic ability. This conjugate also showed an ability to overcome multi-drug resistance (MDR) in SSTR-over-expressing and CPT-insensitive human pancreatic carcinoid BON cells. Notably, another DOX-SST conjugate, AN-238, made by coupling pyrrolino-DOX to the SST analog RC-121, displayed indirect anti-tumor activity against SSTR-negative, non-small cell lung cancer H-157 tumor growth by directly targeting SSTR-positive tumoral vessels of host mice. These cytotoxic SST conjugates should deliver chemotherapeutic agents to receptor-specific sites, enhance anti-tumor efficacy, reduce toxic side effects to normal tissues, and to some extent, overcome MDR. These and other peptide conjugates may possibly represent a newer generation of receptor-targeted cancer therapeutics. This review discusses the progress with reference to SST-based and SSTR-selective cytotoxic cancer therapy.
Somatostatin (SST) is abundantly produced by the human retina, and the main source is the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). SST exerts relevant functions in the retina (neuromodulation, angiostatic, and anti-permeability actions) by interacting with SST receptors (SSTR) that are also expressed in the retina. In the diabetic retina, a downregulation of SST production does exist. In this article, we give an overview of the mechanisms by which this deficit of SST participates in the main pathogenic mechanisms involved in diabetic retinopathy (DR): neurodegeneration, neovascularization, and vascular leakage. In view of the relevant SST functions in the retina and the reduction of SST production in the diabetic eye, SST replacement has been proposed as a new target for treatment of DR. This could be implemented by intravitreous injections of SST analogs or gene therapy, but this is an aggressive route for the early stages of DR. Since topical administration of SST has been effective in preventing retinal neurodegeneration in STZ-induced diabetic rats, it seems reasonable to test this new approach in humans. In this regard, the results of the ongoing clinical trial EUROCONDOR will provide useful information. In conclusion, SST is a natural neuroprotective and antiangiogenic factor synthesized by the retina which is downregulated in the diabetic eye and, therefore, its replacement seems a rational approach for treating DR. However, clinical trials will be needed to establish the exact position of targeting SST in the treatment of this disabling complication of diabetes.
The diverse biological effects of somatostatin (SST) are mediated through a family of G protein coupled receptors of which 5 members have been recently identified by molecular cloning. This review focuses on the molecular biology, pharmacology, expression, and function of these receptors with particular emphasis on the human (h) homologs. hSSTRs are encoded by a family of 5 genes which map to separate chromosomes and which, with one exception, are intronless. SSTR2 gives rise to spliced variants, SSTR2A and 2B. hSSTR1-4 display weak selectivity for SST-14 binding whereas hSSTR5 is SST-28 selective. Based on structural similarity and reactivity for octapeptide and hexapeptide SST analogs, hSSTR2,3, and 5 belong to a similar SSTR subclass. hSSTR1 and 4 react poorly with these analogs and belong to a separate subclass. All 5 hSSTRs are functionally coupled to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase via pertussis toxin sensitive GTP binding proteins. Some of the subtypes are also coupled to tyrosine phosphatase (SSTR1,2), Ca2+ channels (SSTR2), Na+/H+ exchanger (SSTR1), PLA-2 (SSTR4), and MAP kinase (SSTR4). mRNA for SSTR1-5 is widely expressed in brain and peripheral organs and displays an overlapping but characteristic pattern that is subtype-selective, and tissue- and species-specific. Pituitary and islet tumors express several SSTR genes suggesting that multiple SSTR subtypes are coexpressed in the same cell. Structure-function studies indicate that the core residues in SST-14 ligand Phe6-Phe11 dock within a ligand binding pocket located in TMDs 3-7 which is lined by hydrophobic and charged amino acid residues.
Several neurodevelopmental disabilities are strongly associated with alterations in GABAergic transmission, and therapies to stimulate its normal development are lacking. Erythropoietin (EPO) is clinically used in neonatology to mitigate acute brain injury, and to stimulate neuronal maturation. Yet it remains unclear whether EPO can stimulate maturation of the GABAergic system. Here, with the use of a transgenic mouse line that constitutively overexpresses neuronal EPO (Tg21), we show that EPO stimulates postnatal GABAergic maturation in the hippocampus. We show an increase in hippocampal GABA-immunoreactive neurons, and postnatal elevation of interneurons expressing parvalbumin (PV), somatostatin (SST), and neuropeptide Y (NPY). Analysis of perineuronal net (PNN) formation and innervation of glutamatergic terminals onto PV+ cells, shows to be enhanced early in postnatal development. Additionally, an increase in GABA(A)ergic synapse density and IPSCs in CA1 pyramidal cells from Tg21 mice is observed. Detection of EPO receptor (EPOR) mRNA was observed to be restricted to glutamatergic pyramidal cells and increased in Tg21 mice at postnatal day (P)7, along with reduced apoptosis. Our findings show that EPO can stimulate postnatal GABAergic maturation in the hippocampus, by increasing neuronal survival, modulating critical plasticity periods, and increasing synaptic transmission. Our data supports EPO's clinical use to balance GABAergic dysfunction.
The neuropeptide somatostatin (SST) is expressed in a discrete population of interneurons in the dentate gyrus. These interneurons have their soma in the hilus and project to the outer molecular layer onto dendrites of dentate granule cells, adjacent to perforant path input. SST-containing interneurons are very sensitive to excitotoxicty, and thus are vulnerable to a variety of neurological diseases and insults, including epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, traumatic brain injury, and ischemia. The SST gene contains a prototypical cyclic AMP response element (CRE) site. Such a regulatory site confers activity-dependence to the gene, such that it is turned on when neuronal activity is high. Thus SST expression is increased by pathological conditions such as seizures and by natural stimulation such as environmental enrichment. SST may play an important role in cognition by modulating the response of neurons to synaptic input. In the dentate, SST and the related peptide cortistatin (CST) reduce the likelihood of generating long-term potentiation, a cellular process involved in learning and memory. Thus these neuropeptides would increase the threshold of input required for acquisition of new memories, increasing "signal to noise" to filter out irrelevant environmental cues. The major mechanism through which SST inhibits LTP is likely through inhibition of voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels on dentate granule cell dendrites. Transgenic overexpression of CST in the dentate leads to profound deficits in spatial learning and memory, validating its role in cognitive processing. A reduction of synaptic potentiation by SST and CST in dentate may also contribute to the well-characterized antiepileptic properties of these neuropeptides. Thus SST and CST are important neuromodulators in the dentate gyrus, and disruption of this signaling system may have major impact on hippocampal function.
Vibrios are among the most common bacteria that inhabit surface waters throughout the world and are responsible for a number of severe infections both in humans and animals. Several reports recently showed that human Vibrio illnesses are increasing worldwide including fatal acute diarrheal diseases, such as cholera, gastroenteritis, wound infections, and septicemia. Many scientists believe this increase may be associated with global warming and rise in sea surface temperature (SST), although not enough evidence is available to support a causal link between emergence of Vibrio infections and climate warming. The effect of increased SST in promoting spread of vibrios in coastal and brackish waters is considered a causal factor explaining this trend. Field and laboratory studies carried out over the past 40 years supported this hypothesis, clearly showing temperature promotes Vibrio growth and persistence in the aquatic environment. Most recently, a long-term retrospective microbiological study carried out in the coastal waters of the southern North Sea provided the first experimental evidence for a positive and significant relationship between SST and Vibrio occurrence over a multidecadal time scale. As a future challenge, macroecological studies of the effects of ocean warming on Vibrio persistence and spread in the aquatic environment over large spatial and temporal scales would conclusively support evidence acquired to date combined with studies of the impact of global warming on epidemiologically relevant variables, such as host susceptibility and exposure. Assessing a causal link between ongoing climate change and enhanced growth and spread of vibrios and related illness is expected to improve forecast and mitigate future outbreaks associated with these pathogens.
