Somatostatin receptor type 1; Receptor for somatostatin with higher affinity for somatostatin-14 than -28. This receptor is coupled via pertussis toxin sensitive G proteins to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. In addition it stimulates phosphotyrosine phosphatase and Na(+)/H(+) exchanger via pertussis toxin insensitive G proteins.
Somatostatin is a peptide with a potent and broad antisecretory action, which makes it an invaluable drug target for the pharmacological management of pituitary adenomas and neuroendocrine tumors. Somatostatin receptors (SSTR1, 2A and B, 3, 4 and 5) belong to the G protein coupled receptor family and have a wide expression pattern in both normal tissues and solid tumors. Investigating the function of each SSTR in several tumor types has provided a wealth of information about the common but also distinct signaling cascades that suppress tumor cell proliferation, survival and angiogenesis. This provided the rationale for developing multireceptor-targeted somatostatin analogs and combination therapies with signaling-targeted agents such as inhibitors of the mammalian (or mechanistic) target of rapamycin (mTOR). The ability of SSTR to internalize and the development of rabiolabeled somatostatin analogs have improved the diagnosis and treatment of neuroendocrine tumors.
In this study, we report the experience of the only reference clinical next-generation sequencing lab in Saudi Arabia with the first 1000 families who span a wide-range of suspected Mendelian phenotypes. A total of 1019 tests were performed in the period of March 2016-December 2016 comprising 972 solo (index only), 14 duo (parents or affected siblings only), and 33 trio (index and parents). Multigene panels accounted for 672 tests, while whole exome sequencing (WES) represented the remaining 347 tests. Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants that explain the clinical indications were identified in 34% (27% in panels and 43% in exomes), spanning 279 genes and including 165 novel variants. While recessive mutations dominated the landscape of solved cases (71% of mutations, and 97% of which are homozygous), a substantial minority (27%) were solved on the basis of dominant mutations. The highly consanguineous nature of the study population also facilitated homozygosity for many private mutations (only 32.5% of the recessive mutations are founder), as well as the first instances of recessive inheritance of previously assumed strictly dominant disorders (involving ITPR1, VAMP1, MCTP2, and TBP). Surprisingly, however, dual molecular diagnosis was only observed in 1.5% of cases. Finally, we have encountered candidate variants in 75 genes (ABHD6, ACY3, ADGRB2, ADGRG7, AGTPBP1, AHNAK2, AKAP6, ASB3, ATXN1L, C17orf62, CABP1, CCDC186, CCP110, CLSTN2, CNTN3, CNTN5, CTNNA2, CWC22, DMAP1, DMKN, DMXL1, DSCAM, DVL2, ECI1, EP400, EPB41L5, FBXL22, GAP43, GEMIN7, GIT1, GRIK4, GRSF1, GTRP1, HID1, IFNL1, KCNC4, LRRC52, MAP7D3, MCTP2, MED26, MPP7, MRPS35, MTDH, MTMR9, NECAP2, NPAT, NRAP, PAX7, PCNX, PLCH2, PLEKHF1, PTPN12, QKI, RILPL2, RIMKLA, RIMS2, RNF213, ROBO1, SEC16A, SIAH1, SIRT2, SLAIN2, SLC22A20, SMDT1, SRRT, SSTR1, ST20, SYT9, TSPAN6, UBR4, VAMP4, VPS36, WDR59, WDYHV1, and WHSC1) not previously linked to human phenotypes and these are presented to accelerate post-publication matchmaking. Two of these genes were independently mutated in more than one family with similar phenotypes, which substantiates their link to human disease (AKAP6 in intellectual disability and UBR4 in early dementia). If the novel candidate disease genes in this cohort are independently confirmed, the yield of WES will have increased to 83%, which suggests that most "negative" clinical exome tests are unsolved due to interpretation rather than technical limitations.
Somatotropin-release inhibitory factor (SRIF) is a major regulator of pituitary function, mostly inhibiting hormone secretion and to a lesser extent pituitary cell growth. Five SRIF receptor subtypes (SSTR1-5) are ubiquitously expressed G-protein coupled receptors. In the pituitary, SSTR1, 2, 3 and 5 are expressed, with SSTR2 and SSTR5 predominating. As new SRIF analogs have recently been introduced for treatment of pituitary disease, we evaluate the current knowledge of cell-specific pituitary SRIF receptor signaling and highlight areas of future research for comprehensive understanding of these mechanisms. Elucidating pituitary SRIF receptor signaling enables understanding of pituitary hormone secretion and cell growth, and also encourages future therapeutic development for pituitary disorders.
Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) exert critical biological functions such as negatively regulating hormone release and cell proliferation, making them popular targets for developing therapeutics to treat endocrine disorders, especially neuroendocrine tumors. Although several panagonists mimicking the endogenous ligand somatostatin are available, the development of more effective and safer somatostatinergic therapies is limited due to a lack of molecular understanding of the ligand recognition and regulation of divergent SSTR subtypes. Here, we report four cryoelectron microscopy structures of G(i)-coupled SSTR1 and SSTR3 activated by distinct agonists, including the FDA-approved panagonist pasireotide as well as their selective small molecule agonists L-797591 and L-796778. Our structures reveal a conserved recognition pattern of pasireotide in SSTRs attributed to the binding with a conserved extended binding pocket, distinct from SST14, octreotide, and lanreotide. Together with mutagenesis analyses, our structures further reveal the dynamic feature of ligand binding pockets in SSTR1 and SSTR3 to accommodate divergent agonists, the key determinants of ligand selectivity lying across the orthosteric pocket of different SSTR subtypes, as well as the molecular mechanism underlying diversity and conservation of receptor activation. Our work provides a framework for rational design of subtype-selective SSTR ligands and may facilitate drug development efforts targeting SSTRs with improved therapeutic efficacy and reduced side effects.
The neuropeptide somatostatin (SRIF) is a neurotransmitter in the brain that exerts physiological actions including the modulation of Ca2+ and K+ conductances, neuronal cell firing, neurotransmitter release, and certain behaviors such as locomotion and cognitive functions. SRIF induces its biological effects by interacting with cell surface receptors. Recent studies have revealed that subtypes of SRIF receptors exist in the brain and other tissues. The SRIF1 receptor can be distinguished by its high affinity for the agonist MK 678, is coupled to G proteins, and mediates the stimulatory effects of SRIF on a delayed rectifier K+ current in brain neurons. Furthermore, MK 678, when applied to the nucleus accumbens, evokes locomotor activity, and SRIF1 receptors in this brain region selectively mediate the stimulation of this behavioral response to SRIF. SRIF1 receptors are unevenly distributed in the brain, with high levels in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, the locus coeruleus, the neostriatum, and the inner layers of the cerebral cortex. This receptor subtype has characteristics similar to the recently cloned SRIF receptor, SSTR2. A second SRIF receptor subtype has been identified in the brain and is referred to as the SRIF2 receptor. It has no affinity for MK 678, can be selectively labeled with smaller structural analogs of the peptide CGP 23996, and has characteristics similar to the recently cloned receptor subtype SSTR1. SRIF2 receptors are not efficiently coupled to G proteins and have a distinct but overlapping distribution in brain with SRIF1 receptors. No clear biological function has been identified for SRIF2 receptors.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Somatostatin analogs have an important role in the medical therapy of neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Octreotide and lanreotide, both somatostatin analogs binding with high affinity for the somatostatin receptor (SSTR)2, can control symptoms in functional NETs. In addition, these compounds, because of their antiproliferative effects, can stabilize growth of well-differentiated NETs. Pasireotide is a novel multireceptor-targeted somatostatin analog with high affinity for SSTR1, 2, 3, and 5. This review provides an overview of the state of the art of pasireotide in the treatment of NETs, with the aim of addressing clinical relevance and future perspectives for this molecule in the management of NETs.
Somatostatin (SS) and urotensin II (UII) are members of two families of structurally related neuropeptides present in all vertebrates. They exert a large array of biological activities that are mediated by two families of G-protein-coupled receptors called SSTR and UTS2R respectively. It is proposed that the two families of peptides as well as those of their receptors probably derive from a single ancestral ligand-receptor pair. This pair had already been duplicated before the emergence of vertebrates to generate one SS peptide with two receptors and one UII peptide with one receptor. Thereafter, each family expanded in the three whole-genome duplications (1R, 2R, and 3R) that occurred during the evolution of vertebrates, whereupon some local duplications and gene losses occurred. Following the 2R event, the vertebrate ancestor is deduced to have possessed three SS (SS1, SS2, and SS5) and six SSTR (SSTR1-6) genes, on the one hand, and four UII (UII, URP, URP1, and URP2) and five UTS2R (UTS2R1-5) genes, on the other hand. In the teleost lineage, all these have been preserved with the exception of SSTR4. Moreover, several additional genes have been gained through the 3R event, such as SS4 and a second copy of the UII, SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5 genes, and through local duplications, such as SS3. In mammals, all the genes of the SSTR family have been preserved, with the exception of SSTR6. In contrast, for the other families, extensive gene losses occurred, as only the SS1, SS2, UII, and URP genes and one UTS2R gene are still present.
BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine cells (NECs) reside adjacent to colonic stem cells (SCs) in the crypt stem cell (SC) niche, but how NECs are involved in regulation of SCs is unclear. We investigated NECs expressing somatostatin (SST) and somatostatin receptor type 1 (SSTR1) because SST inhibits intestinal proliferation. HYPOTHESIS: SSTR1 cells maintain SCs in a quiescent state, and aberrant SST signaling contributes to SC overpopulation in colorectal cancer (CRC). METHODS: The proportion of SCs to NECs cells was quantified, by flow cytometry, in CRC cell lines and primary normal/tumor tissues based on cellular ALDH and SSTR1 levels, respectively. Doubling time and sphere-formation was used to evaluate cell proliferation and stemness. CRC cell lines were treated with exogenous SST and SST inhibitor cyclosomatostatin (cycloSST) and analyzed for changes in SCs and growth rate. Paracrine signaling between NECs and SCs was ascertained using transwell cultures of ALDH+ and SSTR1+ cells. RESULTS: In CRC cell lines, the proportion of ALDH+ cells inversely correlates with proportion of SSTR1+ cells and with rate of proliferation and sphere-formation. While primary normal tissue shows SST and SSTR1 expression, CRC shows only SSTR1 expression. Moreover, ALDH+ cells did not show SST or SSTR1 expression. Exogenous SST suppressed proliferation but not ALDH+ population size or viability. Inhibition of SSTR1 signaling, via cycloSST treatment, decreased cell proliferation, ALDH+ cell population size and sphere-formation. When co-cultured with SSTR1+ cells, sphere-formation and cell proliferation of ALDH+ cells was inhibited. CONCLUSION: That each CRC cell line has a unique ALDH+/SSTR1+ ratio which correlates with its growth dynamics, suggests feedback mechanisms exist between SCs and NECs that contribute to regulation of SCs. The growth suppression by both SST and cycloSST treatments suggests that SST signaling modulates this feedback mechanism. The ability of SSTR1+ cells to decrease sphere formation and proliferation of ALDH+ cells in transwell cultures indicates that the ALDH subpopulation is regulated by SSTR1 via a paracrine mechanism. Since ALDH+ cells lack SST and SSTR1 expression, we conjecture that SST signaling controls the rate of NEC maturation as SCs mature along the NEC lineage, which contributes to quiescence of SCs and inhibition of proliferation.
BACKGROUNDAndrogen receptor signaling inhibitors (ARSIs) have improved outcomes for patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC), but their clinical benefit is limited by treatment resistance.METHODSTo investigate the mechanisms of ARSI resistance, we analyzed the whole-genome (n = 45) and transcriptome (n = 31) sequencing data generated from paired metastatic biopsies obtained before initiation of first-line ARSI therapy for mCRPC and after radiographic disease progression. We investigated the effects of genetic and pharmacologic modulation of SSTR1 in 22Rv1 cells, a representative mCRPC cell line.RESULTSWe confirmed the predominant role of tumor genetic alterations converging on augmenting androgen receptor (AR) signaling and the increased transcriptional heterogeneity and lineage plasticity during the emergence of ARSI resistance. We further identified amplifications involving a putative enhancer downstream of the AR and transcriptional downregulation of SSTR1, encoding somatostatin receptor 1, in ARSI-resistant tumors. We found that patients with SSTR1-low mCRPC tumors derived less benefit from subsequent ARSI therapy in a retrospective cohort. We showed that SSTR1 was antiproliferative in 22Rv1 cells and that the FDA-approved drug pasireotide suppressed 22Rv1 cell proliferation.CONCLUSIONOur findings expand the knowledge of ARSI resistance and point out actionable next steps, exemplified by potentially targeting SSTR1, to improve patient outcomes.FUNDINGNational Cancer Institute (NCI), NIH; Prostate Cancer Foundation; Conquer Cancer, American Society of Clinical Oncology Foundation; UCSF Benioff Initiative for Prostate Cancer Research; Netherlands Cancer Institute.
A patient with a neuroendocrine tumor and history of coronary artery disease underwent PET with 68Ga-DOTATATE PET tracer for tumor visualization. Analysis of the scan showed uptake of 68Ga-DOTATATE in the left ventricle corresponding to previous myocardial infarct. 68Ga-DOTATATE binds by somatostatin receptors (SSTR) and it has been proposed that it may be useful for the detection of cardiac inflammatory lesions. We aimed to test whether SSTR could be upregulated in cardiac fibrotic scar. We analyzed SSTR in cardiac samples from patients with end-stage ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM, n = 8) and control hearts (n = 5). In mature ICM tissue, SSTR1 and SSTR2 expression was unchanged and SSTR5 expression was significantly decreased in ICM samples vs. control. Immunohistochemistry showed increased SSTR1 and SSTR2 in ICM. Areas with SSTR1 or SSTR2 staining were often adjacent to fibrotic areas. The majority of SSTR1 and SSTR2 staining localized in cardiomyocytes in fibrotic scar-rich areas where CD68 macrophage staining was not present. SSTR are occasionally upregulated in cardiac fibrotic areas. When using 68Ga-DOTATATE PET tracer to detect cardiac sarcoidosis or atherosclerotic plaque, the possibility of tracer uptake in fibrotic areas should be considered.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Somatostatin influences motility, secretion, and absorption and often has in vivo a modulating, indirect effect on target cells in the gastrointestinal tract. Knowledge on tissue-specific expression of the five somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), their capacities for internalization and downregulation, their subtype-specific intracellular messengers, and the possibility of forming functionally distinct homodimers or heterodimers, has further complicated the actual in-vivo mechanism of action of somatostatin. This review reports recent in-vivo and in-vitro studies on somatostatin effects on the gastrointestinal tract and pancreas, most of them using a new engineered animal model able to define specific roles of somatostatin and/or its receptor subtypes. RECENT FINDINGS: SSTR2 knockout mice showed normal circulating gastrin and unchanged acid output, suggesting a high degree of plasticity behind gastric acid secretion. Intestinal inflammation significantly increased somatostatin mRNA in SSTR2 null compared to wild type suggesting that somatostatin mediates inflammation also in SSTR2 null mice. In pancreatic islets of SSTR1-5 null mice no variations of islet size, cellular organization or glucagon or insulin content was shown when compared with null SSTRs and control mice. SUMMARY: Although none of the recent findings produced on somatostatin seem ready to be considered for clinical application, recent developments of animal models such as SSTR knockout mice have highlighted promising results to better understand the direct and indirect effects of somatostatin on gastrointestinal tract functions.
Somatostatin was discovered for its ability to inhibit growth hormone (GH) secretion. Later, it was found to be widely distributed in other brain regions, in which it fulfills a neuromodulatory role, and in several organs of the gastrointestinal tract where it can act as a paracrine factor or as a true circulating factor. In mammals, two molecules of 14 (somatostatin 14) and 28 (somatostatin 28) amino acids are the only biologically active members of the family. They originate from a single gene which gives rise to a single propeptide alternately cleaved in different tissues. In 1992, a major breakthrough in our understanding of somatostatin functions was made with the cloning of five different receptor genes (sstr1 to sstr5) which belong to the seven transmembrane domain receptor family. Their closer relatives are opioid receptors. In first approximation, the tissular expression of the sstrs matches quite well with the distribution of somatostatin binding sites in the "classical" targets of the peptide ie brain, pituitary pancreatic islets and adrenals. The pharmacology of GH inhibition is very close to sstr2 binding but other actions of somatostatins have not yet been attributed clearly to a single receptor subtype. All clinically relevant agonists tested so far (octreotide, lanreotide and vapreotide) are selective of sstr2 being less potent on sstr3 and inactive for sstr1 and sstr4. Surprisingly, rat sstr5 displays nanomolar affinities for octreotide and vapreotide while these agonists are only active at much higher concentrations on human sstr5. All five receptors can be more or less efficiently coupled to inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity in transfected cell systems.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
The diverse physiological effects of somatostatin are mediated by a family of cell surface receptors that bind somatostatin selectively and with high affinity. The somatostatin receptors are members of the seven transmembrane segment receptor superfamily and molecular cloning studies have identified five types, designated sstr1-5. The human somatostatin receptors vary in size from 364 (sstr5) to 418 (sstr3) amino acids with 46-61% amino acid identity between receptors, and 105 amino acids are invariant. The sequences of the seven putative alpha-helical membrane-spanning domains are more highly conserved than those of the extracellular N- and intracellular C-terminal domains. Two forms of sstr2 have been identified in the mouse, sstr2A and sstr2B, which differ in size and sequence of the intracellular C-terminal domain. These two forms of sstr2 are products of a common gene and are generated by alternative splicing with sstr2A and sstr2B being the products of the unspliced and spliced forms, respectively, of sstr2 mRNA. Thus, functional diversity within the somatostatin receptor family may result from the expression of multiple types as well as from alternative splicing. The five somatostatin receptors have distinct patterns of expression in the central nervous system and peripheral tissues. They have also been expressed in vitro and shown to have different pharmacological properties. Somatostatin analogues selective for sstr2, sstr3 and sstr5 have been identified which will facilitate in vivo studies of the functions of these somatostatin receptors. Such studies to date suggest that sstr2 mediates inhibition of growth hormone secretion and sstr5 mediates inhibition of insulin secretion. The molecular cloning and functional characterization of the somatostatin receptor family is a first step in elucidating the diverse effects of somatostatin on cellular functions.
Somatostatin may play an important role in the regulation of cancer growth including pancreatic cancer by interaction with somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) on the cell surface. Five SSTRs were cloned, and the function of these SSTRs is addressed in this review. SSTR-2, SSTR-5, and SSTR-1 are thought to play major roles in inhibiting pancreatic cancer growth both in vitro and in vivo. SSTR-3 may be involved in mediating apoptosis, but the role of SSTR-4 is not clear. In most pancreatic cancers, functional SSTRs are absent. Reintroduction of SSTR genes has been shown to inhibit pancreatic cancer growth in cell cultures and animal models.
Neuroendocrine tumors (neuroendocrine tumors-NET) are a heterogeneous group of neoplasms with a common embryological origin and diverse biological behavior, derived from cells of the neuroendocrine system, the system APUD (amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation). They are characterized by overexpression of all five somatostatin receptors (SSTR1-SSTR5), particularly type 2 (SST2). Surgical resection of the tumor is the treatment option, with a possibility of complete remission in patients with limited disease. Somatostatin analogs (octreotide and lanreotide) are the treatment of choice in patients with residual disease, particularly when it comes to NET non-pancreatic origin. Systemic chemotherapy is administered primarily to patients with poorly differentiated carcinomas. PRRT treatment is recommended in case of non-responsiveness of the disease. The ideal candidates for PRRT are patients with unresectable disease of high and intermediate differentiation. Somatostatine analogs radiolabelled with Indium-111 ((111)In), Yttrium-90 ((90)Y), Lutetium-177 ((177)Lu) and Bismuth-213 ((213)Bi), are selectively concentrated in the tumor cells, causing maximum tissue damage to tumors and with fewer effects on healthy tissue and the immune system. In the current review, it was demonstrated that patients with unresectable grade 1 or 2 disease showed increased PFS (progression free survival) and OS (overall survival), while quality of life was improved after PRRT treatment as compared to somatostatin analogs, chemotherapy and other targeted therapies.
Somatostatin regulates endocrine and exocrine secretion, possesses antiproliferative properties and acts as a neurotransmitter/neuromodulator in the central nervous system. These effects are mediated by G protein-coupled receptors, of which at least five types have been cloned (sstr1-5). In radioligand-binding studies we have compared the binding properties of sstr1-5 with their activities as somatostatin receptors. All receptors identified so far bind somatostatin-14 and somatostatin-28 with high affinity. The similarities in receptor sequence and in the binding profiles of short synthetic somatostastin analogues such as octreotide, MK 678 or RC 160 for sstr1-5 indicate the existence of two classes of receptors sstr1/sstr4 with virtually no or very low affinity and sstr2/sstr3/sstr5 with intermediate to high affinity for the short somatostatin analogues. All five receptors mediate inhibition of adenylyl cyclase; this inhibition is sensitive to pertussis toxin. In vitro and in vivo studies suggest the importance of sstr2 and/or sstr5 in the inhibition of growth hormone release. The sstr2 receptor is apparently the predominant subtype expressed in somatostatin receptor-positive tumours. Evidence exists for the importance of sstr5 receptors in insulin secretion and sstr1 receptors in oncology. Somatostatin receptor-selective agonists and antagonists will help to explore new therapeutic opportunities in oncology as well as in endocrine and gastrointestinal disorders and those of the central nervous system.
Somatostatin analogues are in clinical use for the diagnosis and treatment of several oncological indications, namely pituitary adenomas and endocrine gastrointestinal tumors. In addition for a variety of malignancies their potential value is being studied. It has been speculated that somatostatin plays a role in the homeostasis of gliomas, and that gliomas could be susceptible to antiproliferative effects of somatostatin analogues. These assumptions were tested in 20 human cell lines derived from malignant gliomas and 4 glioblastoma tissue specimens, which were analyzed for their expression of the five known somatostatin receptor genes (SSTR1-5) and for the receptor function. Using semiquantitative PCR techniques, SSTR2 transcripts were found in all 20 cell lines and 4 glioblastomas, SSTR1 transcripts were detected in 9 cell lines and 4 glioblastomas, and SSTR3 transcripts were noted in 7 cell lines and 1 glioblastoma. SSTR4 and SSTR5 transcripts were only rarely detected. Gene expression profiles in glioblastoma tissue specimens resembled those of the cell lines in quality as well as quantity, with average transcript levels being highest for the SSTR2, followed by SSTR1 and SSTR3. However, when compared to GH3 anterior pituitary tumor cells, the relative amounts of PCR amplified DNA fragments were found to be at least 120 fold lower in glioblastoma cell lines and tumor specimens. Binding studies indicated that glioblastoma derived cells contained only minute amounts of SSTRs. No inhibition of proliferation was observed when 10 selected cell lines were incubated with somatostatin-14 (SST-14) or octreotide (SMS 201-995) at concentrations ranging from 10(-9) M to 10(-6) M, however, the proliferation of two cell lines was weakly stimulated after 6 days of incubation with 10(-6) M octreotide. The activity of adenylate cyclase, stimulated by forskolin, was inhibited by maximally 25% at 10(-6) M SST-14 or octreotide in one of 5 selected glioblastoma cell lines. Somatostatin peptides do not seem to exert anti-proliferative effects on glioblastoma cells and therefore appear to be of no obvious value for glioblastoma therapy. Most likely the amount of cell surface SSTRs is not sufficient to mediate antiproliferative effects. Since it has been described that SSTRs are detectable on most differentiated gliomas as well as astrocytes, it may be speculated that SSTRs may be relevant only in the context of well differentiated cellular programs but lose their significance with progressive dedifferentiation.
Therapeutic outcome in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is poor in most advanced cases. To improve therapeutic efficiency, novel therapeutic targets and prognostic factors must be discovered. Our studies have identified several G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) as promising candidates. Significant epigenetic silencing of GPCR expression occurs in HNSCC compared with normal tissue, and is significantly correlated with clinical behavior. Together with the finding that GPCR activity can suppress tumor cell growth, this indicates that GPCR expression has potential utility as a prognostic factor. In this review, we discuss the roles that galanin receptor type 1 (GALR1) and type 2 (GALR2), tachykinin receptor type 1 (TACR1), and somatostatin receptor type 1 (SST1) play in HNSCC. GALR1 inhibits proliferation of HNSCC cells though ERK1/2-mediated effects on cell cycle control proteins such as p27, p57, and cyclin D1, whereas GALR2 inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in HNSCC cells. Hypermethylation of GALR1, GALR2, TACR1, and SST1 is associated with significantly reduced disease-free survival and a higher recurrence rate. Although their overall activities varies, each of these GPCRs has value as both a prognostic factor and a therapeutic target. These data indicate that further study of GPCRs is a promising strategy that will enrich pharmacogenomics and prognostic research in HNSCC.
Insulinomas are rare pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. Most patients can be cured with surgery, but patients with a metastatic disease show impaired survival. The aim of this study was to evaluate somatostatin receptor (SSTR) 1-5 expression in insulinomas and to correlate the expression profile with clinicopathological variables and with patient outcome. This retrospective study involved 52 insulinoma patients. After histological re-evaluation, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples were processed into tissue microarrays and stained immunohistochemically with monoclonal SSTR1-5 antibodies. All the 52 tumours (49 non-metastatic, 3 metastatic) expressed at least one SSTR subtype. SSTR2 was expressed most frequently (71%), followed by SSTR3 (33%), SSTR1 (27%), SSTR5 (6%) and SSTR4 (0%). SSTR3 expression was associated with a larger tumour size (median diameter 19 mm vs. 13 mm, p = 0.043), and SSTR3 and SSTR5 expression were associated with impaired overall survival [HR 3.532 (95% CI 1.106-11,277), p = 0.033, and HR 6.805 (95% CI 1.364-33.955), p = 0.019 respectively]. Most insulinomas express SSTR2, which may be utilized in diagnostic imaging, and in planning individualized treatment strategies for insulinoma patients. Further studies are needed to clarify the association between SSTR profile and overall survival.
