Somatostatin receptor type 2; Receptor for somatostatin-14 and -28. This receptor is coupled via pertussis toxin sensitive G proteins to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. In addition it stimulates phosphotyrosine phosphatase and PLC via pertussis toxin insensitive as well as sensitive G proteins. Inhibits calcium entry by suppressing voltage-dependent calcium channels. Acts as the functionally dominant somatostatin receptor in pancreatic alpha- and beta-cells where it mediates the inhibitory effect of somatostatin-14 on hormone secretion. Inhibits cell growth through enhancement of MAPK1 [...] 
Lu-177 has been developed for the treatment of patients with peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT). A second generation pure no-carrier-added Lu-177 has a high specific activity and has waste disposal advantages over the first generation carrier-added Lu-177. PRRT has recently been developed for the treatment of neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). The majority of pancreatic and gastroenteric NETs (GEP-NETs) express the somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) 2 and 5. These receptors can be specifically targeted with a somatostatin peptide analogue (DOTATOC/DOTATATE) which can be chelated to a positron emission tomography (PET) emitting radioisotope such as Ga-68 for imaging or to a beta-emitting radioisotope Lu-177 for therapy. A key advantage of this approach is that the receptor expression can be demonstrated by PET imaging before the patient is treated. Clinical studies in G1 and G2 GEP-NETS have demonstrated that PRRT is extremely effective in terms of progression free survival (PFS), symptom control and quality of life, with a well-established safety profile. A beneficial effect on outcome survival awaits to be confirmed. The first commercially available product Lu-177-DOTATATE was approved following the NETTER-1 trial in G1 and G2 GE-NETS. Lu-177-DOTATATE 7,4 GBq every 8 weeks for 4 cycles, together with octreotide LAR 30 mg monthly, demonstrated a median PFS of 28,4 months compared to 8,5 months for octreotide LAR 60 mg monthly. A second pivotal study COMPETE is currently in progress, comparing no carrier-added (n.c.a.) Lu-177-DOTATOC to the m-TOR inhibitor Everolimus in both GE-NETs and PNETs. Two studies, NETTER-2 and COMPOSE are currently underway in patients with high grade G2 and G3 NETs. Novel SSTR antagonists are being developed as next generation targeting molecules for SSTR2-expressing tumors. Antagonists have a higher tumor binding to receptors than agonists, opening up the potential indications for SSTR2 targeting to tumors which have a relatively lower expression of SSTR2 compared to NET such as small cell lung cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and breast cancer. In addition to Lu-177, radioisotopes with different radiation properties such as Tb-161 and the alpha-emitter Ac-225 are being developed which have the potential to improve treatment efficacy across the range of G1 to G3 NETs.
Overexpression of somatostatin receptors (SSTR), particularly SSTR2, is found in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NET), and subsets of other solid tumors such as small-cell lung cancer (SCLC). SCLC accounts for approximately 13% to 15% of lung cancer and lacks effective therapeutic options. IHC analysis indicates that up to 50% of SCLC tumors are SSTR2-positive, with a substantial subset showing high and homogenous expression. Peptide receptor radionuclide therapy with radiolabeled somatostatin analogue, Lu-177 DOTATATE, has been approved for GEP-NETs. Different strategies aimed at improving outcomes, such as the use of alpha-emitting radioisotopes, are currently being investigated. RYZ101 (Ac-225 DOTATATE) is comprised of the alpha-emitting radioisotope actinium-225, chemical chelator DOTA, and octreotate (TATE), a somatostatin analogue. In the cell-based competitive radioligand binding assay, RAYZ-10001-La (lanthanum surrogate for RYZ101) showed high binding affinity (Ki = 0.057 nmol/L) to human SSTR2 and >600-fold selectivity against other SSTR subtypes. RAYZ-10001-La exhibited efficient internalization to SSTR2-positive cells. In multiple SSTR2-expressing SCLC xenograft models, single-dose intravenous RYZ101 3 muCi (0.111 MBq) or 4 muCi (0.148 MBq) significantly inhibited tumor growth, with deeper responses, including sustained regression, observed in the models with higher SSTR2 levels. The antitumor effect was further enhanced when RYZ101 was combined with carboplatin and etoposide at clinically relevant doses. In summary, RYZ101 is a highly potent, alpha-emitting radiopharmaceutical agent, and preclinical data demonstrate the potential of RYZ101 for the treatment of patients with SSTR-positive cancers.
Somatostatin analogs, such as octreotide, lanreotide, and pasireotide, which function as somatostatin receptor ligands (SRLs), are the main drugs used for the treatment of acromegaly. These ligands are also used as important molecules for radiation therapy and imaging of neuroendocrine tumors. Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) are canonical G protein-coupled proteins that play a role in metabolism, growth, and pathological conditions such as hormone disorders, neurological diseases, and cancers. Cryogenic electron microscopy combined with the protein structure prediction platform AlphaFold has been used to determine the 3-dimensional structures of many proteins. Recently, several groups published a series of papers illustrating the 3-dimensional structure of SSTR2, including that of the inactive/activated SSTR2-G protein complex bound to different ligands. The results revealed the residues that contribute to the ligand binding pocket and demonstrated that Trp8-Lys9 (the W-K motif) in somatostatin analogs is the key motif in stabilizing the bottom part of the binding pocket. In this review, we discuss the recent findings related to the structural analysis of SSTRs and SRLs, the relationships between the structural data and clinical findings, and the future development of novel structure-based therapies.
CONTEXT: Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas (PPGLs) with pathogenic mutations in the succinate dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB) are associated with a high metastatic risk. Somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2)-dependent imaging is the most sensitive imaging modality for SDHB-related PPGLs, suggesting that SSTR2 expression is a significant cell surface therapeutic biomarker of such tumors. OBJECTIVE: Exploration of the relationship between SSTR2 immunoreactivity and SDHB immunoreactivity, mutational status, and clinical behavior of PPGLs. Evaluation of SSTR-based therapies in metastatic PPGLs. METHODS: Retrospective analysis of a multicenter cohort of PPGLs at 6 specialized Endocrine Tumor Centers in Germany, The Netherlands, and Switzerland. Patients with PPGLs participating in the ENSAT registry were included. Clinical data were extracted from medical records, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for SDHB and SSTR2 was performed in patients with available tumor tissue. Immunoreactivity of SSTR2 was investigated using Volante scores. The main outcome measure was the association of SSTR2 IHC positivity with genetic and clinical-pathological features of PPGLs. RESULTS: Of 202 patients with PPGLs, 50% were SSTR2 positive. SSTR2 positivity was significantly associated with SDHB- and SDHx-related PPGLs, with the strongest SSTR2 staining intensity in SDHB-related PPGLs (P = .01). Moreover, SSTR2 expression was significantly associated with metastatic disease independent of SDHB/SDHx mutation status (P < .001). In metastatic PPGLs, the disease control rate with first-line SSTR-based radionuclide therapy was 67% (n = 22, n = 11 SDHx), and with first-line "cold" somatostatin analogs 100% (n = 6, n = 3 SDHx). CONCLUSION: SSTR2 expression was independently associated with SDHB/SDHx mutations and metastatic disease. We confirm a high disease control rate of somatostatin receptor-based therapies in metastatic PPGLs.
Somatotropin-release inhibitory factor (SRIF) is a major regulator of pituitary function, mostly inhibiting hormone secretion and to a lesser extent pituitary cell growth. Five SRIF receptor subtypes (SSTR1-5) are ubiquitously expressed G-protein coupled receptors. In the pituitary, SSTR1, 2, 3 and 5 are expressed, with SSTR2 and SSTR5 predominating. As new SRIF analogs have recently been introduced for treatment of pituitary disease, we evaluate the current knowledge of cell-specific pituitary SRIF receptor signaling and highlight areas of future research for comprehensive understanding of these mechanisms. Elucidating pituitary SRIF receptor signaling enables understanding of pituitary hormone secretion and cell growth, and also encourages future therapeutic development for pituitary disorders.
AIMS: The aim of our study was to determine the effect of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (HDACis) on somatostatin type-2 receptor (SSTR2) expression and [(111)In]In-/[(177)Lu]Lu-DOTA-TATE uptake in vitro and in vivo. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The human cell lines NCI-H69 (small-cell lung carcinoma) and BON-1 (pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor) were treated with HDACis (i.e. entinostat, mocetinostat (MOC), LMK-235, CI-994 or panobinostat (PAN)), and SSTR2 mRNA expression levels and [(111)In]In-DOTA-TATE uptake were measured. Furthermore, vehicle- and HDACi-treated NCI-H69 and BON-1 tumor-bearing mice were injected with radiolabeled DOTA-TATE followed by biodistribution studies. Additionally, SSTR2 and HDAC mRNA expression of xenografts, and of NCI-H69, BON-1, NCI-H727 (human pulmonary carcinoid) and GOT1 (human midgut neuroendocrine tumor) cells were determined. KEY FINDINGS: HDACi treatment resulted in the desired effects in vitro. However, no significant increase in tumoral DOTA-TATE uptake was observed after HDACi treatment in NCI-H69 tumor-bearing animals, whereas tumoral SSTR2 mRNA and/or protein expression levels were significantly upregulated after treatment with MOC, CI-994 and PAN, i.e. a maximum of 2.1- and 1.3-fold, respectively. Analysis of PAN-treated BON-1 xenografts solely demonstrated increased SSTR2 mRNA expression levels. Comparison of HDACs and SSTR2 expression in BON-1 and NCI-H69 xenografts showed a significantly higher expression of 6/11 HDACs in BON-1 xenografts. Of these HDACs, a significant inverse correlation was found between HDAC3 and SSTR2 expression (Pearson r = -0.92) in the studied cell lines. SIGNIFICANCE: To conclude, tumoral uptake levels of radiolabeled DOTA-TATE were not enhanced after HDACi treatment in vivo, but, depending on the applied inhibitor, increased SSTR2 expression levels were observed.
Background Somatostatin receptors, and specifically somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSTR2), have primarily been associated with neuroendocrine tumors and have revolutionized the imaging and therapy of patients with these tumors. SSTR2 is expressed on other tumors at lower prevalence. Purpose To evaluate the potential of SSTR2-targeted imaging and therapy in patients with breast cancer. Materials and Methods In a preclinical experiment, SSTR2 expression was assessed in tissue microarrays of breast cancer samples using H-score analysis. H-scores higher than 50 (0-300 scale) were considered positive. Then, a prospective phase 2 clinical trial of SSTR2-targeted tetraazacyclododecane tetraacetic acid octreotate (Dotatate) PET/CT was performed in participants with biopsy-proven estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer from January to August 2023. A positive Dotatate PET/CT scan was defined as tumors with a Krenning score of 3 (avidity greater than liver) or 4 (avidity greater than spleen). The proportion of positive scans and the 95% CI were calculated. One participant with metastatic ER-positive breast cancer and a Krenning 4 Dotatate PET/CT result underwent treatment with SSTR2-targeted actinium 225 ((225)Ac) Dotatate. Results Preclinical microarrays demonstrated that 63 of 123 ER-positive breast cancer tissue samples (51% [95% CI: 42, 60]) but only 22 of 121 ER-negative breast cancer tissue samples (18% [95% CI: 12, 26]) were enriched for SSTR2 (P < .001). Thirty female participants (mean age, 66 years +/- 15) with metastatic ER-positive breast cancer were accrued to the phase 2 SSTR2-targeted imaging trial and underwent Dotatate PET/CT. Dotatate PET/CT demonstrated that nine of 30 participants (30% [95% CI: 15, 49]) had tumors with Krenning scores of 3 or 4, indicating strong SSTR2 expression. SSTR2-targeted therapy with alpha-emitting (225)Ac-Dotatate resulted in a near complete response in a heavily pretreated participant with metastatic ER-positive breast cancer and a Krenning 4 Dotatate PET result. Conclusion Molecular imaging targeting SSTR2 and radioligand therapy with SSTR2-targeted (225)Ac-Dotatate enables a new therapeutic option for patients with metastatic breast cancer. Clinical trial registration no. NCT05880394 (c) RSNA, 2024 See also the editorial by Lin and Choyke in this issue.
The cyclic peptide hormone somatostatin regulates physiological processes involved in growth and metabolism, through its binding to G-protein coupled somatostatin receptors. The isoform 2 (SSTR2) is of particular relevance for the therapy of neuroendocrine tumours for which different analogues to somatostatin are currently in clinical use. We present an extensive and systematic computational study on the dynamics of SSTR2 in three different states: active agonist-bound, inactive antagonist-bound and apo inactive. We exploited the recent burst of SSTR2 experimental structures to perform mus-long multi-copy molecular dynamics simulations to sample conformational changes of the receptor and rationalize its binding to different ligands (the agonists somatostatin and octreotide, and the antagonist CYN154806). Our findings suggest that the apo form is more flexible compared to the holo ones, and confirm that the extracellular loop 2 closes upon the agonist octreotide but not upon the antagonist CYN154806. Based on interaction fingerprint analyses and free energy calculations, we found that all peptides similarly interact with residues buried into the binding pocket. Conversely, specific patterns of interactions are found with residues located in the external portion of the pocket, at the basis of the extracellular loops, particularly distinguishing the agonists from the antagonist. This study will help in the design of new somatostatin-based compounds for theranostics of neuroendocrine tumours.
The neuropeptide somatostatin (SRIF) is a neurotransmitter in the brain that exerts physiological actions including the modulation of Ca2+ and K+ conductances, neuronal cell firing, neurotransmitter release, and certain behaviors such as locomotion and cognitive functions. SRIF induces its biological effects by interacting with cell surface receptors. Recent studies have revealed that subtypes of SRIF receptors exist in the brain and other tissues. The SRIF1 receptor can be distinguished by its high affinity for the agonist MK 678, is coupled to G proteins, and mediates the stimulatory effects of SRIF on a delayed rectifier K+ current in brain neurons. Furthermore, MK 678, when applied to the nucleus accumbens, evokes locomotor activity, and SRIF1 receptors in this brain region selectively mediate the stimulation of this behavioral response to SRIF. SRIF1 receptors are unevenly distributed in the brain, with high levels in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, the locus coeruleus, the neostriatum, and the inner layers of the cerebral cortex. This receptor subtype has characteristics similar to the recently cloned SRIF receptor, SSTR2. A second SRIF receptor subtype has been identified in the brain and is referred to as the SRIF2 receptor. It has no affinity for MK 678, can be selectively labeled with smaller structural analogs of the peptide CGP 23996, and has characteristics similar to the recently cloned receptor subtype SSTR1. SRIF2 receptors are not efficiently coupled to G proteins and have a distinct but overlapping distribution in brain with SRIF1 receptors. No clear biological function has been identified for SRIF2 receptors.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs) constitute a heterogenous group of malignancies. Translational research into NEN cell biology is the cornerstone for drug development strategies in this field. Somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSTR2) expression is the hallmark of well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). Somatostatin analogs and peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT) form the basis of anti-SSTR2 treatment onto new combination strategies, antibody-drug conjugates and bispecific antibodies. Classical pathways involved in NET development (PI3K-Akt-mTOR and antiangiogenics) are reviewed but new potential targets for NET treatment will be explored. Epigenetic drugs have shown clinical activity in monotherapy and preclinical combination strategies are more than attractive. Immunotherapy has shown opposite results in different NEN settings. Although the NOTCH pathway has been targeted with disappointing results, new strategies are being developed. Finally, after years of solid preclinical evidence on different genetically engineered oncolytic viruses, clinical trials for refractory NET patients are now ongoing.
Early detection of pulmonary fibrosis is a critical yet insufficiently met clinical necessity. This study evaluated the effectiveness of FAPI-LM3, a (68)Ga-radiolabeled heterobivalent molecular probe that targets fibroblast activating protein (FAP) and somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), in the early detection of pulmonary fibrosis, leveraging its potential for early disease identification. A bleomycin-induced early pulmonary fibrosis model was established in C57BL/6 mice for 7 days. FAP and SSTR2 expression levels were quantitatively assessed in human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis lung tissue samples and bleomycin-treated mouse lung tissues by using western blotting, real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), and immunofluorescence techniques. The diagnostic performance of FAPI-LM3 was investigated by synthesizing monomeric radiotracers (68)Ga-FAPI-46 and (68)Ga-DOTA-LM3 alongside the heterobivalent probe (68)Ga-FAPI-LM3. These imaging radiopharmaceuticals were used in small-animal PET to compare their uptake in fibrotic and normal lung tissues. Results indicated significant upregulation of FAP and SSTR2 at both RNA and protein levels in fibrotic lung tissues compared with that in normal controls. PET imaging demonstrated significantly enhanced uptake of the (68)Ga-FAPI-LM3 probe in fibrotic lung tissues, with superior visual effects compared to monomeric tracers. At 60 min postinjection, early stage fibrotic tissues (day 7) demonstrated low-to-medium uptake of monomeric probes, including (68)Ga-DOTA-LM3 (0.45 +/- 0.04% ID/g) and (68)Ga-FAPI-46 (0.78 +/- 0.09% ID/g), whereas the uptake of the heterobivalent probe (68)Ga-FAPI-LM3 (1.90 +/- 0.10% ID/g) was significantly higher in fibrotic lesions than in normal lung tissue. Blockade experiments confirmed the specificity of (68)Ga-FAPI-LM3 uptake, which was attributed to synergistic targeting of FAP and SSTR2. This study demonstrates the potential of (68)Ga-FAPI-LM3 for early pulmonary fibrosis detection via molecular imaging, offering significant benefits over monomeric tracers (68)Ga-FAPI-46 and (68)Ga-DOTA-LM3. This strategy offers new possibilities for noninvasive and precise early detection of pulmonary fibrosis.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Our understanding of the genetic and epigenetic alterations in meningioma and the underlying tumor biology of meningioma has significantly changed over the past decade and resulted in revision of prognostically relevant meningioma subclasses within and beyond the WHO classification of CNS tumors. RECENT FINDINGS: The 2016 WHO classification of CNS tumors recognizes WHO grade I, II, and III based on histopathological features. Recent work has identified genetic alterations with prognostic implications, including mutations of the TERT promoter, loss of function of the DMD gene, and inactivation of the tumor suppressor BAP-1. Studies of DNA methylation patterns in meningiomas have resulted in a novel and prognostically relevant meningioma subclassification schema. There have been major advances in our understanding of prognostically relevant genetic and epigenetic changes in meningioma which will hopefully allow for improvement in clinical trial design and the development of more effective therapies for meningioma.
Unlike for other digestive cancer entities, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and targeted therapies have, so far, largely failed to improve patient survival in pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC), which remains the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in Europe and the United States. In this context, gene therapy may offer a new avenue for patients with PDAC. In this review, we explore the research currently ongoing in French laboratories aimed at defeating PDAC using nonviral therapeutic gene delivery, targeted transgene expression, or oncolytic virotherapy that recently or will soon bridge the gap between experimental models of cancer and clinical trials. These studies are likely to change clinical practice or thinking about PDAC management, as they represent a major advance not only for PDAC but may also significantly influence the field of gene-based molecular treatment of cancer.
Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), especially SSTR subtype 2, are found expressed at relatively higher levels in many tumor cells and in tumoral blood vessels relative to normal tissues. This creates an opportunity for developing various cytotoxic SST conjugates that selectively target SSTR2-specific sites. Accordingly, some potent chemotherapeutic agents such as camptothecin (CPT), methotrexate (MTX), paclitaxel (PTX) and doxorubicin (DOX) have been coupled to SSTR2-preferential somatostatin (SST) analogs. These new cytotoxic SST conjugates display significant SSTR-selective anti-tumor abilities in many different types of tumors. For instance, the CPT-SST conjugate JF-10-81, in which CPT is coupled to the N-terminus of a SSTR2-specific SST analog (JF-07-69), had wide ranging anti-tumor and anti-angiogenic ability. This conjugate also showed an ability to overcome multi-drug resistance (MDR) in SSTR-over-expressing and CPT-insensitive human pancreatic carcinoid BON cells. Notably, another DOX-SST conjugate, AN-238, made by coupling pyrrolino-DOX to the SST analog RC-121, displayed indirect anti-tumor activity against SSTR-negative, non-small cell lung cancer H-157 tumor growth by directly targeting SSTR-positive tumoral vessels of host mice. These cytotoxic SST conjugates should deliver chemotherapeutic agents to receptor-specific sites, enhance anti-tumor efficacy, reduce toxic side effects to normal tissues, and to some extent, overcome MDR. These and other peptide conjugates may possibly represent a newer generation of receptor-targeted cancer therapeutics. This review discusses the progress with reference to SST-based and SSTR-selective cytotoxic cancer therapy.
Somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSTR2) is one of the five subtypes of somatostatin receptors and is overexpressed on the surface of most gastro-entero-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs), pituitary tumors, paraganglioma, and meningioma, as well as hepatocellular carcinoma and breast cancer. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cells are genetically engineered to express an artificial, T-cell activating binder, leading upon ligation to biocidal activity against target-antigen expressing cells. Adaptor-CAR T-cells recognize, via the CAR, a tag on an antigen-binding molecule, building an activating bridge between the CAR and the target cell. We hypothesized that a novel fluorescent-peptide antagonist of SSTR2, called Octo-Fluo, in combination with anti-FITC adaptor CAR (AdFITC(E2)-CAR) T-cells, may function as an on-off tunable activating bridge between the CAR and SSTR2 expressing target cells. In vitro studies confirmed the binding of Octo-Fluo to Bon1-SSTR2 mCherry-Luc cells without evidence of internalization. AdFITC(E2)-CAR T-cells were activated and efficiently induced Bon1-SSTR2 cell death in vitro, in an Octo-Fluo concentration-dependent manner. Similarly, AdFITC(E2)-CAR T-cells in combination with Octo-Fluo efficiently infiltrated the tumor and eliminated Bon1-SSTR2 tumors in immunodeficient mice in therapeutic settings. Both, AdFITC(E2)-CAR T-cell tumor infiltration and biocidal activity were Octo-Fluo concentration-dependent, with high doses of Octo-Fluo, saturating both the CAR and the SSTR2 antigen independently, leading to the loss of tumor infiltration and biocidal activity due to the loss of bridge formation. Our findings demonstrate the potential of using AdFITC(E2)-CAR T-cells with Octo-Fluo as a versatile, on-off tunable bispecific adaptor for targeted CAR T-cell immunotherapy against SSTR2-positive NETs.
The peptide hormone somatostatin (SST) is produced in the brain, the gut, and in delta-cells in pancreatic islets of Langerhans. SST secretion from delta-cells is stimulated by glucose, amino acids, and glucagon-like peptide-1. Exogenous SST strongly inhibits the secretion of the blood glucose-regulating hormones insulin and glucagon from pancreatic beta-cells and alpha-cells, respectively. Endogenous SST secreted from delta-cells is a paracrine regulator of insulin and glucagon secretion, although the exact physiological significance of this regulation is unclear. Secreted SST binds to specific receptors (SSTRs), which are coupled to Gi/o proteins. In both beta- and alpha-cells, activation of SSTRs suppresses hormone secretion by reducing cAMP levels, inhibiting electrical activity, decreasing Ca(2)(+) influx through voltage-gated Ca(2)(+) channels and directly reducing exocytosis in a Ca(2)(+) and cAMP-independent manner. In rodents, beta-cells express predominantly SSTR5, whereas alpha-cells express SSTR2. In human islets, SSTR2 is the dominant receptor in both beta- and alpha-cells, but other isoforms also contribute to the SST effects. Evidence from rodent models suggests that SST secretion from delta-cells is dysregulated in diabetes mellitus, which may contribute to the metabolic disturbances in this disease. SST analogues are currently used for the treatment of hyperinsulinism and other endocrine disorders, including acromegaly and Cushing's syndrome.
beta(-)-emitting (177)Lu-octreotate is an approved somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (SSTR2)-directed peptide receptor radionuclide therapy for the treatment of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs). However,(177)Lu-octreotate has fast pharmacokinetics, requiring up to 4 treatment doses. Moreover, (177)Lu is less than ideal for theranostics because of the low branching ratio of its gamma-emissions, which limits its SPECT imaging capability. Compared with (177)Lu, (67)Cu has better decay properties for use as a theranostic. Here, we report the preclinical evaluation of a long-lived somatostatin analog, [(67)Cu]Cu-DOTA-Evans blue-TATE (EB-TATE), against SSTR2-positive NETs. Methods: The in vitro cytotoxicity of [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE was investigated on 2-dimensional cells and 3-dimensional spheroids. In vivo pharmacokinetics and dosimetry were studied in healthy BALB/c mice, whereas ex vivo biodistribution, micro-SPECT/CT imaging, and therapy studies were done on athymic nude mice bearing QGP1.SSTR2 and BON1.SSTR2 xenografts. Therapeutic efficacy was compared with [(177)Lu]Lu-EB-TATE. Results: Projected human effective doses of [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE for male (0.066 mSv/MBq) and female (0.085 mSv/MBq) patients are tolerable. In vivo micro-SPECT/CT imaging of SSTR2-positive xenografts with [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE showed tumor-specific uptake and prolonged accumulation. Biodistribution showed tumor accumulation, with concurrent clearance from major organs over a period of 72 h. [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE was more effective (60%) at eliminating tumors that were smaller than 50 mm(3) within the first 15 d of therapy than was [(177)Lu]Lu-EB-TATE (20%) after treatment with 2 doses of 15 MBq administered 10 d apart. Mean survival of [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE-treated groups was 90 d and more than 90 d, whereas that of [(177)Lu]Lu-EB-TATE was more than 90 d and 89 d against vehicle control groups (26 d and 53 d), for QGP1.SSTR2 and BON1.SSTR2 xenografts, respectively. Conclusion: [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE exhibited high SSTR2-positive NET uptake and retention, with favorable dosimetry and SPECT/CT imaging capabilities. The antitumor efficacy of [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE is comparable to that of [(177)Lu]Lu-EB-TATE, with [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE being slightly more effective than [(177)Lu]Lu-EB-TATE for complete remission of small tumors. [(67)Cu]Cu-EB-TATE therefore warrants clinical development.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical features, imaging characteristics, and molecular profile of sellar neurocytoma (SN). METHODS: Clinical, imaging, and pathological features of 11 cases of SN were retrospectively analyzed. Electron microscopy was performed in 5 cases. Molecular features were detected in tumor tissue by RNA sequencing, quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: The clinical features of SN patients showed a high incidence of hyponatremia (73%, 8/11), and the tumors tended to invade the lateral side of the saddle area from preoperative imaging analysis. The tumors had positive NeuN, synaptophysin, neurofilament, somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) immunohistochemistry staining. Tumor transcriptomic analysis suggested a new LMCD1-AS1:GRM7-AS1 fusion gene event and increased expression of 10 hypothalamus-secreted hormones in SN. Fifteen differentially expressed genes were verified for quantitative polymerase chain reaction verification. SSTR2 has been verified by immunohistochemistry. CONCLUSION: Hyponatremia is the dominant clinical features of SN. Preoperative imaging suggests that growth toward the dorsal region is the imaging feature of SN. SSTR2 expression and LMCD1-AS1:GRM7-AS1 fusion gene event expected to become a new molecular marker for SN. Somatostatin receptor ligand therapy may be a potential therapy for SN.
A patient with a neuroendocrine tumor and history of coronary artery disease underwent PET with 68Ga-DOTATATE PET tracer for tumor visualization. Analysis of the scan showed uptake of 68Ga-DOTATATE in the left ventricle corresponding to previous myocardial infarct. 68Ga-DOTATATE binds by somatostatin receptors (SSTR) and it has been proposed that it may be useful for the detection of cardiac inflammatory lesions. We aimed to test whether SSTR could be upregulated in cardiac fibrotic scar. We analyzed SSTR in cardiac samples from patients with end-stage ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM, n = 8) and control hearts (n = 5). In mature ICM tissue, SSTR1 and SSTR2 expression was unchanged and SSTR5 expression was significantly decreased in ICM samples vs. control. Immunohistochemistry showed increased SSTR1 and SSTR2 in ICM. Areas with SSTR1 or SSTR2 staining were often adjacent to fibrotic areas. The majority of SSTR1 and SSTR2 staining localized in cardiomyocytes in fibrotic scar-rich areas where CD68 macrophage staining was not present. SSTR are occasionally upregulated in cardiac fibrotic areas. When using 68Ga-DOTATATE PET tracer to detect cardiac sarcoidosis or atherosclerotic plaque, the possibility of tracer uptake in fibrotic areas should be considered.
Somatostatin analogues have recently been used as therapeutic targets for metastatic or surgically unresectable gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), and associated somatostatin receptor (SSTR) expression has been well demonstrated in most GEP NETs, with the exception of rectal NETs. SSTR2 immunohistochemical expressions were evaluated in 350 surgically or endoscopically resected rectal NETs and compared to clinicopathologic factors. SSTR2 expression was observed in 234 (66.9%) rectal NET cases and associated tumors with smaller size (p = 0.001), low pT classification (p = 0.030), low AJCC tumor stage (p = 0.012), and absence of chromogranin expression (p = 0.009). Patients with rectal NET and SSTR2 expression had significantly better overall survival than those without SSTR2 expression both by univariable (p = 0.006) and multivariable (p = 0.014) analyses. In summary, approximately two-thirds of rectal NETs expressed SSTR2. SSTR2 expression was significantly associated with favorable behavior and good overall survival in patients with rectal NETs. Furthermore, SSTR2 expression can be used as prognostic factors. When metastatic disease occurs, SSTR2 expression can be used a possible target for somatostatin analogues.
