Somatostatin receptor type 5; Receptor for somatostatin 28 and to a lesser extent for somatostatin-14. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins which inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Increases cell growth inhibition activity of SSTR2 following heterodimerization.
Aberrant G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) expression is highly prevalent in cortisol-secreting primary bilateral macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (PBMAH) and unilateral adenomas. The aberrant expression of diverse GPCRs and their ligands play an important role in the over-function of various endocrine tumours. Examples include aberrant expression of MC2R, 5-HT4R, AVPR1A, LHCGR, and GnRHR in primary aldosteronism; GCGR, LHCGR, and 5-HT4R in phaeochromocytomas and paragangliomas; TRHR, GnRHR, GIPR, and GRP101 in pituitary somatotroph tumours; AVPR2, D2DR, and SSTR5 in pituitary corticotroph tumours; GLP1R, GIPR, and somatostatin receptors in medullary thyroid carcinoma; and SSTRs, GLP1R, and GIPR in other neuroendocrine tumours. The genetic mechanisms causing the ectopic expression of GIPR in cortisol-secreting PBMAHs and unilateral adenomas have been identified, but distinct mechanisms are implicated in other endocrine tumours. Development of functional imaging targeting aberrant GPCRs should be useful for identification and for specific therapies of this wide spectrum of tumours. The aim of this review is to show that the regulation of endocrine tumours by aberrant GPCR is not restricted to cortisol-secreting adrenal lesions, but also occurs in tumours of several other organs.
Somatotropin-release inhibitory factor (SRIF) is a major regulator of pituitary function, mostly inhibiting hormone secretion and to a lesser extent pituitary cell growth. Five SRIF receptor subtypes (SSTR1-5) are ubiquitously expressed G-protein coupled receptors. In the pituitary, SSTR1, 2, 3 and 5 are expressed, with SSTR2 and SSTR5 predominating. As new SRIF analogs have recently been introduced for treatment of pituitary disease, we evaluate the current knowledge of cell-specific pituitary SRIF receptor signaling and highlight areas of future research for comprehensive understanding of these mechanisms. Elucidating pituitary SRIF receptor signaling enables understanding of pituitary hormone secretion and cell growth, and also encourages future therapeutic development for pituitary disorders.
Somatostatin (SS) and urotensin II (UII) are members of two families of structurally related neuropeptides present in all vertebrates. They exert a large array of biological activities that are mediated by two families of G-protein-coupled receptors called SSTR and UTS2R respectively. It is proposed that the two families of peptides as well as those of their receptors probably derive from a single ancestral ligand-receptor pair. This pair had already been duplicated before the emergence of vertebrates to generate one SS peptide with two receptors and one UII peptide with one receptor. Thereafter, each family expanded in the three whole-genome duplications (1R, 2R, and 3R) that occurred during the evolution of vertebrates, whereupon some local duplications and gene losses occurred. Following the 2R event, the vertebrate ancestor is deduced to have possessed three SS (SS1, SS2, and SS5) and six SSTR (SSTR1-6) genes, on the one hand, and four UII (UII, URP, URP1, and URP2) and five UTS2R (UTS2R1-5) genes, on the other hand. In the teleost lineage, all these have been preserved with the exception of SSTR4. Moreover, several additional genes have been gained through the 3R event, such as SS4 and a second copy of the UII, SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5 genes, and through local duplications, such as SS3. In mammals, all the genes of the SSTR family have been preserved, with the exception of SSTR6. In contrast, for the other families, extensive gene losses occurred, as only the SS1, SS2, UII, and URP genes and one UTS2R gene are still present.
Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is a major cause of hypoglycaemia in the neonatal period, infancy and childhood. It is caused by unsuppressed insulin secretion in the setting of hypoglycaemia and carries a high risk of significant neurological sequelae, such as cognitive impairment. Genetic mutations have been implicated in the pathogenesis of the condition. Other causes include intra-uterine growth retardation, perinatal asphyxia, maternal diabetes mellitus and syndromes, such as Beckwith-Wiedemann. Based on the aetiology, the clinical presentation can range from absence of symptoms to the typical adrenergic symptoms and coma and even death. The diagnosis is based on biochemical findings and the gold-standard imaging technique is 18F-DOPA PET/CT scanning. Treatment options involve medications, such as diazoxide, nifedipine, glucagon and octreotide, as well as surgery. Novel treatment, such as long-acting octreotide, lanreotide and sirolimus, may be used as an alternative to pancreatectomy. Potential future medical treatments include exendin, a GLP-1 receptor antagonist, and glucagon infusion via a pump.Conclusion: Advances in the fields of genetic testing, imaging techniques and medical treatment are beginning to provide novel insights into earlier detection, less invasive treatment approaches and fewer complications associated with the complex entity of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. What is Known: * HH is caused by dysregulated insulin release from the beta cell due to genetic mutations and carries a risk for complications, such as neurocognitive impairment. 18F-DOPA PET/CT scanning is presented as the gold-standard imaging technique currently in children with hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. * Clinical presentation is heterogeneous and treatment options include medical therapy and pancreatectomy. What is New: * 18F-DOPA PET/CT is indicated in suspected focal CHI due to paternal transmitted mutations in ABCC8 or KCNJ11. * Novel treatment options have been introduced, such as long-acting octreotide, lanreotide, sirolimus and selective nonpeptide somatostatin receptor subtype 5 (SSTR5) agonists. Future medical treatments include exendin, a GLP-1 antagonist, and glucagon infusion via a pump. However, all these options are off-label at present.
Corneal wound healing in diabetic patients is usually delayed and accompanied by excessive inflammation. However, the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we found that somatostatin (SST), an immunosuppressive peptide produced by corneal nerve fibers, was significantly reduced in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. In addition, we discovered that topical administration of exogenous SST significantly improved re-epithelialization and nerve regeneration following diabetic corneal epithelial abrasion. Further analysis showed that topical SST significantly reduced the expression of injury inflammation-related genes, inhibited neutrophil infiltration, and shifted macrophage polarization from pro-inflammatory M1 to anti-inflammatory M2 in diabetic corneas' healing. Moreover, the application of L-817,818, an agonist of the SST receptor type 5 subtype, significantly reduced the inflammatory response following epithelial injury and markedly improved the process of re-epithelialization and nerve regeneration in mice. Taken together, these data suggest that activation of the SST-SST receptor type 5 pathway significantly ameliorates diabetes-induced abnormalities in corneal wound repair in mice. Targeting this pathway may provide a novel strategy to restore impaired corneal wound closure and nerve regeneration in diabetic patients.
Lanreotide is an eight-amino acid peptide, which is an analog of the native somatostatin peptide, physiological inhibitor of growth hormone (GH). The drug shows high binding affinity for somatostatin receptors, SSTR2 and SSTR5, which is the primary mechanism considered to be responsible for decreasing GH secretion and GH cell proliferation in acromegaly. Two different formulations of lanreotide are currently available: lanreotide slow release, which requires intramuscular injection every 7-14 days, and lanreotide autogel, which requires deep subcutaneous injection every 4-8 weeks. Several studies have been published to date on the use of lanreotide in acromegaly. Antisecretory efficacy has been reported in 35%-70% of cases; this huge variability is probably explained by different indications (eg, primary or adjunctive postsurgical treatment), or the fact that some studies were based on patients known to be responders to somatostatin analogs. As a primary treatment, antisecretory efficacy was very similar, confirming the possibility of lanreotide as an option in cases of unsuccessful surgery, contraindication, or surgery refusal. Lanreotide also has antitumoral effects as it induces a decrease in tumor volume of [Symbol: see text]25% in 30%-70% of patients. This could be beneficial before transsphenoidal surgery, as a pretreatment, to decrease tumor volume and ease surgery; however, to date, advantages in terms of final remission or uncured status remain a matter of debate. Side effects are rare; the most frequent being gastrointestinal discomfort and increased risk of gallstone formation, and glucose metabolism modifications. Comparison with the other somatostatin analog, octreotide, tends to show identical levels of efficacy between both drugs. Lanreotide thus seems to be an effective treatment in acromegaly. To date, however, lanreotide is still considered as only suspending GH secretion, thus requiring prolonged and costly treatment.
Somatostatin analogues are in clinical use for the diagnosis and treatment of several oncological indications, namely pituitary adenomas and endocrine gastrointestinal tumors. In addition for a variety of malignancies their potential value is being studied. It has been speculated that somatostatin plays a role in the homeostasis of gliomas, and that gliomas could be susceptible to antiproliferative effects of somatostatin analogues. These assumptions were tested in 20 human cell lines derived from malignant gliomas and 4 glioblastoma tissue specimens, which were analyzed for their expression of the five known somatostatin receptor genes (SSTR1-5) and for the receptor function. Using semiquantitative PCR techniques, SSTR2 transcripts were found in all 20 cell lines and 4 glioblastomas, SSTR1 transcripts were detected in 9 cell lines and 4 glioblastomas, and SSTR3 transcripts were noted in 7 cell lines and 1 glioblastoma. SSTR4 and SSTR5 transcripts were only rarely detected. Gene expression profiles in glioblastoma tissue specimens resembled those of the cell lines in quality as well as quantity, with average transcript levels being highest for the SSTR2, followed by SSTR1 and SSTR3. However, when compared to GH3 anterior pituitary tumor cells, the relative amounts of PCR amplified DNA fragments were found to be at least 120 fold lower in glioblastoma cell lines and tumor specimens. Binding studies indicated that glioblastoma derived cells contained only minute amounts of SSTRs. No inhibition of proliferation was observed when 10 selected cell lines were incubated with somatostatin-14 (SST-14) or octreotide (SMS 201-995) at concentrations ranging from 10(-9) M to 10(-6) M, however, the proliferation of two cell lines was weakly stimulated after 6 days of incubation with 10(-6) M octreotide. The activity of adenylate cyclase, stimulated by forskolin, was inhibited by maximally 25% at 10(-6) M SST-14 or octreotide in one of 5 selected glioblastoma cell lines. Somatostatin peptides do not seem to exert anti-proliferative effects on glioblastoma cells and therefore appear to be of no obvious value for glioblastoma therapy. Most likely the amount of cell surface SSTRs is not sufficient to mediate antiproliferative effects. Since it has been described that SSTRs are detectable on most differentiated gliomas as well as astrocytes, it may be speculated that SSTRs may be relevant only in the context of well differentiated cellular programs but lose their significance with progressive dedifferentiation.
The peptide hormone somatostatin (SST) is produced in the brain, the gut, and in delta-cells in pancreatic islets of Langerhans. SST secretion from delta-cells is stimulated by glucose, amino acids, and glucagon-like peptide-1. Exogenous SST strongly inhibits the secretion of the blood glucose-regulating hormones insulin and glucagon from pancreatic beta-cells and alpha-cells, respectively. Endogenous SST secreted from delta-cells is a paracrine regulator of insulin and glucagon secretion, although the exact physiological significance of this regulation is unclear. Secreted SST binds to specific receptors (SSTRs), which are coupled to Gi/o proteins. In both beta- and alpha-cells, activation of SSTRs suppresses hormone secretion by reducing cAMP levels, inhibiting electrical activity, decreasing Ca(2)(+) influx through voltage-gated Ca(2)(+) channels and directly reducing exocytosis in a Ca(2)(+) and cAMP-independent manner. In rodents, beta-cells express predominantly SSTR5, whereas alpha-cells express SSTR2. In human islets, SSTR2 is the dominant receptor in both beta- and alpha-cells, but other isoforms also contribute to the SST effects. Evidence from rodent models suggests that SST secretion from delta-cells is dysregulated in diabetes mellitus, which may contribute to the metabolic disturbances in this disease. SST analogues are currently used for the treatment of hyperinsulinism and other endocrine disorders, including acromegaly and Cushing's syndrome.
Insulinomas are rare pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. Most patients can be cured with surgery, but patients with a metastatic disease show impaired survival. The aim of this study was to evaluate somatostatin receptor (SSTR) 1-5 expression in insulinomas and to correlate the expression profile with clinicopathological variables and with patient outcome. This retrospective study involved 52 insulinoma patients. After histological re-evaluation, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples were processed into tissue microarrays and stained immunohistochemically with monoclonal SSTR1-5 antibodies. All the 52 tumours (49 non-metastatic, 3 metastatic) expressed at least one SSTR subtype. SSTR2 was expressed most frequently (71%), followed by SSTR3 (33%), SSTR1 (27%), SSTR5 (6%) and SSTR4 (0%). SSTR3 expression was associated with a larger tumour size (median diameter 19 mm vs. 13 mm, p = 0.043), and SSTR3 and SSTR5 expression were associated with impaired overall survival [HR 3.532 (95% CI 1.106-11,277), p = 0.033, and HR 6.805 (95% CI 1.364-33.955), p = 0.019 respectively]. Most insulinomas express SSTR2, which may be utilized in diagnostic imaging, and in planning individualized treatment strategies for insulinoma patients. Further studies are needed to clarify the association between SSTR profile and overall survival.
OBJECTIVE: Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) display a functional effect on the pathogenesis of several diseases, including various tumors. Herein, we aimed to reveal the role of lncRNA somatostatin receptor 5 antisense RNA 1 (SSTR5-AS1) in gastric cancer (GC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: qRT-PCR was utilized for testing the SSTR5-AS1 expression in 158 paired primary GC tissues and corresponding normal gastric specimens. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were established to determine the diagnostic values of overexpression of SSTR5-AS1 in GC. A chi-square test was performed to analyze the correlation between SSTR5-AS1 expressions and several clinicopathological features in GC patients. Kaplan-Meier survival curve was constructed to estimate the overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS). Multivariate analyses were conducted to examine the prognostic value of SSTR5-AS1. RESULTS: We observed that SSTR5-AS1 expression was highly expressed in GC specimens compared with adjacent non-tumor specimens (p < 0.01). High SSTR5-AS1 expression was correlated with an advanced pathologic stage. The ROC curves showed that areas under the ROC curve (AUC) for SSTR5-AS1 is 0.8419. Moreover, high expression of SSTR5-AS1 was observed to be associated with distant metastasis (p = 0.021) and TNM stage (p = 0.042). Besides, survival analysis showed that GC patients with high SSTR5-AS1 expression suffered poorer OS (p = 0.020) and DFS (p = 0.0007). Multivariate assays demonstrated that increased expressions of SSTR5-AS1 could be an independent prognostic marker of OS and DFS of GC patients. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that SSTR5-AS1 served as a promising novel prognostic biomarker for GC.
BACKGROUND: Somatostatin receptor type 5 (SSTR5) P335L is a hypofunctional, single nucleotide polymorphism of SSTR5 with implications in the diagnostics and therapy of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms. The purpose of this study is to determine whether a SSTR5 P335L-specific monoclonal antibody could sufficiently differentiate pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (PNENs) with different SSTR5 genotypes. METHODS: Cellular proliferation rate, SSTR5 mRNA level, and SSTR5 protein level were measured by performing MTS assay, a quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction study, Western blot analysis, and immunohistochemistry, respectively. SSTR5 genotype was determined with the TaqMan SNP Genotyping assay (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). RESULTS: We found that the SSTR5 analogue RPL-1980 inhibited cellular proliferation of CAPAN-1 cells more than that of PANC-1 cells. Only PANC-1 (TT) cells, but not CAPAN-1 (CC) cells expressed SSTR5 P335L. In 29 white patients with PNENs, 38% had a TT genotype for SSTR5 P335L, 24% had a CC genotype for WT SSTR5, and 38% hada CT genotype for both SSTR5 P335L and WT SSTR5. Immunohistochemistry using SSTR5 P335L monoclonal antibody detected immunostaining signals only from the neuroendocrine specimens with TT and CT genotypes, but not those with CC genotypes. CONCLUSION: A SSTR5 P335L monoclonal antibody that specifically recognizes SSTR5 P335L but not WT SSTR5 could differentiate PNENs with different SSTR5 genotypes, thereby providing a potential tool for the clinical diagnosis of PNEN.
Acromegaly is mainly due to the somatotroph pituitary neuroendocrine tumors (PitNET)s. These have been subtyped into densely granulated (DG) and sparsely granulated (SG) tumors, which differ in clinical, histological and biological characteristics and in response to somatostatin analogs (SA)s. The variable remission rate after surgical resection, as first line treatment, has increased interest in identifying pathological markers to better predict the response to medical treatment. Several techniques have shown somatotroph tumors to express somatostatin receptors (SSTR)s, and mainly SSTR2 and SSTR5. The molecular methods appear to give contradictory results, are expansive and cannot be routinely performed. Immunohistochemistry, while being the most powerful technique, requires optimal fixation and the use of monoclonal antibodies against at least SSTR2 and SSTR5. Almost all somatotroph tumors express SSTR2 or SSTR5, and, in great majority, at a high level. More importantly, the type of SSTR, the level of expression, and the response to SA treatment appear well correlated. Indeed, a significantly higher expression of SSTR2 in DG compared to in SG tumors likely explains the better response of DG tumors to the normalization of growth hormone and insulin-like growth factor-1 under SA. However, a reproducible scoring and a cut-off from which the SA efficacy can be reliably predicted, remain to be found. In conclusion, the SSTR expression profile and morphological subtypes of the somatotroph tumor may help predict the response to medical treatment. Such pathological profiling could become a useful decision-making tool for clinicians in the context of a multidisciplinary approach, after surgery failure.
A patient with a neuroendocrine tumor and history of coronary artery disease underwent PET with 68Ga-DOTATATE PET tracer for tumor visualization. Analysis of the scan showed uptake of 68Ga-DOTATATE in the left ventricle corresponding to previous myocardial infarct. 68Ga-DOTATATE binds by somatostatin receptors (SSTR) and it has been proposed that it may be useful for the detection of cardiac inflammatory lesions. We aimed to test whether SSTR could be upregulated in cardiac fibrotic scar. We analyzed SSTR in cardiac samples from patients with end-stage ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM, n = 8) and control hearts (n = 5). In mature ICM tissue, SSTR1 and SSTR2 expression was unchanged and SSTR5 expression was significantly decreased in ICM samples vs. control. Immunohistochemistry showed increased SSTR1 and SSTR2 in ICM. Areas with SSTR1 or SSTR2 staining were often adjacent to fibrotic areas. The majority of SSTR1 and SSTR2 staining localized in cardiomyocytes in fibrotic scar-rich areas where CD68 macrophage staining was not present. SSTR are occasionally upregulated in cardiac fibrotic areas. When using 68Ga-DOTATATE PET tracer to detect cardiac sarcoidosis or atherosclerotic plaque, the possibility of tracer uptake in fibrotic areas should be considered.
Somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) are G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) known to regulate exocrine secretion, neurotransmission, and inhibit endogenous cell proliferation. SSTR subtypes (SSTR1-SSTR5) exhibit homo- or heterodimerization with unique signaling characteristics. Melanocortin receptor accessory protein 1 (MRAP1) functions as an allosteric modulator of melanocortin receptors and some other GPCRs. In this study, we investigated the differential interaction of MRAP1 and SSTRs and examined the pharmacological modulation of MRAP1 on mouse SSTR2/SSTR3 and SSTR2/SSTR5 heterodimerization in vitro. Our results show that the mouse SSTR2 forms heterodimers with SSTR3 and SSTR5 and that MRAP1 selectively interacts with SSTR3 and SSTR5 but not SSTR2. The interactive binding sites of SSTR2/SSTR3 or SSTR2/SSTR5 with MRAP1 locate on SSTR3 and SSTR5 but not SSTR2. The binding sites of MRAP1 to SSTR3 are extensive, while the ones of SSTR5 are restricted on transmembrane region six and seven. The heterodimerization of mouse SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5 can be modulated by binding protein in addition to an agonist. Upregulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases phosphorylation, p27(Kip1), and increased cell growth inhibition with the co-expression of SSTR2/SSTR3 or SSTR2/SSTR5 with MRAP1 suggest a regulatory effect of MRAP1 on anti-proliferative response of two SSTR heterodimers. Taken together, these results provide a new insight of MRAP1 on the maintenance and regulation of mouse SSTR dimers which might be helpful to better understand the molecular mechanism involving SSTRs in tumor biology or other human disorders.
Esophageal cancer (ESCA), as a common cancer worldwide, is a main cause of cancer-related mortality. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown in an increasing number of studies to be capable of playing an important regulatory function in human malignancies. Our study is aimed at delving into the prognostic value and potential function of lncRNA SSTR5-AS1 (SSTR5-AS1) in ESCA. The gene expression data of 182 ESCA samples from TCGA and 653 nontumor specimens from GTEx. The expressions of SSTR5-AS1 were analyzed. We investigated whether there was a correlation between the expression of SSTR5-AS1 and the clinical aspects of ESCA. In order to compare survival curves, the Kaplan-Meier method together with the log-rank test was utilized. The univariate and multivariate Cox regression models were used to analyze the data in order to determine the SSTR5-AS1 expression's significance as a prognostic factor in ESCA patients. In order to investigate the level of SSTR5-AS1 expression in ESCA cells, RT-PCR was utilized. CCK-8 trials served as a model for the loss-of-function tests. In this study, we found that the expressions of SSTR5-AS1 were increased in ESCA specimens compared with nontumor specimens. According to the ROC assays, high SSTR5-AS1 expression had an AUC value of 0.7812 (95% CI: 0.7406 to 0.8217) for ESCA. Patients who had a high level of SSTR5-AS1 expression had a lower overall survival rate than those who had a low level of SSTR5-AS1 expression. In addition, multivariate analysis suggested that SSTR5-AS1 was an independent predictor of overall survival for ESCA patients. Moreover, RT-PCR experiments indicated that SSTR5-AS1 expression was distinctly increased in three ESCA cells compared with HET1A cells. CCK-8 experiments indicated that silence of SSTR5-AS1 distinctly inhibited the proliferation of ESCA cells. Overall, ESCA patients with elevated SSTR5-AS1 had a worse chance of survival, suggesting it could be used as a prognostic and diagnostic biomarker for ESCA.
Tumors and metastases bearing the somatostatin receptor subtypes 2 (SSTR2) or SSTR5 can be visualized in vivo after injection of radiolabeled octapeptide somatostatin analogs like 111In-pentetreotide. The sensitivity of 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy for the detection of carcinoid tumors is 86-95%. The sensitivity of 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy for the detection of gastrinomas, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide-secreting tumors, and glucagonomas as well as clinically non-functioning lesions is 75-100%. However, for insulinoma this is 50-60%. 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy generally has a lower detection rate for benign pheochromocytomas than 123I-MIBG scintigraphy, but it can have a complementary role for the staging of malignant pheochromocytomas. It can also be used for the detection of extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas. Most GH- and TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas can be visualized using 111In-pentetreotide. 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy is negative in microprolactinomas and ACTH-secreting pituitary microadenomas. 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy has been successful for the localization of extra-pituitary ACTH-secreting tumors and their metastases, and especially for occult tumors. A large variety of lesions in and around the pituitary region express somatostatin receptors and, therefore, can be visualized by 111In-pentetreotide scintigraphy.
Somatostatin may play an important role in the regulation of cancer growth including pancreatic cancer by interaction with somatostatin receptors (SSTRs) on the cell surface. Five SSTRs were cloned, and the function of these SSTRs is addressed in this review. SSTR-2, SSTR-5, and SSTR-1 are thought to play major roles in inhibiting pancreatic cancer growth both in vitro and in vivo. SSTR-3 may be involved in mediating apoptosis, but the role of SSTR-4 is not clear. In most pancreatic cancers, functional SSTRs are absent. Reintroduction of SSTR genes has been shown to inhibit pancreatic cancer growth in cell cultures and animal models.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent and poorly responsive cancers worldwide. Bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) inhibitors, such as JQ1 and OTX-015, inhibit BET protein binding to acetylated residues in histones. However, the physiological mechanisms and regulatory processes of BET inhibition in HCC remain unclear. To explore BET inhibitors' potential role in the molecular mechanisms underlying their anticancer effects in HCC, we analyzed BET inhibitor-treated HCC cells' gene expression profiles with RNA-seq and bioinformatics analysis. BET inhibitor treatment significantly downregulated genes related to bromodomain-containing proteins 4 (BRD4), such as ACSL5, SLC38A5, and ICAM2. Importantly, some cell migration-related genes, including AOC3, CCR6, SSTR5, and SCL7A11, were significantly downregulated. Additionally, bioinformatics analysis using Ingenuity Knowledge Base Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed that SMARCA4 regulated migration response molecules. Furthermore, knockdown of SMARCA4 gene expression by siRNA treatment significantly reduced cell migration and the expression of migration-related genes. In summary, our results indicated that BET inhibitor treatment in HCC cell lines reduces cell migration through the downregulation of SMARCA4.
