Platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for homodimeric PDGFB and PDGFD and for heterodimers formed by PDGFA and PDGFB, and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, chemotaxis and migration. Plays an essential role in blood vessel development by promoting proliferation, migration and recruitment of pericytes and smooth muscle cells to endothelial cells. Plays a role in the migration of vascular smooth muscle cells and the formation of neointima at v [...] 
As a point of convergence for numerous oncogenic signaling pathways, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is central in regulating the anti-tumor immune response. STAT3 is broadly hyperactivated both in cancer and non-cancerous cells within the tumor ecosystem and plays important roles in inhibiting the expression of crucial immune activation regulators and promoting the production of immunosuppressive factors. Therefore, targeting the STAT3 signaling pathway has emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy for numerous cancers. In this review, we outline the importance of STAT3 signaling pathway in tumorigenesis and its immune regulation, and highlight the current status for the development of STAT3-targeting therapeutic approaches. We also summarize and discuss recent advances in STAT3-based combination immunotherapy in detail. These endeavors provide new insights into the translational application of STAT3 in cancer and may contribute to the promotion of more effective treatments toward malignancies.
The transcriptional regulator STAT3 has key roles in vertebrate development and mature tissue function including control of inflammation and immunity. Mutations in human STAT3 associate with diseases such as immunodeficiency, autoimmunity and cancer. Strikingly, however, either hyperactivation or inactivation of STAT3 results in human disease, indicating tightly regulated STAT3 function is central to health. Here, we attempt to summarize information on the numerous and distinct biological actions of STAT3, and highlight recent discoveries, with a specific focus on STAT3 function in the immune and hematopoietic systems. Our goal is to spur investigation on mechanisms by which aberrant STAT3 function drives human disease and novel approaches that might be used to modulate disease outcome.
Although links between cancer and inflammation were firstly proposed in the nineteenth century, the molecular mechanism has not yet been clearly understood. Epidemiological studies have identified chronic infections and inflammation as major risk factors for various types of cancer. NF-kappaB transcription factors and the signaling pathways are central coordinators in innate and adaptive immune responses. STAT3 regulates the expression of a variety of genes in response to cellular stimuli, and thus plays a key role in cell growth and apoptosis. Recently, roles of NF-kappaB and STAT3 in colon, gastric and liver cancers have been extensively investigated. The activation and interaction between STAT3 and NF-kappaB play vital roles in control of the communication between cancer cells and inflammatory cells. NF-kappaB and STAT3 are two major factors controlling the ability of pre-neoplastic and malignant cells to resist apoptosis-based tumor-surveillance and regulating tumor angiogenesis and invasiveness. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of NF-kappaB and STAT3 cooperation in cancer will offer opportunities for the design of new chemo-preventive and chemotherapeutic approaches.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is one of seven STAT family members involved with the regulation of cellular growth, differentiation and survival. STAT proteins are conserved among eukaryotes and are important for biological functions of embryogenesis, immunity, haematopoiesis and cell migration. STAT3 is widely expressed and located in the cytoplasm in an inactive form. STAT3 is rapidly and transiently activated by tyrosine phosphorylation by a range of signalling pathways, including cytokines from the IL-6 family and growth factors, such as EGF and PDGF. STAT3 activation and subsequent dimer formation initiates nuclear translocation of STAT3 for the regulation of target gene transcription. Four STAT3 isoforms have been identified, which have distinct biological functions. STAT3 is considered a proto-oncogene and constitutive activation of STAT3 is implicated in the development of various cancers, including multiple myeloma, leukaemia and lymphomas. In this review, we focus on recent progress on STAT3 and osteosarcoma (OS). Notably, STAT3 is overexpressed and associated with the poor prognosis of OS. Constitutive activation of STAT3 in OS appears to upregulate the expression of target oncogenes, leading to OS cell transformation, proliferation, tumour formation, invasion, metastasis, immune evasion and drug resistance. Taken together, STAT3 is a target for cancer therapy, and STAT3 inhibitors represent potential therapeutic candidates for the treatment of OS.
STAT1 and STAT3 are nuclear transcription factors that regulate genes involved in cell cycle, cell survival and immune response. The cross-talk between these signaling pathways determines how cells integrate the environmental signals received ultimately translating them in transcriptional regulation of specific sets of genes. Despite being activated downstream of common cytokine and growth factors, STAT1 and STAT3 play essentially antagonistic roles and the disruption of their balance directs cells from survival to apoptotic cell death or from inflammatory to anti-inflammatory responses. Different mechanisms are proposed to explain this yin-yang relationship. Considering the redox aspect of STATs proteins, this review attempts to summarize the current knowledge of redox regulation of STAT1 and STAT3 signaling focusing the attention on the post-translational modifications that affect their activity.
Breast cancer has grown to be the second leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women. Only a few treatment options are available for breast cancer due to the widespread occurrence of chemoresistance, which emphasizes the need to discover and develop new methods to treat this disease. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is an early tumor diagnostic marker and is known to promote breast cancer malignancy. Recent clinical and preclinical data indicate the involvement of overexpressed and constitutively activated STAT3 in the progression, proliferation, metastasis and chemoresistance of breast cancer. Moreover, new pathways comprised of upstream regulators and downstream targets of STAT3 have been discovered. In addition, small molecule inhibitors targeting STAT3 activation have been found to be efficient for therapeutic treatment of breast cancer. This systematic review discusses the advances in the discovery of the STAT3 pathways and drugs targeting STAT3 in breast cancer. Video abstract.
Janus protein tyrosine kinase (JAK) has the ability to activate signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT). STAT3 is a valued member of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. In recent years, several studies have documented that STAT3 is closely related to the occurrence and development of liver fibrosis caused by various factors. Activation of STAT3 can play anti- or pro-inflammatory roles in the pathogenesis of liver fibrosis. This article reviewed the recent studies on STAT3 in the development of various liver fibrosis to find a more effective method to relieve and cure liver diseases, such as hepatitis B virus (HBV), non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), schistosomiasis, and chemical liver injury.
The Janus kinases (JAKs) and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins, particularly STAT3, are among the most promising new targets for cancer therapy. In addition to interleukin-6 (IL-6) and its family members, multiple pathways, including G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and microRNAs were recently identified to regulate JAK-STAT signalling in cancer. Well known for its role in tumour cell proliferation, survival, invasion and immunosuppression, JAK-STAT3 signalling also promotes cancer through inflammation, obesity, stem cells and the pre-metastatic niche. In addition to its established role as a transcription factor in cancer, STAT3 regulates mitochondrion functions, as well as gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms. Newly identified regulators and functions of JAK-STAT3 in tumours are important targets for potential therapeutic strategies in the treatment of cancer.
Ferroptosis is a new form of regulated cell death that is mediated by intracellular iron and ester oxygenase, and glutathione-dependent lipid hydroperoxidase glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) prevents ferroptosis by converting lipid hydroperoxides into nontoxic lipid alcohols. Although thiostrepton (TST) has been reported to exert antitumor effects, its role in pancreatic cancer and the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we found that TST reduced the viability and clonogenesis of pancreatic cancer cell lines, along with intracellular iron overload, increasing reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation, malondialdehyde (MDA) overexpression, and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PX) depletion. Mechanistically, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and dual luciferase reporter gene assays were used to confirm that signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) binds to the GPX4 promoter region and promotes its transcription, whereas TST blocked GPX4 expression by regulating STAT3. Finally, in vivo experiments revealed that TST inhibited the growth of subcutaneously transplanted tumours and had considerable biosafety. In conclusion, our study identified the mechanism by which TST-induced ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer cells through STAT3/GPX4 signalling.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a transcriptional factor involved in almost all cancer hallmark features including tumor proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis, immunosuppression, tumor inflammation, metabolism reprogramming, drug resistance, cancer stemness. Therefore, STAT3 has become a promising therapeutic target in a wide range of cancers. This review focuses on the up-to-date knowledge of STAT3 signaling in cancer. We summarize both the positive and negative modulators of STAT3 together with the cancer hallmarks involving activities regulated by STAT3 and highlight its extremely sophisticated regulation on immunosuppression in tumor microenvironment and metabolic reprogramming. Direct and indirect inhibitors of STAT3 in preclinical and clinical studies also have been summarized and discussed. Additionally, we highlight and propose new strategies of targeting STAT3 and STAT3-based combinations with established chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy and combination therapy. These efforts may provide new perspectives for STAT3-based target therapy in cancer.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) is a transcription factor that regulates various biological processes, including proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis, immune response, and chemoresistance. In normal cells, STAT3 is tightly regulated to maintain a transiently active state, while persistent STAT3 activation occurs frequently in cancers, associating with a poor prognosis and tumor progression. Targeting the STAT3 protein is a potentially promising therapeutic strategy for tumors. Although none of the STAT3 inhibitors has been marketed yet, a few of them have succeeded in entering clinical trials. This Review aims to systematically summarize the progress of the last 5 years in the discovery of directive STAT3 small-molecule inhibitors and degraders, focusing primarily on their structural features, design strategies, and bioactivities. We hope this Review will shed light on future drug design and inhibitor optimization to accelerate the discovery process of STAT3 inhibitors or degraders.
The role of METTL3-mediated N6-methyladenosine (m(6)A) modification has been elucidated in several cancers, but the concrete mechanism underlying its function in colorectal cancer is still obscure. Here, we revealed that upregulated methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) in colorectal cancer exerted both methyltransferase activity-dependent and -independent functions in gene regulation. METTL3 deposited m(6)A on the 3' untranslated region of the JAK1 transcript to promote JAK1 translation relying on YTHDF1 recognition. Besides, METTL3 was redistributed to the STAT3 promoter and worked in concert with NF-kappaB to facilitate STAT3 transcription, which was achieved independently on METTL3 methyltransferase activity. The increased JAK1 and STAT3 corporately contributed to the activation of the p-STAT3 signaling pathway and further upregulated downstream effectors expressions, including VEGFA and CCND1, which finally resulted in enhanced cancer cell proliferation and metastasis in vitro and in vivo. Collectively, our study revealed the unappreciated dual role of METTL3 as an m(6)A writer and a transcription regulator, which worked together in the same signaling pathway to drive colorectal cancer malignancy.
Overcoming distant metastasis stands as a paramount challenge in enhancing the outcomes of breast cancer treatments. Thus, delving deeper into comprehending the intricate mechanisms underlying breast cancer metastasis becomes imperative, offering potential avenues for pioneering therapeutic approaches. PRMT6, an arginine N-methyltransferase, possesses the ability to methylate both histone and non-histone proteins. It has been reported that methylation of non-histone proteins impacts their cellular localization, stability, and activation, consequently influencing tumor progression. However, the extent to which PRMT6-mediated non-histone protein methylation influences cancer cell metastasis, particularly in the context of breast cancer, remains elusive. In this study, we established that PRMT6 exerted a positive regulatory influence on breast cancer metastasis through both in vivo and in vitro experiments. Mechanistically, we innovatively revealed that PRMT6 asymmetrically di-methylated STAT3 at arginine 729 (STAT3 R729me2a). This modification proved indispensable for STAT3's membrane localization, its interaction with JAK2, STAT3 Y705 phosphorylation, and PRMT6-driven cancer cell metastasis. From a clinical perspective, we unearthed the promising potential of STAT3 R729me2a as a robust prognostic marker for predicting the overall survival time of breast cancer patients. In terms of therapeutic intervention, we demonstrated the significant capability of the PRMT6 inhibitor, EPZ020411, to curtail breast cancer metastasis both in vivo and in vitro. In sum, our study unveils the pivotal biological role of PRMT6-mediated STAT3 R729me2a in breast cancer metastasis and underscores the prospective utility of PRMT6 inhibitors as effective therapeutic strategies against STAT3-driven metastatic breast cancer.
Constitutive activation of the transcription factor STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) contributes to the malignancy of many cancers such as hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and is associated with poor prognosis. STAT3 activity is increased by the reversible palmitoylation of Cys(108) by the palmitoyltransferase DHHC7 (encoded by ZDHHC7). Here, we investigated the consequences of S-palmitoylation of STAT3 in HCC. Increased ZDHHC7 abundance in HCC cases was associated with poor prognosis, as revealed by bioinformatics analysis of patient data. In HepG2 cells in vitro, DHHC7-mediated palmitoylation enhanced the expression of STAT3 target genes, including HIF1A, which encodes the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor HIF1alpha. Inhibiting DHHC7 decreased the S-palmitoylation of STAT3 and decreased HIF1alpha abundance. Furthermore, stabilization of HIF1alpha by cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) enabled it to promote the expression of ZDHHC7, which generated a positive feedback loop between DHHC7, STAT3, and HIF1alpha. Perturbing this loop reduced the growth of HCC cells in vivo. Moreover, DHHC7, STAT3, and HIF1alpha were all abundant in human HCC tissues. Our study identifies a pathway connecting these proteins that is initiated by S-palmitoylation, which may be broadly applicable to understanding the role of this modification in cancer.
CD8+ T cell longevity regulated by metabolic activity plays important roles in cancer immunotherapy. Although in vitro-polarized, transferred IL-9-secreting CD8+ Tc9 (cytotoxic T lymphocyte subset 9) cells exert greater persistence and antitumor efficacy than Tc1 cells, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Here, we show that tumor-infiltrating Tc9 cells display significantly lower lipid peroxidation than Tc1 cells in several mouse models, which is strongly correlated with their persistence. Using RNA-sequence and functional validation, we found that Tc9 cells exhibited unique lipid metabolic programs. Tc9 cell-derived IL-9 activated STAT3, upregulated fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial activity, and rendered Tc9 cells with reduced lipid peroxidation and resistance to tumor- or ROS-induced ferroptosis in the tumor microenvironment. IL-9 signaling deficiency, inhibiting STAT3, or fatty acid oxidation increased lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis of Tc9 cells, resulting in impaired longevity and antitumor ability. Similarly, human Tc9 cells also exhibited lower lipid peroxidation than Tc1 cells and tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells expressed lower IL9 and higher lipid peroxidation- and ferroptosis-related genes than circulating CD8+ T cells in patients with melanoma. This study indicates that lipid peroxidation regulates Tc9 cell longevity and antitumor effects via the IL-9/STAT3/fatty acid oxidation pathway and regulating T cell lipid peroxidation can be used to enhance T cell-based immunotherapy in human cancer.
Typical hyper-IgE syndromes (HIES) are caused by autosomal-dominant-negative (DN) variants of STAT3 (Signal Transducer And Activator Of Transcription 3) or IL6ST (Interleukin 6 Cytokine Family Signal Transducer), biallelic partial loss-of-function (LOF) variants of IL6ST, or biallelic complete LOF variants of ZNF341 (Zinc Finger Protein 341). Including the two new cases described in this review, only 20 patients with autosomal-recessive (AR) ZNF341 deficiency have ever been reported. Patients with AR ZNF341 deficiency have clinical and immunological phenotypes resembling those of patients with autosomal-dominant STAT3 deficiency, but with a usually milder clinical presentation and lower NK (Natural Killer) cell counts. ZNF341-deficient cells have 50% the normal level of STAT3 in the resting state. However, as there is no clear evidence that STAT3 haploinsufficiency causes HIES, this decrease alone is probably insufficient to explain the HIES phenotype observed in the ZNF341-deficient patients. The combination of decreased basal expression level and impaired autoinduction of STAT3 observed in ZNF341-deficient lymphocytes is considered a more likely pathophysiological mechanism. We review here what is currently known about the ZNF341 gene and ZNF341 deficiency, and briefly discuss possible roles for this protein in addition to its control of STAT3 activity.
ERBIN and phosphoglucomutase 3 (PGM3) mutations both lead to rare primary atopic disorders characterized by allergic disease and connective tissue abnormalities, though each disorder has its own rather unique pattern of multisystem presentations. Pathway studies show how ERBIN mutations allow for enhanced TGFb signaling, and prevent STAT3 from negative-regulating TGFb signaling. This likely explains many elements of clinical overlap between disorders of STAT3 and TGFb signaling. The excessive TGFb signaling leading to increased IL-4 receptor expression also provides the rationale for precision-based therapy blocking the IL-4 receptor to treat the atopic disease. The mechanism by which PGM3 deficiency leads to atopic phenotypes is not well understood, nor is the broad variability in disease penetrance and expressivity, though preliminary studies suggest an overlap with IL-6 receptor signaling defects.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 3 is a key signalling protein engaged by a multitude of growth factors and cytokines to elicit diverse biological outcomes including cellular growth, differentiation, and survival. The complete loss of STAT3 is not compatible with life and even partial loss of function mutations lead to debilitating pathologies like hyper IgE syndrome. Conversely, augmented STAT3 activity has been reported in as many as 50% of all human tumours. The dogma of STAT3 activity posits that it is a tyrosine phosphorylated transcription factor which modulates the expression of hundreds of genes. However, the regulation and biological consequences of STAT3 activation are far more complex. In addition to tyrosine phosphorylation, STAT3 is decorated with a plethora of post-translational modifications which regulate STAT3's nuclear function in addition to its non-genomic activities. In addition to these emerging complexities in the biochemical regulation of STAT3 activity, recent studies reveal that STAT3 is either oncogenic or a tumour suppressor. This review will explore these complexities.
The STAT3 story has almost 30 years of evolving history. First identified in 1994 as a pro-inflammatory transcription factor, Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 3 (STAT3) has continued to be revealed as a quintessential pleiotropic signalling module spanning fields including infectious diseases, autoimmunity, vaccine responses, metabolism, and malignancy. In 2007, germline heterozygous dominant-negative loss-of-function variants in STAT3 were discovered as the most common cause for a triad of eczematoid dermatitis with recurrent skin and pulmonary infections, first described in 1966. This finding established that STAT3 plays a critical non-redundant role in immunity against some pathogens, as well as in the connective tissue, dental and musculoskeletal systems. Several years later, in 2014, heterozygous activating gain of function germline STAT3 variants were found to be causal for cases of early-onset multiorgan autoimmunity, thereby underpinning the notion that STAT3 function needed to be regulated to maintain immune homeostasis. As we and others continue to interrogate biochemical and cellular perturbations due to inborn errors in STAT3, we will review our current understanding of STAT3 function, mechanisms of disease pathogenesis, and future directions in this dynamic field.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) is a cytoplasmic transcription with many important functions, including regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, survival, angiogenesis, and immune response. Besides, it plays critical roles in regulating the pluripotency. With the ability of self-renewal and differentiation, embryonic stem (ES) cells provide an unlimited source for cell transplantation. ES cells can maintain its undifferentiated state with leukemia inhibitory factor, the role which is achieved by the activation of the Stat3 pathway. Moreover, Stat3 activation is necessary for the naive state maintenance of the ES cells and somatic stem cells reprogramming. This study presents an overview of the critical roles of Stat3 activation in the pluripotency maintenance of ES cells, somatic cell reprogramming, and naive-primed pluripotent states conversion of ES cells.
