Signal transducer and activator of transcription 5B; Carries out a dual function: signal transduction and activation of transcription. Mediates cellular responses to the cytokine KITLG/SCF and other growth factors. Binds to the GAS element and activates PRL-induced transcription. Positively regulates hematopoietic/erythroid differentiation.
Monomorphic epitheliotropic intestinal T-cell lymphoma (MEITL) is a rare aggressive T-cell lymphoma most reported in Asia. We performed a comprehensive clinical, pathological and genomic study of 71 European MEITL patients (36 males, 35 females, median age 67 years). The majority presented with gastrointestinal involvement and had emergency surgery, and 40% had stage IV disease. The tumors were morphologically classified into two groups: typical (58%) and atypical (i.e., non-monomorphic or with necrosis, angiotropism or starry-sky pattern) (42%), sharing a homogeneous immunophenotypic profile (CD3+ [98%] CD4- [94%] CD5- [97%] CD7+ [97%] CD8+ [90%] CD56+ [86%] CD103+ [80%] cytotoxic marker+ [98%]) with more frequent expression of TCRgd (50%) than TCRab (32%). MYC expression (30% of cases) partly reflecting MYC gene locus alterations, correlated with non-monomorphic cytology. Almost all cases (97%) harbored deleterious mutation(s) and/or deletion of the SETD2 gene and 90% had defective H3K36 trimethylation. Other frequently mutated genes were STAT5B (57%), JAK3 (50%), TP53 (35%), JAK1 (12.5%), BCOR and ATM (11%). Both TP53 mutations and MYC expression correlated with atypical morphology. The median overall survival (OS) of 63 patients (43/63 only received chemotherapy after initial surgery) was 7.8 months. Multivariate analysis found a strong negative impact on outcome of MYC expression, TP53 mutation, STAT5B mutation and poor performance status while aberrant B-cell marker expression (20% of cases) correlated with better survival. In conclusion, MEITL is an aggressive disease with resistance to conventional therapy, predominantly characterized by driver gene alterations deregulating histone methylation and JAK/STAT signaling and encompasses genetic and morphologic variants associated with very high clinical risk.
Rationale: Glioma is the most common primary malignant brain tumor in adults. Chemoresistance of temozolomide (TMZ), the first-line chemotherapeutic agent, is a major issue in the management of patients with glioma. Alterations of alpha thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX) gene constitute one of the most prevalent genetic abnormalities in gliomas. Therefore, elucidation of the role of ATRX contributing to TMZ resistance in glioma is urgently needed. Methods: We performed the bioinformatics analysis of gene expression, and DNA methylation profiling, as well as RNA and ChIP-seq data sets. CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system was used to achieve the ATRX knockout in TMZ resistant cells. In vitro and in vivo experiments were carried out to investigate the role of ATRX contributing to TMZ resistance in glioma. Results: We found that ATRX expression was upregulated via DNA demethylation mediated by STAT5b/TET2 complex and strengthened DNA damage repair by stabilizing PARP1 protein in TMZ resistant cells. ATRX elicited PARP1 stabilization by the down-regulating of FADD expression via the H3K27me3 enrichment, which was dependent on ATRX/EZH2 complex in TMZ resistant cells. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the PARP inhibitor together with TMZ inhibited glioma growth in ATRX wild type TMZ resistant intracranial xenograft models. Conclusions: The present study further illustrated the novel mechanism of the ATRX/PARP1 axis contributing to TMZ resistance. Our results provided substantial new evidence that PARP inhibitor might be a potential adjuvant agent in overcoming ATRX mediated TMZ resistance in glioma.
T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive immature T cell cancer. Mutations in IL7R have been analyzed genetically, but downstream effector functions such as STAT5A and STAT5B hyperactivation are poorly understood. Here, we studied the most frequent and clinically challenging STAT5BN642H driver in T cell development and immature T cell cancer onset and compared it with STAT5A hyperactive variants in transgenic mice. Enhanced STAT5 activity caused disrupted T cell development and promoted an early T cell progenitor-ALL phenotype, with upregulation of genes involved in T cell receptor (TCR) signaling, even in absence of surface TCR. Importantly, TCR pathway genes were overexpressed in human T-ALL and mature T cell cancers and activation of TCR pathway kinases was STAT5 dependent. We confirmed STAT5 binding to these genes using ChIP-Seq analysis in human T-ALL cells, which were sensitive to pharmacologic inhibition by dual STAT3/5 degraders or ZAP70 tyrosine kinase blockers in vitro and in vivo. We provide genetic and biochemical proof that STAT5A and STAT5B hyperactivation can initiate T-ALL through TCR pathway hijacking and suggest similar mechanisms for other T cell cancers. Thus, STAT5 or TCR component blockade are targeted therapy options, particularly in patients with chemoresistant clones carrying STAT5BN642H.
CCR5 serves as R5-tropic HIV co-receptor. Knocking out CCR5 in HIV patients, which has occurred <10 times, is believed important for cure. JAK/STAT inhibitors tofacitinib and ruxolitinib inhibit CCR5 expression in HIV(+) viremic patients. We investigated the association of JAK/STAT signaling pathway with CCR5/CCR2 expression in human primary CD4(+) T cells and confirmed its importance. Six of nine JAK/STAT inhibitors that reduced CCR5/CCR2 expression were identified. Inhibitor-treated CD4(+) T cells were relatively resistant, specifically to R5-tropic HIV infection. Furthermore, single JAK2, STAT3, STAT5A, and STAT5B knockout and different combinations of JAK/STAT knockout significantly reduced CCR2/CCR5 expression of both RNA and protein levels, indicating that CCR5/CCR2 expression was positively regulated by JAK-STAT pathway in CD4(+) T cells. Serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1) knockout affected CCR2/CCR5 gene expression, suggesting that SGK1 is involved in CCR2/CCR5 regulation. If cell surface CCR5 levels can be specifically and markedly down-regulated without adverse effects, that may have a major impact on the HIV cure agenda.
The Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)-5 proteins are required in immune regulation and homeostasis and play a crucial role in the development and function of several hematopoietic cells. STAT5b activation is involved in the expression of genes that participate in cell development, proliferation, and survival. STAT5a and STAT5b are paralogs and only human mutations in STAT5B have been identified leading to immune dysregulation and hematopoietic malignant transformation. The inactivating STAT5B mutations cause impaired post-natal growth, recurrent infections and immune dysregulation, whereas gain of function somatic mutations cause dysregulated allergic inflammation. These mutations are rare, and they are associated with a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations which provide a disease model elucidating the biological mechanism of STAT5 by studying the consequences of perturbations in STAT5 activity. Further, the use of Jak inhibitors as therapy for a variety of autoimmune and malignant disorders has increased substantially heading relevant lessons for the consequences of Jak/STAT immunomodulation from the human model. This review summarizes the biology of the STAT5 proteins, human disease associate with molecular defects in STAT5b, and the connection between aberrant activation of STAT5b and the development of certain cancers.
Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5a and STAT5b) are highly homologous proteins that are encoded by 2 separate genes and are activated by Janus-activated kinases (JAK) downstream of cytokine receptors. STAT5 proteins are activated by a wide variety of hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cytokines and growth factors, all of which use the JAK-STAT signalling pathway as their main mode of signal transduction. STAT5 proteins critically regulate vital cellular functions such as proliferation, differentiation, and survival. The physiological importance of STAT5 proteins is underscored by the plethora of primary human tumors that have aberrant constitutive activation of these proteins, which significantly contributes to tumor cell survival and malignant progression of disease. STAT5 plays an important role in the maintenance of normal immune function and homeostasis, both of which are regulated by specific members of IL-2 family of cytokines, which share a common gamma chain (gamma(c)) in their receptor complex. STAT5 critically mediates the biological actions of members of the gamma(c) family of cytokines in the immune system. Essentially, STAT5 plays a critical role in the function and development of Tregs, and consistently activated STAT5 is associated with a suppression in antitumor immunity and an increase in proliferation, invasion, and survival of tumor cells. Thus, therapeutic targeting of STAT5 is promising in cancer.
Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 4 and STAT6 play a crucial role in immune cells by transducing signals from specific cytokine receptors, and inducing transcription of genes involved in cell-mediated and humoral immunity. These two different defense mechanisms against pathogens are regulated by two specific CD4+ T helper (Th) cells known as Th1 and Th2 cells. Many studies have shown that several diseases including cancer, inflammatory, autoimmune and allergic diseases are associated with a Th1/Th2 imbalance caused by increased or decreased expression/activity of STAT4 or STAT6 often due to genetic and epigenetic aberrances. An altered expression of STAT4 has been observed in different tumors and autoimmune diseases, while a dysregulation of STAT6 signaling pathway is frequently observed in allergic conditions, such as atopic dermatitis, allergic asthma, food allergy, and tumors such as Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Recently, dysregulations of STAT4 and STAT6 expression have been observed in SARS-CoV2 and monkeypox infections, which are still public health emergencies in many countries. SARS-CoV-2 can induce an imbalance in Th1 and Th2 responses with a predominant activation of STAT6 in the cytosol and nuclei of pneumocytes that drives Th2 polarization and cytokine storm. In monkeypox infection the virus can promote an immune evasion by inducing a Th2 response that in turn inhibits the Th1 response essential for virus elimination. Furthermore, genetic variations of STAT4 that are associated with an increased risk of developing systemic lupus erythematosus seem to play a role in defense against SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with reciprocal and balanced chromosomal translocations always involving the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARa) gene on chromosome 17 and variable partner genes (X genes) on distinct chromosomes. RARalpha fuses to the PML gene in the majority of APL cases, and in a few cases to the PLZF, NPM, NuMA and STAT5b genes. As a consequence, X-RARalpha and RARalpha-X fusion genes are generated encoding aberrant chimeric proteins that exert critical oncogenic functions. Here we will integrate some of the most recent findings in APL research in a unified model and discuss some of the outstanding questions that remain to be addressed.
Previous study showed that higher expression of prolactin (PRL) was found in CRPC samples compared with hormone-naive prostate cancer (HNPC) and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) samples. We further investigate the function of PRL in prostate cancer (PCa) and explored its downstream effects. We found heterogeneous expression of the PRLR in clinical prostate samples. The VCaP and 22Rv1 cells exhibited PRLR expression. Among the downstream proteins, STAT5B was the dominant subtype in clinical samples and cell lines. Human recombinant PRL stimulation of PCa cells with PRLR expression resulted in increased phosphorylation of STAT5B(pSTAT5B) and progression of PCa in vitro and in vivo, and STAT5B knockdown can suppress the malignant behavior of PCa. To understand the mechanism further, we performed Bioinformatic analysis, ChIP qPCR, and luciferase reporter gene assay. The results revealed that ARRB2 was the transcription target gene of STAT5B, and higher expression of ARRB2 was related to higher aggression and poorer prognosis of PCa. Additionally, Gene set enrichment analysis indicated that higher expression of ARRB2 was significantly enriched in the MAPK signaling pathway. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) demonstrated elevated pSTAT5B, ARRB2, and pERK1/2 expression levels in CRPC tissues compared to HNPC and BPH. Mechanically, ARRB2 enhanced the activation of the MAPK pathway by binding to ERK1/2, thereby promoting the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 (pERK1/2). In conclusion, our study demonstrated that PRL stimulation can promote the progression of PCa through STAT5B/ARRB2 pathway and activation of MAPK signaling, which can be suppressed by intervention targeting STAT5B. Blockade of the STAT5B can be a potential therapeutic target for PCa.
INTRODUCTION: Inhibition of STAT5 was recently reported to reduce murine atherosclerosis. However, the role of STAT5 isoforms, and more in particular STAT5A in macrophages in the context of human atherosclerosis remains unknown. METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we demonstrate reciprocal expression regulation of STAT5A and STAT5B in human atherosclerotic lesions. The former was highly upregulated in ruptured over stable plaque and correlated with macrophage presence, a finding that was corroborated by the high chromosomal accessibility of STAT5A but not B gene in plaque macrophages. Phosphorylated STAT5 correlated with macrophages confirming its activation status. As macrophage STAT5 is activated by GM-CSF, we studied the effects of its silencing in GM-CSF differentiated human macrophages. STAT5A knockdown blunted the immune response, phagocytosis, cholesterol metabolism, and augmented apoptosis terms on transcriptional levels. These changes could partially be confirmed at functional level, with significant increases in apoptosis and decreases in lipid uptake and IL-6, IL-8, and TNFa cytokine secretion after STAT5A knockdown. Finally, inhibition of general and isoform A specific STAT5 significantly reduced the secretion of TNFa, IL-8 and IL-10 in ex vivo tissue slices of advanced human atherosclerotic plaques. DISCUSSION: In summary, we identify STAT5A as an important determinant of macrophage functions and inflammation in the context of atherosclerosis and show its promise as therapeutic target in human atherosclerotic plaque inflammation.
While insensitivity to GH (GHI) is characterized by low IGF-I levels, normal or elevated GH levels, and lack of IGF-I response to GH treatment, IGF-I resistance is characterized by elevated IGF-I levels with normal/high GH levels. Several genetic defects are responsible for impairment of GH and IGF-I actions resulting in short stature that could affect intrauterine growth or be present in the postnatal period. The genetic defects affecting GH and/or IGF-I action can be divided into five different groups: GH insensitivity by defects affecting the GH receptor (GHR), the intracellular GH signaling pathway (STAT5B, STAT3, IKBKB, IL2RG, PIK3R1), the synthesis of insulin-like growth factors (IGF1, IGF2), the transport/bioavailability of IGFs (IGFALS, PAPPA2), and defects affecting IGF-I sensitivity (IGF1R). Complete GH insensitivity (GHI) was first reported by Zvi Laron and his colleagues in patients with classical appearance of GH deficiency, but presenting elevated levels of GH. The association of GH insensitivity with several clinical sings of immune-dysfunction and autoimmune dysregulation are characteristic of molecular defects in the intracellular GH signaling pathway (STAT5B, STAT3, IKBKB, IL2RG, PIK3R1). Gene mutations in the IGF1 and IGF2 genes have been described in patients presenting intrauterine growth retardation and postnatal short stature. Molecular defects have also been reported in the IGFALS gene, that encodes the acid-labile subunit (ALS), responsible to stabilize circulating IGF-I in ternary complexes, and more recently in the PAPPA2 gen that encodes the pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A2, a protease that specifically cleaves IGFBP-3 and IGFBP-5 regulating the accessibility of IGFs to their target tissues. Mutations in the IGF1R gene resulted in IGF-I insensitivity in patients with impaired intrauterine and postnatal growth. These studies have revealed novel molecular mechanisms of GH insensitivity/primary IGF-I deficiency beyond the GH receptor gene. In addition, they have also underlined the importance of several players of the GH-IGF axis in the complex system that promotes human growth.
Growth hormone (GH) promotes postnatal human growth primarily by regulating insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production through activation of the GH receptor (GHR)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5B signaling cascade. The critical importance of STAT5B in human IGF-I production was confirmed with the identification of the first homozygous, autosomal recessive, STAT5B mutation in a young female patient who phenotypically resembled patients with classical growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) syndrome (Laron syndrome) due to mutations in the GHR gene, presenting with severe postnatal growth failure and marked IGF-I deficiency. Of note, the closely related STAT5A, which shares >95% amino acid identity with STAT5B, could not compensate for loss of functional STAT5B. To date, 7 homozygous, inactivating, STAT5B mutations in 10 patients have been reported. STAT5B deficient patients, unlike patients deficient in GHR, can also present with a novel, potentially fatal, primary immunodeficiency, which can manifest as chronic pulmonary disease. STAT5B deficiency may be underestimated in endocrine, immunology and pulmonary clinics.
The growth factor Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1) regulates myocardial growth and is currently under clinical investigation as a treatment for heart failure. Here, we demonstrate in several in vitro and in vivo models that STAT5b mediates NRG-1/EBBB4-stimulated cardiomyocyte growth. Genetic and chemical disruption of the NRG-1/ERBB4 pathway reduces STAT5b activation and transcription of STAT5b target genes Igf1, Myc, and Cdkn1a in murine cardiomyocytes. Loss of Stat5b also ablates NRG-1-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Dynamin-2 is shown to control the cell surface localization of ERBB4 and chemical inhibition of Dynamin-2 downregulates STAT5b activation and cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. In zebrafish embryos, Stat5 is activated during NRG-1-induced hyperplastic myocardial growth, and chemical inhibition of the Nrg-1/Erbb4 pathway or Dynamin-2 leads to loss of myocardial growth and Stat5 activation. Moreover, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockdown of stat5b results in reduced myocardial growth and cardiac function. Finally, the NRG-1/ERBB4/STAT5b signaling pathway is differentially regulated at mRNA and protein levels in the myocardium of patients with pathological cardiac hypertrophy as compared to control human subjects, consistent with a role of the NRG-1/ERBB4/STAT5b pathway in myocardial growth.
Postnatal growth failure is often attributed to dysregulated somatotropin action, however marked genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity exist. We report five patients from three families who present with short stature, immune dysfunction, atopic eczema and gastrointestinal pathology associated with recessive variants in QSOX2. QSOX2 encodes a nuclear membrane protein linked to disulphide isomerase and oxidoreductase activity. Loss of QSOX2 disrupts Growth hormone-mediated STAT5B nuclear translocation despite enhanced Growth hormone-induced STAT5B phosphorylation. Moreover, patient-derived dermal fibroblasts demonstrate Growth hormone-induced mitochondriopathy and reduced mitochondrial membrane potential. Located at the nuclear membrane, QSOX2 acts as a gatekeeper for regulating stabilisation and import of phosphorylated-STAT5B. Altogether, QSOX2 deficiency modulates human growth by impairing Growth hormone-STAT5B downstream activities and mitochondrial dynamics, which contribute to multi-system dysfunction. Furthermore, our work suggests that therapeutic recombinant insulin-like growth factor-1 may circumvent the Growth hormone-STAT5B dysregulation induced by pathological QSOX2 variants and potentially alleviate organ specific disease.
Growth hormone (GH) plays a pivotal role in many physiological processes in humans, and in other mammalian and non-mammalian vertebrate species, through actions on somatic growth, tissue development and repair, and intermediary metabolism. This review will focus on mechanisms of GH actions on gene expression, primarily from the perspective of the genes that encode proteins stimulated by GH to regulate somatic growth, especially insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-I), but also others that are induced or repressed by GH. Topics to be discussed will include a brief overview of GH-mediated signal transduction pathways and how these cascades alter the functions of responsive transcription factors, with a specific focus on STAT5B, a key member of the signal transducers and activators of transcription family, characterization of essential GH-regulated genes, and elucidation of mechanisms of their regulation from biochemical, genetic, and genomic perspectives.
Growth hormone (GH) regulates insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production primarily through activation of the GH receptor (GHR)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-5b signaling cascade. One of four STAT proteins (STAT1, -3, -5a and -5b) activated by the GH-GHR system, the critical importance of STAT5b in IGF-I production became evident with the identification of homozygous, autosomal recessive STAT5b mutations in patients who presented with severe postnatal growth failure, growth hormone insensitivity syndrome (GHIS) and marked IGF-I deficiency. Unlike GHIS due to GHR mutations, patients carrying STAT5b mutations also presented with chronic pulmonary disease and evidence of perturbations of T-cell homeostasis. At present, no single treatment(s) is available to improve both poor statural growth and immune deficiency. Continued clinical evaluations of patients with STAT5b mutations and elucidating the impact of the mutation on STAT5b structure and function, are important to understanding the pathophysiology of this rare, complex, disease (MIM 245590).
Normal growth requires that pituitary-secreted growth hormone (GH) bind to its specific receptor and activate a complex signaling cascade, leaving to production of insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), which, in turn, activates its own receptor (IGF1R). The GH receptor (GHR) is preformed as a dimer and is transported in a nonligand bound state to the cell surface. Binding of GH to the GHR dimer, results in a conformational change of the dimer, activation of the intracellular Janus Kinase 2 (JAK2) and phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5B. Phosphorylated STAT5B dimers are then translocated to the nucleus, where they transcriptionally activate multiple genes, including those for IGF-I, IGF binding protein-3 and the acid-labile subunit (ALS).
Short stature is the main problem that paediatric endocrinologists have to grapple with. Endocrine disorders account for only 5% of patients with short stature, but this is still one of the most common causes of reports to the endocrine clinic and hospitalisation in the endocrine department. A properly functioning growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor (GH/IGF) axis is one of the most important factors in proper growth. A lot of genetic defects in this axis lead to syndromes marked by impaired growth, like Laron syndrome, muta-tions in the STAT5B, insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), and insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) and mutations in the acid labile subunit (ALS). Two proteases important for the proper functioning of the GH/IGF axis: pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) and pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A2 (PAPP-A2), have been described. The first description of the new syndrome of growth failure associated with mutation in the PAPP-A2 gene was given by Andrew Dauber et al. This review evaluates the current data concerning PAPP-A2 function, and particularly the effect of PAPP-A2 mutation on growth.
Cytokines, growth factors or hormones take action through the JAK/STAT5 signaling pathway, which plays a critical role in regulating the intestinal response to infection and inflammation. However, the way in which STAT5 regulates intestinal epithelial compartment is largely ignored due to the lack of genetic tools for proper exploration and because the two STAT5 transcription factors (STAT5A and STAT5B) have some redundant but also distinct functions. In this review article, by focusing on STAT5 functions in the intestinal undifferentiated and differentiated epithelia, we discuss major advances of the growth factor/cytokine-JAK/STAT5 research in view of intestinal mucosal inflammation and immunity. We highlight the gap in the research of the intestinal STAT5 signaling to anticipate the gastrointestinal explorative insights. Furthermore, we address the critical questions to illuminate how STAT5 signaling influences intestinal epithelial cell differentiation and stem cell regeneration during homeostasis and injury. Overall, our article provides a centric view of the relevance of the relationship between chronic inflammatory diseases and JAK/STAT5 pathway and it also gives an example of how chronic infection and inflammation pirate STAT5 signaling to worsen intestinal injuries. Importantly, our review suggests how to protect a wound healing from gastrointestinal diseases by modulating intestinal STAT5.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal haemopoietic stem cell disorders with reciprocal translocation in chromosome 9 (ch9) and 22 (ch22) which cause the fusion of Break cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia (BCR-ABL) oncogene. This fusion will activate tyrosine kinase. Imatinib mesylate is the first tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI), which could change the prognosis of CML patients. However, there is a resistance to TKI's, and based on transcriptomic study, increase expression of gen signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5A and runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) can cause resistance to TKI's. The STAT5 protein, which in normal myeloid cells being activated by cytokine, in CML patients was activated even without cytokines. STAT5 refer to STAT5A and STAT5B, however they have might have different role in hematopoietic stem cells or in CML cells. This review summarizes the role of STAT5 in tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance in CML patients.
