Serine/threonine-protein kinase 16; Membrane-associated protein kinase that phosphorylates on serine and threonine residues. In vitro substrates include DRG1, ENO1 and EIF4EBP1. Also autophosphorylates. May be involved in secretory vesicle trafficking or intracellular signaling. May have a role in regulating stromal-epithelial interactions that occur during ductal morphogenesis in the mammary gland. May be involved in TGF-beta signaling. Able to autophosphorylate on Tyr residue; it is however unclear whether it has tyrosine-protein kinase toward other proteins.
STK16 (Ser/Thr kinase 16, also known as Krct/PKL12/MPSK1/TSF-1) is a myristoylated and palmitoylated Ser/Thr protein kinase that is ubiquitously expressed and conserved among all eukaryotes. STK16 is distantly related to the other kinases and belongs to the NAK kinase family that has an atypical activation loop architecture. As a membrane-associated protein that is primarily localized to the Golgi, STK16 has been shown to participate in the TGF-beta signaling pathway, TGN protein secretion and sorting, as well as cell cycle and Golgi assembly regulation. This review aims to provide a comprehensive summary of the progress made in recent research about STK16, ranging from its distribution, molecular characterization, post-translational modification (fatty acylation and phosphorylation), interactors (GlcNAcK/DRG1/MAL2/Actin/WDR1), and related functions. As a relatively underexplored kinase, more studies are encouraged to unravel its regulation mechanisms and cellular functions.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) manipulate their human host through at least 39 effector proteins which hijack host processes through direct protein-protein interactions (PPIs). To identify their protein targets in the host cells, we performed yeast two-hybrid screens, allowing us to find 48 high-confidence protein-protein interactions between 15 EHEC effectors and 47 human host proteins. In comparison to other bacteria and viruses we found that EHEC effectors bind more frequently to hub proteins as well as to proteins that participate in a higher number of protein complexes. The data set includes six new interactions that involve the translocated intimin receptor (TIR), namely HPCAL1, HPCAL4, NCALD, ARRB1, PDE6D, and STK16. We compared these TIR interactions in EHEC and enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and found that five interactions were conserved. Notably, the conserved interactions included those of serine/threonine kinase 16 (STK16), hippocalcin-like 1 (HPCAL1) as well as neurocalcin-delta (NCALD). These proteins co-localize with the infection sites of EPEC. Furthermore, our results suggest putative functions of poorly characterized effectors (EspJ, EspY1). In particular, we observed that EspJ is connected to the microtubule system while EspY1 appears to be involved in apoptosis/cell cycle regulation.
Global health is threatened by emerging viruses, many of which lack approved therapies and effective vaccines, including dengue, Ebola, and Venezuelan equine encephalitis. We previously reported that AAK1 and GAK, two of the four members of the understudied Numb-associated kinases (NAK) family, control intracellular trafficking of RNA viruses. Nevertheless, the role of BIKE and STK16 in viral infection remained unknown. Here, we reveal a requirement for BIKE, but not STK-16, in dengue virus (DENV) infection. BIKE mediates both early (postinternalization) and late (assembly/egress) stages in the DENV life cycle, and this effect is mediated in part by phosphorylation of a threonine 156 (T156) residue in the mu subunit of the adaptor protein (AP) 2 complex. Pharmacological compounds with potent anti-BIKE activity, including the investigational anticancer drug 5Z-7-oxozeaenol and more selective inhibitors, suppress DENV infection both in vitro and ex vivo. BIKE overexpression reverses the antiviral activity, validating that the mechanism of antiviral action is, at least in part, mediated by BIKE. Lastly, 5Z-7-oxozeaenol exhibits antiviral activity against viruses from three unrelated RNA viral families with a high genetic barrier to resistance. These findings reveal regulation of poorly understood stages of the DENV life cycle via BIKE signaling and establish a proof-of-principle that pharmacological inhibition of BIKE can be potentially used as a broad-spectrum strategy against acute emerging viral infections.
STK16 is a ubiquitously expressed, myristoylated, and palmitoylated serine/threonine protein kinase with underexplored functions. Recently, it was shown to be involved in cell division but the mechanism remains unclear. Here we found that human STK16 localizes to the Golgi complex throughout the cell cycle and plays important roles in Golgi structure regulation. STK16 knockdown or kinase inhibition disrupts actin polymers and causes fragmented Golgi in cells. In vitro assays show that STK16 directly binds to actin and regulates actin dynamics in a concentration- and kinase activity-dependent way. In addition, STK16 knockdown or kinase inhibition not only delays mitotic entry and prolongs mitosis, but also causes prometaphase and cytokinesis arrest. Therefore, we revealed STK16 as a novel actin binding protein that resides in the Golgi, which regulates actin dynamics to control Golgi structure and participate in cell cycle progression.
Serine/threonine kinase 16 (STK16) is crucial in on regulating tumor cell proliferation, apoptosis, and prognosis. Activated M1 macrophages regulate lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) growth by releasing exosomes. This study aims to investigate the role of STK16 and then focus on the possible mechanisms through which exosomes derived from M1 macrophages play their roles in LUAD cells by targeting STK16. Clinical LUAD samples were used to evaluate the expression of STK16 and its association with prognosis. Exosomes were isolated from M0 and M1 macrophages by ultracentrifugation and were then identified by electron microscopy and western blotting. In vitro gain- and loss-of-function experiments with LUAD cells were performed to elucidate the functions of miR-181a-5p, ETS1, and STK16, and mouse xenograft models were used to verify the function of STK16 in vivo. Western blotting, quantitative real-time PCR, CCK-8 assay, cell apoptosis, immunohistochemistry staining, luciferase assay, ChIP assay, and bioinformatics analysis were performed to reveal the underlying mechanisms. High expression of STK16 was observed in LUAD tissues and cells, and higher expression of STK16 was associated with worse prognosis. Silencing STK16 expression inhibited cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis via the AKT1 pathway. Exosomes from M1 macrophages inhibited viability and promoted apoptosis by inhibiting STK16. Moreover, miR-181a-5p is the functional molecule in M1 macrophage-derived exosomes and plays a vital role in inhibiting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis by targeting ETS1 and STK16. Hence, exosomes derived from M1 macrophages were capable of inhibiting viability and promoting apoptosis in LUAD via the miR-181a-5p/ETS1/STK16 axis.
STK16, reported as a Golgi localized serine/threonine kinase, has been shown to participate in multiple cellular processes, including the TGF-beta signaling pathway, TGN protein secretion and sorting, as well as cell cycle and Golgi assembly regulation. However, the mechanisms of the regulation of its kinase activity remain underexplored. It was known that STK16 is autophosphorylated at Thr185, Ser197, and Tyr198 of the activation segment in its kinase domain. We found that STK16 localizes to the cell membrane and the Golgi throughout the cell cycle, but mutations in the auto-phosphorylation sites not only alter its subcellular localization but also affect its kinase activity. In particular, the Tyr198 mutation alone significantly reduced the kinase activity of STK16, abolished its Golgi and membrane localization, and affected the cell cycle progression. This study demonstrates that a single site autophosphorylation of STK16 could affect its localization and function, which provides insights into the molecular regulatory mechanism of STK16's kinase activity.
Although Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) plays a critical role in the progression of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), its inhibitors are incapable of eradicating these tumor cells, implicating drug resistance mechanisms exist. Our evidences show that TNBC cells express high level of Serine/Threonine Kinase 16 (STK16) when JAK2 signaling is blocked. Pharmacological inhibition or silencing of STK16 significantly enhances the sensitivity of TNBC cells to JAK2 inhibition, while over-expression of STK16 alleviates the anti-tumor effect of JAK2-inhibitor. Mechanistically, elevated STK16 expression rescues the phosphorylation status and transcriptional activity of STAT3, as STK16 is able to directly catalyze the phosphorylation of STAT3 at ser-727 residue. Our data indicate that upon JAK2 inhibition, TNBC cells express STK16 to maintain STAT3 transcriptional activity, dual-inhibition of JAK2/STK16 offers a potential way to treat TNBC patients.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer standed as a global health challenge, ranking third in cancer incidence and second in cancer-related deaths worldwide. A deeper understanding of the intricate mechanisms driving colorectal cancer development was pressing need. STK16 had garnered attention in recent researches, while its involvement in cancer had been minimally explored. c-MYC had emerged as a key player in cancer biology. Due to its complex structure, multifunctionality, and intricate interactions, directly inhibiting the activity of c-MYC proves to be challenging. Hence, current research was directing efforts towards modulating c-MYC expression levels. METHODS: Immunoblot, Immunohistochemistry and immunoprecipitation assays were conducted to assess the indicated protein expression levels. RT-PCR was performed to detect the corresponding mRNA expression levels. The proliferation, migration, invasion, and colony formation abilities of the specified cancer cells were investigated using CCK8 assays, Brdu assays, transwell assays, and colony formation assays, respectively. Cellular and animal experiments were performed to investigate the correlation between STK16 signaling and c-MYC signaling. RESULTS: STK16 plays a positive regulatory role in the progression of colorectal cancer. Delving into the molecular mechanisms, we unveiled that STK16 phosphorylated c-MYC at serine 452, a pivotal event hindering the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway degradation of c-MYC. Importantly, colorectal cancer proliferation mediated by STK16 was found to be dependent on the phosphorylation of c-MYC at S452. Furthermore, the researchers demonstrated that STK16 knockout or pharmacological inhibition significantly curtailed colorectal cancer proliferation and c-MYC expression in in vivo animal models. CONCLUSION: We discovered that STK16 phosphorylates c-MYC at serine 452, hindering its degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. STK16 inhibition, either genetically or pharmacologically, effectively curtails cancer growth and c-MYC expression in vivo. These findings highlight STK16 as a potential therapeutic target for colorectal cancer.
MAL2 (myelin and lymphocyte protein 2) is thought to regulate at least two steps in the hepatic apical transcytotic pathway. As vesicle budding and delivery at each step are driven by complex machineries, we predicted that MAL2 participates in several large protein complexes with multiple binding partners. To identify novel MAL2 interactors, we performed split-ubiquitin yeast two-hybrid assays and identified STK16 (serine/threonine kinase 16) as a putative interactor which we verified morphologically and biochemically. As STK16 is a Golgi-associated constitutively active kinase implicated in regulating secretion and because of the massive constitutive secretory capacity of hepatic cells, we tested whether MAL2 and STK16 function in secretion. Expression of a dominant-negative kinase-dead STK16 mutant (E202A) or knockdown of MAL2 impaired secretion that correlated with decreased expression of albumin and haptoglobin. By using 19 degrees C temperature blocks and lysosome deacidification, we determined that E202A expression or MAL2 knockdown did not interfere with albumin synthesis or processing, but led to albumin lysosomal degradation. We conclude that MAL2 and the constitutively active STK16 function to sort secretory soluble cargo into the constitutive secretory pathway at the TGN (trans-Golgi network) in polarized hepatocytes.
The plasma membrane of polarized hepatocytes is functionally divided into two domains: the apical and basolateral. Our focus is to define the molecular basis of polarized protein sorting of newly-synthesized membrane and secretory proteins in WIF-B cells, an excellent model system for polarized hepatocytes. We determined that MAL2 (myelin and lymphocyte protein 2) and its binding partner, serine/threonine kinase 16 (STK16) regulate basolateral constitutive secretion. Because STK16 is a constitutively active kinase, we reasoned that constitutively phosphorylated substrates must participate in constitutive secretion. To identify either STK16 substrates or other proteins that regulate constitutive secretion, we took a proteomics approach. Post-nuclear supernatants from cells expressing wild type or a kinase-dead (E202A) STK16 were separated on 2D gels and immunoblotted with antibodies against phospho-serine/threonine residues. Sixteen spots were identified from E202A-expressing cells that reproducibly displayed decreased immunoreactivity. From these spots, 28 proteins were identified as possible STK16 substrates. Out of these 28 possible substrates, 25% of them encode predicted STK16 phosphorylation consensus sites, with WD repeat containing protein-1 (WDR1) encoding two such sites. Based on this finding and on the finding that actin remodeling is required for hepatic secretion, we further confirmed that WDR1 is a phosphoprotein that regulates secretion.
C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) is a member of the small family of natriuretic peptides that also includes atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain, or B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP). Unlike them, it performs its major functions in an autocrine or paracrine manner. Those functions, mediated through binding to the membrane guanylyl cyclase natriuretic peptide receptor B (NPR-B), or by signaling through the non-enzyme natriuretic peptide receptor C (NPR-C), include the regulation of endochondral ossification, reproduction, nervous system development, and the maintenance of cardiovascular health. To date, the regulation of CNP gene expression has not received the attention that has been paid to regulation of the ANP and BNP genes. CNP expression in vitro is regulated by TGF-beta and receptor tyrosine kinase growth factors in a cell/tissue-specific and sometimes species-specific manner. Expression of CNP in vivo is altered in diseased organs and tissues, including atherosclerotic vessels, and the myocardium of failing hearts. Analysis of the human CNP gene has led to the identification of a number of regulatory sites in the proximal promoter, including a GC-rich region approximately 50 base pairs downstream of the Tata box, and shown to be a binding site for several putative regulatory proteins, including transforming growth factor clone 22 domain 1 (TSC22D1) and a serine threonine kinase (STK16). The purpose of this review is to summarize the current literature on the regulation of CNP expression, emphasizing in particular the putative regulatory elements in the CNP gene and the potential DNA-binding proteins that associate with them.
Mixed lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) (voiding symptoms suggestive of benign prostatic hyperplasia plus storage symptoms, which can be caused by overactive bladder) are common in men. Unwanted contraction of prostate and/or bladder smooth muscle has been implied in the pathophysiology of male LUTS. Here, we examined effects of the serine/threonine kinase 16 (STK16) inhibitor STK16-IN-1 on contraction of human tissues from the prostate and male detrusor. Tissues were obtained from radical prostatectomy and radical cystectomy. Contractions were studied in an organ bath and STK16 expressions by Western blot analyses and fluorescence staining. In prostate tissues, STK16-IN-1 (1 muM) inhibited contractions induced by endothelin-1 and the thromboxane A(2) analog U46619. Contractions of prostate tissues induced by noradrenaline, the alpha(1)-agonists phenylephrine and methoxamine, or electric field stimulation (EFS) were not changed by STK16-IN-1. In male detrusor tissues, STK16-IN-1 inhibited contractions induced by the cholinergic agonists carbachol and metacholine, and contractions induced by U46619. EFS-induced contractions of detrusor tissues were not changed by STK16-IN-1. Western blot analyses of prostate and detrusor tissues revealed bands matching the molecular weight of STK16. Fluorescence staining of prostate tissues using STK16 antibodies resulted in immunoreactivity in smooth muscle cells. STK16-IN-1 selectively inhibits non-adrenergic/non-neurogenic smooth muscle contractions in the male prostate and to limited extent in the bladder. Because non-adrenergic contractions in the male LUTS may account for limited efficacy of alpha(1)-blockers and for alpha(1)-blocker-resistant symptoms, studies assessing add-on of STK16-IN-1 to alpha(1)-blockers in mixed LUTS appear feasible.
STK16, a serine/threonine protein kinase, is ubiquitously expressed and is conserved among all eukaryotes. STK16 has been implicated to function in a variety of cellular processes such as VEGF and cargo secretion, but the pathways through which these effects are mediated remain to be elucidated. Through screening of our focused library of kinase inhibitors, we discovered a highly selective ATP competitive inhibitor, STK16-IN-1, which exhibits potent inhibitory activity against STK16 kinase (IC50: 0.295 muM) with excellent selectivity across the kinome as assessed using the KinomeScan profiling assay (S score (1) = 0.0). In MCF-7 cells, treatment with STK16-IN-1 results in a reduction in cell number and accumulation of binucleated cells, which can be recapitulated by RNAi knockdown of STK16. Co-treatment of STK16-IN-1 with chemotherapeutics such as cisplatin, doxorubicin, colchicine, and paclitaxel results in a slight potentiation of the antiproliferative effects of the chemotherapeutics. STK16-IN-1 provides a useful tool compound for further elucidating the biological functions of STK16.
The discovery/optimization of bis-aryl ureas as Limk inhibitors to obtain high potency and selectivity and appropriate pharmacokinetic properties through systematic SAR studies is reported. Docking studies supported the observed SAR. Optimized Limk inhibitors had high biochemical potency (IC50 < 25 nM), excellent selectivity against ROCK and JNK kinases (>400-fold), potent inhibition of cofilin phosphorylation in A7r5, PC-3, and CEM-SS T cells (IC50 < 1 muM), and good in vitro and in vivo pharmacokinetic properties. In the profiling against a panel of 61 kinases, compound 18b at 1 muM inhibited only Limk1 and STK16 with >/=80% inhibition. Compounds 18b and 18f were highly efficient in inhibiting cell-invasion/migration in PC-3 cells. In addition, compound 18w was demonstrated to be effective on reducing intraocular pressure (IOP) on rat eyes. Taken together, these data demonstrated that we had developed a novel class of bis-aryl urea derived potent and selective Limk inhibitors.
PKL12/STK16 protein is the first identified mammalian member of a ser/thr kinase subfamily that is conserved across several kingdoms, with a broad expression pattern in murine tissues and cell types. Endogenous STK16 subcellular localization was evaluated by indirect immunofluorescence in NIH/3T3 and NRK cells, demonstrating a Golgi-associated pattern that appears to be independent of signals provided by integrin pathways. When cells were treated with brefeldin A (BFA) or nocodazole, drugs that promote Golgi disorganization, we observed STK16 translocation to the nuclear compartment. Constitutive overexpression of this protein by retroviral vectors also promotes accumulation of STK16 in the nuclear compartment, as shown by subfractionation studies. A kinase-dead STK16 mutant (E202A) was used to demonstrate that both the Golgi association and the nuclear translocation capabilities seem to be independent of the STK16 kinase activity. In addition, we show that STK16 overexpression in several cell lines enhances their capacity to produce and secrete VEGF. To confirm these data in vivo, we injected tumor cells overexpressing STK16 into immunodeficient BALBc/SCID mice. HT1080-derived tumors overexpressing STK16 showed increased volume and number of blood vessels compared to controls. Altogether, these data concur with previous reports suggesting a potential role for STK16 as a transcriptional co-activator.
The highly diverse Numb-associated kinase (NAK) family has been linked to broad cellular functions including receptor-mediated endocytosis, Notch pathway modulation, osteoblast differentiation, and dendrite morphogenesis. Consequently, NAK kinases play a key role in a diverse range of diseases from Parkinson's and prostate cancer to HIV. Due to the plasticity of this kinase family, NAK kinases are often inhibited by approved or investigational drugs and have been associated with side effects, but they are also potential drug targets. The presence of cysteine residues in some NAK family members provides the possibility for selective targeting via covalent inhibition. Here we report the first high-resolution structures of kinases AAK1 and BIKE in complex with two drug candidates. The presented data allow a comprehensive structural characterization of the NAK kinase family and provide the basis for rational design of selective NAK inhibitors.
PKL12 (STK16) is a ubiquitously expressed Ser/Thr kinase, not structurally related to the well known subfamilies, with a putative role in cell adhesion control. Yeast two-hybrid protein interaction screening was used to search for proteins that associate with PKL12 and to delineate signaling pathways and/or regulatory circuits in which this kinase participates. One positive clone contained an open reading frame highly similar to N-acetylglucosamine kinase (GlcNAcK) of several species. The PKL12/GlcNAcK interaction was further confirmed both in vitro and in vivo. Protein expression analysis of GlcNAcK using a specific rabbit antiserum displayed a ubiquitous pattern in cell lines and animal tissues. Subcellular localization studies showed that GlcNAcK is a cytoplasmic protein with a dual subcellular localization, distributed between the perinuclear and peripheral cell reservoirs. After overexpression, GlcNAcK localizes in vesicular structures associated mainly with the cell membrane and colocalizes with the PKL12 protein. GlcNAcK is not otherwise a substrate for PKL12 activity and PKL12 does not appear to influence GlcNAcK activity either in vitro or in vivo. In vitro kinase assays have nonetheless revealed that functional GlcNAcK, although not able to modulate autophosphorylation of PKL12, greatly influences PKL12 kinase activity on a defined substrate protein. These results are interpreted to indicate a potential in vivo role for GlcNAcK in PKL12 translocation and a tentative regulatory role for PKL12-mediated phosphorylation on substrate proteins.
Membrane fusion depends on conserved components and is responsible for organelle biogenesis and vesicular trafficking. Yeast vacuoles are dynamic structures analogous to mammalian lysosomes. We report here that yeast Env7 is a novel palmitoylated protein kinase ortholog that negatively regulates vacuolar membrane fusion. Microscopic and biochemical studies confirmed the localization of tagged Env7 at the vacuolar membrane and implicated membrane association via the palmitoylation of its N-terminal Cys13 to -15. In vitro kinase assays established Env7 as a protein kinase. Site-directed mutagenesis of the Env7 alanine-proline-glutamic acid (APE) motif Glu269 to alanine results in an unstable kinase-dead allele that is stabilized and redistributed to the detergent-resistant fraction by interruption of the proteasome system in vivo. Palmitoylation-deficient Env7C13-15S is also kinase dead and mislocalizes to the cytoplasm. Microscopy studies established that env7Delta is defective in maintaining fragmented vacuoles during hyperosmotic response and in buds. ENV7 function is not redundant with a similar role of vacuolar membrane kinase Yck3, as the two do not share a substrate, and ENV7 is not a suppressor of yck3Delta. Bayesian phylogenetic analyses strongly support ENV7 as an ortholog of the gene encoding human STK16, a Golgi apparatus protein kinase with undefined function. We propose that Env7 function in fusion/fission dynamics may be conserved within the endomembrane system.
Primary cultures of bovine microvascular endothelial cells (BME) isolated from the adrenal cortex, are commonly used to study vascular endothelium, but have a limited life span. To circumvent these limitations, we have immortalized BME cells with either simian virus 40 (SV40) or with a retrovirus containing the coding region of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), and have investigated whether the clonal populations obtained, maintain differentiated properties characteristic of microvascular endothelium. Immortalized cells were characterized for maintenance of typical endothelial morphology, marker expression, and functional characteristics including uptake of Acetylated low-density lipoprotein (Ac-LDL), capillary-like tube formation in three-dimensional collagen gels, as well as metalloproteinase (MMP) and plasminogen activator (PA)-mediated extracellular proteolysis. Whilst immortalization of BME cells with SV40 was associated with loss of endothelial-specific properties, hTERT-BME exhibited an endothelial phenotype similar to that of wild-type endothelial cells. Specifically, they showed a typical cobblestone morphology, were contact-inhibited, expressed endothelial cell-specific markers (e.g., CD31, vWF) and both fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR-1) and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2). In addition, they expressed receptors for LDL. Importantly, when grown on collagen gels, hTERT-BME cells underwent MMP-dependent tube-like structure formation in response to VEGFR-2 activation. In a collagen gel sandwich assay, hTERT-BME formed tubular structures in the absence of exogenously added angiogenic cytokines. Sustained tube formation was induced by VEGF-A alone or in combination with FGF-2. From 17 sub-clones that displayed a non-transformed phenotype, a high proliferative capacity and tubulogenic properties in three-dimensional collagen gels, we isolated two distinct subpopulations that display a highly specific response to VEGF-A or to FGF-2. We have generated hTERT-BME cells that maintain endothelial-specific properties and function and have isolated clones that respond differentially to VEGF-A or FGF-2. These immortalized cell lines will facilitate the study of endothelial cell biology.
We report the molecular cloning and initial characterization of a novel fatty acid acylated serine/threonine protein kinase. The putative open reading frame is predicted to encode a 305 amino acid protein possessing a carboxy-terminal protein kinase domain and amino-terminal myristylation and palmitylation sites. The protein kinase has been accordingly denoted as the myristylated and palmitylated serine/threonine protein kinase (MPSK). Human and mouse MPSKs share approximately 93% identity at the amino acid level with complete retention of acylation sites. Radiation hybridization localized the human MPSK gene to chromosome 2q34-37. Northern analysis demonstrated that the human MPSK 1.7 kilobase mRNA is widely distributed. Epitope tagged human MPSK was found to be acylated by myristic acid at glycine residue 2 and by palmitic acid at cysteines 6 and/or 8. Palmitylation of MPSK in these experiments was found to require an intact myristylation site. While epitope tagged MPSK in immune complexes or purified human glutathione S transferase-MPSK was found to autophosphorylate at one or more threonine residues, the enzyme was not found to phosphorylate several other common exogenous substrates. Indeed, only PHAS-I was identified as an exogenous substrate which was found to be phosphorylated on threonine and serine residues.
