Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; Nuclear receptor that binds peroxisome proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids. Once activated by a ligand, the nuclear receptor binds to DNA specific PPAR response elements (PPRE) and modulates the transcription of its target genes, such as acyl-CoA oxidase. It therefore controls the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty acids. Key regulator of adipocyte differentiation and glucose homeostasis. ARF6 acts as a key regulator of the tissue-specific adipocyte P2 (aP2) enhancer. Acts as a critical regulator of gut ho [...] 
TFEB is a master regulator for transcription of genes involved in autophagy and lysosome biogenesis. Activity of TFEB is inhibited upon its serine phosphorylation by mTOR The overall mechanisms by which TFEB activity in the cell is regulated are not well elucidated. Specifically, the mechanisms of TFEB turnover and how they might influence its activity remain unknown. Here, we show that STUB1, a chaperone-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase, modulates TFEB activity by preferentially targeting inactive phosphorylated TFEB for degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Phosphorylated TFEB accumulated in STUB1-deficient cells and in tissues of STUB1-deficient mice resulting in reduced TFEB activity. Conversely, cellular overexpression of STUB1 resulted in reduced phosphorylated TFEB and increased TFEB activity. STUB1 preferentially interacted with and ubiqutinated phosphorylated TFEB, targeting it to proteasomal degradation. Consistent with reduced TFEB activity, accumulation of phosphorylated TFEB in STUB1-deficient cells resulted in reduced autophagy and reduced mitochondrial biogenesis. These studies reveal that the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway participates in regulating autophagy and lysosomal functions by regulating the activity of TFEB.
YTH domain family 2 (YTHDF2) is the first identified N6-methyladenosine (m(6) A) reader that regulates the status of mRNA. It has been reported that overexpressed YTHDF2 promotes carcinogenesis; yet, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is elusive. Herein, it is demonstrated that YTHDF2 is upregulated and can predict poor outcomes in HCC. Decreased ubiquitination levels of YTHDF2 contribute to the upregulation of YTHDF2. Furthermore, heat shock protein 90 beta (HSP90beta) and STIP1 homology and U-box-containing protein 1 (STUB1) physically interact with YTHDF2 in the cytoplasm. Mechanically, the large and small middle domain of HSP90beta is required for its interaction with STUB1 and YTHDF2. HSP90beta inhibits the STUB1-induced degradation of YTHDF2 to elevate the expression of YTHDF2 and to further boost the proliferation and sorafenib resistance of HCC. Moreover, HSP90beta and YTHDF2 are upregulated, while STUB1 is downregulated in HCC tissues. The expression of HSP90beta is positively correlated with the YTHDF2 protein level, whereas the expression of STUB1 is negatively correlated with the protein levels of YTHDF2 and HSP90beta. These findings deepen the understanding of how YTHDF2 is regulated to drive HCC progression and provide potential targets for treating HCC.
RATIONALE: Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) senescence promotes atherosclerosis and features of plaque instability, in part, through lipid-mediated oxidative DNA damage and telomere dysfunction. SIRT6 (Sirtuin 6) is a nuclear deacetylase involved in DNA damage response signaling, inflammation, and metabolism; however, its role in regulating VSMC senescence and atherosclerosis is unclear. OBJECTIVE: We examined SIRT6 expression in human VSMCs, the role, regulation, and downstream pathways activated by SIRT6, and how VSMC SIRT6 regulates atherogenesis. METHODS AND RESULTS: SIRT6 protein, but not mRNA, expression was markedly reduced in VSMCs in human and mouse atherosclerotic plaques, and in human VSMCs derived from plaques or undergoing replicative or palmitate-induced senescence versus healthy aortic VSMCs. The ubiquitin ligase CHIP (C terminus of HSC70-interacting protein) promoted SIRT6 stability, but CHIP expression was reduced in human and mouse plaque VSMCs and by palmitate in a p38- and c-Jun N-terminal kinase-dependent manner. SIRT6 bound to telomeres, while SIRT6 inhibition using shRNA or a deacetylase-inactive mutant (SIRT6(H133Y)) shortened human VSMC lifespan and induced senescence, associated with telomeric H3K9 (histone H3 lysine 9) hyperacetylation and 53BP1 (p53 binding protein 1) binding, indicative of telomere damage. In contrast, SIRT6 overexpression preserved telomere integrity, delayed cellular senescence, and reduced inflammatory cytokine expression and changes in VSMC metabolism associated with senescence. SIRT6, but not SIRT6(H133Y), promoted proliferation and lifespan of mouse VSMCs, and prevented senescence-associated metabolic changes. ApoE(-/-) (apolipoprotein E) mice were generated that overexpress SIRT6 or SIRT6(H133Y) in VSMCs only. SM22alpha-hSIRT6/ApoE(-/-) mice had reduced atherosclerosis, markers of senescence and inflammation compared with littermate controls, while plaques of SM22alpha-hSIRT6(H133Y)/ApoE(-/-) mice showed increased features of plaque instability. CONCLUSIONS: SIRT6 protein expression is reduced in human and mouse plaque VSMCs and is positively regulated by CHIP. SIRT6 regulates telomere maintenance and VSMC lifespan and inhibits atherogenesis, all dependent on its deacetylase activity. Our data show that endogenous SIRT6 deacetylase is an important and unrecognized inhibitor of VSMC senescence and atherosclerosis.
Imatinib (IM) has significantly improved the prognosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) patients, but some patients still have primary resistance to IM, and approximately half of patients develop acquired drug resistance within 2 years of treatment, necessitating exploration of new treatment strategies. Targeting ferroptosis as a novel approach to tumor treatment has gained attention. Yet, there is limited research on ferroptosis in GIST, and the underlying mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we revealed that IM increased lipid reactive oxygen species and intracellular Fe(2+) levels, and decreased glutathione levels in GIST. This effect could be partially inhibited by Ferrostatin-1. Additionally, knocking down STUB1 and overexpressing GPX4 reversed the IM-induced ferroptosis effect. Moreover, STUB1 was identified as a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase of GPX4, promoting the ubiquitination at site K191 of GPX4. The combination of the GPX4 inhibitor RSL3 and IM synergistically induces ferroptosis, inhibiting GIST proliferation both in vivo and in vitro. Furthermore, STUB1 and GPX4 expression serve as independent prognostic factors for GIST. In conclusion, This study is the first to demonstrate that IM induces ferroptosis by promoting STUB1-mediated GPX4 ubiquitination in GIST, and the combination of RSL3 and IM emerges as a promising therapeutic strategy for GIST.
Dominantly inherited spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are associated with phenotypes that range from pure cerebellar to multisystemic. The list of implicated genes has lengthened in the past 5 years with the inclusion of SCA37/DAB1, SCA45/FAT2, SCA46/PLD3, SCA47/PUM1, SCA48/STUB1, SCA50/NPTX1, SCA25/PNPT1, SCA49/SAM9DL, and SCA27B/FGF14. In some patients, co-occurrence of multiple potentially pathogenic variants can explain variable penetrance or more severe phenotypes. Given this extreme clinical and genetic heterogeneity, genome sequencing should become the diagnostic tool of choice but is still not available in many clinical settings. Treatments tested in phase 2 and phase 3 studies, such as riluzole and transcranial direct current stimulation of the cerebellum and spinal cord, have given conflicting results. To enable early intervention, preataxic carriers of pathogenic variants should be assessed with biomarkers, such as neurofilament light chain and brain MRI; these biomarkers could also be used as outcome measures, given that clinical outcomes are not useful in the preataxic phase. The development of bioassays measuring the concentration of the mutant protein (eg, ataxin-3) might facilitate monitoring of target engagement by gene therapies.
Carnitine metabolism is thought to be negatively correlated with the progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the specific molecular mechanism is yet to be fully elucidated. Here, we report that little characterized cysteine-rich protein 1 (CRIP1) is upregulated in HCC and associated with poor prognosis. Moreover, CRIP1 promoted HCC cancer stem-like properties by downregulating carnitine energy metabolism. Mechanistically, CRIP1 interacted with BBOX1 and the E3 ligase STUB1, promoting BBOX1 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, and leading to the downregulation of carnitine. BBOX1 ubiquitination at lysine 240 is required for CRIP1-mediated control of carnitine metabolism and cancer stem-like properties. Further, our data showed that acetylcarnitine downregulation in CRIP1-overexpressing cells decreased beta-catenin acetylation and promoted nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin, thus facilitating cancer stem-like properties. Clinically, patients with higher CRIP1 protein levels had lower BBOX1 levels but higher nuclear beta-catenin levels in HCC tissues. Together, our findings identify CRIP1 as novel upstream control factor for carnitine metabolism and cancer stem-like properties, suggesting targeting of the CRIP1/BBOX1/beta-catenin axis as a promising strategy for HCC treatment.
Metastasis is a major cause of colorectal cancer (CRC) mortality, but its molecular mechanisms are still not fully understood. Here, we show that upregulated DDX39B correlates with liver metastases and aggressive phenotypes in CRC. DDX39B is an independent prognostic factor associated with poor clinical outcome in CRC patients. We demonstrate that Sp1 potently activates DDX39B transcription by directly binding to the GC box of the DDX39B promoter in CRC cells. DDX39B overexpression augments the proliferation, migration, and invasion of CRC cells, while the opposite results are obtained in DDX39B-deficient CRC cells. Mechanistically, DDX39B interacts directly with and stabilizes PKM2 by competitively suppressing STUB1-mediated PKM2 ubiquitination and degradation. Importantly, DDX39B recruits importin alpha5 to accelerate the nuclear translocation of PKM2 independent of ERK1/2-mediated phosphorylation of PKM2, leading to the transactivation of oncogenes and glycolysis-related genes. Consequently, DDX39B enhances glucose uptake and lactate production to activate Warburg effect in CRC. We identify that Arg319 of DDX39B is required for PKM2 binding as well as PKM2 nuclear accumulation and for DDX39B to promote CRC growth and metastasis. In addition, blocking PKM2 nuclear translocation or treatment with glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose efficiently abolishes DDX39B-triggered malignant development in CRC. Taken together, our findings uncover a key role for DDX39B in modulating glycolytic reprogramming and aggressive progression, and implicate DDX39B as a potential therapeutic target in CRC.
Although p53-mediated cell-cycle arrest, senescence, and apoptosis remain critical barriers to cancer development, the emerging role of p53 in cell metabolism, oxidative responses, and ferroptotic cell death has been a topic of great interest. Nevertheless, it is unclear how p53 orchestrates its activities in multiple metabolic pathways into tumor suppressive effects. Here, we identified the SAT1 (spermidine/spermine N(1)-acetyltransferase 1) gene as a transcription target of p53. SAT1 is a rate-limiting enzyme in polyamine catabolism critically involved in the conversion of spermidine and spermine back to putrescine. Surprisingly, we found that activation of SAT1 expression induces lipid peroxidation and sensitizes cells to undergo ferroptosis upon reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced stress, which also leads to suppression of tumor growth in xenograft tumor models. Notably, SAT1 expression is down-regulated in human tumors, and CRISPR-cas9-mediated knockout of SAT1 expression partially abrogates p53-mediated ferroptosis. Moreover, SAT1 induction is correlated with the expression levels of arachidonate 15-lipoxygenase (ALOX15), and SAT1-induced ferroptosis is significantly abrogated in the presence of PD146176, a specific inhibitor of ALOX15. Thus, our findings uncover a metabolic target of p53 involved in ferroptotic cell death and provide insight into the regulation of polyamine metabolism and ferroptosis-mediated tumor suppression.
The dysregulated expression of immune checkpoint molecules enables cancer cells to evade immune destruction. While blockade of inhibitory immune checkpoints like PD-L1 forms the basis of current cancer immunotherapies, a deficiency in costimulatory signals can render these therapies futile. CD58, a costimulatory ligand, plays a crucial role in antitumor immune responses, but the mechanisms controlling its expression remain unclear. Using two systematic approaches, we reveal that CMTM6 positively regulates CD58 expression. Notably, CMTM6 interacts with both CD58 and PD-L1, maintaining the expression of these two immune checkpoint ligands with opposing functions. Functionally, the presence of CMTM6 and CD58 on tumor cells significantly affects T cell-tumor interactions and response to PD-L1-PD-1 blockade. Collectively, these findings provide fundamental insights into CD58 regulation, uncover a shared regulator of stimulatory and inhibitory immune checkpoints, and highlight the importance of tumor-intrinsic CMTM6 and CD58 expression in antitumor immune responses.
The STUB1 gene (STIP1 homology and U-box-containing protein 1), located at 16q13.3, encodes the CHIP (carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein), an essential E3 ligase involved in protein quality control. CHIP comprises three domains: an N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domain, a middle coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal U-box domain. It functions as a co-chaperone for heat shock protein (HSP) via the TPR domain and as an E3 ligase, ubiquitinating substrates through its U-box domain. Numerous studies suggest that STUB1 plays a crucial role in various physiological process, such as aging, autophagy, and bone remodeling. Moreover, emerging evidence has shown that STUB1 can degrade oncoproteins to exert tumor-suppressive functions, and it has recently emerged as a novel player in tumor immunity. This review provides a comprehensive overview of STUB1's role in cancer, including its clinical significance, impact on tumor progression, dual roles, tumor stem cell-like properties, angiogenesis, drug resistance, and DNA repair. In addition, we explore STUB1's functions in immune cell differentiation and maturation, inflammation, autoimmunity, antiviral immune response, and tumor immunity. Collectively, STUB1 represents a promising and valuable therapeutic target in cancer and immunology.
Targeting cancer-specific metabolic processes is a promising therapeutic strategy. Here, this work uses a compound library that directly inhibits metabolic enzymes to screen the potential metabolic targets in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). SHIN1, the specific inhibitor of serine hydroxymethyltransferase 1/2 (SHMT1/2), has a highly specific inhibitory effect on LUAD cells, and this effect depends mainly on the overexpression of SHMT2. This work clarifies that mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MAPK1)-mediated phosphorylation at Ser90 is the key mechanism underlying SHMT2 upregulation in LUAD and that this phosphorylation stabilizes SHMT2 by reducing STIP1 homology and U-box containing protein 1 (STUB1)-mediated ubiquitination and degradation. SHMT2-Ser90 dephosphorylation decreases S-adenosylmethionine levels in LUAD cells, resulting in reduced N(6)-methyladenosine (m(6)A) levels in global RNAs without affecting total protein or DNA methylation. Methylated RNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeRIP-Seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) analyses further demonstrate that SHMT2-Ser90 dephosphorylation accelerates the RNA degradation of oncogenic genes by reducing m(6)A modification, leading to the inhibition of tumorigenesis. Overall, this study elucidates a new regulatory mechanism of SHMT2 during oncogenesis and provides a theoretical basis for targeting SHMT2 as a therapeutic target in LUAD.
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1), a critical component of the glycolytic pathway, relates to the development of various cancers. However, the mechanisms of PGK1 inhibition and physiological significance of PGK1 inhibitors in cancer cells are unclear. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a vital role in tumor growth and progression. Here, we identify a lncRNA LINC00926 that negatively regulates PGK1 expression and predicts good clinical outcome of breast cancer. LINC00926 downregulates PGK1 expression through the enhancement of PGK1 ubiquitination mediated by E3 ligase STUB1. Moreover, hypoxia inhibits LINC00926 expression and activates PGK1 expression largely through FOXO3A. FOXO3A/LINC00926/PGK1 axis regulates breast cancer glycolysis, tumor growth, and lung metastasis both in vitro and in vivo. In breast cancer patients, LINC00926 expression is negatively correlated with PGK1 and positively correlated with FOXO3A expression. Our work established FOXO3A/LINC00926/PGK1 as a critical axis to regulate breast cancer growth and progression. Targeting PGK1 or supplement of LINC00926 or FOXO3A could be potential therapeutic strategies in breast cancer.
The clinical benefit for patients with diverse types of metastatic cancers that has been observed upon blockade of the interaction between PD-1 and PD-L1 has highlighted the importance of this inhibitory axis in the suppression of tumour-specific T-cell responses. Notwithstanding the key role of PD-L1 expression by cells within the tumour micro-environment, our understanding of the regulation of the PD-L1 protein is limited. Here we identify, using a haploid genetic screen, CMTM6, a type-3 transmembrane protein of previously unknown function, as a regulator of the PD-L1 protein. Interference with CMTM6 expression results in impaired PD-L1 protein expression in all human tumour cell types tested and in primary human dendritic cells. Furthermore, through both a haploid genetic modifier screen in CMTM6-deficient cells and genetic complementation experiments, we demonstrate that this function is shared by its closest family member, CMTM4, but not by any of the other CMTM members tested. Notably, CMTM6 increases the PD-L1 protein pool without affecting PD-L1 (also known as CD274) transcription levels. Rather, we demonstrate that CMTM6 is present at the cell surface, associates with the PD-L1 protein, reduces its ubiquitination and increases PD-L1 protein half-life. Consistent with its role in PD-L1 protein regulation, CMTM6 enhances the ability of PD-L1-expressing tumour cells to inhibit T cells. Collectively, our data reveal that PD-L1 relies on CMTM6/4 to efficiently carry out its inhibitory function, and suggest potential new avenues to block this pathway.
Paclitaxel (PTX) is a first-line drug for ovarian cancer (OC) treatment. However, the regulatory mechanism of STUB1 on ferroptosis and PTX resistance in OC remains unclear. Genes and proteins levels were evaluated by RT-qPCR, western blot and IHC. Cell viability and proliferation were measured by CCK-8 and clone formation. The changes of mitochondrial morphology were observed under a transmission electron microscope (TEM). Reactive oxygen species (ROS), iron, malondialdehyde (MDA) and glutathione (GSH) were measured using suitable kits. The interactions among STUB1, HOXB3 and PARK7 were validated using Co-IP, and dual luciferase reporter assay. Our study found that STUB1 was decreased and PARK7 was increased in tumor tissue, especially from chemotherapy resistant ovarian cancer tissue and resistant OC cells. STUB1 overexpression or PARK7 silencing suppressed cell growth and promoted ferroptosis in PTX-resistant OC cells, which was reversed by HOXB3 overexpression. Mechanistically, STUB1 mediated ubiquitination of HOXB3 to inhibit HOXB3 expression, and HOXB3 promoted the transcription of PARK7 by binding to the promoter region of PARK7. Furthermore, STUB1 overexpression or PARK7 silencing suppressed tumor formation in nude mice. In short, STUB1 promoted ferroptosis through regulating HOXB3/PARK7 axis, thereby suppressing chemotherapy resistance in OC.
INTRODUCTION: Biallelic mutations in STUB1, which encodes the E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP, were originally described in association with SCAR16, a rare autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia, so far reported in 16 kindreds. In the last 2 years, a new form of spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA48), associated with heterozygous mutations in the same gene, has been described in 12 kindreds with autosomal dominant inheritance. METHODS: We reviewed molecular and clinical findings of both SCAR16 and SCA48 described patients. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: SCAR16 is characterized by early onset spastic ataxia and a wide disease spectrum, including cognitive dysfunction, hyperkinetic disorders, epilepsy, peripheral neuropathy, and hypogonadism. SCA48 is an adult-onset syndrome characterized by ataxia and cognitive-psychiatric features, variably associated with chorea, parkinsonism, dystonia, and urinary symptoms. SCA48, the last dominant ataxia to be described, could emerge as the most frequent among the SCAs due to conventional mutations. The overlap of several clinical signs between SCAR16 and SCA48 indicates the presence of a continuous clinical spectrum among recessively and dominantly inherited mutations of STUB1. Different kinds of mutations, scattered over the three gene domains, have been found in both disorders. Their pathogenesis and the relationship between SCA48 and SCAR16 remain to be clarified.
Rab22a-NeoF fusion protein has recently been reported as a promising target for osteosarcoma lung metastasis. However, how this fusion protein is regulated in cells remains unknown. Here, using multiple screenings, it is reported that Rab22a-NeoF1 fusion protein is degraded by an E3 ligase STUB1 via the autophagy receptor NDP52-mediated lysosome pathway, which is facilitated by PINK1 kinase. Mechanistically, STUB1 catalyzes the K63-linked ubiquitin chains on lysine112 of Rab22a-NeoF1, which is responsible for the binding of Rab22a-NeoF1 to NDP52, resulting in lysosomal degradation of Rab22a-NeoF1. PINK1 is able to phosphorylate Rab22a-NeoF1 at serine120, which promotes ubiquitination and degradation of Rab22a-NeoF1. Consistently, by upregulating PINK1, Sorafenib and Regorafenib can inhibit osteosarcoma lung metastasis induced by Rab22a-NeoF1. These findings reveal that the lysosomal degradation of Rab22a-NeoF1 fusion protein is targetable for osteosarcoma lung metastasis, proposing that Sorafenib and Regorafenib may benefit cancer patients who are positive for the RAB22A-NeoF1 fusion gene.
Although the best-known spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are triplet repeat diseases, many SCAs are not caused by repeat expansions. The rarity of individual non-expansion SCAs, however, has made it difficult to discern genotype-phenotype correlations. We therefore screened individuals who had been found to bear variants in a non-expansion SCA-associated gene through genetic testing, and after we eliminated genetic groups that had fewer than 30 subjects, there were 756 subjects bearing single-nucleotide variants or deletions in one of seven genes: CACNA1A (239 subjects), PRKCG (175), AFG3L2 (101), ITPR1 (91), STUB1 (77), SPTBN2 (39), or KCNC3 (34). We compared age at onset, disease features, and progression by gene and variant. There were no features that reliably distinguished one of these SCAs from another, and several genes-CACNA1A, ITPR1, SPTBN2, and KCNC3-were associated with both adult-onset and infantile-onset forms of disease, which also differed in presentation. Nevertheless, progression was overall very slow, and STUB1-associated disease was the fastest. Several variants in CACNA1A showed particularly wide ranges in age at onset: one variant produced anything from infantile developmental delay to ataxia onset at 64 years of age within the same family. For CACNA1A, ITPR1, and SPTBN2, the type of variant and charge change on the protein greatly affected the phenotype, defying pathogenicity prediction algorithms. Even with next-generation sequencing, accurate diagnosis requires dialogue between the clinician and the geneticist.
Myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury (MIRI) is involved in the pathogenesis of multiple cardiovascular diseases. This study elucidated the biological function of lysine acetyltransferase 5 (KAT5) in cardiomyocyte pyroptosis during MIRI. Oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation and left anterior descending coronary artery ligation were used to establish MIRI models. Here we show, KAT5 and STIP1 homology and U-box-containing protein 1 (STUB1) were downregulated, while large tumor suppressor kinase 2 (LATS2) was upregulated in MIRI models. KAT5/STUB1 overexpression or LATS2 silencing repressed cardiomyocyte pyroptosis. Mechanistically, KAT5 promoted STUB1 transcription via acetylation modulation, and subsequently caused ubiquitination and degradation of LATS2, which activated YAP/beta-catenin pathway. Notably, the inhibitory effect of STUB1 overexpression on cardiomyocyte pyroptosis was abolished by LATS2 overexpression or KAT5 depletion. Our findings suggest that KAT5 overexpression inhibits NLRP3-mediated cardiomyocyte pyroptosis to relieve MIRI through modulation of STUB1/LATS2/YAP/beta-catenin axis, providing a potential therapeutic target for MIRI.
The association of hypogonadism and cerebellar ataxia was first recognized in 1908 by Gordon Holmes. Since the seminal description, several heterogeneous phenotypes have been reported, differing for age at onset, associated features, and gonadotropins levels. In the last decade, the genetic bases of these disorders are being progressively uncovered. Here, we review the diseases associating ataxia and hypogonadism and the corresponding causative genes. In the first part of this study, we focus on clinical syndromes and genes (RNF216, STUB1, PNPLA6, AARS2, SIL1, SETX) predominantly associated with ataxia and hypogonadism as cardinal features. In the second part, we mention clinical syndromes and genes (POLR3A, CLPP, ERAL1, HARS, HSD17B4, LARS2, TWNK, POLG, ATM, WFS1, PMM2, FMR1) linked to complex phenotypes that include, among other features, ataxia and hypogonadism. We propose a diagnostic algorithm for patients with ataxia and hypogonadism, and we discuss the possible common etiopathogenetic mechanisms.
The carboxy-terminus of Hsc70 interacting protein (CHIP) is known to function as a chaperone associated E3 ligase for several proteins and regulates a variety of physiological processes. Being a connecting link between molecular chaperones and 26S proteasomes, it is widely regarded as the central player in the cellular protein quality control system. Recent analyses have provided new insights on the biochemical and functional dynamics of CHIP. In this review article, we give a comprehensive account of our current knowledge on the biology of CHIP, which apart from shedding light on fundamental biological questions promises to provide a potential target for therapeutic intervention.
