Sodium-dependent serotonin transporter; Serotonin transporter whose primary function in the central nervous system involves the regulation of serotonergic signaling via transport of serotonin molecules from the synaptic cleft back into the pre-synaptic terminal for re-utilization. Plays a key role in mediating regulation of the availability of serotonin to other receptors of serotonergic systems. Terminates the action of serotonin and recycles it in a sodium-dependent manner.
Williams syndrome (WS) is a relatively rare microdeletion disorder that occurs in as many as 1:7,500 individuals. WS arises due to the mispairing of low-copy DNA repetitive elements at meiosis. The deletion size is similar across most individuals with WS and leads to the loss of one copy of 25-27 genes on chromosome 7q11.23. The resulting unique disorder affects multiple systems, with cardinal features including but not limited to cardiovascular disease (characteristically stenosis of the great arteries and most notably supravalvar aortic stenosis), a distinctive craniofacial appearance, and a specific cognitive and behavioural profile that includes intellectual disability and hypersociability. Genotype-phenotype evidence is strongest for ELN, the gene encoding elastin, which is responsible for the vascular and connective tissue features of WS, and for the transcription factor genes GTF2I and GTF2IRD1, which are known to affect intellectual ability, social functioning and anxiety. Mounting evidence also ascribes phenotypic consequences to the deletion of BAZ1B, LIMK1, STX1A and MLXIPL, but more work is needed to understand the mechanism by which these deletions contribute to clinical outcomes. The age of diagnosis has fallen in regions of the world where technological advances, such as chromosomal microarray, enable clinicians to make the diagnosis of WS without formally suspecting it, allowing earlier intervention by medical and developmental specialists. Phenotypic variability is considerable for all cardinal features of WS but the specific sources of this variability remain unknown. Further investigation to identify the factors responsible for these differences may lead to mechanism-based rather than symptom-based therapies and should therefore be a high research priority.
Shiga toxin (Stx) is one of the most potent bacterial toxins known. Stx is found in Shigella dysenteriae 1 and in some serogroups of Escherichia coli (called Stx1 in E. coli). In addition to or instead of Stx1, some E. coli strains produce a second type of Stx, Stx2, that has the same mode of action as Stx/Stx1 but is antigenically distinct. Because subtypes of each toxin have been identified, the prototype toxin for each group is now designated Stx1a or Stx2a. The Stxs consist of two major subunits, an A subunit that joins noncovalently to a pentamer of five identical B subunits. The A subunit of the toxin injures the eukaryotic ribosome and halts protein synthesis in target cells. The function of the B pentamer is to bind to the cellular receptor, globotriaosylceramide, Gb3, found primarily on endothelial cells. The Stxs traffic in a retrograde manner within the cell, such that the A subunit of the toxin reaches the cytosol only after the toxin moves from the endosome to the Golgi and then to the endoplasmic reticulum. In humans infected with Stx-producing E. coli, the most serious manifestation of the disease, hemolytic-uremic syndrome, is more often associated with strains that produce Stx2a rather than Stx1a, and that relative toxicity is replicated in mice and baboons. Stx1a and Stx2a also exhibit differences in cytotoxicity to various cell types, bind dissimilarly to receptor analogs or mimics, induce differential chemokine responses, and have several distinctive structural characteristics.
IMPORTANCE: Autosomal recessive inherited neurodevelopmental disorders are highly heterogeneous, and many, possibly most, of the disease genes are still unknown. OBJECTIVES: To promote the identification of disease genes through confirmation of previously described genes and presentation of novel candidates and provide an overview of the diagnostic yield of exome sequencing in consanguineous families. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Autozygosity mapping in families and exome sequencing of index patients were performed in 152 consanguineous families (the parents descended from a same ancestor) with at least 1 offspring with intellectual disability (ID). The study was conducted from July 1, 2008, to June 30, 2015, and data analysis was conducted from July 1, 2015, to August 31, 2016. RESULTS: Of the 152 consanguineous families enrolled, 1 child (in 45 families [29.6%]) or multiple children (107 families [70.4%]) had ID; additional features were present in 140 of the families (92.1%). The mean (SD) age of the children was 10.3 (9.0) years, and 171 of 297 (57.6%) were male. In 109 families (71.7%), potentially protein-disrupting and clinically relevant variants were identified. Of these, a clear clinical genetic diagnosis was made in 56 families (36.8%) owing to 57 (likely) pathogenic variants in 50 genes already established in neurodevelopmental disorders (46 autosomal recessive, 2 X-linked, and 2 de novo) or in 7 previously proposed recessive candidates. In 5 of these families, potentially treatable disorders were diagnosed (mutations in PAH, CBS, MTHFR, CYP27A1, and HIBCH), and in 1 family, 2 disease-causing homozygous variants in different genes were identified. In another 48 families (31.6%), 52 convincing recessive variants in candidate genes that were not previously reported in regard to neurodevelopmental disorders were identified. Of these, 14 were homozygous and truncating in GRM7, STX1A, CCAR2, EEF1D, GALNT2, SLC44A1, LRRIQ3, AMZ2, CLMN, SEC23IP, INIP, NARG2, FAM234B, and TRAP1. The diagnostic yield was higher in individuals with severe ID (35 of 77 [45.5%]), in multiplex families (42 of 107 [39.3%]), in patients with additional features (30 of 70 [42.9%]), and in those with remotely related parents (15 of 34 [44.1%]). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Because of the high diagnostic yield of 36.8% and the possibility of identifying treatable diseases or the coexistence of several disease-causing variants, using exome sequencing as a first-line diagnostic approach in consanguineous families with neurodevelopmental disorders is recommended. Furthermore, the literature is enriched with 52 convincing candidate genes that are awaiting confirmation in independent families.
Migraine is a common neurological disorder that affects 11% of adults worldwide. This disease most likely has a neurovascular origin. Migraine with aura (MA) and more common form - migraine without aura (MO) - are the two main clinical subtypes of disease. The exact pathomechanism of migraine is still unknown, but it is thought that both genetic and environmental factors are involved in this pathological process. The first genetic studies of migraine were focused on the rare subtype of MA: familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM). The genes analysed in familial and sporadic migraine are: MTHFR, KCNK18, HCRTR1, SLC6A4, STX1A, GRIA1 and GRIA3. It is possible that migraine is a multifactorial disease with polygenic influence.Recent studies have shown that the pathomechanisms of migraine involves both factors responsible for immune response and oxidative stress such as: cytokines, tyrosine metabolism, homocysteine; and factors associated with pain transmission and emotions e.g.: serotonin, hypocretin-1, calcitonin gene-related peptide, glutamate. The correlations between genetic variants of the HCRTR1 gene, the polymorphism 5-HTTLPR and hypocretin-1, and serotonin were observed. It is known that serotonin inhibits the activity of hypocretin neurons and may affect the appearance of the aura during migraine attack.The understanding of the molecular mechanisms of migraine, including genotype-phenotype correlations, may contribute to finding markers important for the diagnosis and treatment of this disease.
The neuronal SNARE complex drives synaptic vesicle exocytosis. Therefore, one of its core proteins syntaxin 1A (STX1A) has long been suspected to play a role in neurodevelopmental disorders. We assembled eight individuals harboring ultra rare variants in STX1A who present with a spectrum of intellectual disability, autism and epilepsy. Causative variants comprise a homozygous splice variant, three de novo missense variants and two inframe deletions of a single amino acid. We observed a phenotype mainly driven by epilepsy in the individuals with missense variants in contrast to intellectual disability and autistic behavior in individuals with single amino acid deletions and the splicing variant. In silico modeling of missense variants and single amino acid deletions show different impaired protein-protein interactions. We hypothesize the two phenotypic courses of affected individuals to be dependent on two different pathogenic mechanisms: (1) a weakened inhibitory STX1A-STXBP1 interaction due to missense variants results in an STX1A-related developmental epileptic encephalopathy and (2) a hampered SNARE complex formation due to inframe deletions causes an STX1A-related intellectual disability and autism phenotype. Our description of a STX1A-related neurodevelopmental disorder with or without epilepsy thus expands the group of rare diseases called SNAREopathies.
Members of the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) family mediate membrane fusion processes associated with vesicular trafficking and autophagy. SNAREs mediate core membrane fusion processes essential for all cells, but some SNAREs serve cell/tissue type-specific exocytic/endocytic functions, and are therefore critical for various aspects of embryonic development. Mutations or variants of their encoding genes could give rise to developmental disorders, such as those affecting the nervous system and immune system in humans. Mutations to components in the canonical synaptic vesicle fusion SNARE complex (VAMP2, STX1A/B, and SNAP25) and a key regulator of SNARE complex formation MUNC18-1, produce variant phenotypes of autism, intellectual disability, movement disorders, and epilepsy. STX11 and MUNC18-2 mutations underlie 2 subtypes of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. STX3 mutations contribute to variant microvillus inclusion disease. Chromosomal microdeletions involving STX16 play a role in pseudohypoparathyroidism type IB associated with abnormal imprinting of the GNAS complex locus. In this short review, I discuss these and other SNARE gene mutations and variants that are known to be associated with a variety developmental disorders, with a focus on their underlying cellular and molecular pathological basis deciphered through disease modeling. Possible pathogenic potentials of other SNAREs whose variants could be disease predisposing are also speculated upon.
Multiple biological processes throughout development require intracellular vesicular trafficking, where the SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein (SNAP) receptors) complex plays a major role. The core proteins forming the SNARE complex are SNAP-25 (synaptosomal-associated protein 25), VAMP (vesicle-associated membrane protein) and Syntaxins, besides its regulatory proteins, such as Synaptotagmin. Genes encoding these proteins (SNAP25, VAMP1, VAMP2, STX1A, SYT1 and SYT2) have been studied in relation to psychiatric disorders susceptibility. Here, we review physiological aspects of SNARE complex and genetic association results reported for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, both in children and adults, autism spectrum disorders, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Moreover, we included findings from expression, pharmacogenetics and animal model studies regarding these clinical phenotypes. The overall scenario depicted here suggests that the SNARE complex may exert distinct roles throughout development, with age-specific effects of genetic variants in psychiatric disorders. Such perspective should be considered in future studies regarding SNARE complex genes.
Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) are the human pathogenic subset of Shiga toxin (Stx)-producing E. coli (STEC). EHEC are responsible for severe colon infections associated with life-threatening extraintestinal complications such as the hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) and neurological disturbances. Endothelial cells in various human organs are renowned targets of Stx, whereas the role of epithelial cells of colon and kidneys in the infection process has been and is still a matter of debate. This review shortly addresses the clinical impact of EHEC infections, novel aspects of vesicular package of Stx in the intestine and the blood stream as well as Stx-mediated extraintestinal complications and therapeutic options. Here follows a compilation of the Stx-binding glycosphingolipids (GSLs), globotriaosylceramide (Gb3Cer) and globotetraosylceramide (Gb4Cer) and their various lipoforms present in primary human kidney and colon epithelial cells and their distribution in lipid raft-analog membrane preparations. The last issues are the high and extremely low susceptibility of primary renal and colonic epithelial cells, respectively, suggesting a large resilience of the intestinal epithelium against the human-pathogenic Stx1a- and Stx2a-subtypes due to the low content of the high-affinity Stx-receptor Gb3Cer in colon epithelial cells. The review closes with a brief outlook on future challenges of Stx research.
Williams syndrome (WS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by a microdeletion in the q11.23 region of chromosome 7. Recent case series reports and clinical case studies have suggested that the cognitive, behavioral, emotional, and social profile in WS could depend on the genes involved in the deletion. The objective of this systematic review was to analyze and synthesize the variability of the cognitive and behavioral profile of WS with atypical deletion and its probable relationship with the affected genes. The medical subject headings searched were "Williams syndrome," "genotype," "phenotype," "cognitive profile," and "atypical deletion." The studies included were in English or Spanish, with children and adults, and published between January 2000 and October 2022. Twenty-three studies are reported. The characteristics of the participants, the genes involved, the neuropsychological domains and instruments, and the prevalence of the WS cognitive profile criteria were used for the genotype-phenotype analysis. The genes with a major impact on the cognitive profile of WS were (a) LIMK1 and those belonging to the GTF2I family, the former with a greater influence on visuospatial abilities; (b) GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I, which have an impact on intellectual capacity as well as on visuospatial and social skills; (c) FZD9, BAZ1B, STX1A, and CLIP2, which influence the cognitive profile if other genes are also effected; and (d) GTF2IRD2, which is related to the severity of the effect on visuospatial and social skills, producing a behavioral phenotype like that of the autism spectrum. The review revealed four neuropsychological phenotypes, depending on the genes involved, and established the need for more comprehensive study of the neuropsychological profile of these patients. Based on the results found, we propose a model for the investigation of and clinical approach to the WS neuropsychological phenotype.
Genes associated with specific neurocognitive phenotypes in Williams-Beuren syndrome are still controversially discussed. This study identified nine patients with atypical deletions out of 111 patients with Williams-Beuren syndrome; these deletions included seven smaller deletions and two larger deletions. One patient had normal neurodevelopment with a deletion of genes on the distal side of the Williams-Beuren syndrome chromosomal region, including GTF2I and GTF2IRD1. However, another patient retained these genes but showed neurodevelopmental abnormalities. By comparing the genotypes and phenotypes of patients with typical and atypical deletions and previous reports in the literature, we hypothesize that the BAZ1B, FZD9, and STX1A genes may play an important role in the neurodevelopment of patients with WBS.
INTRODUCTION: "Common epilepsies", merely explored for genetics are the most frequent, nonfamilial, sporadic cases in hospitals. Because of their much debated molecular pathology, there is a need to focus on other neuronal pathways including the existing ion channels. METHODS: For this study, a total of 214 epilepsy cases of North Indian ethnicity comprising 59.81% generalized, 40.19% focal seizures, and based on epilepsy types, 17.29% idiopathic, 37.38% cryptogenic, and 45.33% symptomatic were enrolled. Additionally, 170 unrelated healthy individuals were also enrolled. Here, we hypothesize the involvement of epilepsy pathophysiology genes, that is, synaptic vesicle cycle, SVC genes (presynapse), ion channels and their functionally related genes (postsynapse). An interactive analysis was initially performed in SVC genes using multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR). Further, in order to understand the influence of ion channels and their functionally related genes, their interaction analysis with SVC genes was also performed. RESULTS: A significant interactive two-locus model of STX1A_rs4363087|VAMP2_rs2278637 (presynaptic genes) was observed among SVC variants in all epilepsy cases (P 1000-value = 0.054; CVC = 9/10; OR = 2.86, 95%CI = 1.88-4.35). Further, subgroup analysis revealed stronger interaction for the same model in cryptogenic epilepsy patients only (P 1000-value = 0.012; CVC = 10/10; OR = 4.59, 95%CI = 2.57-8.22). However, interactive analysis of presynaptic and postsynaptic genes did not show any significant association. CONCLUSIONS: Significant synergistic interaction of SVC genes revealed the possible functional relatedness of presynapse with pathophysiology of cryptogenic epilepsy. Further, to establish the clinical utility of the results, replication in a large and similar phenotypic group of patients is warranted.
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) interacts with multiple N-ethylmaleimide sensitive factor attachment protein (SNARE) molecules largely via its N-terminal cytoplasmic domain. The earliest known among these SNAREs are the cognate Q-SNARE pair of Syntaxin 1A (STX1A) and SNAP23 on the plasma membrane. These SNAREs affect CFTR chloride channel gating. CFTR exocytosis/recycling in intestinal epithelial cells is dependent on another SNARE located in the apical plasma membrane, STX3. Members of the STX8/STX7/vesicle transport through interaction with t-SNAREs homolog 1b/VAMP8 SNARE complex, which function in early to late endosome/lysosome traffic, are all known to interact with CFTR. Two SNAREs, STX6 and STX16 that function at the trans-Golgi network (TGN), have now been revealed as members of the CFTR SNARE interactome. We summarize here the SNAREs that interact with CFTR and discuss the roles of these SNAREs in the intracellular trafficking of CFTR and CFTR-associated pathophysiology.
Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) is a foodborne zoonotic pathogen that causes diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis (HC), and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) worldwide. Since the infection can be asymptomatic, the circulation of STEC in some asymptomatic carriers, especially in healthy-food-related professionals, is not yet well understood. In this study, a total of 3987 anal swab samples from asymptomatic food handlers were collected, and ten swabs recovered STEC strains (0.251%). Of the ten STEC isolates, seven serotypes and eight sequence types (ST) were determined using whole genome sequencing (WGS). Two stx1 subtypes (stx1a and stx1c) and four stx2 subtypes (stx2a, stx2b, stx2d, and stx2e) were detected. Seven different insertion sites were found in fourteen Stx prophages, and the dmsB and yfhL were the newly identified insertion sites. The ten strains showed the variable Stx transcription levels after the mitomycin C induction. The whole-genome phylogeny indicated that the strains from the asymptomatic food handlers were genetically distant from the strains of HUS patients. The STEC isolates circulating in asymptomatic carriers might pose a low potential to cause disease.
The neuronal loss caused by excessive glutamate release, or 'excitotoxicity', leads to several pathological conditions, including cerebral ischemia, epilepsy, and neurodegenerative diseases. Over-stimulation of presynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors is known to trigger and support glutamate spillover, while postsynaptic NMDA receptors are responsible for the subsequent apoptotic cascade. Almost all molecules developed so far are unable to selectively block presynaptic or postsynaptic NMDA receptors, therefore a deeper knowledge about intracellular NMDA pathways is required to design more specific inhibitors. Our previous work showed that presynaptic c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2 (JNK2) specifically regulates NMDA-evoked glutamate release and here we demonstrate that an interaction between Syntaxin-1a and JNK2 is fundamental to this mechanism. Based on this evidence, a new cell permeable peptide (CPP), "JGRi1", has been developed to disrupt the JNK2/STX1a interaction to indirectly, but specifically, inhibit presynaptic NMDA receptor signaling. JGRi1 reduces the NMDA-evoked release of glutamate both in in-vitro and ex-vivo experiments while also being able to widely diffuse throughout brain tissue via intraperitoneal administration. In conclusion, the JNK2/STX1 interaction is involved in presynaptic NMDA-evoked glutamate release and the novel CPP, JGRi1, acts as a pharmacological tool that promotes neuroprotection.
Shiga toxin (Stx)-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) causes foodborne outbreaks of bloody diarrhea. There are two major types of immunologically distinct Stxs: Stx1a and Stx2a. Stx1a is more cytotoxic to Vero cells than Stx2a, but Stx2a has a lower 50% lethal dose (LD(50)) in mice. Epidemiological data suggest that infections by STEC strains that produce only Stx2a progress more often to a life-threatening sequela of infection called hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) than isolates that make Stx1a only or produce both Stx1a and Stx2a. In this study, we found that an E. coli O26:H11 strain that produces both Stx1a and Stx2a was virulent in streptomycin- and ciprofloxacin-treated mice and that mice were protected by administration of an anti-Stx2 antibody. However, we discovered that in the absence of ciprofloxacin, neutralization of Stx1a enhanced the virulence of the strain, a result that corroborated our previous finding that Stx1a reduces the toxicity of Stx2a by the oral route. We further found that intraperitoneal administration of the purified Stx1a B subunit delayed the mean time to death of mice intoxicated with Stx2a and reduced the cytotoxic effect of Stx2a on Vero cells. Taken together, our data suggest that Stx1a reduces both the pathogenicity of Stx2 in vivo and cytotoxicity in vitro.
Autism is a pervasive developmental disorder diagnosed in early childhood. Abnormalities of serotonergic neurotransmission have been reported in autism. Serotonin transporter (5-HTT), which modulates serotonin levels, is a major therapeutic target in autism. Therefore, factors that regulate 5-HTT expression might be implicated in autism. One candidate 5-HTT-regulatory protein is the presynaptic protein, syntaxin 1A (STX1A). We examined the association of STX1A with autism in a trio association study using DNA samples from Japanese trios with autistic probands. In TDT analysis, rs69510130 (p=0.027) showed nominal associations with autism; modest haplotype association was also observed. We further compared STX1A mRNA expression between the autistic and control groups in the postmortem brain. In the anterior cingulate gyrus region, STX1A expression in the autism group was found to be significantly lower than that of the control group. Thus, we suggest a possible role of STX1A in the pathogenesis of autism.
AIMS: Reduced expression of exocytotic genes is associated with functional defects in insulin exocytosis contributing to impaired insulin secretion and type 2 diabetes (T2D) development. MAFA and MAFB transcription factors regulate beta-cell physiology, and their gene expression is reduced in T2D beta cells. We investigate if loss of MAFA and MAFB in human beta cells contributes to T2D progression by regulating genes required for insulin exocytosis. METHODS: Three approaches were performed: (1) RNAseq analysis with the focus on exocytosis-related genes in MafA(-/-) mouse islets, (2) correlational analysis between MAFA, MAFB and exocytosis-related genes in human islets and (3) MAFA and MAFB silencing in human islets and EndoC-betaH1 cells followed by functional in vitro studies. RESULTS: The expression of 30 exocytosis-related genes was significantly downregulated in MafA(-/-) mouse islets. In human islets, the expression of 29 exocytosis-related genes correlated positively with MAFA and MAFB. Eight exocytosis-related genes were downregulated in MafA(-/-) mouse islets and positively correlated with MAFA and MAFB in human islets. From this analysis, the expression of RAB3A, STXBP1, UNC13A, VAMP2, NAPA, NSF, STX1A and SYT7 was quantified after acute MAFA or MAFB silencing in EndoC-betaH1 cells and human islets. MAFA and MAFB silencing resulted in impaired insulin secretion and reduced STX1A, SYT7 and STXBP1 (EndoC-betaH1) and STX1A (human islets) mRNA expression. STX1A and STXBP1 protein expression was also impaired in islets from T2D donors which lack MAFA expression. CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that STXBP1 and STX1A are important MAFA/B-regulated exocytosis genes which may contribute to insulin exocytosis defects observed in MAFA-deficient human T2D beta cells.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the association of genetic variants in the syntaxin 1A gene (STX1A) with common forms of migraine, and perform a combined analysis of the data from the current study and previously published reports. METHODS: We investigated the parent-to-offspring transmission of rs6951030, rs4363087 and rs2293489 in 191 family trios, each with a proband with childhood-onset migraine, and performed a case-control analysis between the probands and 223 unrelated controls. In addition, we performed a combined data analysis with an overall sample of 567 migraine patients and 720 unrelated controls and performed a migraine-specific gene-network analysis. RESULTS: The transmission disequilibrium test revealed significant transmission distortion of rs4363087 in migraine overall (OR = 1.56, p = 0.006; p = 0.01 after correction for multiple testing) and migraine without aura (OR = 1.58, p = 0.01; corrected p = 0.04). Two-marker haplotype analysis revealed transmission distortion of A-G (rs6951030-rs4363087; OR = 1.47, p = 0.01) and A-C (rs4363087-rs2293489; OR = 0.66, p = 0.01). Combined analysis showed significant association of rs941298 with migraine overall (OR = 1.28, p = 0.004) and migraine without aura (OR = 1.3, p = 0.008). Network analysis identified 24 genes relating STX1A to other migraine candidate genes, including KCNK18 (TRESK channel) involved in the cytoplasmatic calcium signalling together with syntaxin 1A. CONCLUSION: Our results provide support for the hypothesis that STX1A represents a susceptibility gene for migraine.
It was presumed syntaxin-1A (STX1A) might relate to the pathophysiology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), but the results were inconsistent. The present study aims to confirm whether the STX1A gene is involved in the susceptibility of children ADHD. We genotyped three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of STX1A gene using Sequenom MassARRAY technology. A case-control study was performed among Chinese Han population including 754 cases and 772 controls from two different provinces. The Conners Parent Symptom Questionnaire and Integrated Visual and Auditory Continuous Performance Test were used to assess ADHD clinical symptoms. We found for the first time that rs3793243 GG genotype carriers had a lower risk of ADHD compared with AA genotype (OR 0.564, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.406-0.692, P = 0.001), and rs875342 was also associated with children ADHD (OR 1.806, 95% CI 1.349-2.591, P = 0.001). In addition, the two positive SNPs were also significantly associated with the clinical characteristics of ADHD. Expression quantitative trait loci analysis indicated that rs3793243 might mediate STX1A gene expression. Using a case-control study to explore the association between STX1A gene and children ADHD in Chinese Han population, our results suggest STX1A genetic variants might contribute to the susceptibility of children ADHD.
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli (STEC) and enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) strains are food-borne pathogens associated with acute diarrhea. Haemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) is often a complication of STEC infection. In order to examine the occurrence, serotypes, virulence and antimicrobial-resistance profiles of STEC and EPEC in wildlife, 326 faecal E. coli strains from 304 clinically healthy animals were analyzed. For this approach stx(1), stx(2) and eae genes, as well as accessory virulence determinants (ehx, hlyA, saa, tia, bfp, subAB) were PCR-screened and sequenced. Serotyping was performed employing all available O (O1-O185) and H (H1-H56) antisera. Genetic diversity was analyzed by XbaI-PFGE and phylotyping. Thirteen STEC (4.3%) and 10 EPEC (3.3%) were identified among 12 deer, 3 mouflon, 6 wild boars and 2 birds. Nine STEC showed seropathotypes B (O145:[H28]) and C (O22:H8, O128:[H2]) associated with HUS, and D (O110:H28, O146:H21, O146:[H28], ONT:H8) associated with human diarrhea. Although most isolates harbored stx(2b) and stx(1c) variants, stx(2a) and stx(1a) (related with severe disease) were also detected. Additionally, the eae gene was present in one stx(2a)-positive O145:[H28] STEC from a deer and 11 STEC harbored subAB genes (mainly the subAB(2) variant). EPEC isolates showed 7 different intimin variants (beta1, beta2, gamma1, epsilon1, zeta1, iota1-A, kappa). Interestingly, the O49:[H10] eae-kappa EPEC isolated from a wild boar was bfpA-positive showing a combination of serotype/virulence profile previously detected among human clinical tEPEC. Based on present results, wild ruminants, wild boars and to a lesser extent birds would be carriers of potentially pathogenic STEC and EPEC strains.
