Tyrosine-protein kinase STYK1; Probable tyrosine protein-kinase, which has strong transforming capabilities on a variety of cell lines. When overexpressed, it can also induce tumor cell invasion as well as metastasis in distant organs. May act by activating both MAP kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinases (PI3K) pathways (By similarity).
The serine/threonine/tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1) is a receptor protein-tyrosine kinase (RPTK)-like molecule that is detected in several human organs. STYK1 plays an important role in promoting tumorigenesis and metastasis in various cancers. By analyzing the expression of RTKs in immune cells in the database of 2013 Immunological Genome Project, we found that STYK1 was principally expressed in NK cells. In order to investigate the function of STYK1, we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to generate STYK1-deleted mice, we found STYK1 deletion mice have normal number, development, and function of NK cells in spleen and bone marrow in tumor-free resting state. To examine the tumor surveillance of STYK1 in vivo, we utilized a variety of tumor models, including NK cell-specific target cell (ss2M and RMA-S) clearance experiments in vivo, subcutaneous and intravenous injection of B16F10 melanoma model, and the spontaneous breast cancer model MMTV-PyMT. Surprisingly, we discovered that deletion of the oncogenic STYK1 promoted the four-model tumor progression, and we observed a reduction of NK cell accumulation in the tumor tissues of STYK1 deletion mice compared to WT mice. In order to study the mechanism of STYK1 in NK, RNA sequence of STYK1(-/-) and WT NK have unveiled a disparity in the signaling pathways linked to migration and adhesion in STYK1(-/-) NK cells. Further analysis of chemokine receptors associated with NK cell migration revealed that STYK1-deficient NK cells exhibited a significant reduction in CCR2 expression. The STYK1 expression was negatively associated with tumor progression in glioma patients. Overall, our study found the expression of STYK1 in NK cell mediates NK cell anti-tumor response through regulating CCR2 and infiltrating into tumor tissue.
BACKGROUND: Aberrant expression of serine threonine tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1) has been reported in several human malignancies including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the prognostic significance of STYK1 expression in CRC remains unknown. METHODS: STYK1 protein expression in paraffin-embedded CRC specimens was determined immunohistochemically. The correlation of STYK1 expression with clinicopathologic features was assessed in a cohort containing 353 patients with primary CRC. Kaplan-Meier and Cox proportional regression analyses were used to evaluate the association between STYK1 expression and patients' survival. RESULTS: STYK1 expression was frequently up-regulated in CRC clinical samples at the protein levels and was significantly associated with tumor differentiation grade (p = 0.030), lymph node metastasis (p = 0.004), TNM stage (p = 0.007) and patient death (p < 0.001). Kaplan-Meier analysis indicated that patients with high intratumoral STYK1 expression had a significantly shorter disease-specific survival (DSS) than those with low expression (p < 0.001). Importantly, high levels of STYK1 protein predicted poor DSS for both stage II (p < 0.001) and stage III (p = 0.004) patients. Furthermore, multivariate analyses revealed that STYK1 protein expression was an independent prognostic indicator for both stage II (hazard ratio [HR], 2.472; p = 0.001) and stage III (HR, 2.001; p = 0.004) patients. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that increased STYK1 protein expression correlates with disease progression and metastasis and may serve as a predictor of poor survival in CRC.
Serine Threonine Tyrosine Kinase 1 (STYK1) presents oncogenic properties in many studies, and emerging evidence suggests that ferroptosis serve as a novel tumor suppressor. However, the interplay between STYK1 and ferroptosis in NSCLC remains unclear. Our aim is to illustrate the expression of ferroptotic regulator Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) in NSCLC and the relationship between STYK1 and ferroptosis. Herein, results based on ONCOMINE database, clinical specimens, and cellular manipulation revealed GPX4 was upregulated in NSCLC tissues and cell lines, and high GPX4 expression predicted worse prognosis. High STYK1 expression predicted worse OS and was related to high GPX4 in NSCLC tissues; overexpression of STYK1 in lung cancer cell line SW900 upregulated the expression of GPX4, promoted proliferation, and attenuated diverse mitochondrial abnormalities specific to ferroptosis, whereas knockdown of GPX4 exacerbated such attenuations without affecting cell proliferation. Taken together, ferroptosis as an anti-tumor factor is inhibited in NSCLC, and targeting ferroptosis could be a novel therapeutic strategy for the management of NSCLC; furthermore, regulating ferroptosis could be another cancerous mechanism of STYK1.
STYK1/NOK functions in a ligand independent and constitutive fashion to provoke tumor formation and to be up-regulated in many types of cancer cells. However, how STYK1/NOK functions at the whole animal level is completely unknown. Here, we found that STYK1/NOK-transgenic (tg) mice spontaneously developed immunosuppressive B-CLL-like disease with generally shorter life spans. The phenotype of STYK1/NOK-induced B-CLL was typically heterogeneous, and most often, presented lymphadenectasis accompanied with hepatomegaly and/or splenomegaly. STYK1/NOK-tg mice also suffered reduced immune responses. The expanded CD5(+)CD19(+) (B1) lymphocyte pool was detected within peripheral lymphoid organs. Analysis on GEO profile revealed that expression of STYK1/NOK were significantly up-regulated in primary human B-CLL. Inoculation of blood cells from sick STYK1/NOK-tg mice into immune-deficient recipients recaptured the B1 malignant phenotype. Our study demonstrated that STYK1/NOK transgenic mouse may serve as a useful model system for the developments of novel diagnosis and treatment of B-CLL.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer deaths worldwide. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying NSCLC progression remains not fully understood. In this study, 347 patients with complete clinicopathologic characteristics who underwent NSCLC surgery were recruited for the investigation. We verified that elevated serine threonine tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1) or decreased serine peptidase inhibitor Kunitz type 2 (SPINT2/HAI-2) expression significantly correlated with poor prognosis, tumor invasion, and metastasis of NSCLC patients. STYK1 overexpression promoted NSCLC cells proliferation, migration, and invasion. STYK1 also induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition by E-cadherin downregulation and Snail upregulation. Moreover, RNA-seq, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), and western blot analyses confirmed that STYK1 overexpression significantly decreased the SPINT2 level in NSCLC cells, and SPINT2 overexpression obviously reversed STYK1-mediated NSCLC progression both in vitro and in vivo. Further survival analyses showed that NSCLC patients with high STYK1 level and low SPINT2 level had the worst prognosis and survival. These results indicated that STYK1 facilitated NSCLC progression via reducing SPINT2 expression. Therefore, targeting STYK1 and SPINT2 may be a novel therapeutic strategy for NSCLC.
BACKGROUND: Although highly heritable, few genes have been linked to spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (SICH), which does not currently have any evidence-based disease-modifying therapy. Individuals of African ancestry are especially susceptible to SICH, even more so for indigenous Africans. We systematically reviewed the genetic variants associated with SICH and examined opportunities for rapidly advancing SICH genomic research for precision medicine. METHOD: We searched the National Human Genome Research Institute-European Bioinformatics Institute (NHGRI-EBI) Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS) catalog and PubMed for original research articles on genetic variants associated with SICH as of 15 June 2019 using the PRISMA guideline. RESULTS: Eight hundred and sixty-four articles were identified using pre-specified search criteria, of which 64 met the study inclusion criteria. Among eligible articles, only 9 utilized GWAS approach while the rest were candidate gene studies. Thirty-eight genetic loci were found to be variously associated with the risk of SICH, hematoma volume, functional outcome and mortality, out of which 8 were from GWAS including APOE, CR1, KCNK17, 1q22, CETP, STYK1, COL4A2 and 17p12. None of the studies included indigenous Africans. CONCLUSION: Given this limited information on the genetic contributors to SICH, more genomic studies are needed to provide additional insights into the pathophysiology of SICH, and develop targeted preventive and therapeutic strategies. This call for additional investigation of the pathogenesis of SICH is likely to yield more discoveries in the unexplored indigenous African populations which also have a greater predilection.
Macroautophagy/autophagy plays key roles in development, oncogenesis, and cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. Autophagy-specific class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complex I (PtdIns3K-C1) is essential for autophagosome formation. However, the regulation of this complex formation requires further investigation. Here, we discovered that STYK1 (serine/threonine/tyrosine kinase 1), a member of the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) family, is a new upstream regulator of autophagy. We discovered that STYK1 facilitated autophagosome formation in human cells and zebrafish, which was characterized by elevated LC3-II and lowered SQSTM1/p62 levels and increased puncta formation by several marker proteins, such as ATG14, WIPI1, and ZFYVE1. Moreover, we observed that STYK1 directly binds to the PtdIns3K-C1 complex as a homodimer. The binding with this complex was promoted by Tyr191 phosphorylation, by means of which the kinase activity of STYK1 was elevated. We also demonstrated that STYK1 elevated the serine phosphorylation of BECN1, thereby decreasing the interaction between BECN1 and BCL2. Furthermore, we found that STYK1 preferentially facilitated the assembly of the PtdIns3K-C1 complex and was required for PtdIns3K-C1 complex kinase activity. Taken together, our findings provide new insights into autophagy induction and reveal evidence of novel crosstalk between the components of RTK signaling and autophagy. Abbreviations: AICAR: 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide; AMPK: adenosine 5'-monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase; ATG: autophagy related; ATP: adenosine triphosphate; BCL2: BCL2 apoptosis regulator; BECN1: beclin 1; Bre A: brefeldin A; Co-IP: co-immunoprecipitation; CRISPR: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats; DAPI: 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; EBSS: Earle's balanced salt solution; GAPDH: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GFP: green fluorescent protein; GSEA: gene set enrichment analysis; MAP1LC3/LC3, microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAPK8/JNK1: mitogen-activated protein kinase 8; mRFP: monomeric red fluorescent protein; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; MTT: 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; PIK3C3: phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PIK3R4: phosphoinositide-3-kinase regulatory subunit 4; qRT-PCR: quantitative reverse transcription PCR; RACK1: receptor for activated C kinase 1; RUBCN: rubicon autophagy regulator; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; STYK1/NOK: serine/threonine/tyrosine kinase 1; TCGA: The Cancer Genome Atlas; Ub: ubiquitin; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; UVRAG: UV radiation resistance associated; WIPI1: WD repeat domain, phosphoinositide interacting 1; ZFYVE1: zinc finger FYVE-type containing 1.
OBJECTIVE: Alterations in gene expression levels or mutations of previously reported tyrosine kinases are detected in only limited numbers of patients with acute leukemia. In this study, we examined whether serine threonine tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1)/novel oncogene with kinase domain (NOK) is overexpressed in patients with acute leukemia. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In peripheral blood cells from nonleukemic group and acute leukemic patients, STYK1/NOK messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was analyzed by quantitaive reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. The effect of inhibition of STYK1/NOK mRNA on the leukemic cells was also examined. RESULTS: When appropriate, cutoff was set using the values in nonleukemic individuals, positive STYK1/NOK expression was detected in 80.0% of leukemic patients. STYK1/NOK mRNA was highly expressed in the patients with trisomy/tetrasomy 21. mRNA expression began to decrease after chemotherapy with various drugs; this resulted in a decrease in the number of leukemic blasts in the patients' peripheral blood samples. Such changes in the gene expression were also noted in promyelocytic leukemia (M3) patients treated with all-trans retinoic acid. In addition, transfection of small inhibitory RNA against the STYK1/NOK gene into K562 cells inhibited their growth in proportion to the decrease in the mRNA expression. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that STYK1/NOK mRNA is widely expressed in the patients with acute leukemia and suggest that inhibition of this molecule could potentially serve as a novel therapeutic target.
Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) has been reported to be the second most common primary hepatic carcinoma worldwide, and very limited therapies are currently available. Serine threonine tyrosine kinase (STYK1), a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase family, exhibits tumorigenicity in many types of cancers and is a potential therapeutic target for ICC. In this study, STYK1 was knocked down in the ICC cell lines HCCC-9810 and RBE via a lentivirus-mediated system using short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Next, cell proliferation, colony formation, cell cycle progression, tumor formation in nude mice, migration and invasion, and the expression levels of cell cycle proteins in Lv-sh STYK1- or Lv-sh Con-infected cells were analyzed by CCK-8 assay, colony formation evaluation, flow cytometry, tumor formation evaluation, wound scratch assay, transwell assay, and western blotting. The results indicated that depletion of STYK1 inhibits ICC development both in vitro and in vivo.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to uncover the expression characteristic and biological function of STYK1 in the progression of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC), and to explore the underlying mechanism. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Expression level of STYK1 in 44 paired LSCC and adjacent normal tissues was detected by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The relationship between STYK1 level and clinical parameters of LSCC patients was analyzed. Subsequently, the regulatory effect of STYK1 on the proliferative ability of AMC-HN-8 and Hep-2 cells was evaluated by cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay and colony formation assay. Dual-Luciferase reporter gene assay and rescue experiments were conducted to uncover the role of STYK1/TGF-beta1 axis in regulating the progression of LSCC. RESULTS: STYK1 was significantly up-regulated in LSCC tissues than that of adjacent normal tissues (p<0.05). LSCC patients with high expression level of STYK1 exhibited significantly higher clinical stage and lower survival rate (p<0.05). Knockdown of STYK1 remarkably attenuated viability and clonality in Hep-2 cells, while overexpression of STYK1 achieved the opposite trends in AMC-HN-8 cells (p<0.05). TGF-beta1 was confirmed to be the direct target binding STYK1, whose expression level was negatively regulated by STYK1. TGF-beta1 was significantly down-regulated in LSCC tissues  (p<0.05). Meanwhile, its low expression predicted significantly poor prognosis of LSCC patients. In addition, TGF-beta1 was responsible for STYK1-regulated malignant progression of LSCC. CONCLUSIONS: STYK1 is upregulated in LSCC and is closely associated with T stage and poor prognosis. Furthermore, STYK1 promotes the proliferative ability of LSCC cells through targeting TGF-beta1, thus aggravating the malignant progression of LSCC.
Gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) is the most common malignancy of the biliary tract with extremely poor prognosis. The malignant transformation of GBC is associated with cell proliferation, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying GBC progression are poorly understood. We found that serine threonine tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1) was elevated in GBC and was negatively correlated with clinical outcomes and prognosis. Overexpression of STYK1 in GBC cell lines gave rise to increased cell proliferation, colony formation, migration and invasion, thus committing cells to undergoing EMT. In contrast, silence of STYK1 led to opposite effects on cell transformation. Consistent with STYK1 gene knockdown, AKT specific inhibitor MK2206 abrogated tumor promoting action induced by STYK1, suggesting that PI3K/AKT pathway is essential for the oncogenic role of STYK1 in GBC. STYK1 shRNA in GBC cells inhibited development of xenografted tumors compared with control cells. Collectively, our findings suggest that STYK1 is a critical regulator of tumor growth and metastasis, and may serve as a potential target for GBC therapy.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring activating mutations in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) are sensitive to therapy with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). Despite remarkable clinical responses using EGFR TKI, surviving drug tolerant cells serve as a reservoir from which drug resistant tumors may emerge. This study addresses the need for improved efficacy of EGFR TKI by identifying targets involved in functional drug tolerance against them. To this aim, a high-throughput siRNA kinome screen was performed using two EGFR TKI-sensitive EGFR-mutant NSCLC cell lines in the presence/absence of the second-generation EGFR TKI afatinib. From the screen, Serine/Threonine/Tyrosine Kinase 1 (STYK1) was identified as a target that when downregulated potentiates the effects of EGFR inhibition in vitro. We found that chemical inhibition of EGFR combined with the siRNA-mediated knockdown of STYK1 led to a significant decrease in cancer cell viability and anchorage-independent cell growth. Further, we show that STYK1 selectively interacts with mutant EGFR and that the interaction is disrupted upon EGFR inhibition. Finally, we identified fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1) as a downstream effector of STYK1 in NSCLC cells. Accordingly, downregulation of STYK1 counteracted the afatinib-induced upregulation of FGF1. Altogether, we unveil STYK1 as a valuable target to repress the pool of surviving drug tolerant cells arising upon EGFR inhibition. Co-targeting of EGFR and STYK1 could lead to a better overall outcome for NSCLC patients.
Serine/threonine/tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1) is known to be involved in tumor progression. However, its molecular role and mechanism in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unknown. We evaluated the effect of STYK1 expression in HCC tissues and investigated the underlying mechanisms associated with progression. HCC tissues expressed greater levels of STYK1 than paired non-tumor tissues. Patients with HCC expressing low levels of STYK1 showed both, greater disease-free (p < 0.0001) and overall (p = 0.0004) survival than those expressing high levels of STYK1. Decreased expression of STYK1 was significantly associated with decreased cell proliferation, reduced migratory capability, and reduced invasive capability. Overexpression of STYK1 was significantly associated with increased cell proliferation, migratory capability, and invasive capability in vitro, as well as increased volume of tumor, weight of tumor, and number of pulmonary metastases in vivo. Furthermore, STYK1's mechanism of promoting cancer cell mobility and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was found to be via the MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways, resulting in increased expression of mesenchymal protein markers: snail, fibronectin, and vimentin, and decreased E-cadherin expression. Our results suggest that STYK1 acts as an oncogene by inducing cell invasion and EMT via the MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways and it therefore may be a potential therapeutic target in HCC.
Previous studies have indicated that the overexpression of NOK, also named STYK1, led to tumorigenesis and metastasis. Here, we provide evidence that increased expression of NOK/STYK1 caused marked alterations in the overall and inner structures of tumors and substantially facilitates the genesis and remodeling of the blood and lymphatic vessels during tumor progression. In particular, NOK-expressed HeLa stable cells (HeLa-K) significantly enhanced tumor growth and metastasis in xenografted nude mice. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining demonstrated that the tumor tissues generated by HeLa-K cells were much more ichorous and had more interspaces than those generated by control HeLa cells (HeLa-C). The fluorescent areas stained with cluster of differentiation 31 (CD31), a marker protein for blood vessels, appeared to be in different patterns. The total blood vessels, especially the ring patterns, within the tumors of the HeLa-K group were highly enriched compared with those in the HeLa-C group. NOK-HA was demonstrated to be well colocalized with CD31 in the wall of the tubular structures within tumor tissues. Interestingly, antibody staining of the lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor (LYVE-1) further revealed the increase in ring (oratretic strip-like) lymphatic vessels in either the peritumoral or intratumoral areas in the HeLa-K group compared with the HeLa-C group. Consistently, the analysis of human cancerous tissue also showed that NOK was highly expressed in the walls of tubular structures. Thus, our results reveal a novel tumorigenic function of NOK to mediate the genesis and remodeling of blood and lymphatic vessels during tumor progression.
Alterations in the mRNA expression or the mutation of previously reported tyrosine kinases have been detected only in a limited number of patients with acute leukemia. In this study, we examined whether the widely expressed serine threonine tyrosine kinase 1 (STYK1)/novel oncogene with kinase domain (NOK) acts as a drug resistance factor in acute leukemia. The transfection of leukemic HL-60 cells with an STYK1 expression vector resulted in the resistance to doxorubicin and etoposide and decreased drug-induced caspase-3/7 activity and sub-G1 population. To investigate the mechanism of STYK1-induced drug resistance, microarray analysis was performed using HL-60 cells transfected with control or STYK1 expression vectors. Three tyrosine kinases (EphA4, FLT4 and STK31), two NF-kappaB inducers (MAPK4 and TNF-RSF11A), and two genes essential for stem cell replication (SALL4 and NOV) were identified as novel STYK1-induced genes. In addition to the data using cell line, a comparison of the leukemic patients who did and did not respond to therapy revealed that STYK1 expression before therapy was significantly higher in the non-responder group compared with the group that responded completely. These results suggest that STYK1 is a novel drug resistance factor and could be a predictor of the therapeutic response in acute leukemia.
BACKGROUND: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with strong genetic components. Several recent genome-wide association (GWA) studies in Caucasian samples have reported a number of gene regions and loci correlated with the risk of ASD--albeit with very little consensus across studies. METHODS: A two-stage GWA study was employed to identify common genetic variants for ASD in the Taiwanese Han population. The discovery stage included 315 patients with ASD and 1,115 healthy controls, using the Affymetrix SNP array 6.0 platform for genotyping. Several gene regions were then selected for fine-mapping and top markers were examined in extended samples. Single marker, haplotype, gene-based, and pathway analyses were conducted for associations. RESULTS: Seven SNPs had p-values ranging from 3.4~9.9*10-6, but none reached the genome-wide significant level. Five of them were mapped to three known genes (OR2M4, STYK1, and MNT) with significant empirical gene-based p-values in OR2M4 (p = 3.4*10(-5)) and MNT (p = 0.0008). Results of the fine-mapping study showed single-marker associations in the GLIS1 (rs12082358 and rs12080993) and NAALADL2 (rs3914502 and rs2222447) genes, and gene-based associations for the OR2M3-OR2T5 (olfactory receptor genes, p = 0.02), and GLIPR1/KRR1 gene regions (p = 0.015). Pathway analyses revealed important pathways for ASD, such as olfactory and G protein-coupled receptors signaling pathways. CONCLUSIONS: We reported Taiwanese Han specific susceptibility genes and variants for ASD. However, further replication in other Asian populations is warranted to validate our findings. Investigation in the biological functions of our reported genetic variants might also allow for better understanding on the underlying pathogenesis of autism.
STYK1 (Serine/threonine/tyrosine kinase 1), a member of the receptor tyrosine kinase family, exhibits tumorigenicity in many types of cancers. Our study reveals the important role played by STYK1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. STYK1 is upregulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues compared with para-carcinoma. Knockdown of STYK1 inhibits nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, while ectopic STYK1 expression significantly promoted cell proliferation, migration, and invasion abilities. In addition, we provided lines of evidence supporting the critical role of STYK1 in the regulation of glycolysis via activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT pathway. Survival analysis reveals that STYK1 level is an independent prognostic factor for nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients. Our results indicate that STYK1 is a promising therapeutic target in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
The human STYK1/NOK protein is approximately 30-35% similar to mouse fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 and a kinase homologue in D. melanogaster in the tyrosine protein kinase region. STYK1/NOK was identified as being up regulated in MDA-MB-231, an estrogen receptor-alpha negative breast cancer cell line, following 12 h of estrogen treatment at 1x10(-9) M. On further investigation of STYK1/NOK in estrogen treated cell line MDA-MB-231, STYK1/NOK was up regulated at 6 h post treatment when compared to untreated cells. We also investigated the expression levels of STYK1/NOK in other breast cancer cell lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, BT-549, and MDA-MB-435S using QRT-PCR. In addition, the analysis of message accumulation was increased with other synthetic estrogen response modifiers. We propose that the regulation of STYK1/NOK is achieved independent of ERalpha and suggests further investigation to the relevance of this kinase in breast cancer progression.
NOK (also known as STYK1) has been identified as an oncogene. However, its biochemical and biological activities as a molecular regulator are poorly defined. In the present study, we report that NOK overexpression led to enhanced phosphorylation of GSK-3beta at its Ser9 residue via Akt phosphorylation at Thr308. NOK could make complexes with both Akt and GSK-3beta. Moreover, the expression levels of NOK, p-Akt(Thr308) and p-GSK-3beta(Ser9) were positively correlated in cancerous and non-cancerous breast cell lines. Thus, our data identified a novel functional molecular complex formed by NOK, Akt and GSK-3beta that may relay a NOK-directed tumourigenic cascade.
OBJECTIVE: To figure out the relationship between SMAD3 and serine-threonine tyrosine kinase (STYK1) in ovarian carcinoma cell's paclitaxel resistance. METHODS: The quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reactpostion and Western blot analysis were used to analyze RNA and protein content of SMAD3 and STYK1, respectively. The chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was used to confirm the binding site of SMAD3 to the STYK1 promoter region. Transwell assay was used to detect cell invasion and migration, and Western Blot was used to detect the marker proteins (vimentin and E-cadherin) of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process. MTT and apoptosis assay were used to, respectively, measure cell vitality and apoptosis. In vivo experiments, rats were subcutaneously implanted with A2780 cells to establish an animal model of ovarian cancer and the survival curve was drawn. RESULTS: Upregulating SMAD3 induced the expression of STYK1 in ovarian cancer cell lines. STYK1 is a direct transcriptional target of SMAD3. Upregulating STYK1 improved the paclitaxel resistance of ovarian carcinoma cells. Upregulating STYK1 promoted cell invasion, migration, and the EMT process, and SMAD3 had the same effect with STYK1 on cell invasion, cell migration, and the EMT process. The animal assay showed that downregulating STYK1 inhibited the EMT process and the paclitaxel resistance, further promoting the treatment of cervical cancer. CONCLUSION: SMAD3 combined with the promoter region of STYK1 to promote the transcription process of STYK1, thereby promoting the EMT process and paclitaxel resistance of ovarian cancer cells.
