Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
Genetic studies have highlighted microglia as pivotal in orchestrating Alzheimer's disease (AD). Microglia that adhere to Abeta plaques acquire a transcriptional signature, "disease-associated microglia" (DAM), which largely emanates from the TREM2-DAP12 receptor complex that transmits intracellular signals through the protein tyrosine kinase SYK. The human TREM2(R47H) variant associated with high AD risk fails to activate microglia via SYK. We found that SYK-deficient microglia cannot encase Abeta plaques, accelerating brain pathology and behavioral deficits. SYK deficiency impaired the PI3K-AKT-GSK-3beta-mTOR pathway, incapacitating anabolic support required for attaining the DAM profile. However, SYK-deficient microglia proliferated and advanced to an Apoe-expressing prodromal stage of DAM; this pathway relied on the adapter DAP10, which also binds TREM2. Thus, microglial responses to Abeta involve non-redundant SYK- and DAP10-pathways. Systemic administration of an antibody against CLEC7A, a receptor that directly activates SYK, rescued microglia activation in mice expressing the TREM2(R47H) allele, unveiling new options for AD immunotherapy.
This review deals with membrane Fc receptors (FcR) of the immunoglobulin superfamily. It is focused on the mechanisms by which FcR trigger and regulate biological responses of cells on which they are expressed. FcR deliver signals when they are aggregated at the cell surface. The aggregation of FcR having immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) activates sequentially src family tyrosine kinases and syk family tyrosine kinases that connect transduced signals to common activation pathways shared with other receptors. FcR with ITAMs elicit cell activation, endocytosis, and phagocytosis. The nature of responses depends primarily on the cell type. The aggregation of FcR without ITAM does not trigger cell activation. Most of these FcR internalize their ligands, which can be endocytosed, phagocytosed, or transcytosed. The fate of internalized receptor-ligand complexes depends on defined sequences in the intracytoplasmic domain of the receptors. The coaggregation of different FcR results in positive or negative cooperation. Some FcR without ITAM use FcR with ITAM as signal transduction subunits. The coaggregation of antigen receptors or of FcR having ITAMs with FcR having immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs (ITIMs) negatively regulates cell activation. FcR therefore appear as the subunits of multichain receptors whose constitution is not predetermined and which deliver adaptative messages as a function of the environment.
The adaptor protein 3BP2 (SH3-domain binding protein 2), which is encoded by the SH3BP2 locus, nucleates a signaling complex comprising ABL, SRC, VAV, and SYK, and facilitates an open active configuration of these proteins, leading to their kinase activation. Gain-of-function missense mutations in the SH3BP2 gene cause cherubism, an autosomal dominant disorder associated with severe craniofacial developmental defects in children. Previous studies have demonstrated that 3BP2 and its degradation pathway regulate bone metabolism, energy metabolism, and inflammation and that dysregulation of the 3BP2 degradation pathway is associated with human disorders. Herein, we discussed lessons from cherubism indicating that 3BP2 studies could elucidate the pathogenesis of bone loss caused by inflammation and identify suitable therapeutic targets.
UBASH3/STS/TULA is a novel two-member family, which exerts several key regulatory effects in multiple cell types. UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2 is a highly active protein tyrosine phosphatase; its major target appears to be a specific regulatory site of protein tyrosine kinases of the Syk family, dephosphorylation of which inhibits Syk and Zap-70 kinases and suppresses receptor signaling mediated by these kinases. UBASH3A/STS-2/TULA exhibits substantial homology to UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2, but possesses only a small fraction of phosphatase activity of UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2, and thus, its regulatory effect may be based also on the phosphatase-independent mechanisms. Critical physiologic effects of these proteins have been demonstrated in T lymphocytes, platelets, stem cells, and other important cell types. These proteins have also been shown to play a key role in such pathologic conditions as autoimmunity, cancer, and thrombosis. The review focuses on the recent studies of this important family of cellular regulators.
Haploinsufficiency of the progranulin (PGRN)-encoding gene (GRN) causes frontotemporal lobar degeneration (GRN-FTLD) and results in microglial hyperactivation, TREM2 activation, lysosomal dysfunction, and TDP-43 deposition. To understand the contribution of microglial hyperactivation to pathology, we used genetic and pharmacological approaches to suppress TREM2-dependent transition of microglia from a homeostatic to a disease-associated state. Trem2 deficiency in Grn KO mice reduced microglia hyperactivation. To explore antibody-mediated pharmacological modulation of TREM2-dependent microglial states, we identified antagonistic TREM2 antibodies. Treatment of macrophages from GRN-FTLD patients with these antibodies led to reduced TREM2 signaling due to its enhanced shedding. Furthermore, TREM2 antibody-treated PGRN-deficient microglia derived from human-induced pluripotent stem cells showed reduced microglial hyperactivation, TREM2 signaling, and phagocytic activity, but lysosomal dysfunction was not rescued. Similarly, lysosomal dysfunction, lipid dysregulation, and glucose hypometabolism of Grn KO mice were not rescued by TREM2 ablation. Synaptic loss and neurofilament light-chain (NfL) levels, a biomarker for neurodegeneration, were further elevated in the Grn/Trem2 KO cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). These findings suggest that TREM2-dependent microglia hyperactivation in models of GRN deficiency does not promote neurotoxicity, but rather neuroprotection.
LMP2A is an EBV-encoded protein with three domains: (a) an N-terminal cytoplasmic domain, which has PY motifs that bind to WW domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligases and an ITAM that binds to SH2 domain-containing proteins, (b) a transmembrane domain with 12 transmembrane segments that localizes LMP2A in cellular membranes, and (c) a 27-amino acid C-terminal domain which mediates homodimerization and heterodimerization of LMP2 protein isoforms. The most prominent two isoforms of the protein are LMP2A and LMP2B. The LMP2B isoform lacks the 19-amino acid N-terminal domain found in LMP2A, which modulates cellular signaling resulting in a baseline activation of B cells and degradation of cellular kinases leading to the downregulation of normal B cell signaling pathways. These two seemingly contradictory processes allow EBV to establish and maintain latency. LMP2 is expressed in many EBV-associated malignancies. While its antigenic properties may be useful in developing LMP2-specific immunity, the LMP2A N-terminal motifs also provide a basis to target LMP2A-modulated cellular kinases for the development of treatment strategies.
The binding of von Willebrand factor (VWF) to the platelet membrane glycoprotein 1b-IX (GP1b-IX) leads to activation of platelets. GP1b was shown to signal via the FcRgamma-ITAM (Fc Receptor gamma-Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif) pathway, activating spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) and other tyrosine kinases. However, there have been conflicting reports regarding the role of Syk in GP1b signaling. In this study, we sought to resolve these conflicting reports and clarify the role of Syk in VWF-induced platelet activation. The inhibition of Syk with the selective Syk inhibitors, OXSI-2 and PRT-060318, did not inhibit VWF-induced platelet adhesion, agglutination, aggregation, or secretion. In contrast, platelets stimulated with the Glycoprotein VI (GPVI) agonist, collagen-related peptide (CRP), failed to cause any aggregation or secretion in presence of the Syk inhibitors. Furthermore, GP1b-induced platelet signaling was unaffected in the presence of Syk inhibitors, but GPVI-induced signaling was abolished under similar conditions. Thus, we conclude that Syk kinase activity does not play any functional role downstream of GP1b-mediated platelet activation.
The current view of nucleic acid-mediated innate immunity is that binding of intracellular sensors to nucleic acids is sufficient for their activation. Here, we report that endocytosis of virus or foreign DNA initiates a priming signal for the DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-mediated innate immune response. Mechanistically, viral infection or foreign DNA transfection triggers recruitment of the spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) and cGAS to the endosomal vacuolar H(+) pump (V-ATPase), where SYK is activated and then phosphorylates human cGAS(Y214/215) (mouse cGas(Y200/201)) to prime its activation. Upon binding to DNA, the primed cGAS initiates robust cGAMP production and mediator of IRF3 activation/stimulator of interferon genes-dependent innate immune response. Consistently, blocking the V-ATPase-SYK axis impairs DNA virus- and transfected DNA-induced cGAMP production and expression of antiviral genes. Our findings reveal that V-ATPase-SYK-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of cGAS following endocytosis of virus or other cargos serves as a priming signal for cGAS activation and innate immune response.
Non-receptor type of protein-tyrosine kinase Syk (spleen tyrosine kinase) was isolated in the University of Fukui in 1991. Syk is known to be essential for the various physiological functions, especially in hematopoietic lineage cells. Moreover, ectopic expression of Syk by epigenetic changes is reported to cause retinoblastoma. Recently, novel Syk inhibitors were developed and its usefulness has been evaluated in the treatment of allergic rhinitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. In this review, we will summarize the history, structure, and function of Syk, and then describe the novel Syk inhibitors and their current status. Furthermore, we will introduce our findings of the adaptor protein 3BP2 (c-Abl SH3 domain-binding protein-2), as a novel target of Syk.
INTRODUCTION: Splenic tyrosine kinase (SYK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase. It is important for downstream signaling from several cell surface receptors, including Fc receptors, complement receptors and integrins. SYK can have either oncogenic or tumor suppressor activity in human malignancies. Recent studies suggest that SYK inhibition may have an antileukemic effect in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML). AREAS COVERED: Relevant publications were identified through literature searches in the PubMed database. We searched for (i) original articles describing the results from clinical studies of SYK inhibition; (ii) published articles describing the importance of SYK in human malignancies, especially AML. EXPERT OPINION: SYK is important for the downstream signaling from several cell surface receptors. There is also a crosstalk between SYK and signaling initiated through ligation of Toll like receptors, and SYK is thereby linked with the NFkappaB mediated transcriptional regulation. SYK activation will also influence PI3K-Akt-mTOR signaling. Several of these signaling events are important for survival and proliferation of primary human AML cells. In the present review we describe and discuss the role of SYK in human AML, and these data suggest that SYK inhibition is a possible therapeutic strategy in human AML.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive bone marrow malignancy where the immature leukemia cells communicate with neighboring cells through constitutive cytokine release and through their cell surface adhesion molecules. The primary AML cells express various integrins. These heterodimeric molecules containing an alpha and a beta chain are cell surface molecules that bind extracellular matrix molecules, cell surface molecules and soluble mediators. The beta3 integrin (ITGB3) chain can form heterodimers only with the two alpha chains alphaIIb and alphaV. These integrins are among the most promiscuous and bind to a large number of ligands, including extracellular matrix molecules, cell surface molecules and soluble mediators. Recent studies suggest that the two beta3 integrins are important for leukemogenesis and chemosensitivity in human AML. Firstly, alphaIIb and beta3 are both important for adhesion of AML cells to vitronectin and fibronectin. Secondly, beta3 is important for the development of murine AML and also for the homing and maintenance of the proliferation for xenografted primary human AML cells, and for maintaining a stem cell transcriptional program. These last effects seem to be mediated through Syk kinase. The beta3 expression seems to be regulated by HomeboxA9 (HoxA9) and HoxA10, and the increased beta3 expression then activates spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) and thereby contributes to cytokine hypersensitivity and activation of beta2 integrins. Finally, high integrin alphaV/beta3 expression is associated with an adverse prognosis in AML and decreased sensitivity to the kinase inhibitor sorafenib; this integrin can also be essential for osteopontin-induced sorafenib resistance in AML. In the present article, we review the experimental and clinical evidence for a role of beta3 integrins for leukemogenesis and chemosensitivity in AML.
Spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) is a cytosolic non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) and is mainly expressed in hematopoietic cells. Syk was recognized as a critical element in the B-cell receptor signaling pathway. Syk is also a key component in signal transduction from other immune receptors like Fc receptors and adhesion receptors. Several oral Syk inhibitors including fostamatinib (R788), entospletinib (GS-9973), cerdulatinib (PRT062070), and TAK-659 are being assessed in clinical trials. The second generation compound, entospletinib, showed promising results in clinical trials against B-cell malignancies, mainly chronic lymphoid leukemia. Syk inhibitors are being evaluated in combination regimens in multiple malignancies.
Retinoblastoma (Rb) is the most prevalent intraocular malignancy in children, with a worldwide survival rate <30%. We have developed a cancerous model of Rb in retinal organoids derived from genetically engineered human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) with a biallelic mutagenesis of the RB1 gene. These organoid Rbs exhibit properties highly consistent with Rb tumorigenesis, transcriptome, and genome-wide methylation. Single-cell sequencing analysis suggests that Rb originated from ARR3-positive maturing cone precursors during development, which was further validated by immunostaining. Notably, we found that the PI3K-Akt pathway was aberrantly deregulated and its activator spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) was significantly up-regulated. In addition, SYK inhibitors led to remarkable cell apoptosis in cancerous organoids. In conclusion, we have established an organoid Rb model derived from genetically engineered hESCs in a dish that has enabled us to trace the cell of origin and to test novel candidate therapeutic agents for human Rb, shedding light on the development and therapeutics of other malignancies.
Many tyrosine kinases cannot be expressed readily in Escherichia coli, limiting facile production of these proteins for biochemical experiments. We used ancestral sequence reconstruction to generate a spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) variant that can be expressed in bacteria and purified in soluble form, unlike the human members of this family (Syk and zeta-chain-associated protein kinase of 70 kDa [ZAP-70]). The catalytic activity, substrate specificity, and regulation by phosphorylation of this Syk variant are similar to the corresponding properties of human Syk and ZAP-70. Taking advantage of the ability to express this novel Syk-family kinase in bacteria, we developed a two-hybrid assay that couples the growth of E. coli in the presence of an antibiotic to successful phosphorylation of a bait peptide by the kinase. Using this assay, we screened a site-saturation mutagenesis library of the kinase domain of this reconstructed Syk-family kinase. Sites of loss-of-function mutations identified in the screen correlate well with residues established previously as critical to function and/or structure in protein kinases. We also identified activating mutations in the regulatory hydrophobic spine and activation loop, which are within key motifs involved in kinase regulation. Strikingly, one mutation in an ancestral Syk-family variant increases the soluble expression of the protein by 75-fold. Thus, through ancestral sequence reconstruction followed by deep mutational scanning, we have generated Syk-family kinase variants that can be expressed in bacteria with very high yield.
Proteins with a modular architecture of multiple domains connected by linkers often exhibit diversity in the relative positions of domains, while the domain tertiary structure remains unchanged. The biological function of these modular proteins, or the regulation of their activity, depends on the variation in domain orientation and separation. Accordingly, careful characterization of interdomain motion and correlated fluctuations of multidomain systems is relevant for understanding the functional behavior of modular proteins. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations provides a powerful approach to study these motions in atomic detail. Nevertheless, the common procedure for analyzing fluctuations from MD simulations after rigid-body alignment fails for multidomain proteins; it greatly overestimates correlated positional fluctuations in the presence of relative domain motion. We show here that expressing the atomic motions of a multidomain protein as a combination of displacement within the domain reference frame and motion of the relative domains correctly separates the internal motions to allow a useful description of correlated fluctuations. We illustrate the methodology of separating the domain fluctuations and local fluctuations by application to the tandem SH2 domains of human Syk protein kinase and by characterizing an effect of phosphorylation on the dynamics. Correlated motions are assessed from a distance covariance rather than the more common vector-coordinate covariance. The approach makes it possible to calculate the proper correlations in fluctuations internal to a domain as well as between domains.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cholesterol crystals are a key component of atherosclerotic lesions where they promote pro-inflammatory cytokine production and plaque destabilization. Antagonists of inflammatory mediators and agents that dissolve or prevent the formation of cholesterol crystals are being explored as potential therapeutics for atherothrombosis. We sought to identify signalling molecules activated following exposure of immune cells to cholesterol crystals with the view to identifying novel therapeutic targets. METHODS: Human macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) were exposed to cholesterol crystals and activation of signalling molecules was assessed by immunoblotting. The role of Syk and PI3K in crystal-induced interleukin (IL)-1 production was determined by ELISA using specific kinase inhibitors. Real-time PCR was employed to examine the role of Syk/PI3K in cholesterol crystal-induced expression of S100 proteins and MMPs. RESULTS: Exposure of human macrophages and DC to cholesterol crystals induced robust activation of Syk and PI3K within 2-5 min. Pharmacological inhibition of Syk/PI3K reduced crystal-induced IL-1alpha/beta production by approximately 80%. Activation of the downstream MAP kinases, MEK and ERK, was suppressed following inhibition of Syk and PI3K. Finally, inhibition of both Syk and PI3K significantly reduced cholesterol crystal-induced S100A8 and MMP1 gene expression by >70% while inhibition of PI3K also reduced S100A12 expression. CONCLUSION: Cholesterol crystals activate specific cell signalling pathways which drive the production of inflammatory cytokines and degradative enzymes known to contribute to disease initiation and progression. These molecular events are dependent on activation of Syk and PI3K, hence, they represent potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of cholesterol crystal-related pathologies.
Immune cells modify their metabolic pathways in response to fungal infections. Nevertheless, the biochemical underpinnings need to be better understood. This study reports that fungal infection drives a switch from glycolysis to the serine synthesis pathway (SSP) and one-carbon metabolism by inducing the interaction of spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) and phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). As a result, PHGDH promotes SYK phosphorylation, leading to the recruitment of SYK to C-type lectin receptors (CLRs). The CLR/SYK complex initiates signaling cascades that lead to transcription factor activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine production. SYK activates SSP and one-carbon metabolism by inducing PHGDH activity. Then, one-carbon metabolism supports S-adenosylmethionine and histone H3 lysine 36 trimethylation to drive the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. These findings reveal the crosstalk between amino acid metabolism, epigenetic modification, and CLR signaling during fungal infection.
Recent advances in the understanding of allergic mechanisms have highlighted the role of immunoglobulin E (IgE) signaling in the mast cell. One of the most important kinases in the IgE signaling pathway is spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) which has a critical function early in the signaling cascade following binding of allergen to receptor bound IgE on the mast cell. A number of Syk inhibitors have now been developed which have been shown to effectively inhibit IgE-driven mast cell degranulation and release of inflammatory cytokines in vitro and inhibit allergic responses in a variety of in vivo models. In humans, allergen-driven symptoms were reduced in allergic rhinitic patients exposed to tree pollen in an outdoor environment following intranasal dosing of the Syk inhibitor R-112. Syk therefore represents a promising target for therapeutic intervention in allergic diseases.
Hybridisation of amino-pyrimidine based SYK inhibitors (e.g. 1a) with previously reported diamine-based SYK inhibitors (e.g. TAK-659) led to the identification and optimisation of a novel pyrimidine-based series of potent and selective SYK inhibitors, where the original aminomethylene group was replaced by a 3,4-diaminotetrahydropyran group. The initial compound 5 achieved excellent SYK potency. However, it suffered from poor permeability and modest kinase selectivity. Further modifications of the 3,4-diaminotetrahydropyran group were identified and the interactions of those groups with Asp512 were characterised by protein X-ray crystallography. Further optimisation of this series saw mixed results where permeability and kinase selectivity were increased and oral bioavailability was achieved in the series, but at the expense of potent hERG inhibition.
BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most aggressive human brain tumors, with a median survival of 15-18 months. There is a desperate need to find novel therapeutic targets. Various receptor protein kinases have been identified as potential targets; however, response rates in clinical studies have been somewhat disappointing. Targeting the spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK), which acts downstream of a range of oncogenic receptors, may therefore show more promising results. METHODS: Kinase expression of brain tumor samples including GBM and low-grade tumors were compared with normal brain and normal human astrocytes by microarray analysis. Furthermore, SYK, LYN, SLP76, and PLCG2 protein expressions were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, western blot, and immunofluorescence of additional GBM patient samples, murine glioma samples, and cell lines. SYK was then blocked chemically and genetically in vitro and in vivo in 2 different mouse models. Multiphoton intravital imaging and multicolor flow cytometry were performed in a syngeneic immunocompetent C57BL/6J mouse GL261 glioma model to study the effect of these inhibitors on the tumor microenvironment. RESULTS: SYK, LYN, SLP76, and PLCG2 were found expressed in human and murine glioma samples and cell lines. SYK inhibition blocked proliferation, migration, and colony formation. Flow cytometric and multiphoton imaging imply that targeting SYK in vivo attenuated GBM tumor growth and invasiveness and reduced B and CD11b+ cell mobility and infiltration. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that gliomas express a SYK signaling network important in glioma progression, inhibition of which results in reduced invasion with slower tumor progression.
