Trace amine-associated receptor 5; Olfactory receptor specific for trimethylamine, a trace amine. Also activated at lower level by dimethylethylamine. Trimethylamine is a bacterial metabolite found in some animal odors, and to humans it is a repulsive odor associated with bad breath and spoiled food. This receptor is probably mediated by the G(s)-class of G-proteins which activate adenylate cyclase.
Trace amines are endogenous compounds classically regarded as comprising beta-phenylethyalmine, p-tyramine, tryptamine, p-octopamine, and some of their metabolites. They are also abundant in common foodstuffs and can be produced and degraded by the constitutive microbiota. The ability to use trace amines has arisen at least twice during evolution, with distinct receptor families present in invertebrates and vertebrates. The term "trace amine" was coined to reflect the low tissue levels in mammals; however, invertebrates have relatively high levels where they function like mammalian adrenergic systems, involved in "fight-or-flight" responses. Vertebrates express a family of receptors termed trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs). Humans possess six functional isoforms (TAAR1, TAAR2, TAAR5, TAAR6, TAAR8, and TAAR9), whereas some fish species express over 100. With the exception of TAAR1, TAARs are expressed in olfactory epithelium neurons, where they detect diverse ethological signals including predators, spoiled food, migratory cues, and pheromones. Outside the olfactory system, TAAR1 is the most thoroughly studied and has both central and peripheral roles. In the brain, TAAR1 acts as a rheostat of dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and serotonergic neurotransmission and has been identified as a novel therapeutic target for schizophrenia, depression, and addiction. In the periphery, TAAR1 regulates nutrient-induced hormone secretion, suggesting its potential as a novel therapeutic target for diabetes and obesity. TAAR1 may also regulate immune responses by regulating leukocyte differentiation and activation. This article provides a comprehensive review of the current state of knowledge of the evolution, physiologic functions, pharmacology, molecular mechanisms, and therapeutic potential of trace amines and their receptors in vertebrates and invertebrates.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) represent a family of druggable targets when treating several diseases and continue to be a leading part of the drug discovery process. Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) are GPCRs involved in many physiological functions with TAAR1 having important roles within the central nervous system (CNS). By using homology modeling methods, the responsiveness of TAAR1 to endogenous and synthetic ligands has been explored. In addition, the discovery of different chemo-types as selective murine and/or human TAAR1 ligands has helped in the understanding of the species-specificity preferences. The availability of TAAR1-ligand complexes sheds light on how different ligands bind TAAR1. TAAR5 is considered an olfactory receptor but has specific involvement in some brain functions. In this case, the drug discovery effort has been limited. Here, we review the successful computational efforts developed in the search for novel TAAR1 and TAAR5 ligands. A specific focus on applying structure-based and/or ligand-based methods has been done. We also give a perspective of the experimental data available to guide the future drug design of new ligands, probing species-specificity preferences towards more selective ligands. Hints for applying repositioning approaches are also discussed.
Olfaction is the primary sense used by most animals to perceive the external world. The mouse olfactory system is composed of several sensory structures, the largest of which is the main olfactory epithelium (MOE). Olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) located within the MOE detect odors and pheromones using dedicated seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). Two families of GPCRs are expressed in the MOE and are conserved in humans and other vertebrates: odorant receptors (ORs) and trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs). TAARs are distantly related to biogenic amine receptors, such as dopamine and serotonin receptors. Several TAARs detect volatile amines including ethological odors that evoke innate animal behavioral responses. Mouse TAAR4 recognizes the aversive predator odor 2-phenylethylamine, while mouse TAAR5 detects the attractive male mouse odor trimethylamine. In zebrafish, TAAR13c detects the foul death-associated odor cadaverine that mediates innate avoidance behavior. TAARs thus provide an excellent model subsystem to study odor valence. And identification of additional high-affinity ligands for TAARs will provide extra tools for such study. Therefore, this chapter focuses on the so-called SEAP assay that has been successfully applied for TAAR deorphanization in different species.
Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) interact with amine compounds called "trace amines" which are present in tissues at low concentrations. Recently, TAARs expression in neoplastic tumors was reported. In this study, TAARs expression was analyzed in public RNAseq datasets in nevi and melanoma samples and compared to the expression of dopamine receptors (DRDs) that are known to be involved in melanoma pathogenesis. It was found that all DRDs and TAARs are expressed in nevi at comparable levels. Differential expression analysis demonstrated the drastic decrease of TAAR1, TAAR2, TAAR5, TAAR6, and TAAR8 expression in melanomas compared to benign nevi with only TAAR6, TAAR8, and TAAR9 remaining detectable in malignant tumors. No association of TAARs expression levels and melanoma clinicopathological characteristics was observed. TAARs co-expressed genes in melanoma and nevi were selected by correlation values for comparative pathway enrichment analysis between malignant and benign neoplasia. It was found that coexpression of TAARs with genes inquired in neurotransmitter signaling is lost in melanoma, and tumor-specific association of TAAR6 expression with the mTOR pathway and inflammatory signaling is observed. It is not excluded that TAARs may have certain functions in melanoma pathogenesis, the significance of which to tumor progression is yet to be understood.
Olfactory receptor (OR) genes in humans form a special class characterized by unusually high DNA sequence diversity, which should give rise to differences in perception and behavior. In the largest genome-wide association study to date based on olfactory testing, we investigated odor perception and naming with smell tasks performed by 9,122 Icelanders, with replication in a separate sample of 2,204 individuals. We discovered an association between a low-frequency missense variant in TAAR5 and reduced intensity rating of fish odor containing trimethylamine (p.Ser95Pro, p(combined) = 5.6 x 10(-15)). We demonstrate that TAAR5 genotype affects aversion to fish odor, reflected by linguistic descriptions of the odor and pleasantness ratings. We also discovered common sequence variants in two canonical olfactory receptor loci that associate with increased intensity and naming of licorice odor (trans-anethole: lead variant p.Lys233Asn in OR6C70, p(combined) = 8.8 x 10(-16) and p(combined) = 1.4 x 10(-9)) and enhanced naming of cinnamon (trans-cinnamaldehyde; intergenic variant rs317787-T, p(combined) = 5.0 x 10(-17)). Together, our results show that TAAR5 genotype variation influences human odor responses and highlight that sequence diversity in canonical OR genes can lead to enhanced olfactory ability, in contrast to the view that greater tolerance for mutations in the human OR repertoire leads to diminished function.
Currently, metabolic syndrome treatment includes predominantly pharmacological symptom relief and complex lifestyle changes. Trace amines and their receptor systems modulate signaling pathways of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, which are involved in the pathogenesis of this disorder. Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) is expressed in endocrine organs, and it was revealed that TAAR1 may regulate insulin secretion in pancreatic islet beta-cells. For instance, accumulating data demonstrate the positive effect of TAAR1 agonists on the dynamics of metabolic syndrome progression and MetS-associated disease development. The role of other TAARs (TAAR2, TAAR5, TAAR6, TAAR8, and TAAR9) in the islet's function is much less studied. In this review, we summarize the evidence of TAARs' contribution to the metabolic syndrome pathogenesis and regulation of insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. Additionally, by the analysis of public transcriptomic data, we demonstrate that TAAR1 and other TAAR receptors are expressed in the pancreatic islets. We also explore associations between the expression of TAARs mRNA and other genes in studied samples and demonstrate the deregulation of TAARs' functional associations in patients with metabolic diseases compared to healthy donors.
Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs), which were discovered only in 2001, are known to be involved in the regulation of a spectrum of neuronal processes and may play a role in the pathogenesis of a number of neuropsychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia and others. We have previously shown that TAARs also have interconnections with the regulation of neurogenesis and, in particular, with the neurogenesis of dopamine neurons, but the exact mechanisms of this are still unknown. In our work we analyzed the expression of TAARs (TAAR1, TAAR2, TAAR5, TAAR6, TAAR8 and TAAR9) in cells from the human substantia nigra and ventral tegmental areas and in human pluripotent stem cells at consecutive stages of their differentiation to dopaminergic neurons, using RNA sequencing data from open databases, and TaqMan PCR data from the differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells in vitro. Detectable levels of TAARs expression were found in cells at the pluripotent stages, and the dynamic of their expression had a trend of increasing with the differentiation and maturation of dopamine neurons. The expression of several TAAR types (particularly TAAR5) was also found in human dopaminergic neuron-enriched zones in the midbrain. This is the first evidence of TAARs expression during neuronal differentiation, which can help to approach an understanding of the role of TAARs in neurogenesis.
Most cases of anxiety are currently treated with either benzodiazepines or serotonin reuptake inhibitors. These drugs carry with them risks for a multitude of side effects, and patient compliance suffers for this reason. There is thus a need for novel anxiolytics, and among the most compelling prospects in this vein is the study of the TAARs. The anxiolytic potential of ulotaront, a full agonist at the human TAAR1, is currently being investigated in patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Irrespective of whether this compound succeeds in clinical trials, a growing body of preclinical literature underscores the relevance of modulating the TAARs in anxiety. Multiple behavioral paradigms show anxiolytic-like effects in rodents, possibly due to increased neurogenesis and plasticity, in addition to a panoply of interactions between the TAARs and other systems. Crucially, multiple lines of evidence suggest that the TAARs, particularly TAAR1, TAAR2, and TAAR5, are expressed in the extended amygdala and hippocampus. These regions are central in the actuation of anxiety, and are particularly susceptible to neurogenic and neuroplastic effects which the TAARs are now known to regulate. The TAARs also regulate the dopamine and serotonin systems, both of which are implicated in anxiety. Ligands of the TAARs may thus constitute a new class of anxiolytics.
Application of 3-iodothyronamine (3-T1AM) results in decreased body temperature and body weight in rodents. The trace amine-associated receptor (TAAR) 1, a family A G protein-coupled receptor, is a target of 3-T1AM. However, 3-T1AM effects still persist in mTaar1 knockout mice, which suggest so far unknown further receptor targets that are of physiological relevance. TAAR5 is a highly conserved TAAR subtype among mammals and we here tested TAAR5 as a potential 3-T1AM target. First, we investigated mouse Taar5 (mTaar5) expression in several brain regions of the mouse in comparison to mTaar1. Secondly, to unravel the full spectrum of signaling capacities, we examined the distinct Gs-, Gi/o-, G12/13-, Gq/11- and MAP kinase-mediated signaling pathways of mouse and human TAAR5 under ligand-independent conditions and after application of 3-T1AM. We found overlapping localization of mTaar1 and mTaar5 in the amygdala and ventromedial hypothalamus of the mouse brain. Second, the murine and human TAAR5 (hTAAR5) display significant basal activity in the Gq/11 pathway but show differences in the basal activity in Gs and MAP kinase signaling. In contrast to mTaar5, 3-T1AM application at hTAAR5 resulted in significant reduction in basal IP3 formation and MAP kinase signaling. In conclusion, our data suggest that the human TAAR5 is a target for 3-T1AM, exhibiting inhibitory effects on IP3 formation and MAP kinase signaling pathways, but does not mediate Gs signaling effects as observed for TAAR1. This study also indicates differences between TAAR5 orthologs with respect to their signaling profile. In consequence, 3-T1AM-mediated effects may differ between rodents and humans.
Human trace amines (TAs) are endogenous compounds, previously almost ignored in human pathology for many reasons (difficulty of their measurement in biological fluids, unknown receptors for elusive amines), are now considered to play a significant role in synaptic transmission within the central nervous system (CNS) acting as neuromodulators. The recent discovery of a novel family of G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that includes individual members that are highly specific for TAs indicates a potential role for TAs as vertebrate neurotransmitters or neuromodulators, although the majority of these GPCRs so far have not been demonstrated to be activated by TAs. Human trace amine receptors (including TAAR1 TAAR2 TAAR5 TAAR6 TAAR8 TAAR9) are expressed in the brain and play significant physiological and neuropathological roles by activation of trace amines. We herein discuss the recent findings that provide insights into the functional roles of human trace amines (including P-Octopamine, beta phenylethylamine, Tryptamine, Tyramine, Synephrine, 3-Iodothyronamine, 3-Methoxytyramine, N-Methyltyramine, N-Methylphenethylamine) in brain. Furthermore, we discuss the known functions of human trace amine receptors in brain.
It is known that trace amine-associated receptor 5 (TAAR5) is expressed in various regions of the central nervous system. However, very limited information is available on the behavioral effects of TAAR5 activation and the TAAR5 functional role, in general. We studied the effect of TAAR5 agonist (2-(alpha-naphthoyl) ethyltrimethylammonium iodide) systemic administration on animal behavior. The study was performed on male C57BL/6 mice. It was observed that alpha-NETA in 10 mg/kg dose caused specific impairment of motor behavior, similar to the manifestations of tardive dyskinesia in humans. It can be assumed that trace amines and TAAR5 may be involved in the human tardive dyskinesia pathogenesis.
Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) are G Protein-Coupled Receptors that function as vertebrate olfactory receptors. Like odorant receptors, TAARs constitute an ever-evolving sensory subsystem, with individual TAARs recognizing particular chemicals and some evoking stereotyped behaviors. Several TAARs mediate aversion or attraction towards volatile amines that include the mouse odor trimethylamine, the predator odor 2-phenylethylamine, and the death-associated odor cadaverine. TAAR-expressing sensory neurons achieve monoallelic receptor expression, use canonical olfactory signaling molecules, and target a dedicated olfactory bulb region. In mouse, TAAR4 and TAAR5 are encoded by adjacent genes and localize to adjacent glomeruli, yet mediate opposing behaviors. Future studies are needed to understand how TAAR-expressing sensory neurons engage higher-order neural circuits to encode odor valence.
The family of trace amine-associated receptors (TAAR) comprises 9 mammalian TAAR subtypes, with intact gene and pseudogene numbers differing considerably even between closely related species. To date the best characterized subtype is TAAR1, which activates the G(s) protein/adenylyl cyclase pathway upon stimulation by trace amines and psychoactive substances like MDMA or LSD. Recently, chemosensory function involving recognition of volatile amines was proposed for murine TAAR3, TAAR4 and TAAR5. Humans can smell volatile amines despite carrying open reading frame (ORF) disruptions in TAAR3 and TAAR4. Therefore, we set out to study the functional and structural evolution of these genes with a special focus on primates. Functional analyses showed that ligands activating the murine TAAR3, TAAR4 and TAAR5 do not activate intact primate and mammalian orthologs, although they evolve under purifying selection and hence must be functional. We also find little evidence for positive selection that could explain the functional differences between mouse and other mammals. Our findings rather suggest that the previously identified volatile amine TAAR3-5 agonists reflect the high agonist promiscuity of TAAR, and that the ligands driving purifying selection of these TAAR in mouse and other mammals still await discovery. More generally, our study points out how analyses in an evolutionary context can help to interpret functional data generated in single species.
Thyronamines are a novel class of endogenous signaling compounds, structurally related to thyroid hormones (THs). Specific thyronamines, particularly 3-iodothyronamine (T1AM), stimulate with nanomolar affinity trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1), a G protein-coupled membrane receptor, and may also interact with other TAAR subtypes (particularly TAAR5), adrenergic receptors (particularly alpha2 receptors), amine transporters, and mitochondrial proteins. In addition to its structural similarities with THs, T1AM also contains the arylethylamine scaffold as in monoamine neurotransmitters, implicating an intriguing role for T1AM as both a neuromodulator and a hormone-like molecule constituting a part of thyroid hormone signaling. A large number of T1AM derivatives have already been synthesized. We discuss the different chemical strategies followed to obtain thyronamine analogues, their potency at TAAR1, and their structure-activity relationship. Preliminary characterization of the functional effects of these synthetic compounds is also provided.
Mammals, including humans, sense smell by the responses of odorant receptors (ORs) to odor molecules. We have developed an effective method to identify novel antagonists capable of suppressing the pungent odor of cat urine by targeting specific ORs. Since odors are typically complex mixtures of multiple volatile compounds, olfactory perception can vary depending on the composition. We analyzed the response of ORs to cat urine odor using vapor stimulation assays to identify the responding ORs. Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry was then performed to identify compounds eliciting responses from these ORs. Trace-amine-associated receptor 5 (TAAR5) demonstrated a significant response associated with the odor intensity of cat urine, identifying trimethylamine as a major contributor to the strong odor. From hundreds of candidate compounds, we identified several novel antagonists that exhibited greater efficacy than a known TAAR5 antagonist. These compounds not only reduced the responses of TAAR5-expressing cells to cat urine odor but also significantly reduced odor intensity and improved sensory pleasantness in human tests. Our findings suggest that targeting ORs responsive to specific odors, without isolating their individual components, is a promising strategy for developing deodorizing agents against complex malodors like cat urine odor. This study emphasizes the value of using real odor mixtures to enhance our understanding of odor perception.
Trace amine-associated receptors (TAAR) recognize organic compounds, including primary, secondary, and tertiary amines. The TAAR5 receptor is known to be involved in the olfactory sensing of innate socially relevant odors encoded by volatile amines. However, emerging data point to the involvement of TAAR5 in brain functions, particularly in the emotional behaviors mediated by the limbic system which suggests its potential contribution to the pathogenesis of neuropsychiatric diseases. TAAR5 expression was explored in datasets available in the Gene Expression Omnibus, Allen Brain Atlas, and Human Protein Atlas databases. Transcriptomic data demonstrate ubiquitous low TAAR5 expression in the cortical and limbic brain areas, the amygdala and the hippocampus, the nucleus accumbens, the thalamus, the hypothalamus, the basal ganglia, the cerebellum, the substantia nigra, and the white matter. Altered TAAR5 expression is identified in Down syndrome, major depressive disorder, or HIV-associated encephalitis. Taken together, these data indicate that TAAR5 in humans is expressed not only in the olfactory system but also in certain brain structures, including the limbic regions receiving olfactory input and involved in critical brain functions. Thus, TAAR5 can potentially be involved in the pathogenesis of brain disorders and represents a valuable novel target for neuropsychopharmacology.
In mice, trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) are interspersed in the olfactory epithelium and constitute a chemosensory subsystem that is highly specific for detecting volatile amines. Humans possess six putative functional TAAR genes. Human TAAR5 (hTAAR5) is highly expressed in the olfactory mucosa and was shown to be specifically activated by trimethylamine. In this study, we were challenged to uncover an effective blocker substance for trimethylamine-induced hTAAR5 activation. To monitor blocking effects, we recombinantly expressed hTAAR5 and employed a commonly used Cre-luciferase reporter gene assay. Among all tested potential blocker substances, Timberol(R), an amber-woody fragrance, is able to inhibit the trimethylamine-induced hTAAR5 activation up to 96%. Moreover, human psychophysical data showed that the presence of Timberol(R) increases the olfactory detection threshold for the characteristic fishy odor of trimethylamine by almost one order of magnitude. In conclusion, our results show that among tested receptors Timberol(R) is a specific and potent antagonist for the hTAAR5-mediated response to trimethylamine in a heterologous system. Furthermore, our data concerning the observed shift of the olfactory detection threshold in vivo implicate that hTAAR5 or other receptors that may be inhibited by Timberol(R) could be involved in the high affinity olfactory perception of trimethylamine in humans.
In addition to the canonical olfactory receptors, TAARs were currently suggested to be a second class of chemosensory receptors in the olfactory epithelium of vertebrates. In contrast to several deorphanized murine TAARs, agonists for the intact human TAAR genes 2, 5, 6, 8 and 9 that are potentially expressed in the human olfactory epithelium have not been determined so far. Moreover, the physiological relevance of TAARs still remains elusive. We present the first successful functional expression of a human TAAR and agonists of human TAAR5. We performed a ligand screening using recombinantly expressed human TAAR5 in HANA3A cells and Xenopus laevis oocytes. In order to measure receptor activity, we used a cAMP-dependent reporter gene assay and two-electrode voltage clamp technique. As a result, human TAAR5 can be activated in a concentration-dependent manner by trimethylamine and with less efficacy by dimethylethylamine. It could neither be activated by any other of the tested single amines with a related chemical structure (42 in total), nor by any of the tested odorant mixtures. The hypothesis that Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) within the reading frame of an olfactory receptor gene can cause a specific anosmia, formed the basis for clarifying the question, if anosmia for trimethylamine is caused by a SNP in a TAAR coding sequence. All functional human TAAR gene reading frames of subjects with specific anosmia for trimethylamine were amplified and products analyzed regarding SNP distribution. We demonstrated that the observed specific anosmia for trimethylamine is not correlated with a SNP in the coding sequence of one of the putatively functional human TAAR genes.
Hippocampus is one of the neurogenic zones where adult neurogenesis takes place. This process is quite complex and has a multicomponent regulation. A family of G protein-coupled trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) was discovered only in 2001, and most of them (TAAR2-TAAR9) were primarily considered olfactory. Recent studies have shown, however, that they are also expressed in the mouse brain, particularly in limbic formations, and can play a role in the regulation of emotional behaviors. The observations in knockout mice indicate that at least two members of the family, TAAR2 and TAAR5, have an impact on the regulation of adult neurogenesis. In the present study, we analyzed the expression of TAARs in the murine and human hippocampus using public RNAseq datasets. Our results indicate a low but detectable level of certain TAARs expression in the hippocampal cells in selected high-quality transcriptomic datasets from both mouse and human samples. At the same time, we observed the difference between humans, where TAAR6 expression was the highest, and murine samples, where TAAR1, TAAR2, TAAR3, TAAR4 and TAAR5 are more pronouncedly expressed. These observations provide further support to the data gained in knockout mice, indicating a role of TAARs in the regulation of adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
Mismatch negativity (MMN) is a well-defined component of human event-related potentials that reflects the pre-attentive, stimulus-discrimination process and is associated with involuntary switching of attention. MMN-like responses detected in animal models provide an opportunity to investigate the neural mechanisms of this process that involves several neurotransmitter and neuromodulator systems. Trace amines are believed to play a significant role in neuromodulation of synaptic transmission. The present study aimed to determine the role of trace amine-associated receptor 5 (TAAR5) in the MMN-like response in rats. First, using a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET) cAMP biosensor, we performed unbiased screening of TAAR5 ligands from a commercially available compound library (661 compounds) and identified 2-(alpha-naphthoyl)ethyltrimethylammonium iodide (alpha-NETA) as a potent (EC(50) 150 nM) TAAR5 agonist. Then, we recorded auditory event-related potentials during an oddball paradigm in awake freely moving rats that were intraperitoneally injected with a vehicle or two doses of the putative TAAR5 agonist alpha-NETA. The MMN-like response was increased by alpha-NETA 3 mg/kg dose, but not by 1 mg/kg dose or 0.9% saline solution. These results suggest that the MMN-like response in rats may be modulated, at least in part, through TAAR5-dependent processes.
