Trace amine-associated receptor 1; Receptor for trace amines, including beta-phenylethylamine (b-PEA), p-tyramine (p-TYR), octopamine and tryptamine, with highest affinity for b-PEA and p-TYR. Unresponsive to classical biogenic amines, such as epinephrine and histamine and only partially activated by dopamine and serotonin. Trace amines are biogenic amines present in very low levels in mammalian tissues. Although some trace amines have clearly defined roles as neurotransmitters in invertebrates, the extent to which they function as true neurotransmitters in vertebrates has remained spe [...] 
Trace amines are endogenous compounds classically regarded as comprising beta-phenylethyalmine, p-tyramine, tryptamine, p-octopamine, and some of their metabolites. They are also abundant in common foodstuffs and can be produced and degraded by the constitutive microbiota. The ability to use trace amines has arisen at least twice during evolution, with distinct receptor families present in invertebrates and vertebrates. The term "trace amine" was coined to reflect the low tissue levels in mammals; however, invertebrates have relatively high levels where they function like mammalian adrenergic systems, involved in "fight-or-flight" responses. Vertebrates express a family of receptors termed trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs). Humans possess six functional isoforms (TAAR1, TAAR2, TAAR5, TAAR6, TAAR8, and TAAR9), whereas some fish species express over 100. With the exception of TAAR1, TAARs are expressed in olfactory epithelium neurons, where they detect diverse ethological signals including predators, spoiled food, migratory cues, and pheromones. Outside the olfactory system, TAAR1 is the most thoroughly studied and has both central and peripheral roles. In the brain, TAAR1 acts as a rheostat of dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and serotonergic neurotransmission and has been identified as a novel therapeutic target for schizophrenia, depression, and addiction. In the periphery, TAAR1 regulates nutrient-induced hormone secretion, suggesting its potential as a novel therapeutic target for diabetes and obesity. TAAR1 may also regulate immune responses by regulating leukocyte differentiation and activation. This article provides a comprehensive review of the current state of knowledge of the evolution, physiologic functions, pharmacology, molecular mechanisms, and therapeutic potential of trace amines and their receptors in vertebrates and invertebrates.
Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) senses a spectrum of endogenous amine-containing metabolites (EAMs) to mediate diverse psychological functions and is useful for schizophrenia treatment without the side effects of catalepsy. Here, we systematically profiled the signaling properties of TAAR1 activation and present nine structures of TAAR1-Gs/Gq in complex with EAMs, clinical drugs, and synthetic compounds. These structures not only revealed the primary amine recognition pocket (PARP) harboring the conserved acidic D(3.32) for conserved amine recognition and "twin" toggle switch for receptor activation but also elucidated that targeting specific residues in the second binding pocket (SBP) allowed modulation of signaling preference. In addition to traditional drug-induced Gs signaling, Gq activation by EAM or synthetic compounds is beneficial to schizophrenia treatment. Our results provided a structural and signaling framework for molecular recognition by TAAR1, which afforded structural templates and signal clues for TAAR1-targeted candidate compounds design.
Trace amines, a group of amines expressed at the nanomolar level in the mammalian brain, can modulate monoamine transmission. The discovery of and the functional research on the trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs), especially the most well-characterized TAAR1, have largely facilitated our understanding of the function of the trace amine system in the brain. TAAR1 is expressed in the mammalian brain at a low level and widely distributed in the monoaminergic system, including the ventral tegmental area and substantial nigra, where the dopamine neurons reside in the mammalian brain. Growing in vitro and in vivo evidence has demonstrated that TAAR1 could negatively modulate monoamine transmission and play a crucial role in many psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, substance use disorders, sleep disorders, depression, and anxiety. Notably, in the last two decades, many studies have repeatedly confirmed the pharmacological effects of the selective TAAR1 ligands in various preclinical models of psychiatric disorders. Recent clinical trials of the dual TAAR1 and serotonin receptor agonist ulotaront also revealed a potential efficacy for treating schizophrenia. Here, we review the current understanding of the TAAR1 system and the recent advances in the elucidation of behavioral and physiological properties of TAAR1 agonists evaluated both in preclinical animal models and clinical trials. We also discuss the potential TAAR1-dependent signaling pathways and the cellular mechanisms underlying the inhibitory effects of TAAR1 activation on drug addiction. We conclude that TAAR1 is an emerging target for the treatment of psychiatric disorders.
Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1), the founding member of a nine-member family of trace amine receptors, is responsible for recognizing a range of biogenic amines in the brain, including the endogenous beta-phenylethylamine (beta-PEA)(1) as well as methamphetamine(2), an abused substance that has posed a severe threat to human health and society(3). Given its unique physiological role in the brain, TAAR1 is also an emerging target for a range of neurological disorders including schizophrenia, depression and drug addiction(2,4,5). Here we report structures of human TAAR1-G-protein complexes bound to methamphetamine and beta-PEA as well as complexes bound to RO5256390, a TAAR1-selective agonist, and SEP-363856, a clinical-stage dual agonist for TAAR1 and serotonin receptor 5-HT(1A)R (refs. (6,7)). Together with systematic mutagenesis and functional studies, the structures reveal the molecular basis of methamphetamine recognition and underlying mechanisms of ligand selectivity and polypharmacology between TAAR1 and other monoamine receptors. We identify a lid-like extracellular loop 2 helix/loop structure and a hydrogen-bonding network in the ligand-binding pockets, which may contribute to the ligand recognition in TAAR1. These findings shed light on the ligand recognition mode and activation mechanism for TAAR1 and should guide the development of next-generation therapeutics for drug addiction and various neurological disorders.
BACKGROUND: An oral compound, SEP-363856, that does not act on dopamine D2 receptors but has agonist activity at trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) and 5-hydroxytryptamine type 1A (5-HT(1A)) receptors, may represent a new class of psychotropic agent for the treatment of psychosis in schizophrenia. METHODS: We performed a randomized, controlled trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of SEP-363856 in adults with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia. The patients were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive once-daily treatment with SEP-363856 (50 mg or 75 mg) or placebo for 4 weeks. The primary end point was the change from baseline in the total score on the Positive and Negative Symptom Scale (PANSS; range, 30 to 210; higher scores indicate more severe psychotic symptoms) at week 4. There were eight secondary end points, including the changes from baseline in the scores on the Clinical Global Impressions Severity (CGI-S) scale and the Brief Negative Symptom Scale (BNSS). RESULTS: A total of 120 patients were assigned to the SEP-363856 group and 125 to the placebo group. The mean total score on the PANSS at baseline was 101.4 in the SEP-363856 group and 99.7 in the placebo group, and the mean change at week 4 was -17.2 points and -9.7 points, respectively (least-squares mean difference, -7.5 points; 95% confidence interval, -11.9 to -3.0; P = 0.001). The reductions in the CGI-S and BNSS scores at week 4 were generally in the same direction as those for the primary outcome, but the results were not adjusted for multiple comparisons. Adverse events with SEP-363856 included somnolence and gastrointestinal symptoms; one sudden cardiac death occurred in the SEP-363856 group. The incidence of extrapyramidal symptoms and changes in the levels of lipids, glycated hemoglobin, and prolactin were similar in the trial groups. CONCLUSIONS: In this 4-week trial involving patients with an acute exacerbation of schizophrenia, SEP-363856, a non-D2-receptor-binding antipsychotic drug, resulted in a greater reduction from baseline in the PANSS total score than placebo. Longer and larger trials are necessary to confirm the effects and side effects of SEP-363856, as well as its efficacy relative to existing drug treatments for patients with schizophrenia. (Funded by Sunovion Pharmaceuticals; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02969382.).
Trace-amine-associated receptors (TAARs), a group of biogenic amine receptors, have essential roles in neurological and metabolic homeostasis(1). They recognize diverse endogenous trace amines and subsequently activate a range of G-protein-subtype signalling pathways(2,3). Notably, TAAR1 has emerged as a promising therapeutic target for treating psychiatric disorders(4,5). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying its ability to recognize different ligands remain largely unclear. Here we present nine cryo-electron microscopy structures, with eight showing human and mouse TAAR1 in a complex with an array of ligands, including the endogenous 3-iodothyronamine, two antipsychotic agents, the psychoactive drug amphetamine and two identified catecholamine agonists, and one showing 5-HT(1A)R in a complex with an antipsychotic agent. These structures reveal a rigid consensus binding motif in TAAR1 that binds to endogenous trace amine stimuli and two extended binding pockets that accommodate diverse chemotypes. Combined with mutational analysis, functional assays and molecular dynamic simulations, we elucidate the structural basis of drug polypharmacology and identify the species-specific differences between human and mouse TAAR1. Our study provides insights into the mechanism of ligand recognition and G-protein selectivity by TAAR1, which may help in the discovery of ligands or therapeutic strategies for neurological and metabolic disorders.
Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) are a family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) that are evolutionarily conserved in vertebrates. The first discovered TAAR1 is mainly expressed in the brain, and is able to detect low abundant trace amines. TAAR1 is also activated by several synthetic compounds and psychostimulant drugs like amphetamine. Activation of TAAR1 by specific agonists can regulate the classical monoaminergic systems in the brain. Further studies have revealed that other TAAR family members are highly expressed in the olfactory system which are termed olfactory TAARs. In vertebrates, olfactory TAARs can specifically recognize volatile or water-soluble amines. Some of these TAAR agonists are produced by decarboxylation of amino acids. In addition, some TAAR agonists are ethological odors that mediate animal innate behaviors. In this study, we provide a comprehensive review of TAAR agonists, including their structures, biosynthesis pathways, and functions.
d-Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) is known for its hallucinogenic properties and psychotic-like symptoms, especially at high doses. It is indeed used as a pharmacological model of psychosis in preclinical research. The goal of this review was to understand the mechanism of action of psychotic-like effects of LSD. We searched Pubmed, Web of Science, Scopus, Google Scholar and articles' reference lists for preclinical studies regarding the mechanism of action involved in the psychotic-like effects induced by LSD. LSD's mechanism of action is pleiotropic, primarily mediated by the serotonergic system in the Dorsal Raphe, binding the 5-HT(2A) receptor as a partial agonist and 5-HT(1A) as an agonist. LSD also modulates the Ventral Tegmental Area, at higher doses, by stimulating dopamine D(2), Trace Amine Associate receptor 1 (TAAR(1)) and 5-HT(2A). More studies clarifying the mechanism of action of the psychotic-like symptoms or psychosis induced by LSD in humans are needed. LSD's effects are mediated by a pleiotropic mechanism involving serotonergic, dopaminergic, and glutamatergic neurotransmission. Thus, the LSD-induced psychosis is a useful model to test the therapeutic efficacy of potential novel antipsychotic drugs, particularly drugs with dual serotonergic and dopaminergic (DA) mechanism or acting on TAAR(1) receptors.
Trace amine-associated receptor 1 is one of the best-characterized receptors of trace amines. Growing evidence shows that TAAR1 negatively regulates the monoaminergic activity, including dopamine transmission in the mesocorticolimbic system. Neurochemical assays demonstrated that selective TAAR1 full and partial agonists were effective to prevent psychostimulants-induced dopamine transmission in vitro and in vivo. In the last decade, many preclinical models of psychostimulant addiction such as drug-induced behavioral sensitization, drug-induced conditioned place preference, drug self-administration, drug discrimination, and relapse models were used to assess the effects of TAAR1 agonists on psychostimulants' behavioral effects. In general, activation of TAAR1 attenuated while knockout of TAAR1 potentiated psychostimulant abuse-related behaviors. Here, we review the advances in TAAR1 and its agonists in modulating psychostimulant addiction. We discuss the similarities and differences between the neurochemical and behavioral effects of TAAR1 full and partial agonists. We also discuss several concerns including the abuse liability, sleep reduction, and species-dependent effects that might affect the successful translation of TAAR1 agonists from preclinical studies to clinical application. In conclusion, although further investigations are in need to address certain concerns and the underlying neural mechanisms, TAAR1 agonists appear to be a promising pharmacotherapy to treat psychostimulant addiction and prevent relapse.
Despite extensive research efforts aimed at discovering novel antipsychotic compounds, a satisfactory pharmacological strategy for schizophrenia treatment remains elusive. All the currently available drugs act by modulating dopaminergic neurotransmission, leading to insufficient management of the negative and cognitive symptoms of the disorder. Due to these challenges, several attempts have been made to design agents with innovative, non-dopaminergic mechanisms of action. Consequently, a number of promising compounds are currently progressing through phases 2 and 3 of clinical trials. This review aims to examine the rationale behind the most promising of these strategies while simultaneously providing a comprehensive survey of study results. We describe the versatility behind the cholinergic neurotransmission modulation through the activation of M(1) and M(4) receptors, exemplified by the prospective drug candidate KarXT. Our discussion extends to the innovative approach of activating TAAR1 receptors via ulotaront, along with the promising outcomes of iclepertin, a GlyT-1 inhibitor with the potential to become the first treatment option for cognitive impairment associated with schizophrenia. Finally, we evaluate the 5-HT(2A) antagonist paradigm, assessing two recently developed serotonergic agents, pimavanserin and roluperidone. We present the latest advancements in developing novel solutions to the complex challenges posed by schizophrenia, offering an additional perspective on the diverse investigated drug candidates.
The incidence of metabolic syndrome is significantly higher in patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), but the mechanisms involved remain unclear. Gut microbiota is causatively linked with the development of both metabolic dysfunctions and gastrointestinal disorders, thus gut dysbiosis in IBS may contribute to the development of metabolic syndrome. Here, we show that human gut bacterium Ruminococcus gnavus-derived tryptamine and phenethylamine play a pathogenic role in gut dysbiosis-induced insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes (T2D) and IBS. We show levels of R. gnavus, tryptamine, and phenethylamine are positively associated with insulin resistance in T2D patients and IBS patients. Monoassociation of R. gnavus impairs insulin sensitivity and glucose control in germ-free mice. Mechanistically, treatment of R. gnavus-derived metabolites tryptamine and phenethylamine directly impair insulin signaling in major metabolic tissues of healthy mice and monkeys and this effect is mediated by the trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1)-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling axis. Our findings suggest a causal role for tryptamine/phenethylamine-producers in the development of insulin resistance, provide molecular mechanisms for the increased prevalence of metabolic syndrome in IBS, and highlight the TAAR1 signaling axis as a potential therapeutic target for the management of metabolic syndrome induced by gut dysbiosis.
There are nine subfamilies of TAARs. They are predominantly intracellular, located in the central nervous system and peripherally. They have a role in homeostasis and rheostasis, and also in olfaction. They demonstrate significant cross-talk with the monoamine system and are involved in the regulation of cAMP signalling and K(+) channels. There is evidence to suggest that TAAR1 may be a promising therapeutic target for the treatment of schizophrenia, psychosis in Parkinson's disease, substance use disorders, and the metabolic syndrome and obesity. TAAR1 expression may also be a prognostic biomarker for cancers. A number of TAAR modulators have been identified, including endogenous ligands and new chemical entities. Some of these agents have shown efficacy in animal models of addiction behaviours, depression and anxiety. Only one agent, SEP-363856, has progressed to randomised clinical trials in humans; however further, larger studies with SEP-363856 are required to clarify its suitability as a new treatment for schizophrenia spectrum disorders. SEP-363856 is an agonist of TAAR1 and 5HT(1A) and it is not clear to what extent its efficacy can be attributed to TAAR1 rather than to other drug targets. However, current research suggests that TAAR1 has an important role in human physiology and pathophysiology. TAAR1 modulators may become an important new drug class for the management of a wide array of mental disorders in the future.
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) represent a family of druggable targets when treating several diseases and continue to be a leading part of the drug discovery process. Trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) are GPCRs involved in many physiological functions with TAAR1 having important roles within the central nervous system (CNS). By using homology modeling methods, the responsiveness of TAAR1 to endogenous and synthetic ligands has been explored. In addition, the discovery of different chemo-types as selective murine and/or human TAAR1 ligands has helped in the understanding of the species-specificity preferences. The availability of TAAR1-ligand complexes sheds light on how different ligands bind TAAR1. TAAR5 is considered an olfactory receptor but has specific involvement in some brain functions. In this case, the drug discovery effort has been limited. Here, we review the successful computational efforts developed in the search for novel TAAR1 and TAAR5 ligands. A specific focus on applying structure-based and/or ligand-based methods has been done. We also give a perspective of the experimental data available to guide the future drug design of new ligands, probing species-specificity preferences towards more selective ligands. Hints for applying repositioning approaches are also discussed.
Introduction: The greater interest in TAAR1-mediated potential for the treatment of different pathologies, especially those related to CNS disorders, has given a considerable boost to the search for developing TAAR1-selective small molecules.Areas covered: During the last decade, the medicinal chemistry efforts have allowed the yield of various chemotypes to be properly dressed toward TAAR1 receptor. The more relevant chemical features and structure-activity relationship studies on the TAAR1 ligands will be discussed in order to guide future drug discovery investigations.Expert opinion: The discovery of TAAR receptors has allowed better investigation of the role played by TAs, not only as secondary neuromodulators, but also as neurotransmitters, even if it should still be completely clarified. This has drawn new ways for further insights around the TAAR1 involvement in numerous diseases. Despite this, the limited number of promising ligands targeting hTAAR1 orthologue makes the discovery of novel compounds still a challenging task. Relevant efforts have to be focused on safe ligands, devoid of any side-efficacy toward other highly related GPCR (monoaminergic systems). Moreover, species-specificity preferences experienced by numerous compounds so far investigated, based on rodent models and translated to the human environment, turn in a critical bottleneck in drug discovery.
Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1), a member of the trace amine receptor family, recognizes various trace amines in the brain, including endogenous beta-phenylethylamine (PEA) and methamphetamine (METH). TAAR1 is a novel target for several neurological disorders, including schizophrenia, depression, and substance abuse. Herein, we report the structure of the human TAAR1-G(s) protein complex bound to METH. Using functional studies, we reveal the molecular basis of METH recognition by TAAR1, and potential mechanisms underlying the selectivity of TAAR1 for different ligands. Molecular dynamics simulations further elucidated possible mechanisms for the binding of chiral amphetamine (AMPH)-like psychoactive drugs to TAAR1. Additionally, we discovered a hydrophobic core on the transmembrane helices (TM), TM5 and TM6, explaining the unique mechanism of TAAR1 activation. These findings reveal the ligand recognition pattern and activation mechanism of TAAR1, which has important implications for the development of next-generation treatments for substance abuse and various neurological disorders.
Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) has emerged as a promising therapeutic target for neuropsychiatric disorders due to its ability to modulate monoaminergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission. In particular, agonist compounds have generated interest as potential treatments for schizophrenia and other psychoses due to TAAR1-mediated regulation of dopaminergic tone. Here, we review unmet needs in schizophrenia, the current state of knowledge in TAAR1 circuit biology and neuropharmacology, including preclinical behavioral, imaging, and cellular evidence in glutamatergic, dopaminergic and genetic models linked to the pathophysiology of psychotic, negative and cognitive symptoms. Clinical trial data for TAAR1 drug candidates are reviewed and contrasted with antipsychotics. The identification of endogenous TAAR1 ligands and subsequent development of small-molecule agonists has revealed antipsychotic-, anxiolytic-, and antidepressant-like properties, as well as pro-cognitive and REM-sleep suppressing effects of TAAR1 activation in rodents and non-human primates. Ulotaront, the first TAAR1 agonist to progress to randomized controlled clinical trials, has demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of schizophrenia, while another, ralmitaront, is currently being evaluated in clinical trials in schizophrenia. Coupled with the preclinical findings, this provides a rationale for further investigation and development of this new pharmacological class for the treatment of schizophrenia and other psychiatric disorders.
The existing available antipsychotics have failed to manage the cognitive impairment of schizophrenia and induced a number of seriously undesirable effects. Trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) has emerged as an ideal target for the design of antischizophrenia drugs, with the ability to mediate multiple psychological functions by sensing endogenous amine-containing metabolites without the side effects of catalepsy. In this work, a series of novel TAAR1 agonists were designed based on the structural analysis of the TAAR1 activation pocket. Among them, 6e displayed a potent TAAR1-G(s)/G(q) dual-pathway activation property, being different from that of the clinical drug candidate SEP-363856 with only TAAR1-G(s) pathway activation. In rodent models, 6e significantly alleviated MK-801-induced schizophrenia-like cognitive phenotypes without inducing catalepsy. Furthermore, 6e.HCl exhibited favorable pharmacokinetic (T(1/2) = 2.31 h, F = 39%) and safety properties. All these demonstrated that 6e.HCl may be used as a novel drug candidate for schizophrenia treatment.
There is a need for innovation with respect to therapeutics in psychiatry. Available evidence indicates that the trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1) agonist SEP-363856 is promising, as it improves measures of cognitive and reward function in schizophrenia. Hedonic and cognitive impairments are transdiagnostic and constitute major burdens in mood disorders. Herein, we systematically review the behavioural and genetic literature documenting the role of TAAR1 in reward and cognitive function, and propose a mechanistic model of TAAR1's functions in the brain. Notably, TAAR1 activity confers antidepressant-like effects, enhances attention and response inhibition, and reduces compulsive reward seeking without impairing normal function. Further characterization of the responsible mechanisms suggests ion-homeostatic, metabolic, neurotrophic, and anti-inflammatory enhancements in the limbic system. Multiple lines of evidence establish the viability of TAAR1 as a biological target for the treatment of mood disorders. Furthermore, the evidence suggests a role for TAAR1 in reward and cognitive function, which is attributed to a cascade of events that are relevant to the cellular integrity and function of the central nervous system.
Trace-amines (TAs) are endogenous amines that are implicated in several physiological processes including modulation of aminergic neurotransmission. These compounds exert their effect by activating a class of G protein-coupled receptors termed Trace-Amine Associated Receptors (TAARs), where TAAR1 is the only human receptor that has been shown to bind endogenous TAs. Most of the studies have focused on studying the role of TAAR1 on modulation of the dopamine transmission. These studies indicate that TAAR1 is a negative regulator of dopamine transmission making TAAR1 a novel target for neuropsychiatric disorders that arises from dopamine dysfunction such as schizophrenia. This review discusses the unique pharmacology of TAAR1 with the major focus on the physiological role of TAAR1 and its modulation of dopamine transmission.
