Thromboxane A synthase 1; Belongs to the cytochrome P450 family.
Our knowledge of genetic predisposing factors of drug hypersensitivity reactions (DHRs) is still scarce. The analysis of the genetic basis of these reactions may contribute to dissect the underlying mechanisms. We will outline current knowledge of the genetic predictors of most common DHRs, including reactions to betalactam antibiotics (BLs), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and biological agents. The predictors of DHRs to BLs are mostly linked to IgE-class switching, IgE pathway and atopy (IL4R, NOD2, LGALS3) in replicated candidate gene studies, and to antigen presentation (HLA-DRA) in the single replicated GWAS performed so far. The HLA-DRA variants are predictors of allergy to penicillins, but not to cephalosporins and they influence also the sensitization against prevalent allergens. The predictors of DHRs against NSAIDs are mostly linked to metabolism of eicosanoids (ALOX5, ALOX5AP, TBXAS1, PTGDR, CYSLTR1). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes involved in histamine biosynthesis and antigen presentation, HLA, could also have a role in DHRs against NSAIDs. The intriguing association of DHRs to NSAIDs with atopy should deserve further attention. Predictors of DHRs against asparaginase and other biological agents relate to antigen presentation (HLA-DRB1 and HLA-A alleles, respectively). The potential relationship of genetic predictors of DHRs with pathomechanisms also involved in environmental exposure and atopy highlights the need to perform GWAS in contrasted populations, taking into account world-wide variations of allele frequencies and contrasted situations of environmental exposure.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Hua Zhuo Ning Fu Decoction (HZD) is an empirical prescription from traditional Chinese medicine that shows excellent clinical results for psoriasis patients. Uncertainty lingered over HZD's potential anti-psoriasis mechanisms. AIM OF THE STUDY: The study's objective is to investigate the pharmacological processes and therapeutic effects of HZD on psoriasis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the initial phase of the study, an investigation was conducted to assess the effects of HZD on psoriasis-afflicted mice using an imiquimod (IMQ)-induced murine model. The experimental mice were randomly allocated to different groups, including the IMQ-induced model group, the control group, the HZD therapy groups with varying dosage levels (low, medium, and high), and Dexamethasone (DEX, the positive control medicine) group. Bioinformatics analysis and molecular docking were subsequently employed to identify the primary components and molecular targets associated with the therapeutic action of HZD in the context of psoriasis. Additionally, to find the impacts on metabolite regulation, plasma metabolomics based on ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UPLC-QTOF/MS) was used. It's interesting to note that the combined mechanisms from metabolomics were examined in tandem with the targets. In vivo tests were the last step in validating the potential mechanism. Throughout the trial, the following data were recorded: body weight, psoriasis area and severity index (PASI). The molecular targets connected to HZD's anti-psoriasis activities were revealed using histological examination, western blot (WB), and ELISA investigation. RESULTS: In mice induced with IMQ, HZD shown good anti-psoriasis effects in terms of PASI score and epidermal acanthosis. 95 HZD targets and 77 bioactive chemicals connected to psoriasis were found by bioinformatics research; of these, 7 key targets (EPHX2, PLA2G2A, TBXAS1, MAOA, ALDH1A3, ADH1A, and ADH1B) were linked to the mechanisms of HZD, the combination degree of which was finally expressed by the score of docking. In addition, HZD regulated nine metabolites. In line with this, HZD modified three metabolic pathways. Additionally, a combined examination of 7 key targets and 9 metabolites suggested that the metabolism of arachidonic acid might be the key metabolic route, which was identified by ELISA analysis. The in vivo investigation shown that HZD could control cytokines associated to inflammation (IL-10, TGF-beta, IL-17A, and IL-23), as well as important antioxidant system markers (ROS, GSH, and MDA). Moreover, HZD controlled iron levels and the expression of ferroptosis-related proteins (ACSL4 and GPX4), suggesting that ferroptosis played a crucial role in this process. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated the whole mechanism and anti-psoriasis effectiveness of HZD, which will promote its clinical application and aid in the investigation of new bioactive components of HZD against psoriasis.
Over the last two decades, there has been an increasing awareness of the role of eicosanoids in the development and progression of several types of cancer, including breast, prostate, lung, and colorectal cancers. Several processes involved in cancer development, such as cell growth, migration, and angiogenesis, are regulated by the arachidonic acid derivative thromboxane A(2) (TXA(2)). Higher levels of circulating TXA(2) are observed in patients with multiple cancers, and this is accompanied by overexpression of TXA(2) synthase (TBXAS1, TXA(2)S) and/or TXA(2) receptors (TBXA2R, TP). Overexpression of TXA(2)S or TP in tumor cells is generally associated with poor prognosis, reduced survival, and metastatic disease. However, the role of TXA(2) signaling in the stroma during oncogenesis has been underappreciated. TXA(2) signaling regulates the tumor microenvironment by modulating angiogenic potential, tumor ECM stiffness, and host immune response. Moreover, the by-products of TXA(2)S are highly mutagenic and oncogenic, adding to the overall phenotype where TXA(2) synthesis promotes tumor formation at various levels. The stability of synthetic enzymes and receptors in this pathway in most cancers (with few mutations reported) suggests that TXA(2) signaling is a viable target for adjunct therapy in various tumors to reduce immune evasion, primary tumor growth, and metastasis.
Clinical evidence recently suggests that the regular use of aspirin is associated with a lower risk of breast cancer metastasis, but mechanisms remain unclear. Resistance to anoikis has been implicated in malignant transformation and metastasis. Here, we investigated whether aspirin might prevent breast cancer metastasis to lung by targeting anoikis resistance. Aspirin sensitized breast cancer cells to anoikis in vitro and lowered the circulating tumor cells as well as distant metastasis in vivo. Mechanistically, thromboxane A2 (TXA2) pathway was identified as the relevant molecular target for aspirin in anoikis sensitization. Upon detachment, both thromboxane A2 receptor (TP) and thromboxane A2 synthase 1 (TBXAS1) were up-regulated in metastatic breast cancer cells, conferred anoikis resistance through persistent activation of Akt, thereby facilitated breast cancer metastasis to lung. Consistently, either knockdown of TP in cancer cells or genetic deletion of TP in mice protected against lung metastasis in vivo. Collectively, TXA2 pathway plays a critical role in anoikis resistance and might serve as potential target for chemoprevention of breast cancer metastasis.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the expression patterns of a specific set of genes involved in the inflammation process in children with Down Syndrome (DS) and children without the syndrome (control group) to identify differences that may be related to the immune abnormalities observed in DS individuals. METHOD: RNA samples were obtained from peripheral blood, and gene expression was quantified using the TaqMan(R) Array Plate Human Inflammation Kit, which facilitated the investigation into 92 inflammation-related genes and four reference genes using real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). RESULTS: Twenty genes showed differential expression in children with DS; 12 were overexpressed (PLA2G2D, CACNA1D, ALOX12, VCAM1, ICAM1, PLCD1, ADRB1, HTR3A, PDE4C, CASP1, PLA2G5, and PLCB4), and eight were underexpressed (LTA4H, BDKRB1, ADRB2, CD40LG, ITGAM, TNFRSF1B, ITGB1, and TBXAS1). After statistically correcting for the false discovery rate, only the genes BDKRB1 and LTA4H showed differential expression, and both were underexpressed within the DS group. CONCLUSION: DS children showed differential expression of inflammation-related genes that were not located on chromosome 21 compared with children without DS. The BDKRB1 and LTA4H genes may differentiate the case and control groups based on the inflammatory response, which plays an important role in DS pathogenesis.
As major components of the tumor microenvironment (TME), tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) play an exceedingly complicated role in tumor progression and tumorigenesis. However, few studies have reported the specific TAM gene signature in bladder cancer. Herein, this study focused on developing a TAM-related prognostic model in bladder cancer patients based on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data. Weighted Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) was used to identify key genes related to TAM (M2 macrophage). Gene ontology (GO) enrichment and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) signaling pathway analysis showed the functional categories of the key genes. Simultaneously, we used the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) and univariate and multivariate Cox regressions to establish a TMA-related prognostic model containing six key genes: TBXAS1, GYPC, HPGDS, GAB3, ADORA3, and FOLR2. Subsequently, single-cell sequencing data downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) suggested that the six genes in the prognostic model were expressed in TAM specifically and may be involved in TAM polarization. In summary, our research uncovered six-TAM related genes that may have an effect on risk stratification in bladder cancer patients and could be regarded as potential TAM-related biomarkers.
Malignant mesothelioma is an aggressive and therapy-resistant neoplasm arising from mesothelial cells. Evidence suggests that the major pathology associated with asbestos-induced mesothelioma is local iron overload. In the present study, we induced iron-induced mesothelioma in rats based on previous reports. Ten Wistar rats were given ferric saccharate and nitrilotriacetate i.p. for 5 days a week. Five of the ten rats exhibited widespread mesotheliomas in the peritoneum and tunica vaginalis. The tumor cells showed positive immunostaining for calretinin, wilms tumor-1, podoplanin and the oxidative DNA marker 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine. In three of the five rats with mesothelioma, array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis identified a common chromosomal deletion mapped to the chromosomal 4q31 locus, which encompasses the TBXAS1 gene. Downregulation of the TBXAS1 gene was confirmed using quantitative PCR. TBXAS1 gene expression was also reduced in three of four human malignant pleural mesothelioma cell lines compared with normal bronchial epithelial cells. Immunohistochemistry revealed that TBXAS1 expression was weakly positive and positive in five and three out of eight human malignant mesothelioma samples, respectively. In conclusion, TBXAS1 gene expression was downregulated in rats with iron-induced mesothelioma. The relationship between iron overload and TBXAS1 downregulation should be pursued further.
Aspirin has been widely used for the prevention of cardiovascular diseases, but its antiplatelet efficiency varies between individuals. The present study aimed to evaluate response to aspirin based on gene profiles as well as potential regulating pathways using human blood samples and cell lines. Platelet function in patients 50 years or older with coronary artery disease on 100 mg/day aspirin was measured by light transmission aggregometry (LTA) of arachidonic acid (AA)-induced platelet aggregation. The expression of eight candidate genes-PTGS1/COX1, PLA2G4A, PLA2G6, PLA2G7, TBXAS1, TBXA2R, PTGIR, and ITGA2B-and the ingredients involved in AA metabolism were analyzed. Our data showed that the expressions of thromboxane A synthase 1 (TBXAS1), thromboxane synthase (TXS), and thromboxane B(2) (TXB(2)) were increased in the upper quartile of platelet aggregation (LTA-AA_Q4) group compared with the lower quartile of platelet aggregation (LTA-AA_Q1) group. Our bioinformatics analysis suggested that TBXAS1 was targeted by miR-34b-3p via binding to its 3'-UTR, which was subsequently verified experimentally. Although overexpression of miR-34b-3p exhibited no apparent effect on cell proliferation, inhibition of miR-34b-3p promoted megakaryocyte viability. Our data demonstrated that the expression of TBXAS1 was higher in the aspirin hyporesponsiveness group than that in the hyperresponsiveness group, suggesting that high expression of TBXAS1 may be associated with aspirin hyporesponsiveness. miR-34b-3p may regulate the platelet and aspirin response by suppressing TBXAS1 expression and megakaryocyte proliferation.
BACKGROUND: Eicosanoids may play a role in ischemic stroke (IS). However, the association of variants in eicosanoid genes with symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis and neurologic deterioration (ND) is not fully understood. The aim of the present study was to investigate the association of 11 variants in eicosanoid genes with symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis and ND. METHODS: Eleven variants in eicosanoid genes were examined using mass spectrometry method in 297 IS patients. The symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis was assessed by computed tomographic angiography. Platelet aggregation and platelet-leukocyte aggregates were measured. The primary outcome was ND within 10 days of admission. ND was defined as an increase of 2 or more points in National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score. RESULTS: Among 297 IS patients, 182 (61.3%) cases had symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis, and 88 (29.6%) patients experienced ND within 10 days after admission. Symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis was significantly associated with higher ND (P < .001). Rs20417CC, rs41708TT, and rs5629CC were independent risk factors for symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis and ND, and associated with higher platelet aggregation and platelet-leukocyte aggregates. CONCLUSIONS: Symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis was associated with higher ND. Rs20417CC, rs41708TT, and rs5629CC were not only independent risk factors for symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis, but also independent risk predictors for ND.
Prostanoids are well-described primary mediators of inflammatory processes and are essential for the normal physiological function of the female reproductive system. The aim of this study was to determine the temporal expression of the prostanoid biosynthetic enzymes (PTGS1, PTGS2, PTGES, PTGES2, PTGES3, AKR1B1, AKR1C3, CBR1, HPGDS, PTGDS, PTGIS, TBXAS1 and HPGD) and the prostanoid receptors (PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, PTGER4, PTGFR, PTGDR, GPR44, PTGIR and TBXA2R) in the human endometrium throughout the menstrual cycle. The analysis identified PTGFR to have a distinct expression profile compared with other components of the prostanoid system, as expression is maximal during the proliferative phase. Immunohistochemical analysis for PTGER1 suggests a dual function for this receptor depending on its temporal (proliferative versus secretory) and spatial (nuclear versus cell membrane) expression. The expression profiles of the PGF(2alpha) synthases identified AKR1B1 and CBR1 as the likely regulators of PGF(2alpha) production during the menstrual phase. Immunohistochemical analysis for AKR1B1, CBR1 and AKR1C3 suggest expression to be in the glandular epithelium and vasculature. This study represents the first comprehensive analysis of the components of prostanoid biosynthetic and signalling pathway in the human endometrium. The expression profiles described have the potential to identify specific prostanoid components that may be dysregulated in inflammatory-associated disorders of the endometrium.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between thromboxane A synthase 1 (TBXAS1) gene polymorphism and metabolic syndrome (MS) and explore whether gene polymorphism could act as biomarkers in MS and its components or whether it could play a role in MS-related damage. METHODS: A total of 3072 eligible subjects were obtained, of which 1079 cases were controls and 1993 cases were MS patients. Subjects were followed up for 5 years, and the endpoint were recorded. The gene polymorphism of TBXAS1 was detected by using the Sequenom MassArray method. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in ischemic stroke and NC_000007.14: g.139985896C>T (P < 0.05). The incidence of ischemic stroke was significantly higher in T allele carriers than in C (P < 0.05). C allele was the protective factor of the onset of ischemic stroke. There were negative interactions between C allele and waist circumference (WC), systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and fasting plasma glucose (FPG). CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that NC_000007.14: g.139985896C>T was related to the incidence of ischemic stroke in the whole and MS population, and individuals who carry the C allele have a reduced risk of ischemic stroke, which may be used as a promising biomarker of disease risk in patients with MS.
Although depression is an emerging disorder affecting many people worldwide, most genetic studies have been performed in European descent populations. Herein, a genome-wide association study (GWAS) was conducted in Korean population to elucidate the genomic loci associated with depressive symptoms. Two independent cohorts were used as discovery datasets, which consisted of 6474 (1484 cases and 4990 controls) and 1654 (557 cases and 1097 controls) Korean participants, respectively. The participants were divided into case and control groups based on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Meta-analysis using the two cohorts revealed that rs6945590 was significantly associated with the risk of depressive symptoms [P = 2.83 x 10(-8); odds ratio (OR) = 1.23; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.15-1.33]. This association was validated in other independent cohorts which were another Korean cohort (258 cases and 1757 controls) and the East Asian study of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) (12,455 cases and 85,548 controls). The predicted expression levels of thromboxane A synthase 1 gene (TBXAS1), which encodes the enzyme thromboxane A synthase 1 and participates in the arachidonic acid (AA) cascade, was significantly decreased in the whole blood tissues of the participants with depressive symptoms. Furthermore, Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis showed a causal association between TBXAS1 expression and the risk of depressive symptoms. In conclusion, as the number of risk alleles (A) of rs6945590 increased, TBXAS1 expression decreased, which subsequently caused an increase in the risk of depressive symptoms.
Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia (GHDD) is a rare, autosomal recessive condition characterised by diaphyseal dysplasia of long bones with defective haematopoiesis. We describe 2 such cases with clinical and radiological evidence of GHDD. Molecular analysis revealed novel variants in TBXAS1 gene in both of them. Suspicion and confirmation of this entity is crucial in cases of refractory anemia with bony deformities, as the clinical manifestations in this entity are usually well responsive to corticosteroids.
BACKGROUND: Ghosal Type Hematodiaphyseal Dysplasia is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by refractory anemia and diaphyseal bone dysplasia. CASE CHARACTERISTICS: A 3 y 9 mo-old male child presented with progressive anemia and bowing of thighs. Child was found to have a previously reported homozygous point mutation c.1238G>A, (p.Arg413Glu) in Exon 16 of TBXAS1 gene. OUTCOME: Low dose steroid therapy resulted in normalization of hemoglobin and prevented further progression of bony changes. MESSAGE: Refractory anemia in association with bony deformities should prompt pediatricians to investigate for inherited bony dysplasia.
The aim of the study is the identification of genetic factors that influence the long-term response to interferon-beta (IFNbeta) (4-year follow-up). We performed a genome-wide association study in 337 IFNbeta-treated Italian multiple sclerosis patients at the extreme of treatment response, and we meta-analyzed association effects, integrating results with pathway analysis, gene-expression profiling of IFNbeta-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 20 healthy controls (HC) and expression quantitative locus (eQTL) analyses. From meta-analysis, 43 markers were associated at P<10(-4), and two of them (rs7298096 and rs4726460) pointed to two genes, NINJ2 and TBXAS1, that were significantly downregulated after IFNbeta stimulation in HC (P=3.1 x 10(-9) and 5.6 x 10(-10)). We also observed an eQTL effect for the allele associated with favorable treatment response (rs4726460(A)); moreover, TBXAS1 appeared downregulated upon IFNbeta administration (beta=-0.39; P=0.02). Finally, we found an enrichment of pathways related to inflammatory processes and presynaptic membrane, the latter with involvement of genes related to glutamatergic system (GRM3 and GRIK2), confirming its potential role in the response to IFNbeta.
INTRODUCTION: Metastasis is the major cause of thyroid cancer morbidity and mortality. However, the mechanisms are still poorly understood. METHODS: We performed genome-wide transcriptome analysis comparing gene expression profile of metastatic thyroid cancer cells (Met) with primary tumor cells established from transgenic mouse models of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), follicular thyroid cancer (FTC), poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (PDTC), and anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC). RESULTS: Genes involved in tumor microenvironment (TME), inflammation, and immune escape were significantly overexpressed in Met cells. Notably, IL-6-mediated inflammatory and PD-L1 pathways were highly active in Met cells with increased secretion of pro-inflammatory and pro-metastatic cytokines such as CCL2, CCL11, IL5, IL6, and CXCL5. Furthermore, Met cells showed robust overexpression of Tbxas1, a thromboxane A synthase 1 gene that catalyzes the conversion of prostaglandin H2 to thromboxane A2 (TXA2), a potent inducer of platelet aggregation. Application of aspirin, a TXA2 inhibitor, significantly reduced lung metastases. Mertk, a member of the TAM (Tyro, Axl, Mertk) family of RTKs, was also overexpressed in Met cells, which led to increased MAPK activation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and enrichment of cancer stem cells. Braf-mutant Met cells developed resistance to BRAFV600E inhibitor PLX4720, but remained sensitive to beta-catenin inhibitor PKF118-310. CONCLUSION: We have identified several overexpressed genes/pathways in thyroid cancer metastasis, making them attractive therapeutic targets. Given the complexity of metastasis involving multiple pathways (PD-L1, Mertk, IL6, COX-1/Tbxas1-TXA2), simultaneously targeting more than one of these pathways may be warranted to achieve better therapeutic effect for metastatic thyroid cancer.
BACKGROUND: Low-grade serous ovarian cancer (LGSOC) is a rare disease that occurs more frequently in younger women than those with high-grade disease. The current treatment is suboptimal and a better understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of this disease is required. In this study, we compared the proteogenomic analyses of LGSOCs from short- and long-term survivors (defined as < 40 and > 60 months, respectively). Our goal was to identify novel mutations, proteins, and mRNA transcripts that are dysregulated in LGSOC, particularly in short-term survivors. METHODS: Initially, targeted sequencing of 409 cancer-related genes was performed on 22 LGSOC and 6 serous borderline ovarian tumor samples. Subsequently, whole-genome sequencing analysis was performed on 14 LGSOC samples (7 long-term survivors and 7 short-term survivors) with matched normal tissue samples. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), quantitative proteomics, and phosphoproteomic analyses were also performed. RESULTS: We identified single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) (range: 5688-14,833 per sample), insertion and deletion variants (indels) (range: 880-1065), and regions with copy number variants (CNVs) (range: 62-335) among the 14 LGSOC samples. Among all SNVs and indels, 2637 mutation sites were found in the exonic regions. The allele frequencies of the detected variants were low (median12%). The identified recurrent nonsynonymous missense mutations included KRAS, NRAS, EIF1AX, UBR5, and DNM3 mutations. Mutations in DNM3 and UBR5 have not previously been reported in LGSOC. For the two samples, somatic DNM3 nonsynonymous missense mutations in the exonic region were validated using Sanger sequencing. The third sample contained two missense mutations in the intronic region of DNM3, leading to a frameshift mutation detected in RNA transcripts in the RNA-seq data. Among the 14 LGSOC samples, 7754 proteins and 9733 phosphosites were detected by global proteomic analysis. Some of these proteins and signaling pathways, such as BST1, TBXAS1, MPEG1, HBA1, and phosphorylated ASAP1, are potential therapeutic targets. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to use whole-genome sequencing to detect somatic mutations in LGSOCs with matched normal tissues. We detected and validated novel mutations in DNM3, which were present in 3 of the 14 samples analyzed. Additionally, we identified novel indels, regions with CNVs, dysregulated mRNA, dysregulated proteins, and phosphosites that are more prevalent in short-term survivors. This integrated proteogenomic analysis can guide research into the pathogenesis and treatment of LGSOC.
Large artery atherosclerosis (LAA) is known as an important cause of ischemic stroke (IS), which is a multifactorial disorder. Many candidate genes have been proposed for IS like (TBXAS1) that plays a significant role in LAA stroke pathogenesis. This is the first study on the evaluation of the association of the five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TBXAS1 promoter region and the level of TBXAS1 transcript with large-artery atherosclerosis stroke. Five SNPs in TBXAS1 genes were investigated in 248 patients with large-artery atherosclerosis stroke and 199 healthy controls in Iranian population in this case-control study through using the high-resolution melting assay. In addition, the relationships between the selected SNPs with alteration of TBXAS1 gene expressions were investigated in terms of blood platelets through the reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Multivariate logistic analysis with adjustments indicated that rs10256282CC, rs10237429CC, and rs4590360GG genotypes were associated with large-artery atherosclerosis stroke (adjusted odds ratio = 2.804, 2.872, and 2.432, respectively; P < 0.05, q < 0.05). Furthermore, the frequency of CACCG haplotype in the patients was greatly higher than that in the controls (OR = 1.424, 95% CI: 1.071-1.893, P = 0.014738). In addition, TBXAS1 expression was higher in patients compared to the controls (P = 0.021), and individuals with the homozygous mutated genotypes of these SNPs showed a higher expression level compared to other genotype (P < 0.05). In total, our findings indicate a significant association of TBXAS1 gene rs10256282CC, rs10237429CC, and rs4590360GG polymorphisms with large-artery atherosclerosis stroke susceptibility and the level of TBXAS1 expression, which was not previously reported in any population.
The gene encoding human thromboxane synthase (TBXAS1) was isolated from a human EMBL3 genomic library using human platelet thromboxane synthase cDNA as a probe. Nucleotide sequencing revealed that the human thromboxane synthase gene spans more than 75 kb and consists of 13 exons and 12 introns, of which the splice donor and acceptor sites conform to the GT/AG rule. The exon-intron boundaries of the thromboxane synthase gene were similar to those of the human cytochrome P450 nifedipine oxidase gene (CYP3A4) except for introns 9 and 10, although the primary sequences of these enzymes exhibited 35.8% identity each other. The 1.2-kb of the 5'-flanking region sequence contained potential binding sites for several transcription factors (AP-1, AP-2, GATA-1, CCAAT box, xenobiotic-response element, PEA-3, LF-A1, myb, basic transcription element and cAMP-response element). Primer-extension analysis indicated the multiple transcription-start sites, and the major start site was identified as an adenine residue located 142 bases upstream of the translation-initiation site. However, neither a typical TATA box nor a typical CAAT box is found within the 100-b upstream of the translation-initiation site. Southern-blot analysis revealed the presence of one copy of the thromboxane synthase gene per haploid genome. Furthermore, a fluorescence in situ hybridization study revealed that the human gene for thromboxane synthase is localized to band q33-q34 of the long arm of chromosome 7. A tissue-distribution study demonstrated that thromboxane synthase mRNA is widely expressed in human tissues and is particularly abundant in peripheral blood leukocyte, spleen, lung and liver. The low but significant levels of mRNA were observed in kidney, placenta and thymus.
