Serotransferrin; Transferrins are iron binding transport proteins which can bind two Fe(3+) ions in association with the binding of an anion, usually bicarbonate. It is responsible for the transport of iron from sites of absorption and heme degradation to those of storage and utilization. Serum transferrin may also have a further role in stimulating cell proliferation.
Transcription factors (TFs) recognize specific DNA sequences to control chromatin and transcription, forming a complex system that guides expression of the genome. Despite keen interest in understanding how TFs control gene expression, it remains challenging to determine how the precise genomic binding sites of TFs are specified and how TF binding ultimately relates to regulation of transcription. This review considers how TFs are identified and functionally characterized, principally through the lens of a catalog of over 1,600 likely human TFs and binding motifs for two-thirds of them. Major classes of human TFs differ markedly in their evolutionary trajectories and expression patterns, underscoring distinct functions. TFs likewise underlie many different aspects of human physiology, disease, and variation, highlighting the importance of continued effort to understand TF-mediated gene regulation.
Expansions of amino acid repeats occur in >20 inherited human disorders, and many occur in intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of transcription factors (TFs). Such diseases are associated with protein aggregation, but the contribution of aggregates to pathology has been controversial. Here, we report that alanine repeat expansions in the HOXD13 TF, which cause hereditary synpolydactyly in humans, alter its phase separation capacity and its capacity to co-condense with transcriptional co-activators. HOXD13 repeat expansions perturb the composition of HOXD13-containing condensates in vitro and in vivo and alter the transcriptional program in a cell-specific manner in a mouse model of synpolydactyly. Disease-associated repeat expansions in other TFs (HOXA13, RUNX2, and TBP) were similarly found to alter their phase separation. These results suggest that unblending of transcriptional condensates may underlie human pathologies. We present a molecular classification of TF IDRs, which provides a framework to dissect TF function in diseases associated with transcriptional dysregulation.
Activation of oncogenic gene expression from long-range enhancers is initiated by the assembly of DNA-binding transcription factors (TF), leading to recruitment of co-activators such as CBP/p300 to modify the local genomic context and facilitate RNA-Polymerase 2 (Pol2) binding. Yet, most TF-to-coactivator recruitment relationships remain unmapped. Here, studying the oncogenic fusion TF PAX3-FOXO1 (P3F) from alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS), we show that a single cysteine in the activation domain (AD) of P3F is important for a small alpha helical coil that recruits CBP/p300 to chromatin. P3F driven transcription requires both this single cysteine and CBP/p300. Mutants of the cysteine reduce aRMS cell proliferation and induce cellular differentiation. Furthermore, we discover a profound dependence on CBP/p300 for clustering of Pol2 loops that connect P3F to its target genes. In the absence of CBP/p300, Pol2 long range enhancer loops collapse, Pol2 accumulates in CpG islands and fails to exit the gene body. These results reveal a potential novel axis for therapeutic interference with P3F in aRMS and clarify the molecular relationship of P3F and CBP/p300 in sustaining active Pol2 clusters essential for oncogenic transcription.
The Integrator complex attenuates gene expression via the premature termination of RNA polymerase II (RNAP2) at promoter-proximal pausing sites. It is required for stimulus response, cell differentiation, and neurodevelopment, but how gene-specific and adaptive regulation by Integrator is achieved remains unclear. Here, we identify two sites on human Integrator subunits 13/14 that serve as binding hubs for sequence-specific transcription factors (TFs) and other transcription effector complexes. When Integrator is attached to paused RNAP2, these hubs are positioned upstream of the transcription bubble, consistent with simultaneous TF-promoter tethering. The TFs co-localize with Integrator genome-wide, increase Integrator abundance on target genes, and co-regulate responsive transcriptional programs. For instance, sensory cilia formation induced by glucose starvation depends on Integrator-TF contacts. Our data suggest TF-mediated promoter recruitment of Integrator as a widespread mechanism for targeted transcription regulation.
Transcriptional coregulators and transcription factors (TFs) contain intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) that are critical for their association and function in gene regulation. More recently, IDRs have been shown to promote multivalent protein-protein interactions between coregulators and TFs to drive their association into condensates. By contrast, here we demonstrate how the IDR of the corepressor LSD1 excludes TF association, acting as a dynamic conformational switch that tunes repression of active cis-regulatory elements. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange shows that the LSD1 IDR interconverts between transient open and closed conformational states, the latter of which inhibits partitioning of the protein's structured domains with TF condensates. This autoinhibitory switch controls leukemic differentiation by modulating repression of active cis-regulatory elements bound by LSD1 and master hematopoietic TFs. Together, these studies unveil alternative mechanisms by which disordered regions and their dynamic crosstalk with structured regions can shape coregulator-TF interactions to control cis-regulatory landscapes and cell fate.
Due to its receptor activity for factor VII, tissue factor (TF) is primary initiator of the blood coagulation cascade and ensures rapid hemostasis in case of organ damage. Inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha or interleukins, strongly induce expression of both full-length TF as well as the alternatively spliced TF in endothelial and blood cells. Beyond its role in hemostasis, TF also has signaling activity and promotes pleiotropic inflammatory responses via protease-activated receptors in concert with other coagulation factors. Alteration of TF expression and TF alternative splicing provides an effective means to change the endothelial phenotype and modulate inflammatory responses of the vessel.
Cux1 and Cux2 are the vertebrate members of a family of homeodomain transcription factors (TF) containing Cut repeat DNA-binding sequences. Perturbation of their expression has been implicated in a wide variety of diseases and disorders, ranging from cancer to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Within the nervous system, both genes are expressed during neurogenesis and in specific neuronal subpopulations. Their role during development and circuit specification is discussed here, with a particular focus on the cortex where their restricted expression in pyramidal neurons of the upper layers appears to be responsible for many of the specialized functions of these cells, and where their functions have been extensively investigated. Finally, we discuss how Cux TF represent a promising avenue for manipulating neuronal function and for reprogramming.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The role of tissue factor (TF) in the initiation of the blood coagulation network leading to generation of a fibrin clot has been well defined over the past 50 years. Although much is known about this sequence of events and its regulation, many important questions remain unresolved. More recently, a complex role for TF in cellular processes independent of fibrin generation has emerged. This review summarizes some of the advances in this field. RECENT FINDINGS: TF is the cellular receptor and cofactor for factor VII/VIIa; however, controversy still surrounds expression of TF within the vasculature, the role of circulating microvesicle pools of TF and mechanisms of 'encryption' of TF activity. However, there have been significant advances in the role of TF-initiated cell signalling. Lastly, an alternatively spliced TF transcript has been identified and some insights into its role in cancer cell metastasis/proliferation have been elucidated. SUMMARY: Understanding of TF structure function has increased substantially; however, multiple controversies still surround some aspects of its regulation. TF has emerged as a pivotal player in orchestrating not only fibrin generation but wound repair. Derangement of these repair processes contributes significantly to the pathophysiology of a number of disease processes.
Human epigenome and transcription activities have been characterized by a number of sequence-based deep learning approaches which only utilize the DNA sequences. However, transcription factors interact with each other, and their collaborative regulatory activities go beyond the linear DNA sequence. Therefore leveraging the informative 3D chromatin organization to investigate the collaborations among transcription factors is critical. We developed ECHO, a graph-based neural network, to predict chromatin features and characterize the collaboration among them by incorporating 3D chromatin organization from 200-bp high-resolution Micro-C contact maps. ECHO predicted 2,583 chromatin features with significantly higher average AUROC and AUPR than the best sequence-based model. We observed that chromatin contacts of different distances affected different types of chromatin features' prediction in diverse ways, suggesting complex and divergent collaborative regulatory mechanisms. Moreover, ECHO was interpretable via gradient-based attribution methods. The attributions on chromatin contacts identify important contacts relevant to chromatin features. The attributions on DNA sequences identify TF binding motifs and TF collaborative binding. Furthermore, combining the attributions on contacts and sequences reveals important sequence patterns in the neighborhood which are relevant to a target sequence's chromatin feature prediction.
Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) represents a group of inducible transcription factors (TFs) regulating the expression of a great variety of genes implicated in diverse processes, particularly modulation of immune system responses. This TF has functional interactions with non-coding RNAs, constructing a complicated network through which NF-kappaB, miRNAs, and lncRNAs coordinately regulate gene expression at different facets. This type of interaction is involved in the pathophysiology of several human disorders including both neoplastic disorders and non-neoplastic conditions. MALAT1 and NKILA are among lncRNAs whose interactions with NF-kappaB have been vastly assessed in different conditions including cancer and inflammatory conditions. In addition, miR-146a/b has functional interactions with this TF in different contexts. Although miRNAs have mutual interactions with NF-kappaB, the regulatory role of miRNAs on this TF has been more clarified. The aim of the current review is to explore the function of NF-kappaB-related miRNAs and lncRNAs in these two types of human disorders.
In eukaryotic cells, gene transcription typically occurs in discrete periods of promoter activity, interspersed with intervals of inactivity. This pattern deviates from simple stochastic events and warrants a closer examination of the molecular interactions that activate the promoter. Recent studies have identified transcription factor (TF) clusters as key precursors to transcriptional bursting. Often, these TF clusters form at chromatin segments that are physically distant from the promoter, making changes in chromatin conformation crucial for promoter-TF cluster interactions. In this review, I explore the formation and constituents of TF clusters, examining how the dynamic interplay between chromatin architecture and TF clustering influences transcriptional bursting. Additionally, I discuss techniques for visualizing TF clusters and provide an outlook on understanding the remaining gaps in this field.
Most complex trait-associated variants are located in non-coding regulatory regions of the genome, where they have been shown to disrupt transcription factor (TF)-DNA binding motifs. Variable TF-DNA interactions are therefore increasingly considered as key drivers of phenotypic variation. However, recent genome-wide studies revealed that the majority of variable TF-DNA binding events are not driven by sequence alterations in the motif of the studied TF. This observation implies that the molecular mechanisms underlying TF-DNA binding variation and, by extrapolation, inter-individual phenotypic variation are more complex than originally anticipated. Here, we summarize the findings that led to this important paradigm shift and review proposed mechanisms for local, proximal, or distal genetic variation-driven variable TF-DNA binding. In addition, we discuss the biomedical implications of these findings for our ability to dissect the molecular role(s) of non-coding genetic variants in complex traits, including disease susceptibility.
The incidence of severe complications, such as disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) in malignant lymphoma, differs between clinical stages and histological types of the disease, but they occur frequently in stage IV or natural killer (NK) cell lymphoma. Patients with stage IV or NK cell lymphoma exhibit abnormal thrombotic and hemostatic states. One of the mechanisms in DIC might involve elevated cytokine expression by lymphoma cells stimulating the expression of tissue factor (TF) in blood cells or surrounding tissue. During chemotherapy for lymphoma, the white blood cell count was significantly reduced at days 1 and 3, but significantly increased at days 7 and 9. At day 7 of chemotherapy, leukocyte TF mRNA levels were significantly increased. Plasma concentrations of granulocyte elastase derived-XDP (GEXDP) levels correlated with D-dimer levels, suggesting that almost all elevated D-dimer is GE-XDP. C-reactive protein (CRP), GE-XDP and D-dimer were significantly elevated in patients with infection, DIC or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Analysis of patients with DIC or ARDS revealed that TF mRNA correlated with D-dimer, and GE-XDP correlated with leukocyte count, CRP and D-dimer, suggesting that inflammatory changes due to thrombosis may cause the activation of leukocytes during chemotherapy.
Contribution of mass spectrometry (MS) in the diagnosis and characterization of congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) has long been known. CDG type I diseases are characterized by the under-occupancy of protein N-glycosylation sites. Electrospray (ESI) MS and matrix assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) MS are effective for underglycosylation analyses of intact serum Transferrin (Tf) in CDG-I patients by mass determination of individual component glycoforms. Thus, high-throughput methods developed to speed-up analytical times found increasing application in clinical testing for CDG detection. ESI MS recognizable glycoform profiles of serum Tf have been reported in CDG-I different from PMM2-CDG and in individual CDG-II defects. MALDI MS analysis of acidic and neutral N-linked glycans released from total plasma or targeted glycoproteins, is the mainstream tool to explore abnormal oligosaccharide structure and changes in the relative amount of individual oligosaccharides in CDG-II patients. Here we briefly review state-of-the-art and updates of MS-based applications for the diagnosis of CDG with special emphasis to detectable glycosylation profiles reported in different CDG types.
Transcription factors (TFs) bind to specific DNA motifs to regulate the expression of target genes. To reach their binding sites, TFs diffuse in 3D and perform local motions such as 1D sliding, hopping, or intersegmental transfer. TF-DNA interactions depend on multiple parameters, such as the chromatin environment, TF partitioning into distinct subcellular regions, and cooperativity with other DNA-binding proteins. In this review, how current understanding of the search process has initially been shaped by prokaryotic studies is discussed, as well as what is known about the parameters regulating TF search efficiency in the context of the complex eukaryotic chromatin landscape.
Tissue factor (TF) is historically known as the trigger of the coagulation cascade. This integral membrane glycoprotein forms a ternary complex with factor VIIa (FVIIa) and zymogen factor (FX), which is then activated to factor Xa (FXa). The latter cleaves prothrombin into thrombin (FIIa), which in turn activates fibrinogen in fibrin monomers. What is less known is its additional non-haemostatic roles in inflammation, tumour growth and angiogenesis. This aspect will be developed here. TF, as a transmembrane protein, has a signalling effect requiring FVIIa. TF-FVIIa complex activates G protein-coupled receptor protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR-2) and therefore modulates various cellular processes, such as cell proliferation and survival, gene transcription and protein translation. In this review we will first highlight, using recent structural data, the 'potentially' active domain able to modulate the triggered intracellular response. We also will focus on the still emerging and promising results deciphering the diverse locations in which TF appears. We conclude with a description of an emerging and atypical use of tissue factor in platelet gel surgery for sinus augmentation.
For 30 years it was thought the alphavirus 6K gene encoded a single 6 kDa protein. However, through a bioinformatics search 10 years ago, it was discovered that there is a frameshifting event and two proteins, 6K and transframe (TF), are translated from the 6K gene. Thus, many functions attributed to the 6K protein needed reevaluation to determine if they properly belong to 6K, TF, or both proteins. In this mini-review, we reevaluate the past research on 6K and put those results in context where there are two proteins, 6K and TF, instead of one. Additionally, we discuss the most cogent outstanding questions for 6K and TF research, including their collective importance in alphavirus budding and their potential importance in disease based on the latest virulence data.
The eukaryotic genome is organized in a chain of nucleosomes that consist of 145-147 bp of DNA wrapped around a histone octamer protein core. Binding of transcription factors (TF) to nucleosomal DNA is frequently impeded, which makes it a challenging task to calculate TF occupancy at a given regulatory genomic site for predicting gene expression. Here, we review methods to calculate TF binding to DNA in the presence of nucleosomes. The main theoretical problems are (i) the computation speed that is becoming a bottleneck when partial unwrapping of DNA from the nucleosome is considered, (ii) the perturbation of the binding equilibrium by the activity of ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers, which translocate nucleosomes along the DNA, and (iii) the model parameterization from high-throughput sequencing data and fluorescence microscopy experiments in living cells. We discuss strategies that address these issues to efficiently compute transcription factor binding in chromatin.
Background: Tissue factor (TF) combined with its ligand FVII initiates blood coagulation and intracellular signaling. Obese and type 2 diabetic subjects have increased TF expression in their adipose tissue and an increased risk for thrombotic complications. Here we address the role of TF/FVII on adipocyte functions. Materials and methods: Subcutaneous fat was obtained by means of needle aspiration from healthy volunteers, and adipocytes were isolated after collagenase digestion. 3T3-L1 fibroblasts kept in culture were differentiated into adipocytes by addition of IBMX, dexamethasone, rosiglitazone, and insulin to the media. Proteins and mRNA were analyzed by western blot and RT-PCR. Coagulation activity was determined by a colorimetric FX-assay. Lipolysis was measured as free glycerol using a colorimetric method. Glucose uptake was evaluated by scintillation counting of D-[U-(14)C] glucose. Results: In isolated human primary adipocytes we found expression of TF and FVII. TF expression was confirmed in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, and both cell types were found to be procoagulant in a TF/FVIIa-dependent manner. FXa was generated without FVIIa added to the coagulation assay, and active site-inhibited FVIIa blocked FXa formation, supporting our finding of FVII production by human primary adipocytes. There was no evidence for a role of TF in either lipolysis or glucose uptake in our experimental settings. Conclusion: Human primary adipocytes express active TF and FVII, and the TF/FVIIa complex formed on the adipocyte surface can activate substrate FX. Whether the TF/FVIIa complex conveys signaling pathways leading to biological functions and has any biological activity in adipocytes beyond coagulation remains to be elucidated.
Knowledge about species compatibility is crucial for proper interpretation of data from in vivo experiments with human proteins in pharmacological models and of data from cross-species in vitro experiments. Information about the cross-species compatibility of tissue factor (TF) and coagulation factor (F) VII (FVII) has accumulated since the early history of coagulation research. Many observations were connected to the introduction and development of the prothrombin time (PT) assay where fibrin clot formation was observed when tissue extracts of different origins were added to recalcified human or non-human plasmas. Studies on cross-species TF-FVIIa compatibility entered into a new area with the cloning and recombinant expression of TF and FVII from a number of species as well as with the possibility of specific amino acid substitution. TF and/or FVIIa from cattle, dog, rabbit, mouse, rat and zebrafish have been purified and characterized in varying detail. In addition to adding knowledge about the species-specific TF-FVIIa interactions, cross-species studies often reveal information which adds to the general view of the structural and functional properties of the human TF-FVIIa complex. This review briefly outlines the features of human TF and FVIIa, their intermolecular interactions, and the biological effects of TF-FVIIa complex formation and compares this information to findings obtained in studies addressing TF or FVIIa of non-human origin. By examples we point to difficulties which may arise from the transcendence across species borders and how some cross-species data have advanced our understanding of the structure and function of the human TF-FVIIa complex.
