Toll-like receptor 4; Cooperates with LY96 and CD14 to mediate the innate immune response to bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Acts via MYD88, TIRAP and TRAF6, leading to NF-kappa-B activation, cytokine secretion and the inflammatory response. Also involved in LPS-independent inflammatory responses triggered by free fatty acids, such as palmitate, and Ni(2+). Responses triggered by Ni(2+) require non- conserved histidines and are, therefore, species-specific. Both M.tuberculosis HSP70 (dnaK) and HSP65 (groEL-2) act via this protein to stimulate NF-kappa-B expression. In complex with  [...] 
Bacterial lipopolysaccharides (LPS) typically consist of a hydrophobic domain known as lipid A (or endotoxin), a nonrepeating "core" oligosaccharide, and a distal polysaccharide (or O-antigen). Recent genomic data have facilitated study of LPS assembly in diverse Gram-negative bacteria, many of which are human or plant pathogens, and have established the importance of lateral gene transfer in generating structural diversity of O-antigens. Many enzymes of lipid A biosynthesis like LpxC have been validated as targets for development of new antibiotics. Key genes for lipid A biosynthesis have unexpectedly also been found in higher plants, indicating that eukaryotic lipid A-like molecules may exist. Most significant has been the identification of the plasma membrane protein TLR4 as the lipid A signaling receptor of animal cells. TLR4 belongs to a family of innate immunity receptors that possess a large extracellular domain of leucine-rich repeats, a single trans-membrane segment, and a smaller cytoplasmic signaling region that engages the adaptor protein MyD88. The expanding knowledge of TLR4 specificity and its downstream signaling pathways should provide new opportunities for blocking inflammation associated with infection.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The paper observes regulation of the expression levels of NLRP3 and TLR4 in hippocampal CA1 neurons in CUMS mice by aerobic exercise with constructing CUMS depression mouse model, in order to explore the neuroprotective mechanism of aerobic exercise on the hippocampus of depressed mice. STUDY DESIGN AND METHOD: 24 healthy male 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice were randomly divided into CG, MG and ME. Thirteen stress-stimulating factors were randomly formulated into a CUMS stress-stimulating program. The mice were underwent 28 days of CUMS depression model, referenced clinical means for experimental research. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Yichun University (YCUEC IRB number LSK NO.2022.18). After model preparation, ME mice were subjected to moderate-intensity treadmill exercise training for 8 weeks. TST, FST and SPT were used to detect the depression-like behaviors of the mice in each group. Nissl staining was used to compare the cell morphology in the CA1 region of the mouse hippocampus. Immunohistochemical staining and western blot were used to detect the changes in the expression levels of NLRP3, TLR4 and other proteins in the CA1 region of the mouse hippocampus. RESULTS: The results of neurobehavioral assessment showed that, the immobility time of TST and FST were significantly increased, and SPT index was significantly decreased of MG mice. Compared with MG, ME mice significantly improved depression-like behaviors such as TST, FST and SPT index. Nissl staining showed that the morphology of neurons in CA1 region of hippocampus of MG mice were mostly vacuolar-like, with severe nuclear pyknosis. Abnormal morphological changes such as vacuolar-like and pyknotic pyknosis of neurons in the hippocampal CA1 region of ME mice were significantly reduced. Protein expression test showed that the number of NLRP3, TLR4, IL-1beta and IL-10 positive neurons in hippocampal CA1 region of MG mice increased significantly compared with CG, and the proportion of positive cells increased significantly, while NLRP3 and TLR4 positive neurons in the hippocampal CA1 region of ME mice were significantly reduced, the proportion of TLR4 positive cells was significantly reduced. CONCLUSION: Systematic moderate-intensity exercise can effectively improve the depression-like behavior of CUMS depressed mice through the expression of TLR4/NLRP3 inflammatory signaling pathway, and provide an effective experimental basis for the clinical rehabilitation treatment of depression.
TAK-242 (resatorvid), a small-molecule-specific inhibitor of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling, inhibits the production of lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory mediators by binding to the intracellular domain of TLR4. Cys747 in TLR4 has been identified previously as the binding site of TAK-242. However, the mechanism by which TAK-242 inhibits TLR4 signaling after binding to TLR4 remains unknown. The present study demonstrated, using coimmunoprecipitation, that TAK-242 interferes with protein-protein interactions between TLR4 and its adaptor molecules. Among 10 different human TLRs, TAK-242 selectively bound to TLR4. The time course of the inhibitory effect of TAK-242 on inflammatory mediator production corresponded to that of the binding of TAK-242 to TLR4. TAK-242 inhibited the association of TLR4 with Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor protein (TIRAP) or Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor protein inducing interferon-beta-related adaptor molecule (TRAM) in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells overexpressing TLR4, MD-2, and TIRAP or TRAM, respectively. TAK-242 inhibited the TIRAP-mediated activation of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and the TRAM-mediated activation of NF-kappaB and interferon-sensitive response element in HEK293 cells stably expressing TLR4, MD-2, and CD14. The activation of endogenous interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase in RAW264.7 cells was also inhibited by TAK-242 treatment. These findings suggest that TAK-242 binds selectively to TLR4 and subsequently disrupts the interaction of TLR4 with adaptor molecules, thereby inhibiting TLR4 signal transduction and its downstream signaling events. This work proposes a novel paradigm of a small molecule capable of disrupting protein-protein interactions.
Mycoplasmas are smallest organisms capable of self-replication and cause various diseases in human. Especially, Mycoplasma pneumoniae is known as an etiological agent of pneumonia. From 2010 to 2012, epidemics of M. pneumoniae infections were reported worldwide (e.g., in France, Israel, and Japan). In the diseases caused by mycoplasmas, strong inflammatory responses induced by mycoplasmas have been thought to be important. However, mycoplasmas lack of cell wall and do not possess inflammation-inducing endotoxin such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS). We purified inflammation-inducing factors from pathogenic mycoplasmas and identified that they were lipoproteins. Lipoproteins derived from mycoplasmas induced inflammatory responses through Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2. In addition, we demonstrated that cytadherent property of M. pneumoniae played an important role in induction of inflammatory responses. Cytadherent property of M. pneumoniae induced inflammatory responses through TLR2 independent pathway. TLR4, inflammasomes, and autophagy were involved in this TLR2 independent induction of inflammatory responses.
BACKGROUND: Intracranial aneurysm (IA) is a severe cerebrovascular disease, and effective gene therapy and drug interventions for its treatment are still lacking. Oxidative stress (OS) is closely associated with the IA, but the key regulatory genes involved are still unclear. Through multiomics analysis and experimental validation, we identified two diagnostic markers for IA associated with OS. METHODS: In this study, we first analyzed the IA dataset GSE75436 and conducted a joint analysis of oxidative stress-related genes (ORGs). Differential analysis, functional enrichment analysis, immune infiltration, WGCNA, PPI, LASSO, and other methods were used to identify IA diagnostic markers related to OS. Next, the functions of TLR4 and ALOX5 expression in IA and their potential targeted therapeutic drugs were analyzed. We also performed single-cell sequencing of patient IA and control (superficial temporal artery, STA) tissues. 23,342 cells were captured from 2 IA and 3 STA samples obtained from our center. Cell clustering and annotation were conducted using R software to observe the distribution of TLR4 and ALOX5 expression in IAs. Finally, the expression of TLR4 and ALOX5 were validated in IA patients and in an elastase-induced mouse IA model using experiments such as WB and immunofluorescence. RESULTS: Through bioinformatics analysis, we identified 16 key ORGs associated with IA pathogenesis. Further screening revealed that ALOX5 and TLR4 were highly expressed to activate a series of inflammatory responses and reduce the production of myocytes. Methotrexate (MTX) may be a potential targeted drug. Single-cell analysis revealed a notable increase in immune cells in the IA group, with ALOX5 and TLR4 primarily localized to monocytes/macrophages. Validation through patient samples and mouse models confirmed high expression of ALOX5 and TLR4 in IAs. CONCLUSIONS: Bioinformatics analysis indicated that ALOX5 and TLR4 are the most significant ORGs associated with the pathogenesis of IA. Single-cell sequencing and experiments revealed that the high expression of ALOX5 and TLR4 are closely related to IA. These two genes are promising new targets for IA therapy.
This review covers the current knowledge and gaps in Helicobacter pylori lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structure and biosynthesis. H. pylori is a Gram-negative bacterium which colonizes the luminal surface of the human gastric epithelium. Both a constitutive alteration of the lipid A preventing TLR4 elicitation and host mimicry of the Lewis antigen decorated O-antigen of H. pylori LPS promote immune escape and chronic infection. To date, the complete structure of H. pylori LPS is not available, and the proposed model is a linear arrangement composed of the inner core defined as the hexa-saccharide (Kdo-LD-Hep-LD-Hep-DD-Hep-Gal-Glc), the outer core composed of a conserved trisaccharide (-GlcNAc-Fuc-DD-Hep-) linked to the third heptose of the inner core, the glucan, the heptan and a variable O-antigen, generally consisting of a poly-LacNAc decorated with Lewis antigens. Although the glycosyltransferases (GTs) responsible for the biosynthesis of the H. pylori O-antigen chains have been identified and characterized, there are many gaps in regard to the biosynthesis of the core LPS. These limitations warrant additional mutagenesis and structural studies to obtain the complete LPS structure and corresponding biosynthetic pathway of this important gastric bacterium.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The goal of this manuscript is to summarize the current understanding of the secreted APOA1 binding protein (AIBP), encoded by NAXE, in angiogenesis, hematopoiesis, and inflammation. The studies on AIBP illustrate a critical connection between lipid metabolism and the aforementioned endothelial and immune cell biology. RECENT FINDINGS: AIBP dictates both developmental processes such as angiogenesis and hematopoiesis, and pathological events such as inflammation, tumorigenesis, and atherosclerosis. Although cholesterol efflux dictates AIBP-mediated lipid raft disruption in many of the cell types, recent studies document cholesterol efflux-independent mechanism involving Cdc42-mediated cytoskeleton remodeling in macrophages. AIBP disrupts lipid rafts and impairs raft-associated VEGFR2 but facilitates non-raft-associated NOTCH1 signaling. Furthermore, AIBP can induce cholesterol biosynthesis gene SREBP2 activation, which in turn transactivates NOTCH1 and supports specification of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs). In addition, AIBP also binds TLR4 and represses TLR4-mediated inflammation. In this review, we summarize the latest research on AIBP, focusing on its role in cholesterol metabolism and the attendant effects on lipid raft-regulated VEGFR2 and non-raft-associated NOTCH1 activation in angiogenesis, SREBP2-upregulated NOTCH1 signaling in hematopoiesis, and TLR4 signaling in inflammation and atherogenesis. We will discuss its potential therapeutic applications in angiogenesis and inflammation due to selective targeting of activated cells.
PURPOSE: Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is increasingly recognized for its ability to govern the etiology and prognostic outcomes of colorectal cancer (CRC) due to its profound immunomodulatory capacity. Despite widespread interest in TLR4 and CRC, no clear analysis of current literature and data exists. Therefore, translational advances have failed to move beyond conceptual ideas and suggestions. METHODS: We aimed to determine the relationship between TLR4 and CRC through a systematic review and analysis of published literature and datasets. Data were extracted from nine studies that reported survival, CRC staging and tumor progression data in relation to TLR4 expression. Primary and metastatic tumor samples with associated clinical data were identified through the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. RESULTS: Systematic review identified heterogeneous relationships between TLR4 and CRC traits, with no clear theme evident across studies. A total of 448 datasets were identified through the TCGA database. Analysis of TCGA datasets revealed TLR4 mRNA expression is decreased in advanced CRC stages (P < 0.05 for normal vs Stage II, Stage III and Stage IV). Stage-dependent impact of TLR4 expression on survival outcomes were also found, with high TLR4 expression associated with poorer prognosis (stage I vs III (HR = 4.2, P = 0.008) and stage I vs IV (HR = 11.3, P < 0.001)). CONCLUSION: While TLR4 mRNA expression aligned with CRC staging, it appeared to heterogeneously regulate survival outcomes depending on the stage of disease. This underscores the complex relationship between TLR4 and CRC, with unique impacts dependent on disease stage.
Appetite is the basis for obtaining food and maintaining normal metabolism. Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is an important receptor expressed in the brain that induces inflammatory signaling after activation. Inflammation is considered to affect the homeostatic and non-homeostatic systems of appetite, which are dominated by hypothalamic and mesolimbic dopamine signaling. Although the pathological features of many types of inflammation are known, their physiological functions in appetite are largely unknown. This review mainly addresses several key issues, including the structures of the homeostatic and non-homeostatic systems. In addition, the mechanism by which TLR4-induced inflammatory signaling contributes to these two systems to regulate appetite is also discussed. This review will provide potential opportunities to develop new therapeutic interventions that control appetite under inflammatory conditions.
Tens of millions suffer from insulin deficiency (ID); a defect leading to severe metabolic imbalance and death. The only means for management of ID is insulin therapy; yet, this approach is sub-optimal and causes life-threatening hypoglycemia. Hence, ID represents a great medical and societal challenge. Here we report that S100A9, also known as Calgranulin B or Myeloid-Related Protein 14 (MRP14), is a leptin-induced circulating cue exerting beneficial anti-diabetic action. In murine models of ID, enhanced expression of S100A9 alone (i.e. without administered insulin and/or leptin) slightly improves hyperglycemia, and normalizes key metabolic defects (e.g. hyperketonemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and increased hepatic fatty acid oxidation; FAO), and extends lifespan by at least a factor of two. Mechanistically, we report that Toll-Like Receptor 4 (TLR4) is required, at least in part, for the metabolic-improving and pro-survival effects of S100A9. Thus, our data identify the S100A9/TLR4 axis as a putative target for ID care.
TLR4 is unique among pathogen-recognition receptors in that it initiates different pathways in different cellular locations. Binding of a bridging factor, Mal, allows recruitment of an adapter protein, MyD88, at the plasma membrane, which leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines. Upon internalization, TLR4 uses a different bridging factor, TRAM, to activate a MyD88-independent pathway that results in type I interferon expression. Interestingly, both Mal and TRAM are localised initially at the plasma membrane. In this Opinion, I suggest a possible mechanism by which endosomal acidification triggers the differential adaptor usage of TLR4. I discuss the evidence of the pH sensitivity of TLR4 and propose a new dimerisation mode for TLR4 based on the crystal structure of the related receptor TLR3 bound to its ligand, double-stranded RNA.
PURPOSE: To investigate systemic and ocular toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 expression and its association with oxidative stress markers in ocular rosacea (OR). METHODS: This prospective study included 40 patients with rosacea with ocular involvement and 20 healthy volunteers. Tear break-up time (TBUT), Schirmer test, meibomoscore, and ocular surface disease index (OSDI) scores were estimated for all participants. TLR-4 expression in conjunctival epithelium and peripheral blood mononuclear cells was quantified using real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In the tears and serum samples of all participants, antioxidant status (TAS), total oxidant status (TOS), and arylesterase (ARE) activation levels were measured using a fully automated spectrophotometric method, and the oxidative stress index (OSI) was calculated. RESULTS: TLR-4 expression levels and oxidative stress status (TOS and OSI values) were significantly higher (p < 0.01), and antioxidant status (TAS and ARE values) were significantly lower (p < 0.01) in both ocular and blood samples of patients with OR compared with those in controls. A significant positive correlation was found between the ocular and blood values in all parameters (p < 0.05). According to the clinical associations of these results, we found negative correlations between TLR-4, OSI, and TBUT and between TLR-4 and Schirmer, whereas a positive correlation was observed between TLR-4, OSI, and meiboscore and between TLR-4, OSI, and OSDI (p < 0.05). No correlation was found between the OSI and Schirmer results (p = 0.92). CONCLUSIONS: TLR-4 and oxidative stress both play important roles in OR pathophysiology and are closely related to clinical findings.
AIMS: This study aims to explore the molecular mechanism of circular RNAs' (circRNAs) potential involvement in myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury (MIRI). METHODS AND RESULTS: Differently expressed genes in myocardial infarction (MI) were identified by screening the GEO database. Serum was collected from MI patients and healthy volunteers (n = 5 for each group). AC16 cells were cultured and exposed to hypoxia/reperfusion (H/R) treatment for the cell experiments. Then candidate genes were validated in human serum and the H/R model. Quantitative real-time PCR and western blot were used to detect expression of key molecules such as circDGKZ, miR-345-5p, and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), as well as pyroptosis markers such as NOD-like receptor thermal protein domain-associated protein 3 (NLRP3), ASC, C-caspase1, interleukin (IL)-1beta, and IL-18. CircDGKZ was positively correlated in human serum (P < 0.05) and in AC16 cells (P < 0.01). Knockdown of circDGKZ inhibited cardiomyocyte pyroptosis and the TLR4/nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) signalling pathway (all P < 0.05). A luciferase assay was used to detect the molecule interaction. MiR-345-5p was regulated by circDGKZ and regulated TLR4 in cardiomyocytes both through direct interaction (P < 0.01). The stability and distribution of circRNA or linear RNA were examined by subcellular localization and RNA decay assays. CircDGKZ was stably expressed in cardiomyocytes and mainly distributed in the cytoplasm (P < 0.01). Knockdown of circDGKZ also promoted the degradation of NLRP3 by inducing autophagy (P < 0.05). MIRI rat models were constructed (n = 5 for each group), and the cellular results were further confirmed in rat models (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Knockdown of circDGKZ interrupted pyroptosis and induced autophagy of cardiomyocytes via regulating miR-345-5p/TLR4/NF-kappaB.
The Toll family of class I transmembrane receptors recognizes and responds to diverse structures associated with pathogenic microorganisms. These receptors mediate initial responses in innate immunity and are required for the development of the adaptive immune response. Toll receptor signaling pathways are also implicated in serious autoimmune diseases such as endotoxic shock and thus are important therapeutic targets. In this review we discuss how microbial structures as different as nucleic acids and lipoproteins can be recognized by the extracellular domains of Toll receptors. We review recent evidence that the mechanism of signal transduction is complex and involves sequential changes in the conformation of the receptor induced by binding of the ligand. Finally, we assess the emerging area of cross talk in the Toll pathways. Recent work suggests that signaling through TLR4 in response to endotoxin is modified by inputs from at least two other pathways acting through beta2 integrins and protein kinase Cepsilon.
Gp96 is an endoplasmic reticulum chaperone for multiple protein substrates. Its lack in intestinal macrophages of Crohn's disease (CD) patients is correlated with loss of tolerance against the host gut flora. Gp96 has been stablished to be an essential chaperone for Toll-like receptors (TLRs). We studied the impact of gp96-knockdown on TLR-function in macrophages. TLR2 and TLR4 expression was only decreased but not abolished when gp96 was knocked-down in cell lines, whereas in a monocyte/macrophage specific knock-out mouse model (LysMCre) TLR4 was abolished, while TLR2 was still present. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced NF-kappaB activation was still observed in the absence of gp96, and gp96-deficient macrophages were able to up-regulate surface TLR4 upon LPS treatment, suggesting that there is another chaperone involved in the folding of TLR4 upon stress responses. Moreover, LPS-dependent pro-inflammatory cytokines were still expressed, although to a lesser extent in the absence of gp96, which reinforces the fact that gp96 is involved in regulating signaling cascades downstream of TLR4 are impaired upon loss of gp96. In addition, we have also found a reduced phosphorylation of ERK and p38 kinases and an impaired response upon CSF1R activation in gp96 deficient macrophages. Our findings indicate that the loss of gp96 not only impairs TLR4 signaling, but is also associated with a diminished phosphorylation of ERK and mitogen-activated stress kinases resulting in an impaired signalling through several receptors, including CSF1R.
In 1997, a human homologue of the Drosophila Toll protein was described, a protein later to be designated Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Since that time, additional human and murine TLR proteins have been identified. Mammalian TLR proteins appear to represent a conserved family of innate immune recognition receptors. These receptors are coupled to a signaling pathway that is conserved in mammals, insects, and plants, resulting in the activation of genes that mediate innate immune defenses. Numerous studies have now identified a wide variety of chemically-diverse bacterial products that serve as putative ligands for TLR proteins. More recent studies have identified the first endogenous protein ligands for TLR proteins. TLR signaling represents a key feature of innate immune response to pathogen invasion.
The identification of the bacterial endotoxin receptors for innate immunity, most notably TLR4 (Toll-like receptor 4), has sparked great interest in therapeutic manipulation of the innate immune system. In the present mini-review, several natural and synthetic molecules that modulate the TLR4-mediated LPS (lipopolysaccharide) signalling in animals and humans are considered, and their mechanisms of action are discussed. The process of LPS sensing and signal amplification in humans is based on the sequential action of specific receptors situated in the extracellular side of the innate immunity cells, which bind and transfer LPS to TLR4: LBP (LPS-binding protein), CD14, MD-2 (myeloid differentiation protein 2). We classified the compounds active on TLR4 pathway depending on the specific molecular targets (LPS, LBP, CD14, MD-2 or TLR4). Small molecules developed by our group are described that inhibit LPS-stimulated TLR4 activation by selectively targeting the LPS-CD14 interaction. These compounds have an interesting antiseptic shock, anti-inflammatory and anti-neuropathic pain activity in vivo.
BackgroundStudies in cell cultures and rodents suggest that TLR4 is involved in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance, but direct data in humans are limited. We tested the hypothesis that pharmacologic blockade of TLR4 with the competitive inhibitor eritoran would improve insulin resistance in humans.MethodsIn protocol I, 10 lean, healthy individuals received the following 72-hour i.v. infusions in a randomized crossover design: saline (30 mL/h) plus vehicle; Intralipid (30 mL/h) plus vehicle; or Intralipid (30 mL/h) plus eritoran (12 mg i.v. every 12 hours). In protocol II, also a randomized crossover design, 9 nondiabetic individuals with obesity received eritoran or vehicle for 72 hours. The effect of eritoran was assessed with euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamps.ResultsIn protocol I, lipid infusion significantly decreased peripheral insulin sensitivity (M value) by 14% and increased fasting plasma glucose (FPG) concentrations, fasting plasma insulin (FPI) concentrations, and the homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index by 7%, 22%, and 26%, respectively. Eritoran did not prevent lipid-induced alterations of these metabolic parameters. Eritoran also failed to improve any baseline metabolic parameters (M, FPG, FPI, HOMA-IR) in individuals with obesity and insulin resistance (protocol II).ConclusionsAcute TLR4 inhibition with eritoran did not protect against lipid-induced insulin resistance. Short-term eritoran administration also failed to improve obesity-associated insulin resistance. These data do not support a role for TLR4 in insulin resistance. Future studies with a different class of TLR4 inhibitors, longer drug exposure, and/or lipid-enhancing interventions richer in saturated fats may be needed to further clarify the role of TLR4 in metabolic dysfunction in humans.Trial registrationClinicalTrials.gov NCT02321111 and NCT02267317.FundingNIH grants R01DK080157, P30AG044271, P30AG013319, and UL1TR002645.
Stimulation of TLRs by exogenous and endogenous ligands triggers expression of several genes that are involved in innate immune responses. Recently, a role of TLR4 in the myocardial response to injury separate from microbial pathogens has been examined in experimental studies. TLR4 deficient mice sustain significantly smaller infarctions compared with wild-type control mice given similar areas at risk. Levels of serum cytokines such as IL-1b, IL-6, and TNFa are increased after ischemia/reperfusion, but these responses are attenuated in TLR4 deficient mice compared to control mice. TLR2 signaling also importantly contributes to cardiac dysfunction following ischemia/reperfusion. MyD88, a key adaptor protein for TLR signaling, is responsible for the protective effects of TLR signaling inhibition in ischemia/reperfusion injury. TLR4 gene polymorphism (Asp299Gly) attenuates innate immune responsiveness, reduces the risk for coronary artery disease, and increases a chance of longevity. The innate immune system is clearly involved in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases and could be a new therapeutic target.
The aim of this study was to investigate the expressions of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2, TLR4, TLR9, and their correlations with the expression of cytokines that are associated with activation of CD4(+) T cells and inflammation including interferon gamma (IFNgamma), interleukin 4 (IL4), interleukin 17 (IL17), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in muscle tissues of patients with dermatomyositis (DM) and polymyositis (PM). The expressions of TLR2, TLR4, TLR9, IFNgamma, IL4, IL17, and TNFalpha were measured by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in muscle tissues from 14 patients with DM and PM (nine patients with DM, five patients with PM) and three controls. The expressions of TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9 were also localized with immunohistochemistry. The expression levels of TLR2, TLR4, TLR9, IFNgamma, IL4, IL17, and TNFalpha were significantly high in patients with DM and PM compared with those in the controls, and the expression levels of TLR4 and TLR9 had significant positive correlations with the expressions of IFNgamma, IL4, IL17, and TNFalpha. Immunohistochemistry showed that TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9 were expressed by infiltrating cells of perimysium in DM, whereas they were expressed by infiltrating cells of endomysium in PM. These results suggest that the involvement of TLR4 and TLR9 in immunopathogenesis of DM and PM might be connected with activation of CD4(+) T cells.
