Toll-like receptor 7; Key component of innate and adaptive immunity. TLRs (Toll- like receptors) control host immune response against pathogens through recognition of molecular patterns specific to microorganisms. TLR7 is a nucleotide-sensing TLR which is activated by single-stranded RNA. Acts via MYD88 and TRAF6, leading to NF-kappa-B activation, cytokine secretion and the inflammatory response (By similarity).
DNA and RNA stimulate the mammalian innate immune system through activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). DNA containing methylated CpG motifs, however, is not stimulatory. Selected nucleosides in naturally occurring RNA are also methylated or otherwise modified, but the immunomodulatory effects of these alterations remain untested. We show that RNA signals through human TLR3, TLR7, and TLR8, but incorporation of modified nucleosides m5C, m6A, m5U, s2U, or pseudouridine ablates activity. Dendritic cells (DCs) exposed to such modified RNA express significantly less cytokines and activation markers than those treated with unmodified RNA. DCs and TLR-expressing cells are potently activated by bacterial and mitochondrial RNA, but not by mammalian total RNA, which is abundant in modified nucleosides. We conclude that nucleoside modifications suppress the potential of RNA to activate DCs. The innate immune system may therefore detect RNA lacking nucleoside modification as a means of selectively responding to bacteria or necrotic tissue.
Although circumstantial evidence supports enhanced Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) signalling as a mechanism of human systemic autoimmune disease(1-7), evidence of lupus-causing TLR7 gene variants is lacking. Here we describe human systemic lupus erythematosus caused by a TLR7 gain-of-function variant. TLR7 is a sensor of viral RNA(8),(9) and binds to guanosine(10)-(12). We identified a de novo, previously undescribed missense TLR7(Y264H) variant in a child with severe lupus and additional variants in other patients with lupus. The TLR7(Y264H) variant selectively increased sensing of guanosine and 2',3'-cGMP(10-12), and was sufficient to cause lupus when introduced into mice. We show that enhanced TLR7 signalling drives aberrant survival of B cell receptor (BCR)-activated B cells, and in a cell-intrinsic manner, accumulation of CD11c(+) age-associated B cells and germinal centre B cells. Follicular and extrafollicular helper T cells were also increased but these phenotypes were cell-extrinsic. Deficiency of MyD88 (an adaptor protein downstream of TLR7) rescued autoimmunity, aberrant B cell survival, and all cellular and serological phenotypes. Despite prominent spontaneous germinal-centre formation in Tlr7(Y264H) mice, autoimmunity was not ameliorated by germinal-centre deficiency, suggesting an extrafollicular origin of pathogenic B cells. We establish the importance of TLR7 and guanosine-containing self-ligands for human lupus pathogenesis, which paves the way for therapeutic TLR7 or MyD88 inhibition.
UNC93B1 is critical for trafficking and function of nucleic acid-sensing Toll-like receptors (TLRs) TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9, which are essential for antiviral immunity. Overactive TLR7 signaling induced by recognition of self-nucleic acids has been implicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Here, we report UNC93B1 variants (E92G and R336L) in four patients with early-onset SLE. Patient cells or mouse macrophages carrying the UNC93B1 variants produced high amounts of TNF-alpha and IL-6 and upon stimulation with TLR7/TLR8 agonist, but not with TLR3 or TLR9 agonists. E92G causes UNC93B1 protein instability and reduced interaction with TLR7, leading to selective TLR7 hyperactivation with constitutive type I IFN signaling. Thus, UNC93B1 regulates TLR subtype-specific mechanisms of ligand recognition. Our findings establish a pivotal role for UNC93B1 in TLR7-dependent autoimmunity and highlight the therapeutic potential of targeting TLR7 in SLE.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other age-related disorders associated with demyelination exhibit sex differences. In this work, we used single-nuclei transcriptomics to dissect the contributions of sex chromosomes and gonads in demyelination and AD. In a mouse model of demyelination, we identified the roles of sex chromosomes and gonads in modifying microglia and oligodendrocyte responses before and after myelin loss. In an AD-related mouse model expressing APOE4, XY sex chromosomes heightened interferon (IFN) response and tau-induced demyelination. The X-linked gene, Toll-like receptor 7 (Tlr7), regulated sex-specific IFN response to myelin. Deletion of Tlr7 dampened sex differences while protecting against demyelination. Administering TLR7 inhibitor mitigated tau-induced motor impairment and demyelination in male mice, indicating that Tlr7 plays a role in the male-biased type I Interferon IFN response in aging- and AD-related demyelination.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have a crucial role in the recognition of pathogens and initiation of immune responses(1-3). Here we show that a previously uncharacterized protein encoded by CXorf21-a gene that is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus(4,5)-interacts with the endolysosomal transporter SLC15A4, an essential but poorly understood component of the endolysosomal TLR machinery also linked to autoimmune disease(4,6-9). Loss of this type-I-interferon-inducible protein, which we refer to as 'TLR adaptor interacting with SLC15A4 on the lysosome' (TASL), abrogated responses to endolysosomal TLR agonists in both primary and transformed human immune cells. Deletion of SLC15A4 or TASL specifically impaired the activation of the IRF pathway without affecting NF-kappaB and MAPK signalling, which indicates that ligand recognition and TLR engagement in the endolysosome occurred normally. Extensive mutagenesis of TASL demonstrated that its localization and function relies on the interaction with SLC15A4. TASL contains a conserved pLxIS motif (in which p denotes a hydrophilic residue and x denotes any residue) that mediates the recruitment and activation of IRF5. This finding shows that TASL is an innate immune adaptor for TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 signalling, revealing a clear mechanistic analogy with the IRF3 adaptors STING, MAVS and TRIF(10,11). The identification of TASL as the component that links endolysosomal TLRs to the IRF5 transcription factor via SLC15A4 provides a mechanistic explanation for the involvement of these proteins in systemic lupus erythematosus(12-14).
Hyperactive TLR7 signaling has long been appreciated as driver of autoimmune disease in mouse models. Recently, gain-of-function mutations in TLR7 were identified as a monogenic cause of human lupus. TLR7 is an intracellular transmembrane receptor, sensing RNA breakdown products within late endosomes. Here, we show that endosome dysfunction leads to unrestricted TLR7 signaling and is associated with human lupus. The late endosomal BORC complex together with the small GTPase Arl8b controls intracellular TLR7 levels by regulating receptor turnover. This requires a direct interaction between the TLR7-associated trafficking factor Unc93b1 and Arl8b. We identified an UNC93B1 mutation in a patient with childhood-onset lupus, which results in reduced BORC interaction and endosomal TLR7 accumulation. Therefore, a failure to control TLR7 turnover is sufficient to break immunological tolerance to nucleic acids. Our results highlight the importance of an intact endomembrane system in preventing pathological TLR7 signaling and autoimmune disease.
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 and TLR8 are transmembrane receptors that recognize single-stranded RNA. Activation of these receptors results in immune cell stimulation and inflammatory cytokine production, which is normally a protective host response. However, aberrant activation of TLR7/8 is potentially pathogenic and linked to progression of certain autoimmune diseases such as lupus. Thus, we hypothesize that an inhibitor that blocks TLR7/8 would be an effective therapeutic treatment. Prior efforts to develop inhibitors of TLR7/8 have been largely unsuccessful as a result of the challenge of producing a small-molecule inhibitor for these difficult targets. Here, we report the characterization of M5049 and compound 2, molecules which were discovered in a medicinal chemistry campaign to produce dual TLR7/8 inhibitors with drug-like properties. Both compounds showed potent and selective activity in a range of cellular assays for inhibition of TLR7/8 and block synthetic ligands and natural endogenous RNA ligands such as microRNA and Alu RNA. M5049 was found to be potent in vivo as TLR7/8 inhibition efficaciously treated disease in several murine lupus models and, interestingly, was efficacious in a disease context in which TLR7/8 activity has not previously been considered a primary disease driver. Furthermore, M5049 had greater potency in disease models than expected based on its in vitro potency and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic properties. Because of its preferential accumulation in tissues, and ability to block multiple TLR7/8 RNA ligands, M5049 may be efficacious in treating autoimmunity and has the potential to provide benefit to a variety of patients with varying disease pathogenesis. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This study reports discovery of a novel toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 and TLR8 inhibitor (M5049); characterizes its binding mode, potency/selectivity, and pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties; and demonstrates its potential for treating autoimmune diseases in two mouse lupus models. TLR7/8 inhibition is unique in that it may block both innate and adaptive autoimmunity; thus, this study suggests that M5049 has the potential to benefit patients with autoimmune diseases.
Rare genetic variants in toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) are known to cause lupus in humans and mice. UNC93B1 is a transmembrane protein that regulates TLR7 localization into endosomes. In the present study, we identify two new variants in UNC93B1 (T314A, located proximally to the TLR7 transmembrane domain, and V117L) in a cohort of east Asian patients with childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus. The V117L variant was associated with increased expression of type I interferons and NF-kappaB-dependent cytokines in patient plasma and immortalized B cells. THP-1 cells expressing the variant UNC93B1 alleles exhibited exaggerated responses to stimulation of TLR7/-8, but not TLR3 or TLR9, which could be inhibited by targeting the downstream signaling molecules, IRAK1/-4. Heterozygous mice expressing the orthologous Unc93b1(V117L) variant developed a spontaneous lupus-like disease that was more severe in homozygotes and again hyperresponsive to TLR7 stimulation. Together, this work formally identifies genetic variants in UNC93B1 that can predispose to childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus.
Double-stranded ribonucleic acid (dsRNA) serves as a danger signal associated with viral infection and leads to stimulation of innate immune cells. In contrast, the immunostimulatory potential of single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) is poorly understood and innate immune receptors for ssRNA are unknown. We report that guanosine (G)- and uridine (U)-rich ssRNA oligonucleotides derived from human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) stimulate dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages to secrete interferon-alpha and proinflammatory, as well as regulatory, cytokines. By using Toll-like receptor (TLR)-deficient mice and genetic complementation, we show that murine TLR7 and human TLR8 mediate species-specific recognition of GU-rich ssRNA. These data suggest that ssRNA represents a physiological ligand for TLR7 and TLR8.
Dysregulation of pathogen-recognition pathways of the innate immune system is associated with multiple autoimmune disorders. Due to the intricacies of the molecular network involved, the identification of pathway- and disease-specific therapeutics has been challenging. Using a phenotypic assay monitoring the degradation of the immune adapter TASL, we identify feeblin, a chemical entity which inhibits the nucleic acid-sensing TLR7/8 pathway activating IRF5 by disrupting the SLC15A4-TASL adapter module. A high-resolution cryo-EM structure of feeblin with SLC15A4 reveals that the inhibitor binds a lysosomal outward-open conformation incompatible with TASL binding on the cytoplasmic side, leading to degradation of TASL. This mechanism of action exploits a conformational switch and converts a target-binding event into proteostatic regulation of the effector protein TASL, interrupting the TLR7/8-IRF5 signaling pathway and preventing downstream proinflammatory responses. Considering that all components involved have been genetically associated with systemic lupus erythematosus and that feeblin blocks responses in disease-relevant human immune cells from patients, the study represents a proof-of-concept for the development of therapeutics against this disease.
Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) is essential for recognition of RNA viruses and initiation of antiviral immunity. TLR7 contains two ligand-binding pockets that recognize different RNA degradation products: pocket 1 recognizes guanosine, while pocket 2 coordinates pyrimidine-rich RNA fragments. We found that the endonuclease RNase T2, along with 5' exonucleases PLD3 and PLD4, collaboratively generate the ligands for TLR7. Specifically, RNase T2 generated guanosine 2',3'-cyclic monophosphate-terminated RNA fragments. PLD exonuclease activity further released the terminal 2',3'-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (2',3'-cGMP) to engage pocket 1 and was also needed to generate RNA fragments for pocket 2. Loss-of-function studies in cell lines and primary cells confirmed the critical requirement for PLD activity. Biochemical and structural studies showed that PLD enzymes form homodimers with two ligand-binding sites important for activity. Previously identified disease-associated PLD mutants failed to form stable dimers. Together, our data provide a mechanistic basis for the detection of RNA fragments by TLR7.
The endosomal Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) is a major driver of murine and human systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The role of TLR7 in lupus pathogenesis is enhanced when the regulatory role of TLR9 is absent. TLR7 signaling in plasmacytoid DCs (pDC) is generally thought to be a major driver of the IFN response and disease pathology; however, the cell types in which TLR7 acts to mediate disease have not been distinguished. To address this, we selectively deleted TLR7 in either CD11c+ cells or CD19+ cells; using a TLR7-floxed allele, we created on the lupus-prone MRL/lpr background, along with a BM chimera strategy. Unexpectedly, TLR7 deficiency in CD11c+ cells had no impact on disease, while TLR7 deficiency in CD19+ B cells yielded mild suppression of proteinuria and a trend toward reduced glomerular disease. However, in TLR9-deficient MRL/lpr mice with accelerated SLE, B cell-specific TLR7 deficiency greatly improved disease. These results support revision of the mechanism by which TLR7 drives lupus and highlight a cis regulatory interaction between the protective TLR9 and the pathogenic TLR7 within the B cell compartment. They suggest B cell-directed, dual TLR7 antagonism/TLR9 agonism or dual TLR7/9 antagonism as a potential future therapeutic strategy to treat SLE.
The pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is linked to the differential roles of toll-like receptors (TLRs), particularly TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9. TLR7 overexpression or gene duplication, as seen with the Y-linked autoimmune accelerator (Yaa) locus or TLR7 agonist imiquimod, correlates with increased SLE severity, and specific TLR7 polymorphisms and gain-of-function variants are associated with enhanced SLE susceptibility and severity. In addition, the X-chromosome location of TLR7 and its escape from X-chromosome inactivation provide a genetic basis for female predominance in SLE. The absence of TLR8 and TLR9 have been shown to exacerbate the detrimental effects of TLR7, leading to upregulated TLR7 activity and increased disease severity in mouse models of SLE. The regulatory functions of TLR8 and TLR9 have been proposed to involve competition for the endosomal trafficking chaperone UNC93B1. However, recent evidence implies more direct, regulatory functions of TLR9 on TLR7 activity. The association between age-associated B cells (ABCs) and autoantibody production positions these cells as potential targets for treatment in SLE, but the lack of specific markers necessitates further research for precise therapeutic intervention. Therapeutically, targeting TLRs is a promising strategy for SLE treatment, with drugs like hydroxychloroquine already in clinical use.
Red blood cells (RBCs) express the nucleic acid-binding toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) and bind CpG-containing DNA. However, whether human RBCs express other nucleic acid-binding TLRs is unknown. Here we show that human RBCs express the RNA sensor TLR7. TLR7 is present on the red cell membrane and is associated with the RBC membrane protein Band 3. In patients with SARS-CoV2-associated sepsis, TLR7-Band 3 interactions in the RBC membrane are increased when compared with healthy controls. In vitro, RBCs bind synthetic ssRNA and RNA from ssRNA viruses. Thus, RBCs may serve as a previously unrecognized sink for exogenous RNA, expanding the repertoire of non-gas exchanging functions performed by RBCs.
Recent evidence of gut microbiota dysbiosis in the context of psoriasis and the increased cooccurrence of inflammatory bowel disease and psoriasis suggest a close relationship between skin and gut immune responses. Using a mouse model of psoriasis induced by the Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 ligand imiquimod, we found that psoriatic dermatitis was accompanied by inflammatory changes in the small intestine associated with eosinophil degranulation, which impaired intestinal barrier integrity. Inflammatory responses in the skin and small intestine were increased in mice prone to eosinophil degranulation. Caco-2 human intestinal epithelial cells were treated with media containing eosinophil granule proteins and exhibited signs of inflammation and damage. Imiquimod-induced skin and intestinal changes were attenuated in eosinophil-deficient mice, and this attenuation was counteracted by the transfer of eosinophils. Imiquimod levels and the distribution of eosinophils were positively correlated in the intestine. TLR7-deficient mice did not exhibit intestinal eosinophil degranulation but did exhibit attenuated inflammation in the skin and small intestine following imiquimod administration. These results suggest that TLR7-dependent bidirectional skin-to-gut communication occurs in psoriatic inflammation and that inflammatory changes in the intestine can accelerate psoriasis.
Endolysosomal Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play crucial roles in immune responses to pathogens, while aberrant activation of these pathways is associated with autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The endolysosomal solute carrier family 15 member 4 (SLC15A4) is required for TLR7/8/9-induced responses and disease development in SLE models. SLC15A4 has been proposed to affect TLR7-9 activation through its transport activity, as well as by assembling an IRF5-activating complex with TASL, but the relative contribution of these functions remains unclear. Here, we show that the essential role of SLC15A4 is to recruit TASL to endolysosomes, while its transport activity is dispensable when TASL is tethered to this compartment. Endolysosomal-localized TASL rescues TLR7-9-induced IRF5 activation as well as interferon beta and cytokine production in SLC15A4-deficient cells. SLC15A4 acts as signaling scaffold, and this function is essential to control TLR7-9-mediated inflammatory responses. These findings support targeting the SLC15A4-TASL complex as a potential therapeutic strategy for SLE and related diseases.
The B cell scaffold protein with ankyrin repeats (BANK1) is expressed primarily in B cells and with multiple but discrete roles in B cell signaling, including B cell receptor signaling, CD40-related signaling, and Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling. The gene for BANK1, located in chromosome 4, has been found to contain genetic variants that are associated with several autoimmune diseases and also other complex phenotypes, in particular, with systemic lupus erythematosus. Common genetic variants are associated with changes in BANK1 expression in B cells, while rare variants modify their capacity to bind efferent effectors during signaling. A BANK1-deficient model has shown the importance of BANK1 during TLR7 and TLR9 signaling and has confirmed its role in the disease. Still, much needs to be done to fully understand the function of BANK1, but the main conclusion is that it may be the link between different signaling functions within the B cells and they may act to synergize the various pathways within a cell. With this review, we hope to enhance the interest in this molecule.
Organisms throughout biology need to maintain the integrity of their genome. From bacteria to vertebrates, life has established sophisticated mechanisms to detect and eliminate foreign genetic material or to restrict its function and replication. Tremendous progress has been made in the understanding of these mechanisms which keep foreign or unwanted nucleic acids from viruses or phages in check. Mechanisms reach from restriction-modification systems and CRISPR/Cas in bacteria and archaea to RNA interference and immune sensing of nucleic acids, altogether integral parts of a system which is now appreciated as nucleic acid immunity. With inherited receptors and acquired sequence information, nucleic acid immunity comprises innate and adaptive components. Effector functions include diverse nuclease systems, intrinsic activities to directly restrict the function of foreign nucleic acids (e.g., PKR, ADAR1, IFIT1), and extrinsic pathways to alert the immune system and to elicit cytotoxic immune responses. These effects act in concert to restrict viral replication and to eliminate virus-infected cells. The principles of nucleic acid immunity are highly relevant for human disease. Besides its essential contribution to antiviral defense and restriction of endogenous retroelements, dysregulation of nucleic acid immunity can also lead to erroneous detection and response to self nucleic acids then causing sterile inflammation and autoimmunity. Even mechanisms of nucleic acid immunity which are not established in vertebrates are relevant for human disease when they are present in pathogens such as bacteria, parasites, or helminths or in pathogen-transmitting organisms such as insects. This review aims to provide an overview of the diverse mechanisms of nucleic acid immunity which mostly have been looked at separately in the past and to integrate them under the framework nucleic acid immunity as a basic principle of life, the understanding of which has great potential to advance medicine.
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are the professional interferon (IFN)-producing cells of the immune system. pDCs specifically express Toll-like receptor (TLR)7 and TLR9 molecules and produce massive amounts of type I IFN by sensing microbial nucleic acids via TLR7 and TLR9. Here we report that protein kinase C and casein kinase substrate in neurons (PACSIN) 1, is specifically expressed in human and mouse pDCs. Knockdown of PACSIN1 by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) in a human pDC cell line significantly inhibited the type I IFN response of the pDCs to TLR9 ligand. PACSIN1-deficient mice exhibited normal levels of conventional DCs and pDCs, demonstrating that development of pDCs was intact although PACSIN1-deficient pDCs showed reduced levels of IFN-alpha production in response to both cytosine guanine dinucleotide (CpG)-oligonucleotide (ODN) and virus. In contrast, the production of proinflammatory cytokines in response to those ligands was not affected in PACSIN1-deficient pDCs, suggesting that PACSIN1 represents a pDC-specific adaptor molecule that plays a specific role in the type I IFN signaling cascade.
BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are key players in innate immunity and modulation of TLR signaling has been demonstrated to profoundly affect proliferation and growth in different types of cancer. However, the role of TLRs in human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) pathogenesis remains largely unexplored. AIMS: We set out to determine if TLRs play any role in ICCs which could potentially make them useful treatment targets. METHODS: Tissue microarrays containing samples from 9 human ICCs and normal livers were examined immunohistochemically for TLR4, TLR7, and TLR9 expression. Proliferation of human ICC cell line HuCCT1 was measured by MTS assay following treatment with CpG-ODN (TLR9 agonist), imiquimod (TLR7 agonist), chloroquine (TLR7 and TLR9 inhibitor) and IRS-954 (TLR7 and TLR9 antagonist). The in vivo effects of CQ and IRS-954 on tumor development were also examined in a NOD-SCID mouse xenograft model of human ICC. RESULTS: TLR4 was expressed in all normal human bile duct epithelium but absent in the majority (60%) of ICCs. TLR7 and TLR9 were expressed in 80% of human ICCs. However, TLR7 was absent in all cases of normal human bile duct epithelium and only one was TLR9 positive. HuCCT1 cell proliferation in vitro significantly increased following IMQ or CpG-ODN treatment (P < 0.03 and P < 0.002, respectively) but decreased with CQ (P < 0.02). In the mouse xenograft model there was significant reduction in size of tumors from CQ and IRS-954 treated mice compared to untreated controls. CONCLUSION: TLR7 and TLR9 should be further explored for their potential as actionable targets in the treatment of ICC.
