Prostaglandin G/H synthase 2; Converts arachidonate to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), a committed step in prostanoid synthesis. Constitutively expressed in some tissues in physiological conditions, such as the endothelium, kidney and brain, and in pathological conditions, such as in cancer. PTGS2 is responsible for production of inflammatory prostaglandins. Up-regulation of PTGS2 is also associated with increased cell adhesion, phenotypic changes, resistance to apoptosis and tumor angiogenesis. In cancer cells, PTGS2 is a key step in the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which plays imp [...] 
The TP53 gene is a major player in cancer formation, and it is considered the most important tumor suppressor gene. The p53 protein acts as a transcription factor, and it is involved in DNA repair, senescence, cell-cycle control, autophagy, and apoptosis. Beyond cancer, there is evidence that TP53 is associated with fertility, aging, and longevity. Additionally, more evidence exists that genetic variants in TP53 are associated with environmental adaptation. Special TP53 amino-acid residues or pathogenic TP53 mutations seem to be adaptive for animals living in hypoxic and cold environments or having been exposed to starvation, respectively. At the somatic level, it has recently been proven that multiple cancer genes, including TP53, are under positive selection in healthy human tissues. It is not clear why these driver mutations do not transform these tissues into cancerous ones. Other studies have shown that elephants have multiple TP53 copies, probably this being the reason for the very low cancer incidence in these large animals. This may explain the famous Peto's paradox. This review discusses in detail the multilevel role of TP53 in adaptation, according to the published evidence. This role is complicated, and it extends from cells to individuals and to populations.
Clinical variability is commonly seen in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Phenotypic heterogeneity is present among different families affected by the same pathogenic variant in TP53 gene and among members of the same family. However, causes of this huge clinical spectrum have not been studied in depth. TP53 type mutation, polymorphic variants in TP53 gene or in TP53-related genes, copy number variations in particular regions, and/or epigenetic deregulation of TP53 expression might be responsible for clinical heterogeneity. In this review, recent advances in the understanding of genetic and epigenetic aspects influencing Li-Fraumeni phenotype are discussed.
The evolutionarily conserved p53 protein and its cellular pathways mediate tumour suppression through an informed, regulated and integrated set of responses to environmental perturbations resulting in either cellular death or the maintenance of cellular homeostasis. The p53 and MDM2 proteins form a central hub in this pathway that receives stressful inputs via MDM2 and respond via p53 by informing and altering a great many other pathways and functions in the cell. The MDM2-p53 hub is one of the hubs most highly connected to other signalling pathways in the cell, and this may be why TP53 is the most commonly mutated gene in human cancers. Initial or truncal TP53 gene mutations (the first mutations in a stem cell) are selected for early in cancer development inectodermal and mesodermal-derived tissue-specific stem and progenitor cells and then, following additional mutations, produce tumours from those tissue types. In endodermal-derived tissue-specific stem or progenitor cells, TP53 mutations are functionally selected as late mutations transitioning the mutated cell into a malignant tumour. The order in which oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes are functionally selected for in a stem cell impacts the timing and development of a tumour.
Human cancers share properties referred to as hallmarks, among which sustained proliferation, escape from apoptosis, and genomic instability are the most pervasive. The sustained proliferation hallmark can be explained by mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressors that regulate cell growth, whereas the escape from apoptosis hallmark can be explained by mutations in the TP53, ATM, or MDM2 genes. A model to explain the presence of the three hallmarks listed above, as well as the patterns of genomic instability observed in human cancers, proposes that the genes driving cell proliferation induce DNA replication stress, which, in turn, generates genomic instability and selects for escape from apoptosis. Here, we review the data that support this model, as well as the mechanisms by which oncogenes induce replication stress. Further, we argue that DNA replication stress should be considered as a hallmark of cancer because it likely drives cancer development and is very prevalent.
TP53 gene mutations are one of the most frequent somatic events in cancer. The IARC TP53 Database (http://p53.iarc.fr) is a popular resource that compiles occurrence and phenotype data on TP53 germline and somatic variations linked to human cancer. The deluge of data coming from cancer genomic studies generates new data on TP53 variations and attracts a growing number of database users for the interpretation of TP53 variants. Here, we present the current contents and functionalities of the IARC TP53 Database and perform a systematic analysis of TP53 somatic mutation data extracted from this database and from genomic data repositories. This analysis showed that IARC has more TP53 somatic mutation data than genomic repositories (29,000 vs. 4,000). However, the more complete screening achieved by genomic studies highlighted some overlooked facts about TP53 mutations, such as the presence of a significant number of mutations occurring outside the DNA-binding domain in specific cancer types. We also provide an update on TP53 inherited variants including the ones that should be considered as neutral frequent variations. We thus provide an update of current knowledge on TP53 variations in human cancer as well as inform users on the efficient use of the IARC TP53 Database.
The tumour suppressor gene TP53 is mutated in ~50% of human cancers. In addition to its function in tumour suppression, p53 also plays a major role in the response of malignant as well as nontransformed cells to many anticancer therapeutics, particularly those that cause DNA damage. P53 forms a homotetrameric transcription factor that is reported to directly regulate ~500 target genes, thereby controlling a broad range of cellular processes, including cell cycle arrest, cell senescence, DNA repair, metabolic adaptation and cell death. For a long time, induction of apoptotic death in nascent neoplastic cells was regarded as the principal mechanism by which p53 prevents tumour development. This concept has, however, recently been challenged by the findings that in striking contrast to Trp53-deficient mice, gene-targeted mice that lack the critical effectors of p53-induced apoptosis do not develop tumours spontaneously. Remarkably, even mice lacking all mediators critical for p53-induced apoptosis, G1/S boundary cell cycle arrest and cell senescence do not develop any tumours spontaneously. In this review we discuss current understanding of the mechanisms by which p53 induces cell death and how this affects p53-mediated tumour suppression and the response of malignant cells to anticancer therapy.
Recent studies have suggested that mRNA internal m(7)G and its writer protein METTL1 are closely related to cell metabolism and cancer regulation. Here, we identify that IGF2BP family proteins IGF2BP1-3 can preferentially bind internal mRNA m(7)G. Such interactions, especially IGF2BP3 with m(7)G, could promote the degradation of m(7)G target transcripts in cancer cells. IGF2BP3 is more responsive to changes of m(7)G modification, while IGF2BP1 prefers m(6)A to stabilize the bound transcripts. We also demonstrate that p53 transcript, TP53, is m(7)G-modified at its 3'UTR in cancer cells. In glioblastoma, the methylation level and the half lifetime of the modified transcript could be modulated by tuning IGF2BP3, or by site-specific targeting of m(7)G through a dCas13b-guided system, resulting in modulation of cancer progression and chemosensitivity.
The deubiquitinating enzyme BAP1 is a tumor suppressor, among others involved in cholangiocarcinoma. BAP1 has many proposed molecular targets, while its Drosophila homolog is known to deubiquitinate histone H2AK119. We introduce BAP1 loss-of-function by CRISPR/Cas9 in normal human cholangiocyte organoids. We find that BAP1 controls the expression of junctional and cytoskeleton components by regulating chromatin accessibility. Consequently, we observe loss of multiple epithelial characteristics while motility increases. Importantly, restoring the catalytic activity of BAP1 in the nucleus rescues these cellular and molecular changes. We engineer human liver organoids to combine four common cholangiocarcinoma mutations (TP53, PTEN, SMAD4, and NF1). In this genetic background, BAP1 loss results in acquisition of malignant features upon xenotransplantation. Thus, control of epithelial identity through the regulation of chromatin accessibility appears to be a key aspect of BAP1's tumor suppressor function. Organoid technology combined with CRISPR/Cas9 provides an experimental platform for mechanistic studies of cancer gene function in a human context.
Whole-genome doubling (WGD) is a recurrent event in human cancers and it promotes chromosomal instability and acquisition of aneuploidies(1-8). However, the three-dimensional organization of chromatin in WGD cells and its contribution to oncogenic phenotypes are currently unknown. Here we show that in p53-deficient cells, WGD induces loss of chromatin segregation (LCS). This event is characterized by reduced segregation between short and long chromosomes, A and B subcompartments and adjacent chromatin domains. LCS is driven by the downregulation of CTCF and H3K9me3 in cells that bypassed activation of the tetraploid checkpoint. Longitudinal analyses revealed that LCS primes genomic regions for subcompartment repositioning in WGD cells. This results in chromatin and epigenetic changes associated with oncogene activation in tumours ensuing from WGD cells. Notably, subcompartment repositioning events were largely independent of chromosomal alterations, which indicates that these were complementary mechanisms contributing to tumour development and progression. Overall, LCS initiates chromatin conformation changes that ultimately result in oncogenic epigenetic and transcriptional modifications, which suggests that chromatin evolution is a hallmark of WGD-driven cancer.
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome is characterized clinically by the appearance of tumors in multiple organs generally at an early age. This hereditary condition is caused by germinal mutations in the TP53 gene, which codifies for the tumoural suppressor gene p53. We present the case of a patient aged 31 with clinical and molecular diagnosis of Li-Fraumeni syndrome who presented two synchronous tumors: a leiomyosarcoma on the forearm and a phyllodes breast tumour. She had a family history of cancer, including a son diagnosed with a cortical adrenal carcinoma when he was three years old, who died at five from the disease. Furthermore, her maternal grandmother and great-grandmother died of stomach cancer at 56 and 60 years old, respectively, while her other great-grandmother and a great aunt presented with breast cancer at the ages of 60 and 40, respectively. After genetic counseling, complete sequencing and analysis of duplications and deletions in the TP53 gene were ordered prior to diagnosis. The molecular analysis of a DNA sample taken from peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed the germinal mutation c.527G>T (p.Cys176Phe) on exon 5 of the TP53 gene, a deleterious mutation described previously in tumoural tissues. To our knowledge, this is the first published case in Colombia of Li-Fraumeni syndrome with confirmed molecular diagnosis. The diagnosis and management of Li-Fraumeni syndrome should be performed by a multidisciplinary team, and genetic counselling should be offered to patients and their relatives.
Epigenetic influence of brain and neuronal function plays key regulatory roles in health and diseases. The microRNA miR-34a is a tumor suppressor transcript, and its loss has been prominently linked to various human cancers, including malignancies of the brain. Interestingly, miR-34a is abundantly expressed in the adult mammalian brain, and emerging evidence has implicated its involvement in a range of neurodevelopmental and neuropathological processes. Developmentally, miR-34a regulates neural stem/progenitor cell differentiation and aspects of neurogenesis. During aging, its elevation is connected to hearing loss and age-related macular degeneration. Pathologically, its elevations during epileptic seizures and ischemic stroke contribute to neuronal injury and death. Inhibition or suppression of miR-34a improved neuronal survival against a variety of neurotoxins implicated in Parkinson's disease. Its elevation may also play a role in neuronal demise in animal models of Alzheimer's disease, and suppression of its levels may be generally neuroprotective. The roles and activities of miR-34a in the brain are modulated by factors that control its expression (such as Tp53/73), as well as its downstream target genes (such as the sirtuins SIRT1 and SIRT6) and signaling pathways (such the Notch pathway). We discuss here the known and emerging roles of the miR-34a regulatory network in neurophysiology and neuropathology.
The TP53 tumour-suppressor gene belongs to a family that includes the two recently identified homologues TP63 and TP73. Overexpression of p73 can activate typical p53-responsive genes and induce apoptosis like p53. In addition, activation of p73 has been implicated in apoptotic cell death induced by aberrant cell proliferation and some forms of DNA-damage. These data together with the localization of TP73 on chromosome 1p36, a region frequently deleted in a variety of human cancers, led to the hypothesis that p73 has tumour suppressor activity just like p53. However, despite its proapoptotic activity in vitro, the lack of tumour-formation in p73 knock-out mice and primary human tumour data demonstrating overexpression of wild-type p73 currently argue against p73 being a classical tumour suppressor. Interestingly, in contrast to TP53, TP73 gives rise to a complex pattern of pro- and antiapoptotic p73 isoforms generated by differential splicing and alternative promoter usage. Therefore further insight into the function and regulation of these structurally and functionally diverse p73 proteins is needed to elucidate the role of TP73 for apoptosis and human tumorigenesis.
BACKGROUND: Although the Chufeng Qingpi Decoction (CQD) has demonstrated clinical effectiveness in the treatment of schistosomiasis, the precise active components and the underlying mechanisms of its therapeutic action remain elusive. To achieve a profound comprehension, we incorporate network pharmacology, bioinformatics analysis, molecular docking, and molecular dynamics simulations as investigative methodologies within our research framework. METHOD: Utilizing TCMSP and UniProt, we identified formula components and targets. Cytoscape 3.10.0 was used to construct an herb-target interaction network. Genecards, DisGeNET, and OMIM databases were examined for disease-related objectives. A Venn diagram identified the intersection of compound and disease targets. Using Draw Venn, overlapping targets populated STRING for PPI network. CytoNCA identified schistosomiasis treatment targets. GO & KEGG enrichment analysis followed High-scoring genes in PPI were analyzed by LASSO, RF, SVM-RFE. Molecular docking & simulations investigated target-compound interactions. RESULT: The component's target network encompassed 379 nodes, 1629 edges, highlighting compounds such as wogonin, kaempferol, luteolin, and quercetin. Amongst the proteins within the PPI network, PTGS2, TNF, TGFB1, BCL2, TP53, IL10, JUN, MMP2, IL1B, and MYC stood out as the most prevalent entities. GO and KEGG revealed that mainly involved the responses to UV, positive regulation of cell migration and motility. The signal pathways encompassed Pathways in cancer, Lipid and atherosclerosis, Fluid shear stress and atherosclerosis, as well as the AGE-RAGE. Bioinformatics analysis indicated TP53 was the core gene. Ultimately, the molecular docking revealed that wogonin, kaempferol, luteolin, and quercetin each exhibited significant affinity in their respective interactions with TP53. Notably, kaempferol exhibited the lowest binding energy, indicating a highly stable interaction with TP53. Lastly, we validated the stability of the binding interaction between the four small molecules and the TP53 through molecular dynamics simulations. The molecular dynamics simulation further validated the strongest binding between TP53 and kaempferol. In essence, our research groundbreaking in its nature elucidates for the first time the underlying molecular mechanism of CQD in the therapeutic management of schistosomiasis, thereby providing valuable insights and guidance for the treatment of this disease. CONCLUSION: This study uncovered the efficacious components and underlying molecular mechanisms of the Chufeng Qingpi Decoction in the management of schistosomiasis, thereby offering valuable insights for future fundamental research endeavors.
Tumor suppressor protein p53 (TP53) is a key transcription factor that, in response to various stress signals, regulates numerous genes involved in a broad range of cellular functions including DNA repair, apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, senescence, metabolism, etc [...].
Adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-redirected T lymphocytes (CAR-T cells) has had less striking therapeutic effects in solid tumors than in lymphoid malignancies. Although active tumor-mediated immunosuppression may have a role in limiting the efficacy of CAR-T cells, functional changes in T lymphocytes after their ex vivo manipulation may also account for the reduced ability of cultured CAR-T cells to penetrate stroma-rich solid tumors compared with lymphoid tissues. We therefore studied the capacity of human in vitro-cultured CAR-T cells to degrade components of the extracellular matrix (ECM). In contrast to freshly isolated T lymphocytes, we found that in vitro-cultured T lymphocytes lack expression of the enzyme heparanase (HPSE), which degrades heparan sulfate proteoglycans, the main components of ECM. We found that HPSE mRNA is downregulated in in vitro-expanded T cells, which may be a consequence of p53 (officially known as TP53, encoding tumor protein 53) binding to the HPSE gene promoter. We therefore engineered CAR-T cells to express HPSE and showed their improved capacity to degrade the ECM, which promoted tumor T cell infiltration and antitumor activity. The use of this strategy may enhance the activity of CAR-T cells in individuals with stroma-rich solid tumors.
The transcription factor p53 plays a key role in the cellular defense against cancer development. It is inactivated in virtually every tumor, and in every second tumor this inactivation is due to a mutation in the TP53 gene. In this perspective, we show that this diverse mutational spectrum is unique among all other cancer-associated proteins and discuss what drives the selection of TP53 mutations in cancer. We highlight that several factors conspire to make the p53 protein particularly vulnerable to inactivation by the mutations that constantly plague our genome. It appears that the TP53 gene has emerged as a victim of its own evolutionary past that shaped its structure and function towards a pluripotent tumor suppressor, but came with an increased structural fragility of its DNA-binding domain. TP53 loss of function - with associated dominant-negative effects - is the main mechanism that will impair TP53 tumor suppressive function, regardless of whether a neomorphic phenotype is associated with some of these variants.
PURPOSE: Therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN) is a life-threatening complication of autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (aPBSCT) for Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). Although previous studies have reported an association between clonal hematopoiesis (CH) in the infused PBSC product and subsequent post-aPBSCT risk of t-MN in patients with non-HL, information about patients with HL treated with aPBSCT is not available. METHODS: We constructed a retrospective cohort of 321 patients with HL transplanted at a median age of 34 years (range, 18-71). Targeted DNA sequencing of PBSC products performed for CH-associated or myeloid malignancy-associated genes identified pathogenic mutations in these patients. RESULTS: CH was identified in the PBSC product of 46 patients (14.3%) with most prominent representation of DNMT3A (n = 25), PPM1D (n = 7), TET2 (n = 7), and TP53 (n = 5) mutations. Presence of CH in the PBSC product was an independent predictor of t-MN (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR], 4.50 [95% CI, 1.54 to 13.19]). Notably all patients with TP53 mutations in the PBSC product developed t-MN, whereas none of the patients with DNMT3A mutations alone (without co-occurring TP53 or PPM1D mutations) did. Presence of TP53 and/or PPM1D mutations was associated with a 7.29-fold higher hazard of t-MN when compared with individuals carrying no CH mutations (95% CI, 1.72 to 30.94). The presence of TP53 and/or PPM1D mutations was also associated with a 4.17-fold higher hazard of nonrelapse mortality (95% CI, 1.25 to 13.87). There was no association between CH and relapse-related mortality. CONCLUSION: The presence of TP53 and/or PPM1D mutations in the PBSC product increases the risk of post-aPBSCT t-MN and nonrelapse mortality among patients with HL and may support alternative therapeutic strategies.
Programmed cell death 5 (PDCD5) was originally identified as an apoptosis-accelerating protein that is widely expressed and has been well conserved during the process of evolution. PDCD5 has complex biological functions, including programmed cell death and immune regulation. It can accelerate apoptosis in different type of cells in response to different stimuli. During this process, PDCD5 rapidly translocates from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. PDCD5 regulates the activities of TIP60, HDAC3, MDM2 and TP53 transcription factors. These proteins form part of a signaling network that is disrupted in most, if not all, cancer cells. Recent evidence suggests that PDCD5 participates in immune regulation by promoting regulatory T cell function via the PDCD5-TIP60-FOXP3 pathway. The stability and expression of PDCD5 are finely regulated by other molecules, such as NF-kappaB p65, OTUD5, YAF2 and DNAJB1. PDCD5 is phosphorylated by CK2 at Ser119, which is required for nuclear translocation in response to genotoxic stress. In this review, we describe what is known about PDCD5 and its cellular functions.
Recent studies have revealed that normal human tissues accumulate many somatic mutations. In particular, human skin is riddled with mutations, with multiple subclones of variable sizes. Driver mutations are frequent and tend to have larger subclone sizes, suggesting selection. To begin to understand the histories encoded by these complex somatic mutations, we incorporated genomes into a simple agent-based skin-cell model whose prime directive is homeostasis. In this model, stem-cell survival is random and dependent on proximity to the basement membrane. This simple homeostatic skin model recapitulates the observed log-linear distributions of somatic mutations, where most mutations are found in increasingly smaller subclones that are typically lost with time. Hence, neutral mutations are "passengers" whose fates depend on the random survival of their stem cells, where a rarer larger subclone reflects the survival and spread of mutations acquired earlier in life. The model can also maintain homeostasis and accumulate more frequent and larger driver subclones if these mutations (NOTCH1 and TP53) confer relatively higher persistence in normal skin or during tissue damage (sunlight). Therefore, a relatively simple model of epithelial turnover indicates how observed passenger and driver somatic mutations could accumulate without violating the prime directive of homeostasis in normal human tissues.
Therapy-related clonal hematopoiesis (t-CH) is defined as clonal hematopoiesis detected in individuals previously treated with chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy. With the increased use of genetic analysis in oncological care, the detection of t-CH among cancer patients is becoming increasingly common. t-CH arises through the selective bottleneck imposed by chemotherapies and potentially through direct mutagenesis from chemotherapies, resulting in a distinct mutational landscape enriched with mutations in DNA damage-response pathway genes such as TP53, PPM1D, and CHEK2. Emerging evidence sheds light on the mechanisms of t-CH development and potential strategies to mitigate its emergence. Due to its unique characteristics that predominantly affect cancer patients, t-CH has clinical implications distinct from those of CH in the general population. This Review discusses the potential mechanisms of t-CH development, its mutational landscape, mutant-drug relationships, and its clinical significance. We highlight the distinct nature of t-CH and call for intensified research in this field.
