Tribbles homolog 2; Interacts with MAPK kinases and regulates activation of MAP kinases. Does not display kinase activity (By similarity). Belongs to the protein kinase superfamily. CAMK Ser/Thr protein kinase family. Tribbles subfamily.
Despite remarkable clinical efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) in cancer treatment, ICB benefits for triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) remain limited. Through pooled in vivo CRISPR knockout (KO) screens in syngeneic TNBC mouse models, we found that deletion of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cop1 in cancer cells decreases secretion of macrophage-associated chemokines, reduces tumor macrophage infiltration, enhances anti-tumor immunity, and strengthens ICB response. Transcriptomics, epigenomics, and proteomics analyses revealed that Cop1 functions through proteasomal degradation of the C/ebpdelta protein. The Cop1 substrate Trib2 functions as a scaffold linking Cop1 and C/ebpdelta, which leads to polyubiquitination of C/ebpdelta. In addition, deletion of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cop1 in cancer cells stabilizes C/ebpdelta to suppress expression of macrophage chemoattractant genes. Our integrated approach implicates Cop1 as a target for improving cancer immunotherapy efficacy in TNBC by regulating chemokine secretion and macrophage infiltration in the tumor microenvironment.
Advances in the understanding of the Tribbles family of pseudokinases (TRIB1, TRIB2 and TRIB3) reveal these proteins as potentially valuable biomarkers of disease diagnosis, prognosis, prediction and clinical strategy. In their role as signalling mediators and scaffolding proteins, TRIBs lead to changes in protein stability and activity, which impact on diverse cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, cell cycle and cell death. We review the role of TRIB proteins as promising therapeutic targets, with an emphasis on their role in cancer, and as biomarkers, with potential application across diverse pathological processes.
INTRODUCTION: Ferroptosis is associated with multiple pathophysiological processes. Inhibition of ferroptosis has received much concern for some diseases. Nonetheless, there is no study comprehensively illustrating functions of ferroptosis-related genes (FRGs) in psoriasis. METHODS: In this study, FRGs together with psoriasis-associated data were obtained in Ferroptosis Database (FerrDb) and gene expression omnibus (GEO) database separately. This work identified altogether 199 psoriasis-associated DE-FRGs, and they were tightly associated with immunity and autophagy modulation. Thereafter, the present study utilized SVM-RFE and LASSO algorithms to identify NR5A2, CISD1, GCLC, PRKAA2, TRIB2, ABCC5, ACSF2, TIMM9, DCAF7, PEBP1, and MDM2 from those 199 DE-FRGs to be marker genes. As revealed by later functional annotation, the marker genes possibly had important effects on psoriasis through being involved in diverse psoriasis pathogenesis-related pathways such as cell cycle, toll-like receptor (TLR), chemokine, and nod-like receptor (NLR) pathways. Moreover, altogether 37 drugs that targeted 11 marker genes were acquired. Besides, based on CIBERSORT analysis, alterations of immune microenvironment in psoriasis cases were possibly associated with PRKAA2, PEBP1, CISD1, and ACSF2. DISCUSSION: Taken together, this work established the diagnostic potency and shed more lights on psoriasis-related mechanism. More investigations are warranted to validate its value in diagnosing psoriasis before it is applied in clinic.
IMPORTANCE: Epicardial and pericardial adipose tissue (EPAT) has been associated with cardiovascular diseases such as atrial fibrillation or flutter (AF) and coronary artery disease (CAD), but studies have been limited in sample size or drawn from selected populations. It has been suggested that the association between EPAT and cardiovascular disease could be mediated by local or paracrine effects. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of EPAT with prevalent and incident cardiovascular disease and to elucidate the genetic basis of EPAT in a large population cohort. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A deep learning model was trained to quantify EPAT area from 4-chamber magnetic resonance images using semantic segmentation. Cross-sectional and prospective cardiovascular disease associations were evaluated, controlling for sex and age. Prospective associations were additionally controlled for abdominal visceral adipose tissue (VAT) volumes. A genome-wide association study was performed, and a polygenic score (PGS) for EPAT was examined in independent FinnGen cohort study participants. Data analyses were conducted from March 2022 to December 2023. EXPOSURES: The primary exposures were magnetic resonance imaging-derived continuous measurements of epicardial and pericardial adipose tissue area and visceral adipose tissue volume. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Prevalent and incident CAD, AF, heart failure (HF), stroke, and type 2 diabetes (T2D). RESULTS: After exclusions, this study included 44 475 participants (mean [SD] age, 64.1 [7.7] years; 22 972 female [51.7%]) from the UK Biobank. Cross-sectional and prospective cardiovascular disease associations were evaluated for a mean (SD) of 3.2 (1.5) years of follow-up. Prospective associations were additionally controlled for abdominal VAT volumes for 38 527 participants. A PGS for EPAT was examined in 453 733 independent FinnGen cohort study participants. EPAT was positively associated with male sex (beta = +0.78 SD in EPAT; P < 3 x 10-324), age (Pearson r = 0.15; P = 9.3 x 10-229), body mass index (Pearson r = 0.47; P < 3 x 10-324), and VAT (Pearson r = 0.72; P < 3 x 10-324). EPAT was more elevated in prevalent HF (beta = +0.46 SD units) and T2D (beta = +0.56) than in CAD (beta = +0.23) or AF (beta = +0.18). EPAT was associated with incident HF (hazard ratio [HR], 1.29 per +1 SD in EPAT; 95% CI, 1.17-1.43), T2D (HR, 1.63; 95% CI, 1.51-1.76), and CAD (HR, 1.19; 95% CI, 1.11-1.28). However, the associations were no longer significant when controlling for VAT. Seven genetic loci were identified for EPAT, implicating transcriptional regulators of adipocyte morphology and brown adipogenesis (EBF1, EBF2, and CEBPA) and regulators of visceral adiposity (WARS2 and TRIB2). The EPAT PGS was associated with T2D (odds ratio [OR], 1.06; 95% CI, 1.05-1.07; P =3.6 x 10-44), HF (OR, 1.05; 95% CI, 1.04-1.06; P =4.8 x 10-15), CAD (OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 1.03-1.05; P =1.4 x 10-17), AF (OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 1.03-1.06; P =7.6 x 10-12), and stroke in FinnGen (OR, 1.02; 95% CI, 1.01-1.03; P =3.5 x 10-3) per 1 SD in PGS. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results of this cohort study suggest that epicardial and pericardial adiposity was associated with incident cardiovascular diseases, but this may largely reflect a metabolically unhealthy adiposity phenotype similar to abdominal visceral adiposity.
Inflammation is part of the physiological innate immune response to invading pathogens and tissue injury. However, unresolved inflammation leads to human disease. The tribbles (TRIB) family of pseudokinase proteins has been shown to modulate key inflammatory signalling pathways, including the MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) and PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) networks. This review summarizes our current knowledge on TRIBs in the context of inflammation, both at the level of molecular mechanisms and in disease development.
Tribbles family of pseudokinase proteins are known to mediate the degradation of target proteins in Drosophila and mammalian systems. The main protein proteolysis pathway in eukaryotic cells is the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The tribbles homolog 2 (TRIB2) mammalian family member has been well characterized for its role in murine and human leukaemia, lung and liver cancer. One of the most characterized substrates for TRIB2-mediated degradation is the myeloid transcription factor CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha). However, across a number of cancers, the molecular interactions that take place between TRIB2 and factors involved in the UPS are varied and have differential downstream effects. This review summarizes our current knowledge of these interactions and how this information is important for our understanding of TRIB2 in cancer.
BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the most common chronic respiratory diseases in the world. COPD is a general term for a class of lung diseases, including emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and refractory asthma. It is characterized by irreversible airflow obstruction and chronic tracheal inflammation. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the expression and related mechanisms of miR-100 and TRIB2 in patients with COPD. METHODS: We collected the serum of patients admitted to our hospital and healthy volunteers undergoing physical examination at the same time, pulmonary fibroblasts were purchased for the experiments, miR-100 was overexpressed, and TRIB2 expression was inhibited in cells. The miR-100 and TRIB2 expression levels in serum and cells were detected by qRT-PCR and Western blot, cell proliferation and apoptosis were detected by CCK-8 and flow cytometry, and the relationship between miR-100 and TRIB2 was explored by the dual-luciferase report. RESULTS: The miR-100 expression in the serum of the COPD group was expressed normally, while the TRIB2 expression was expressed abnormally (p < 0.05). The AUC of serum miR-146a and TRIB2 for COPD diagnosis were 0.965 and 0.954, respectively. Overexpressing miR-100 and inhibiting the TRIB2 expression could decrease cell proliferation and increase apoptosis rate. According to the dual-luciferase report, miR-100 and TRIB2 had a targeted regulatory relationship. Rescue experiments showed that overexpressing TRIB2 could reverse the changes of cell proliferation and apoptosis caused by overexpression of miR-100. CONCLUSION: miR-100 and TRIB2 were expressed abnormally in serum of COPD patients, and miR-100 could inhibit proliferation of pulmonary fibroblasts and promote their apoptosis.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in the Western world. Multiple molecular and cellular processes underpinning the pathogenesis of CVD are regulated by the zinc finger transcription factor and product of an immediate-early gene, early growth response-1 (Egr-1). Egr-1 regulates multiple pro-inflammatory processes that underpin the manifestation of CVD. The activity of Egr-1 itself is influenced by a range of post-translational modifications including sumoylation, ubiquitination and acetylation. Egr-1 also undergoes phosphorylation by protein kinases, such as extracellular-signal regulated kinase (ERK) which is itself phosphorylated by MEK. This article reviews recent progress on the MEK-ERK-Egr-1 cascade, notably regulation in conjunction with factors and agents such as TET2, TRIB2, MIAT, SphK1, cAMP, teneligliptin, cholinergic drugs, red wine and flavonoids, wogonin, febuxostat, docosahexaenoic acid and AT1R blockade. Such insights should provide new opportunity for therapeutic intervention in CVD.
TRIB2 (tribbles homolog 2) encodes one of three members of the tribbles family in mammals. These members share a Trb (tribbles) domain, which is homologous to protein serine-threonine kinases, but lack the active site lysine. The tribbles proteins interact and modulate the activity of signal transduction pathways in a number of physiological and pathological processes. TRIB2 has been identified as an oncogene that inactivates the transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) and causes acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML). Recent research provided compelling evidence that TRIB2 can also act as oncogenic driver in solid tumours, such as lung and liver cancer. In particular, our recent work demonstrated that TRIB2 is dramatically overexpressed in malignant melanomas compared with normal skin and promotes the malignant phenotype of melanoma cells via the down-regulation of FOXO (forkhead box protein O) tumour suppressor activity in vitro and in vivo. TRIB2 was found to be expressed in normal skin, but its expression consistently increased in benign nevi, melanoma and was highest in samples from patients with malignant melanoma. The observation that TRIB2 strongly correlates with the progression of melanocyte-derived malignancies suggests TRIB2 as a meaningful biomarker to both diagnose and stage melanoma. In addition, interfering with TRIB2 activity might be a therapeutic strategy for the treatment of several different tumour types.
AIMS: CD4+ T cells are activated during inflammatory dilated cardiomyopathy (iDCM) development to induce immunogenic responses that damage the myocardium. Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS), a novel physiotherapy for cardiovascular diseases, has recently been shown to modulate inflammatory responses. However, its efficacy in iDCM remains unknown. Here, we investigated whether LIPUS could improve the severity of iDCM by orchestrating immune responses and explored its therapeutic mechanisms. METHODS AND RESULTS: In iDCM mice, LIPUS treatment reduced cardiac remodelling and dysfunction. Additionally, CD4+ T-cell inflammatory responses were suppressed. LIPUS increased Treg cells while decreasing Th17 cells. LIPUS mechanically stimulates endothelial cells, resulting in increased secretion of extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are taken up by CD4+ T cells and alter their differentiation and metabolic patterns. Moreover, EVs selectively loaded with microRNA (miR)-99a are responsible for the therapeutic effects of LIPUS. The hnRNPA2B1 translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and binding to caveolin-1 and miR-99a confirmed the upstream mechanism of miR-99a transport. This complex is loaded into EVs and taken up by CD4+ T cells, which further suppress mTOR and TRIB2 expression to modulate cellular differentiation. CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed that LIPUS uses an EVs-dependent molecular mechanism to protect against iDCM progression. Therefore, LIPUS is a promising new treatment option for iDCM.
The family of Tribbles proteins play many critical nonenzymatic roles and regulate a wide range of key signaling pathways. Tribbles homolog 2 (Trib2) is a pseudo serine/threonine kinase that functions as a scaffold or adaptor in various physiological and pathological processes. Trib2 can interact with E3 ubiquitin ligases and control protein stability of downstream effectors. This protein is induced by mitogens and enhances the propagation of several cancer cells, including myeloid leukemia, liver, lung, skin, bone, brain, and pancreatic. Thus, Trib2 can be a predictive and valuable biomarker for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Recent studies have illustrated that Trib2 plays a major role in cell fate determination of stem cells. Stem cells have the capacity to self-renew and differentiate into specific cell types. Stem cells are important sources for cell-based regenerative medicine and drug screening. Trib2 has been found to increase the self-renewal ability of embryonic stem cells, the reprogramming efficiency of somatic cells, and chondrogenesis. In this review, we will focus on the recent advances of Trib2 function in tumorigenesis and stem cell fate decisions. Video abstract.
The tribbles protein family, an evolutionarily conserved group of pseudokinases, have been shown to regulate multiple cellular events including those involved in normal and malignant haematopoiesis. The three mammalian Tribbles homologues, Trib1, Trib2 and Trib3 are characterized by conserved motifs, including a pseudokinase domain and a C-terminal E3 ligase-binding domain. In this review, we focus on the role of Trib (mammalian Tribbles homologues) proteins in mammalian haematopoiesis and leukaemia. The Trib proteins show divergent expression in haematopoietic cells, probably indicating cell-specific functions. The roles of the Trib proteins in oncogenesis are also varied and appear to be tissue-specific. Finally, we discuss the potential mechanisms by which the Trib proteins preferentially regulate these processes in multiple cell types.
Narcolepsy is a chronic sleep disorder caused by the loss of neurons that produce hypocretin. The close association with HLA-DQB1*06:02, evidence for immune dysregulation and increased incidence upon influenza vaccination together suggest that this disorder has an autoimmune origin. However, there is little evidence of autoreactive lymphocytes in patients with narcolepsy. Here we used sensitive cellular screens and detected hypocretin-specific CD4(+) T cells in all 19 patients that we tested; T cells specific for tribbles homologue 2-another self-antigen of hypocretin neurons-were found in 8 out of 13 patients. Autoreactive CD4(+) T cells were polyclonal, targeted multiple epitopes, were restricted primarily by HLA-DR and did not cross-react with influenza antigens. Hypocretin-specific CD8(+) T cells were also detected in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid of several patients with narcolepsy. Autoreactive clonotypes were serially detected in the blood of the same-and even of different-patients, but not in healthy control individuals. These findings solidify the autoimmune aetiology of narcolepsy and provide a basis for rapid diagnosis and treatment of this disease.
Naive CD4(+) T cells are more resistant to age-related loss than naive CD8(+) T cells, suggesting mechanisms that preferentially protect naive CD4(+) T cells during aging. Here, we show that TRIB2 is more abundant in naive CD4(+) than CD8(+) T cells and counteracts quiescence exit by suppressing AKT activation. TRIB2 deficiency increases AKT activity and accelerates proliferation and differentiation in response to interleukin-7 (IL-7) in humans and during lymphopenia in mice. TRIB2 transcription is controlled by the lineage-determining transcription factors ThPOK and RUNX3. Ablation of Zbtb7b (encoding ThPOK) and Cbfb (obligatory RUNT cofactor) attenuates the difference in lymphopenia-induced proliferation between naive CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells. In older adults, ThPOK and TRIB2 expression wanes in naive CD4(+) T cells, causing loss of naivety. These findings assign TRIB2 a key role in regulating T cell homeostasis and provide a model to explain the lesser resilience of CD8(+) T cells to undergo changes with age.
Insulin resistance and its linked health complications are increasing in prevalence. Recent work has caused the role of Tribbles2 (TRIB2) in metabolism and cellular signaling to be increasingly appreciated, but its role in the progression of insulin resistance has not been elucidated. Here, we explore the functions of TRIB2 in modulating insulin resistance and the mechanism involved in insulin-resistant mice and palmitic acid-treated HepG2 cells. We demonstrate that whole-body knockout and hepatic-specific TRIB2 deficiency protect against diet-induced insulin resistance, inflammation, and endoplasmic reticulum stress. Accordingly, upregulation of TRIB2 in the liver aggravates these metabolic disturbances in high-fat diet-induced mice and ob/ob mice. Mechanistically, TRIB2 directly binds to the alphagamma-SBS domain of PRKAB through its pseudokinase domain, subsequently inhibiting the formation and activity of the AMPK complex. Moreover, the results of intervention against AMPK suggest that the effects of TRIB2 depend on AMPK. Our findings reveal that TRIB2 is a novel target for the treatment of insulin resistance and its associated metabolic complications and clarify the function of TRIB2 as a regulatory component of AMPK activity.
Early hematopoiesis is a continuous process in which hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) gradually differentiate toward specific lineages. Aging and myeloid malignant transformation are characterized by changes in the composition and regulation of HSPCs. In this study, we used single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to characterize an enriched population of human HSPCs obtained from young and elderly healthy individuals. Based on their transcriptional profile, we identified changes in the proportions of progenitor compartments during aging, and differences in their functionality, as evidenced by gene set enrichment analysis. Trajectory inference revealed that altered gene expression dynamics accompanied cell differentiation, which could explain aging-associated changes in hematopoiesis. Next, we focused on key regulators of transcription by constructing gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and detected regulons that were specifically active in elderly individuals. Using previous findings in healthy cells as a reference, we analyzed scRNA-seq data obtained from patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and detected specific alterations of the expression dynamics of genes involved in erythroid differentiation in all patients with MDS such as TRIB2. In addition, the comparison between transcriptional programs and GRNs regulating normal HSPCs and MDS HSPCs allowed identification of regulons that were specifically active in MDS cases such as SMAD1, HOXA6, POU2F2, and RUNX1 suggesting a role of these transcription factors (TFs) in the pathogenesis of the disease. In summary, we demonstrate that the combination of single-cell technologies with computational analysis tools enable the study of a variety of cellular mechanisms involved in complex biological systems such as early hematopoiesis and can be used to dissect perturbed differentiation trajectories associated with perturbations such as aging and malignant transformation. Furthermore, the identification of abnormal regulatory mechanisms associated with myeloid malignancies could be exploited for personalized therapeutic approaches in individual patients.
The pseudo-kinase family of tribbles (TRIB) proteins has been linked to a variety of cell signalling pathways and appears to have functionally divergent roles with respect to intracellular protein degradation and the ability to regulate signal transduction pathways. In the arthritides, inflammation and a wide variety of pro-inflammatory pathways have been implicated to drive the cartilage destruction and consequent disability associated with both rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA). Despite burgeoning evidence linking the TRIB to inflammation-related pathologies such as diabetes, multiple sclerosis and cancer, very little is known about their roles in arthritis. The present review discusses current knowledge of the impact of TRIB on pro-inflammatory cellular mechanisms and pathways known to be important in the pathogenesis of RA and OA.
Human Tribbles 2 (TRIB2) is a cancer-associated pseudokinase with a broad human protein interactome, including the well-studied AKT, C/EBPalpha and MAPK modules. Several lines of evidence indicate that human TRIB2 promotes cell survival and drug-resistance in solid tumors and blood cancers and is therefore of interest as a potential therapeutic target, although its physiological functions remain relatively poorly understood. The unique TRIB2 pseudokinase domain lacks the canonical 'DFG' motif, and subsequently possesses very low affinity for ATP in both the presence and absence of metal ions. However, TRIB2 also contains a unique cysteine-rich alphaC-helix, which interacts with a conserved peptide motif in its own carboxyl-terminal tail. This regulatory flanking region drives regulated interactions with distinct E3 ubiquitin ligases that serve to control the stability and turnover of TRIB2 client proteins. TRIB2 is also a low-affinity target of several known small-molecule protein kinase inhibitors, which were originally identified using purified recombinant TRIB2 proteins and a thermal shift assay. In this chapter, we discuss laboratory-based procedures for purification, stabilization and analysis of human TRIB2, including screening procedures that can be used for the identification of both reversible and covalent small molecule ligands.
The molecular mechanisms underlying unexplained recurrent implantation failure (RIF) remain unclear. This study aimed at identifying potential biomarkers, exploring relevant signaling pathways, and analyzing the contribution of immune cell infiltration in RIF. Microarray expression datasets were extracted from the Gene Expression Omnibus database to perform bioinformatic analyses. The results showed that ten hub genes may predict RIF with high specificity and sensitivity (area under the curve = 1.000). Protein-protein interaction analysis revealed close interactions between the hub genes and the endometrial receptivity array. The real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction further validated three potential biomarkers (RAB32, TRIB2, and FAM155B). Functional enrichment analyses indicated that immune pathways were significantly downregulated and lipid metabolism pathways were significantly upregulated in RIF compared with the controls. Significant negative correlations were observed between fatty acid biosynthesis and the immune pathways. Immune cell infiltration, including those in CD56dim natural killer, dendritic, Th1, Th2, and regulatory T cells, as well as macrophages, was significantly reduced in RIF compared with the controls used herein. This study may provide a novel perspective on the diagnosis and treatment of RIF.
