5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2C; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances, including ergot alkaloid derivatives, 1-2,5,- dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane (DOI) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathway [...] 
IMPORTANCE: Clinical exome sequencing (CES) is rapidly becoming a common molecular diagnostic test for individuals with rare genetic disorders. OBJECTIVE: To report on initial clinical indications for CES referrals and molecular diagnostic rates for different indications and for different test types. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Clinical exome sequencing was performed on 814 consecutive patients with undiagnosed, suspected genetic conditions at the University of California, Los Angeles, Clinical Genomics Center between January 2012 and August 2014. Clinical exome sequencing was conducted as trio-CES (both parents and their affected child sequenced simultaneously) to effectively detect de novo and compound heterozygous variants or as proband-CES (only the affected individual sequenced) when parental samples were not available. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Clinical indications for CES requests, molecular diagnostic rates of CES overall and for phenotypic subgroups, and differences in molecular diagnostic rates between trio-CES and proband-CES. RESULTS: Of the 814 cases, the overall molecular diagnosis rate was 26% (213 of 814; 95% CI, 23%-29%). The molecular diagnosis rate for trio-CES was 31% (127 of 410 cases; 95% CI, 27%-36%) and 22% (74 of 338 cases; 95% CI, 18%-27%) for proband-CES. In cases of developmental delay in children (<5 years, n = 138), the molecular diagnosis rate was 41% (45 of 109; 95% CI, 32%-51%) for trio-CES cases and 9% (2 of 23, 95% CI, 1%-28%) for proband-CES cases. The significantly higher diagnostic yield (P value = .002; odds ratio, 7.4 [95% CI, 1.6-33.1]) of trio-CES was due to the identification of de novo and compound heterozygous variants. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this sample of patients with undiagnosed, suspected genetic conditions, trio-CES was associated with higher molecular diagnostic yield than proband-CES or traditional molecular diagnostic methods. Additional studies designed to validate these findings and to explore the effect of this approach on clinical and economic outcomes are warranted.
Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are serine/threonine kinases and their catalytic activities are modulated by interactions with cyclins and Cdk inhibitors (CKIs). Close cooperation between this trio is necessary for ensuring orderly progression through the cell cycle. In addition to their well-established function in cell cycle control, it is becoming increasingly apparent that mammalian Cdks, cyclins and CKIs play indispensable roles in processes such as transcription, epigenetic regulation, metabolism, stem cell self-renewal, neuronal functions and spermatogenesis. Even more remarkably, they can accomplish some of these tasks individually, without the need for Cdk/cyclin complex formation or kinase activity. In this Review, we discuss the latest revelations about Cdks, cyclins and CKIs with the goal of showcasing their functional diversity beyond cell cycle regulation and their impact on development and disease in mammals.
The Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor (RhoGEF) TRIO acts as a key regulator of neuronal migration, axonal outgrowth, axon guidance, and synaptogenesis by activating the GTPase RAC1 and modulating actin cytoskeleton remodeling. Pathogenic variants in TRIO are associated with neurodevelopmental diseases, including intellectual disability (ID) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Here, we report the largest international cohort of 24 individuals with confirmed pathogenic missense or nonsense variants in TRIO. The nonsense mutations are spread along the TRIO sequence, and affected individuals show variable neurodevelopmental phenotypes. In contrast, missense variants cluster into two mutational hotspots in the TRIO sequence, one in the seventh spectrin repeat and one in the RAC1-activating GEFD1. Although all individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and a neuro-behavioral phenotype, individuals with a pathogenic variant in the seventh spectrin repeat have a more severe ID associated with macrocephaly than do most individuals with GEFD1 variants, who display milder ID and microcephaly. Functional studies show that the spectrin and GEFD1 variants cause a TRIO-mediated hyper- or hypo-activation of RAC1, respectively, and we observe a striking correlation between RAC1 activation levels and the head size of the affected individuals. In addition, truncations in TRIO GEFD1 in the vertebrate model X. tropicalis induce defects that are concordant with the human phenotype. This work demonstrates distinct clinical and molecular disorders clustering in the GEFD1 and seventh spectrin repeat domains and highlights the importance of tight control of TRIO-RAC1 signaling in neuronal development.
ITSN1 plays an important role in brain development. Recent studies in large cohorts of subjects with neurodevelopmental disorders have identified de novo variants in ITSN1 gene thereby suggesting that this gene is involved in the development of such disorders. The aim of this study is to provide further proof of such a link. We performed trio exome sequencing in a patient presenting autism, intellectual disability, and severe behavioral difficulties. Additional affected patients with a neurodevelopmental disorder harboring a heterozygous variant in ITSN1 (NM_003024.2) were collected through a worldwide collaboration. All patients underwent detailed phenotypic and genetic assessment and data was collected and shared by healthcare givers. We identified ten novel patients from eight families with heterozygous truncating or missense variants in ITSN1 gene. In addition, four previously published patients from large meta-analysis studies were included. In total, 7/14 patients presented a de novo variant in ITSN1. All patients showed neurodevelopmental disorders from autism spectrum disorders (90%), intellectual disability (86%), and epilepsy (30%). We demonstrated that truncating variants are in the first half of ITSN1 whereas missense variants are clustered in C-terminal region. We suggest ITSN1 gene is involved in development of an autism spectrum disorder with variable additional neurodevelopmental deficiency, thus confirming the hypothesis that ITSN1 is important for brain development.
Throughout history, epilepsy affects about 1-2% of the population worldwide. Epilepsy can be caused by traumatic brain injury, exposure to certain toxins and drugs, and mutations of genes that often encode synaptic proteins. In addition to conventional linkage and association studies, the recent trio exome sequencing in epilepsy and proteomic analysis in autoimmune synaptopathies have accelerated identification of novel epilepsy-related proteins, most of which play critical roles in synaptic transmission. Furthermore, super-resolution microscopy analysis has revealed subsynaptic nanoscale distribution of presynaptic and postsynaptic proteins and suggests a precise trans-synaptic alignment of neurotransmitter release to receptors. Such identification and characterization of epilepsy-related synaptic proteins have been promoting the development of anti-epileptic drugs and the understanding of mechanisms of synaptic transmission.
IMPORTANCE: While congenital malformations and genetic diseases are a leading cause of early infant death, to our knowledge, the contribution of single-gene disorders in this group is undetermined. OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic yield and use of clinical exome sequencing in critically ill infants. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Clinical exome sequencing was performed for 278 unrelated infants within the first 100 days of life who were admitted to Texas Children's Hospital in Houston, Texas, during a 5-year period between December 2011 and January 2017. Exome sequencing types included proband exome, trio exome, and critical trio exome, a rapid genomic assay for seriously ill infants. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Indications for testing, diagnostic yield of clinical exome sequencing, turnaround time, molecular findings, patient age at diagnosis, and effect on medical management among a group of critically ill infants who were suspected to have genetic disorders. RESULTS: The mean (SEM) age for infants participating in the study was 28.5 (1.7) days; of these, the mean (SEM) age was 29.0 (2.2) days for infants undergoing proband exome sequencing, 31.5 (3.9) days for trio exome, and 22.7 (3.9) days for critical trio exome. Clinical indications for exome sequencing included a range of medical concerns. Overall, a molecular diagnosis was achieved in 102 infants (36.7%) by clinical exome sequencing, with relatively low yield for cardiovascular abnormalities. The diagnosis affected medical management for 53 infants (52.0%) and had a substantial effect on informed redirection of care, initiation of new subspecialist care, medication/dietary modifications, and furthering life-saving procedures in select patients. Critical trio exome sequencing revealed a molecular diagnosis in 32 of 63 infants (50.8%) at a mean (SEM) of 33.1 (5.6) days of life with a mean (SEM) turnaround time of 13.0 (0.4) days. Clinical care was altered by the diagnosis in 23 of 32 patients (71.9%). The diagnostic yield, patient age at diagnosis, and medical effect in the group that underwent critical trio exome sequencing were significantly different compared with the group who underwent regular exome testing. For deceased infants (n = 81), genetic disorders were molecularly diagnosed in 39 (48.1%) by exome sequencing, with implications for recurrence risk counseling. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Exome sequencing is a powerful tool for the diagnostic evaluation of critically ill infants with suspected monogenic disorders in the neonatal and pediatric intensive care units and its use has a notable effect on clinical decision making.
Activity-dependent modifications in the strength of excitatory synapses are considered to be major cellular mechanisms that contribute to the plasticity of neuronal networks underlying learning and memory. Key mechanisms for the regulation of synaptic efficacy involve the dynamic changes in size and number of dendritic spines, as well as the synaptic incorporation and removal of AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPAr). As key regulators of the actin cytoskeleton, the Rho subfamily of GTP-binding proteins play a critical role in synaptic development and plasticity. They shuttle between the active GTP-bound form and the inactive GDP-bound form under the regulation of dedicated guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). More than 80 human GEFs and 70 GAPs have been identified, most of which are expressed in the brain with a specific spatial and temporal expression pattern. However, the function of most GEFs and GAPs in the brain has not been elucidated. In this review, we highlight the novel neuronal function of the synaptic RhoGAP ARHGAP12 and the ID-associated RhoGEF TRIO and further propose 3 possible approaches of neurons utilizing Rho GTPase regulatory proteins to accurately modulate synaptic function.
Single monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) can be expressed in vivo through gene delivery of their mRNA formulated with lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). However, delivery of a mAb combination could be challenging due to the risk of heavy and light variable chain mispairing. We evaluated the pharmacokinetics of a three mAb combination against Staphylococcus aureus first in single chain variable fragment scFv-Fc and then in immunoglobulin G 1 (IgG1) format in mice. Intravenous delivery of each mRNA/LNP or the trio (1 mg/kg each) induced functional antibody expression after 24 h (10-100 mug/mL) with 64%-78% cognate-chain paired IgG expression after 3 days, and an absence of non-cognate chain pairing for scFv-Fc. We did not observe reduced neutralizing activity for each mAb compared with the level of expression of chain-paired mAbs. Delivery of the trio mRNA protected mice in an S. aureus-induced dermonecrosis model. Intravenous administration of the three mRNA in non-human primates achieved peak serum IgG levels ranging between 2.9 and 13.7 mug/mL with a half-life of 11.8-15.4 days. These results suggest nucleic acid delivery of mAb combinations holds promise and may be a viable option to streamline the development of therapeutic antibodies.
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s) are the central players in the trio of enzymes responsible for the attachment of ubiquitin (Ub) to cellular proteins. Humans have  approximately 40 E2s that are involved in the transfer of Ub or Ub-like (Ubl) proteins (e.g., SUMO and NEDD8). Although the majority of E2s are only twice the size of Ub, this remarkable family of enzymes performs a variety of functional roles. In this review, we summarize common functional and structural features that define unifying themes among E2s and highlight emerging concepts in the mechanism and regulation of E2s.
Cysteine dioxygenases, 3-mercaptopropionate dioxygenases and mercaptosuccinate dioxygenases are all thiol dioxygenases (TDOs) that catalyse oxidation of thiol molecules to sulphinates. They are Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenases with a cupin fold that supports a 3xHis metal-coordinating triad at the active site. They also have other, broadly common features including arginine residues involved in substrate carboxylate binding and a conserved trio of residues at the active site featuring a tyrosine important in substrate binding catalysis. Recently, N-terminal cysteinyl dioxygenase enzymes (NCOs) have been identified in plants (plant cysteine oxidases, PCOs), while human 2-aminoethanethiol dioxygenase (ADO) has been shown to act as both an NCO and a small molecule TDO. Although the cupin fold and 3xHis Fe(II)-binding triad seen in the small molecule TDOs are conserved in NCOs, other active site features and aspects of the overall protein architecture are quite different. Furthermore, the PCOs and ADO appear to act as biological O(2) sensors, as shown by kinetic analyses and hypoxic regulation of the stability of their biological targets (N-terminal cysteine oxidation triggers protein degradation via the N-degron pathway). Here, we discuss the emergence of these two subclasses of TDO including structural features that could dictate their ability to bind small molecule or polypeptide substrates. These structural features may also underpin the O(2) -sensing capability of the NCOs. Understanding how these enzymes interact with their substrates, including O(2) , could reveal strategies to manipulate their activity, relevant to hypoxic disease states and plant adaptive responses to flooding.
Protein-lipid interactions are important for protein targeting, signal transduction, lipid transport, lipid biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, and the maintenance of cellular compartments and membranes. Specific lipid-binding protein domains, such as PH, FYVE, PX, PHD, C2 and SEC14 homology domains, mediate interactions between proteins and specific phospholipids. Here we review the published literature, plus some of our most recent unpublished findings, regarding the biology of the SEC14 domain, also known as CRAL_TRIO domain.
Clear-cell renal cell carcinoma exhibits unique molecular features, some of which are associated with the response to immunotherapy. However, the interactions between different genomic entities remains incompletely understood. In this issue, Zhou and colleagues show that PBRM1 inactivation is associated with increased expression of specific human endogenous retroviruses and identify HIF1/2A transcriptional activity as an important mediator of this interaction, helping uncover the interplay between some of the key molecular traits of this disease. See related article by Zhou et al., p. 285 (3).
Receptor protein tyrosine phosphatases (RPTPs) are type-I transmembrane proteins and involved in various biological and pathological processes. Their functions are supposed to be exerted through tyrosine dephosphorylation of their specific substrates. However, our comprehensive understanding of specific substrates or interacting proteins for RPTPs is poor. PTPRsigma belongs to class 2a RPTP family, dephosphorylates cortactin, and leads to autophagy flux disruption and axonal regeneration inhibition in response to its ligand chondroitin sulphate. Here, we applied proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) assay, a proximity-labelling assay, to PTPRsigma and reproducibly identified the 99 candidates as interactors for PTPRsigma including already-known interactors such as Liprin-alpha and Trio. Of note, cortactin was also listed up in our assay. Our results suggest that the BioID assay is a powerful and reliable tool to identify RPTP-interacting proteins including its specific substrate.
Fetal growth restriction (FGR), a leading cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality, is caused by fetal, maternal, and placental factors. Uniparental disomy (UPD) is a rare condition that leads to imprinting effects, low-level mosaic aneuploidies and homozygosity for pathogenic variants. In the present study, UPD events were detected in 5 women with FGR by trio exome sequencing (trio-WES) of a cohort of 150 FGR cases. Furthermore, noninvasive prenatal testing results of the 5 patients revealed a high risk of rare autosomal trisomy. Trio-WES showed no copy-number variations (CNVs) or nondisease-causing mutations associated with FGR. Among the 5 women with FGR, two showed gene imprinting, and two exhibited confined placental mosaicism (CPM) by copy number variant sequencing (CNV-seq). The present study showed that in FGR patients with UPD, the detection of imprinted genes and CPM could enhance the genetic diagnosis of FGR.
Genome sequencing (GS) is a powerful test for the diagnosis of rare genetic disorders. Although GS can enumerate most non-coding variation, determining which non-coding variants are disease-causing is challenging. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has emerged as an important tool to help address this issue, but its diagnostic utility remains understudied, and the added value of a trio design is unknown. We performed GS plus RNA-seq from blood using an automated clinical-grade high-throughput platform on 97 individuals from 39 families where the proband was a child with unexplained medical complexity. RNA-seq was an effective adjunct test when paired with GS. It enabled clarification of putative splice variants in three families, but it did not reveal variants not already identified by GS analysis. Trio RNA-seq decreased the number of candidates requiring manual review when filtering for de novo dominant disease-causing variants, allowing for the exclusion of 16% of gene-expression outliers and 27% of allele-specific-expression outliers. However, clear diagnostic benefit from the trio design was not observed. Blood-based RNA-seq can facilitate genome analysis in children with suspected undiagnosed genetic disease. In contrast to DNA sequencing, the clinical advantages of a trio RNA-seq design may be more limited.
Due to postmortem DNA degradation and microbial colonization, most ancient genomes have low depth of coverage, hindering genotype calling. Genotype imputation can improve genotyping accuracy for low-coverage genomes. However, it is unknown how accurate ancient DNA imputation is and whether imputation introduces bias to downstream analyses. Here we re-sequence an ancient trio (mother, father, son) and downsample and impute a total of 43 ancient genomes, including 42 high-coverage (above 10x) genomes. We assess imputation accuracy across ancestries, time, depth of coverage, and sequencing technology. We find that ancient and modern DNA imputation accuracies are comparable. When downsampled at 1x, 36 of the 42 genomes are imputed with low error rates (below 5%) while African genomes have higher error rates. We validate imputation and phasing results using the ancient trio data and an orthogonal approach based on Mendel's rules of inheritance. We further compare the downstream analysis results between imputed and high-coverage genomes, notably principal component analysis, genetic clustering, and runs of homozygosity, observing similar results starting from 0.5x coverage, except for the African genomes. These results suggest that, for most populations and depths of coverage as low as 0.5x, imputation is a reliable method that can improve ancient DNA studies.
TRIO and F-actin-binding protein (TRIOBP) also referred to as Tara, was originally isolated as a cytoskeleton remodeling protein. TRIOBP-1 is important for regulating F-actin filament reorganization. TRIOBP variants are broadly classified as variant-1 or - 4 and do not share exons. TRIOBP variant-5 contains all exons. Earlier studies indicated that TRIOBP-4/5 mutation is a pivotal element of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss. However, recent studies provide clues that TRIOBP variants are associated with other human diseases including cancer and brain diseases. In this review, recent functional studies focusing on TRIOBP variants and its possible disease models are described.
Small Rho-GTPases are enzymes that are bound to GDP or GTP, which determines their inactive or active state, respectively. The exchange of GDP for GTP is catalyzed by so-called Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Rho-GEFs are characterized by a Dbl-homology (DH) and adjacent Pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain that serves as enzymatic unit for the GDP/GTP exchange. Rho-GEFs show different GTPase specificities, meaning that a particular GEF can activate either multiple GTPases or only one specific GTPase. We recently reported that the Rho-GEF Trio, known to be able to exchange GTP on Rac1, RhoG and RhoA, regulates lamellipodia formation to mediate cell spreading and migration in a Rac1-dependent manner. In this commentary, we review the current knowledge of Trio in several aspects of cell biology.
Activins and inhibins are closely related protein heterodimers with a similar tissue distribution; however, these two complexes have opposing functions in development and disease. Both are secreted cytokine hormones, with activin the primary inducer of downstream signaling cascades and inhibin acting as a rheostat that exquisitely governs activin function. Adding to the complexity of activin signaling, follistatin, a highly glycosylated monomeric protein, binds activin with high affinity and restrains downstream pathway activation but through a mechanism distinct from that of inhibin. These three proteins were first identified as key ovarian hormones in the pituitary-gonadal axis that direct the synthesis and secretion of FSH from the pituitary, hence controlling folliculogenesis. Research during the past 30 years has expanded the roles of these proteins, first by discovering the ubiquitous expression of the trio and then by implicating them in a wide array of biological functions. In concert, these three hormones govern tissue development, homeostasis, and disease in multiple organ systems through diverse autocrine and paracrine mechanisms. In the present study, we have reviewed the actions of activin and its biological inhibitors, inhibin, and follistatin, in mammary gland morphogenesis and cancer.
Since the discovery of SOX9 mutations in the severe human skeletal malformation syndrome campomelic dysplasia in 1994, Sox9 was shown to be both required and sufficient for chondrocyte specification and differentiation. At the same time, its distant relatives Sox5 and Sox6 were shown to act in redundancy with each other to robustly enhance its functions. The Sox trio is currently best known for its ability to activate the genes for cartilage-specific extracellular matrix components. Sox9 and Sox5/6 homodimerize through domains adjacent to their Sry-related high-mobility-group DNA-binding domain to increase the efficiency of their cooperative binding to chondrocyte-specific enhancers. Sox9 possesses a potent transactivation domain and thereby recruits diverse transcriptional co-activators, histone-modifying enzymes, subunits of the mediator complex, and components of the general transcriptional machinery, such as CBP/p300, Med12, Med25, and Wwp2. This information helps us begin to unravel the mechanisms responsible for Sox9-mediated transcription. We review here the discovery of this master chondrogenic trio and its roles in chondrogenesis in vivo and at the molecular level, and we discuss how these pioneering studies open the way for many additional studies that are needed to further increase our understanding of the transcriptional regulatory machinery operating in chondrogenesis.
