Thyrotropin subunit beta; Indispensable for the control of thyroid structure and metabolism; Belongs to the glycoprotein hormones subunit beta family.
To identify the spectrum and prevalence of thirteen causative genes mutations in congenital hypothyroidism (CH) patients, we collected blood samples and extracted genomic DNA of 106 CH patients, and designed a customized targeted next-generation sequencing panel containing 13 CH-causing genes to detect mutations. A total of 132 mutations were identified in 65.09% of patients (69/106) on the following nine genes: DUOX2, TG, TPO, TSHR, TTF1, TTF2, NKX2-5, PAX8 and GNAS. 69.70% (92/132) mutations related to thyroid dyshormonogenesis genes, including DUOX2 (n = 49), TG (n = 35), and TPO (n = 8). 21.21% (28/132) mutations related to thyroid dysgenesis genes, including TSHR (n = 19), TTF1 (n = 5), TTF2 (n = 1), PAX8 (n = 2), and NKX2-5 (n = 1). 9.09% (12/132) mutations related to GNAS, which was associated with thyrotropin resistance. No mutation of THRA, TSHB, IYD or SLC5A5 was detected. Among 69 mutations detected patients, 41 (59.42%) patients were two or more mutations detected, and mutations of 30 (43.48%) patients related to two or three genes. According to the pathomechanism of the mutant genes, 57.97% CH patients were classified as thyroid dyshormonogenesis. Overall, DUOX2, TG and TSHR mutations were the most common genetic defects in Chinese CH patients, and thyroid dyshormonogenesis could be the first genetic etiology of CH in Chinese. Besides, multiple mutations accounts for a part of genetic pathogenesis.
To assess how genomic information of the general population reflects probabilities of developing diseases and the differences in those probabilities among ethnic groups, a general population database was analyzed with an example of congenital hypothyroidism. Twelve candidate genes that follow an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern in congenital hypothyroidism (SLC5A5, TPO, TG, IYD, DUOXA2, DUOX2, TSHR, SLC26A7, GLIS3, FOXE1, TSHB, TRHR) in the gnomAD database (v2.1.1) were analyzed. The carrier frequency (CF) and predicted genetic prevalence (pGP) were estimated. The total CF in the overall population was 3.6%. DUOX2 showed the highest CF (1.8%), followed by TG (0.46%), TPO (0.44%), TSHR (0.31%), SLC26A7 (0.144%), DUOXA2 (0.141%), IYD (0.08%), SLC5A5 (0.06%), TRHR (0.059%), GLIS3 (0.059%), TSHB (0.04%), and FOXE1 (0%). The pGP in the overall population was 10.01 individuals per 100,000 births (1:9992). The highest pGP was in the East Asian population at 52.48 per 100,000 births (1:1905), followed by Finnish (35.96), Non-Finnish European (9.56), African/African American (4.0), Latino/Admixed American (3.89), South Asian (3.56), and Ashkenazi Jewish (1.81) groups. Comparing the pGP with the real incidence of congenital hypothyroidism, the pGP in East Asian populations was highly consistent with the real incidence.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Thyroid hormones have been recently linked to senescence and longevity. Given the recent description of TSHB mRNA in human adipose tissue (AT), we aimed to investigate the relationship between local AT TSH and adipose tissue senescence. METHODS: TSHB mRNA (measured by real-time PCR) and markers of adipose tissue senescence [BAX, DBC1, TP53, TNF (real-time PCR), telomere length (Telo TAGGG Telomere Length Assay) and lipidomics (liquid chromatography mass spectrometry)] were analysed in subcutaneous (SAT) and visceral (VAT) AT from euthyroid subjects. The chronic effects of TSH were also investigated in AT from hypothyroid rats and after recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) administration in human adipocytes. RESULTS: Both VAT and SAT TSHB gene expression negatively correlated with markers of AT cellular senescence (BAX, DBC1, TP53, TNF gene expression and specific glucosylceramides) and positively associated with telomere length. Supporting these observations, both rhTSH administration in human adipocytes and increased TSH in hypothyroid rats resulted in decreased markers of cellular senescence (Bax and Tp53 mRNA) in both gonadal and subcutaneous white adipose tissue. CONCLUSION: These data point to a possible role of TSH in AT cellular senescence.
Central congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) is an underdiagnosed disorder poorly described in childhood and adolescence. Congenital defects in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) synthesis, secretion or bioactivity may lead to a state of 'regulatory' hypothyroidism expressed through aberrantly low or normal TSH levels and low thyroxine (T4), a hormonal pattern undetectable by TSH-based neonatal screening programs for congenital hypothyroidism (CH) implemented in most countries worldwide. CCH is more prevalent than previously thought, reaching 1 in 16,000 neonates in countries consistently identifying CCH through T4-based CH screening strategies. Neonatal detection and early treatment of CCH would prevent the risk of developing mental retardation secondary to late diagnosis of infantile hypothyroidism. CCH is frequently associated with other pituitary defects causing life-threatening situations (like e.g. adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency) which could benefit from the early detection of CCH, avoiding considerable morbidity and mortality. CCH is not easy to identify clinically, and therefore few children are investigated for the disorder. The current knowledge on the genetic bases of CCH is also scarce. At the hypothalamic level no gene defects causing CCH have yet been identified in humans, but pituitary (thyrotrope)-selective genes encoding the TSH-releasing hormone (TRH) receptor (TRHR), the TSH beta-subunit (TSHB) and, recently, the immunoglobulin superfamily factor 1 (IGSF1) are genes involved in isolated central hypothyroidism. Moreover, central hypothyroidism is a complex condition where many regulatory signals are implicated and converge to finely modulate the activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. This review focuses on novel pathogenic mechanisms and their implications to understand human CCH and improve the identification and the therapeutic handling of this elusive disease in the pediatric age.
This study addresses the in vivo and in vitro expression pattern of three genes that are operative in the thyrotroph subpopulation of anterior pituitary cells: glycoprotein alpha-chain (Cga), thyroid-stimulating hormone beta-chain (Tshb), and TRH receptor (Trhr). In vivo, the expression of Cga and Tshb was robust, whereas the expression of Trhr was low. In cultured pituitary cells, there was a progressive decline in the expression of Cga, Tshb, and Trhr. The expression of Tshb could not be reversed via pulsatile or continuous TRH application in variable concentrations and treatment duration or by the removal of thyroid and steroid hormones from the sera. In parallel, the expression of CGA and TSHB proteins declined progressively in pituitary cells from both sexes. The lack of the effect of TRH on Tshb expression was not related to the age of pituitary cultures and the presence of functional TRH receptors. In cultured pituitary fragments, there was also a rapid decline in expression of these genes, but TRH was able to induce transient Tshb expression. In vivo, thyrotrophs were often in close proximity to each other and to somatotroph and folliculostellate cell networks and especially to the lactotroph cell network; such an organization pattern was lost in vitro. These observations suggest that the lack of influence of anterior pituitary architecture and/or intrapituitary factors probably accounts for the loss of basal and TRH-stimulated Tshb expression in dispersed pituitary cells.
Subclinical hypothyroidism is known to be associated with increased serum cholesterol. Since thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) exerts an inductor effect on cholesterol biosynthesis, we aimed to investigate the relationship between TSH mRNA and cholesterol metabolism in human adipose tissue (AT). Cross-sectionally, AT TSH-beta (TSHB) mRNA was evaluated in 4 independent cohorts in association with serum total and LDL cholesterol, and AT lipidomics. Longitudinally, the effects of statins and of diet and exercise on AT TSHB mRNA were also examined. The bidirectional relationship between cholesterol and TSHB were studied in isolated human adipocytes. TSHB mRNA was consistently detected in AT from euthyroid subjects, and positively associated with serum total- and LDL-cholesterol, and with AT-specific cholesterol metabolism-associated lipids [arachidonoyl cholesteryl ester, C8-dihydroceramide, N-stearoyl-d-sphingosine, and GlcCer(18:0, 24:1)]. Reduction of cholesterol with statins and with diet and exercise interventions led to decreased TSHB mRNA in human AT, whereas excess cholesterol up-regulated TSHB mRNA in human adipocytes. In addition, recombinant human TSH alpha/beta administration resulted in increased HMGCR mRNA levels in human adipocytes. In mice, subcutaneous AT Tshb expression levels correlated directly with circulating cholesterol levels. In summary, current results provide novel evidence of TSHB as a paracrine factor that is modulated in parallel with cholesterol metabolism in human AT.-Moreno-Navarrete, J. M., Moreno, M., Ortega, F., Xifra, G., Hong, S., Asara, J. M., Serrano, J. C. E., Jove, M., Pissios, P., Bluher, M., Ricart, W., Portero-Otin, M., Fernandez-Real, J. M. TSHB mRNA is linked to cholesterol metabolism in adipose tissue.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigated whether epistasis between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the TSHB (thyroid-stimulating hormone beta) and ADAMTS16 (ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif, 16) genes is associated with an increased risk of premature ovarian failure (POF) in Korean women. METHODS: In stage I, 120 women with POF and 222 controls participated. A GoldenGate assay with VeraCode technology was used to genotype SNPs within the TSHB and ADAMTS16 genes. For stage II, we obtained genotype data merged with imputed data for 1,641 female controls from the Korean Genome Epidemiology Study. RESULTS: In stage I, two SNPs (rs7530810 and rs1321108) in the 5' flanking region of the TSHB gene demonstrated significant synergistic interactions with one tagging intronic SNP (rs13172105) in the ADAMTS16 gene (odds ratios, 6.63 and 5.57; 95% CIs, 2.30-19.18 and 2.05-15.12; P = 0.00048 and 0.00074, respectively) although the SNPs were not significantly associated with POF in a single SNP model. When at least one G allele at rs7530810 or one A allele at rs1321108 was present in combination with a C allele at rs13172105, significant synergistic effects were observed in a recessive model. In stage II and combined analyses, the same combinations repeatedly showed significant synergistic interactions. CONCLUSIONS: Epistasis between SNPs within the TSHB and ADAMTS16 genes may increase the risk of POF in Korean women.
Central congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) may occur in isolation, or more frequently in combination with additional pituitary hormone deficits with or without associated extrapituitary abnormalities. Although uncommon, it may be more prevalent than previously thought, affecting up to 1:16 000 neonates in the Netherlands. Since TSH is not elevated, CCH will evade diagnosis in primary, TSH-based, CH screening programs and delayed detection may result in neurodevelopmental delay due to untreated neonatal hypothyroidism. Alternatively, coexisting growth hormones or ACTH deficiency may pose additional risks, such as life threatening hypoglycaemia. Genetic ascertainment is possible in a minority of cases and reveals mutations in genes controlling the TSH biosynthetic pathway (TSHB, TRHR, IGSF1) in isolated TSH deficiency, or early (HESX1, LHX3, LHX4, SOX3, OTX2) or late (PROP1, POU1F1) pituitary transcription factors in combined hormone deficits. Since TSH cannot be used as an indicator of euthyroidism, adequacy of treatment can be difficult to monitor due to a paucity of alternative biomarkers. This review will summarize the normal physiology of pituitary development and the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, then describe known genetic causes of isolated central hypothyroidism and combined pituitary hormone deficits associated with TSH deficiency. Difficulties in diagnosis and management of these conditions will then be discussed.
BACKGROUND: Four genetic causes of isolated congenital central hypothyroidism (CeH) have been identified, but many cases remain unexplained. We hypothesised the existence of other genetic causes of CeH with a Mendelian inheritance pattern. METHODS: We performed exome sequencing in two families with unexplained isolated CeH and subsequently Sanger sequenced unrelated idiopathic CeH cases. We performed clinical and biochemical characterisation of the probands and carriers identified by family screening. We investigated IRS4 mRNA expression in human hypothalamus and pituitary tissue, and measured serum thyroid hormones and Trh and Tshb mRNA expression in hypothalamus and pituitary tissue of Irs4 knockout mice. RESULTS: We found mutations in the insulin receptor substrate 4 (IRS4) gene in two pairs of brothers with CeH (one nonsense, one frameshift). Sequencing of IRS4 in 12 unrelated CeH cases negative for variants in known genes yielded three frameshift mutations (two novel) in three patients and one male sibling. All male carriers (n=8) had CeH with plasma free thyroxine concentrations below the reference interval. MRI of the hypothalamus and pituitary showed no structural abnormalities (n=12). 24-hour thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secretion profiles in two adult male patients showed decreased basal, pulsatile and total TSH secretion. IRS4 mRNA was expressed in human hypothalamic nuclei, including the paraventricular nucleus, and in the pituitary gland. Female knockout mice showed decreased pituitary Tshb mRNA levels but had unchanged serum thyroid hormone concentrations. CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in IRS4 are associated with isolated CeH in male carriers. As IRS4 is involved in leptin signalling, the phenotype may be related to disrupted leptin signalling.
Thyroid hormones (THs) classically regulate the gene expression by transcriptional mechanisms. In pituitary, the encoding genes for growth hormone (GH) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) are examples of genes regulated by triiodothyronine (T(3)) in a positive and negative way, respectively. Recent studies have shown a rapid adjustment of GH and TSH synthesis/secretion induced by T(3) posttranscriptional actions. In somatotrophs, T(3) promotes an increase in Gh mRNA content, poly(A) tail length and binding to the ribosome, associated with a rearrangement of actin cytoskeleton. In thyrotrophs, T(3) reduces Tshb mRNA content, poly(A) tail length and its association with the ribosome. In parallel, it promotes a redistribution of TSH secretory granules to more distal regions of the cell periphery, indicating a rapid effect of T(3) inhibition of TSH secretion. T(3) was shown to affect the content of tubulin and the polymerization of actin and tubulin cytoskeletons in the whole anterior pituitary gland, and to increase intracellular alpha (CGA) content. This review summarizes genomic and non-genomic/posttranscriptional actions of TH on the regulation of several steps of GH and TSH synthesis and secretion. These distinct mechanisms induced by T(3) can occur simultaneously, even though non-genomic effects are promptly elicited and precede the genomic actions, coexisting in a functional network within the cells.
TSHB gene mutation results in isolated central congenital hypothyroidism (iCCH). Often diagnosed late, mild neurocognitive impairment is common despite thyroxine initiation. We discuss a female term neonatal presenting with prolonged unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. The diagnosis of hypothyroidism was based on strong clinical suspicion, although her thyroid function tests were not felt to fit with the usual appearance of primary thyroid disease. Levothyroxine was started on day 11 of life. On follow-up, the history of low T4 and undetectable TSH at diagnosis plus subsequent normal anterior pituitary hormones and normal pituitary on MRI raised suspicion of iCCH. Genetic analysis revealed deletion involving coding sequence position c.108-109 in exon 2 of TSHB gene. Despite having severe congenital hypothyroidism, timely initiation of levothyroxine averted neurocognitive sequelae. She is on follow-up for 25 years. Early diagnosis and prompt thyroxine initiation are rewarding regardless of the severity of mutation.
Pitx2 is a homeodomain transcription factor required in a dose-dependent manner for the development of multiple organs. Pitx2-null homozygotes (Pitx2(-/-)) have severe pituitary hypoplasia, whereas mice with reduced-function alleles (Pitx2(neo/neo)) exhibit modest hypoplasia and reduction in the developing gonadotroph and Pou1f1 lineages. PITX2 is expressed broadly in Rathke's pouch and the fetal pituitary gland. It predominates in adult thyrotrophs and gonadotrophs, although it is not necessary for gonadotroph function. To test the role of PITX2 in thyrotroph function, we developed thyrotroph-specific cre transgenic mice, Tg(Tshb-cre) with a recombineered Tshb bacterial artificial chromosome that ablates floxed genes in differentiated pituitary thyrotrophs. We used the best Tg(Tshb-Cre) strain to generate thyrotroph-specific Pitx2-deficient offspring, Pitx2(flox/-;)Tg(Tshb-cre). Double immunohistochemistry confirmed Pitx2 deletion. Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre) mice have a modest weight decrease. The thyroid glands are smaller, although circulating T(4) and TSH levels are in the normal range. The pituitary levels of Pitx1 transcripts are significantly increased, suggesting a compensatory mechanism. Hypothyroidism induced by low-iodine diet and oral propylthiouracil revealed a blunted TSH response in Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre) mice. Pitx1 transcripts increased significantly in control mice with induced hypothyroidism, but they remained unchanged in Pitx2(flox/-);Tg(Tshb-cre) mice, possibly because Pitx1 levels were already maximally elevated in untreated mutants. These results suggest that PITX2 and PITX1 have overlapping roles in thyrotroph function and response to hypothyroidism. The novel cre transgene that we report will be useful for studying the function of other genes in thyrotrophs.
BACKGROUND: The pituitary gland is a neuroendocrine organ containing diverse cell types specialized in secreting hormones that regulate physiology. Pituitary thyrotropes produce thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), a critical factor for growth and maintenance of metabolism. The transcription factors POU1F1 and GATA2 have been implicated in thyrotrope fate, but the transcriptomic and epigenomic landscapes of these neuroendocrine cells have not been characterized. The goal of this work was to discover transcriptional regulatory elements that drive thyrotrope fate. RESULTS: We identified the transcription factors and epigenomic changes in chromatin that are associated with differentiation of POU1F1-expressing progenitors into thyrotropes using cell lines that represent an undifferentiated Pou1f1 lineage progenitor (GHF-T1) and a committed thyrotrope line that produces TSH (TalphaT1). We compared RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, histone modification (H3K27Ac, H3K4Me1, and H3K27Me3), and POU1F1 binding in these cell lines. POU1F1 binding sites are commonly associated with bZIP transcription factor consensus binding sites in GHF-T1 cells and Helix-Turn-Helix (HTH) or basic Helix-Loop-Helix (bHLH) factors in TalphaT1 cells, suggesting that these classes of transcription factors may recruit or cooperate with POU1F1 binding at unique sites. We validated enhancer function of novel elements we mapped near Cga, Pitx1, Gata2, and Tshb by transfection in TalphaT1 cells. Finally, we confirmed that an enhancer element near Tshb can drive expression in thyrotropes of transgenic mice, and we demonstrate that GATA2 enhances Tshb expression through this element. CONCLUSION: These results extend the ENCODE multi-omic profiling approach to the pituitary gland, which should be valuable for understanding pituitary development and disease pathogenesis.
CONTEXT: Isolated congenital central hypothyroidism (CeH) can result from mutations in TRHR, TSHB, and IGSF1, but its etiology often remains unexplained. We identified a missense mutation in the transducin beta-like protein 1, X-linked (TBL1X) gene in three relatives diagnosed with isolated CeH. TBL1X is part of the thyroid hormone receptor-corepressor complex. OBJECTIVE: The objectives of the study were the identification of TBL1X mutations in patients with unexplained isolated CeH, Sanger sequencing of relatives of affected individuals, and clinical and biochemical characterization; in vitro investigation of functional consequences of mutations; and mRNA expression in, and immunostaining of, human hypothalami and pituitary glands. DESIGN: This was an observational study. SETTING: The study was conducted at university medical centers. PATIENTS: Nineteen individuals with and seven without a mutation participated in the study. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Outcome measures included sequencing results, clinical and biochemical characteristics of mutation carriers, and results of in vitro functional and expression studies. RESULTS: Sanger sequencing yielded five additional mutations. All patients (n = 8; six males) were previously diagnosed with CeH (free T(4) [FT4] concentration below the reference interval, normal thyrotropin). Eleven relatives (two males) also carried mutations. One female had CeH, whereas 10 others had low-normal FT4 concentrations. As a group, adult mutation carriers had 20%-25% lower FT4 concentrations than controls. Twelve of 19 evaluated carriers had hearing loss. Mutations are located in the highly conserved WD40-repeat domain of the protein, influencing its expression and thermal stability. TBL1X mRNA and protein are expressed in the human hypothalamus and pituitary. CONCLUSIONS: TBL1X mutations are associated with CeH and hearing loss. FT4 concentrations in mutation carriers vary from low-normal to values compatible with CeH.
BACKGROUND: Primary hypothyroidism is a common endocrinopathy in dogs. In contrast, central hypothyroidism is rare in this species. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this article is to describe the occurrence and clinical presentation of central hypothyroidism in Miniature Schnauzers. Additionally, the possible role of the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-releasing hormone receptor (TRHR) gene and the TSHbeta (TSHB) gene was investigated. ANIMALS: Miniature Schnauzers with proven central hypothyroidism, based on scintigraphy, and the results of a 3-day-TSH-stimulation test, or a TSH-releasing hormone (TRH)-stimulation test or both, presented to the Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals at Utrecht University or the Department of Medicine and Clinical Biology of Small Animals at Ghent University from 2008 to 2012. METHODS: Retrospective study. Pituitary function tests, thyroid scintigraphy, and computed tomography (CT) of the pituitary area were performed. Gene fragments of affected dogs and controls were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Subsequently, the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequences of the products were analyzed. RESULTS: Central hypothyroidism was diagnosed in 7 Miniature Schnauzers. Three dogs had disproportionate dwarfism and at least one of them had a combined deficiency of TSH and prolactin. No disease-causing mutations were found in the TSHB gene and the exons of the TRHR gene of these Schnauzers. CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Central hypothyroidism could be underdiagnosed in Miniature Schnauzers with hypothyroidism, especially in those of normal stature. The fact that this rare disorder occurred in 7 dogs from the same breed suggests that central hypothyroidism could have a genetic background in Miniature Schnauzers.
Pathogenic variants in TSHB are known to cause severe isolated central congenital hypothyroidism (CH). In this study, we present the clinical, biochemical, and genetic features of the first patient with a mild central CH phenotype. We identified a novel homozygous variant in TSHB: (Chr1: NM_000549.5):c.290A>G p.(Tyr97Cys) in a newborn girl detected by neonatal CH screening, whose central CH was initially overlooked because of misinterpretation of her plasma-free thyroxine (fT4) concentration. This report adds to the phenotypic spectrum of TSHB variants and underlines the importance of using age-specific fT4 reference intervals to diagnose central CH.
In normal individuals, pituitary somatotrophs optimise body composition by responding to metabolic signals from leptin. To identify mechanisms behind the regulation of somatotrophs by leptin, we used Cre-LoxP technology to delete leptin receptors (LEPR) selectively in somatotrophs and developed populations purified by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) that contained 99% somatotrophs. FACS-purified, Lepr-null somatotrophs showed reduced levels of growth hormone (GH), growth hormone-releasing hormone receptor (GHRHR), and Pou1f1 proteins and Gh (females) and Ghrhr (both sexes) mRNAs. Pure somatotrophs also expressed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and prolactin (PRL), both of which were reduced in pure somatotrophs lacking LEPR. This introduced five gene products that were targets of leptin. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that leptin is both a transcriptional and a post-transcriptional regulator of these gene products. Our tests showed that Pou1f1 and/or the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 transcriptional regulatory pathways are implicated in the leptin regulation of Gh or Ghrhr mRNAs. We then focused on potential actions by candidate microRNAs (miRNAs) with consensus binding sites on the 3' UTR of Gh or Ghrhr mRNAs. Somatotroph Lepr-null deletion mutants expressed elevated levels of miRNAs including miR1197-3p (in females), miR103-3p and miR590-3p (both sexes), which bind Gh mRNA, or miRNA-325-3p (elevated in both sexes), which binds Ghrhr mRNA. This elevation indicates repression of translation in the absence of LEPR. In addition, after detecting binding sites for Musashi on Tshb and Prl 3' UTR, we determined that Musashi1 repressed translation of both mRNAs in in vitro fluc assays and that Prl mRNA was enriched in Musashi immunoprecipitation assays. Finally, we tested ghrelin actions to determine whether its nitric oxide-mediated signalling pathways would restore somatotroph functions in deletion mutants. Ghrelin did not restore either GHRH binding or GH secretion in vitro. These studies show an unexpectedly broad role for leptin with respect to maintaining somatotroph functions, including the regulation of PRL and TSH in subsets of somatotrophs that may be progenitor cells.
A 15-mth-old male child of consanguineous parents, presented with classical features of congenital hypothyroidism. Serum total thyroxine (T4), total triiodothyronine (T3) and TSH were low. There was no evidence of deficiency of other pituitary hormones. Magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary was normal. TSHB gene sequencing revealed a homozygous missense mutation due to single base substitution G?A at codon 85 resulting in change from Glycine to Arginine. This mutation in TSHB gene has been reported earlier in three cases with similar phenotype from Japan.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the case of a patient with central congenital hypothyroidism (CCH) due to a recurrent mutation in the TSHB gene, as well as to conduct a genetic study of his family. CASE DESCRIPTION: It is presented a case report of a 5-month-old boy with a delayed diagnosis of isolated CCH in whom the molecular analysis was performed 12 years later and detected a recurrent mutation (c.373delT) in TSHB gene. The parents and sister were carriers of the mutant allele. COMMENTS: The c.373delT mutation has previously been reported in patients from Brazil, Germany, Belgium, United States, Switzerland, Argentina, France, Portugal, United Kingdom and Ireland. In summary, our case and other ones reported in the literature support the theory that this mutation may be a common cause of isolated TSH deficiency. Isolated TSH deficiency is not detected by routine TSH-based neonatal screening, representing a clinical challenge. Therefore, when possible, molecular genetic study is indicated. Identification of affected and carriers allows the diagnosis, treatment and adequate genetic counseling.
