Testis-specific serine/threonine-protein kinase 1; Testis-specific serine/threonine-protein kinase required during spermatid development. Phosphorylates 'Ser-288' of TSKS. Involved in the late stages of spermatogenesis, during the reconstruction of the cytoplasm. During spermatogenesis, required for the transformation of a ring-shaped structure around the base of the flagellum originating from the chromatoid body.
Male infertility is a global problem affecting a considerable part of the male population. Current guidelines and practices aimed at diagnosing the cause of this problem still have low diagnostic yield. As novel candidate genes for infertility emerge, their functional role needs to be investigated in patient populations. The present study aimed to investigate testis‑specific serine kinase 1B (TSSK1B), which was discovered in a previously diagnosed patient. Sanger sequencing of the coding regions and exon borders of TSSK1B was performed in a cohort of 100 male Bulgarian patients with unresolved infertility causes. Missense mutations were discovered in 10% of patients and were associated with clinical data on sperm dysmorphology. Two previously unreported mutations were discovered, p.3D>N and p.52F>L. All mutations were scored via in silico predictors and protein modelling using AlphaFold2. The present findings indicated an association between TSSK1B mutations and asthenoteratozoospermia, with further missense mutations in patients with azoospermia and teratozoospermia. Mutations in TSSK1B may be a cause of undiagnosed cases of male infertility and should be considered when molecular diagnostics are warranted.
The Hippo pathway's main effector, Yes-associated protein (YAP), plays a crucial role in tumorigenesis as a transcriptional coactivator. YAP's phosphorylation by core upstream components of the Hippo pathway, such as mammalian Ste20 kinase 1/2 (MST1/2), mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase kinases (MAP4Ks), and their substrate, large tumor suppressor 1/2 (LATS1/2), influences YAP's subcellular localization, stability, and transcriptional activity. However, recent research suggests the existence of alternative pathways that phosphorylate YAP, independent of these core upstream Hippo pathway components, raising questions about additional means to inactivate YAP. In this study, we present evidence demonstrating that TSSK1B, a calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CAMK) superfamily member, is a negative regulator of YAP, suppressing cellular proliferation and oncogenic transformation. Mechanistically, TSSK1B inhibits YAP through two distinct pathways. Firstly, the LKB1-TSSK1B axis directly phosphorylates YAP at Ser94, inhibiting the YAP-TEAD complex's formation and suppressing its target genes' expression. Secondly, the TSSK1B-LATS1/2 axis inhibits YAP via phosphorylation at Ser127. Our findings reveal the involvement of TSSK1B-mediated molecular mechanisms in the Hippo-YAP pathway, emphasizing the importance of multilevel regulation in critical cellular decision-making processes.
Azoospermia, which is the absence of spermatozoa in an ejaculate occurring due to defects in sperm production, or the obstruction of the reproductive tract, affects about 1% of all men and is prevalent in up to 10-15% of infertile males. Conventional semen analysis remains the gold standard for diagnosing and treating male infertility; however, advances in molecular biology and bioinformatics now highlight the insufficiency thereof. Hence, the need to widen the scope of investigating the aetiology of male infertility stands pertinent. The current study aimed to identify common differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that might serve as potential biomarkers for non-obstructive azoospermia (NOA) and overall male infertility. DEGs across different datasets of transcriptomic profiling of testis from human patients with different causes of infertility/ impaired spermatogenesis and/or azoospermia were explored using the gene expression omnibus (GEO) database. Following the search using the GEOquery, 30 datasets were available, with 5 meeting the inclusion criteria. The DEGs for datasets were identified using limma R packages through the GEO2R tool. The annotated genes of the probes in each dataset were intersected with DEGs from all other datasets. Enriched Ontology Clustering for the identified genes was performed using Metascape to explore the possible connection or interaction between the genes. Twenty-five DEGs were shared between most of the datasets, which might indicate their role in the pathogenesis of male infertility. Of the 25 DEGs, eight genes (THEG, SPATA20, ROPN1L, GSTF1, TSSK1B, CABS1, ADAD1, RIMBP3) are either involved in the overall spermatogenic processes or at specific phases of spermatogenesis. We hypothesize that alteration in the expression of these genes leads to impaired spermatogenesis and, ultimately, male infertility. Thus, these genes can be used as potential biomarkers for the early detection of NOA.
Multisite lambda-dynamics (MSlambdaD) is a novel method for the calculation of relative free energies of binding for ligands to their targeted receptors. It can be readily used to examine a large number of molecules with multiple functional groups at multiple sites around a common core. This makes MSlambdaD a powerful tool in structure-based drug design. In the present study, MSlambdaD is applied to calculate the relative binding free energies of 1296 inhibitors to the testis specific serine kinase 1B (TSSK1B), a validated target for male contraception. For this system, MSlambdaD requires significantly fewer computational resources compared to traditional free energy methods like free energy perturbation or thermodynamic integration. From MSlambdaD simulations, we examined whether modifications of a ligand at two different sites are coupled or not. Based on our calculations, we established a quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) for this set of molecules and identified a site in the ligand where further modification, such as adding more polar groups, may lead to increased binding affinity.
The testis-specific serine/threonine protein kinases TSSK1 and TSSK2 are known to be essential for male fertility, in mice. The enzymes are present in elongating spermatids, and targeted deletion of the two genes Tssk1 and Tssk2 results in dysregulation of spermiogenesis. The mouse genes are genetically closely linked, forming a Tssk1-Tssk2 tandem. In human, TSSK1 is present in the form of a pseudogene, TSSK1A, which is linked to an intact TSSK2 gene, and in the form of an intact gene, TSSK1B, which is not genetically linked to TSSK2. Studies on conservation of genes and gene function between mouse and human are relevant, to be able to use mouse models for studies on human infertility, and to evaluate possible targets for non-hormonal contraception targeting the male. Therefore, we have performed a detailed analysis of the evolution of genes encoding TSSK1 and TSSK2 among mammals, in particular among primates. This study includes functional analysis of replacement mutation K27R in TSSK2, which is frequently observed among humans. In primates, the kinase domains of TSSK1B and TSSK2 have evolved under negative selection, reflecting the importance to maintain their kinase activity. Positive selection was observed for the C-terminal domain of TSSK1B, which indicates that TSSK1B and TSSK2 may perform at least partly differential functions.
