Tyrosine-protein kinase TXK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase that plays a redundant role with ITK in regulation of the adaptive immune response. Regulates the development, function and differentiation of conventional T-cells and nonconventional NKT-cells. When antigen presenting cells (APC) activate T-cell receptor (TCR), a series of phosphorylation lead to the recruitment of TXK to the cell membrane, where it is phosphorylated at Tyr-420. Phosphorylation leads to TXK full activation. Contributes also to signaling from many receptors and participates in multiple downstream pathways, inclu [...] 
BACKGROUND/AIM: Angioleiomyoma is a benign tumor, occurs at any age, and arises most frequently in the lower extremities. Genetic information on angioleiomyomas is restricted to six reported abnormal karyotypes, losses in chromosome 22 and gains in Xq found by comparative genomic hybridization, and mutation analysis of notch receptor 2 (NOTCH2), NOTCH3, platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB), and mediator complex subunit 12 (MED12) in a few tumors. Herein, we report the genetic findings in another three angioleiomyomas. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The tumors were examined using G-banding and karyotyping, RNA sequencing, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, Sanger sequencing, and expression analysis. RESULTS: The first tumor carried a t(4;5)(p12;q32) translocation resulting in fusion of the cardiac mesoderm enhancer-associated non-coding RNA (CARMN in 5q32) with the TXK tyrosine kinase gene (TXK in 4p12) leading to overexpression of TXK. To our knowledge, this is the first time that a recurrent chromosome translocation and its resulting fusion gene have been described in angioleiomyomas. The second tumor carried a four-way translocation, t(X;3;4;16)(q22;p11;q11;p13) which fused the myosin heavy chain 11 gene (MYH11 in 16p13) with intergenic sequences from Xq22 that mapped a few kilobase pairs distal to the insulin receptor substrate 4 gene (IRS4), resulting in enhanced IRS4 expression. The third angioleiomyoma carried another rearrangement of chromosome band Xq22, t(X;9)(q22;q32), as the sole cytogenetic aberration, but no material was available for further molecular investigation. CONCLUSION: Our data, together with previously reported abnormal karyotypes in angioleiomyomas, show the presence of two recurrent genetic pathways in this tumor type: The first is characterized by presence of the translocation t(4;5)(p12;q32), which generates a CARMN::TXK chimera. The second is recurrent rearrangement of Xq22 resulting in overexpression of IRS4.
The Tec kinases have been implicated as important components of signalling pathways downstream of lymphocyte antigen receptors. Activation of these kinases requires two steps: (i) phosphorylation by Src family kinases and (ii) plasma membrane localization, which is mediated by interaction between the pleckstrin homology (PH) domains of Tec kinases and the products of phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI-3K). Itk and Rlk/Txk are Tec kinases expressed in T-lymphocytes. Despite similarity to other Tec kinases, Rlk/Txk lacks a PH domain and instead possesses a palmitoylated cysteine-string motif. We have found that both Rlk/Txk and Itk are phosphorylated in response to T-cell receptor stimulation and can be activated by phosphorylation by Src family kinases. However, consistent with its lack of PH domain, Rlk/Txk is phosphorylated independent of PI-3K activity. Furthermore, we demonstrated that like Itk, Rlk/Txk is associated with lipid RAFTs (detergent-insoluble, cholesterol-rich regions of the membrane), but unlike Itk, Rlk/Txk's RAFT association is independent of PI-3K activity. Despite these differences, Rlk/Txk partially compensates for loss of Itk in gene-targeted animals, suggesting overlapping functions for these kinases.
Txk/Rlk, a member of the Tec family of tyrosine kinases, is an important signaling mediator. We previously reported that human Txk is expressed in Th1/Th0 cells, and Txk translocates from cytoplasm into nuclei upon activation. Txk regulates specifically interferon-gamma gene transcription. Txk, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1, and elongation factor 1alpha make a complex to bind to interferon-gamma gene promoter region-53/-39 (Txk responsive element) to exert positive effects on transcription as a Th1 cell-associated transcription factor. Txk expression is enhanced in rheumatoid arthritis and Behcet's disease, where Th1 dominant immunity occurs. In bronchial asthma and atopic dermatitis, typical Th2 diseases, Txk expression is reduced. Modulation of Txk expression by gene transfer or similar modality may lead to the correction of aberrant immunity and, consequently, disease treatment.
Developing thymocytes and T cells express the Tec kinases Itk, Rlk/Txk and Tec, which are critical modulators of T-cell receptor signaling, required for full activation of phospholipase Cgamma, and downstream Ca(2+) and ERK-mediated signaling pathways. Over the last 10 years, data have implicated the Tec family kinases Itk and Rlk/Txk as important regulators of cytokine production by CD4(+) effector T-cell populations. Emerging data now suggest that the Tec family kinases not only influence cytokine-producing T-cell populations in the periphery, but also regulate the development of distinct innate-type cytokine-producing T-cell populations in the thymus. Together, these results suggest that the Tec family kinases play critical roles in helping shape immune responses via their effects on the differentiation and function of distinct cytokine-producing, effector T-cell populations.
The Tec (tyrosine kinase expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma) family of non-receptor tyrosine kinases consists of five members: Tec, Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk), inducible T-cell kinase (Itk), resting lymphocyte kinase (Rlk/Txk), and bone marrow-expressed kinase (Bmx/Etk). Although their functions are probably best understood in antigen receptor signaling, where they participate in the phosphorylation and regulation of phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma), it is now appreciated that these kinases contribute to signaling from many receptors and that they participate in multiple downstream pathways, including regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. In T cells, three Tec kinases are expressed, Itk, Rlk/Txk, and Tec. Itk is expressed at highest amounts and plays the major role in regulating signaling from the T-cell receptor. Recent studies provide evidence that these kinases contribute to multiple aspects of T-cell biology and have unique roles in T-cell development that have revealed new insight into the regulation of conventional and innate T-cell development. We review new findings on the Tec kinases with a focus on their roles in T-cell development and mature T-cell differentiation.
Intervertebral disc degeneration (IVDD) is one of the most prevalent causes of chronic low back pain. The role of m6A methylation modification in disc degeneration (IVDD) remains unclear. We investigated immune-related m6A methylation regulators as IVDD biomarkers through comprehensive analysis and experimental validation of m6A methylation regulators in disc degeneration. The training dataset was downloaded from the GEO database and analysed for differentially expressed m6A methylation regulators and immunological features, the differentially regulators were subsequently validated by a rat IVDD model and RT-qPCR. Further screening of key m6A methylation regulators based on machine learning and LASSO regression analysis. Thereafter, a predictive model based on key m6A methylation regulators was constructed for training sets, which was validated by validation set. IVDD patients were then clustered based on the expression of key m6A regulators, and the expression of key m6A regulators and immune infiltrates between clusters was investigated to determine immune markers in IVDD. Finally, we investigated the potential role of the immune marker in IVDD through enrichment analysis, protein-to-protein network analysis, and molecular prediction. By analysising of the training set, we revealed significant differences in gene expression of five methylation regulators including RBM15, YTHDC1, YTHDF3, HNRNPA2B1 and ALKBH5, while finding characteristic immune infiltration of differentially expressed genes, the result was validated by PCR. We then screen the differential m6A regulators in the training set and identified RBM15 and YTHDC1 as key m6A regulators. We then used RBM15 and YTHDC1 to construct a predictive model for IVDD and successfully validated it in the training set. Next, we clustered IVDD patients based on the expression of RBM15 and YTHDC1 and explored the immune infiltration characteristics between clusters as well as the expression of RBM15 and YTHDC1 in the clusters. YTHDC1 was finally identified as an immune biomarker for IVDD. We finally found that YTHDC1 may influence the immune microenvironment of IVDD through ABL1 and TXK. In summary, our results suggest that YTHDC1 is a potential biomarker for the development of IVDD and may provide new insights for the precise prevention and treatment of IVDD.
It is generally considered mammals and birds have five Tec family kinases (TFKs): Btk, Bmx (also known as Etk), Itk, Tec, and Txk (also known as Rlk). Here, we discuss the domains and their functions and regulation in TFKs. Over the last few years, a large number of genomes from various phyla have been sequenced making it possible to study evolutionary relationships at the molecular and sequence level. Using bioinformatics tools, we for the first time demonstrate that a TFK ancestor exists in the unicellular choanoflagellate Monosiga brevicollis, which is the closest known relative to metazoans with a sequenced genome. The analysis of the genomes for sponges, insects, hagfish, and frogs suggests that these species encode a single TFK. The insect form has a divergent and unique N-terminal region. Duplications generating the five members took place prior to the emergence of vertebrates. Fishes have two or three forms and the platypus, Ornithorhynchus anatinus, has four (lacks Txk). Thus, not all mammals have all five TFKs. The single identified TFK in frogs is an ortholog of Tec. Bmx seems to be unique to mammals and birds. SH3BP5 is a negative regulator of Btk. It is conserved in choanoflagellates and interestingly exists also in nematodes, which do not express TFKs, suggesting a broader function in addition to Btk regulation. The related SH3BP5-like protein is not found in Nematodes.
The Src Homology 3 (SH3) domain is an important regulatory domain found in many signaling proteins. X-ray crystallography and NMR structures of SH3 domains are generally conserved but other studies indicate that protein flexibility and dynamics are not. We previously reported that based on hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry (HX MS) studies, there is variable flexibility and dynamics among the SH3 domains of the Src-family tyrosine kinases and related proteins. Here we have extended our studies to the SH3 domains of the Tec family tyrosine kinases (Itk, Btk, Tec, Txk, Bmx). The SH3 domains of members of this family augment the variety in dynamics observed in previous SH3 domains. Txk and Bmx SH3 were found to be highly dynamic in solution by HX MS and Bmx was unstructured by NMR. Itk and Btk SH3 underwent a clear EX1 cooperative unfolding event, which was localized using pepsin digestion and mass spectrometry after hydrogen exchange labeling. The unfolding was localized to peptide regions that had been previously identified in the Src-family and related protein SH3 domains, yet the kinetics of unfolding were not. Sequence alignment does not provide an easy explanation for the observed dynamics behavior, yet the similarity of location of EX1 unfolding suggests that higher-order structural properties may play a role. While the exact reason for such dynamics is not clear, such motions can be exploited in intra- and intermolecular binding assays of proteins containing the domains.
Behcet's disease (BD) is characterized by recurrent attacks of uveitis, oral aphtha, genital ulcers and skin lesions. The etiology and pathogenesis of BD are largely unknown. It has been reported that excessive Th1 cell function is involved in the pathogenesis of BD. Previously, we found that Txk, a member of the Tec family of tyrosine kinases, acts as a Th1 cell-specific transcription factor that is involved in the effector function of Th1 cells. Thus, we studied Th1 cytokine production and Txk expression of T-lymphocytes in patients with BD. Peripheral blood lymphocytes produced excessive Th1-associated cytokines including interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and interleukin (IL)-12 in patients with BD. Circulating CD3+ and purified CD4+ T cells expressed excessive Txk protein. The extent of IFN-gamma production by the lymphocytes correlated with the expression of Txk protein in the immunoblotting analysis. The majority of cells infiltrating into the skin lesions of patients with BD expressed IFN-gamma. IL-12 and IL-18 were found in the mononuclear cell aggregates in the skin and intestinal lesions of those with BD. Lymphocytes accumulating in the skin and intestinal lesions expressed higher levels of Txk as compared with other Th2-associated diseases. IFN-gamma, IL-18 and IL-12 detected in skin lesions may induce preferential development of Th1 cells in patients with BD. Collectively, Th1 cells expressing Txk and Th1-associated cytokines may play a critical role in the development of skin and intestinal lesions in patients with BD. This review may serve as a reminder of the importance of excessive Th1 cell function in the pathogenesis of BD and may contribute to the discovery of new molecular targets for the development of a specific therapeutic strategy for BD.
The front pocket (FP) N-terminal cap (Ncap) cysteine is the most popular site of covalent modification in kinases. A long-standing hypothesis associates the Ncap position with cysteine hyper-reactivity; however, traditional computational predictions suggest that the FP Ncap cysteines are predominantly unreactive. Here we applied the state-of-the-art continuous constant pH molecular dynamics (CpHMD) to test the Ncap hypothesis. Simulations found that the Ncap cysteines of BTK/BMX/TEC/ITK/TXK, JAK3, and MKK7 are reactive to varying degrees; however, those of BLK and EGFR/ERBB2/ERBB4 possessing a Ncap+3 aspartate are unreactive. Analysis suggested that hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions drive the reactivity, and their absence renders the Ncap cysteine unreactive. To further test the Ncap hypothesis, we examined the FP Ncap+2 cysteines in JNK1/JNK2/JNK3 and CASK. Our work offers a systematic understanding of the cysteine structure-reactivity relationship and illustrates the use of CpHMD to differentiate cysteines toward the design of targeted covalent inhibitors with reduced chemical reactivities.
We have previously shown that Txk, a member of Tec family tyrosine kinase, is expressed in Th1 and ThO cells and directly contributes to gene transcription of Th1-related proteins, including interferon (IFN)-gamma, through nuclear translocation in response to mitogenic stimuli. Btk, another member of Tec family tyrosine kinase, has been shown to have a Src family tyrosine kinase-dependent transphosphorylation site and an autophosphorylation site. However, little is known about the phosphorylation mechanism of Txk, except that 420 tyrosine residue was identified as the transphosphorylation site. In this study, we found that Txk autophosphorylated itself by using an in vitro kinase assay. To elucidate the role of phosphorylation in Txk function, we studied IFN-gamma secretion by Jurkat T cells expressing mutant Txk proteins. While transfection with the wild-type Txk resulted in increased IFN-gamma production, the function was abrogated by disruption of the ATP biding site, which is presumably involved in the autophosphorylation mechanism. The results suggest that phosphorylated Txk is an active form to promote IFN-gamma synthesis. The 91 tyrosine residue of Txk is deduced to be an autophosphorylation site by comparing its structure with Btk. In Jurkat cells transfected with Txk Y91A, IFN-gamma production was decreased in comparison with the wild-type Txk transfected Jurkat cells. These data suggest that phosphorylation of the 91 tyrosine residue in Txk plays a positive regulatory role in Txk function.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: DNA methylation alterations may provide important insights into gene-environment interaction in cancer, aging, and complex diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). We aim first to determine whether the circulating DNA methylome in patients requiring surgery may predict Crohn's disease (CD) recurrence following intestinal resection; and second to compare the circulating methylome seen in patients with established CD with that we had reported in a series of inception cohorts. METHODS: TOPPIC was a placebo-controlled, randomized controlled trial of 6-mercaptopurine at 29 UK centers in patients with CD undergoing ileocolic resection between 2008 and 2012. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood samples from 229 of the 240 patients taken before intestinal surgery and analyzed using 450KHumanMethylation and Infinium Omni Express Exome arrays (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Coprimary objectives were to determine whether methylation alterations may predict clinical disease recurrence; and to assess whether the epigenetic alterations previously reported in newly diagnosed IBD were present in the patients with CD recruited into the TOPPIC study. Differential methylation and variance analysis was performed comparing patients with and without clinical evidence of recurrence. Secondary analyses included investigation of methylation associations with smoking, genotype (MeQTLs), and chronologic age. Validation of our previously published case-control observation of the methylome was performed using historical control data (CD, n = 123; Control, n = 198). RESULTS: CD recurrence in patients following surgery is associated with 5 differentially methylated positions (Holm P < .05), including probes mapping to WHSC1 (P = 4.1 x 10(-9), Holm P = .002) and EFNA3 (P = 4.9 x 10(-8), Holm P = .02). Five differentially variable positions are demonstrated in the group of patients with evidence of disease recurrence including a probe mapping to MAD1L1 (P = 6.4 x 10(-5)). DNA methylation clock analyses demonstrated significant age acceleration in CD compared with control subjects (GrimAge + 2 years; 95% confidence interval, 1.2-2.7 years), with some evidence for accelerated aging in patients with CD with disease recurrence following surgery (GrimAge +1.04 years; 95% confidence interval, -0.04 to 2.22). Significant methylation differences between CD cases and control subjects were seen by comparing this cohort in conjunction with previously published control data, including validation of our previously described differentially methylated positions (RPS6KA2 P = 1.2 x 10(-19), SBNO2 = 1.2 x 10(-11)) and regions (TXK [false discovery rate, P = 3.6 x 10(-14)], WRAP73 [false discovery rate, P = 1.9 x 10(-9)], VMP1 [false discovery rate, P = 1.7 x 10(-7)], and ITGB2 [false discovery rate, P = 1.4 x 10(-7)]). CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate differential methylation and differentially variable methylation in patients developing clinical recurrence within 3 years of surgery. Moreover, we report replication of the CD-associated methylome, previously characterized only in adult and pediatric inception cohorts, in patients with medically refractory disease needing surgery.
The Tec family has emerged recently as a subfamily among nonreceptor type protein-tyrosine kinases, consisting of Tec, Btk, Itk/Tsk/Emt, Bmx, and Txk/Rlk. Because many members of this family have been shown to be activated in response to growth and differentiation stimuli in hematopoietic tissues, they are presumed to function in vivo as important signaling mediators. Although that hypothesis was further strengthened by the knowledge that mutations in Btk cause agammaglobulinemia in humans, we have only limited information concerning the molecular interaction through which Tec kinases exert their effects. One characteristic feature of Tec family members is the presence of a pleckstrin homology domain in their protein structure, suggesting a physical and functional interaction with the phospholipid-dependent signaling pathways. Recent data have revealed that Tec kinases regulate phospholipase C isoforms. This review summarizes current knowledge concerning the in vivo roles of the Tec family proteins.
ITK and Rlk/Txk are the predominant Tec family of tyrosine kinases expressed in T cells, and are involved in T cell antigen receptor mediated activation of T cells. These kinases require prior activation of Lck, Zap-70 and PI3-kinase for efficient activation. They share major substrates with both Lck and Zap-70, however the pathways they regulate are unclear. Recent evidence suggests that these kinases may not activate unique pathways, but instead serve as amplifiers for the upstream kinases Lck and Zap-70. This review will discuss the evidence for this view.
Epigenetic alterations may provide important insights into gene-environment interaction in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Here we observe epigenome-wide DNA methylation differences in 240 newly-diagnosed IBD cases and 190 controls. These include 439 differentially methylated positions (DMPs) and 5 differentially methylated regions (DMRs), which we study in detail using whole genome bisulphite sequencing. We replicate the top DMP (RPS6KA2) and DMRs (VMP1, ITGB2 and TXK) in an independent cohort. Using paired genetic and epigenetic data, we delineate methylation quantitative trait loci; VMP1/microRNA-21 methylation associates with two polymorphisms in linkage disequilibrium with a known IBD susceptibility variant. Separated cell data shows that IBD-associated hypermethylation within the TXK promoter region negatively correlates with gene expression in whole-blood and CD8(+) T cells, but not other cell types. Thus, site-specific DNA methylation changes in IBD relate to underlying genotype and associate with cell-specific alteration in gene expression.
Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) is mutated in X-linked agammaglobulinemia patients and plays an essential role in B cell receptor signal transduction. Btk is a member of the Tec family of nonreceptor protein-tyrosine kinases that includes Bmx, Itk, Tec, and Txk. Cell lines deficient for Btk are impaired in phospholipase C-gamma2 (PLCgamma2)-dependent signaling. Itk and Tec have recently been shown to reconstitute PLCgamma2-dependent signaling in Btk-deficient human cells, but it is not known whether the atypical Tec family members, Bmx and Txk, can reconstitute function. Here we reconstitute Btk-deficient DT40 B cells with Bmx and Txk to compare their function with other Tec kinases. We show that in common with Itk and Tec, Bmx reconstituted PLCgamma2-dependent responses including calcium mobilization, extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation, and apoptosis. Txk also restored PLCgamma2/calcium signaling but, unlike other Tec kinases, functioned in a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-independent manner and failed to reconstitute apoptosis. These results are consistent with a common role for Tec kinases as amplifiers of PLCgamma2-dependent signal transduction, but suggest that the pleckstrin homology domain of Tec kinases, absent in Txk, is essential for apoptosis.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to find differentially expressed long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs) and mRNAs and related signaling pathways, contributing to understanding the molecular mechanism of acute recurrent pancreatitis (ARP). METHODS: First, peripheral whole blood samples from five acute pancreatitis (AP) patients, five ARP patients and five healthy individuals ( N ) were collected for RNA sequencing. Second, differentially/specifically expressed lncRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs were identified in AP vs. N , ARP vs. N and ARP. Third, the ceRNA (lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA) networks of common/specifical lncRNAs, miRNAs and mRNAs were constructed in AP vs. N , ARP vs. N and ARP. Finally, functional analysis of common mRNAs in AP vs. N and ARP vs. N was performed. RESULTS: A total of 315 common lncRNAs, 12 common miRNAs and 909 common mRNAs were identified between AP and ARP. Ninety-four specifically expressed lncRNAs, one specifically expressed miRNAs and 286 specifically expressed mRNAs were found in ARP. Some interaction pairs were identified in AP and ARP, such as LUCAT1/NEAT1-hsa-miR-16-2-3p-HK2, CHRM3-AS2-hsa-miR-122-5p/hsa-miR-145-3p-DBH/CACNA1C, CHRM3-AS2-hsa-miR-200a-3p-PDGFD, RBM26-AS1-hsa-miR-200b-3p-FHIT and LINC00891/KTN1-AS1-hsa-miR-143-3p-tyrosine kinase (TXK). ASAP1-IT2/DGCR9-hsa-miR-342-5p-ABCC5/MAP2K6 was the only one specific interaction pair identified in ARP. Four significantly enriched signaling pathways were identified in AP vs. N and ARP vs. N , including amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism (involved NPL and HK2), MAPK signaling pathway (involved CACNA1C and PDGFD), metabolic pathways (involved DBH and FHIT) and leukocyte transendothelial migration (involved TXK). CONCLUSION: The identified altered lncRNAs, miRNAs, mRNAs and related signaling pathways may be involved in the AP development and recurrence.
Antiestrogen resistance in estrogen receptor positive (ER(+)) breast cancer is associated with increased expression and activity of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R). Here, a kinome siRNA screen has identified 10 regulators of IGF1R-mediated antiestrogen with clinical significance. These include the tamoxifen resistance suppressors BMPR1B, CDK10, CDK5, EIF2AK1, and MAP2K5, and the tamoxifen resistance inducers CHEK1, PAK2, RPS6KC1, TTK, and TXK. The p21-activated kinase 2, PAK2, is the strongest resistance inducer. Silencing of the tamoxifen resistance inducing genes, particularly PAK2, attenuates IGF1R-mediated resistance to tamoxifen and fulvestrant. High expression of PAK2 in ER(+) metastatic breast cancer patients is correlated with unfavorable outcome after first-line tamoxifen monotherapy. Phospho-proteomics has defined PAK2 and the PAK-interacting exchange factors PIXalpha/beta as downstream targets of IGF1R signaling, which are independent from PI3K/ATK and MAPK/ERK pathways. PAK2 and PIXalpha/beta modulate IGF1R signaling-driven cell scattering. Targeting PIXalpha/beta entirely mimics the effect of PAK2 silencing on antiestrogen re-sensitization. These data indicate PAK2/PIX as an effector pathway in IGF1R-mediated antiestrogen resistance.
We have found previously that Txk, a member of the Tec family tyrosine kinases, is involved importantly in T helper 1 (Th1) cytokine production. However, how Txk regulates interferon (IFN)-gamma gene transcription in human T lymphocytes was not fully elucidated. In this study, we identified poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) and elongation factor 1alpha (EF-1alpha) as Txk-associated molecules that bound to the Txk responsive element of the IFN-gamma gene promoter. Txk phosphorylated EF-1alpha and PARP1 formed a complex with them, and bound to the IFN-gamma gene promoter in vitro. In particular, the N terminal region containing the DNA binding domain of PARP1 was important for the trimolecular complex formation involving Txk, EF-1alpha and PARP1. Several mutant Txk which lacked kinase activity were unable to form the trimolecular complex. A PARP1 inhibitor, PJ34, suppressed IFN-gamma but not interleukin (IL)-4 production by normal peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL). Multi-colour confocal analysis revealed that Txk and EF-1alpha located in the cytoplasm in the resting condition. Upon activation, a complex involving Txk, EF-1alpha and PARP1 was formed and was located in the nucleus. Collectively, Txk in combination with EF-1alpha and PARP1 bound to the IFN-gamma gene promoter, and exerted transcriptional activity on the IFN-gamma gene.
Cytoplasmic protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) are enzymes involved in transducing a vast number of signals in metazoans. The importance of the Tec family of kinases was immediately recognized when, in 1993, mutations in the gene encoding Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk) were reported to cause the human disease X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA). Since then, additional kinases belonging to this family have been isolated, and the availability of full genome sequences allows identification of all members in selected species enabling phylogenetic considerations. Tec kinases are endowed with Pleckstrin homology (PH) and Tec homology (TH) domains and are involved in diverse biological processes related to the control of survival and differentiation fate. Membrane translocation resulting in the activation of Tec kinases with subsequent Ca2+ release seems to be a general feature. However, nuclear translocation may also be of importance. The purpose of this essay is to characterize members of the Tec family and discuss their involvement in signaling. The three-dimensional structure, expression pattern and evolutionary aspects will also be considered.
