Sororin; Regulator of sister chromatid cohesion in mitosis stabilizing cohesin complex association with chromatin. May antagonize the action of WAPL which stimulates cohesin dissociation from chromatin. Cohesion ensures that chromosome partitioning is accurate in both meiotic and mitotic cells and plays an important role in DNA repair. Required for efficient DNA double-stranded break repair. Belongs to the sororin family.
Telomere length in humans is associated with lifespan and severe diseases, yet the genetic determinants of telomere length remain incompletely defined. Here we performed genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 functional telomere length screening and identified thymidine (dT) nucleotide metabolism as a limiting factor in human telomere maintenance. Targeted genetic disruption using CRISPR-Cas9 revealed multiple telomere length control points across the thymidine nucleotide metabolism pathway: decreasing dT nucleotide salvage via deletion of the gene encoding nuclear thymidine kinase (TK1) or de novo production by knockout of the thymidylate synthase gene (TYMS) decreased telomere length, whereas inactivation of the deoxynucleoside triphosphohydrolase-encoding gene SAMHD1 lengthened telomeres. Remarkably, supplementation with dT alone drove robust telomere elongation by telomerase in cells, and thymidine triphosphate stimulated telomerase activity in a substrate-independent manner in vitro. In induced pluripotent stem cells derived from patients with genetic telomere biology disorders, dT supplementation or inhibition of SAMHD1 promoted telomere restoration. Our results demonstrate a critical role of thymidine metabolism in controlling human telomerase and telomere length, which may be therapeutically actionable in patients with fatal degenerative diseases.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, heterogeneous autoimmune disease. Its high disability rate has a serious impact on society and individuals, but there is still a lack of effective and reliable diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for RA. In this study, we integrated RA patient information from three GEO databases for differential gene expression analysis. Additionally, we also obtained pan-cancer-related genes from the TCGA and GTEx databases. For RA-related differential genes, we performed functional enrichment analysis and constructed a weighted gene co-expression network (WGCNA). Then, we obtained 490 key genes by intersecting the significant module genes selected by WGCNA and the differential genes. After using the RanddomForest, SVM-REF, and LASSO three algorithms to analyze these key genes and take the intersection, based on the four core genes (BTN3A2, CYFIP2, ST8SIA1, and TYMS) that we found, we constructed an RA diagnosis. The nomogram model showed good reliability and validity after evaluation, and the ROC curves of the four genes showed that these four genes played an important role in the pathogenesis of RA. After further gene correlation analysis, immune infiltration analysis, and mouse gene expression validation, we finally selected CYFIP2 as the cut-in gene for pan-cancer analysis. The results of the pan-cancer analysis showed that CYFIP2 was closely related to the prognosis of patients with various tumors, the degree of immune cell infiltration, as well as TMB, MSI, and other indicators, suggesting that this gene may be a potential intervention target for human diseases including RA and tumors.
BACKGROUND: Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) is a common condition in the intensive care unit (ICU) with a high mortality rate, yet the diagnosis rate remains low. Recent studies have increasingly highlighted the role of aging in the occurrence and progression of ARDS. This study is committed to investigating the pathogenic mechanisms of cellular and genetic changes in elderly ARDS patients, providing theoretical support for the precise treatment of ARDS. METHODS: Gene expression profiles for control and ARDS samples were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, while aging-related genes (ARGs) were sourced from the Human Aging Genomic Resources (HAGR) database. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were subjected to functional enrichment analysis to understand their roles in ARDS and aging. The Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) and machine learning pinpointed key modules and marker genes, with ROC curves illustrating their significance. The expression of four ARDS-ARDEGs was validated in lung samples from aged mice with ARDS using qRT-PCR. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) investigated the signaling pathways and immune cell infiltration associated with TYMS expression. Single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-Seq) explored gene-level differences among cells to investigate intercellular communication during ARDS onset and progression. RESULTS: ARDEGs are involved in cellular responses to DNA damage stimuli, inflammatory reactions, and cellular senescence pathways. The MEmagenta module exhibited a significant correlation with elderly ARDS patients. The LASSO, RRF, and XGBoost algorithms were employed to screen for signature genes, including CKAP2, P2RY14, RBP2, and TYMS. Further validation emphasized the potential role of TYMS in the onset and progression of ARDS. Immune cell infiltration indicated differential proportion and correlations with TYMS expression. SnRNA-Seq and cell-cell communication analysis revealed that TYMS is highly expressed in endothelial cells, and the SEMA3 signaling pathway primarily mediates cell communication between endothelial cells and other cells. CONCLUSION: Endothelial cell damage associated with aging could contribute to ARDS progression by triggering inflammation. TYMS emerges as a promising diagnostic biomarker and potential therapeutic target for ARDS.
Thymidylate synthase (TYMS) is an important target for chemotherapy drugs, such as 5-fluorouracil (5FU) and methotrexate. Over-expression of TYMS is linked to resistance to TYMS-targeted chemotherapy drugs. Currently there is no protocol for selecting cancer patients at risk for drug resistance prior to chemotherapy treatment. Three polymorphisms in the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (5'UTR and 3'UTR) of the thymidylate synthase gene have been shown to influence TYMS expression. Preliminary data has suggested a poorer response rate to 5FU or methotrexate is seen in patients with 3 copies of a 28 bp tandem repeat in the 5'UTR enhancer region (TSER polymorphism) and this relationship may be further clarified by the presence of a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) with the second repeat of the 3 repeat (TSER(*)3) allele. A 6 bp deletion in the 3'UTR of the TYMS gene has also been shown to affect TYMS RNA expression and has a significant association with poor outcome in 5FU treated patients. Evidence linking all 3 TYMS polymorphisms with TYMS expression and patient response to TYMS-targeted chemotherapy treatment will be highlighted.
BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that hepatocyte mitochondrial dysfunction leads to abnormal lipid metabolism, redox imbalance, and programmed cell death, driving the onset and progression of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Identifying hub mitochondrial genes linked to NASH may unveil potential therapeutic targets. METHODS: Mitochondrial hub genes implicated in NASH were identified via analysis using 134 algorithms. RESULTS: The Random Forest algorithm (RF), the most effective among the 134 algorithms, identified three genes: Aldo-keto reductase family 1 member B10 (AKR1B10), thymidylate synthase (TYMS), and triggering receptor expressed in myeloid cell 2 (TREM2). They were upregulated and positively associated with genes promoting inflammation, genes involved in lipid synthesis, fibrosis, and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis activity scores in patients with NASH. Moreover, using these three genes, patients with NASH were accurately categorized into cluster 1, exhibiting heightened disease severity, and cluster 2, distinguished by milder disease activity. CONCLUSION: These three genes are pivotal mitochondrial genes implicated in NASH progression.
Methotrexate (MTX), a structural analog of folic acid, is widely employed in the treatment of different cancers and autoimmune diseases. Despite the successful results observed, the main disadvantage lies in interpatient variability in the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters. In particular, adverse events and toxicities induced by MTX are a matter of concern and can be the cause of dose reduction or treatment discontinuation. Among the different approaches to reduce MTX therapeutic limitations, pharmacogenomics contributes by considering the effect of inherited genetic differences on those parameters. This review provides an update on MTX pharmacogenomics. It reports the contribution of main gene polymorphisms involved in the influx, efflux, cellular effect, and elimination on MTX toxicity and efficacy, on all the diseases treated with this drug. From the analysis of the data presented in this review, we concluded that only gene polymorphisms MTHFR rs1801133, SLC19A1 rs1051266, and TYMS rs34743033 could influence clinical decision-making.
Endometrial cancer (EC) is one of the most common malignant tumors in women, and the increasing incidence and mortality pose a serious threat to the public health. Early diagnosis of EC could prolong the survival period and optimize the survivorship, greatly alleviating patients' suffering and social medical pressure. In this study, we collected urine and serum samples from the recruited patients, analyzed the samples using LC-MS approach, and identified the differential metabolites through metabolomic analysis. Then, the differentially expressed genes were identified through the systematic transcriptomic analysis of EC-related dataset from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), followed by network profiling of metabolic-reaction-enzyme-gene. In this experiment, a total of 83 differential metabolites and 19 hub genes were discovered, of which 10 different metabolites and 3 hub genes were further evaluated as more potential biomarkers based on network analysis. According to the KEGG enrichment analysis, the potential biomarkers and gene-encoded proteins were found to be involved in the arginine and proline metabolism, histidine metabolism, and pyrimidine metabolism, which was of significance for the early diagnosis of EC. In particular, the combination of metabolites (histamine, 1-methylhistamine, and methylimidazole acetaldehyde) as well as the combination of RRM2, TYMS and TK1 exerted more accurate discrimination abilities between EC and healthy groups, providing more criteria for the early diagnosis of EC.
Most of the drugs currently prescribed for cancer treatment are riddled with substantial side effects. In order to develop more effective and specific strategies to treat cancer, it is of importance to understand the biology of drug targets, particularly the newly emerging ones. A comprehensive evaluation of these targets will benefit drug development with increased likelihood for success in clinical trials. The folate-mediated one-carbon (1C) metabolism pathway has drawn renewed attention as it is often hyperactivated in cancer and inhibition of this pathway displays promise in developing anticancer treatment with fewer side effects. Here, we systematically review individual enzymes in the 1C pathway and their compartmentalization to mitochondria and cytosol. Based on these insight, we conclude that (1) except the known 1C targets (DHFR, GART, and TYMS), MTHFD2 emerges as good drug target, especially for treating hematopoietic cancers such as CLL, AML, and T-cell lymphoma; (2) SHMT2 and MTHFD1L are potential drug targets; and (3) MTHFD2L and ALDH1L2 should not be considered as drug targets. We highlight MTHFD2 as an excellent therapeutic target and SHMT2 as a complementary target based on structural/biochemical considerations and up-to-date inhibitor development, which underscores the perspectives of their therapeutic potential.
TS is critical for providing the requisite nucleotide precursors in order to maintain DNA synthesis and repair. Furthermore, it is an important target for several drugs such as 5-fluorouracil and methotrexate. However, several mechanisms of resistance to TS inhibitors have been explained as linked to TYMS overexpression. Some authors have described the relationship between genetic polymorphisms on TYMS, in particular rs34743033, rs2853542 and rs34489327, with the development of several diseases and with the clinical response to drug therapy and/or survival. Nevertheless, the obtained results described in the literature are controversial, which has lead to a search strategy to understand the impact of these polymorphisms on molecular epidemiology and pharmacogenetics. With the progress of these scientific areas, early identification of individuals at risk of disease along with improvement in the prediction of patients' outcome will offer a powerful tool for the translation of TYMS polymorphisms into clinical practice and individualization of treatments.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether the thymidylate synthase (TYMS) 2R/3R and 6 bp I/D polymorphisms can predict the response to or toxicity of methotrexate (MTX) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). METHODS: We conducted a meta-analysis of studies on the association between the TYMS 2R/3R and 6 bp I/D polymorphisms and non-responsiveness to or toxicity of MTX in RA patients. RESULTS: A total of 11 studies involving 1613 patients were considered. Meta-analysis showed no association between the TYMS 2R/3R 3R allele and non-responsiveness to MTX therapy (odds ratio [OR] = 1.087, confidence interval [CI] = 0.682-1.731, p = 0.726). The meta-analysis indicated that there was no association between the TYMS 6 bp I/D D allele and non-responsiveness to MTX therapy (OR = 0.688, 95% CI = 0.281-1.683, p = 0.413). Meta-analysis revealed that the TYMS 2R/3R polymorphism was not associated with MTX toxicity, except for in a co-dominant model, and the TYMS 6 bp I/D polymorphism was not associated with MTX toxicity in all genetic models. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrates that the TYMS 2R/3R and 6 bp I/D polymorphisms may not be associated with non-responsiveness to or toxicity of MTX therapy in RA patients.
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is well known as a highly malignant neuroendocrine tumor. Immunotherapy combined with chemotherapy has become a standard treatment for extensive SCLC. However, since most patients quickly develop resistance and relapse, finding new therapeutic targets for SCLC is important. We obtained four microarray datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus database and screened differentially expressed genes by two methods: batch correction and "RobustRankAggregation". After the establishment of a protein-protein interaction network through Cytoscape, seven hub genes (AURKB, BIRC5, TOP2A, TYMS, PCNA, UBE2C, and AURKA) with high expression in SCLC samples were obtained by eight CytoHubba algorithms. The Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator regression and the Wilcoxon test were used to analyze the differences in the immune cells' infiltration between normal and SCLC samples. The contents of seven kinds of immune cells were considered to differ significantly between SCLC samples and normal samples. A negative association was found between BIRC5 and monocytes in the correlation analysis between immune cells and the seven hub genes. The subsequent in vitro validation of experimental results showed that downregulating the expression of BIRC5 by siRNA can promote apoptotic activity of SCLC cells and inhibit their vitality, migration, and invasion. The use of BIRC5 inhibitor inhibited the vitality of SCLC cells and increased their apoptotic activity. BIRC5 may be a novel therapeutic target option for SCLC.
BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma (OS) is a type of bone cancer most often affects pre-teens and teens, but it is still a rare disorder. Neuropilin and tolloid-like 2 (NETO2) has been reported to promote OS progression, but its upstream mechanism in OS cells remains obscure. METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) and Western blot were conducted to examine RNA and protein levels, separately. Functional assays were performed to assess the impact of NETO2 on OS cell malignancy. Moreover, bioinformatics analyses and mechanism experiments were performed to identify the upstream mechanism of NETO2 in OS cells. RESULTS: Functionally, NETO2 depletion repressed cell proliferation, migration and invasion as well as epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) but triggered the apoptosis of OS cells. NETO2 is directly targeted and negatively regulated by microRNA-101-3p (miR-101-3p). Mechanically, miR-101-3p could combine with long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) TYMS opposite strand RNA (TYMSOS) in OS cells. In addition, our study proved that TYMSOS promotes the malignancy of OS via elevating NETO2 expression as miR-101-3p sponge. CONCLUSION: TYMSOS-miR-101-3p-NETO2 axis promotes the malignant behaviors of OS cells, which might offer a novel sight for OS treatment.
There has been significant progress made in individualizing cancer therapy, especially for colorectal and breast cancer. This has included objective determination of aggressiveness of therapy using molecular predictors of disease recurrence (i.e., Mammaprint, OncotypeDX), identifying altered drug activation for dose modifications (i.e., DPYD, CYP2D6, UGT1A1), or variation in drug targets or components of a pharmacodynamic pathway (TYMS, EGFR, KRAS). With patient-specific molecular characteristics increasingly guiding therapy, this review provides important and timely insights on targeted therapy. Ultimately, integration of both pharmacogenomic and clinical characteristics can provide powerful predictive tools for stratifying responders from nonresponders and identifying patients at increased risk for toxicity.
INTRODUCTION: 5- fluorouracil (5-FU), alone or in combination, is the most prevalent and effective chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of cancers of the head and neck, breast, pancreas and gastrointestinal tract. AREAS COVERED: Three rare DPYD mutations, a splice mutation in intron 14 (c.1905+1G>A) and two nonsynonymous coding variants (c.1679T>G, c.2846A>T), have consistently been associated with severe 5-FU toxicity. A relatively common haplotype, hapB3, containing three intronic polymorphisms (c.483+18G>A; c.680+139G>A; c.959-51T>C) and a synonymous mutation c.1236G>A linked to c.1129-5923C>G, is a major contributor to early onset severe toxicity. TYMS VNTR 2R and TYMS-3'-UTR 6-bp ins-del variants were associated with global toxicity in capecitabine-treated patients. A candidate gene study of capecitabine-related toxicity reported that the s12132152 were strongly associated with hand-foot syndrome (HFS), whereas rs7548189 was associated with diarrhea. The rs2612091 and rs2741171, which are downstream of TYMS and intronic for ENOSF1, were associated with increased global toxicity and HFS. EXPERT OPINION: Sex-dependent differences, ethnicity, cancer types and 5-FU-based chemotherapy regimens might affect the heterogeneity of genetic variants for predictive 5-FU-related toxicity. Future approaches using genome-wide association analyses may help in identifying additional candidate genes causally involved in the path mechanisms of 5-FU-related toxicity.
Capecitabine is an oral prodrug of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and approved for treatment of various malignancies. Hereditary genetic variants may affect a drug's pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics and account for differences in treatment response and adverse events among patients. In this review we present the current knowledge on genetic variants, commonly single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), tested in cohorts of cancer patients and possibly useful for prediction of capecitabine efficacy or toxicity. Capecitabine is activated to 5-FU by CES, CDA and TYMP, of which SNPs in CDA and CES2 were found to be associated with efficacy and toxicity. In addition, variants in genes of the 5-FU metabolic pathway, including TYMS, MTHFR and DPYD also influenced capecitabine efficacy and toxicity. In particular, well-known SNPs in TYMS and DPYD as well as putative DPYD SNPs had an association with clinical outcome as well as adverse events. Inconsistent findings may be attributable to factors related to ethnic differences, sample size, study design, study endpoints, dosing schedule and the use of multiple agents. Of the SNPs described in this review, dose reduction of fluoropyrimidines based on the presence of DPYD variants (*)2A (rs3918290), (*)13 (rs55886062), -2846A>T (rs67376798) and -1236G>A/HapB3 (rs56038477) has already been recommended. Other variants merit further validation to establish their definite role in explanation of interindividual differences in the outcome of capecitabine-based therapy.
BACKGROUND: The active metabolite of 5-Fluorouracil (5FU), used in the treatment of several types of cancer, acts by inhibiting the thymidylate synthase encoded by the TYMS gene, which catalyzes the rate-limiting step in DNA replication. The major failure of 5FU-based cancer therapy is the development of drug resistance. High levels of TYMS-encoded protein in cancerous tissues are predictive of poor response to 5FU treatment. Expression of TYMS is regulated by various mechanisms, including involving non-coding RNAs, both miRNAs and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs). AIM: To delineate the miRNAs and lncRNAs network regulating the level of TYMS-encoded protein. MAIN BODY: Several miRNAs targeting TYMS mRNA have been identified in colon cancers, the levels of which can be regulated to varying degrees by lncRNAs. Due to their regulation by the MALAT1 lncRNA, these miRNAs can be divided into three groups: (1) miR-197-3p, miR-203a-3p, miR-375-3p which are downregulated by MALAT1 as confirmed experimentally and the levels of these miRNAs are actually reduced in colon and gastric cancers; (2) miR-140-3p, miR-330-3p that could potentially interact with MALAT1, but not yet supported by experimental results; (3) miR-192-5p, miR-215-5p whose seed sequences do not recognize complementary response elements within MALAT1. Considering the putative MALAT1-miRNAs interaction network, attention is drawn to the potential positive feedback loop causing increased expression of MALAT1 in colon cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma, where YAP1 acts as a transcriptional co-factor which, by binding to the TCF4 transcription factor/ beta-catenin complex, may increase the activation of the MALAT1 gene whereas the MALAT1 lncRNA can inhibit miR-375-3p which in turn targets YAP1 mRNA. CONCLUSION: The network of non-coding RNAs may reduce the sensitivity of cancer cells to 5FU treatment by upregulating the level of thymidylate synthase.
BACKGROUND: World Health Organization defined pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas (PPGL) as malignant tumors in 2017 because the existing classification system could not reflect locally aggressive behavior sufficiently. However, predicting the likelihood of metastasis remains a crucial part of the treatment strategy. METHODS: From one tertiary care hospital and one secondary hospital, 97 PPGL cases were selected. Medical records of PPGL cases with the presence of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue of primary lesion were reviewed. For FFPE tissues, a nCounter assay was conducted to determine differently expressed genes between metastatic and non-metastatic PPGL groups. Performances of prediction models for the likelihood of metastasis were calculated. RESULTS: Of a total of 97 PPGL cases, 39, 20, and 38 were classified as benign, malignant, and validation, respectively. In the nCounter assay, CDK1, TYMS, and TOP2A genes showed significant differences in expression. Tumor size was positively correlated with CDK1 expression level. The Lasso regression model showed supreme performance of sensitivity 91.7% and specificity 95.5% when those significant factors were considered. CONCLUSION: Machine learning of multi-modal classifiers can be used to create a prediction model for metastasis of PPGL with high sensitivity and specificity using nCounter assay. Moreover, CDK1 inhibitors could be considered for developing drug treatment.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common histopathological type, and it is purposeful for screening potential prognostic biomarkers for NSCLC. This study aims to identify the lncRNAs and mRNAs related to survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The expression profile data of lung adenocarcinoma and lung squamous cell carcinoma were downloaded in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset. A total of eight survival related long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and 262 survival related mRNAs were filtered. By gene set enrichment analysis, 17 significantly correlated Gene Ontology signal pathways and 14 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes signal pathways were screened. Based on the clinical survival and prognosis information of the samples, we screened eight lncRNAs and 193 mRNAs by single factor Cox regression analysis. Further single and multifactor Cox regression analysis were performed, 30 independent prognostication-related mRNAs were obtained. The PPI network was further constructed. We then performed the machine learning algorithms (Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator, Recursive feature elimination, and Random forest) to screen the optimized DEGs combination, and a total of 17 overlapping mRNAs were obtained. Based on the 17 characteristic mRNAs obtained, we firstly built a Nomogram prediction model, and the ROC values of training set and testing set were 0.835 and 0.767, respectively. By overlapping the 17 characteristic mRNAs and PPI network hub genes, three genes were obtained: CDC6, CEP55, TYMS, which were considered as key factors associated with survival of NSCLC. The in vitro experiments were performed to examine the effect of CDC6, CEP55, and TYMS on NSCLC cells. Finally, the lncRNAs-mRNAs networks were constructed.
SCOPE: The metabolism of folate involves a complex network of polymorphic enzymes that may explain a proportion of the risk associated with colorectal neoplasia. Over 60 observational studies primarily in non-Hispanic White populations have been conducted on selected genetic variants in specific genes, MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, CBS, TCNII, RFC, GCPII, SHMT, TYMS, and MTHFD1, including five meta-analyses on MTHFR 677C>T (rs1801133) and MTHFR 1298C>T (rs1801131); two meta-analyses on MTR-2756A>C (rs1805087); and one for MTRR 66A>G (rs1801394). METHODS AND RESULTS: This systematic review synthesizes these data, highlighting the consistent inverse association between MTHFR 677TT genotype and risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) and its null association with adenoma risk. Results for other variants varied across individual studies; in our meta-analyses we observed some evidence for SHMT 1420C>T (rs1979277) ((odds ratio) OR = 0.85; 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.73-1.00 for TT v. CC) and TYMS 5' 28 bp repeat (rs34743033) and CRC risk (OR = 0.84; 95% CI = 0.75-0.94 for 2R/3R v. 3R/3R and OR = 0.82; 95% CI = 0.69-0.98 for 2R/2R v. 3R/3R). CONCLUSION: To gain further insight into the role of folate variants in colorectal neoplasia will require incorporating measures of the metabolites, including B-vitamin cofactors, homocysteine and S-adenosylmethionine, and innovative statistical methods to better approximate the folate one-carbon metabolism pathway.
We previously showed that elevated TYMS exhibits oncogenic properties and promotes tumorigenesis after a long latency, suggesting cooperation with sequential somatic mutations. Here we report the cooperation of ectopic expression of human TYMS with loss of Ink4a/Arf, one of the most commonly mutated somatic events in human cancer. Using an hTS/Ink4a/Arf (-/-) genetically engineered mouse model we showed that deregulated TYMS expression in Ink4a/Arf null background accelerates tumorigenesis and metastasis. In addition, tumors from TYMS-expressing mice were associated with a phenotype of genomic instability including enhanced double strand DNA damage, aneuploidy and loss of G1/S checkpoint. Downregulation of TYMS in vitro decreased cell proliferation and sensitized tumor cells to antimetabolite chemotherapy. In addition, depletion of TYMS in vivo by TYMS shRNA reduced tumor incidence, delayed tumor progression and prolonged survival in hTS/Ink4a/Arf (-/-) mice. Our data shows that activation of TYMS in Ink4a/Arf null background enhances uncontrolled cell proliferation and tumor growth, supporting the development of new agents and strategies targeting TYMS to delay tumorigenesis and prolong survival.
