Ubiquitin-associated and SH3 domain-containing protein B; Interferes with CBL-mediated down-regulation and degradation of receptor-type tyrosine kinases. Promotes accumulation of activated target receptors, such as T-cell receptors and EGFR, on the cell surface. Exhibits tyrosine phosphatase activity toward several substrates including EGFR, FAK, SYK, and ZAP70. Down-regulates proteins that are dually modified by both protein tyrosine phosphorylation and ubiquitination.
We determined the relationships between DNA sequence variation and DNA methylation using blood samples from 3,799 Europeans and 3,195 South Asians. We identify 11,165,559 SNP-CpG associations (methylation quantitative trait loci (meQTL), P < 10(-14)), including 467,915 meQTL that operate in trans. The meQTL are enriched for functionally relevant characteristics, including shared chromatin state, High-throuhgput chromosome conformation interaction, and association with gene expression, metabolic variation and clinical traits. We use molecular interaction and colocalization analyses to identify multiple nuclear regulatory pathways linking meQTL loci to phenotypic variation, including UBASH3B (body mass index), NFKBIE (rheumatoid arthritis), MGA (blood pressure) and COMMD7 (white cell counts). For rs6511961 , chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) validates zinc finger protein (ZNF)333 as the likely trans acting effector protein. Finally, we used interaction analyses to identify population- and lineage-specific meQTL, including rs174548 in FADS1, with the strongest effect in CD8(+) T cells, thus linking fatty acid metabolism with immune dysregulation and asthma. Our study advances understanding of the potential pathways linking genetic variation to human phenotype.
Selective degradation of protein aggregates by macroautophagy/autophagy is an essential homeostatic process of safeguarding cells from the effects of proteotoxicity. Among the ubiquitin-like proteins, NEDD8 conjugation to misfolded proteins is prominent in stress-induced protein aggregates, albeit the function of neddylation in autophagy is unclear. Here, we report that polyneddylation functions as a post-translational modification for autophagic degradation of proteotoxic-stress induced protein aggregates. We also show that HYPK functions as an autophagy receptor in the polyneddylation-dependent aggrephagy. The scaffolding function of HYPK is facilitated by its C-terminal ubiquitin-associated domain and N-terminal tyrosine-type LC3-interacting region which bind to NEDD8 and LC3 respectively. Both NEDD8 and HYPK are positive modulators of basal and proteotoxicity-induced autophagy, leading to protection of cells from protein aggregates, such as aggregates of mutant HTT exon 1. Thus, we propose an indispensable and additive role of neddylation and HYPK in clearance of protein aggregates by autophagy, resulting in cytoprotective effect during proteotoxic stress.Abbreviations: ATG5, autophagy related 5; ATG12, autophagy related 12; ATG14, autophagy related 14; BECN1, beclin 1; CBL, casitas B-lineage lymphoma; CBLB, Cbl proto-oncogene B; GABARAP, GABA type A receptor-associated protein; GABARAPL1, GABA type A receptor associated protein like 1; GABARAPL2, GABA type A receptor associated protein like 2; GFP, green fluorescent protein; HTT, huntingtin; HTT97Q exon 1, huntingtin 97-glutamine exon 1; HUWE1, HECT, UBA and WWE domain containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1; HYPK, huntingtin interacting protein K; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IMR-32, Institute for Medical Research-32; KD, knockdown; K(d), dissociation constant; LAMP1, lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; LIR, LC3 interacting region; MAP1LC3/LC3, microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; MAP1LC3A/LC3A, microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha; MAP1LC3B/LC3B, microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MARK1, microtubule affinity regulating kinase 1; MARK2, microtubule affinity regulating kinase 2; MARK3, microtubule affinity regulating kinase 3; MARK4, microtubule affinity regulating kinase 4; MCF7, Michigan Cancer Foundation-7; MTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; NAE1, NEDD8 activating enzyme E1 subunit 1; NBR1, NBR1 autophagy cargo receptor; NEDD8, NEDD8 ubiquitin like modifier; Ni-NTA, nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid; NUB1, negative regulator of ubiquitin like proteins 1; PIK3C3, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit type 3; PolyQ, poly-glutamine; PSMD8, proteasome 26S subunit, non-ATPase 8; RAD23A, RAD23 homolog A, nucleotide excision repair protein; RAD23B, RAD23 homolog B, nucleotide excision repair protein; RFP, red fluorescent protein; RPS27A, ribosomal protein S27a; RSC1A1, regulator of solute carriers 1; SNCA, synuclein alpha; SIK1, salt inducible kinase 1; siRNA, small interfering ribonucleic acid; SOD1, superoxide dismutase 1; SPR, surface plasmon resonance; SQSTM1, sequestosome 1; SUMO1, small ubiquitin like modifier 1; TAX1BP1, Tax1 binding protein 1; TDRD3, tudor domain containing 3; TNRC6C, trinucleotide repeat containing adaptor 6C; TOLLIP, toll interacting protein; TUBA, tubulin alpha; TUBB, tubulin beta class I; UBA, ubiquitin-associated; UBA1, ubiquitin like modifier activating enzyme 1; UBA5, ubiquitin like modifier activating enzyme 5; UBAC1, UBA domain containing 1; UBAC2, UBA domain containing 2; UBAP1, ubiquitin associated protein 1; UBAP2, ubiquitin associated protein 2; UBASH3B, ubiquitin associated and SH3 domain containing B; UBD/FAT10, ubiquitin D; UBE2K, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 K; UBLs, ubiquitin-like proteins; UBL7, ubiquitin like 7; UBQLN1, ubiquilin 1; UBQLN2, ubiquilin 2; UBQLN3, ubiquilin 3; UBQLN4, ubiquilin 4; UBXN1, UBX domain protein 1; ULK1, unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; URM1, ubiquitin related modifier 1; USP5, ubiquitin specific peptidase 5; USP13, ubiquitin specific peptidase 13; VPS13D, vacuolar protein sorting 13 homolog D.
Two members of the UBASH3/STS/TULA family exhibit a unique protein domain structure, which includes a histidine phosphatase domain, and play a key role in regulating cellular signaling. UBASH3A/STS-2/TULA is mostly a lymphoid protein, while UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2 is expressed ubiquitously. Dephosphorylation of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins by TULA-2 and, probably to a lesser extent, by TULA critically contribute to the molecular basis of their regulatory effect. The notable differences between the effects of the two family members on cellular signaling and activation are likely to be linked to the difference between their specific enzymatic activities. However, these differences might also be related to the functions of their domains other than the phosphatase domain and independent of their phosphatase activity. The down-regulation of the Syk/Zap-70-mediated signaling, which to-date appears to be the best-studied regulatory effect of TULA family, is discussed in detail in this publication.
UBASH3/STS/TULA is a novel two-member family, which exerts several key regulatory effects in multiple cell types. UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2 is a highly active protein tyrosine phosphatase; its major target appears to be a specific regulatory site of protein tyrosine kinases of the Syk family, dephosphorylation of which inhibits Syk and Zap-70 kinases and suppresses receptor signaling mediated by these kinases. UBASH3A/STS-2/TULA exhibits substantial homology to UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2, but possesses only a small fraction of phosphatase activity of UBASH3B/STS-1/TULA-2, and thus, its regulatory effect may be based also on the phosphatase-independent mechanisms. Critical physiologic effects of these proteins have been demonstrated in T lymphocytes, platelets, stem cells, and other important cell types. These proteins have also been shown to play a key role in such pathologic conditions as autoimmunity, cancer, and thrombosis. The review focuses on the recent studies of this important family of cellular regulators.
BACKGROUND: Metabolic reprogramming plays a pivotal role in tumorigenesis and development of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). However, the precise mechanisms and potential targets for metabolic reprogramming in LUAD remain elusive. Our prior investigations revealed that the mitochondrial ribosomal protein MRPL12, identified as a novel mitochondrial transcriptional regulatory gene, exerts a critical influence on mitochondrial metabolism. Despite this, the role and regulatory mechanisms underlying MRPL12's transcriptional activity in cancers remain unexplored. METHODS: Human LUAD tissues, Tp53(fl/fl);Kras(G12D)-driven LUAD mouse models, LUAD patient-derived organoids (PDO), and LUAD cell lines were used to explored the expression and function of MRPL12. The posttranslational modification of MRPL12 was analyzed by mass spectrometry, and the oncogenic role of key phosphorylation sites of MRPL12 in LUAD development was verified in vivo and in vitro. RESULTS: MRPL12 was upregulated in human LUAD tissues, Tp53(fl/fl);Kras(G12D)-driven LUAD tissues in mice, LUAD PDO, and LUAD cell lines, correlating with poor patient survival. Overexpression of MRPL12 significantly promoted LUAD tumorigenesis, metastasis, and PDO formation, while MRPL12 knockdown elicited the opposite phenotype. Additionally, MRPL12 deletion in a Tp53(fl/fl);Kras(G12D)-driven mouse LUAD model conferred a notable survival advantage, delaying tumor onset and reducing malignant progression. Mechanistically, we discovered that MRPL12 promotes tumor progression by upregulating mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. Furthermore, we identified UBASH3B as a specific binder of MRPL12, dephosphorylating tyrosine 60 in MRPL12 (MRPL12 Y60) and inhibiting its oncogenic functions. The decrease in MRPL12 Y60 phosphorylation impeded the binding of MRPL12 to POLRMT, downregulating mitochondrial metabolism in LUAD cells. In-depth in vivo, in vitro, and organoid models validated the inhibitory effect of MRPL12 Y60 mutation on LUAD. CONCLUSION: This study establishes MRPL12 as a novel oncogene in LUAD, contributing to LUAD pathogenesis by orchestrating mitochondrial metabolism reprogramming towards oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Furthermore, it confirms Y60 as a specific phosphorylation modification site regulating MRPL12's oncogenic functions, offering insights for the development of LUAD-specific targeted drugs and clinical interventions.
BACKGROUND: FLI1 is an oncogenic transcription factor that promotes diverse malignancies through mechanisms that are not fully understood. Herein, FLI1 is shown to regulate the expression of Ubiquitin Associated and SH3 Domain Containing A/B (UBASH3A/B) genes. UBASH3B and UBASH3A are found to act as an oncogene and tumor suppressor, respectively, and their combined effect determines erythroleukemia progression downstream of FLI1. METHODS: Promoter analysis combined with luciferase assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis were applied on the UBASH3A/B promoters. RNAseq analysis combined with bioinformatic was used to determine the effect of knocking-down UBASH3A and UBASH3B in leukemic cells. Downstream targets of UBASH3A/B were inhibited in leukemic cells either via lentivirus-shRNAs or small molecule inhibitors. Western blotting and RT-qPCR were used to determine transcription levels, MTT assays to assess proliferation rate, and flow cytometry to examine apoptotic index. RESULTS: Knockdown of FLI1 in erythroleukemic cells identified the UBASH3A/B genes as potential downstream targets. Herein, we show that FLI1 directly binds to the UBASH3B promoter, leading to its activation and leukemic cell proliferation. In contrast, FLI1 indirectly inhibits UBASH3A transcription via GATA2, thereby antagonizing leukemic growth. These results suggest oncogenic and tumor suppressor roles for UBASH3B and UBASH3A in erythroleukemia, respectively. Mechanistically, we show that UBASH3B indirectly inhibits AP1 (FOS and JUN) expression, and that its loss leads to inhibition of apoptosis and acceleration of proliferation. UBASH3B also positively regulates the SYK gene expression and its inhibition suppresses leukemia progression. High expression of UBASH3B in diverse tumors was associated with worse prognosis. In contrast, UBASH3A knockdown in erythroleukemic cells increased proliferation; and this was associated with a dramatic induction of the HSP70 gene, HSPA1B. Accordingly, knockdown of HSPA1B in erythroleukemia cells significantly accelerated leukemic cell proliferation. Accordingly, overexpression of UBASH3A in different cancers was predominantly associated with good prognosis. These results suggest for the first time that UBASH3A plays a tumor suppressor role in part through activation of HSPA1B. CONCLUSIONS: FLI1 promotes erythroleukemia progression in part by modulating expression of the oncogenic UBASH3B and tumor suppressor UBASH3A.
Fusion genes including NPM-ALK can promote T-cell transformation, but the signals required to drive a healthy T cell to become malignant remain undefined. In this study, we introduce NPM-ALK into primary human T cells and demonstrate induction of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program, attenuation of most T-cell effector programs, reemergence of an immature epigenomic profile, and dynamic regulation of c-Myc, E2F, and PI3K/mTOR signaling pathways early during transformation. A mutant of NPM-ALK failed to bind several signaling complexes including GRB2/SOS, SHC1, SHC4, and UBASH3B and was unable to transform T cells. Finally, T-cell receptor (TCR)-generated signals were required to achieve T-cell transformation, explaining how healthy individuals can harbor T cells with NPM-ALK translocations. These findings describe the fundamental mechanisms of NPM-ALK-mediated oncogenesis and may serve as a model to better understand factors that regulate tumor formation. SIGNIFICANCE: This investigation into malignant transformation of T cells uncovers a requirement for TCR triggering, elucidates integral signaling complexes nucleated by NPM-ALK, and delineates dynamic transcriptional changes as a T cell transforms.See related commentary by Spasevska and Myklebust, p. 3160.
Acquired drug-resistance, often involving downregulation or mutations in the target protein, is a major caveat in precision medicine. Understanding mechanisms of resistance to therapeutic drugs may unravel strategies to overcome or prevent them. We previously identified phorbol ester (PE) compounds such as TPA that induce Protein Kinase delta (PKCdelta), thereby suppressing leukemogenesis. Here we identified erythroleukemia cell lines that resist PEs and showed that reduced PKCdelta protein expression underlies drug resistance. Reduced level of PKCdelta in resistant cell lines was due to its phosphorylation followed by protein degradation. Indeed, proteasome inhibition prevented PE-induced loss of PKCdelta. Accordingly, a combination of TPA and the proteasome inhibitor ALLN significantly suppressed leukemia in a mouse model of leukemia. PKCdelta downregulation by TPA was independent of the downstream MAPK/ERK/P38/JNK pathway. Instead, expression of ubiquitin-associated and SH3 domain-containing protein b (Ubash3b) was induced by TPA, which leads to PKCdelta protein dephosphorylation and degradation. This specific degradation was blocked by RNAi-mediated depletion of Ubash3b. In drug-sensitive leukemic cells, TPA did not induce Ubash3b, and consequently, PKCdelta levels remained high. A PE-resistant cell line derived from PE-treated sensitive cells exhibited very low PKCdelta expression. In these drug resistance cells, a Ubash3b independent mechanism led to PKCdelta degradation. Thus, PE compounds in combination with proteasome or specific inhibitors for Ubash3b, or other factors can overcome resistance to TPA, leading to durable suppression of leukemic growth. These results identify Ubash3b as a potential target for drug development.
The T cell Ubiquitin Ligand (TULA) protein family contains two members, UBASH3A and UBASH3B, that display similarities in protein sequence and domain structure. Both TULA proteins act to repress T cell activation via a combination of overlapping and nonredundant functions. UBASH3B acts mainly as a phosphatase that suppresses proximal T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. In contrast, UBASH3A acts primarily as an adaptor protein, interacting with other proteins (including UBASH3B) in T cells upon TCR stimulation and resulting in downregulation of TCR signaling and NF-kappaB signaling. Human genetic and functional studies have revealed another notable distinction between UBASH3A and UBASH3B: numerous genome-wide association studies have identified statistically significant associations between genetic variants in and around the UBASH3A gene and at least seven different autoimmune diseases, suggesting a key role of UBASH3A in autoimmunity. However, the evidence for an independent role of UBASH3B in autoimmune disease is limited. This review summarizes key findings regarding the roles of TULA proteins in T cell biology and autoimmunity, highlights the commonalities and differences between UBASH3A and UBASH3B, and speculates on the individual and joint effects of TULA proteins on T cell signaling.
Two members of the TULA family (TULA/STS-2/UBASH3A and TULA-2/STS-1/UBASH3B) recently emerged as novel regulators of several cellular functions. The degree of structural similarity between the TULA-family proteins is typical for proteins that belong to the same family. Furthermore, the experiments with knockout mice lacking these proteins may be interpreted as suggesting that functions of TULA-family proteins in T lymphocytes overlap. At the same time, TULA and TULA-2 exhibit clear functional dissimilarities, starting with the finding that a conserved phosphatase domain present in both proteins exhibits remarkable differences in enzymatic activity; TULA-2 is an active phosphatase capable of dephosphorylating multiple tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins, whereas the phosphatase activity of TULA is extremely low. In contrast, TULA, but not TULA-2, facilitates growth factor withdrawal-induced apoptosis in T cells. In spite of their apparent importance, the functional role of TULA-family proteins is not well understood. In particular, the role of functional dissimilarities between them remains unclear.
Mitosis ensures equal segregation of the genome and is controlled by a variety of ubiquitylation signals on substrate proteins. However, it remains unexplored how the versatile ubiquitin code is read out during mitotic progression. Here, we identify the ubiquitin receptor protein UBASH3B as an important regulator of mitosis. UBASH3B interacts with ubiquitylated Aurora B, one of the main kinases regulating chromosome segregation, and controls its subcellular localization but not protein levels. UBASH3B is a limiting factor in this pathway and is sufficient to localize Aurora B to microtubules prior to anaphase. Importantly, targeting Aurora B to microtubules by UBASH3B is necessary for the timing and fidelity of chromosome segregation in human cells. Our findings uncover an important mechanism defining how ubiquitin attachment to a substrate protein is decoded during mitosis.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a lung disease caused by limited airflow that leads to difficulty breathing. It is a major chronic disease that affects human quality of life and even endangers life. However, the exact cause of COPD is still unclear. The present study aimed to identify characteristic genes in COPD, assess the level of immune cell infiltration in COPD samples, and explore the association between characteristic genes and infiltrating immune cells. In this paper, we used dataset GSE76925 to identify 452 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (including 407 downregulated and 45 upregulated DEGs). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis showed that the functions mainly include leukocyte migration, protein folding, negative regulation of cell activation, transcription regulator complex, collagen-containing extracellular matrix, RNA polymerase II transcription regulator complex, guanyl nucleotide binding, guanyl ribonucleotide binding, ubiquitin protein ligase binding, etc. In the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis, pathways identified by DEGs mainly focused on Basal transcription factors, Arachidonic acid metabolism, Nucleocytoplasmic transport, Glutamatergic synapse, Ether lipid metabolism, alpha-Linolenic acid metabolism, etc. Next, we constructed a weighted gene co-expression network, identified six gene modules, found that the module with the highest correlation was the MEturquoise, and obtained 51 hub module genes. Further, 43 overlapping genes were obtained after the intersection of 452 DEGs and 51 hub genes in MEturquoise module, and seven characteristic DEGs (C-DEGs) (LOC649214, LOC440563, LOC643431, LOC642585, KRT18P17, LOC648057 and UBASH3B) were identified by the Least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) regression method. In addition, we assessed the infiltration of 28 immune cells in 111 COPD samples and 40 NC samples, calculated and visualized the correlation between the expression of 7 C-DEGs and the infiltration level of 28 immune cells. These results will contribute to our further understanding of the molecular immunopathogenesis of COPD and have potential reference value for the development of molecular drug targets in the future.
Efforts to improve the clinical outcome of highly aggressive triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) have been hindered by the lack of effective targeted therapies. Thus, it is important to identify the specific gene targets/pathways driving the invasive phenotype to develop more effective therapeutics. Here we show that ubiquitin-associated and SH3 domain-containing B (UBASH3B), a protein tyrosine phosphatase, is overexpressed in TNBC, where it supports malignant growth, invasion, and metastasis largely through modulating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). We also show that UBASH3B is a functional target of anti-invasive microRNA200a (miR200a) that is down-regulated in TNBC. Importantly, the oncogenic potential of UBASH3B is dependent on its tyrosine phosphatase activity, which targets CBL ubiquitin ligase for dephosphorylation and inactivation, leading to EGFR up-regulation. Thus, UBASH3B may function as a crucial node in bridging multiple invasion-promoting pathways, thereby providing a potential therapeutic target for TNBC.
The t(8;21) rearrangement, which creates the AML1-ETO fusion protein, represents the most common chromosomal translocation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Clinical data suggest that CBL mutations are a frequent event in t(8;21) AML, but the role of CBL in AML1-ETO-induced leukemia has not been investigated. In this study, we demonstrate that CBL mutations collaborate with AML1-ETO to expand human CD34+ cells both in vitro and in a xenograft model. CBL depletion by shRNA also promotes the growth of AML1-ETO cells, demonstrating the inhibitory function of endogenous CBL in t(8;21) AML. Mechanistically, loss of CBL function confers hyper-responsiveness to thrombopoietin and enhances STAT5/AKT/ERK/Src signaling in AML1-ETO cells. Interestingly, we found the protein tyrosine phosphatase UBASH3B/Sts-1, which is known to inhibit CBL function, is upregulated by AML1-ETO through transcriptional and miR-9-mediated regulation. UBASH3B/Sts-1 depletion induces an aberrant pattern of CBL phosphorylation and impairs proliferation in AML1-ETO cells. The growth inhibition caused by UBASH3B/Sts-1 depletion can be rescued by ectopic expression of CBL mutants, suggesting that UBASH3B/Sts-1 supports the growth of AML1-ETO cells partly through modulation of CBL function. Our study reveals a role of CBL in restricting myeloid proliferation of human AML1-ETO-induced leukemia, and identifies UBASH3B/Sts-1 as a potential target for pharmaceutical intervention.
To elucidate the genes responsible for constitutive human skin color, we measured the extent of skin pigmentation in the buttock, representative of lifelong non-sun-exposed skin, and conducted a gene mapping study on skin color in an isolated Mongolian population composed of 344 individuals from 59 families who lived in Dashbalbar, Mongolia. The heritability of constitutive skin color was 0.82, indicating significant genetic association on this trait. Through the linkage analysis using 1,039 short tandem repeat (STR) microsatellite markers, we identified a novel genomic region regulating constitutive skin color on 11q24.2 with an logarithm of odds (LOD) score of 3.39. In addition, we also found other candidate regions on 17q23.2, 6q25.1, and 13q33.2 (LOD >/= 2). Family-based association tests on these regions with suggestive linkage peaks revealed ten and two significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the linkage regions of chromosome 11 and 17, respectively. We were able to discover four possible candidate genes that would be implicated to regulate human skin color: ETS1, UBASH3B, ASAM, and CLTC.
Circulating total-tau levels can be used as an endophenotype to identify genetic risk factors for tauopathies and related neurological disorders. Here, we confirmed and better characterized the association of the 17q21 MAPT locus with circulating total-tau in 14,721 European participants and identified three novel loci in 953 African American participants (4q31, 5p13, and 6q25) at P < 5 x 10(-8). We additionally detected 14 novel loci at P < 5 x 10(-7), specific to either Europeans or African Americans. Using whole-exome sequence data in 2,279 European participants, we identified ten genes associated with circulating total-tau when aggregating rare variants. Our genetic study sheds light on genes reported to be associated with neurological diseases including stroke, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's (F5, MAP1B, and BCAS3), with Alzheimer's pathological hallmarks (ADAMTS12, IL15, and FHIT), or with an important function in the brain (PARD3, ELFN2, UBASH3B, SLIT3, and NSD3), and suggests that the genetic architecture of circulating total-tau may differ according to ancestry.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) causes progressive damage to kidney function with increased inflammation. This process contributes to complex amino acid changes. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) has been proposed as a new biomarker of CKD in previous studies. In our research, we performed a metabolite genome-wide association study (mGWAS) to identify common and rare variants associated with IDO activity in a Korean population. In addition, single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) selected through mGWAS were further analyzed for associations with the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and CKD. A total of seven rare variants achieved the genome-wide significance threshold (p < 1 x 10(-8)). Among them, four genes (TNFRSF19, LOC105377444, LOC101928535, and FSTL5) associated with IDO activity showed statistically significant associations with eGFR and CKD. Most of these rare variants appeared specifically in an Asian geographic region. Furthermore, 15 common variants associated with IDO activity were detected in this study and five novel genes (RSU1, PDGFD, SNX25, LOC107984031, and UBASH3B) associated with CKD and eGFR were identified. This study discovered several loci for IDO activity via mGWAS and provided insight into the underlying mechanisms of CKD through association analysis with CKD. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to suggest a genetic link between IDO activity and CKD through comparative and integrated analysis.
INTRODUCTION: Behcet's disease is a chronic systemic inflammatory disease that remains incompletely understood. Herein, we perform the first genome-wide association study in Behcet's disease. METHODS: Using DNA pooling technology and the Affymetrix 500K arrays, we identified possible candidate gene associations with Behcet's disease in a cohort of 152 Behcet's disease patients and 172 healthy ethnically matched controls. Genetic loci that were identified in the pooling study were genotyped in patients and controls using TaqMan genotyping technology. RESULTS: We identified genetic associations between Behcet's disease and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in KIAA1529, CPVL, LOC100129342, UBASH3B, and UBAC2 (odds ratio = 2.04, 2.26, 1.84, 1.71, and 1.61, respectively; P value = 4.2 x 10-5, 1.0 x 10-4, 3.0 x 10-4, 1.5 x 10-3, and 5.8 x 10-3, respectively). Among the associated SNPs, the Behcet's disease-risk allele in rs2061634 leads to substitution of serine to cysteine at amino acid position 995 (S995C) in the KIAA1529 protein. CONCLUSIONS: Using an unbiased whole-genome genetic association approach, we identified novel candidate genetic loci that are associated with increased susceptibility for Behcet's disease. These findings will help to better understand the pathogenesis of Behcet's disease and identify novel targets for therapeutic intervention.
The formation of erythroid progenitor cells depends sharply upon erythropoietin (EPO), its cell surface receptor (erythropoietin receptor, EPOR), and Janus kinase 2 (JAK2). Clinically, recombinant human EPO (rhEPO) additionally is an important anti-anemia agent for chronic kidney disease (CKD), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and chemotherapy, but induces hypertension, and can exert certain pro-tumorigenic effects. Cellular signals transduced by EPOR/JAK2 complexes, and the nature of EPO-modulated signal transduction factors, therefore are of significant interest. By employing phospho-tyrosine post-translational modification (p-Y PTM) proteomics and human EPO- dependent UT7epo cells, we have identified 22 novel kinases and phosphatases as novel EPO targets, together with their specific sites of p-Y modification. New kinases modified due to EPO include membrane palmitoylated protein 1 (MPP1) and guanylate kinase 1 (GUK1) guanylate kinases, together with the cytoskeleton remodeling kinases, pseudopodium enriched atypical kinase 1 (PEAK1) and AP2 associated kinase 1 (AAK1). Novel EPO- modified phosphatases include protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type A (PTPRA), phosphohistidine phosphatase 1 (PHPT1), tensin 2 (TENC1), ubiquitin associated and SH3 domain containing B (UBASH3B) and protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 18 (PTPN18). Based on PTPN18's high expression in hematopoietic progenitors, its novel connection to JAK kinase signaling, and a unique EPO- regulated PTPN18-pY389 motif which is modulated by JAK2 inhibitors, PTPN18's actions in UT7epo cells were investigated. Upon ectopic expression, wt-PTPN18 promoted EPO dose-dependent cell proliferation, and survival. Mechanistically, PTPN18 sustained the EPO- induced activation of not only mitogen-activated protein kinases 1 and 3 (ERK1/2), AKT serine/threonine kinase 1-3 (AKT), and signal transducer and activator of transcription 5A and 5B (STAT5), but also JAK2. Each effect further proved to depend upon PTPN18's EPO- modulated (p)Y389 site. In analyses of the EPOR and the associated adaptor protein RHEX (regulator of hemoglobinization and erythroid cell expansion), wt-PTPN18 increased high molecular weight EPOR forms, while sharply inhibiting the EPO-induced phosphorylation of RHEX-pY141. Each effect likewise depended upon PTPN18-Y389. PTPN18 thus promotes signals for EPO-dependent hematopoietic cell growth, and may represent a new druggable target for myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Cbl proteins are regulators of signal transduction through many pathways and, consequently, regulate cell function and development. They are ubiquitin ligases that ubiquitinate and target many signaling molecules for degradation. The Cbl proteins themselves are regulated by an increasingly complex network of interactions that fine-tune the effects that Cbl proteins have on signaling. The negative regulation of Cbl protein function can occur via cis-acting structural elements that prevent inappropriate ubiquitin ligase activity, degradation of the Cbl proteins, inhibition without degradation owing to interaction with other signaling proteins, deubiquitination of Cbl substrates, and regulation of assembly of the endosomal ESCRT-I complex. Defects in the regulatory mechanisms that control Cbl function are implicated in the development of immunological and malignant diseases.
