Cytochrome P450 1A2; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids, steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Exhibits high catalytic activity for the formation of hydroxyestrogens from estrone (E1) and 17beta- estradiol (E2), namely 2-hydroxy E1 and  [...] 
The transcriptional regulation of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases UGT2B4 and UGT2B7 has been well studied using liver cancer cell lines, and post-transcriptional regulation of these two UGTs by microRNA (miRNA/miR) miR-216b-5p was recently reported. This study describes novel miRNA-mediated regulation of UGT2B4 and UGT2B7 in liver cancer cells. Bioinformatic analyses identified a putative miR-3664-3p binding site in the UGT2B7 3'-untranslated region (UTR) and binding sites for both miR-135a-5p and miR-410-3p in the UGT2B4 3'-UTR. These sites were functionally characterized using miRNA mimics and reporter constructs. A miR-3664-3p mimic induced repression of a luciferase reporter carrying the UGT2B7 3'-UTR in liver cancer cell lines; mutation of the miR-3664-3p site abrogated the response of the reporter to the mimic. Similarly, mutation of the miR-135a-5p site or miR-410-3p site in a luciferase reporter bearing UGT2B4 3'-UTR abrogated the ability of miR-135a-5p or miR-410-3p mimics to reduce reporter activity. Transfection of miR-3664-3p mimics in HepG2 liver cancer cells significantly reduced mRNA and protein levels of UGT2B7, and this led to reduced enzymatic activity. Transfection of miR-135a-5p or miR-410-3p mimics significantly decreased UGT2B4 mRNA levels in Huh7 liver cancer cells. The expression levels of miR-410-3p were inversely correlated with UGT2B4 mRNA levels in The Cancer Genome Atlas cohort of liver hepatocellular carcinoma (371 specimens) and a panel of ten normal human tissues. Similarly, there was an inverse correlation between miR-135a and UGT2B4 mRNA levels in a panel of 18 normal human liver tissues. Together, these data suggest that miR-135a and miR-410 control UGT2B4 and that miR-3664 controls UGT2B7 expression in liver cancer and/or normal liver cells.
Esophageal cancer (EC) has a globally increasing incidence with poor curative treatment options and survival rates. Environmental and dietary factors have crucial roles in esophageal carcinogenesis. Polymorphisms in the UGT genes, a superfamily of enzymes essential for the detoxification of carcinogens, may alter enzyme activity and subsequently may play a role in EC etiology. Rather than solely establishing differences in genotype distribution, we investigated whether functional polymorphisms in UGT genes that can predict enzyme activity in vivo, may influence EC risk. A case-control study including 351 Caucasian EC patients and 592 Caucasian controls was conducted and polymorphisms in seven UGT genes were determined, using the polymerase chain reaction. On the basis of allelic in vitro enzyme activity measurements, genotypes were categorized according to their predicted in vivo enzyme activity into high, medium and low categories. Predicted enzyme activity groups were combined and compared between patients and controls. The UGT1A1 and UGT1A8 predicted high enzyme activity genotypes were significantly more (OR=1.62; 95% CI, 1.02-2.56) and less frequent (OR=0.36; 95% CI, 0.15-0.84) among patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), respectively. High (OR=0.42; 95% CI, 0.22-0.84) and medium (OR=0.25; 95% CI, 0.12-0.52) activity UGT2B4 genotypes were significantly less often present in ESCC patients. No association was detected between UGT genotypes and esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) risk. Polymorphisms in UGT genes, resulting in altered enzyme activity genotypes, do not seem modifiers of EAC risk. However, the predicted high activity UGT1A1 genotype, associated with low serum levels of the antioxidant bilirubin, was associated with an increased ESCC risk. The UGT1A8 and UGT2B4 genotypes associated with decreased predicted enzyme activities, were significantly associated with an increased risk of ESCC, probably by a decreased detoxification of carcinogens.
The role of the kidney as an excretory organ for exogenous and endogenous compounds is well recognized, but there is a wealth of data demonstrating that the kidney has significant metabolizing capacity for a variety of exogenous and endogenous compounds that in some cases surpass the liver. The induction of drug-metabolizing enzymes by some chemicals can cause drug-drug interactions and intraindividual variability in drug clearance. In this study, we evaluated the expression and induction of cytochrome P450 (P450) and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) isoforms in 3D-cultured primary human renal proximal tubule epithelial cells (RPTEC) to elucidate their utility as models of renal drug metabolism. CYP2B6, CYP2E1, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and all detected UGTs (UGT1A1, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A9, and UGT2B7) mRNA levels in 3D-RPTEC were significantly higher than those in 2D-RPTEC and HK-2 cells and were close to the levels in the human kidney cortex. CYP1B1 and CYP2J2 mRNA levels in 3D-RPTEC were comparable to those in 2D-RPTEC, HK-2 cells, and the human kidney cortex. Midazolam 1'-hydroxylation, trifluoperazine N-glucuronidation, serotonin O-glucuronidation, propofol O-glucuronidation, and morphine 3-glucuronidation in the 3D-RPTEC were significantly higher than the 2D-RPTEC and comparable to those in the HepaRG cells, although bupropion, ebastine, and calcitriol hydroxylations were not different between the 2D- and 3D-RPTEC. Treatment with ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor and farnesoid X receptor induced CYP1A1 and UGT2B4 expression, respectively, in 3D-RPTEC compared with 2D-RPTEC. We provided information on the expression, activity, and induction abilities of P450s and UGTs in 3D-RPTEC as an in vitro human renal metabolism model. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: This study demonstrated that the expression of cytochrome P450s (P450s) and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) in 3D-cultured primary human renal proximal tubule epithelial cells (3D-RPTEC) was higher than those in 2D-cultured primary human renal proximal tubule epithelial cells and HK-2 cells. The results were comparable to that in the human kidney cortex. 3D-RPTEC are useful for evaluating the induction of kidney P450s, UDP-glucuronosyltransferases, and human renal drug metabolism in cellulo.
Both UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B4 (UGT2B4) and UGT2B7 are expressed mainly in the human liver and have several overlapping substrates; e.g., catechol estrogens, bile acids, codeine, and carvedilol. To identify novel single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and haplotypes in a Japanese population, the enhancer/promoter regions, all the exons, and the surrounding intronic regions of UGT2B4 and UGT2B7 were sequenced from 136 Japanese individuals. We found 16 and 21 polymorphisms, including 10 and 4 novel ones in UGT2B4 and UGT2B7, respectively. The novel nonsynonymous SNPs were 1364A>G (K455R) and 1531T>C (C511R) in UGT2B4 and 1192G> A (D398N) in UGT2B7. From linkage disequilibrium analysis, several SNPs in UGT2B7 were found to be highly linked with each other. No close linkage between the SNPs in UGT2B4 and UGT2B7 was observed, indicating that each gene is located within an independent haplotype block. Thus, haplotype analysis was separately performed for the two genes. In UGT2B4, we unambiguously determined 8 haplotypes and inferred an additional 12 haplotypes using an expectation-maximization-based program. In UGT2B7, five haplotypes were unambiguously assigned and an additional eight haplotypes were inferred. The haplotype structure of UGT2B7 was more diverse than that of UGT2B4 in terms of the number of frequent SNPs. In addition, ethnic differences in the UGT2B4(*)2 and UGT2B7(*)2 haplotypes between the Japanese and the Caucasian and/or African populations were found. Our findings provide fundamental and useful information for genotyping UGT2B4 and UGT2B7 in the Japanese, and probably other populations.
During cholestasis, the bile acid-conjugating enzymes, SULT2A1 and UGT2B4, work in concert to prevent the accumulation of toxic bile acids. To understand the impact of sulfotransferase deficiency on human hepatic gene expression, we knocked down 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate synthases (PAPSS) 1 and 2, which catalyze synthesis of the obligate sulfotransferase cofactor, in HepG2 cells. PAPSS knockdown caused no change in SULT2A1 expression; however, UGT2B4 expression increased markedly ( approximately 41-fold increase in UGT2B4 mRNA content). Knockdown of SULT2A1 in HepG2 cells also increased UGT2B4 expression. To investigate the underlying mechanism, we transfected PAPSS-deficient HepG2 cells with a luciferase reporter plasmid containing  approximately 2 Kb of the UGT2B4 5'-flanking region, which included a response element for the bile acid-sensing nuclear receptor, farnesoid X receptor (FXR). FXR activation or overexpression increased UGT2B4 promoter activity; however, knocking down FXR or mutating or deleting the FXR response element did not significantly decrease UGT2B4 promoter activity. Further evaluation of the UGT2B4 5'-flanking region indicated the presence of distal regulatory elements between nucleotides -10090 and -10037 that negatively and positively regulated UGT2B4 transcription. Pulse-chase analysis showed that increased UGT2B4 expression in PAPSS-deficient cells was attributable to both increased mRNA synthesis and stability. Transfection analysis demonstrated that the UGT2B4 3'-untranslated region decreased luciferase reporter expression less in PAPSS-deficient cells than in control cells. These data indicate that knocking down PAPSS increases UGT2B4 transcription and mRNA stability as a compensatory response to the loss of SULT2A1 activity, presumably to maintain bile acid-conjugating activity.
Expression profiles of human adult and fetal hepatic and intestinal UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), information about their endo- and xenobiotic substrates, and their transcriptional regulation suggests regulatory circuits between some UGT substrates and ligands of their transcription factors. For examples: (i) bilirubin is solely conjugated by UGT1A1 and activates its transcription factors Ah receptor, PXR and CAR. (ii) Hepatotoxic lithocholic acid (LCA) is oxidized to hyodeoxycholic acid, the latter conjugated by UGT2B4 and UGT2B7. LCA is also an agonist of FXR and PPARalpha, which are controlling these UGTs. (iii) Similar feedback loops possibly exist between some eicosanoids, PPARalpha and UGTs. (iv) Regulatory circuits may also have evolved between dietary polyphenols, which are efficient substrates of UGTs and activators of the Ah receptor. Although many newly developed drugs are conjugated by promiscuous UGTs, the discussed regulatory circuits may provide hints to evolutionary important UGT substrates.
Clofazimine [N,5-bis(4-chlorophenyl)-3-[(propane-2-yl)rimino]-3,5-dihydrophenazin-2-amine] is an antimycobacterial agent used as a second-line antituberculosis (anti-TB) drug. Nonetheless, little information is known about the metabolic routes of clofazimine, and the enzymes involved in metabolism. This study aimed to characterize the metabolic pathways and enzymes responsible for the metabolism of clofazimine in human liver microsomes. Eight metabolites, including four oxidative metabolites, three glucuronide conjugates, and one sulfate conjugate were identified, and their structures were deduced based on tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra. Hydroxylated clofazimine and hydrated clofazimine was generated even in the absence of the NADPH generating system presumably via a nonenzymatic pathway. Hydrolytic-dehalogenated clofazimine was catalyzed mainly by CYP1A2 whereas hydrolytic-deaminated clofazimine was formed by CYP3A4/A5. In case of glucuronide conjugates, UGT1A1, UGT1A3, and UGT1A9 showed catalytic activity toward hydroxylated and hydrated clofazimine glucuronide whereas hydrolytic-deaminated clofazimine glucuronide was catalyzed by UGT1A4, UGT1A9, UGT1A3, and UGT2B4. Our results suggested that CYP1A2 and CYP3A are involved in the formation of oxidative metabolites while UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A4, 1A9, and 2B4 are involved in the formation of glucuronide conjugates of oxidative metabolites of clofazimine.
Variations in glucuronidation activities among different individuals have been reported; however, genetic polymorphisms in the genes encoding phase II drug metabolizing UDP-glucuronosyltransferases have not been studied extensively. A novel UGT2B cDNA clone UGT2B4(E458) was isolated from human prostate and LNCaP cell cDNA libraries. The cDNA encoding UGT2B4(E458) is 2097 bp in length and has an open reading frame of 1584 nucleotides encoding a protein of 528 amino acids. Characterization of the UGT2B4(E458) cDNA revealed nucleotide differences with the previously published UGT2B4 and UGT2B11 cDNAs. These variations in the UGT2B4 sequence lead to an amino acid change from aspartic acid to glutamic acid at position 458. In the previous UGT2B11 cDNA (which has subsequently been renamed UGT2B4 (L109,396, D458)), leucine residues are found at positions 109 and 396, whereas phenylalanines are present at these positions in the UGT2B4(D458) and UGT2B4(E458) enzymes. Analysing the genomic DNA of 26 unrelated Caucasian individuals demonstrated the presence of variant alleles encoding UGT2B4(D458) and UGT2B4(E458). Stable expression of UGT2B4(E458) cDNA in HK293 cells demonstrates the presence of a 52 kDa protein, which is in agreement with other characterized (UGT2B proteins. UGT2B4(E458) conjugates hyodeoxycholic acid (HDCA) as well as 4-hydroxyestrone (4-OH-E1), androstane-3alpha,17beta-diol (3alpha-diol) and androsterone (ADT). Specific reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed expression of UGT2B4(D458) and UGT2B4(E458) transcripts in a wide range of extrahepatic tissues, including the liver, kidney, testis, mammary gland, prostate, placenta, adipose, adrenal, skin and lung. Our results suggest that UGT2B4(E458) and UGT2B(E458) are two widely expressed isoenzymes, and that polymorphism in the UGT2B4 gene might be responsible for differences in UGT2B4 enzymatic properties.
Herbs are often administered in combination with therapeutic drugs, raising the possibility for herb-drug interactions (HDIs). Furoquinoline alkaloids are found in Rutaceae plants, which are structurally similar and have many medicinal properties. This study aims to investigate the inhibition of four furoquinoline alkaloids on the activity of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs).The recombinant UGTs-catalyzed glucuronidation metabolism of 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) was utilized to investigate the inhibition potential. Inhibition type and parameters were determined, and in silico docking was employed to elucidate the inhibition difference of furoquinoline alkaloids towards UGTs.Dictamine, haplopine, gamma-fagarine and skimmianine strongly inhibited UGT1A3, UGT1A7, UGT1A9 and UGT2B4, respectively. Among them, dictamnine inhibited more than 70% of the four UGTs. Inhibition kinetics determination showed that they all exerted competitive inhibition, and the inhibition kinetic constant (K(i)) was determined to be 8.3, 7.2, 3.7 and 33.9 muM, respectively. In vitro-in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) was employed to demonstrate the inhibition possibility for four alkaloids. Skimmianine was proved to be more suitable for clinical application. In silico docking study indicated that the hydrophobic interactions played a key role in the inhibition of furoquinoline alkaloids towards three of the four UGTs. In conclusion, monitoring the interactions between furoquinoline alkaloids and drugs mainly undergoing UGTs-catalyzed metabolism is necessary.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Combination regimens of six-month duration may increase the incidence of anti-tuberculosis drug-induced liver injury (ATLI), which is clinically characterized by mild cholestasis and hepatocanalicular lesions. UGT2B4 is a predominant UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzyme in the human liver that plays an important role in the detoxification of bile acids, which yields water-soluble inactive compounds that can easily be excreted in the bile or urine. This study aimed to investigate the potential association between UGT2B4 variants and the susceptibility to ATLI. METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood sample of each patient, and all SNPs were genotyped using an improved multiplex ligation detection reaction method. Clinical symptoms and laboratory results were recorded regularly. Five genetic variants at UGT2B4(rs1131878, rs1966151, rs28361541, rs4557343 and rs79407331) were identified in a prospective study of 118 ATLI cases and 628 non-ATLI controls. All participants were treated by first-line anti-TB drugs in Western China Hospital. The potential association between SNPs, ATLI risk and clinical phenotypes were determined based on the distribution of allelic frequencies and different genetic models. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Statistical comparisons of cases and controls after correction for multiple testing did not yield any significant association between genetic variants at UGT2B4 and risk of ATLI via the analyses of single locus and subgroup differences. WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: This is the first study aimed to investigate the association of UGT2B4 polymorphisms with ATLI risk. Our results revealed that UGT2B4 genetic variants are unlikely to confer susceptibility to ATLI in the Western Chinese Han population.
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase is a group of catabolic enzymes involved in the detoxification and excretion of many xenobiotic and endogeneous substances in intrahepatic and extrahepatic tissues. The group consists of two subfamilies, UGT1 and UGT2. UGT1 consists of 5 exons and has a unique gene structure. There are thirteen exon 1s from UGT1A1 to UGT1A13P, and exon 2 to exon 5 are used in common for all mRNAs expressed from the gene. Each isoform of UGT1 results from differential splicing of exon1s to common exon 2-5, and has an unique spectrum of substrate specificity. In contrast, the genes of the UGT2 family consist of 6 exons, and all the enzymes have an individual set of exon 1 to exon 6. In UGT1 there are no reports of polymorphism in the common exons, although a number of polymorphisms have been reported for exon 1s. The mutations of UGT1A1 cause hereditary unconjugated hyperbilirubinemias: Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, type II and Gilbert syndrome. UGT1A1 has two major polymorphisms--a missense mutation of G71R and an insertion mutation of TATA box. Prevalence of Gilbert syndrome is attributed to these polymorphisms. Since UGT1A1 metabolizes not only bilirubin but also hormones and drugs, the mutations could be involved in carcinogenesis and adverse drug reactions. Recent studies also revealed a widespread presence of diverse polymorphisms in other isoforms of UGT1 as well as the UGT2 family, including UGT1A6, UGTG1A7, UGT1A8, UGT1A10, UGT2B4, UGT2B7 and UGT2B15. The incidences and types of the polymorphisms for these enzymes are quite different in region and ethnic groups. Understanding of these polymorphisms is essential for the prevention of adverse effects of a considerable number of drugs and to predict cancer risks.
Our previous work identified one region upstream human UGT2B4 (UDP glucuronosyltransferase family 2 member B4) which is associated with breast cancer and under balancing selection. However, the distribution, functional variation and molecular mechanism underlying breast cancer and balancing selection remain unclear. In current study, the two haplotypes with deep divergence are described by analyzing 1000 genomes project data and observed to be with high frequencies in all human populations. Through population genetics analysis and genome annotation, the potential functional region is identified and verified by reporter gene assay. Further mutagenesis indicates that the functional mutations are rs66862535 and rs68096061. Both SNPs can alter the interaction efficiency of transcription factor POU2F1 (POU class 2 homeobox 1). Through chromosome conformation capture, it is identified that the enhancer containing these two SNPs can interact with UGT2B4 promoter. Expression quantitative trait loci analysis indicates that UGT2B4 expression is dependent on the genotype of this locus. The common haplotype in human is lost in four genomes of archaic hominins, which suggests that Neanderthal and Denisovan should present relatively lower UGT2B4 expression and further higher steroid hormone level. This study provides new insight into the contribution of ancient population structure to human phenotypes.
The availability of assays that predict the contribution of cytochrome P450 (CYP) metabolism allows for the design of new chemical entities (NCEs) with minimal oxidative metabolism. These NCEs are often substrates of non-CYP drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs), such as UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), sulfotransferases (SULTs), carboxylesterases (CESs), and aldehyde oxidase (AO). Nearly 30% of clinically approved drugs are metabolized by non-CYP enzymes. However, knowledge about the differential hepatic versus extrahepatic abundance of non-CYP DMEs is limited. In this study, we detected and quantified the protein abundance of eighteen non-CYP DMEs (AO, CES1 and 2, ten UGTs, and five SULTs) across five different human tissues. AO was most abundantly expressed in the liver and to a lesser extent in the kidney; however, it was not detected in the intestine, heart, or lung. CESs were ubiquitously expressed with CES1 being predominant in the liver, while CES2 was enriched in the small intestine. Consistent with the literature, UGT1A4, UGT2B4, and UGT2B15 demonstrated liver-specific expression, whereas UGT1A10 expression was specific to the intestine. UGT1A1 and UGT1A3 were expressed in both the liver and intestine; UGT1A9 was expressed in the liver and kidney; and UGT2B17 levels were significantly higher in the intestine than in the liver. All five SULTs were detected in the liver and intestine, and SULT1A1 and 1A3 were detected in the lung. Kidney abundance was the most variable among the studied tissues, and overall, high interindividual variability (>15-fold) was observed for UGT2B17, CES2 (intestine), SULT1A1 (liver), UGT1A9, UGT2B7, and CES1 (kidney). These differential tissue abundance data can be integrated into physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for the prediction of non-CYP drug metabolism and toxicity in hepatic and extrahepatic tissues.
Carvedilol ((+/-)-1-carbazol-4-yloxy)-3-[[2-(o-methoxyphenoxy)ethyl]amino]-2-propanol) is metabolized primarily into glucuronide conjugates. In the present study, we identified the human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) isoforms involved in the glucuronidation of carvedilol by thin-layer chromatography using microsomes from human liver or insect cells expressing recombinant UGT isoforms. We observed two forms of carvedilol glucuronides, namely G1 and G2, in hepatic microsomes. The glucuronidation of carvedilol was catalyzed by at least three recombinant UGT isoforms: UGT1A1, UGT2B4, and UGT2B7. UGT2B4 formed both G1 and G2, whereas UGT1A1 and UGT2B7 were responsible for the formation of glucuronide G2 and G1, respectively. The enzyme kinetics for carvedilol glucuronidation by UGT1A1, UGT2B4, and UGT2B7 in addition to human liver microsomes were examined by Lineweaver-Burk analysis. The values of Km and Vmax for human liver microsomes were 26.6 microM and 106 pmol/min/mg protein for G1, and 46.0 microM and 44.5 pmol/min/mg protein for G2, respectively. The Km values for UGT1A1, UGT2B4, and UGT2B7 for G1 and G2 (22.1-55.1 microM) were comparable to those of the liver microsomes, whereas the Vmax values were in the range of 3.33 to 7.88 pmol/min/mg protein. The Km and Vmax/Km values for UGT2B4 and UGT2B7 for G1 were similar, whereas UGT2B4 had lower Km and higher Vmax/Km values for G2 compared with those of UGT1A1. These results suggest that G1 formation is catalyzed by UGT2B4 and UGT2B7, whereas G2 is formed by UGT2B4 and UGT1A1. These three hepatic UGT isoforms may have important roles in carvedilol metabolism.
The antiplatelet drug clopidogrel is metabolized to an acyl-beta-d-glucuronide, which causes time-dependent inactivation of CYP2C8. Our aim was to characterize the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes that are responsible for the formation of clopidogrel acyl-beta-d-glucuronide. Kinetic analyses and targeted inhibition experiments were performed using pooled human liver and intestine microsomes (HLMs and HIMs, respectively) and selected human recombinant UGTs based on preliminary screening. The effects of relevant UGT polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics of clopidogrel were evaluated in 106 healthy volunteers. UGT2B7 and UGT2B17 exhibited the greatest level of clopidogrel carboxylic acid glucuronidation activities, with a CL(int,u) of 2.42 and 2.82 microl⋅min(-1)⋅mg(-1), respectively. Of other enzymes displaying activity (UGT1A3, UGT1A9, UGT1A10-H, and UGT2B4), UGT2B4 (CL(int,u) 0.51 microl⋅min(-1)⋅mg(-1)) was estimated to contribute significantly to the hepatic clearance. Nonselective UGT2B inhibitors strongly inhibited clopidogrel acyl-beta-d-glucuronide formation in HLMs and HIMs. The UGT2B17 inhibitor imatinib and the UGT2B7 and UGT1A9 inhibitor mefenamic acid inhibited clopidogrel carboxylic acid glucuronidation in HIMs and HLMs, respectively. Incubation of clopidogrel carboxylic acid in HLMs with UDPGA and NADPH resulted in strong inhibition of CYP2C8 activity. In healthy volunteers, the UGT2B17*2 deletion allele was associated with a 10% decrease per copy in the plasma clopidogrel acyl-beta-d-glucuronide to clopidogrel carboxylic acid area under the plasma concentration-time curve from 0 to 4 hours (AUC(0-4)) ratio (P < 0.05). To conclude, clopidogrel carboxylic acid is metabolized mainly by UGT2B7 and UGT2B4 in the liver and by UGT2B17 in the small intestinal wall. The formation of clopidogrel acyl-beta-d-glucuronide is impaired in carriers of the UGT2B17 deletion. These findings may have implications regarding the intracellular mechanisms leading to CYP2C8 inactivation by clopidogrel.
UGT2B4 is a highly expressed drug-metabolizing enzyme in the liver contributing to the glucuronidation of several drugs. To enable quantitatively assessing UGT2B4 contribution toward metabolic clearance, a potent and selective UGT2B4 inhibitor that can be used for reaction phenotyping was sought. Initially, a canagliflozin-2'-O-glucuronyl transferase activity assay was developed in recombinant UGT2B4 and human liver microsomes (HLM) [+/-2% bovine serum albumin (BSA)]. Canagliflozin-2'-O-glucuronidation (C2OG) substrate concentration at half-maximal velocity value in recombinant UGT2B4 and HLM were similar. C2OG formation intrinsic clearance was five- to seven-fold higher in incubations containing 2% BSA, suggesting UGT2B4 susceptibility to the inhibitory unsaturated long-chain fatty acids released during the incubation. Monitoring for C2OG formation, 180 compounds were evaluated for UGT2B4 inhibition potency in the presence and absence of 2% BSA. Compounds that exhibited an apparent UGT2B4 IC(50) of < 1 muM in HLM with 2% BSA were evaluated for inhibition of UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A9, UGT2B7, UGT2B10, UGT2B15, and UGT2B17 catalytic activities to establish selectivity suitable for supporting UGT reaction phenotyping. In this study, clotrimazole was identified as a potent UGT2B4 inhibitor (HLM apparent IC(50) of 11 to 35 nM +/- 2% BSA). Moreover, clotrimazole exhibited selectivity for UGT2B4 inhibition (>24-fold) over the other UGT enzymes evaluated. Additionally, during this study it was discovered that the previously described UGT2B7 inhibitors 16alpha- and 16beta-phenyllongifolol also inhibit UGT2B4. Clotrimazole, a potent and selective UGT2B4 inhibitor, will prove essential during UGT reaction phenotyping. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: To mechanistically evaluate drug interactions, it is essential to understand the contribution of individual enzymes to the metabolic clearance of a drug. The present study describes the development of a UGT2B4 activity assay that enabled the discovery of the highly selective and potent UGT2B4 inhibitor clotrimazole. Clotrimazole can be used in UGT reaction phenotyping studies to estimate fractional contribution of UGT2B4.
As glucuronidation is a major process for the metabolism and removal of lipophilic chemicals, polymorphic variations in genes encoding the enzymes involved in this process, the UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT), may have a significant impact on our capacity to detoxify and eliminate drugs and toxins. Although 24 human UGT genes have been identified to date, only polymorphisms in five UGTs, viz. UGT1A1, UGT1A6, UGT2B4, UGT2B7 and UGT2B15 have been described. Polymorphisms in UGT1A1, the major bilirubin-glucuronidating form, often result in a decreased capacity to glucuronidate bilirubin, such as observed in Gilbert Syndrome and some forms of perinatal jaundice. The frequencies of individual UGT1A1 polymorphisms show extensive variability across ethnic groups. Two variants of UGT1A6 and UGT2B4 and one variant of UGT2B7 and UGT2B15 have been identified. However, the clinical significance of these variants is unclear. More UGT polymorphisms will undoubtedly be discovered when the human genome is sequenced. However, unless the UGT in question is responsible for the exclusive metabolism of a particular drug or chemical (e.g. UGT1A1 and bilirubin) or is the predominant or only UGT present in the cell, it is unlikely that these polymorphisms will be of major clinical significance.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: UGT2B4 is a member of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) superfamily, a major detoxifying system in humans. UGT2B4 is involved in bile acids metabolism and highly expressed in liver and extrahepatic tissues. The aim of this study was to uncover new molecular mechanisms underlying interindividual variability in the UGT2B4 pathway. METHODS: We carried out a comprehensive scan for additional exons at this locus and discovered multiple alternative splicing events. We then assessed the expression profile of alternatively spliced transcripts in human tissues and the activity of the corresponding overexpressed proteins toward bile acids. RESULTS: We discovered three previously unidentified UGT2B4 exons, increasing the total known gene length to 46 kb. Molecular analyses revealed at least eight distinct mRNAs produced by (i) alternative promoter usage, (ii) complete and partial exon skipping, and (iii) use of alternative 3' splice sites. These splice variants were predominantly expressed in liver, gastrointestinal tract, and other extrahepatic tissues. Quantitative analyses of splicing events further sustain their prevalence in the liver. UGT2B4 proteins produced from these mRNA variants had undetectable transferase activity in human cells. However, when stably co-expressed with the active UGT2B4 isoform 1, three newly identified UGT2B4 isoforms (i2, i3, and i5) were found to negatively regulate glucuronidation. CONCLUSION: In addition to heritable genetic mutations and control of gene expression, the newly discovered diversity of UGT2B4 mRNAs may introduce variability in this glucuronidation pathway.
Phthalate monoesters are important metabolites of phthalate esters (PAEs) which have been extensively utilized in industry. This study aims to investigate the inhibition of phthalate monoesters on the activity of various isoforms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), trying to elucidate the toxicity mechanism of environmental endocrine disruptors from the new perspectives. In vitro recombinant UGTs-catalyzed glucuronidation of 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU) was employed to evaluate 8 kinds of phthalate monoesters on 11 sorts of main human UGT isoforms. 100 muM phthalate monoesters exhibited negligible inhibition towards the activity of UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A6, UGT1A8, UGT1A10, UGT2B4, UGT2B7, UGT2B15 and UGT2B17. The activity of UGT1A7 was strongly inhibited by monoethylhexyl phthalate (MEHP), but slightly inhibited by all the other phthalate monoesters. UGT1A9 was broadly inhibited by monobenzyl phthalate (MBZP), monocyclohexyl phthalate (MCHP), MEHP, monohexyl phthalate (MHP) and monooctyl phthalate (MOP), respectively. MEHP exhibited competitive inhibition towards UGT1A7, and MBZP, MCHP, MEHP, MHP and MOP showed competitive inhibition towards UGT1A9. The inhibition kinetic parameters (K(i)) were calculated to be 11.25 muM for MEHP-UGT1A7, and 2.13, 0.09, 1.17, 7.47, 0.16 muM for MBZP-UGT1A9, MCHP-UGT1A9, MEHP-UGT1A9, MHP-UGT1A9, MOP-UGT1A9, respectively. Molecular docking indicated that both hydrogen bonds formation and hydrophobic interactions significantly contributed to the interaction between phthalate monoesters and UGT isoforms. All these information will be beneficial for understanding the adverse effects of PAEs.
