UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2A3; UDP-glucuronosyltransferases catalyze phase II biotransformation reactions in which lipophilic substrates are conjugated with glucuronic acid to increase water solubility and enhance excretion. They are of major importance in the conjugation and subsequent elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds (By similarity).
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Patients with ulcerative colitis [UC] with long disease duration have a higher risk of developing colitis-associated cancer [CAC] compared with patients with short-duration UC. The aim of this study was to identify transcriptomic differences associated with the duration of UC disease. METHODS: We conducted transcriptome profiling on 32 colonic biopsies [11 long-duration UC, >/=20 years; and 21 short-duration UC, </=5 years] using Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array 2.0. Differentially expressed genes [fold change > 1.5, p < 0.05] and alternative splicing events [splicing index > 1.5, p < 0.05] were determined using the Transcriptome Analysis Console. KOBAS 3.0 and DAVID 6.8 were used for KEGG and GO analysis. Selected genes from microarray analysis were validated using qPCR. RESULTS: There were 640 differentially expressed genes between both groups. The top ten upregulated genes were HMGCS2, UGT2A3 isoforms, B4GALNT2, MEP1B, GUCA2B, ADH1C, OTOP2, SLC9A3, and LYPD8; the top ten downregulated genes were PI3, DUOX2, VNN1, SLC6A14, GREM1, MMP1, CXCL1, TNIP3, TFF1, and LCN2. Among the 123 altered KEGG pathways, the most significant were metabolic pathways; fatty acid degradation; valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation; the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor signalling pathway; and bile secretion, which were previously linked with CAC. Analysis showed that 3560 genes exhibited differential alternative splicing between long- and short-duration UC. Among them, 374 were differentially expressed, underscoring the intrinsic relationship between altered gene expression and alternative splicing. CONCLUSIONS: Long-duration UC patients have altered gene expressions, pathways, and alternative splicing events as compared with short-duration UC patients, and these could be further validated to improve our understanding of the pathogenesis of CAC.
BACKGROUND: Chromosomal heterogeneity leads to the abnormal expression and mutation of tumor-specific genes. Drugs targeting oncogenes have been extensively developed. However, given the random mutation of tumor suppressor genes, the development of its targeted drugs is difficult. METHODS: Our early research revealed that artificial circular single-stranded DNA (CSSD) can restore multiple tumor suppressor genes to inhibit tumor malignant progression by adsorbing miRNA. Here, we improved CSSD to a fully closed single-stranded DNA with G quadruplex DNA secondary structure (G4-CSSD), which made G4-CSSD with higher acquisition rate and decreased degradation. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Human Protein Atlas database were used to predict tumour suppressor genes in colon cancer. Cellular and animal experiments were performed to validate the role of G4-CSSD in cancer cell progression. RESULTS: In colon cancer, we observed the simultaneous low expressions of chloride channel accessory 1 (CLCA1), UDP-GlcNAc:betaGal beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 6 (B3GNT6) and UDP glucuronosyltransferase family 2 member A3 (UGT2A3), which indicated an favourable prognosis. After repressing miR-590-3p with G4-CSSD590, the upregulation of CLCA1, B3GNT6 and UGT2A3 inhibited the proliferation and metastasis of colon cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: This study may provide basis for new treatment methods for colon cancer by restoration of tumor suppressor genes.
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2A3 belongs to a UGT superfamily of phase II drug-metabolizing enzymes that catalyzes the glucuronidation of many endobiotics and xenobiotics. Previous studies have demonstrated that UGT2A3 is expressed in the human liver, small intestine, and kidney at the mRNA level; however, its protein expression has not been determined. Evaluation of the protein expression of UGT2A3 would be useful to determine its role at the tissue level. In this study, we prepared a specific antibody against human UGT2A3 and evaluated the relative expression of UGT2A3 in the human liver, small intestine, and kidney. Western blot analysis indicated that this antibody is specific to UGT2A3 because it did not cross-react with other human UGT isoforms or rodent UGTs. UGT2A3 expression in the human small intestine was higher than that in the liver and kidney. Via treatment with endoglycosidase, it was clearly demonstrated that UGT2A3 was N-glycosylated. UGT2A3 protein levels were significantly correlated with UGT2A3 mRNA levels in a panel of 28 human liver samples (r = 0.64, p < 0.001). In conclusion, we successfully prepared a specific antibody against UGT2A3. This antibody would be useful to evaluate the physiological, pharmacological, and toxicological roles of UGT2A3 in human tissues.
OBJECTIVES: Characterize the expression and glucuronidation activities of the human uridine 5'-diphospho (UDP)-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2A2. METHOD: UGT2A1 was cloned from nasal mucosa mRNA. Synthetic cDNA for UGT2A2 was constructed assuming exon sharing between UGT2A1 and UGT2A2 (Mackenzie et al., Pharmacogenetics and Genomics 2005, 15:677-685). Exon 1 of UGT2A2 was amplified from genomic DNA and combined with exons 2-6 of UGT2A1. UGT2A3 was cloned from liver mRNA. Quantitative reverse-transcribed-PCR (RT-PCR) was used to evaluate the expression of all the three UGTs of subfamily 2A in different tissues. Recombinant UGT2A1, UGT2A2 and UGT2A3 were expressed in baculovirus-infected insect cells and analyzed for glucuronidation activity towards different substrates. RESULTS: DNA sequencing of RT-PCR products from human nasal mucosa mRNA, confirmed exon sharing between UGT2A1 and UGT2A2. In addition, it indicated that the N-terminal signal peptide sequence of UGT2A2 is the longest among the human UGTs. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that both UGT2A1 and UGT2A2 are mainly expressed in the nasal mucosa, and that their expression level in fetal samples was much higher than in adults. Activity assays with recombinant UGTs 2A1-2A3 showed broad substrate selectivity for UGT2A1 and UGT2A2. Although glucuronidation rates and substrate affinities were mostly higher in UGT2A1, the Km values for UDP-glucuronic acid were similar in both UGTs. In addition, there were regioselectivity differences between the two UGTs and, with a few substrates, particularly ethinylestradiol, the activity of UGT2A2 was higher. CONCLUSION: UGT2A2 is mainly expressed in the nasal mucosa and it has glucuronidation activity towards several different endobiotic and xenobiotic substrates.
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase A1 (UGT2A1) is expressed in the lung and exhibits activity against polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), suggesting UGT2A1 involvement in the local metabolism of PAH tobacco carcinogens. The goal of the present study was to investigate the importance of two additional UGT2A enzymes, UGT2A2 and UGT2A3, in tobacco carcinogen metabolism. Real-time polymerase chain reaction suggested that wild-type UGT2A2 had the highest expression in the breast, followed by trachea > larynx > kidney. A novel splice variant of UGT2A2 lacking exon 3 (termed UGT2A2Deltaexon3) was investigated, with UGT2A2Deltaexon3 expression determined to be 25-50% that of wild-type UGT2A2 in all tissues examined. UGT2A3 was determined to be well expressed in the liver and colon, followed by pancreas > kidney > lung > tonsil > trachea > larynx. Cell homogenates prepared from human embryonic kidney (HEK)293 cells overexpressing wild-type UGT2A2 (termed UGT2A2_i1) exhibited glucuronidation activity, as observed by reverse-phase ultra-pressure liquid chromatography, against 1-hydroxy-(OH)-pyrene, 1-naphthol, and hydroxylated benzo(a)pyrene metabolites, whereas homogenates prepared from HEK293 cells overexpressing UGT2A3 only showed activity against simple PAHs like 1-OH-pyrene and 1-naphthol. Activity assays showed the UGT2A2Deltaexon3 protein (termed UGT2A2_i2) exhibited no detectable glucuronidation activity against all substrates examined; however, coexpression studies suggested that UGT2A2_i2 negatively modulates UGT2A2_i1 activity. Both UGT2A2 and UGT2A3 exhibited no detectable activity against complex PAH proximate carcinogens, tobacco-specific nitrosamines, or heterocyclic amines. These data suggest that, although UGT2A1 is the only UGT2A enzyme active against PAH proximate carcinogens (including PAH diols), both UGTs 2A1 and 2A2 play an important role in the local detoxification of procarcinogenic monohydroxylated PAH metabolites.
BACKGROUND: Bile acids (BAs) are closely related to the occurrence and development of colorectal cancer (CRC), but the specific mechanism is still unclear. AIMS: To identify potential targets related to BAs in CRC and analyze the correlation with immunity. METHODS: The expression of BAs and CRC-related genes in TCGA was studied and screened using KEGG. GSE71187 was used for external validation of differentially expressed genes. Immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, and enzymatic cycling assays were used to detect the expression levels of the differentially expressed genes ki67 and BAs. Weighted gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) was used to identify genes associated with differential gene expression and immunity. The Cibersort algorithm was used to detect the infiltration of 22 kinds of immune cells in cancer tissues. The PPI network and ceRNA network were constructed to reveal the possible molecular mechanisms behind tumorigenesis. RESULTS: The BA-related gene UGT2A3 is positively correlated with good prognoses in CRC. The expression level of UGT2A3 was negatively related to the BA level and positively related to the Ki67 proliferation index. The expression level of UGT2A3 was higher in the moderately differentiation and advanced stage (stage IV) of CRC. In addition, the expression level of UGT2A3 is correlated with CD8+ T cells. A PPI network related to UGT2A3 and T-cell immune-related genes was constructed. A ceRNA network containing 32 miRNA‒mRNA and 40 miRNA‒lncRNA regulatory pairs was constructed. CONCLUSION: UGT2A3 is a potential molecular target of bile acids in the regulation of CRC and is related to T-cell immunity.
Quercetin has been widely found to exhibit anticancer activity with low toxicity and prevalence in foods. Quercetin has been reported to inhibit digestive system cancers including pancreatic cancer (PAAD) and colon cancer (COAD), but rectal cancer (READ) has not been reported. The reported mechanisms and targets are divergent. In this study, new targets and mechanisms were predicted for the influence of quercetin on PAAD, COAD, and READ using bioinformatics methods. The results showed that quercetin may target CD36 and reduce the death rate caused by PAAD by enhancing the cell adhesion, mediating the uptake of fatty acids (FAs), regulating thrombospondin-1, and stimulating the immune response. Quercetin may lower the death rate from READ by targeting SLCO1B1 and producing enhanced effects from use of this compound, inhibiting cell growth, and inducing apoptosis in tumor cells. ACADS, ALDH3B2, UGT2A3, AMH, CDKN2A, FOSL1, CD36, CFL2, CYP3A4, and MAF were identified as targets for quercetin to reduce the death rate caused by COAD. Glutathione metabolism was mainly involved in the effect of quercetin on COAD, including the enhancement of the oxidation of fatty acids, the metabolism of anticancer medications, and the stiffness of cells, and the reduction of chemical carcinogenesis, the level of anti-Mullerian hormone, the proliferation of cancer cells and transcriptional misregulation, and mediation of the activity of glutathione transferases. The combined analyses of three databases can be referred to and used to seek medications and targets that can be applied to other diseases.
The UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) and sulfotransferases (SULTs) represent major phase II drug-metabolizing enzymes that are also responsible for maintaining cellular homeostasis by metabolism of several endogenous molecules. Perturbations in the expression or function of these enzymes can lead to metabolic disorders and improper management of xenobiotics and endobiotics. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) represents a spectrum of liver damage ranging from steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and cirrhosis. Because the liver plays a central role in the metabolism of xenobiotics, the purpose of the current study was to determine the effect of human NAFLD progression on the expression and function of UGTs and SULTs in normal, steatosis, NASH (fatty), and NASH (not fatty/cirrhosis) samples. We identified upregulation of UGT1A9, 2B10, and 3A1 and SULT1C4 mRNA in both stages of NASH, whereas UGT2A3, 2B15, and 2B28 and SULT1A1, 2B1, and 4A1 as well as 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate synthase 1 were increased in NASH (not fatty/cirrhosis) only. UGT1A9 and 1A6 and SULT1A1 and 2A1 protein levels were decreased in NASH; however, SULT1C4 was increased. Measurement of the glucuronidation and sulfonation of acetaminophen (APAP) revealed no alterations in glucuronidation; however, SULT activity was increased in steatosis compared with normal samples, but then decreased in NASH compared with steatosis. In conclusion, the expression of specific UGT and SULT isoforms appears to be differentially regulated, whereas sulfonation of APAP is disrupted during progression of NAFLD.
The uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) catalyze conjugation reactions between various substrates and glucuronic acid, UDPGA (uridine diphosphate glucuronic acid), within the endoplasmic reticulum. Conjugation with UDPGA (glucuronidation) is an important pathway in the elimination, detoxification, and activation of compounds including steroid hormones, xenobiotics, and quaternary ammonium substrates. The guinea pig, which has a placental structure and a glucuronidation profile for morphine that are similar to the human, serves as a good small animal model to study the ontogeny of UGTs and the effect of in utero exposure to morphine on UGTs. We examined type 2 UGTs expressed in the guinea pig using amplification and cloning of partial cDNAs from liver RNA. Sequence analysis revealed a novel UGT2 (subsequently named UGT2A3),(2) that has a 64% amino acid sequence similarity to a known UGT2.(3) Full-length cDNAs were isolated from a guinea pig liver cDNA library. Tissue distribution of UGT2A3 using Northern blot analysis showed expression of three distinct size UGT2A3 mRNAs with unique expression in liver and small intestine. UGT2A3 mRNA is expressed at high levels in liver and lower levels in kidney and small intestine. In utero exposure to chronic intermittent morphine resulted in the up regulation of mRNA in 7-day-old female pups' liver and kidney as determined by quantitative RT-PCR analysis. The conjugation profile for UGT2A3 using stable expression in CHO cells and thin-layer chromatography demonstrated active conjugation of phenolic substrates. Regulation of UGTs by in utero morphine exposure may play an important role in fetal development.
Several novel UDP glycosyltransferase (UGT) genes, mainly UDP glucuronosyltransferases, have been identified in the human, mouse and rat genomes and in other mammalian species. This review provides an update of the UGT nomenclature to include these new genes and prevent the confusion that arises when the same gene is given different names. The new genes are named following previously established recommendations, taking into consideration evolutionary relatedness and the names already in general usage in the literature. The mammalian UGT gene superfamily currently has 117 members that can be divided into four families, UGT1, UGT2, UGT3 and UGT8. The 5-exon genes of the UGT1 family each contain a unique first exon, plus four exons that are shared between the genes; the exons 1 appear to have evolved by a process of duplication, leading to the synthesis of proteins with identical carboxyl-terminal and variable amino-terminal domains. Exon-sharing is also seen with the 6-exon UGT2A1 and UGT2A2 genes. However, UGT2A3 and those of the UGT2B (six exons), UGT3 (seven exons) and UGT8 gene families (five or six exons) do not share exons and most likely were derived by a process of duplication of all exons in the gene. Most UGT1 and UGT8 enzymes have been characterized in detail; however, the catalytic functions of the UGT3A enzymes and several UGT2 enzymes remain to be characterized.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer worldwide and liver metastases are the leading cause of death in patients with CRC. In this study, we performed next-generation sequencing profiling on primary colorectal tumor tissues obtained from three CRC patients with liver metastases and three CRC patients without liver metastases to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that might be responsible for the metastases process. After filtering 2690 DEGs, comprising 996 upregulated and 1694 downregulated RNAs, 22 upregulated and 73 downregulated DEGs were identified. Gene ontology (GO) and pathway analyses were performed to determine the underlying mechanisms. Single-organism process (biological process), cell (cellular component), and binding (molecular function) were the most related terms in the GO analysis. We selected the top 13 upregulated and top 12 downregulated genes by fold change to verify their differential expression using quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC). The validation showed that three most significantly upregulated DEGs were HOXD10, UGT2A3, and SLC13A2, whereas the five most significantly downregulated DEGs were SPP1, CXCL8, MMP3, OSM, and CXCL6, respectively. These aberrantly expressed genes may play pivotal roles in promoting or inhibiting metastases. Further studies are required to determine the functions of DEGs to promote the diagnosis of metastases and provide novel chemotherapy targets.
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are critical to the detoxification of numerous drugs, environmental pollutants, and endogenous molecules. However, as yet not all of the human UGTs have been cloned and characterized. cDNA clones from the UGT2A3 gene (located on chromosome 4q13) were isolated using pooled human liver RNA. Approximately 10% of clones contained a c.1489A>G nucleotide substitution, yielding proteins with a residue 497 alanine (UGT2A3.2) instead of a threonine (UGT2A3.1). The allele frequency of this polymorphism (rs13128286) was 0.13 in a European-American population as determined by direct DNA sequencing. Of 81 structurally diverse glucuronidation substrates tested, UGT2A3 expressed by a baculovirus system selectively glucuronidated bile acids, particularly hyodeoxycholic acid at the 6-hydroxy position. Apparent K(m) values of UGT2A3.1 and UGT2A3.2 for hyodeoxycholic acid 6-glucuronidation were 69 +/- 7 and 44 +/- 12 microM, respectively. Of 29 different extrahepatic tissues evaluated by real-time polymerase chain reaction, UGT2A3 mRNA was most highly expressed in small intestine (160% of liver), colon (78% of liver), and adipose tissue (91% of liver). An in silico scan of the proximal UGT2A3 promoter/5'-regulatory region identified transcription factor consensus elements consistent with tissue-selective expression in liver (HNF1) and intestine (CXD2), as well as induction by rifampicin (pregnane X receptor). In LS180 human intestinal cells, rifampicin increased UGT2A3 mRNA by more than 4.5-fold compared with vehicle, whereas levels were not significantly affected by the arylhydrocarbon receptor ligand beta-naphthoflavone. This is the first report establishing UGT2A3 as a functional enzyme, and it represents significant progress toward the goal of having a complete set of recombinant human UGTs for comparative functional analyses.
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are classified into three subfamilies in mice: Ugt1a, 2b, and 2a. In the Ugt1a subfamily, Ugt1a1 and 1a6 appear to correspond to human UGT1A1 and 1A6 The mouse is an important animal for its use in investigations, but the substrate specificities of Ugt isoforms belonging to the 2b subfamily in mice remain largely unknown. To address this issue, we characterized the substrate specificity of all isoforms of the Ugt2b subfamily expressed in the mouse liver. The cDNAs of Ugt1a1, Ugt2a3, and all the Ugt2b isoforms expressed in the liver were reverse-transcribed from the total RNA of male FVB-mouse livers and then amplified. A baculovirus-Sf9 cell system for expressing each Ugt was established. Of all the Ugts examined, Ugt2b34, 2b36, and 2b37 exhibited the ability to glucuronidate morphine with Ugt2b36, the most active in this regard. Ugt1a1, but also Ugt2b34, 2b36, and 2b37 to a lesser extent, preferentially catalyzed the glucuronidation of 17beta-estradiol on the 3-hydroxyl group (E3G). With these isoforms, E3G formation by Ugt1a1 was efficient; however, Ugt2b5 exhibited a preference for the 17beta-hydroxyl group (E17G). Ugt2b1 and Ugt2a3 formed comparable levels of E3G and E17G. Ugt2b1 and 2b5 were the only isoforms involved in chloramphenicol glucuronidation. As Ugt2b36 is highly expressed in the liver, it is most likely that Ugt2b36 is a major morphine Ugt in mouse liver. Regarding E3G formation, Ugt1a1, like the human homolog, seems to play an important role in the liver.
BACKGROUND: Drug metabolism genes are involved in the in vivo metabolic processing of drugs. In previous research, we found that a high-fat diet affected the transcript levels of mouse hepatic genes responsible for drug metabolism. AIMS: Our research intends to discover the drug metabolism genes that are dysregulated at the transcriptome level in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). METHODS: We analyzed the transcriptome for drug metabolism genes of 35 human liver tissues obtained during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Additionally, we imported transcriptome data from mice fed a high-fat diet in previous research and two open-access Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets (GSE63067 and GSE89632). Then, using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), we cross-linked the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in clinical and animal samples and validated the common genes. RESULTS: In this study, we identified 35 DEGs, of which 33 were up-regulated and two were down-regulated. Moreover, we found 71 DEGs (39 up- and 32 down-regulated), 276 DEGs (157 up- and 119 down-regulated), and 158 DEGs (117 up- and 41 down-regulated) in the GSE63067, GSE89632, and high-fat diet mice, respectively. Of the 35 DEGs, nine co-regulated DEGs were found in the Venn diagram (CYP20A1, CYP2U1, SLC9A6, SLC26A6, SLC31A1, SLC46A1, SLC46A3, SULT1B1, and UGT2A3). CONCLUSION: Nine significant drug metabolism genes were identified in NAFLD. Future research should investigate the impacts of these genes on drug dose adjustment in patients with NAFLD. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: http://www.chictr.org.cn, identifier ChiCTR2100041714.
BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in microRNA-related genes have been associated with epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) risk in two reports, yet associated alleles may be inconsistent across studies. METHODS: We conducted a pooled analysis of previously identified SNPs by combining genotype data from 3,973 invasive EOC cases and 3,276 controls from the Ovarian Cancer Association Consortium. We also conducted imputation to obtain dense coverage of genes and comparable genotype data for all studies. In total, 226 SNPs within 15 kb of 4 miRNA biogenesis genes (DDX20, DROSHA, GEMIN4, and XPO5) and 23 SNPs located within putative miRNA binding sites of 6 genes (CAV1, COL18A1, E2F2, IL1R1, KRAS, and UGT2A3) were genotyped or imputed and analyzed in the entire dataset. RESULTS: After adjustment for European ancestry, no overall association was observed between any of the analyzed SNPs and EOC risk. CONCLUSIONS: Common variants in these evaluated genes do not seem to be strongly associated with EOC risk. IMPACT: This analysis suggests earlier associations between EOC risk and SNPs in these genes may have been chance findings, possibly confounded by population admixture. To more adequately evaluate the relationship between genetic variants and cancer risk, large sample sizes are needed, adjustment for population stratification should be carried out, and use of imputed SNP data should be considered.
BACKGROUND: Concanavalin A (ConA)-induced liver damage of mice is a well-established murine model mimicking the human autoimmune hepatitis (AIH). However, the pathogenic genes of the liver injury remain to be revealed. METHODS: Using time-series liver transcriptome, top dynamic genes were inferred from a set of segmented regression models, and cross-checked by weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA). AIH murine models created by ConA were used to verify the in vivo effect of these genes. RESULTS: We identified 115 top dynamic genes, of which most were overlapped with the hub genes determined by WGCNA. The expression of several top dynamic genes including Cd63, Saa3, Slc10a1, Nrxn1, Ugt2a3, were verified in vivo. Further, Cluster determinant 63 (Cd63) knockdown in mice treated with ConA showed significantly less liver pathology and inflammation as well as higher survival rates than the corresponding controls. CONCLUSION: We have identified the top dynamic genes related to the process of acute liver injury, and highlighted a targeted strategy for Cd63 might have utility for the protection of hepatocellular damage.
Bile acids (BA) are essential modulators of lipid, glucose, and cholesterol homeostasis, but they exert cytotoxic effects in the cholestatic liver. Glucuronidation, catalyzed by the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes is a pharmacologically relevant BA detoxification process. The present study characterized the BA-conjugating activity of the little-studied human UGTs of subfamily 2A: UGT2A1, 2A2, and 2A3. Recombinant UGT2As, expressed in baculovirus-infected insect cells, were assayed for the glucuronidation of six major bile acids: chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), cholic acid (CA), lithocholic acid (LCA), deoxycholic acid (DCA), hyocholic acid (HCA) and hyodeoxycholic acid (HDCA). UGT2A3 exhibited detectable but very low activity with all the tested BA substrates. UGT2A1 was highly efficient in forming LCA-3 and LCA-24G, CDCA-24, DCA-24, HCA-24, and HDCA-24G, whereas UGT2A2 was the most active enzyme for CA-24G and CDCA-24G formation and also was able to generate HDCA-6G, HDCA-24G, LCA-24G, and HCA-24G. The Km values of UGT2A1 varied between 102.2 +/- 14.3 microM and 2.4 +/- 1.2 mM. With the exception of CA-24G, a low affinity substrate for UGT2A2, all the Km values for UGT2A2 were in the 100 to 400 microM range. We demonstrate the high reactivity of the human UGT2A1 and UGT2A2 for bile acid glucuronidation. The physiologic importance of these reactions to BA disposition remains, however, to be clarified in vivo.
