Urotensin-2B; Potent vasoconstrictor; Belongs to the urotensin-2 family.
Urotensin II receptor (UTS2R) is suggested to mediate the actions of urotensin II (UTS2) and UTS2-related peptide (URP, also called UTS2B) in mammals. However, the information regarding the gene structure, functionality and tissue expression of UTS2/URP receptor remains largely unknown in non-mammalian vertebrates including birds. In this study, using RACE-PCR, we cloned the full-length cDNAs of four chicken UTS2/URP receptors and designated them as cUTS2R1, cUTS2R2, cUTS2R3 and cUTS2R5 respectively, according to their evolutionary origin. The cloned cUTS2R1, cUTS2R2, cUTS2R3 and cUTS2R5 are predicted to encode 7-transmembrane receptors of 382, 343, 331 and 363 amino acids respectively, which show 50-66 % amino acid sequence identity with human UTS2R. Using cell-based luciferase reporter assays and Western blot, we demonstrated that chicken UTS2Rs expressed in HEK293 cells could be effectively activated by synthetic chicken UTS2-12, UTS2-17 and URP peptides, and their activation can elevate intracellular calcium concentration and activate MAPK/ERK signaling cascade, indicating that the four UTS2Rs are functional and capable of mediating UTS2/URP actions in chickens. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that the four receptors are widely, but differentially, expressed in adult chicken tissues, while cUTS2 and cURP are highly expressed in the hindbrain and spinal cord, and moderately/weakly expressed in other tissues examined including the spleen and gonads. Taken together, our data provide first piece of evidence that all four UTS2Rs are functional in an avian species and help to reveal the conserved roles of UTS2R signaling across vertebrates.
Songbirds communicate through learned vocalizations, using a forebrain circuit with convergent similarity to vocal-control circuitry in humans. This circuit is incomplete in female zebra finches, hence only males sing. We show that the UTS2B gene, encoding Urotensin-Related Peptide (URP), is uniquely expressed in a key pre-motor vocal nucleus (HVC), and specifically marks the neurons that form a male-specific projection that encodes timing features of learned song. UTS2B-expressing cells appear early in males, prior to projection formation, but are not observed in the female nucleus. We find no expression evidence for canonical receptors within the vocal circuit, suggesting either signalling to other brain regions via diffusion or transduction through other receptor systems. Urotensins have not previously been implicated in vocal control, but we find an annotation in Allen Human Brain Atlas of increased UTS2B expression within portions of human inferior frontal cortex implicated in human speech and singing. Thus UTS2B (URP) is a novel neural marker that may have conserved functions for vocal communication.
Prolonged social isolation has negative effects on brain and behavior in humans and other social organisms, but neural mechanisms leading to these effects are not understood. Here we tested the hypothesis that even brief periods of social isolation can alter gene expression and DNA methylation in higher cognitive centers of the brain, focusing on the auditory/associative forebrain of the highly social zebra finch. Using RNA sequencing, we first identified genes that individually increase or decrease expression after isolation and observed general repression of gene sets annotated for neurotrophin pathways and axonal guidance functions. We then pursued 4 genes of large effect size: EGR1 and BDNF (decreased by isolation) and FKBP5 and UTS2B (increased). By in situ hybridization, each gene responded in different cell subsets, arguing against a single cellular mechanism. To test whether effects were specific to the social component of the isolation experience, we compared gene expression in birds isolated either alone or with a single familiar partner. Partner inclusion ameliorated the effect of solo isolation on EGR1 and BDNF, but not on FKBP5 and UTS2B nor on circulating corticosterone. By bisulfite sequencing analysis of auditory forebrain DNA, isolation caused changes in methylation of a subset of differentially expressed genes, including BDNF. Thus, social isolation has rapid consequences on gene activity in a higher integrative center of the brain, triggering epigenetic mechanisms that may influence processing of ongoing experience.
Urotensin-II (U-II) and urotensin-II-related peptide (URP) have been identified as the endogenous ligands of the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR14 now renamed UT. The occurrence of U-II and URP in the central nervous system, and the widespread distribution of UT in the brain suggest that U-II and URP may play various behavioral activities. Studies conducted in rodents have shown that central administration of U-II stimulates locomotion, provokes anxiety- and depressive-like states, enhances feeding activity and increases the duration of paradoxical sleep episodes. These observations indicate that, besides the endocrine/paracrine activities of U-II and URP on cardiovascular and kidney functions, these peptides may act as neurotransmitters and/or neuromodulators to regulate various neurobiological activities.
Urotensin II (UII) is a cyclic neuropeptide that was first isolated from the urophysis of teleost fish on the basis of its ability to contract the hindgut. Subsequently, UII was characterized in tetrapods including humans. Phylogenetic studies and synteny analysis indicate that UII and its paralogous peptide urotensin II-related peptide (URP) belong to the somatostatin/cortistatin superfamily. In mammals, the UII and URP genes are primarily expressed in cholinergic neurons of the brainstem and spinal cord. UII and URP mRNAs are also present in various organs notably in the cardiovascular, renal, and endocrine systems. UII and URP activate a common G protein-coupled receptor, called UT, that exhibits relatively high sequence identity with somatostatin, opioid, and galanin receptors. The UT gene is widely expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) and in peripheral tissues including the retina, heart, vascular bed, lung, kidney, adrenal medulla, and skeletal muscle. Structure-activity relationship studies and NMR conformational analysis have led to the rational design of a number of peptidic and nonpeptidic UT agonists and antagonists. Consistent with the wide distribution of UT, UII has now been shown to exert a large array of biologic activities, in particular in the CNS, the cardiovascular system, and the kidney. Here, we review the current knowledge concerning the pleiotropic actions of UII and discusses the possible use of antagonists for future therapeutic applications.
Over the last decade, the urotensinergic system, composed of one G protein-coupled receptor and two endogenous ligands, has garnered significant attention as a promising new target for the treatment of various cardiovascular diseases. Indeed, this system is associated with various biomarkers of cardiovascular dysfunctions and is involved in changes in cardiac contractility, fibrosis, and hypertrophy contributing, like the angiotensinergic system, to the pathogenesis and progression of heart failure. Significant investment has been made toward the development of clinically relevant UT ligands for therapeutic intervention, but with little or no success to date. This system therefore remains to be therapeutically exploited. Pepducins and other lipidated peptides have been used as both mechanistic probes and potential therapeutics; therefore, pepducins derived from the human urotensin II receptor might represent unique tools to generate signaling bias and study hUT signaling networks. Two hUT-derived pepducins, derived from the second and the third intracellular loop of the receptor (hUT-Pep2 and [Trp(1), Leu(2)]hUT-Pep3, respectively), were synthesized and pharmacologically characterized. Our results demonstrated that hUT-Pep2 and [Trp(1), Leu(2)]hUT-Pep3 acted as biased ago-allosteric modulators, triggered ERK(1/2) phosphorylation and, to a lesser extent, IP(1) production, and stimulated cell proliferation yet were devoid of contractile activity. Interestingly, both hUT-derived pepducins were able to modulate human urotensin II (hUII)- and urotensin II-related peptide (URP)-mediated contraction albeit to different extents. These new derivatives represent unique tools to reveal the intricacies of hUT signaling and also a novel avenue for the design of allosteric ligands selectively targeting hUT signaling potentially.
Urotensin II (UII) and its paralog peptide, urotensin II-related peptide (URP), exert not only common but also divergent actions through the activation of UT, a specific membrane-bound receptor that belongs to the 1A G protein-coupled receptor subclass. In this study, we have designed and synthesized new URP analogues in which the intracyclic Trp residue was replaced with natural, unnatural, and constrained amino acids to determine important physicochemical features for receptor binding and activation. The biological data, highlighting the potent agonistic behavior of [Tiq(4)]URP and [Tpi(4)]URP, also suggest that the Trp residue, and more specifically the indole ring, is not critical for receptor interaction and could in fact be involved in the intramolecular stabilization of the bioactive conformation of URP. Finally, these analogues, which are intracyclic constrained URP-based agonists, could represent useful pharmacological tools for the study of the urotensinergic system.
In accordance with their common but also divergent physiological actions, human urotensin II (1) and urotensin II-related peptide (2) could stabilize specific urotensin II receptor (UTR) conformations, thereby activating different signaling pathways, a feature referred to as biased agonism or functional selectivity. Sequential N-methylation of the amides in the conserved core sequence of 1, 2, and fragment U-II(4-11) (3) shed light on structural requirements involved in their functional selectivity. Thus, 18 N-methylated UTR ligands were synthesized and their biological profiles evaluated using in vitro competition binding assays, ex vivo rat aortic ring bioassays and BRET-based biosensor experiments. Biological activity diverged from that of the parent structures contingent on the location of amide methylation, indicating relevant hydrogen-bond interactions for the function of the endogenous peptides. Conformational analysis of selected N-methyl analogs indicated the importance of specific amide residues of 2 for the distinct pharmacology relative to 1 and 3.
OBJECTIVE: Cardiac hypertrophy is the heart's response to a variety of extrinsic and intrinsic stimuli, some of which might finally lead up to a maladaptive state. Clinical evidence, in vitro and in vivo studies have implicated urotensin II (U-II/UTS2) in the development of cardiac hypertrophy, contributing to the (patho)-physiological regulation of cardiovascular homeostasis in humans. Several genes are associated with left ventricular hypertrophy; considering these, our objective was to evaluate the possible role of UTS2 gene polymorphisms (Thr21Met and Ser89Asn) in the genetic susceptibility to cardiac hypertrophy in a Chinese population. METHODS: A case-control study was designed to compare the distribution of alleles and genotypes between three groups: case group 1 (subjects with hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy, n=265), case group 2 (subjects with hypertension, without cardiac hypertrophy, n=768), and the control group (subjects neither with hypertension nor with cardiac hypertrophy, n=416). The detection of UTS2 gene polymorphisms was achieved with the PCR restriction fragment length polymorphism technique. RESULTS: We did not identify statistically significant differences between the three groups, neither with regard to the frequency of genotype/variant at the Ser89Asn locus nor at the Thr21Met locus. When stratified by sex, differences in genotype distribution of polymorphism Ser89Asn were only seen in female subjects in both the additive tested inheritance model (OR=0.507, 95% CI 0.249 to 1.032, p=0.032) and the recessive tested inheritance model (OR=0.475, 95% CI 0.239 to 0.945, p=0.034) between case group 2 (subjects with hypertension, without cardiac hypertrophy) and the control group (subjects neither with hypertension nor with cardiac hypertrophy). When stratified by sex, for female subjects with cardiac hypertrophy, we identified statistically significant differences in left ventricular posterior wall thickness for variant genotypes at the Ser89Asn locus (AA vs GG: 1.2500 (1.2000, 1.3750) vs 1.2500 (1.2000, 1.3750), p=0.03) and (AG+AA vs GG: 1.2000 (1.2000, 1.3000) vs 1.2000 (1.1000, 1.2000), p=0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Ser89Asn (S89N) polymorphisms of the UTS2 gene were associated with hypertension in a Chinese female population. Additionally, we demonstrated that genotype Asn89Asn was associated with left ventricular posterior wall thickness for subjects with hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy in a Chinese female population.
The urotensin II receptor (UTR) has long been studied mainly for its involvement in the cardiovascular homeostasis both in health and disease state. Two endogenous ligands activate UTR, i.e. urotensin II (U-II) and urotensin II-related peptide (URP). Extensive expression of the two ligands uncovers the diversified pathophysiological effects mediated by the urotensinergic system such as cardiovascular disorders, smooth muscle cell proliferation, renal disease, diabetes, and tumour growth. As newly reported, U-II and URP have distinct effects on transcriptional activity, cell proliferation, and myocardial contractile activities supporting the idea that U-II and URP interact with UTR in a distinct manner (biased agonism). To shed light on the origin of the divergent activities of the two endogenous ligands, we performed a conformational study on URP by solution NMR in sodium dodecyl sulfate micelle solution and compared the obtained NMR structure of URP with that of hU-II previously determined. Finally, we undertook docking studies between URP, hU-II, and an UT receptor model.
AIMS: Internal mammary (IMA) and radial artery (RA) have different incidence of vasospasm and long-term patency rates in arterial grafting. We compared the vasoreactivity of human urotensin II (hU-II) and its receptor with mechanism investigations in IMA and RA. METHODS: IMA and RA taken from patients undergoing coronary bypass surgery were studied in organ baths. Urotensin receptor expression was determined by RT-PCR. RESULTS: hU-II contracted IMA with pD(2) of 8.57+/-0.41 and 45.4+/-9.1% E(max) of contraction to 100 mM KCl, whereas caused less contractile responses in RA (pD(2):8.30+/-0.79, E(max):20.4+/-4.8%, p<0.05). Nifedipine inhibited hU-II-contraction in IMA. In U(46619)-precontraction, hU-II elicited comparable relaxation in IMA (pD(2):8.39+/-0.43, E(max):56.1+/-4.0%) and RA (pD(2):9.03+/-0.46, E(max):65.2+/-7.1%). The relaxation was abolished by endothelium denudation and by indomethacin, oxadiazoloquinoxalinone or N(omega)-nitro-L-arginine, oxyhemoglobin, and Ca2+-activated K+ channel (K(Ca)) blockers. Urotensin receptor mRNA was detected in both arteries. CONCLUSIONS: hU-II is an important spasmogen in arterial grafts with receptors expressed in IMA and RA. hU-II elicits stronger contraction in IMA than in RA and a moderate endothelium-dependent relaxation attributable to nitric oxide, prostacyclin, and endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor with involvement of K(Ca) activation. The relaxant response of endothelium-intact IMA and RA to hU-II demonstrates the importance of preservation of endothelium in these grafts.
Urotensin II (UII) and UII-related peptide (URP) are vasoactive peptide hormones causing strong vasoconstriction or vasodilation, depending on the type of blood vessel. In humans, the active forms are resulting from proteolytic cleavage of their inactive precursor protein. In blood plasma, a defined protease converting the inactive UII and URP precursors into their active forms has not been identified yet. Using mass spectrometry-based enzyme screening for detecting UII- and URP-converting enzymes, the human plasma fraction Cohn IV-4 was chromatographed, and the resulting fractions were screened for UII- or URP-generating activity. Plasma kallikrein (PK) as a UII- and URP-generating protease was identified. URP generation was also found for the serine protease factor XIa, plasmin, thrombin, and, to a smaller extent, factor XIIa. It was demonstrated that in the Cohn IV-4 fraction, PK accounts for a significant amount of UII- and URP-generating activity.
Urotensin-II controls ion/water homeostasis in fish and vascular tone in rodents. We hypothesised that common genetic variants in urotensin-II pathway genes are associated with human blood pressure or renal function. We performed family-based analysis of association between blood pressure, glomerular filtration and genes of the urotensin-II pathway (urotensin-II, urotensin-II related peptide, urotensin-II receptor) saturated with 28 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms in 2024 individuals from 520 families; followed by an independent replication in 420 families and 7545 unrelated subjects. The expression studies of the urotensin-II pathway were carried out in 97 human kidneys. Phylogenetic evolutionary analysis was conducted in 17 vertebrate species. One single nucleotide polymorphism (rs531485 in urotensin-II gene) was associated with adjusted estimated glomerular filtration rate in the discovery cohort (p = 0.0005). It showed no association with estimated glomerular filtration rate in the combined replication resource of 8724 subjects from 6 populations. Expression of urotensin-II and its receptor showed strong linear correlation (r = 0.86, p<0.0001). There was no difference in renal expression of urotensin-II system between hypertensive and normotensive subjects. Evolutionary analysis revealed accumulation of mutations in urotensin-II since the divergence of primates and weaker conservation of urotensin-II receptor in primates than in lower vertebrates. Our data suggest that urotensin-II system genes are unlikely to play a major role in genetic control of human blood pressure or renal function. The signatures of evolutionary forces acting on urotensin-II system indicate that it may have evolved towards loss of function since the divergence of primates.
Benzotriazepin-2-ones were designed to mimic the suggested bioactive gamma-turn conformation of the Bip-Lys-Tyr tripeptide in Urocontrin ([Bip(4)]URP), which modulates the urotensin II receptor (UT) and differentiates the effects of the endogenous ligands urotensin II (UII) and urotensin II-related peptide (URP). Twenty-six benzotriazepin-2-ones were synthesized by acylation of anthranilate-derived amino ketones with an aza-glycine equivalent, chemoselective nitrogen functionalization, and ring closure. Several mimics exhibited selective modulatory effects on hUII- and URP-associated vasoconstriction in an ex vivo rat aortic ring bioassay. The C(5) p-hydroxyphenethenyl benzotriazepin-2-one 20g decreased hUII potency and efficacy without changing URP induced vasoconstriction. Its saturated phenethyl counterpart 23g decreased URP potency without influencing hUII-mediated contraction. To our knowledge, 20g and 23g represent the first achiral molecules that modulate selectively hUII and URP biological activities. Effectively synthesized, benzotriaepin-2-one turn mimics offer the potential to differentiate the respective roles, signaling pathways, and phenotypic outcomes of hUII and URP in the UT system.
Urotensin II (UII) has been reported as the most potent known vasoconstrictor. While rat and mouse orthologs of UII precursor protein have been reported, only the tentative structures of UII peptides of these animals have been demonstrated, since prepro-UII proteins lack typical processing sites for their mature peptides. In the present study, we isolated a novel peptide, UII-related peptide (URP), from the extract of the rat brain as the sole immunoreactive substance to anti-UII antibody; the amino acid sequence of the peptide was determined as ACFWKYCV. cDNAs encoding rat, mouse, and human precursor proteins for URP were cloned and revealed that the sequences of mouse and human URP peptides are the same as that for rat URP. Prepro-URP gene is expressed in several rat tissues such as those of the thymus, spleen, testis, and spinal cord, although with lower levels than the prepro-UII gene. In the human, the prepro-URP gene is expressed comparably to prepro-UII in several tissues except the spinal cord. URP was found to bind and activate the human or rat UII receptors (GPR14) and showed a hypotensive effect when administered to anesthetized rats. These results suggest that URP is the endogenous and functional ligand for UII receptor in the rat and mouse, and possibly in the human. We also describe the preparation of specific monoclonal antibodies raised against UII peptide and the establishment of a highly sensitive enzyme immunoassay system for UII peptides.
Urotensin II (UII) is an evolutionarily conserved neuropeptide initially isolated from teleost fish on the basis of its smooth muscle-contracting activity. Subsequent studies have demonstrated the occurrence of several UII-related peptides (URPs), such that the UII family is now known to include four paralogue genes called UII, URP, URP1 and URP2. These genes probably arose through the two rounds of whole genome duplication that occurred during early vertebrate evolution. URP has been identified both in tetrapods and teleosts. In contrast, URP1 and URP2 have only been observed in ray-finned and cartilaginous fishes, suggesting that both genes were lost in the tetrapod lineage. In the present study, the distribution of urp1 mRNA compared to urp2 mRNA is reported in the central nervous system of zebrafish. In the spinal cord, urp1 and urp2 mRNAs were mainly colocalized in the same cells. These cells were also shown to be GABAergic and express the gene encoding the polycystic kidney disease 2-like 1 (pkd2l1) channel, indicating that they likely correspond to cerebrospinal fluid-contacting neurons. In the hindbrain, urp1-expressing cells were found in the intermediate reticular formation and the glossopharyngeal-vagal motor nerve nuclei. We also showed that synthetic URP1 and URP2 were able to induce intracellular calcium mobilization in human UII receptor (hUT)-transfected CHO cells with similar potencies (pEC50=7.99 and 7.52, respectively) albeit at slightly lower potencies than human UII and mammalian URP (pEC50=9.44 and 8.61, respectively). The functional redundancy of URP1 and URP2 as well as the colocalization of their mRNAs in the spinal cord suggest the robustness of this peptidic system and its physiological importance in zebrafish.
Urotensin II (UII) and urotensin-related peptide (URP) are vasoactive neuropeptides with wide ranges of action in the normal mammalian lung, including the control of smooth muscle cell proliferation. UII and URP exert their actions by binding to the G-protein coupled receptor-14 known as UT. Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a disease of progressive lung destruction resulting from the excessive growth of abnormal smooth muscle-like cells that exhibit markers of neural crest origin. LAM cells also exhibit inactivation of the tumor suppressor tuberin (TSC2), excessive activity of 'mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), and dysregulated cell growth and proliferation. In the present study we examined the expression and distribution of UII and UT in the lungs of patients with LAM. There was abundant expression of UII, URP and UT proteins in the interstitial nodular lesions of patients with LAM. By immunohistochemistry, UII, URP and UT were co-localized with HMB45, a diagnostic marker of LAM. Immunoreactivity for UII, URP and UT was also evident over the pulmonary epithelium, pulmonary vasculature and inflammatory cells. Western blotting revealed the presence of greater UT expression in the lungs of patients with LAM compared to normal human lungs. UT expression correlated with mTOR activity, as indicated by increased phosphorylation of S6 in LAM samples. These findings demonstrate for the first time the presence of UII, URP and their receptor in the lesions of patients with LAM, and suggest a possible role in the pathogenesis of the disease.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Recent evidence suggested that urotensin II (UII) and its paralog peptide UII-related peptide (URP) might exert common but also divergent physiological actions. Unfortunately, none of the existing antagonists were designed to discriminate specific UII- or URP-associated actions, and our understanding, on how these two endogenous peptides can trigger different, but also common responses, is limited. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Ex vivo rat and monkey aortic ring contraction as well as dissociation kinetics studies using transfected CHO cells expressing the human urotensin (UT) receptors were used in this study. KEY RESULTS: Ex vivo rat and monkey aortic ring contraction studies revealed the propensity of [Pep(4)]URP to decrease the maximal response of human UII (hUII) without any significant change in potency, whereas no effect was noticeable on the URP-induced vasoconstriction. Dissociation experiments demonstrated the ability of [Pep(4)]URP to increase the dissociation rate of hUII, but not URP. Surprisingly, URP, an equipotent UII paralog, was also able to accelerate the dissociation rate of membrane-bound (125)I-hUII, whereas hUII had no noticeable effect on URP dissociation kinetics. Further experiments suggested that an interaction between the glutamic residue at position 1 of hUII and the UT receptor seems to be critical to induce conformational changes associated with agonistic activation. Finally, we demonstrated that the N-terminal domain of the rat UII isoform was able to act as a specific antagonist of the URP-associated actions. CONCLUSION: Such compounds, that is [Pep(4)]URP and rUII(1-7), should prove to be useful as new pharmacological tools to decipher the specific role of UII and URP in vitro but also in vivo.
Urotensin II (UII) and urotensin II-related peptide (URP) are functionally selective, suggesting that these two hormones might play distinct physiological role through different interactions with their cognate receptor UT. Hypothesizing that the Phe(3) residue of URP, which is also present in UII, is a key-element of its specific UT activation, we evaluated the impact of its replacement by non-natural amino acids in URP. Each compound was evaluated for its ability to bind UT, induce rat aortic ring contraction, and activate G(q), G(12), and beta-arrestin 1 signaling pathways. Such modifications impaired contractile efficacy, reflected by a reduced aptitude to activate G(12) in URP but not in the truncated but equipotent UII(4-11). Moreover, we have identified two structurally different UT modulators: [d-Phe(pI)(3)]URP and [Bip(3)]URP, which exert a probe-dependent action against UII and URP. These compounds should help us understand the specific roles of these hormones as well as guide further therapeutic development.
Urotensin II (UTN) is a cyclic eleven amino acid peptide that can induce endothelial independent vasoconstriction and endothelial dependent vasodilatation in human vasculature. The cyclic part of the peptide is composed of six amino acids. Similarly, Urotensin Related Peptide (URP) is only eight amino acids long but shares the identical ring structure to UTN. Plasma UTN has been shown to be raised in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) suggesting a potential role of the peptide system in the pathophysiology of heart failure. Given their similar structures, techniques measuring plasma UTN may also be simultaneously detecting URP and could provide a misrepresentation of true UTN and URP levels in patients' plasma. Thus we describe the development of a solid phase extraction technique that can differentially extract UTN and URP from human plasma so that they can be assayed separately using non-radioactive immunoluminometric assays. This reliable and sensitive protocol was utilized to characterise the plasma of 20 healthy controls and 20 patients admitted with acute heart failure (AHF). The groups were age and sex matched. Plasma UTN was significantly raised in patients with AHF on admission when compared to controls (median 1.29 [range 0.50-5.55] pmol/L vs 0.50 [0.50-3.33] pmol/L, p=0.019). Likewise plasma URP was significantly higher in the heart failure group on admission (8.38 [1.30-66.80]pmol/L vs 2.25 [1.30-14.40] pmol/L, p<0.005). This suggests a role for both members of the Urotensin peptide system in acute heart failure.
