Urotensin-2 receptor; High affinity receptor for urotensin-2 and urotensin-2B. The activity of this receptor is mediated by a G-protein that activate a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system.
Intervertebral disc degeneration (IDD) results from the dysfunction of nucleus pulposus (NP) cells and the exhaustion of NP progenitors (ProNPs). The cellular applications of NP cells during IDD are currently limited due to the lack of in vivo studies showing whether NP cells are heterogeneous and contain ProNPs throughout postnatal stages. In this study, single-cell RNA sequencing of purified NP cells is used to map four molecularly defined populations and urotensin II receptor (UTS2R)-expressing postnatal ProNPs is identified, which are markedly exhausted during IDD, in mouse and human specimens. The lineage tracing shows that UTS2R(+) ProNPs preferentially resides in the NP periphery with its niche factor tenascin-C and give rise to functional NP cells. It is also demonstrated that transplanting UTS2R(+) ProNPs with tenascin-C into injured intervertebral discs attenuate the progression of IDD. The study provides a novel NP cell atlas, identified resident ProNPs with regenerative potential, and revealed promising diagnostic and therapeutic targets for IDD.
Remdesivir is an antiviral drug used for COVID-19 treatment worldwide. Cardiovascular side effects have been associated with remdesivir; however, the underlying molecular mechanism remains unknown. Here, we performed a large-scale G-protein-coupled receptor screening in combination with structural modeling and found that remdesivir is a selective, partial agonist for urotensin-II receptor (UTS2R) through the Galpha(i/o)-dependent AKT/ERK axis. Functionally, remdesivir treatment induced prolonged field potential and APD(90) in human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPS)-derived cardiomyocytes and impaired contractility in both neonatal and adult cardiomyocytes, all of which mirror the clinical pathology. Importantly, remdesivir-mediated cardiac malfunctions were effectively attenuated by antagonizing UTS2R signaling. Finally, we characterized the effect of 110 single-nucleotide variants in UTS2R gene reported in genome database and found four missense variants that show gain-of-function effects in the receptor sensitivity to remdesivir. Collectively, our study illuminates a previously unknown mechanism underlying remdesivir-related cardiovascular events and that genetic variations of UTS2R gene can be a potential risk factor for cardiovascular events during remdesivir treatment, which collectively paves the way for a therapeutic opportunity to prevent such events in the future.
Somatostatin (SS) and urotensin II (UII) are members of two families of structurally related neuropeptides present in all vertebrates. They exert a large array of biological activities that are mediated by two families of G-protein-coupled receptors called SSTR and UTS2R respectively. It is proposed that the two families of peptides as well as those of their receptors probably derive from a single ancestral ligand-receptor pair. This pair had already been duplicated before the emergence of vertebrates to generate one SS peptide with two receptors and one UII peptide with one receptor. Thereafter, each family expanded in the three whole-genome duplications (1R, 2R, and 3R) that occurred during the evolution of vertebrates, whereupon some local duplications and gene losses occurred. Following the 2R event, the vertebrate ancestor is deduced to have possessed three SS (SS1, SS2, and SS5) and six SSTR (SSTR1-6) genes, on the one hand, and four UII (UII, URP, URP1, and URP2) and five UTS2R (UTS2R1-5) genes, on the other hand. In the teleost lineage, all these have been preserved with the exception of SSTR4. Moreover, several additional genes have been gained through the 3R event, such as SS4 and a second copy of the UII, SSTR2, SSTR3, and SSTR5 genes, and through local duplications, such as SS3. In mammals, all the genes of the SSTR family have been preserved, with the exception of SSTR6. In contrast, for the other families, extensive gene losses occurred, as only the SS1, SS2, UII, and URP genes and one UTS2R gene are still present.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) can be associated with neurological deficits and has profound consequences for mortality and morbidity. Cerebral vasospasm (CVS) and delayed cerebral ischemia affect neurological outcomes in SAH patients, but their mechanisms are not fully understood, and effective treatments are limited. Here, we report that urotensin II receptor UT plays a pivotal role in both early events and delayed mechanisms following SAH in male mice. Few days post-SAH, UT expression is triggered by blood or hemoglobin in the leptomeningeal compartment. UT contributes to perimeningeal glia limitans astrocyte reactivity, microvascular alterations and neuroinflammation independent of CNS-associated macrophages (CAMs). Later, CAM-dependent vascular inflammation and subsequent CVS develop, leading to cognitive dysfunction. In an SAH model using humanized UT(h+)/(h+) male mice, we show that post-SAH CVS and behavioral deficits, mediated by UT through Gq/PLC/Ca(2+) signaling, are prevented by UT antagonists. These results highlight the potential of targeting UT pathways to reduce early meningeal response and delayed cerebral ischemia in SAH patients.
STUDY DESIGN: A case-control study. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the association of urotensin II (UTS2) signals with the susceptibility of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) in the Chinese Han population. SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Dysregulated UTS2 signals induced by impaired cerebrospinal fluid flow have been implicated in the development of idiopathic scoliosis through studies on zebrafish. Furthermore, mutations in urotensin II receptor (UTS2R) were reported to cause severe scoliosis in zebrafish. In spite of the evidence presented in animal models, there is still a lack of knowledge concerning the role of UTS2 signaling related genes in AIS. METHODS: In the discovery stage, exons of UTS2, UTS2R, and UTS2D were sequenced for 200 AIS patients and 200 healthy controls. Newly identified mutations were further genotyped in another independent cohort of 1000 AIS patients and 1000 controls by allelic-specific multiple ligase detection reactions. Gene expression analysis was performed in 36 AIS patients and 36 age-matched congenital scoliosis patients. The Chi-square test was used to compare the genotyping data between the groups. Gene expression analysis was compared with the Student t test. RESULTS: Association between two novel mutations (rs11654140, c.51T > C; rs568196624, c.1146C > G) and the development of AIS was identified. Allele C of rs11654140 and allele G of rs568196624 were significantly associated with the risk of AIS (1.5% vs. 0.5%, odds ratio = 3.02, P = 0.01 for rs11654140; 1.41% vs. 0.58%, odds ratio = 2.29, P = 0.04 for rs568196624). The mRNA expression of UTS2R in the AIS group was significantly higher as compared with that in the control group (0.059 +/- 0.015 vs. 0.035 +/- 0.013, P < 0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Rare mutations in UTS2R were significantly associated with AIS. Expression of UTS2R was significantly increased in AIS patients. The role of UTS2 signaling in the development of AIS is worthy of further investigation.Level of Evidence: N/A.
Chemotactic migration is a fundamental behavior of cells and its regulation is particularly relevant in physiological processes such as organogenesis and angiogenesis, as well as in pathological processes such as tumor metastasis. The majority of chemotactic stimuli activate cell surface receptors that belong to the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily. Although the autophagy machinery has been shown to play a role in cell migration, its mode of regulation by chemotactic GPCRs remains largely unexplored. We found that ligand-induced activation of 2 chemotactic GPCRs, the chemokine receptor CXCR4 and the urotensin 2 receptor UTS2R, triggers a marked reduction in the biogenesis of autophagosomes, in both HEK-293 and U87 glioblastoma cells. Chemotactic GPCRs exert their anti-autophagic effects through the activation of CAPNs, which prevent the formation of pre-autophagosomal vesicles from the plasma membrane. We further demonstrated that CXCR4- or UTS2R-induced inhibition of autophagy favors the formation of adhesion complexes to the extracellular matrix and is required for chemotactic migration. Altogether, our data reveal a new link between GPCR signaling and the autophagy machinery, and may help to envisage therapeutic strategies in pathological processes such as cancer cell invasion.
Several reports have shown that urotensin 2 (UTS2) and its receptor (UTS2R) are involved in glucose metabolism and insulin resistance, which lead to development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in humans. In the present study, we annotated both bovine UTS2 and UTS2R genes and identified 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for the former gene and 14 mutations for the latter gene. Four mutations were genotyped on a Wagyu x Limousin reference population, including 6 F(1 )bulls, 113 F(1 )dams and ~250 F(2 )progeny. Among 12 phenotypes related to fat deposition and fatty acid composition, we observed that the UTS2 gene was significantly associated with the amount of skeletal saturated fatty acids, while its receptor (UTS2R) gene had significant effects on amounts of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids, Delta(9) desaturase activity for converting 16:0 into 16:1, muscle fat (marbling) score and Longissimus Dorsi muscle area. However, in this population, these markers were not associated with subcutaneous fat depth or percent kidney, pelvic and heart fat. We also found that mutations in the promoter regions altered the promoter activities in both genes and coding SNPs might affect the mRNA stability in the UTS2R gene. Overall, our present study provides the first evidence that both UTS2 and UTS2R genes regulate skeletal muscle fat accumulation and fatty acid metabolism, thus indicating their potential pathological functions related to obesity and T2DM in humans.
Urotensin-II (U-II) and urotensin-II-related peptide (URP) have been identified as the endogenous ligands of the orphan G-protein-coupled receptor GPR14 now renamed UT. The occurrence of U-II and URP in the central nervous system, and the widespread distribution of UT in the brain suggest that U-II and URP may play various behavioral activities. Studies conducted in rodents have shown that central administration of U-II stimulates locomotion, provokes anxiety- and depressive-like states, enhances feeding activity and increases the duration of paradoxical sleep episodes. These observations indicate that, besides the endocrine/paracrine activities of U-II and URP on cardiovascular and kidney functions, these peptides may act as neurotransmitters and/or neuromodulators to regulate various neurobiological activities.
Urotensin II (UT II) is an important factor of cellular homeostasis. This regulatory peptide is involved in the pathophysiology of many disorders. For example, it plays an important role in the pathogenesis of acute and chronic diseases, stressful and adaptive reactions of the body, in the development of cardiovascular pathologies, metabolic syndrome, inflammation, liver cirrhosis, renal failure, diabetic nephropathy, reproductive dysfunction, progression of psychosomatic, psychoendocrinal and psychiatric disorders. In this concern, the involvement of UT II in the pathophysiology of many processes determines the perspectives for the development of blockers of urotensin receptors for the treatment of the aforementioned diseases. It is important that even today this kind of perspective is feasible due to the synthesis of a series of GPR14 blockers. The objective of this review is to discuss current molecular mechanisms of biological activity, regulatory functions of UT II, its role in the pathogenesis of different nosologies, as well as analysis of the possible routes of exposure to GPR14 as potential therapeutic targets.
Urotensin II (U-II) is the most potent vasoconstrictor known, even more potent than endothelin-1. It was first isolated from the fish spinal cord and has been recognized as a hormone in the neurosecretory system of teleost fish for over 30 years. After the identification of U-II in humans and the orphan human G-protein-coupled receptor 14 as the urotensin II receptor, UT, many studies have shown that U-II may play an important role in cardiovascular regulation. Human urotensin II (hU-II) is an 11 amino acid cyclic peptide, generated by proteolytic cleavage from a precursor prohormone. It is expressed in the central nervous system as well as other tissues, such as kidney, spleen, small intestine, thymus, prostate, pituitary, and adrenal gland and circulates in human plasma. The plasma U-II level is elevated in renal failure, congestive heart failure, diabetes mellitus, systemic hypertension and portal hypertension caused by liver cirrhosis. The effect of U-II on the vascular system is variable, depending on species, vascular bed and calibre of the vessel. The net effect on vascular tone is a balance between endothelium-independent vasoconstriction and endothelium-dependent vasodilatation. U-II is also a neuropeptide and may play a role in tumour development. The development of UT receptor antagonists may provide a useful research tool as well as a novel treatment for cardiorenal diseases.
BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have previously been emerged as key players in a series of biological processes. Dysregulation of lncRNA is correlated to human diseases including neurological disorders. Here, we developed a multi-step bioinformatics analysis to study the functions of a particular Down syndrome-associated gene DSCR9 including the lncRNAs. The method is named correlation-interaction-network (COIN), based on which a pipeline is implemented. Co-expression gene network analysis and biological network analysis results are presented. METHODS: We identified the regulation function of DSCR9, a lncRNA transcribed from the Down syndrome critical region (DSCR) of chromosome 21, by analyzing its co-expression genes from over 1700 sets and nearly 60,000 public Affymetrix human U133-Plus 2 transcriptional profiling microarrays. After proper evaluations, a threshold is chosen to filter the data and get satisfactory results. Microarray data resource is from EBI database and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network information is incorporated from the most complete network databases. PPI integration strategy guarantees complete information regarding DSCR9. Enrichment analysis is performed to identify significantly correlated pathways. RESULTS: We found that the most significant pathways associated with the top DSCR9 co-expressed genes were shown to be involved in neuro-active ligand-receptor interaction (GLP1R, HTR4, P2RX2, UCN3, and UTS2R), calcium signaling pathway (CACNA1F, CACNG4, HTR4, P2RX2, and SLC8A3), neuronal system (KCNJ5 and SYN1) by the KEGG, and GO analysis. The A549 and U251 cell lines with stable DSCR9 overexpression were constructed. We validated 10 DSCR9 co-expression genes by qPCR in both cell lines with over 70% accuracy. CONCLUSIONS: DSCR9 was highly correlated with genes that were known as important factors in the developments and functions of nervous system, indicating that DSCR9 may regulate neurological proteins regarding Down syndrome and other neurological-related diseases. The pipeline can be properly adjusted to other applications.
Urotensin II receptor (UTS2R) is suggested to mediate the actions of urotensin II (UTS2) and UTS2-related peptide (URP, also called UTS2B) in mammals. However, the information regarding the gene structure, functionality and tissue expression of UTS2/URP receptor remains largely unknown in non-mammalian vertebrates including birds. In this study, using RACE-PCR, we cloned the full-length cDNAs of four chicken UTS2/URP receptors and designated them as cUTS2R1, cUTS2R2, cUTS2R3 and cUTS2R5 respectively, according to their evolutionary origin. The cloned cUTS2R1, cUTS2R2, cUTS2R3 and cUTS2R5 are predicted to encode 7-transmembrane receptors of 382, 343, 331 and 363 amino acids respectively, which show 50-66 % amino acid sequence identity with human UTS2R. Using cell-based luciferase reporter assays and Western blot, we demonstrated that chicken UTS2Rs expressed in HEK293 cells could be effectively activated by synthetic chicken UTS2-12, UTS2-17 and URP peptides, and their activation can elevate intracellular calcium concentration and activate MAPK/ERK signaling cascade, indicating that the four UTS2Rs are functional and capable of mediating UTS2/URP actions in chickens. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that the four receptors are widely, but differentially, expressed in adult chicken tissues, while cUTS2 and cURP are highly expressed in the hindbrain and spinal cord, and moderately/weakly expressed in other tissues examined including the spleen and gonads. Taken together, our data provide first piece of evidence that all four UTS2Rs are functional in an avian species and help to reveal the conserved roles of UTS2R signaling across vertebrates.
Urotensin II (U-II) has been known for over 30 years as an important teleost fish hormone, but only recently has it been recognized as the endogenous ligand of a new human G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) homologous to the GPR14 orphan receptor from rat. Human U-II was found to be a potent vasoconstrictor, widely distributed in human tissues, possibly contributing to several human cardiovascular diseases. It thus has become a major target of medicinal chemistry research. The common structural feature of U-II peptides from different species is the C-terminal portion, characterized by the disulfide bridged cyclic hexapeptide Cys-Phe-Trp-Lys-Tyr-Cys. The few structure-activity relationship studies reported to date attributed a critical role to this portion, with the Trp-Lys-Tyr motif appearing as the key determinant of U-II bioactivity. Consequently, this shorter cyclic peptide was used as a template for the development of several synthetic analogues, among which a superagonist, termed P5U: H-Asp-cyclo(Pen-Phe-Trp-Lys-Tyr-Cys)-Val-OH. Conformational studies confirmed the important role of hU-II C-terminal cyclic portion, enabling the development of 3D pharmacophore models. These findings should lead to the design of new, potent and selective analogues, acting as agonist or antagonist at the human U-II receptor, finally contributing to a deeper comprehension of the (patho)physiological significance of this peptide.
Urotensin-II (U-II) is a "somatostatin-like" cyclic neuropeptide which was originally isolated from goby fish urophysis, and subsequently identified in other species, including man. The interest in human U-II (hU-II) has grown enormously in the last few years, following the identification of a specific human receptor (formerly identified as the GPR14/SENR orphan receptor), now referred to as UT receptor. The U-II/UT system seems to play an important role in cardiovascular functions. hU-II vasoconstrictive potency is reported to be an order of magnitude greater than that of endothelin-1 (ET-1), which would make it the most potent mammalian vasoconstrictor identified to date. hU-II also exerts potent inotropic effects in the human heart in vitro. On the basis of its spectrum of activities, hU-II has been suggested to modulate cardiovascular homeostasis and possibly to be involved in certain cardiovascular pathologies. Central nervous effects of U-II have also been described, in particular, intracerebroventricular administration promotes anxiogenic-like behaviors in rodents. Furthermore, UT receptor overexpression has been observed in some tumor cell lines. Therefore, specific and selective UT receptor antagonists provide useful tools for investigating the (patho)physiological role(s) of the U-II/UT receptor system. In this review we aim to provide an overview of the research in the area of UT receptor antagonists as well as the progress in understanding the role of the U-II/UT system in human (patho)physiology.
BackgroundGenetic variation in calcium signaling pathways is associated with Kawasaki disease (KD) susceptibility and coronary artery aneurysms (CAA). Expression quantitative trait locus analysis for KD-associated variants in calcium/sodium channel gene solute carrier family 8 member 1 (SLC8A1) revealed an effect on expression of urotensin 2 (UTS2). We speculated that UTS2 is influenced by genetic variation in SLC8A1 and contributes to disease pathogenesis.MethodsWe measured levels of UTS2 and its receptor in blood and tissues using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and immunohistochemical staining.ResultsUTS2 transcript levels were higher in the whole blood of subjects with KD homozygous for three risk alleles in SLC8A1 (P=0.002-0.006). Increased levels of plasma UTS2 varied as a function of SLC8A1 genotype (P=0.008-0.04). UTS2 and UTS2 receptor were expressed in mononuclear inflammatory cells and spindle-shaped cells in the coronary arterial wall of a patient suffering from KD with CAA and in a femoral endarterectomy specimen from an adult patient with peripheral aneurysms following KD in childhood.ConclusionHost genetics influences UTS2 levels, which may contribute to inflammation and cardiovascular damage in KD.
Urotensin II (UII) is a cyclic neuropeptide that was first isolated from the urophysis of teleost fish on the basis of its ability to contract the hindgut. Subsequently, UII was characterized in tetrapods including humans. Phylogenetic studies and synteny analysis indicate that UII and its paralogous peptide urotensin II-related peptide (URP) belong to the somatostatin/cortistatin superfamily. In mammals, the UII and URP genes are primarily expressed in cholinergic neurons of the brainstem and spinal cord. UII and URP mRNAs are also present in various organs notably in the cardiovascular, renal, and endocrine systems. UII and URP activate a common G protein-coupled receptor, called UT, that exhibits relatively high sequence identity with somatostatin, opioid, and galanin receptors. The UT gene is widely expressed in the central nervous system (CNS) and in peripheral tissues including the retina, heart, vascular bed, lung, kidney, adrenal medulla, and skeletal muscle. Structure-activity relationship studies and NMR conformational analysis have led to the rational design of a number of peptidic and nonpeptidic UT agonists and antagonists. Consistent with the wide distribution of UT, UII has now been shown to exert a large array of biologic activities, in particular in the CNS, the cardiovascular system, and the kidney. Here, we review the current knowledge concerning the pleiotropic actions of UII and discusses the possible use of antagonists for future therapeutic applications.
Urotensin II (U-II) is a vasoactive hormone that acts through a recently described seven transmembrane-spanning G-protein-coupled receptor called GPR14. Although touted as the most potent vasoconstrictor peptide yet identified, the responses elicited by U-II are species-, tissue- and endothelium-dependent. Available data question the contribution of U-II to resting cardiovascular homeostasis in humans; instead they point to a role for this hormone in disease (heart failure and cardiac cell growth, renal function, diabetes, and mitogenesis in vascular and tumour cells). Key features of these diseases are increased expression and activity of U-II receptors. In this review, we focus on recent evidence that supports a role of U-II and its receptor in cardiovascular disease.
Urotensin II, through its interaction with its UT receptor, is a potent vasoactive peptide in humans and in several animal models. Recent studies have demonstrated elevated plasma U-II levels in patients with atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. U-II is expressed in endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells and infiltrating macrophages of atherosclerotic human coronary arteries. UT receptor expression is up-regulated by inflammatory stimuli. Activation of UT receptor by U-II stimulates endothelial and smooth muscle cell proliferation and monocytes chemotaxis. Therefore, in addition to its primary vasoactive effect, these observations suggest a role of U-II and UT receptor in the initiation and/or progression of atherosclerosis.
Urotensin II (U-II) is a cyclic neuropeptide that was first isolated from teleost fish some 35 years ago. Mammalian U-II is a powerful vasoconstrictor with a potency greater than that of endothelin-1.Nevertheless, unlike endothelin-1, which constricts all or nearly all vascular beds, the vasoactive effects of U-II are reported to be dependent both on the species and on the regional vascular bed examined. Typical regional variability occurs in the rat in which vasoconstriction to U-II is most robust in thoracic aorta proximal to the aortic arch and decreases gradually towards the distal peripheral arteries. As small peripheral arteries but not larger arteries such as the aorta play a major role in regulating peripheral resistance and consequent blood pressure as well as workload on the heart, doubts have been raised concerning the importance of this peptide in cardiovascular physiology. Moreover, an interaction between U-II and other endogenous vasoactive molecules may add a level of complexity to the vascular actions of U-II.On the other hand, recent experimental and clinical studies have revealed increased expression of U-II and urotensin receptor (UT receptor) in animals with experimentally induced myocardial infarction, heart failure, and in patients with hypertension, atherosclerosis, and diabetic nephropathy, which suggests a potential role for U-II in both cardiovascular and renal diseases. A series of peptidic and nonpeptidic UT receptor ligands have been shown to be effective in antagonizing the effects of U-II in the cardiorenal system. This article aims to review recent advances in our understanding of the physiology and pathophysiology of U-II with particular references to its role in cardiovascular health and disease.
