Beta-3 adrenergic receptor; Beta-adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins. Beta- 3 is involved in the regulation of lipolysis and thermogenesis.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is one of the most successful modern pathogens. The same organism that lives as a commensal and is transmitted in both health-care and community settings is also a leading cause of bacteraemia, endocarditis, skin and soft tissue infections, bone and joint infections and hospital-acquired infections. Genetically diverse, the epidemiology of MRSA is primarily characterized by the serial emergence of epidemic strains. Although its incidence has recently declined in some regions, MRSA still poses a formidable clinical threat, with persistently high morbidity and mortality. Successful treatment remains challenging and requires the evaluation of both novel antimicrobials and adjunctive aspects of care, such as infectious disease consultation, echocardiography and source control. In this Review, we provide an overview of basic and clinical MRSA research and summarize the expansive body of literature on the epidemiology, transmission, genetic diversity, evolution, surveillance and treatment of MRSA.
BACKGROUND: Ceftobiprole is a cephalosporin that may be effective for treating complicated Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus. METHODS: In this phase 3, double-blind, double-dummy, noninferiority trial, adults with complicated S. aureus bacteremia were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive ceftobiprole at a dose of 500 mg intravenously every 6 hours for 8 days and every 8 hours thereafter, or daptomycin at a dose of 6 to 10 mg per kilogram of body weight intravenously every 24 hours plus optional aztreonam (at the discretion of the trial-site investigators). The primary outcome, overall treatment success 70 days after randomization (defined as survival, bacteremia clearance, symptom improvement, no new S. aureus bacteremia-related complications, and no receipt of other potentially effective antibiotics), with a noninferiority margin of 15%, was adjudicated by a data review committee whose members were unaware of the trial-group assignments. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: Of 390 patients who underwent randomization, 387 (189 in the ceftobiprole group and 198 in the daptomycin group) had confirmed S. aureus bacteremia and received ceftobiprole or daptomycin (modified intention-to-treat population). A total of 132 of 189 patients (69.8%) in the ceftobiprole group and 136 of 198 patients (68.7%) in the daptomycin group had overall treatment success (adjusted difference, 2.0 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], -7.1 to 11.1). Findings appeared to be consistent between the ceftobiprole and daptomycin groups in key subgroups and with respect to secondary outcomes, including mortality (9.0% and 9.1%, respectively; 95% CI, -6.2 to 5.2) and the percentage of patients with microbiologic eradication (82.0% and 77.3%; 95% CI, -2.9 to 13.0). Adverse events were reported in 121 of 191 patients (63.4%) who received ceftobiprole and 117 of 198 patients (59.1%) who received daptomycin; serious adverse events were reported in 36 patients (18.8%) and 45 patients (22.7%), respectively. Gastrointestinal adverse events (primarily mild nausea) were more frequent with ceftobiprole. CONCLUSIONS: Ceftobiprole was noninferior to daptomycin with respect to overall treatment success in patients with complicated S. aureus bacteremia. (Funded by Basilea Pharmaceutica International and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; ERADICATE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03138733.).
Infective endocarditis (IE) is a rare, life-threatening disease that has long-lasting effects even among patients who survive and are cured. IE disproportionately affects those with underlying structural heart disease and is increasingly associated with health care contact, particularly in patients who have intravascular prosthetic material. In the setting of bacteraemia with a pathogenic organism, an infected vegetation may form as the end result of complex interactions between invading microorganisms and the host immune system. Once established, IE can involve almost any organ system in the body. The diagnosis of IE may be difficult to establish and a strategy that combines clinical, microbiological and echocardiography results has been codified in the modified Duke criteria. In cases of blood culture-negative IE, the diagnosis may be especially challenging, and novel microbiological and imaging techniques have been developed to establish its presence. Once diagnosed, IE is best managed by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in infectious diseases, cardiology and cardiac surgery. Antibiotic prophylaxis for the prevention of IE remains controversial. Efforts to develop a vaccine that targets common bacterial causes of IE are ongoing, but have not yet yielded a commercially available product.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a growing burden worldwide, and there is no reliable biomarker used in clinical routines to date. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is routinely collected in patients with neurological symptoms and should closely reflect alterations in PD patients' brains. Here, we describe a scalable and sensitive mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflow for CSF proteome profiling. From two independent cohorts with over 200 individuals, our workflow reproducibly quantifies over 1,700 proteins from minimal CSF amounts. Machine learning determines OMD, CD44, VGF, PRL, and MAN2B1 to be altered in PD patients or to significantly correlate with clinical scores. We also uncover signatures of enhanced neuroinflammation in LRRK2 G2019S carriers, as indicated by increased levels of CTSS, PLD4, and HLA proteins. A comparison with our previously acquired urinary proteomes reveals a large overlap in PD-associated changes, including lysosomal proteins, opening up new avenues to improve our understanding of PD pathogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (CRPA) is a global threat, but the distribution and clinical significance of carbapenemases are unclear. The aim of this study was to define characteristics and outcomes of CRPA infections and the global frequency and clinical impact of carbapenemases harboured by CRPA. METHODS: We conducted an observational, prospective cohort study of CRPA isolated from bloodstream, respiratory, urine, or wound cultures of patients at 44 hospitals (10 countries) between Dec 1, 2018, and Nov 30, 2019. Clinical data were abstracted from health records and CRPA isolates were whole-genome sequenced. The primary outcome was 30-day mortality from the day the index culture was collected. We compared outcomes of patients with CRPA infections by infection type and across geographic regions and performed an inverse probability weighted analysis to assess the association between carbapenemase production and 30-day mortality. FINDINGS: We enrolled 972 patients (USA n=527, China n=171, south and central America n=127, Middle East n=91, Australia and Singapore n=56), of whom 581 (60%) had CRPA infections. 30-day mortality differed by infection type (bloodstream 21 [30%] of 69, respiratory 69 [19%] of 358, wound nine [14%] of 66, urine six [7%] of 88; p=0.0012) and geographical region (Middle East 15 [29%] of 52, south and central America 20 [27%] of 73, USA 60 [19%] of 308, Australia and Singapore three [11%] of 28, China seven [6%] of 120; p=0.0002). Prevalence of carbapenemase genes among CRPA isolates also varied by region (south and central America 88 [69%] of 127, Australia and Singapore 32 [57%] of 56, China 54 [32%] of 171, Middle East 27 [30%] of 91, USA ten [2%] of 527; p<0.0001). KPC-2 (n=103 [49%]) and VIM-2 (n=75 [36%]) were the most common carbapenemases in 211 carbapenemase-producing isolates. After excluding USA patients, because few US isolates had carbapenemases, patients with carbapenemase-producing CRPA infections had higher 30-day mortality than those with non-carbapenemase-producing CRPA infections in both unadjusted (26 [22%] of 120 vs 19 [12%] of 153; difference 9%, 95% CI 3-16) and adjusted (difference 7%, 95% CI 1-14) analyses. INTERPRETATION: The emergence of different carbapenemases among CRPA isolates in different geographical regions and the increased mortality associated with carbapenemase-producing CRPA infections highlight the therapeutic challenges posed by these organisms. FUNDING: National Institutes of Health.
The prevalence of Parkinson's disease (PD) is increasing but the development of novel treatment strategies and therapeutics altering the course of the disease would benefit from specific, sensitive, and non-invasive biomarkers to detect PD early. Here, we describe a scalable and sensitive mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic workflow for urinary proteome profiling. Our workflow enabled the reproducible quantification of more than 2,000 proteins in more than 200 urine samples using minimal volumes from two independent patient cohorts. The urinary proteome was significantly different between PD patients and healthy controls, as well as between LRRK2 G2019S carriers and non-carriers in both cohorts. Interestingly, our data revealed lysosomal dysregulation in individuals with the LRRK2 G2019S mutation. When combined with machine learning, the urinary proteome data alone were sufficient to classify mutation status and disease manifestation in mutation carriers remarkably well, identifying VGF, ENPEP, and other PD-associated proteins as the most discriminating features. Taken together, our results validate urinary proteomics as a valuable strategy for biomarker discovery and patient stratification in PD.
INTRODUCTION: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human Alzheimer's disease (AD) biospecimens contain amyloid beta (Abeta) peptide and tau. While AD EVs are known to affect brain disease pathobiology, their biochemical and molecular characterizations remain ill defined. METHODS: EVs were isolated from the cortical gray matter of 20 AD and 18 control brains. Tau and Abeta levels were measured by immunoassay. Differentially expressed EV proteins were assessed by quantitative proteomics and machine learning. RESULTS: Levels of pS396 tau and Abeta1-42 were significantly elevated in AD EVs. High levels of neuron- and glia-specific factors are detected in control and AD EVs, respectively. Machine learning identified ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ in AD EV compared to controls. They distinguished AD EVs from controls in the test sets with 88% accuracy. DISCUSSION: In addition to Abeta and tau, ANXA5, VGF, GPM6A, and ACTZ are new signature proteins in AD EVs.
BACKGROUND: Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (CRKP) is a global threat. We therefore analysed the bacterial characteristics of CRKP infections and the clinical outcomes of patients with CRKP infections across different countries. METHODS: In this prospective, multicentre, cohort study (CRACKLE-2), hospitalised patients with cultures positive for CRKP were recruited from 71 hospitals in Argentina, Australia, Chile, China, Colombia, Lebanon, Singapore, and the USA. The first culture positive for CRKP was included for each unique patient. Clinical data on post-hospitalisation death and readmission were collected from health records, and whole genome sequencing was done on all isolates. The primary outcome was a desirability of outcome ranking at 30 days after the index culture, and, along with bacterial characteristics and 30-day all-cause mortality (a key secondary outcome), was compared between patients from China, South America, and the USA. The desirability of outcome ranking was adjusted for location before admission, Charlson comorbidity index, age at culture, Pitt bacteremia score, and anatomical culture source through inverse probability weighting; mortality was adjusted for the same confounders, plus region where relevant, through multivariable logistic regression. This study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03646227, and is complete. FINDINGS: Between June 13, 2017, and Nov 30, 2018, 991 patients were enrolled, of whom 502 (51%) met the criteria for CRKP infection and 489 (49%) had positive cultures that were considered colonisation. We observed little intra-country genetic variation in CRKP. Infected patients from the USA were more acutely ill than were patients from China or South America (median Pitt bacteremia score 3 [IQR 2-6] vs 2 [0-4] vs 2 [0-4]) and had more comorbidities (median Charlson comorbidity index 3 [IQR 2-5] vs 1 [0-3] vs 1 [0-2]). Adjusted desirability of outcome ranking outcomes were similar in infected patients from China (n=246), South America (n=109), and the USA (n=130); the estimates were 53% (95% CI 42-65) for China versus South America, 50% (41-61) for the USA versus China, and 53% (41-66) for the USA versus South America. In patients with CRKP infections, unadjusted 30-day mortality was lower in China (12%, 95% CI 8-16; 29 of 246) than in the USA (23%, 16-30; 30 of 130) and South America (28%, 20-37; 31 of 109). Adjusted 30-day all-cause mortality was higher in South America than in China (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 4.82, 95% CI 2.22-10.50) and the USA (aOR 3.34, 1.50-7.47), with the mortality difference between the USA and China no longer being significant (aOR 1.44, 0.70-2.96). INTERPRETATION: Global CRKP epidemics have important regional differences in patients' baseline characteristics and clinical outcomes, and in bacterial characteristics. Research findings from one region might not be generalisable to other regions. FUNDING: The National Institutes of Health.
BACKGROUND: Direct cardiac reprogramming of fibroblasts into cardiomyocytes has emerged as a promising strategy to remuscularize injured myocardium. However, it is insufficient to generate functional induced cardiomyocytes from human fibroblasts using conventional reprogramming cocktails, and the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well studied. METHODS: To discover potential missing factors for human direct reprogramming, we performed transcriptomic comparison between human induced cardiomyocytes and functional cardiomyocytes. RESULTS: We identified TBX20 (T-box transcription factor 20) as the top cardiac gene that is unable to be activated by the MGT133 reprogramming cocktail (MEF2C, GATA4, TBX5, and miR-133). TBX20 is required for normal heart development and cardiac function in adult cardiomyocytes, yet its role in cardiac reprogramming remains undefined. We show that the addition of TBX20 to the MGT133 cocktail (MGT+TBX20) promotes cardiac reprogramming and activates genes associated with cardiac contractility, maturation, and ventricular heart. Human induced cardiomyocytes produced with MGT+TBX20 demonstrated more frequent beating, calcium oscillation, and higher energy metabolism as evidenced by increased mitochondria numbers and mitochondrial respiration. Mechanistically, comprehensive transcriptomic, chromatin occupancy, and epigenomic studies revealed that TBX20 colocalizes with MGT reprogramming factors at cardiac gene enhancers associated with heart contraction, promotes chromatin binding and co-occupancy of MGT factors at these loci, and synergizes with MGT for more robust activation of target gene transcription. CONCLUSIONS: TBX20 consolidates MGT cardiac reprogramming factors to activate cardiac enhancers to promote cardiac cell fate conversion. Human induced cardiomyocytes generated with TBX20 showed enhanced cardiac function in contractility and mitochondrial respiration.
This study aimed to elucidate the specific biochemical pathways linked to changes in proteins in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) human hippocampus. Our data demonstrate a constant rise in the expression of four proteins (VGF, GFAP, HSPB1, and APP) across all eleven studies. Notably, UBC was the most centrally involved and had increased expression in the hippocampus tissue of individuals with AD. Modified proteins in the hippocampal tissue were found to activate the innate immune system and disrupt communication across chemical synapses. Four hub proteins (CD44, APP, ITGB2, and APOE) are connected to amyloid plaques, whereas two hub proteins (RPL24 and RPS23) are related to neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). The presence of modified proteins was discovered to trigger the activation of microglia and decrease the functioning of ribosomes and mitochondria in the hippocampus. Three significant microRNAs (hsa-miR-106b-5p, hsa-miR-17-5p, and hsa-miR-16-5p) and transcription factors (MYT1L, PIN1, and CSRNP3) have been discovered to improve our understanding of the alterations in proteins within the hippocampal tissues that lead to the progression of AD. These findings establish a path for possible treatments for AD to employ therapeutic strategies that specifically focus on the proteins or processes linked to the illness.
Insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells is regulated by multiple stimuli, including nutrients, hormones, neuronal inputs, and local signalling. Amino acids modulate insulin secretion via amino acid transporters expressed on beta cells. The granin protein VGF has dual roles in beta cells: regulating secretory granule formation and functioning as a multiple peptide precursor. A VGF-derived peptide, neuroendocrine regulatory peptide-4 (NERP-4), increases Ca(2+) influx in the pancreata of transgenic mice expressing apoaequorin, a Ca(2+)-induced bioluminescent protein complex. NERP-4 enhances glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from isolated human and mouse islets and beta-cell-derived MIN6-K8 cells. NERP-4 administration reverses the impairment of beta-cell maintenance and function in db/db mice by enhancing mitochondrial function and reducing metabolic stress. NERP-4 acts on sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter 2 (SNAT2), thereby increasing glutamine, alanine, and proline uptake into beta cells and stimulating insulin secretion. SNAT2 deletion and inhibition abolish the protective effects of NERP-4 on beta-cell maintenance. These findings demonstrate a novel autocrine mechanism of beta-cell maintenance and function that is mediated by the peptide-amino acid transporter axis.
Obesity is an indication of an imbalance between energy expenditure and food intake. It is a complicated disease of epidemic proportions as it involves many factors and organs. Sedentary lifestyles and overeating have caused a substantial rise in people with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Thus, the discovery of successful and sustainable therapies for these chronic illnesses is critical. However, the mechanisms of obesity and diabetes and the crosstalk between these diseases are still ambiguous. Numerous studies are being done to study these mechanisms, with updates made frequently. VGF peptide and its derivatives are anticipated to have a role in the development of obesity and diabetes. However, contradictory studies have produced conflicting findings on the function of VGF. Therefore, in this review, we attempt to clarify and explain the role of VGF peptides in the brain, pancreas, and adipose tissue in the development of obesity.
A disturbed balance between excitation and inhibition (E/I balance) is increasingly recognized as a key driver of neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis (MS), a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system. To understand how chronic hyperexcitability contributes to neuronal loss in MS, we transcriptionally profiled neurons from mice lacking inhibitory metabotropic glutamate signaling with shifted E/I balance and increased vulnerability to inflammation-induced neurodegeneration. This revealed a prominent induction of the nuclear receptor NR4A2 in neurons. Mechanistically, NR4A2 increased susceptibility to excitotoxicity by stimulating continuous VGF secretion leading to glycolysis-dependent neuronal cell death. Extending these findings to people with MS (pwMS), we observed increased VGF levels in serum and brain biopsies. Notably, neuron-specific deletion of Vgf in a mouse model of MS ameliorated neurodegeneration. These findings underscore the detrimental effect of a persistent metabolic shift driven by excitatory activity as a fundamental mechanism in inflammation-induced neurodegeneration.
BACKGROUND: Here, we generated human cardiac muscle patches (hCMPs) of clinically relevant dimensions (4 cm x 2 cm x 1.25 mm) by suspending cardiomyocytes, smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells that had been differentiated from human induced-pluripotent stem cells in a fibrin scaffold and then culturing the construct on a dynamic (rocking) platform. METHODS: In vitro assessments of hCMPs suggest maturation in response to dynamic culture stimulation. In vivo assessments were conducted in a porcine model of myocardial infarction (MI). Animal groups included: MI hearts treated with 2 hCMPs (MI+hCMP, n=13), MI hearts treated with 2 cell-free open fibrin patches (n=14), or MI hearts with neither experimental patch (n=15); a fourth group of animals underwent sham surgery (Sham, n=8). Cardiac function and infarct size were evaluated by MRI, arrhythmia incidence by implanted loop recorders, and the engraftment rate by calculation of quantitative polymerase chain reaction measurements of expression of the human Y chromosome. Additional studies examined the myocardial protein expression profile changes and potential mechanisms of action that related to exosomes from the cell patch. RESULTS: The hCMPs began to beat synchronously within 1 day of fabrication, and after 7 days of dynamic culture stimulation, in vitro assessments indicated the mechanisms related to the improvements in electronic mechanical coupling, calcium-handling, and force generation, suggesting a maturation process during the dynamic culture. The engraftment rate was 10.9+/-1.8% at 4 weeks after the transplantation. The hCMP transplantation was associated with significant improvements in left ventricular function, infarct size, myocardial wall stress, myocardial hypertrophy, and reduced apoptosis in the periscar boarder zone myocardium. hCMP transplantation also reversed some MI-associated changes in sarcomeric regulatory protein phosphorylation. The exosomes released from the hCMP appeared to have cytoprotective properties that improved cardiomyocyte survival. CONCLUSIONS: We have fabricated a clinically relevant size of hCMP with trilineage cardiac cells derived from human induced-pluripotent stem cells. The hCMP matures in vitro during 7 days of dynamic culture. Transplantation of this type of hCMP results in significantly reduced infarct size and improvements in cardiac function that are associated with reduction in left ventricular wall stress. The hCMP treatment is not associated with significant changes in arrhythmogenicity.
Members of the neurotrophin family and in particular brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) regulate the response to rapid- and slow-acting chemical antidepressants and voluntary exercise. Recent work suggests that rapid-acting antidepressants that modulate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA-R) signaling (e.g., ketamine and GLYX-13) require expression of VGF (non-acronymic), the BDNF-inducible secreted neuronal protein and peptide precursor, for efficacy. In addition, the VGF-derived C-terminal peptide TLQP-62 (named by its 4 N-terminal amino acids and length) has antidepressant efficacy following icv or intra-hippocampal administration, in the forced swim test (FST). Similar to ketamine, the rapid antidepressant actions of TLQP-62 require BDNF expression, mTOR activation (rapamycin-sensitive), and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor activation (NBQX-sensitive) and are associated with GluR1 insertion. We review recent findings that identify a rapidly induced autoregulatory feedback loop, which likely plays a critical role in sustained efficacy of rapid-acting antidepressants, depression-like behavior, and cognition, and requires VGF, its C-terminal peptide TLQP-62, BDNF/TrkB signaling, the mTOR pathway, and AMPA receptor activation and insertion.
1. The vgf gene encodes a neuropeptide precursor with a restricted pattern of expression that is limited to a subset of neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems and to specific populations of endocrine cells in the adenohypophysis, adrenal medulla, gastrointestinal tract, and pancreas. In responsive neurons, vgf transcription is upregulated by neurotrophins. the basis for the original identification of VGF as nerve growth factor- (NGF) inducible in PC12 cells (A. Levi, J. D. Eldridge, and B. M. Paterson, Science 229:393-395, 1985). 2. In this review, we shall summarize data concerning the transcriptional regulation of vgf in vitro, the structural organization of the vgf promoter as well as the transcription factors which regulate its activity. 3. On the basis of in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical studies, the in vivo tissue-specific expression of VGF during differentiation and in the adult will be summarized. 4. Parallel biochemical data will be reviewed, addressing the proteolytical processing of the pro-VGF precursor within the secretory compartment of neuroendocrine cells. 5. Finally, analysis of the phenotype of VGF knockout mice will be discussed, implying a nonredundant role of VGF products in the regulation of energy storage and expenditure.
Mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder and schizophrenia, are complex multigenetic conditions, but focused studies of single genes might reveal genes involved in the pathogenesis of mental disorders, including major depressive disorder and schizophrenia. Several candidate genes have been identified using transgenic mice. VGF nerve growth factor inducible (VGF) is a neuropeptide expression of which is induced by nerve growth factor (NGF). VGF is robustly and exclusively synthesized in neuronal and neuroendocrine cells. In central nervous system (CNS), VGF is extensively expressed especially in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. VGF has many roles in the CNS, such as promotion of synaptic plasticity, neurogenesis, and neurite outgrowth. In clinical studies, altered expression and genetic mutations of VGF have been reported in patients with major depressive disorder and schizophrenia. On this basis, studies using transgenic mice to overexpress or knockout VGF have been performed to investigate the roles of upregulation or downregulation of VGF. In this review, we will discuss studies of the roles of VGF using transgenic mice and its relevance to pathologies in major depressive disorder and schizophrenia.
Notwithstanding major advances in psychotherapeutics, their efficacy and specificity remain limited. The slow onset of beneficial outcomes and numerous adverse effects of widely used medications remain of chief concern, warranting in-depth studies. The majority of frontline therapies are thought to enhance the endogenous monoaminergic drive, to initiate a cascade of molecular events leading to lasting functional and structural plasticity. They also involve alterations in trophic factor signalling, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), VGF (non-acronymic), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and others. In several major mental disorders, emerging data suggest protective and restorative effects of trophic factors in preclinical models, when applied on their own. Antidepressant outcomes of VGF and FGF2, for instance, were shown in experimental animals, while BDNF and GDNF prove useful in the treatment of addiction, schizophrenia, and autism spectrum disorders. The main challenge with the effective translation of these and other findings in the clinic is the knowledge gap in action mechanisms with potential risks, as well as the lack of effective platforms for validation under clinical settings. Herein, we review the state-of-the-art and advances in the therapeutic use of trophic factors in several major neuropsychiatric disorders.
Insight into the mechanisms of action of neurotrophic growth factors has been obtained through the identification and characterization of gene products that are regulated or modified at the transcriptional, translational, and/or posttranslational level in response to neurotrophin treatment. VGF (non-acronymic) was identified approximately 15 years ago as a nerve growth factor (NGF)-regulated transcript in rat PC12 pheochromocytoma cells. Subsequent studies have demonstrated that neurotrophins such as NGF and brain-derived neurotrophic factor induce vgf gene expression relatively rapidly in PC12 cells and cultured cortical neurons, respectively, in comparison to less robust regulation by epidermal growth factor (EGF) and insulin, growth factors which do not trigger the neuronal differentiation of PC12 cells. vgf gene expression is stimulated in vitro by NGF and the ras/map kinase signaling cascade through a CREB-dependent mechanism, while in vivo, VGF mRNA levels are regulated by neuronal activity, including long-term potentiation, seizure, and injury. Both the mRNA and encoded approximately 68-kDa protein (VGF) are selectively synthesized in neuroendocrine and neuronal cells. The predicted VGF sequence is rich in paired basic amino acid residues that are potential sites for proteolytic processing, and VGF undergoes regulated release from dense core secretory vesicles. Although VGF mRNA is synthesized widely, by neurons in the brain, spinal cord, and peripheral nervous system, its expression is particularly abundant in the hypothalamus. In addition, VGF peptides are found in hypophysial, adrenal medullary, gastrointestinal, and pancreatic endocrine cells, suggesting important neuroendocrine functions. Recent analysis of VGF knockout mice indeed demonstrates that VGF plays a critical role in the control of energy homeostasis. VGF knockout mice are thin, small, hypermetabolic, hyperactive, and relatively infertile, with markedly reduced leptin levels and fat stores and altered hypothalamic pro-opiomelanocortin, neuropeptide Y, and agouti-related peptide expression. Coupled with the demonstration that VGF mRNA levels are induced in the normal mouse hypothalamic arcuate nuclei in response to fasting, important central and peripheral roles for VGF in the regulation of metabolism are suggested. Here we review previous studies of VGF in the broader context of its newly recognized role in the control of energy balance and propose several models and experimental approaches that may better define the mechanisms of action of VGF.
Five hundred thirty-seven million people globally suffer from diabetes. Insulin-producing beta cells are reduced in number in most people with diabetes, but most individuals still have some residual beta cells. However, none of the many diabetes drugs in common use increases human beta cell numbers. Recently, small molecules that inhibit dual tyrosine-regulated kinase 1A (DYRK1A) have been shown to induce immunohistochemical markers of human beta cell replication, and this is enhanced by drugs that stimulate the glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) receptor (GLP1R) on beta cells. However, it remains to be demonstrated whether these immunohistochemical findings translate into an actual increase in human beta cell numbers in vivo. It is also unknown whether DYRK1A inhibitors together with GLP1R agonists (GLP1RAs) affect human beta cell survival. Here, using an optimized immunolabeling-enabled three-dimensional imaging of solvent-cleared organs (iDISCO(+)) protocol in mouse kidneys bearing human islet grafts, we demonstrate that combination of a DYRK1A inhibitor with exendin-4 increases actual human beta cell mass in vivo by a mean of four- to sevenfold in diabetic and nondiabetic mice over 3 months and reverses diabetes, without alteration in human alpha cell mass. The augmentation in human beta cell mass occurred through mechanisms that included enhanced human beta cell proliferation, function, and survival. The increase in human beta cell survival was mediated, in part, by the islet prohormone VGF. Together, these findings demonstrate the therapeutic potential and favorable preclinical safety profile of the DYRK1A inhibitor-GLP1RA combination for diabetes treatment.
