Vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4B; Involved in late steps of the endosomal multivesicular bodies (MVB) pathway. Recognizes membrane-associated ESCRT-III assemblies and catalyzes their disassembly, possibly in combination with membrane fission. Redistributes the ESCRT-III components to the cytoplasm for further rounds of MVB sorting. MVBs contain intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) that are generated by invagination and scission from the limiting membrane of the endosome and mostly are delivered to lysosomes enabling degradation of membrane proteins, such as stimulated growth fact [...] 
BACKGROUND: Nuclear Yes1-associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1) promotes tumor progression. However, the function of cytoplasmic YAP1 in breast cancer cells and its impact on the survival of breast cancer patients remain unclear. Our research aimed to explore the biological function of cytoplasmic YAP1 in breast cancer cells and the possibility of cytoplasmic YAP1 as a predictive marker of breast cancer survival. METHODS: We constructed cell mutant models, including NLS-YAP1(5SA) (nuclear localized), YAP1(S94A) (incapable of binding to the TEA domain transcription factor family) and YAP1(S127D) (cytoplasmic localized), and used Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assays, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assays, and Western blotting (WB) analysis to detect cell proliferation and apoptosis. The specific mechanism of cytoplasmic YAP1-mediated endosomal sorting complexes required for transport III (ESCRT-III) assembly was studied by co-immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence staining, and WB analysis. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) was used to simulate YAP1 retention in the cytoplasm in in vitro and in vivo experiments to study the function of cytoplasmic YAP1. YAP1 binding to NEDD4-like E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (NEDD4L) was identified using mass spectrometry and was verified in vitro. Breast tissue microarrays were used to analyze the relationship between cytoplasmic YAP1 expression and the survival of breast cancer patients. RESULTS: YAP1 was mainly expressed in the cytoplasm in breast cancer cells. Cytoplasmic YAP1 promoted autophagic death of breast cancer cells. Cytoplasmic YAP1 bound to the ESCRT-III complex subunits charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B) and vacuolar protein sorting 4 homolog B (VPS4B), promoting assembly of CHMP2B-VPS4B and activating autophagosome formation. EGCG retained YAP1 in the cytoplasm, promoting the assembly of CHMP2B-VPS4B to promote autophagic death of breast cancer cells. YAP1 bound to NEDD4L, and NEDD4L mediated ubiquitination and degradation of YAP1. Breast tissue microarrays revealed that high levels of cytoplasmic YAP1 were beneficial to the survival of breast cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: Cytoplasmic YAP1 mediated autophagic death of breast cancer cells by promoting assembly of the ESCRT-III complex; furthermore, we established a new breast cancer survival prediction model based on cytoplasmic YAP1 expression.
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles (EVs) secreted upon fusion of endosomal multivesicular bodies (MVBs) with the plasma membrane. The mechanisms involved in their biogenesis have not yet been fully identified although they could be used to modulate exosome formation and therefore are a promising tool in understanding exosome functions. We have performed an RNA interference screen targeting 23 components of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery and associated proteins in MHC class II (MHC II)-expressing HeLa-CIITA cells. Silencing of HRS, STAM1 or TSG101 reduced the secretion of EV-associated CD63 and MHC II but each gene altered differently the size and/or protein composition of secreted EVs, as quantified by immuno-electron microscopy. By contrast, depletion of VPS4B augmented this secretion while not altering the features of EVs. For several other ESCRT subunits, it was not possible to draw any conclusions about their involvement in exosome biogenesis from the screen. Interestingly, silencing of ALIX increased MHC II exosomal secretion, as a result of an overall increase in intracellular MHC II protein and mRNA levels. In human dendritic cells (DCs), ALIX depletion also increased MHC II in the cells, but not in the released CD63-positive EVs. Such differences could be attributed to a greater heterogeneity in size, and higher MHC II and lower CD63 levels in vesicles recovered from DCs as compared with HeLa-CIITA. The results reveal a role for selected ESCRT components and accessory proteins in exosome secretion and composition by HeLa-CIITA. They also highlight biogenetic differences in vesicles secreted by a tumour cell line and primary DCs.
Vacuolar protein sorting 4B (VPS4B), a member of ATPase family proteins, reportedly possesses multiple biological functions, such as regulating the development of breast cancer and non-small-cell lung cancer, participating in Parkinson's disease, and modulating neuronal apoptosis after cerebral ischemia. However, its expression and potential functions in Crohn's disease (CD) has not been understood. In this study, we reported for the first time that VPS4B was over-expressed in intestinal epithelial cell (IECs) of patients with CD. In TNBS-induced mouse colitis models, we observed the up-regulation of VPS4B was accompanied with the elevated levels of IEC apoptotic markers (active caspase-3 and cleaved PARP) and phosphorylated p38 in colitis IECs. Co-localization of VPS4B and active caspase-3 in IECs of the TNBS group further indicated the possible involvement of VPS4B in IEC apoptosis. Employing the TNF-alpha-treated HT29 cells as an in vitro IEC apoptosis model, we confirmed the positive correlation of VPS4B with caspase-dependent cellular apoptosis. Knocking VPS4B down by siRNA significantly alleviated TNF-alpha-induced p38 phosphorylation and cellular apoptosis in HT29 cells. Taken together, our findings suggested that VPS4B may facilitate the IEC apoptosis in CD via p38 MAPK signaling pathway.
Somatic copy number alterations play a critical role in oncogenesis. Loss of chromosomal regions containing tumor suppressors can lead to collateral deletion of passenger genes. This can be exploited therapeutically if synthetic lethal partners of such passenger genes are known and represent druggable targets. Here, we report that VPS4B gene, encoding an ATPase involved in ESCRT-dependent membrane remodeling, is such a passenger gene frequently deleted in many cancer types, notably in colorectal cancer (CRC). We observed downregulation of VPS4B mRNA and protein levels from CRC patient samples. We identified VPS4A paralog as a synthetic lethal interactor for VPS4B in vitro and in mouse xenografts. Depleting both proteins profoundly altered the cellular transcriptome and induced cell death accompanied by the release of immunomodulatory molecules that mediate inflammatory and anti-tumor responses. Our results identify a pair of novel druggable targets for personalized oncology and provide a rationale to develop VPS4 inhibitors for precision therapy of VPS4B-deficient cancers.
VPS4B (vacuolar protein sorting 4B), a member of the ATPase associated with diverse cellular activities (AAA) protein family, is a component of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport machinery which regulates the internalization and lysosomal degradation of membrane proteins. We previously reported that VPS4B is one of the pathogenic genes related to dentin dysplasia type I, although its function was largely unknown. To investigate the role of VPS4B in tooth development, we deleted the Vps4b gene in mice. We found that heterozygous knockout mice (Vps4b(+/-) ) developed normally and were fertile. However, homozygous deletion of the Vps4b gene resulted in early embryonic lethality of Vps4b(-/-) mice at approximately embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5). To investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms, we examined the molecular functions of VPS4B in vivo and in vitro. Cell experiments showed that VPS4B influenced the proliferation, apoptosis, and cell cycle of transfected human neuroblastoma cells (IMR-32 cells) with over-expression or knockdown of VPS4B. Moreover, qRT-PCR detection showed that the mRNA expression levels of apoptosis-, cell cycle-, and endocytosis-related genes was significantly down or up-regulated in RNA interference-mediated knockdown of VPS4B in IMR-32 cells and Vps4b(+/-) E12.5 embryos. We accordingly speculated that signal transduction disorders of cell endocytosis are a contributing factor to the prenatal lethality of Vps4b(-/-) mice.
Hereditary dentin disorders include dentinogenesis imperfecta (DGI) and dentin dysplasia (DD), which are autosomal dominant diseases characterized by altered dentin structure such as abnormality in dentin mineralization and the absence of root dentin. Shields classified DGI into three subgroups and DD into two subtypes. Although they are all hereditary dentin diseases, they do not share the same causative genes. To date, the pathogenic genes of DGI type I, which is considered a clinical manifestation of syndrome osteogenesis imperfecta, include COL1A1 and COL1A2. Mutations of the DSPP gene, which encodes the dentin sialophosphoprotein, a major non-collagenous protein, are responsible for three isolated dentinal diseases: DGI-II, DGI-III, and DD-II. However, DD-I appears to be special in that researchers have found three pathogenicity genes-VPS4B, SSUH2, and SMOC2-in three affected families from different countries. It is believed that DD-I is a genetically heterogeneous disease and is distinguished from other types of dentin disorders. This review summarizes the DD-I literature in the context of clinical appearances, radiographic characteristics, and functions of its pathogenic genes and aims to serve clinicians in further understanding and diagnosing this disease.
The structural conservation across the AAA (ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities) protein family makes designing selective chemical inhibitors challenging. Here, we identify a triazolopyridine-based fragment that binds the AAA domain of human katanin, a microtubule-severing protein. We have developed a model for compound binding and designed ASPIR-1 (allele-specific, proximity-induced reactivity-based inhibitor-1), a cell-permeable compound that selectively inhibits katanin with an engineered cysteine mutation. Only in cells expressing mutant katanin does ASPIR-1 treatment increase the accumulation of CAMSAP2 at microtubule minus ends, confirming specific on-target cellular activity. Importantly, ASPIR-1 also selectively inhibits engineered cysteine mutants of human VPS4B and FIGL1-AAA proteins, involved in organelle dynamics and genome stability, respectively. Structural studies confirm our model for compound binding at the AAA ATPase site and the proximity-induced reactivity-based inhibition. Together, our findings suggest a chemical genetics approach to decipher AAA protein functions across essential cellular processes and to test hypotheses for developing therapeutics.
This study examined the anti-hepatitis B virus (HBV) effect of wild-type (WT) vacuolar protein sorting 4B (VPS4B) and its dominant negative (DN) mutant VPS4B-K180Q in vivo in order to further explore the relationship between HBV and the host cellular factor VPS4. VPS4B gene was amplified from Huh7 cells by RT-PCR and cloned into the eukaryotic expression vector pXF3H. Then, the VPS4B plasmid and the VPS4B-K180Q mutation plasmid were constructed by using the overlap extension PCR site-directed mutagenesis technique. VPS4B and HBV vectors were co-delivered into mice by the hydrodynamic tail-vein injection to establish HBV vector-based models. Quantities of HBsAg and HBeAg in the mouse sera were determined by ElectroChemiLuminescence (ECL). HBV DNA in sera was measured by real-time quantitative PCR. Southern blot analysis was used to assay the intracellular HBV nuclear capsid-related DNA, real-time quantitative PCR to detect the HBV-related mRNA and immunohistochemical staining to observe the HBcAg expression in the mouse liver tissues. Our results showed that VPS4B and its mutant VPS4B-K180Q could decrease the levels of serum HBsAg, HBeAg and HBV-DNA. In addition, the HBV DNA replication and the mRNA level of HBV in the liver tissues of treated mice could be suppressed by VPS4B and VPS4B-K180Q. It was also found that VPS4B and VPS4B-K180Q had an ability to inhibit core antigen expression in the infected mouse liver. Furthermore, the anti-HBV effect of mutant VPS4B-K180Q was more potent than that of wild-type VPS4B. Taken together, it was concluded that VPS4B and its DN mutant VPS4B-K180Q have anti-HBV effect in vivo, which helps develop molecular therapeutic strategies for HBV infection.
Lyssaviruses are well-known worldwide and often cause fatal encephalitis. Previous studies have shown that autophagy is beneficial for the replication of rabies virus (RABV), the representative lyssavirus, but the detailed mechanism remains obscure. In this study, we showed that the rabies virus matrix protein (RABV-M) used its PPxY motif to interact with the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase NEDD4. NEDD4 then recruited MAP1LC3/LC3 via its LC3-interacting region (LIR). Interestingly, after binding to the ubiquitinated RABV-M, NEDD4 could bind more LC3 and enhance autophagosome accumulation, while NEDD4 knockdown significantly reduced M-induced autophagosome accumulation. Further study revealed that RABV-M prevented autophagosome-lysosome fusion and facilitated viral budding. Inhibition of RABV-M-induced autophagosome accumulation reduced the production of extracellular virus-like particles. We also found that M proteins of most lyssaviruses share the same mechanism to accumulate autophagosome by hijacking NEDD4. Collectively, this study revealed a novel strategy for lyssaviruses to achieve efficient viral replication by exploiting the host autophagy system.Abbreviations: ABLV: Australian bat lyssavirus; ATG5: autophagy related 5; Baf A1:bafilomycin A(1);co-IP: co-immunoprecipitation; CQ: chloroquine; DAPI:4',6-diamidino-2'-phenylindole; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; EBLV:European bat lyssavirus; GFP: green fluorescent protein; GST:glutathione S-transferase; hpi: hours post-infection; hpt: hourspost-transfection; LIR: LC3-interactingregion;MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; mCherry:red fluorescent protein; MOI: multiplicity of infection; NC: negativecontrol; MVB: multivesicular body; NEDD4: neural precursorcell-expressed developmentally down-regulated 4; RABV: rabies virus;SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; VLP: virus-like particle; VPS4B: vacuolarprotein sorting 4B; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; WB:western blotting; WT: wild-type; mum: micrometer; muM: micromole.
The assembly and budding of newly formed human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) particles occur at the plasma membrane of infected cells. Although the molecular basis for viral budding has been studied extensively, investigation of its spatiotemporal characteristics has been limited by the small dimensions ( approximately 100 nm) of HIV particles and the fast kinetics of the process (a few minutes from bud formation to virion release). Here we applied ultra-fast atomic force microscopy to achieve real-time visualization of individual HIV-1 budding events from wild-type (WT) cell lines as well as from mutated lines lacking vacuolar protein sorting-4 (VPS4) or visceral adipose tissue-1 protein (VTA1). Using single-particle analysis, we show that HIV-1 bud formation follows two kinetic pathways (fast and slow) with each composed of three distinct phases (growth, stationary, decay). Notably, approximately 38% of events did not result in viral release and were characterized by the formation of short (rather than tall) particles that slowly decayed back into the cell membrane. These non-productive events became more abundant in VPS4 knockout cell lines. Strikingly, the absence of VPS4B, rather than VPS4A, increased the production of short viral particles, suggesting a role for VPS4B in earlier stages of HIV-1 budding than traditionally thought.
The Nuclear envelope (NE) is frequently challenged by mechanical stimuli involving cells passing through a tight space and such stress is known as "NE stress." Various factors that cooperate to repair the NE have been identified, including endosomal sorting complex required for transport-III (ESCRT-III). Recently, vacuolar protein sorting 4 homolog B (VPS4B) has been reported to modulate the recycling of ESCRT-III during NE repair, but the regulatory mechanism remains unclear. Our previous study revealed that U251MG cells, derived from the glioblastoma (GBM), exhibited nuclear deformation followed by DNA damage upon mechanical NE stress while these phenotypes were not observed in U87MG, another GBM-derived cell line. Here, we found that VPS4B expression was lower in U251MG than in U87MG. Our functional analysis demonstrated that insufficient VPS4B triggers an inadequate response to NE stress and that VPS4B regulates the dynamics of ESCRT-III, uncovering the mechanism underlying the NE stress response in GBM.
Cell migration through tight spaces can induce substantial deformations of the nucleus and cause nuclear envelope (NE) rupture, resulting in uncontrolled exchange of nuclear and cytosolic proteins. These events can cause DNA damage and, in severe cases, nuclear fragmentation, challenging the integrity of the genomic material. Cells overcome NE ruptures during interphase by repairing the NE using components of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery. Paralleling the molecular mechanism used during NE reformation in late mitosis, ESCRT-III subunits and the associated AAA-ATPase VPS4B are recruited to NE rupture sites and help restore NE integrity. While these findings are common to many cell types, they are particularly relevant in the context of cancer metastasis, where nuclear deformation and rupture could drive genomic instability in invading cells and further promote cancer progression. At the same time, inhibiting NE repair may offer new therapeutic approaches to specifically target invasive cancer cells.
Mutations in the human AAA-ATPase VPS4 isoform, VPS4A, cause severe neurodevelopmental defects and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (CDA). VPS4 is a crucial component of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) system, which drives membrane remodeling in numerous cellular processes, including receptor degradation, cell division, and neural pruning. Notably, while most organisms encode for a single VPS4 gene, human cells have 2 VPS4 paralogs, namely VPS4A and VPS4B, but the functional differences between these paralogs is mostly unknown. Here, we set out to investigate the role of the human VPS4 paralogs in cytokinetic abscission using a series of knockout cell lines. We found that VPS4A and VPS4B hold both overlapping and distinct roles in abscission. VPS4A depletion resulted in a more severe abscission delay than VPS4B and was found to be involved in earlier stages of abscission. Moreover, VPS4A and a monomeric-locked VPS4A mutant bound the abscission checkpoint proteins CHMP4C and ANCHR, while VPS4B did not, indicating a regulatory role for the VPS4A isoform in abscission. Depletion of VTA1, a co-factor of VPS4, disrupted VPS4A-ANCHR interactions and accelerated abscission, suggesting that VTA1 is also involved in the abscission regulation. Our findings reveal a dual role for VPS4A in abscission, one that is canonical and can be compensated by VPS4B, and another that is regulatory and may be delivered by its monomeric form. These observations provide a potential mechanistic explanation for the neurodevelopmental defects and other related disorders reported in VPS4A-mutated patients with a fully functional VPS4B paralog.
BACKGROUND: Vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4B (VPS4B) is a member of the ATP enzyme AAA protein family, and is mainly involved in protein degradation and cell membrane fusion. Recently, a dominant mutation in this gene was identified in human dentin dysplasia type I (DD-I). Herein, we report the generation of Vps4b knockout (Vps4b KO) mice; however, the homozygous Vps4b KO mutation was embryonic lethal at the early stages of embryo development, and we therefore report the results of heterozygous mutant mice. RESULTS: Mice heterozygous for Vps4b did not develop tooth defects replicating human DD-I. Immunohistochemistry showed that gene KO was successful, as there was decreased expression of Vps4b in heterozygous mice; hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining also showed that the width of the pre-dentin zone was increased in heterozygous mice, although the arrangement of the odontoblasts was not significantly different from wild-type (WT) mice. However, H&E staining showed no obvious abnormalities in the bones of heterozygous mice. Moreover, stereomicroscopic and X-ray radiography results indicated no abnormal manifestations in teeth or bones. Furthermore, statistical analysis of the volume and density of dentin and enamel, as well as skeletal analysis, including the volume and separation of trabecular bone analyzed by micro-CT, all showed no differences between Vps4b heterozygotes and WT mice. In addition, there also were no significant differences in bone or cartilage mineralization as evaluated by Alcian blue-Alizarin red staining. CONCLUSIONS: The heterozygous Vps4b KO mice do not develop tooth defects that replicate human DD-I and this is likely to be due to differences in tooth development between the two species. Consequently, further studies are needed to determine whether mice are an appropriate animal model for human tooth diseases.
Few therapies target the loss of tumor suppressor genes in cancer. We examine CRISPR-SpCas9 and RNA-interference loss-of-function screens to identify new therapeutic targets associated with genomic loss of tumor suppressor genes. The endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) ATPases VPS4A and VPS4B score as strong synthetic lethal dependencies. VPS4A is essential in cancers harboring loss of VPS4B adjacent to SMAD4 on chromosome 18q and VPS4B is required in tumors with co-deletion of VPS4A and CDH1 (E-cadherin) on chromosome 16q. We demonstrate that more than 30% of cancers selectively require VPS4A or VPS4B. VPS4A suppression in VPS4B-deficient cells selectively leads to ESCRT-III filament accumulation, cytokinesis defects, nuclear deformation, G2/M arrest, apoptosis, and potent tumor regression. CRISPR-SpCas9 screening and integrative genomic analysis reveal other ESCRT members, regulators of abscission, and interferon signaling as modifiers of VPS4A dependency. We describe a compendium of synthetic lethal vulnerabilities and nominate VPS4A and VPS4B as high-priority therapeutic targets for cancers with 18q or 16q loss.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is an inherently immune cell deprived tumor, characterized by desmoplastic stroma and suppressive immune cells. Here we systematically dissect PDA intrinsic mechanisms of immune evasion by in vitro and in vivo CRISPR screening, and identify Vps4b and Rnf31 as essential factors required for escaping CD8(+) T cell killing. For Vps4b we find that inactivation impairs autophagy, resulting in increased accumulation of CD8(+) T cell-derived granzyme B and subsequent tumor cell lysis. For Rnf31 we demonstrate that it protects tumor cells from TNF-mediated caspase 8 cleavage and subsequent apoptosis induction, a mechanism that is conserved in human PDA organoids. Orthotopic transplantation of Vps4b- or Rnf31 deficient pancreatic tumors into immune competent mice, moreover, reveals increased CD8(+) T cell infiltration and effector function, and markedly reduced tumor growth. Our work uncovers vulnerabilities in PDA that might be exploited to render these tumors more susceptible to the immune system.
OBJECTIVE: Small extracellular vesicle (sEV)-mediated intercellular communication is increasingly the key for the understanding of venous malformations (VMs). This study aims to clarify the detailed changes of sEVs in VMs. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Fifteen VM patients without treatment history and twelve healthy donors were enrolled in the study. sEVs were isolated from both fresh lesions and cell supernatant, and were examined by western blotting, nanoparticle tracking analysis and transmission electron microscopy. Western blot analysis, immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence were adopted to screening candidate regulator of sEV size. Specific inhibitors and siRNA were employed to validate the role of dysregulated p-AKT/vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4B (VPS4B) signaling on the size of sEVs in endothelial cells. RESULTS: The size of sEVs derived from both VM lesion tissues and cell model was significantly increased. VPS4B, whose expression level was mostly significantly downregulated in VM endothelial cells, was responsible for the size change of sEVs. Targeting abnormal AKT activation corrected the size change of sEVs by recovering the expression level of VPS4B. CONCLUSION: Downregulated VPS4B in endothelial cells, resulted from abnormally activated AKT signaling, contributed to the increased size of sEVs in VMs.
Vacuolar protein sorting 4B (VPS4B), a member of ATPase family proteins, plays a crucial role in lysosome-dependent degradation. Recently, it was found that VPS4B could negatively regulate breast cancer progression through promoting lysosomal-dependent degradation for EGFR. Nevertheless, other studies found that VPS4B was also essential for cell division and mitosis through insuring the maintenance of centrosome and spindle assembly. Thus, the role of VPS4B in cancer biology remains under debate. In this study, we analyzed the clinical significance of VPS4B in NSCLC. The expression of VPS4B was evaluated by Western blot in 8 paired fresh NSCLC tissues and immunohistochemistry on 105 paraffin-embedded slices. VPS4B was highly expressed in NSCLC and significantly associated with NSCLCs tumor size, histological differentiation, clinical stage and Ki-67. Besides, high VPS4B expression was an independent prognostic factor for NSCLC patients' poor survival. To determine whether VPS4B could regulate the proliferation of NSCLC cells, we knocked down the expression of VPS4B and analyzed the proliferation of A549 NSCLC cells using Western blot, CCK8 and flow cytometry assays, which together indicated that loss of VPS4B could inhibit cell cycle progress. These data suggest that VPS4B may promote the progression of NSCLC and be a biotarget for NSCLCs therapy.
SKD1 belongs to the AAA-ATPase family and is one of the mammalian class E Vps (vacuolar protein sorting) proteins. Previously we have reported that the overexpression of an ATPase activity-deficient form of SKD1 (suppressor of potassium transport growth defect), SKD1(E235Q), leads the perturbation of membrane transport through endosomes and lysosomes, however, the molecular mechanism behind the action of SKD1 is poorly understood. We have identified two SKD1-binding proteins, SBP1 and mVps2, by yeast two-hybrid screening and we assign them as mammalian class E Vps proteins. The primary sequence of SBP1 indicates 22.5% identity with that of Vta1p from Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which was recently identified as a novel class E Vps protein binding to Vps4p. In fact, SBP1 binds directly to SKD1 through its C-terminal region (198-309). Endogenous SBP1 is exclusively localized to cytosol, however it is redirected to an aberrant endosomal structure, the E235Q compartment, in the cells expressing SKD1(E235Q). The ATPase activity of SKD1 regulates both the membrane association of, and assembly of, a large hetero-oligomer protein complex, containing SBP1, which is potentially involved in membrane transport through endosomes and lysosomes. The N-terminal half (1-157) of human SBP1 is identical to lyst-interacting protein 5 and intriguingly, SKD1 ATPase activity significantly influences the membrane association of lyst protein. The SKD1-SBP1 complex, together with lyst protein, may function in endosomal membrane transport. A primary sequence of mVps2, a mouse homologue of human CHMP2A/BC-2, indicates 44.4% identity with Vps2p/Did4p/Chm2p from Saccharomyces cerevisiae. mVps2 also interacts with SKD1 and is localized to the E235Q compartment. Intriguingly, the N-terminal coiled-coil region of mVps2 is required for the formation of the E235Q compartment but not for binding to SKD1. We propose that both SBP1 and mVps2 regulate SKD1 function in mammalian cells.
A splicing mutation in VPS4B can cause dentin dysplasia type I (DD-I), a hereditary autosomal-dominant disorder characterized by rootless teeth, the etiology of which is genetically heterogeneous. In our study, dental follicle cells (DFCs) were isolated and cultured from a patient with DD-I and compared with those from an age-matched, healthy control. In a previous study, this DD-I patient was confirmed to have a loss-of-function splicing mutation in VPS4B (IVS7 + 46C > G). The results from this study showed that the isolated DFCs were vimentin-positive and CK14-negative, indicating that the isolated cells were derived from the mesenchyme. DFCs harboring the VPS4B mutation had a significantly higher proliferation rate from day 3 to day 8 than control DFCs, indicating that VPS4B is involved in cell proliferation. The cells were then replenished with osteogenic medium to investigate how the VPS4B mutation affected osteogenic differentiation. Induction of osteogenesis, detected by alizarin red and alkaline phosphatase staining in vitro, was decreased in the DFCs from the DD-I patient compared to the control DFCs. Furthermore, we also found that the VPS4B mutation in the DD-I patient downregulated the expression of osteoblast-related genes, such as ALP, BSP, OCN, RUNX2, and their encoded proteins. These outcomes confirmed that the DD-I-associated VPS4B mutation could decrease the capacity of DFCs to differentiate during the mineralization process and may also impair physiological root formation and bone remodeling. This might provide valuable insights and implications for exploring the pathological mechanisms underlying DD-I root development.
