Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
BACKGROUNDS: Prolyl-4-hydroxylases (P4Hs) are key enzymes in collagen synthesis. The P4HA subunit (P4HA1, P4HA2, and P4HA3) contains a substrate binding and catalyzation domain. We postulated that P4HA2 would play a key role in the cholangiocyte pathology of cholestatic liver diseases. METHODS: We studied humans with primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) and Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), P4HA2 -/- mice injured by DDC, and P4HA2 -/- /MDR2 -/- double knockout mice. A parallel study was performed in patients with PBC, PSC, and controls using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. In the murine model, the level of ductular reaction and biliary fibrosis were monitored by histology, qPCR, immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting. Expression of Yes1 Associated Transcriptional Regulator (YAP) phosphorylation was measured in isolated mouse cholangiocytes. The mechanism of P4HA2 was explored in RBE and 293T cell lines by using qPCR, Western blot, immunofluorescence, and co-immunoprecipitation. RESULTS: The hepatic expression level of P4HA2 was highly elevated in patients with PBC or PSC. Ductular reactive cholangiocytes predominantly expressed P4HA2. Cholestatic patients with more severe liver injury correlated with levels of P4HA2 in the liver. In P4HA2 -/- mice, there was a significantly reduced level of ductular reaction and fibrosis compared with controls in the DDC-induced chronic cholestasis. Decreased liver fibrosis and ductular reaction were observed in P4HA2 -/- /MDR2 -/- mice compared with MDR2 -/- mice. Cholangiocytes isolated from P4HA2 -/- /MDR2 -/- mice displayed a higher level of YAP phosphorylation, resulting in cholangiocytes proliferation inhibition. In vitro studies showed that P4HA2 promotes RBE cell proliferation by inducing SAV1 degradation, eventually resulting in the activation of YAP. CONCLUSIONS: P4HA2 promotes hepatic ductular reaction and biliary fibrosis by regulating the SAV1-mediated Hippo signaling pathway. P4HA2 is a potential therapeutic target for PBC and PSC.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is the third most common cancer and second most common cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) N6-methyladnosine (m6A) and methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3) play key roles in cancer progression. However, the roles of m6A and METTL3 in CRC progression require further clarification. METHODS: Adenoma and CRC samples were examined to detect m6A and METTL3 levels, and tissue microarrays were performed to evaluate the association of m6A and METTL3 levels with the survival of patients with CRC. The biological functions of METTL3 were investigated through cell counting kit-8, wound healing, and transwell assays. M6A epitranscriptomic microarray, methylated RNA immunoprecipitation-qPCR, RNA stability, luciferase reporter, and RNA immunoprecipitation assays were performed to explore the mechanism of METTL3 in CRC progression. RESULTS: M6A and METTL3 levels were substantially elevated in CRC tissues, and patients with CRC with a high m6A or METTL3 levels exhibited shorter overall survival. METTL3 knockdown substantially inhibited the proliferation, migration, and invasion of CRC cells. An m6A epitranscriptomic microarray revealed that the cell polarity regulator Crumbs3 (CRB3) was the downstream target of METTL3. METTL3 knockdown substantially reduced the m6A level of CRB3, and inhibited the degradation of CRB3 mRNA to increase CRB3 expression. Luciferase reporter assays also showed that the transcriptional level of wild-type CRB3 significantly increased after METTL3 knockdown but not its level of variation. Knockdown of YT521-B homology domain-containing family protein 2 (YTHDF2) substantially increased CRB3 expression. RNA immunoprecipitation assays also verified the direct interaction between the YTHDF2 and CRB3 mRNA, and this direct interaction was impaired after METTL3 inhibition. In addition, CRB3 knockdown significantly promoted the proliferation, migration, and invasion of CRC cells. Mechanistically, METTL3 knockdown activated the Hippo pathway and reduced nuclear localization of Yes1-associated transcriptional regulator, and the effects were reversed by CRB3 knockdown. CONCLUSIONS: M6A and METTL3 levels were substantially elevated in CRC tissues relative to normal tissues. Patients with CRC with high m6A or METTL3 levels exhibited shorter overall survival, and METTL3 promoted CRC progression. Mechanistically, METTL3 regulated the progression of CRC by regulating the m6A-CRB3-Hippo pathway.
Sulfation is a widespread modification of biomolecules that has been incompletely explored to date. Through cross-phenotype meta-analysis of bone mineral density in up to 426,824 genotyped human participants along with phenotypic characterization of multiple mutant mouse lines, we identified a causative role for sulfate transporter solute carrier family 26 member A2 (SLC26A2) deficiency in osteoporosis. Ablation of SLC26A2 in osteoblasts caused severe bone loss and accumulation of immature bone cells and elicited peculiar pericellular matrix (PCM) production characterized by undersulfation coupled with decreased stiffness. These altered chemophysical properties of the PCM disrupted the formation of focal adhesions in osteoblasts. Bulk RNA sequencing and functional assays revealed that the mechanoreciprocal inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and Yes1-associated transcriptional regulator (YAP)/WW domain containing transcription regulator 1 (TAZ) signaling impinged osteoblast maturation upon SLC26A2 deficiency. Moreover, pharmacological abrogation of the Hippo kinases and forced wheel-running ameliorated SLC26A2-deficient osteoporosis by promoting YAP/TAZ activity. Analysis of mouse single-cell RNA sequencing data suggested coordination among sulfate metabolism, focal adhesion, and YAP/TAZ activity during osteoblast-to-osteocyte transition. In addition to the SLC26A2-deficient setting, altered FAK and YAP/TAZ signaling was also observed in bone cells of ovariectomized mice and patients with osteoporosis, and pharmacological enforcing of YAP/TAZ activity ameliorated bone loss in ovariectomized mice. Collectively, these data unveil a role for sulfation in the developmental mechanoreciprocity between matrix and osteoblasts, which could be leveraged to prevent bone loss.
YES1 is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase that belongs to the SRC family of kinases (SFK) and controls multiple cancer signaling pathways. YES1 is amplified and overexpressed in many tumor types, where it promotes cell proliferation, survival, and invasiveness. Therefore, YES1 has been proposed as an emerging target in solid tumors. In addition, studies have shown that YES1 is a prognostic biomarker and a predictor of dasatinib activity. Several SFKs-targeting drugs have been developed, and some of them have reached clinical trials. However, these drugs have encountered challenges to their utilization in the clinical practice in unselected patients due to toxicity and lack of efficacy. In the case of YES1, novel specific inhibitors have been developed and tested in preclinical models, with impressive antitumor effects. In this review, we summarize the structure and activation of YES1 and describe its role in cancer as a target and prognostic and companion biomarker. We also address the efficacy of SFKs inhibitors that are currently in clinical trials, highlighting the main hindrances for their clinical use. Current available information strongly suggests that inhibiting YES1 in tumors with high expression of this protein is a promising strategy against cancer.
Src family kinases (SFKs) are non-receptor tyrosine kinases that are recognized as proto-oncogenic products. Among SFKs, YES1 is frequently amplified and overexpressed in a variety of human tumors, including lung, breast, ovarian, and skin cancers. YES1 plays a pivotal role in promoting cell proliferation, survival, and invasiveness during tumor development. Recent findings indicate that YES1 expression and activation are associated with resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs and tyrosine kinase inhibitors in human malignancies. YES1 undergoes post-translational modifications, such as lipidation and nitrosylation, which can modulate its catalytic activity, subcellular localization, and binding affinity for substrate proteins. Therefore, we investigated the diverse mechanisms governing YES1 activation and its impact on critical intracellular signal transduction pathways. We emphasized the function of YES1 as a potential mechanism contributing to the anticancer drug resistance emergence.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Growing evidence shows that some non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) contain small open reading frames (smORFs) that are translated into short peptides. Herein, we aimed to determine where and how these short peptides might promote hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. METHODS: We performed an RNA-immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (RIP-seq) assay with an antibody against ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6) on 4 cancer cell lines. Focusing on 1 long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), LINC00998, we used qPCR and public databases to evaluate its expression level in patients with HCC. Special vectors were constructed to confirm its coding potential. We also explored the function and mechanism of LINC00998-encoded peptide in tumor growth and metastasis. RESULTS: We discovered that many lncRNAs bind to RPS6 in cancer cells. One of these lncRNAs, LINC00998, encoded a small endogenous peptide, termed SMIM30. SMIM30, rather than the RNA itself, promoted HCC tumorigenesis by modulating cell proliferation and migration, and its level was correlated with poor survival in patients with HCC. Furthermore, SMIM30 was transcribed by c-Myc and then drove the membrane anchoring of the non-receptor tyrosine kinases SRC/YES1. Moreover, the downstream MAPK signaling pathway was activated by SRC/YES1. CONCLUSIONS: Our results not only unravel a new mechanism of HCC tumorigenesis promoted by ncRNA-encoded peptides, but also suggest that these peptides can serve as a new target for HCC cancer therapy and a new biomarker for HCC diagnosis and prognosis. LAY SUMMARY: Very little is known about how peptides activate signaling pathways that play a crucial role in diseases such as cancer. Specifically, we reported on a conserved peptide encoded by LINC00998, SMIM30. This peptide promoted the tumorigenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) by modulating cell proliferation and migration. Of note, it bound the non-receptor tyrosine kinases, SRC/YES1, to drive their membrane anchoring and phosphorylation, activating the downstream MAPK signaling pathway. Our work not only unravels a new mechanism of HCC tumorigenesis promoted by peptides, but also demonstrates how the peptide works to activate a signaling pathway.
Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is a rare and highly aggressive malignant tumor arising from bone and soft tissue. Suffering from intractable or recurrent diseases, the patients' therapy options are very limited. It is extremely urgent to identify novel potential therapeutic targets for ES and put them into use in clinical settings. In the present study, high-throughput screening of a small molecular pharmacy library was performed. The killing effect of the Aurora kinase A (AURKA) inhibitor TCS7010 in ES cells was identified, and AURKA was selected as the research object for further study. Disparate suppressants were adopted to study the cell death manner of TCS7010. TCS7010 and RNA silencing were used to evaluate the functions of AURKA in the apoptosis and ferroptosis of ES cells. Co-immunoprecipitation assay was used to investigate the correlation of AURKA and nucleophosmin1 (NPM1) in ES. Nude-mice transplanted tumor model was used for investigating the role of AURKA in ES in vivo. Investigations into the protein activities of AURKA were conducted using ES cell lines and xenograft models. AURKA was found to be prominently upregulated in ES. The AURKA expression level was remarkably connected to ES patients' shorter overall survival (OS) and event-free survival (EFS). Furthermore, AURKA inhibition markedly induced the apoptosis and ferroptosis of ES cells and attenuated tumorigenesis in vivo. On the part of potential mechanisms, it was found that AURKA inhibition triggered the apoptosis and ferroptosis of ES cells through the NPM1/Yes1 associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1) axis, which provides new insights into the tumorigenesis of ES. AURKA may be a prospective target for clinical intervention in ES patients.
Impaired degradation of the transcriptional coactivator YAP1 and IL6ST (interleukin 6 cytokine family signal transducer), two proteins deregulated in liver cancer, has been shown to promote tumor growth. Here, we demonstrate that YAP1 and IL6ST are novel substrates of chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and hepatocyte cell lines. Knockdown of the lysosomal CMA receptor LAMP2A increases protein levels of YAP1 and IL6ST, without changes in mRNA expression. Additionally, both proteins show KFERQ-dependent binding to the CMA chaperone HSPA8 and accumulate into isolated lysosomes after stimulation of CMA by prolonged starvation. We further show that LAMP2A downregulation promotes the proliferation and migration in HCC cells and a human hepatocyte cell line, and that it does so in a YAP1- and IL6ST-dependent manner. Finally, LAMP2A expression is downregulated, and YAP1 and IL6ST expression is upregulated, in human HCC biopsies. Taken together, our work reveals a novel mechanism that controls the turnover of two cancer-relevant proteins and suggests a tumor suppressor function of CMA in the liver, advocating for the exploitation of CMA activity for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.Abbreviations: ACTB: actin beta; ATG5: autophagy related 5; ATG7: autophagy related 7; CMA: chaperone-mediated autophagy; eMI: endosomal microautophagy; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; HSPA8: heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 8; IL6ST: interleukin 6 cytokine family signal transducer; JAK: Janus kinase; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; LAMP2A: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2A; MAPK8: mitogen-activated protein kinase 8; P6: pyridine 6; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TUBA: tubulin alpha; VDAC1: voltage dependent anion channel 1; VP: verteporfin; YAP1: Yes1 associated transcriptional regulator.
Erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular receptor A2 (EphA2) is a key member of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) family, while YES Proto-Oncogene 1 (YES1) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase (nRTK) and annexin A2 (ANXA2) belongs to the calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding protein family annexins. Here, we show that EphA2, YES1, and ANXA2 form a signal axis, in which YES1 activated by EphA2 phosphorylates ANXA2 at Tyr24 site, leading to ANXA2 activation and increased ANXA2 nuclear distribution in gastric cancer (GC) cells. Overexpression (OE) of YES1 increases, while knockdown (KD) of YES1 or ANXA2 decreases GC cell invasion and migration in vitro and tumor growth in mouse models. Reexpression of wildtype (WT) rather than mutant ANXA2 (Tyr24F) in ANXA2 knockdown (ANXA2-KD) GC cells restores YES1-induced cell invasion and migration, while neither WT nor mutant ANXA2 (Tyr24F) can restore cell invasion and migration in YES1-KD GC cells. In addition, the activation of EphA2-YES1-ANXA2 pathway is correlated with poor prognosis. Thus, our results establish EphA2-YES1-ANXA2 axis as a novel pathway that drives GC invasion and metastasis, targeting this pathway would be an efficient way for the treatment of GC.
INTRODUCTION: SCLC is an extremely aggressive subtype of lung cancer without approved targeted therapies. Here we identified YES1 as a novel targetable oncogene driving SCLC maintenance and metastasis. METHODS: Association between YES1 levels and prognosis was evaluated in SCLC clinical samples. In vitro functional experiments for proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle, and cytotoxicity were performed. Genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of YES1 was evaluated in vivo in cell- and patient-derived xenografts and metastasis. YES1 levels were evaluated in mouse and patient plasma-derived exosomes. RESULTS: Overexpression or gain/amplification of YES1 was identified in 31% and 26% of cases, respectively, across molecular subgroups, and was found as an independent predictor of poor prognosis. Genetic depletion of YES1 dramatically reduced cell proliferation, three-dimensional organoid formation, tumor growth, and distant metastasis, leading to extensive apoptosis and tumor regressions. Mechanistically, YES1-inhibited cells revealed alterations in the replisome and DNA repair processes, that conferred sensitivity to irradiation. Pharmacologic blockade with the novel YES1 inhibitor CH6953755 or dasatinib induced marked antitumor activity in organoid models and cell- and patient-derived xenografts. YES1 protein was detected in plasma exosomes from patients and mouse models, with levels matching those of tumors, suggesting that circulating YES1 could represent a biomarker for patient selection/monitoring. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide evidence that YES1 is a new druggable oncogenic target and biomarker to advance the clinical management of a subpopulation of patients with SCLC.
Emerging evidence indicates that transfer RNA (tRNA)-derived small RNAs (tsRNAs), originated from tRNA with high abundance RNA modifications, play an important role in many complex physiological and pathological processes. However, the biological functions and regulatory mechanisms of modified tsRNAs in cancer remain poorly understood. Here, it is screened for and confirmed the presence of a novel m(7)G-modified tsRNA, m(7)G-3'-tiRNA Lys(TTT) (mtiRL), in a variety of chemical carcinogenesis models by combining small RNA sequencing with an m(7)G small RNA-modified chip. Moreover, it is found that mtiRL, catalyzed by the tRNA m(7)G-modifying enzyme mettl1, promotes bladder cancer (BC) malignancy in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, mtiRL is found to specifically bind the oncoprotein Annexin A2 (ANXA2) to promote its Tyr24 phosphorylation by enhancing the interactions between ANXA2 and Yes proto-oncogene 1 (Yes1), leading to ANXA2 activation and increased p-ANXA2-Y24 nuclear localization in BC cells. Together, these findings define a critical role for mtiRL and suggest that targeting this novel m(7)G-modified tsRNA can be an efficient way for to treat BC.
BACKGROUND: The mechanism of metabolism reprogramming is an unsolved problem in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Recently, it was discovered that the Hippo pathway altered tumor metabolism and promoted tumor progression. Thus, this study aimed at identifying key regulators of metabolism reprogramming and the Hippo pathway in ccRCC and pinpointing potential therapeutic targets for ccRCC patients. METHODS: Hippo-related gene sets and metabolic gene sets were used to screen potential regulators of the Hippo pathway in ccRCC. Public databases and samples from patients were applied to investigate the association of dihydrolipoamide branched chain transacylase E2 (DBT) with ccRCC and Hippo signaling. The role of DBT was confirmed by gain or loss of function assays in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistic results were yielded by luciferase reporter assay, immunoprecipitation, mass spectroscopy, and mutational studies. RESULTS: DBT was confirmed as a Hippo-related marker with significant prognostic predictive value, and its downregulation was caused by methyltransferase-like-3 (METTL3)-mediated N6-methyladenosine (m(6) A) modification in ccRCC. Functional studies specified DBT as a tumor suppressor for inhibiting tumor progression and correcting the lipid metabolism disorder in ccRCC. Mechanistic findings revealed that annexin A2 (ANXA2) interacted with the lipoyl-binding domain of DBT to activate Hippo signaling which led to decreased nuclear localization of yes1-associated transcriptional regulator (YAP) and transcriptional repression of lipogenic genes. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated a tumor-suppressive role for the DBT/ANXA2/YAP axis-regulated Hippo signaling and suggested DBT as a potential target for pharmaceutical intervention in ccRCC.
BACKGROUND: Nuclear Yes1-associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1) promotes tumor progression. However, the function of cytoplasmic YAP1 in breast cancer cells and its impact on the survival of breast cancer patients remain unclear. Our research aimed to explore the biological function of cytoplasmic YAP1 in breast cancer cells and the possibility of cytoplasmic YAP1 as a predictive marker of breast cancer survival. METHODS: We constructed cell mutant models, including NLS-YAP1(5SA) (nuclear localized), YAP1(S94A) (incapable of binding to the TEA domain transcription factor family) and YAP1(S127D) (cytoplasmic localized), and used Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assays, 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) incorporation assays, and Western blotting (WB) analysis to detect cell proliferation and apoptosis. The specific mechanism of cytoplasmic YAP1-mediated endosomal sorting complexes required for transport III (ESCRT-III) assembly was studied by co-immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence staining, and WB analysis. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) was used to simulate YAP1 retention in the cytoplasm in in vitro and in vivo experiments to study the function of cytoplasmic YAP1. YAP1 binding to NEDD4-like E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (NEDD4L) was identified using mass spectrometry and was verified in vitro. Breast tissue microarrays were used to analyze the relationship between cytoplasmic YAP1 expression and the survival of breast cancer patients. RESULTS: YAP1 was mainly expressed in the cytoplasm in breast cancer cells. Cytoplasmic YAP1 promoted autophagic death of breast cancer cells. Cytoplasmic YAP1 bound to the ESCRT-III complex subunits charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B) and vacuolar protein sorting 4 homolog B (VPS4B), promoting assembly of CHMP2B-VPS4B and activating autophagosome formation. EGCG retained YAP1 in the cytoplasm, promoting the assembly of CHMP2B-VPS4B to promote autophagic death of breast cancer cells. YAP1 bound to NEDD4L, and NEDD4L mediated ubiquitination and degradation of YAP1. Breast tissue microarrays revealed that high levels of cytoplasmic YAP1 were beneficial to the survival of breast cancer patients. CONCLUSIONS: Cytoplasmic YAP1 mediated autophagic death of breast cancer cells by promoting assembly of the ESCRT-III complex; furthermore, we established a new breast cancer survival prediction model based on cytoplasmic YAP1 expression.
Rationale: The characterization of new genetic alterations is essential to assign effective personalized therapies in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Furthermore, finding stratification biomarkers is essential for successful personalized therapies. Molecular alterations of YES1, a member of the SRC (proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src) family kinases (SFKs), can be found in a significant subset of patients with lung cancer.Objectives: To evaluate YES1 (v-YES-1 Yamaguchi sarcoma viral oncogene homolog 1) genetic alteration as a therapeutic target and predictive biomarker of response to dasatinib in NSCLC.Methods: Functional significance was evaluated by in vivo models of NSCLC and metastasis and patient-derived xenografts. The efficacy of pharmacological and genetic (CRISPR [clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats]/Cas9 [CRISPR-associated protein 9]) YES1 abrogation was also evaluated. In vitro functional assays for signaling, survival, and invasion were also performed. The association between YES1 alterations and prognosis was evaluated in clinical samples.Measurements and Main Results: We demonstrated that YES1 is essential for NSCLC carcinogenesis. Furthermore, YES1 overexpression induced metastatic spread in preclinical in vivo models. YES1 genetic depletion by CRISPR/Cas9 technology significantly reduced tumor growth and metastasis. YES1 effects were mainly driven by mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signaling. Interestingly, cell lines and patient-derived xenograft models with YES1 gene amplifications presented a high sensitivity to dasatinib, an SFK inhibitor, pointing out YES1 status as a stratification biomarker for dasatinib response. Moreover, high YES1 protein expression was an independent predictor for poor prognosis in patients with lung cancer.Conclusions: YES1 is a promising therapeutic target in lung cancer. Our results provide support for the clinical evaluation of dasatinib treatment in a selected subset of patients using YES1 status as predictive biomarker for therapy.
Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women. Although routine and targeted therapies have improved the survival rate, there are still considerable challenges in the treatment of breast cancer. Metastasis is the leading cause of death in patients diagnosed with breast cancer. Yes-associated protein (YAP) and/or PDZ binding motif (TAZ) are usually abnormally activated in breast cancer leading to a variety of effects on tumour promotion, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cancer stem cell production and drug-resistance. The abnormal activation of YAP/TAZ can affect metastasis-related processes and promote cancer progression and metastasis by interacting with some metastasis-related factors and pathways. In this article, we summarise the evidence that YAP/TAZ regulates breast cancer metastasis, its post-translational modification mechanisms, and the latest advances in the treatment of YAP/TAZ-related breast cancer metastasis, besides providing a new strategy of YAP/TAZ-based treatment of human breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a new family of abundant regulatory RNAs with roles in various types of cancer. While the hsa_circ_0046701 (circ-YES1) function in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unclear. METHODS: Circ-YES1 expression in normal pulmonary epithelial and NSCLC cells was examined. The small interfering RNA for circ-YES1 was prepared, cell proliferation and migration were assessed. Tumorigenesis in nude mice was assayed to validate the role of circ-YES1. Bioinformatics analyses and luciferase reporter assays were utilized to identify downstream targets of circ-YES1. RESULTS: Compared to normal pulmonary epithelial cells, the circ-YES1 expression increased in NSCLC cells, and cell proliferation and migration were suppressed after circ-YES1 knockdown. Both high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1) and miR-142-3p were found to be downstream targets of circ-YES1, and miR-142-3p inhibition and HMGB1 overexpression reversed the effects of circ-YES1 knockdown on cell proliferation and migration. Similarly, HMGB1 overexpression reversed the miR-142-3p overexpression effects on these two processes. The imaging experiment results revealed that circ-YES1 knockdown impeded tumor development and metastasis in a nude mouse xenograft model. CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results show that circ-YES1 promotes tumor development through the miR-142-3p-HMGB1 axis and support the development of circ-YES1 probability as a new therapeutic NSCLC target.
Novel components in the noncanonical Hippo pathway that mediate the growth, metastasis, and drug resistance of breast cancer (BC) cells need to be identified. Here, we showed that expression of SAM and SH3 domain-containing protein 1 (SASH1) is negatively correlated with expression of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase kinase 4 (MAP4K4) in a subpopulation of patients with luminal-subtype BC. Downregulated SASH1 and upregulated MAP4K4 synergistically regulated the proliferation, migration, and invasion of luminal-subtype BC cells. The expression of LATS2, SASH1, and YAP1 and the phosphorylation of YAP1 were negatively regulated by MAP4K4, and LATS2 then phosphorylated SASH1 to form a novel MAP4K4-LATS2-SASH1-YAP1 cascade. Dephosphorylation of Yes1 associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1), YAP1/TAZ nuclear translocation, and downstream transcriptional regulation of YAP1 were promoted by the combined effects of ectopic MAP4K4 expression and SASH1 silencing. Targeted inhibition of MAP4K4 blocked proliferation, cell migration, and ER signaling both in vitro and in vivo. Our findings reveal a novel MAP4K4-LATS2-SASH1-YAP1 phosphorylation cascade, a noncanonical Hippo pathway that mediates ER signaling, tumorigenesis, and metastasis in breast cancer. Targeted intervention with this noncanonical Hippo pathway may constitute a novel alternative therapeutic approach for endocrine-resistant BC.
Rationale: The response rate to the MEK inhibitor trametinib in BRAF-mutated melanoma patients is less than 30%, and drug resistance develops rapidly, but the mechanism is still unclear. Yes1-associated transcriptional regulator (YAP1) is highly expressed in melanoma and may be related to MEK inhibitor resistance. The purpose of this study was to investigate the mechanism of YAP1 in MEK inhibitor resistance in melanoma and to screen YAP1 inhibitors to further determine whether YAP1 inhibition reverses MEK inhibitor resistance. Methods: On the one hand, we analyzed paired melanoma and adjacent tissue samples using RNA-seq and found that the Hippo-YAP1 signaling pathway was the top upregulated pathway. On the other hand, we evaluated the transcriptomes of melanoma samples from patients before and after trametinib treatment and investigated the correlation between YAP1 expression and trametinib resistance. Then, we screened for inhibitors that repress YAP1 expression and investigated the mechanisms. Finally, we investigated the antitumor effect of YAP1 inhibition combined with MEK inhibition both in vitro and in vivo. Results: We found that YAP1 expression levels upon trametinib treatment in melanoma patients were correlated with resistance to trametinib. YAP1 was translocated into the nucleus after trametinib treatment in melanoma cells, which could render resistance to MEK inhibition. Thus, we screened for inhibitors that repress YAP1 expression and identified multiple bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) inhibitors, including NHWD-870, as hits. BET inhibition repressed YAP1 expression by decreasing BRD4 binding to the YAP1 promoter. Consistently, YAP1 overexpression was sufficient to reverse the proliferation defect caused by BRD4 depletion. In addition, the BET inhibitor NHWD-870 acted synergistically with trametinib to suppress melanoma growth in vitro and in vivo. Conclusions: We identified a new vulnerability for MEK inhibitor-resistant melanomas, which activated Hippo pathway due to elevated YAP1 activity. Inhibition of BRD4 using BET inhibitors suppressed YAP1 expression and led to blunted melanoma growth when combined with treatment with the MEK inhibitor trametinib.
OBJECTIVE: Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation is a metabolic pathway whose dysregulation is recognized as a critical factor in various cancers, because it sustains cancer cell survival, proliferation, and metastasis. The acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain (ACSL) family is known to activate long-chain fatty acids, yet the specific role of ACSL3 in breast cancer has not been determined. METHODS: We assessed the prognostic value of ACSL3 in breast cancer by using data from tumor samples. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function assays were also conducted to determine the roles and downstream regulatory mechanisms of ACSL3 in vitro and in vivo. RESULTS: ACSL3 expression was notably downregulated in breast cancer tissues compared with normal tissues, and this phenotype correlated with improved survival outcomes. Functional experiments revealed that ACSL3 knockdown in breast cancer cells promoted cell proliferation, migration, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Mechanistically, ACSL3 was found to inhibit beta-oxidation and the formation of associated byproducts, thereby suppressing malignant behavior in breast cancer. Importantly, ACSL3 was found to interact with YES proto-oncogene 1, a member of the Src family of tyrosine kinases, and to suppress its activation through phosphorylation at Tyr419. The decrease in activated YES1 consequently inhibited YAP1 nuclear colocalization and transcriptional complex formation, and the expression of its downstream genes in breast cancer cell nuclei. CONCLUSIONS: ACSL3 suppresses breast cancer progression by impeding lipid metabolism reprogramming, and inhibiting malignant behaviors through phospho-YES1 mediated inhibition of YAP1 and its downstream pathways. These findings suggest that ACSL3 may serve as a potential biomarker and target for comprehensive therapeutic strategies for breast cancer.
