ATP-binding cassette sub-family B member 5; Drug efflux transporter present in a number of stem cells that acts as a regulator of cellular differentiation. Able to mediate efflux from cells of the rhodamine dye and of the therapeutic drug doxorubicin. Specifically present in limbal stem cells, where it plays a key role in corneal development and repair.
ABCB5 encodes a full transporter (ABCB5FL) and a half transporter (ABCB5beta), which is unique in the ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter superfamily. We discuss the roles of both isoforms in undifferentiated slow-cycling cells, multidrug resistance, and tumorigenesis, and their regulation pathways.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs, which are important in the development of multidrug resistance in cancer by regulating gene expression at the post‑transcriptional level. The present study investigated the functional effects of miR‑522 in chemoresistant colon cancer cells. The results demonstrated that miR‑522 was significantly downregulated in doxorubicin (DOX) resistant colon cell line, HT29/DOX, compared with the parental HT29 colon cancer cell line. Overexpression of miR‑522 in the HT29/DOX cells partially restored DOX sensitivity. miRNA target prediction algorithms suggested that ABCB5 was a target gene for miR‑522. A fluorescent reporter assay confirmed that miR‑522 was able to specifically bind to the predicted site of the ABCB5 mRNA 3'‑untranslated region. When miR‑522 was overexpressed in the HT29/DOX cells, the protein expression levels of ABCB5 were downregulated. Furthermore, knockdown of ABCB5 significantly increased the growth inhibition rate of the HT29/DOX cells, compared with the control group. These results suggested that miR‑522 may affect the sensitivity of colon cancer cell lines to DOX treatment by targeting ABCB5.
BACKGROUND: Sinonasal mucosal melanoma (SNMM) is a lethal malignancy with poor prognosis. Treatment outcomes of SNMM are poor. Novel prognostic or progression markers are needed to help adjust therapy. METHODS: RNA-seq was used to analyze the mRNA expression of tumor tissues and normal nasal mucosa from primary SNMM patients (n= 3). Real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) was used to validate the results of RNA-seq (n= 3), while protein expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry (IHC, n= 31) and western blotting (n= 3). Retrospective studies were designed to determine the clinical parameters and the total survival rate, and correlation between the protein expression levels of the most significant key genes and prognosis was analyzed. RESULTS: In total, 668 genes were upregulated and 869 genes were downregulated in SNMM (fold change ⩾ 2, adjusted p value < 0.01). Both mRNA and protein expression levels of the key genes in SNMM tumor tissues were higher than those in the normal control nasal mucosal tissues. The expression rates of TYRP1, ABCB5, and MMP17 in 31 primary SNMM cases were 90.32%, 80.65%, and 64.52%, respectively. In addition, age, typical symptoms, and AJCC stage were related to overall survival rate of patients with SNMM (p< 0.05). Furthermore, the expression of ABCB5 was age-related (p= 0.002). Compared with individuals with negative ABCB5 expression, those with positive expression exhibited significantly poor overall survival (p= 0.02). CONCLUSION: The expression levels of TYRP1, ABCB5, and MMP17 were significantly upregulated in SNMM tissues, and the expression of ABCB5 was related to poor prognosis in SNMM. Thus, ABCB5 may serve as a progression marker and can predict unfavorable prognosis in patients with SNMM.
Corneal transparency and avascularity are essential for vision. The avascular cornea transitions into the vascularized conjunctiva at the limbus. Here, we explore a limbal stromal cell sub-population that expresses ABCB5 and has mesenchymal stem cell characteristics. Human primary corneal stromal cells were enriched for ABCB5 by using FACS sorting. ABCB5+ cells expressed the MSC markers CD90, CD73, and CD105. ABCB5+ but not ABCB5- cells from the same donor displayed evidence of pluripotency with a significantly higher colony-forming efficiency and the ability of trilineage differentiation (osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic). The ABCB5+ cell secretome demonstrated lower levels of the pro-inflammatory protein MIF (macrophage migration inhibitory factor) as well as of the pro-(lymph)angiogenic growth factors VEGFA and VEGFC, which correlated with reduced proliferation of Jurkat cells co-cultured with ABCB5+ cells and decreased proliferation of blood and lymphatic endothelial cells cultured in ABCB5+ cell-conditioned media. These data support the hypothesis that ABCB5+ limbal stromal cells are a putative MSC population with potential anti-inflammatory and anti-(lymph)angiogenic effects. The therapeutic modulation of ABCB5+ limbal stromal cells may prevent cornea neovascularization and inflammation and, if transplanted to other sites in the body, provide similar protective properties to other tissues.
The ATP-binding cassette superfamily member ABCB5 identifies a subset of skin-resident mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) that exhibit potent immunomodulatory and wound healing-promoting capacities along with superior homing ability. The ABCB5(+) MSCs can be easily accessed from discarded skin samples, expanded, and delivered as a highly homogenous medicinal product with standardized potency. A range of preclinical studies has suggested therapeutic efficacy of ABCB5(+) MSCs in a variety of currently uncurable skin and non-skin inflammatory diseases, which has been substantiated thus far by distinct clinical trials in chronic skin wounds or recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Therefore, skin-derived ABCB5(+) MSCs have the potential to provide a breakthrough at the forefront of MSC-based therapies striving to fulfill current unmet medical needs. The most recent milestones in this regard are the approval of a phase III pivotal trial of ABCB5(+) MSCs for treatment of recessive dystrophic and junctional epidermolysis bullosa by the US Food and Drug Administration, and national market access of ABCB5(+) MSCs (AMESANAR((R))) for therapy-refractory chronic venous ulcers under the national hospital exemption pathway in Germany.
Defining markers of different phenotypic states in melanoma is important for understanding disease progression, determining the response to therapy, and defining the molecular mechanisms underpinning phenotype-switching driven by the changing intratumor microenvironment. The ABCB5 transporter is implicated in drug-resistance and has been identified as a marker of melanoma-initiating cells. Indeed ongoing studies are using ABCB5 to define stem cell populations. However, we show here that the ABCB5 is a direct target for the microphthalmia-associated transcription factor MITF and its expression can be induced by beta-catenin, a key activator and co-factor for MITF. Consequently, ABCB5 mRNA expression is primarily associated with melanoma cells exhibiting differentiation markers. The results suggest first that ABCB5 is unlikely to represent a marker of de-differentiated melanoma stem cells, and second that ABCB5 may contribute to the non-genetic drug-resistance associated with highly differentiated melanoma cells. To reconcile the apparently conflicting observations in the field, we propose a model in which ABCB5 may mark a slow-cycling differentiated population of melanoma cells.
BACKGROUND: The role of CD133 und ABCB5 is discussed in treatment resistance in several types of cancer. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) colocalization differs in untreated, in beam radiation treated, and in chemotherapy treated retinoblastoma specimens. Additionally, CD133, ABCB5, sphingosine kinase 1, and sphingosine kinase 2 gene expression was analyzed in WERI-RB1 (WERI RB1) and etoposide-resistant WERI RB1 subclones (WERI ETOR). METHODS: Active human untreated retinoblastoma specimens (n = 12), active human retinoblastoma specimens pretreated with beam radiation before enucleation (n = 8), and active human retinoblastoma specimens pretreated with chemotherapy before enucleation (n = 7) were investigated for localization and expression of CD133 and ABCB5 by immunohistochemistry. Only specimens with IIRC D, but not E, were included in this study. Furthermore, WERI RB1 and WERI ETOR cell lines were analyzed for CD133, ABCB5, sphingosine kinase 1, and sphingosine kinase 2 by the real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the same amount of CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) colocalization islets in untreated and treated human retinoblastoma specimens. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed a statistically significant upregulation of CD133 in WERI ETOR (p = 0.002). No ABCB5 expression was detected in WERI RB1 and WERI ETOR. On the other hand, SPHK1 (p = 0.0027) and SPHK2 (p = 0.017) showed significant downregulation in WERI ETOR compared to WERI RB1. CONCLUSIONS: CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) co-localization islets were noted in untreated and treated human retinoblastoma specimens. Therefore, we assume that CD133(+)/ABCB5(+) islets might play a role in retinoblastoma genesis, but not in retinoblastoma treatment resistance.
ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 5 (ABCB5) is a new member of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily and has been reported as a novel marker for limbal stem cell (LSC), which is essential for corneal homeostasis. ABCB5 expression has also been discovered in the subpopulation of several cancer cells containing the cancer stem cell (CSC). However, the pathogenetic relationship between LSC and CSC and ABCB5 in the ocular surface squamous neoplasm (OSSN) is still entirely unknown. To improve understanding of the role of ABCB5 in OSSN, we performed immunohistochemistry for ABCB5 in nine OSSN case series. While expression of ABCB5 is restricted to the basal epithelial cell layer in the normal limbus, elevated expressions of ABCB5 were clearly observed in all OSSN, and there was some breadth in the range of intensity of ABCB5 expression. Interestingly, the elevated expression patterns of ABCB5 in OSSN could be classified in three categories: perivascular, marginal and diffuse patterns. Our findings demonstrated for the first time that the expression of ABCB5 was upregulated in OSSN and that elevated expression of ABCB5 may be involved in the pathogenesis of OSSN.
BACKGROUND: In malignant melanoma (MM), the proteins SOX10, ABCB5 and CD271 are strongly expressed, and are associated with tumour-initiating potential and stem cell-like properties. AIM: To compare SOX10, ABCB5 and CD271 expression profiles in melanocytic naevi and MM at different stages, and to correlate these with survival data. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed for SOX10, ABCB5 and CD271 expression in common naevi (n = 14), dysplastic naevi (n = 11), primary MM (n = 39), lymph node metastases (n = 14) and distant metastases (n = 14). Data were assessed using univariate and multivariate statistics. RESULTS: Compared with melanocytic naevi, there was significantly higher SOX10 expression in primary melanomas, lymph node metastases and distant metastases. ABCB5 had significantly higher expression in primary melanomas, lymph node metastases and distant metastases compared with melanocytic naevi. CD271 expression was significantly increased in dysplatic naevi, lymph node metastases and distant metastases. Using multivariate analysis, SOX10 was demonstrated to be a significant independent positive predictor for metastatic disease. CONCLUSIONS: SOX10, ABCB5 and CD271 proteins are strongly expressed in advanced MM, whereas SOX10 appears to be the most suitable marker for independent prediction of metastatic disease. Our data indicate that SOX10, ABCB5 and CD271 might play a role in MM progression.
BACKGROUND: More than 50% of metastatic melanoma patients have a specific mutation in the serine/threonine kinase BRAF. This results in constitutive activation of the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK-MAP kinase pathway, which causes uncontrolled cell growth. Vemurafenib (PLX4032) is an oral chemotherapeutic agent that targets the specific mutation V600E in the BRAF protein. Initial response rates are high in patients with BRAF mutant melanoma treated with a BRAF inhibitor such as vemurafenib, but resistance nearly always develops and disease progression ensues. There are several different mechanisms by which melanoma develops BRAF inhibitor resistance. One potential component of resistance is increased drug efflux. Overexpressed ABCB5 (ATP-binding cassette transporter, subfamily B, member 5) has been shown to efflux anti-cancer drugs from cancer cells. The purpose of this study is to determine whether ABCB5 is highly expressed in BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanoma cells and to evaluate whether ABCB5 is involved in the development of resistance to BRAF inhibitors in cutaneous melanoma. METHODS: We established three BRAF inhibitor-resistant melanoma cell lines with BRAF mutation. The expression level of ABCB5 in PLX-resistant cell lines was checked by real-time PCR and Western blot analysis. SK-MEL-2 melanoma cells with wild-type BRAF were used for comparison. The association of different levels of ABCB5 with the changes of ERK, p-ERK, Akt and p-Akt was also assessed by Western blotting. Re-sensitization of melanoma cells to PLX was tested by p-ERK inhibitor PD58059 and ABCB5 knockdown by ABCB5 siRNA, respectively. RESULTS: We showed that ABCB5 was overexpressed in SK-MEL-28PLXr and A2058PLXr cells but not in A375PLXr cells. ABCB5 overexpression is associated with activation of p-ERK status but not Akt. Inhibition of p-ERK re-sensitized SK-MEL-28PLXr and A2058PLXr cells to PLX treatment, but knockdown of ABCB5 did not re-sensitize A2058 PLXr and SK-MEL-28 PLXr cells to PLX treatment. CONCLUSION: These results confirm that, even though ABCB5 was overexpressed in SK-MEL-28 and A2058 melanoma cells that develop resistance to BRAF inhibitors, ABCB5 may not be a major targetable contributor to BRAF resistance. p-ERK inhibition may play important roles in BRAF resistance in these two melanoma cell lines.
This study investigated the impact of ABCB5, ABCC5 and RLIP76 polymorphisms on doxorubicin pharmacokinetics in Asian breast cancer patients (N=62). Direct sequencing was performed to screen for previously identified ABCC5 polymorphisms as well as polymorphisms in the exons and exon-intron boundaries of ABCB5 and RLIP76 genes. Genotype-phenotype correlations were analyzed using Mann-Whitney U-test. The homozygous variant allele at the ABCC5 g.+7161G>A (rs1533682) locus was significantly associated with higher doxorubicin clearance (g.+7161AA vs g.+7161GG, CL/BSA (Lh(-1)m(-2)): 30.34 (25.41-33.60) vs 22.46 (15.04-49.4), P=0.04). Homozygosity for the reference allele at the ABCC5 g.-1679T>A locus was associated with significantly higher doxorubicinol exposure (g.-1679TT vs g.-1679TA, AUC(0-infinity)/dose/BSA (hm(-5)): 15.48 (6.18-67.17) vs 8.88 (3.68-21.71), P=0.0001). No significant influence of the three newly identified ABCB5 polymorphisms (c.2T>C, c.343A>G and c.1573G>A) on doxorubicin pharmacokinetics was observed. No polymorphisms were identified in the RLIP76 gene. These findings suggest that ABCC5 polymorphisms may explain partially the interpatient variability in doxorubicin disposition.
