Tyrosine-protein kinase ABL1; Non-receptor tyrosine-protein kinase that plays a role in many key processes linked to cell growth and survival such as cytoskeleton remodeling in response to extracellular stimuli, cell motility and adhesion, receptor endocytosis, autophagy, DNA damage response and apoptosis. Coordinates actin remodeling through tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins controlling cytoskeleton dynamics like WASF3 (involved in branch formation); ANXA1 (involved in membrane anchoring); DBN1, DBNL, CTTN, RAPH1 and ENAH (involved in signaling); or MAPT and PXN (microtubule-bindin [...] 
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), caused by constitutively active BCR-ABL1 fusion tyrosine kinase, has served as a paradigm for successful application of molecularly targeted cancer therapy. The development of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) imatinib allows patients with CML to experience near-normal life expectancy. Specific point mutations that decrease drug binding affinity can produce TKI resistance, and second- and third-generation TKIs largely mitigate this problem. Some patients develop TKI resistance without known resistance mutations, with significant heterogeneity in the underlying mechanism, but this is relatively uncommon, with the majority of patients with chronic phase CML achieving long-term disease control. In contrast, responses to TKI treatment are short lived in advanced phases of the disease or in BCR-ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia, with relapse driven by both BCR-ABL1 kinase-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Additionally, the frontline CML treatment with second-generation TKIs produces deeper molecular responses, driving disease burden below the detection limit for a greater number of patients. For patients with deep molecular responses, up to half have been able to discontinue therapy. Current efforts are focused on identifying therapeutic strategies to drive deeper molecular responses, enabling more patients to attempt TKI discontinuation.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In this review, we emphasize up-to-date practical cytogenetic and molecular aspects of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and summarize current knowledge on tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) resistance and treatment response monitoring of CML. RECENT FINDINGS: The introduction of TKIs has changed the natural course of CML and markedly improved patient survival. Over the past decades, many research efforts were devoted to elucidating the leukemogenic mechanisms of BCR-ABL1 and developing novel TKIs. More recent studies have attempted to answer new questions that have emerged in the TKI era, such as the cytogenetic and molecular bases of treatment failure and disease progression, the clinical impact of genetic aberrations in Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-positive and Ph-negative cells, and the biological significance of Ph secondarily acquired during therapy of other hematological neoplasms. Recent progresses in the understanding of the cytogenetic and molecular mechanisms underlying therapeutic failure and disease progression have improved the risk stratification of CML and will be helpful in the design of novel therapeutic strategies.
CONTEXT.-: In the 2016 update of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of hematopoietic neoplasms, BCR-ABL1-like B-acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (B-ALL) is added as a new provisional entity that lacks the BCR-ABL1 translocation but shows a pattern of gene expression very similar to that seen in B-ALL with BCR-ABL1. OBJECTIVE.-: To review the kinase-activating alterations and the diagnostic approach for BCR-ABL1-like B-ALL. DATA SOURCES.-: We provide a comprehensive review of BCR-ABL1-like B-ALL based on recent literature and the 2016 update of the World Health Organization classification of hematopoietic neoplasms. CONCLUSIONS.-: Several types of kinase-activating alterations (fusions or mutations) are identified in BCR-ABL1-like B-ALL. The main categories are alterations in the ABL class family of genes, encompassing ABL1, ABL2, PDGFRB, PDGFRA (rare), and colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) fusions, or the JAK2 class family of genes, encompassing alterations in JAK2, CRLF2, EPOR, and other genes in this pathway. These alterations determine the sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. As a wide variety of genomic alterations are included in this category, the diagnosis of BCR-ABL1-like B-ALL is extremely complex. Stepwise algorithms and comprehensive unbiased testing are the 2 ways to approach the diagnosis of BCR-ABL1-like B-ALL.
BCR-ABL1 compound mutations can lead to resistance to ABL1 inhibitors in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), which could be targeted by combining the ATP-site inhibitor ponatinib and the allosteric inhibitor asciminib. Here, we report the clinical validation of this approach in a CML patient, providing a basis for combination therapy to overcome such resistance.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is driven by a translocation event between chromosomes 9 and 22, leading to the formation of a constitutively active BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein. Approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) for CML inhibit BCR-ABL1 by competitively targeting its adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding site, which significantly improves patient outcomes. However, resistance to and intolerance of TKIs remains a clinical challenge. Asciminib is a promising investigational agent in development that allosterically targets BCR-ABL1 in a non-ATP-competitive manner. It binds to the ABL1 myristoyl-binding pocket and is effective against most ABL1 kinase domain mutations that confer resistance to ATP-competitive TKIs, including the T315I mutation. This review discusses unmet needs in the current CML treatment landscape, reports clinical data from asciminib trials that support the use of single-agent asciminib as third-line therapy and beyond, and explores the potential benefit of asciminib in combination with approved TKIs in earlier lines.
With the success of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy for the treatment of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), CML is now treated as a chronic disease. As such, the community of oncologists may see patients with CML more often than the primary-care physician and must focus on long-term management of adverse events and adherence. BCR-ABL1 TKIs are effective therapies in CML but are associated with distinct safety profiles. Thus, selection of long-term treatment with any TKI requires assessment of patient comorbidities and regular monitoring to identify the potential emergence of adverse effects or new risk factors. With a focus on long-term safety, this review provides a holistic picture of the primary care needs of patients with CML, emphasizing on the importance of community oncologists who in many cases act as both oncologists and primary-care physicians.
In BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukemia, treatment heterogeneity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), especially in the absence of kinase domain mutations in BCR-ABL1, is poorly understood. Through deep molecular profiling, we uncovered three transcriptomic subtypes of BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukemia, each representing a maturation arrest at a stage of B-cell progenitor differentiation. An earlier arrest was associated with lineage promiscuity, treatment refractoriness and poor patient outcomes. A later arrest was associated with lineage fidelity, durable leukemia remissions and improved patient outcomes. Each maturation arrest was marked by specific genomic events that control different transition points in B-cell development. Interestingly, these events were absent in BCR-ABL1(+) preleukemic stem cells isolated from patients regardless of subtype, which supports that transcriptomic phenotypes are determined downstream of the leukemia-initialing event. Overall, our data indicate that treatment response and TKI efficacy are unexpected outcomes of the differentiation stage at which this leukemia transforms.
Asciminib is a potent, orally bioavailable, investigational drug that specifically and potently inhibits the tyrosine kinase activity of native ABL1, together with that of the chimeric BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein which causes chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In contrast to ATP-competitive BCR-ABL1 kinase inhibitors employed to treat CML that target multiple kinases, asciminib binds to the myristate binding pocket on the kinase domains of ABL1 and BCR-ABL1. Hitherto no drugs have been developed whose mechanism of action involves interacting with myristate binding pockets on proteins, and analysis of the structures of such binding sites in proteins other than ABL1/ABL2/BCR-ABL1 strongly suggest that asciminib will not bind to these with high affinity. Accordingly, the drug has no known safety liabilities resulting from any off-target activity, as illustrated by its specificity towards cells expressing BCR-ABL1 and lack of effects on non-kinase targets in biochemical screens. Because asciminib does not bind to the ATP-binding site it maintains substantial activity against kinase domain mutations that impart acquired drug resistance to ATP-competitive drugs. However, in vitro studies in cells have identified BCR-ABL1 mutations that reduce the anti-proliferative activity of asciminib, some of which are associated with clinical resistance towards the drug in patients. Here we review effects of asciminib on mutant forms of BCR-ABL1, analyse their sensitivity towards the drug from a structural perspective and affirm support for employing combinations with ATP-competitive inhibitors to impede the reactivation of BCR-ABL1 kinase activity in patients receiving monotherapy.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for BCR::ABL1 is the most common and widely accepted method of measurable residual disease (MRD) assessment in Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL); however, RT-PCR may not be an optimal measure of MRD in many cases of Ph+ ALL. We evaluated the clinical impact of a highly sensitive next-generation sequencing (NGS) MRD assay (sensitivity of 10(-6) ) and its correlation with RT-PCR for BCR::ABL1 in patients with Ph+ ALL. Overall, 32% of patients had a discordance between MRD assessment by RT-PCR and NGS, and 31% of patients who achieved NGS MRD negativity were PCR+ at the same timepoint. Among eight patients with long-term detectable BCR::ABL1 by PCR, six were PCR+/NGS-. These patients generally had stable PCR levels that persisted despite therapeutic interventions, and none subsequently relapsed; in contrast, patients who were PCR+/NGS+ had more variable PCR values that responded to therapeutic intervention. In a separate cohort of prospectively collected clinical samples, 11 of 65 patients (17%) with Ph+ ALL who achieved NGS MRD negativity had detectable BCR::ABL1 by PCR, and none of these patients relapsed. Relapse-free survival and overall survival were similar in patients who were PCR+/NGS- and PCR-/NGS-, suggesting that PCR for BCR::ABL1 did not provide additional prognostic information in patients who achieved NGS MRD negativity. NGS-based assessment of MRD is prognostic in Ph+ ALL and identifies patients with low-level detectable BCR::ABL1 who are unlikely to relapse nor to benefit from therapeutic interventions.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a hematological malignancy characterized by the excessive proliferation of myeloid progenitors. In the case of CML, these extracellular vesicles (EVs) were shown to communicate with hematopoietic stem cells, mesenchymal stem cells, myeloid derived suppressor cells and endothelial cells determining a beneficial microenvironment for the CML clone. Moreover, as these EVs are marked through BCR-ABL1, they were shown to be useful in clinical research in determining the grade of molecular remission with further studies being needed to determine if they are better or worse at predicting CML relapse. More than this, we consider BCR-ABL1-positive EVs to represent only a stepping-stone for other malignancies that also present fusion genes that are loaded in EVs.
Leukemia is a many-sided molecular disorder that arises because of over expression of oncogenes, suppression of tumor suppressor genes, and chromosomal translocations. These chromosomal rearrangements are nonetheless among the many determinants that underlie transformation of cells from normal to a cancerous phenotype and predispose cells to refractoriness against interventions by reduced drug influx and substantial drug efflux. This review unfolds current understanding of BCR-ABL1 (break point cluster region-c-abl oncogene 1, non-receptor tyrosine kinase) signaling with a focus on apoptotic suppressive mechanisms and alternative approaches to chronic myeloid leukemia therapy.
Distinct diagnostic entities within BCR::ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) are currently defined by the International Consensus Classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemias (ICC): "lymphoid only", with BCR::ABL1 observed exclusively in lymphatic precursors, vs "multilineage", where BCR::ABL1 is also present in other hematopoietic lineages. Here, we analyzed transcriptomes of 327 BCR::ABL1-positive patients with ALL (age, 2-84 years; median, 46 years) and identified 2 main gene expression clusters reproducible across 4 independent patient cohorts. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of fluorescence-activated cell-sorted hematopoietic compartments showed distinct BCR::ABL1 involvement in myeloid cells for these clusters (n = 18/18 vs n = 3/16 patients; P < .001), indicating that a multilineage or lymphoid BCR::ABL1 subtype can be inferred from gene expression. Further subclusters grouped samples according to cooperating genomic events (multilineage: HBS1L deletion or monosomy 7; lymphoid: IKZF1-/- or CDKN2A/PAX5 deletions/hyperdiploidy). A novel HSB1L transcript was highly specific for BCR::ABL1 multilineage cases independent of HBS1L genomic aberrations. Treatment on current German Multicenter Study Group for Adult ALL (GMALL) protocols resulted in comparable disease-free survival (DFS) for multilineage vs lymphoid cluster patients (3-year DFS: 70% vs 61%; P = .530; n = 91). However, the IKZF1-/- enriched lymphoid subcluster was associated with inferior DFS, whereas hyperdiploid cases showed a superior outcome. Thus, gene expression clusters define underlying developmental trajectories and distinct patterns of cooperating events in BCR::ABL1-positive ALL with prognostic relevance.
BACKGROUND: The purpose of this report is to enhance our scientific understanding of the clinicopathologic features of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) with the e12a3 transcript and to provide insights into potential treatment options for this rare subtype of CML. CASE SUMMARY: We present the case of a 21-year-old Chinese male patient who was diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) with the e12a3 transcript. Biopsy of his left iliac soft tissue mass indicated that he was in the blast crisis phase of CML. The patient was treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) drugs and achieved remission, but relapsed soon after. Despite receiving prognostic chemotherapy, the disease progressed and eventually led to the patient's death. CONCLUSION: To avoid missed diagnosis and misdiagnosis, it is recommended to conduct a thorough clinical evaluation and actively identify the underlying etiology.
Directing the axis of cell division toward extrinsic and intrinsic cues plays a fundamental role in morphogenesis, asymmetric cell division, and stem cell self-renewal. Recent studies highlight the misorientation of the cell division axis as a cause of mammalian diseases, including polycystic kidney disease. Although the core regulators for oriented cell division have been identified in invertebrate model systems, we still have an imprecise picture of the relevant signaling networks in the mammalian system. The reasons for this include the lack of established approaches in mammalian cells to survey the molecules required for the spindle orientation. Here we summarize our recent study on a genome-scale RNA-mediated interference screen of human kinases to identify a new player for the oriented cell division in both culture cells and developing mammalian tissues.
Secondary kinase domain mutations in BCR::ABL1 represent the most common cause of resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. The first 5 approved BCR::ABL1 TKIs target the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding pocket. Mutations confer resistance to these ATP-competitive TKIs and those approved for other malignancies by decreasing TKI affinity and/or increasing ATP affinity. Asciminib, the first highly active allosteric TKI approved for any malignancy, targets an allosteric regulatory pocket in the BCR::ABL1 kinase C-lobe. As a non-ATP-competitive inhibitor, the activity of asciminib is predicted to be impervious to increases in ATP affinity. Here, we report several known mutations that confer resistance to ATP-competitive TKIs in the BCR::ABL1 kinase N-lobe that are distant from the asciminib binding pocket yet unexpectedly confer in vitro resistance to asciminib. Among these is BCR::ABL1 M244V, which confers clinical resistance even to escalated asciminib doses. We demonstrate that BCR::ABL1 M244V does not impair asciminib binding, thereby invoking a novel mechanism of resistance. Molecular dynamic simulations of the M244V substitution implicate stabilization of an active kinase conformation through impact on the alpha-C helix as a mechanism of resistance. These N-lobe mutations may compromise the clinical activity of ongoing combination studies of asciminib with ATP-competitive TKIs.
BCR-ABL1 is in the center of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) pathology, diagnosis and treatment, as confirmed by the success of tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. However, additional mechanisms and events, many of which function independently of BCR-ABL1, play important roles, particularly in terms of leukemic stem cell (LSC) persistence, primary and secondary resistance, and disease progression. Promising therapeutic approaches aim to disrupt pathways which mediate LSC survival during successful TKI treatment, in the hope of improving long-term treatment-free-remission and perhaps provide a functional cure for some patients. Over the years through advances in sequencing technology frequent molecular aberrations in addition to BCR-ABL1 have been identified not only in advanced disease but also in chronic phase CML, often affecting epigenetic regulators such as ASXL1, DNMT3A and TET2. Analyses of serial samples have revealed various patterns of clonal evolution with some mutations preceding the BCR-ABL1 acquisition. Such mutations can be considered to be important co-factors in the pathogenesis of CML and could potentially influence therapeutic strategies in the future.
