Adenylate cyclase type 1; Catalyzes the formation of the signaling molecule cAMP in response to G-protein signaling. Mediates responses to increased cellular Ca(2+)/calmodulin levels (By similarity). May be involved in regulatory processes in the central nervous system. May play a role in memory and learning. Plays a role in the regulation of the circadian rhythm of daytime contrast sensitivity probably by modulating the rhythmic synthesis of cyclic AMP in the retina (By similarity). Belongs to the adenylyl cyclase class-4/guanylyl cyclase family.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) is one of the most lethal malignant tumors in the world. The GSE55643 and GSE15471 microarray datasets were downloaded to screen the diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers for PAAD. 143 downregulated genes and 118 upregulated genes were obtained. Next, we performed gene ontology (GO) and The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis on these genes and constructed a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. We screened out two important clusters of genes, including 13 upregulated and 5 downregulated genes. After the survival analysis, 3 downregulated genes and 10 upregulated genes were identified as the selected key genes. The KEGG analysis on 13 selected genes showed that GNG7 and ADCY1 enriched in the Pathway in Cancer. Next, the diagnostic and prognostic value of GNG7 and ADCY1 was investigated using independent cohort of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), GSE84129 and GSE62452. We observed that the expression of the GNG7 and ADCY1 was decreased in PAAD. The diagnostic receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis indicated that the GNG7 and ADCY1 could serve as sensitive diagnostic markers in PAAD. Survival analysis suggested that expression of GNG7, ADCY1 were significantly associated with PAAD overall survival (OS). The multivariate cox regression analysis showed that the expression of GNG7, ADCY1 were independent risk factors for PAAD OS. Our study indicated GNG7 and ADCY1 may be potential diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in patients with PAAD.
Airway epithelial cells express both Ca(2+) activated TMEM16A/ANO1 and cAMP activated CFTR anion channels. Previous work suggested a significant crosstalk of intracellular Ca(2+) and cAMP signaling pathways, leading to activation of both chloride channels. We demonstrate that in airway epithelial cells, stimulation of purinergic or muscarinic G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) activates TMEM16A and CFTR. Additional expression of G(q/11) and phospholipase C coupled GPCRs strongly enhanced the crosstalk between Ca(2+)- and cAMP-dependent signaling. Knockdown of endogenous GRCRs attenuated crosstalk and functional coupling between TMEM16A and CFTR. The number of receptors did not affect expression or membrane localization of TMEM16A or CFTR, but controlled assembly of the local signalosome. GPCRs translocate Ca(2+)-sensitive adenylate cyclase type 1 (ADCY1) and exchange protein directly activated by cAMP (EPAC1) to particular plasma membrane domains containing GPCRs, CFTR and TMEM16A, thereby producing compartmentalized Ca(2+) and cAMP signals and significant crosstalk. While biosynthesis and membrane trafficking of CFTR requires a functional Golgi apparatus, maturation and membrane trafficking of TMEM16A may occur independent of the Golgi. Because Ca(2+) activated TMEM16A currents are only transient, continuous Cl(-) secretion by airway epithelial cells requires CFTR. The present data also explain why receptor-dependent activation of TMEM16A is more efficient than direct stimulation by Ca(2+).
Although doxorubicin (DOX) is a broad-spectrum and anthracycline chemotherapeutic agent, cardiotoxicity limits its clinical application. Therefore, it is meant to prevent the clinical side effects of DOX. Human cardiomyocyte-like AC16 cells were treated with DOX to induce intracellular toxicity. AC16 cell viability was determined by Cell Counting Kit 8 and 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine assays. The tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 abundances were quantified by matched kits. The apoptosis rate was measured by flow cytometry. Western blot analysis was conducted to measure the protein expression levels in AC16 cells. Oxidative stress was analyzed by measuring superoxide dismutase and malondialdehyde production. The quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was conducted to assess the expression levels of circ-latent transforming growth factor-beta binding protein-1 (circ-LTBP1), microRNA-107 (miR-107), and Adenylate cyclase 1 (ADCY1) expression in AC16 cells. The interaction relationship among circ-LTBP1, miR-107, and ADCY1 was verified by dual-luciferase reporter and RNA immunoprecipitation assays. As a result, treatment with DOX induced the proliferation inhibition, inflammation, apoptosis, and oxidative stress in AC16 cells, which were rescued by circ-LTBP1 inhibition or miR-107 upregulation. MiR-107 was confirmed as a target of circ-LTBP1, and inhibition of circ-LTBP1-mediated effects on DOX-stimulated cells were abolished by downregulation of miR-107. Circ-LTBP1 mediated ADCY1 expression by sponging miR-107 in AC16 cells. The upregulation of miR-107 increased cell proliferation and inhibited inflammation, apoptosis, and oxidative stress in DOX-stimulated cells through downregulation of ADCY1. Circ-LTBP1 was found to enhance DOX-induced effects on proliferation inhibition, inflammation, apoptosis, and oxidative stress in AC16 cells through competitively sponging miR-107 and elevating ADCY1.
PURPOSE: This study aims to identify the mechanism of Inhibin Subunit Beta B (INHBB), a member of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family involved in the regulation of human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs) decidualization in recurrent implantation failure (RIF). METHODS: RNA-seq was conducted to identify the differentially expressed genes in the endometria from control and RIF patients. RT-qPCR, WB, and immunohistochemistry were performed to analyse the expression levels of INHBB in endometrium and decidualised HESCs. RT-qPCR and immunofluorescence were used to detect changes in the decidual marker genes and cytoskeleton after knockdown INHBB. Then, RNA-seq was used to dig out the mechanism of INHBB regulating decidualization. The cAMP analogue (forskolin) and si-INHBB were used to investigate the involvement of INHBB in the cAMP signalling pathway. The correlation of INHBB and ADCY expression was analysed by Pearson's correlation analysis. RESULTS: Our results showed significantly reduced expression of INHBB in endometrial stromal cells of women with RIF. In addition, INHBB was increased in the endometrium of the secretory phase and significantly induced in in-vitro decidualization of HESCs. Notably, with RNA-seq and siRNA-mediated knockdown approaches, we demonstrated that the INHBB-ADCY1-mediated cAMP signalling pathway regulates the reduction of decidualization. We found a positive association between the expression of INHBB and ADCY1 in endometria with RIF (R(2) = 0.3785, P = 0.0005). CONCLUSIONS: The decline of INHBB in HESCs suppressed ADCY1-induced cAMP production and cAMP-mediated signalling, which attenuated decidualization in RIF patients, indicating that INHBB is an essential component in the decidualization process.
