Adenylate cyclase type 6; Catalyzes the formation of the signaling molecule cAMP downstream of G protein-coupled receptors. Functions in signaling cascades downstream of beta- adrenergic receptors in the heart and in vascular smooth muscle cells. Functions in signaling cascades downstream of the vasopressin receptor in the kidney and has a role in renal water reabsorption. Functions in signaling cascades downstream of PTH1R and plays a role in regulating renal phosphate excretion. Functions in signaling cascades downstream of the VIP and SCT receptors in pancreas and contributes to the [...] 
Non-syndromic arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is characterized by multiple congenital contractures resulting from reduced fetal mobility. Genetic mapping and whole exome sequencing (WES) were performed in 31 multiplex and/or consanguineous undiagnosed AMC families. Although this approach identified known AMC genes, we here report pathogenic mutations in two new genes. Homozygous frameshift mutations in CNTNAP1 were found in four unrelated families. Patients showed a marked reduction in motor nerve conduction velocity (<10 m/s) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of sciatic nerve in the index cases revealed severe abnormalities of both nodes of Ranvier width and myelinated axons. CNTNAP1 encodes CASPR, an essential component of node of Ranvier domains which underlies saltatory conduction of action potentials along the myelinated axons, an important process for neuronal function. A homozygous missense mutation in adenylate cyclase 6 gene (ADCY6) was found in another family characterized by a lack of myelin in the peripheral nervous system (PNS) as determined by TEM. Morpholino knockdown of the zebrafish orthologs led to severe and specific defects in peripheral myelin in spite of the presence of Schwann cells. ADCY6 encodes a protein that belongs to the adenylate cyclase family responsible for the synthesis of cAMP. Elevation of cAMP can mimic axonal contact in vitro and upregulates myelinating signals. Our data indicate an essential and so far unknown role of ADCY6 in PNS myelination likely through the cAMP pathway. Mutations of genes encoding proteins of Ranvier domains or involved in myelination of Schwann cells are responsible for novel and severe human axoglial diseases.
Breast cancer is a malignant tumor that seriously threatens women's health, and luminal-like cancer subtypes account for the majority of the cases. The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationships among DNA methylation, gene expression profile, and the tumor-immune microenvironment of luminal-like breast cancer, and to identify the potential key genes that regulate immune cell infiltration in luminal-like breast cancer. The ESTIMATE algorithm was applied to calculate immune scores and stromal scores of patients with breast cancer. Kaplan-Meier curves were generated for survival analysis. The clusterProfile package was used for Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using the STRING database and Cytoscape software. Correlations between ADCY6 expression and immune cell infiltration-related pathways were analyzed by gene set variation analysis. R software was used for the statistical analysis and figure generation. Disease-free survival was higher in the immune score-high group than it was in the immune score-low group, while the stromal score had no correlation with prognosis. There were 515 genes that differed in both gene expression and DNA methylation levels, and these genes were mainly enriched in immune process-related pathways. ADCY6 was enriched in module A of the PPI network. Patients with downregulation and hypermethylation of ADCY6 associated with a better prognosis. ADCY6 expression was negatively correlated with the activation of immune process-related signaling pathways, immune checkpoint receptors, and ligands, except for CLEC4G. DNA methylation was found to be involved in the regulation of the key cellular pathways of luminal-like breast cancer immune cell infiltration. Additionally, ADCY6 was identified as a prognostic factor involved in the DNA methylation-regulated immune processes in luminal-like breast cancer.
B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) is the common type of blood cancer. Although the remission rate has increased, the current treatment options for B-ALL are usually related to adverse reactions and recurrence, so it is necessary to find other treatment options. G protein signaling modulator 1 (GPSM1) is one of several factors that affect the basic activity of the G protein signaling system, but its role in B-ALL has not yet been clarified. In this study, we analyzed the expression of GPSM1 in the Oncomine database and found that the GPSM1 levels were higher in B-ALL cells than in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Analyses of the Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA) demonstrated that patients with high GPSM1 levels had shorter survival times than those with low levels. Additionally, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) suggested that GPSM1 was positively correlated with proliferation, G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) ligand binding, Galphas signaling and calcium signaling pathways. In further experiments, GPSM1 was found to be highly expressed in Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines, and downregulation of GPSM1 inhibited proliferation and promoted cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in BALL-1 and Reh cells. Moreover, knockdown of GPSM1 suppressed ADCY6 and RAPGEF3 expression in BALL-1 and Reh cells. Furthermore, we reported that GPSM1 regulated JNK expression via ADCY6-RAPGEF3. The present study demonstrates that GPSM1 promotes tumor growth in BALL-1 and Reh cells by modulating ADCY6-RAPGEF3-JNK signaling.
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is defined as congenital, non-progressive contractures in more than two joints and in multiple body areas, resulting from reduced fetal mobility. So far, more than 400 causative genes for AMC have been identified. Some isolated AMC phenotypes arise as a result of mutations in genes encoding components required for motor neuron structure, function, and myelination, as in the case of ADCY6 encoding the enzyme adenylyl cyclase type 6. ADCY6 inactivation, due to biallelic variants, have been previously associated with the lethal congenital contracture syndrome 8 (LCCS8). So far, only four LCCS8 patients, from two families, have been reported. Here, we describe a new patient affected by a severe form of AMC, harboring two novel compound heterozygous variants in ADCY6. Our findings expand the clinical and mutational spectrum of LCCS8, showing a possible correlation between the impact of the ADCY6 missense variants reported to date, predicted by molecular modeling, and the severity of the phenotype.
