Adenylate cyclase type 5; Catalyzes the formation of the signaling molecule cAMP in response to G-protein signaling. Mediates signaling downstream of ADRB1. Regulates the increase of free cytosolic Ca(2+) in response to increased blood glucose levels and contributes to the regulation of Ca(2+)-dependent insulin secretion.
Adenylyl cyclase 5 (ADCY5)-related phenotypes comprise an expanding disease continuum, but much remains to be understood about the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of the disease. ADCY5-related disease comprises a spectrum of hyperkinetic disorders involving chorea, myoclonus, and/or dystonia, often with paroxysmal exacerbations. Hypotonia, developmental delay, and intellectual disability may be present. The causative gene encodes adenylyl cyclase, the enzyme responsible for the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to cyclic adenosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP). cAMP is a second messenger that exerts a wide variety of effects via several intracellular signaling pathways. ADCY5 is the most commonly expressed isoform of adenylyl cyclase in medium spiny neurons (MSNs) of the striatum, and it integrates and controls dopaminergic signaling. Through cAMP pathway, ADCY5 is a key regulator of the cortical and thalamic signaling that control initiation of voluntary movements and prevention of involuntary movements. Gain-of-function mutations in ADCY5 have been recently linked to a rare genetic disorder called ADCY5-related dyskinesia, where dysregulation of the cAMP pathway leads to reduced inhibitory activity and involuntary hyperkinetic movements. Here, we present an update on the neurobiology of ADCY5, together with a detailed overview of the reported clinical phenotypes and genotypes. Although a range of therapeutic approaches has been trialed, there are currently no disease-modifying treatments. Improved in vitro and in vivo laboratory models will no doubt increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of this rare genetic movement disorder, which will improve diagnosis, and also facilitate the development of precision medicine approaches for this, and other forms of hyperkinesia. (c) 2021 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
INTRODUCTION: ADCY5-related dyskinesia is a rare neurological disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding the adenylyl cyclase 5 (ADCY5) isoform, a protein that plays an important role in intracellular transmission. Variants in ADCY5 are associated with a spectrum of neurological disease encompassing dyskinesia, chorea, and dystonia. State of the-art. ADCY5 mutations result in clinically heterogeneous manifestations which comprise a range of core and less to highly variable symptoms. Due to the heterogeneous nature and difficulty in diagnosis of the disorder, available treatments are highly limited. CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: ADCY5-related dyskinesia was reported in 52 individuals in the literature over a five-year period (January 2017 to January 2022). We have listed all the symptoms and their frequency. The most common symptom reported in these patients was dystonia. Over 50% of patients developed dyskinesia and chorea. We report two cases of familial occurrence of symptomatic ADCY5-related dyskinesia. A 45-year-old patient presented with involuntary movements which had been occurring since childhood. The proband's neurological examination revealed dysarthria, involuntary myoclonic twitches, and choreic movements. The patient's 9-year-old son had developed involuntary movements, mainly chorea and dystonia. FUTURE DIRECTIONS: This paper aims to summarise the recent literature on ADCY5-related neurological disorders and to present a new case of a Polish family with ADCY5 mutation. Genetic diagnostics are important in the context of possible future targeted treatments.
To investigate the influence of miR-18a-3p and ADCY5 on OP and osteogenic differentiation of human Mesenchymal stem cell (hBMSCs) and its possible mechanism. Samples were collected from osteoporotic patients with or without vertebral compression fracture, and without OP volunteers. MiR-18a-3p and ADCY5 mRNA expression levels in the tissue samples and hBMSCs during osteogenic differentiation were detected。MiR-18a-3p mimic and OE-ADCY5 were introduced into hBMSCs to research the effects of miR-18a-3p and ADCY5 on osteogenesis differentiation of hBMSCs. Dual luciferase reporter system and RNA pull-down were applied to determine whether ADCY5 was a target gene of miR-18a-3p. Compared with the control group, ADCY5 expression level was down-regulated in patients with OP-no-Frx and OP-Frx, but that of miR-18a-3p was up-regulated. In addition, ADCY5 increased during osteogenesis differentiation of hBMSCs, whereas miR-18a-3p did not. OE-ADCY5 significantly facilitated calcium deposition, ALP activity, osteoblast protein expression (OSX, ALP and EUNX2), miR-18a-3p mimic inhibited osteogenic differentiation, and partially reversed the effect of OE-ADCY5 on osteogenic differentiation. In general, miR-18a-3p targets ADCY5 to promote OP and may be involved in spinal fracturs.
BACKGROUND: Mutations of theADCY5 have been identified in patients with familial dyskinesia, early-onsetautosomal dominant chorea and dystonia, and benign hereditary chorea. Most ofthe ADCY5 mutations are de novo or transmitted in an autosomal dominantfashion. Only two pedigrees are known to show autosomal recessive inheritance. OBJECTIVES: We report twosiblings with severe ID, dystonic movement, and growth failure with unknownetiology. METHODS: We planned a proband-parentapproach using whole exome sequencing. RESULTS: Homozygous mutationin exon 21 of the ADCY5 (p.R1238W) was identified in the siblings. Althoughtheir parents were heterozygous for the mutation, they were free from clinicalmanifestations. CONCLUSIONS: Our results furtherexpand the phenotype/genotype correlations of the ADCY5-related disorders.Mutations of ADCY5 should be considered in pediatric patients with ID andinvoluntary movement.
This report details prominent neuropsychiatric features in one family with an ADCY5 gene mutation. ADCY5 mutations cause a variable motor phenotype, though most cases have some core involuntary movement features. The psychiatric aspects of the disorder have not been emphasised in previous publications. We discuss possible pathogenesis.
BACKGROUND: ADCY5 mutation is a clinical condition that has been described in limited numbers in the literature, causing hyperkinetic movement disorder, and may be sporadic or familial. PATIENT DESCRIPTION: This report looks at the involuntary movements that started early in life in a 5-year-old girl. RESULTS: Patient's electroensephalogram and cranial magnetic resonance imaging were normal. Metabolic scans were normal. ADCY5 mutation was found in whole exome sequencing of the patient who did not have a similar family history. CONCLUSION: Some features such as the worsening of involuntary movements after sleep and the presence of hypotonia in our patient suggested this mutation. Our patient is resistant to more than one drug. With this report, we aimed to pave the way for better understanding of the gene and the discovery of different treatment options.
BACKGROUND: Striatal cyclic adenosine monophosphate activity modulates movement and is determined from the balance between its synthesis by adenylate cyclase 5 (ADCY5) and its degradation by phosphodiesterase 10A (PDE10A). OBJECTIVE: We assessed the integrity of striatocortical pathways, in vivo, in 2 genetic hyperkinetic disorders caused by ADCY5 and PDE10A mutations. METHODS: We studied 6 subjects with PDE10A and ADCY5 mutations using [(11) C]IMA107 PET, [(123) I]FP-CIT Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and multimodal MRI to investigate PDE10A and dopamine transporter availability, neuromelanin-containing neurons, and microstructural white and gray matter changes, respectively. RESULTS: We found that PDE10A and ADCY5 mutations were associated with decreased PDE10A expression in the striatum and globus pallidus, decreased dopamine transporter expression in the striatum, loss of substantia nigra neuromelanin-containing neurons, and microstructural white and gray matter changes within the substantia nigra, striatum, thalamus, and frontoparietal cortices. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate an association between PDE10A and ADCY5 mutations and pre/postsynaptic molecular changes, substantia nigra damage, and white and gray matter changes within the striatocortical pathways. (c) 2018 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
BACKGROUND: ADCY5-related dyskinesia is characterized by early-onset movement disorders. There is currently no validated treatment, but anecdotal clinical reports and biological hypotheses suggest efficacy of caffeine. OBJECTIVE: The aim is to obtain further insight into the efficacy and safety of caffeine in patients with ADCY5-related dyskinesia. METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted worldwide in 30 patients with a proven ADCY5 mutation who had tried or were taking caffeine for dyskinesia. Disease characteristics and treatment responses were assessed through a questionnaire. RESULTS: Caffeine was overall well tolerated, even in children, and 87% of patients reported a clear improvement. Caffeine reduced the frequency and duration of paroxysmal movement disorders but also improved baseline movement disorders and some other motor and nonmotor features, with consistent quality-of-life improvement. Three patients reported worsening. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that caffeine should be considered as a first-line therapeutic option in ADCY5-related dyskinesia. (c) 2022 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
We describe a family with an autosomal dominant familial dyskinesia resembling myoclonus-dystonia associated with a novel missense mutation in ADCY5, found through whole-exome sequencing. A tiered analytical approach was used to analyse whole-exome sequencing data from an affected grandmother-granddaughter pair. Whole-exome sequencing identified 18,000 shared variants, of which 46 were non-synonymous changes not present in a local cohort of control exomes (n = 422). Further filtering based on predicted splicing effect, minor allele frequency in the 1000 Genomes Project and on phylogenetic conservation yielded 13 candidate variants, of which the heterozygous missense mutation c.3086T>G, p. M1029R in ADCY5 most closely matched the observed phenotype. This report illustrates the utility of whole-exome sequencing in cases of undiagnosed movement disorders with clear autosomal dominant inheritance. Moreover, ADCY5 mutations should be considered in cases with apparent myoclonus-dystonia, particularly where SCGE mutations have been excluded. ADCY5-related dyskinesia may manifest variable expressivity within a single family, and affected individuals may be initially diagnosed with differing neurological phenotypes.
BACKGROUND: Adenylyl cyclase 5 (ADCY5) mutations is associated with heterogenous syndromes: familial dyskinesia and facial myokymia; paroxysmal chorea and dystonia; autosomal-dominant chorea and dystonia; and benign hereditary chorea. We provide detailed clinical data on 7 patients from six new kindreds with mutations in the ADCY5 gene, in order to expand and define the phenotypic spectrum of ADCY5 mutations. METHODS: In 5 of the 7 patients, followed over a period of 9 to 32 years, ADCY5 was sequenced by Sanger sequencing. The other 2 unrelated patients participated in studies for undiagnosed pediatric hyperkinetic movement disorders and underwent whole-exome sequencing. RESULTS: Five patients had the previously reported p.R418W ADCY5 mutation; we also identified two novel mutations at p.R418G and p.R418Q. All patients presented with motor milestone delay, infantile-onset action-induced generalized choreoathetosis, dystonia, or myoclonus, with episodic exacerbations during drowsiness being a characteristic feature. Axial hypotonia, impaired upward saccades, and intellectual disability were variable features. The p.R418G and p.R418Q mutation patients had a milder phenotype. Six of seven patients had mild functional gain with clonazepam or clobazam. One patient had bilateral globus pallidal DBS at the age of 33 with marked reduction in dyskinesia, which resulted in mild functional improvement. CONCLUSION: We further delineate the clinical features of ADCY5 gene mutations and illustrate its wide phenotypic expression. We describe mild improvement after treatment with clonazepam, clobazam, and bilateral pallidal DBS. ADCY5-associated dyskinesia may be under-recognized, and its diagnosis has important prognostic, genetic, and therapeutic implications. (c) 2016 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the ADCY5 gene, encoding adenylate cyclase 5, are associated with elevated fasting glucose and increased type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk. Despite this, the mechanisms underlying the effects of these polymorphic variants at the level of pancreatic beta-cells remain unclear. Here, we show firstly that ADCY5 mRNA expression in islets is lowered by the possession of risk alleles at rs11708067. Next, we demonstrate that ADCY5 is indispensable for coupling glucose, but not GLP-1, to insulin secretion in human islets. Assessed by in situ imaging of recombinant probes, ADCY5 silencing impaired glucose-induced cAMP increases and blocked glucose metabolism toward ATP at concentrations of the sugar >8 mmol/L. However, calcium transient generation and functional connectivity between individual human beta-cells were sharply inhibited at all glucose concentrations tested, implying additional, metabolism-independent roles for ADCY5. In contrast, calcium rises were unaffected in ADCY5-depleted islets exposed to GLP-1. Alterations in beta-cell ADCY5 expression and impaired glucose signaling thus provide a likely route through which ADCY5 gene polymorphisms influence fasting glucose levels and T2D risk, while exerting more minor effects on incretin action.
INTRODUCTION: ADCY5-related hyperkinesia encompasses a heterogeneous group of phenotypes, including paroxysmal chorea, myoclonus, and dystonia. The disease is attributed to mutations of ADCY5, which encodes an adenylate cyclase enzyme. The disease can occur in a sporadic or familial pattern. With exception of one study, all reports on familial ADCY5-related hyperkinesia were associated with an autosomal dominant inheritance. Herein, we describe a native Arabian Bedouin family with an autosomal recessive ADCY5-related disorder and expand the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of this disorder. METHODS: The pedigree included 4 generations of a family with 6 affected individuals. The patients were examined clinically and radiologically. Homozygosity mapping and Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) were used to identify a variant, predicted to be pathogenic, which segregated with disease in this family. RESULTS: All patients presented with early-onset dystonia and myoclonus. The patients had delayed motor and language milestones, axial hypotonia, severe anxiety, social phobia, and isolation. One patient had dilated cardiomyopathy. WES of one affected individual revealed a novel homozygous missense mutation (c.1762G > A, p.D588N) of ADCY5, that segregated with disease in an autosomal recessive manner, and was absent in more than 1000 ethnically-matched chromosomes. The mutation replaces a highly conserved nucleotide and is predicted to be deleterious. CONCLUSION: This study reports the second family with autosomal recessive childhood-onset ADCY5-related disorder and expands our understanding of phenotype/genotype correlations of this disorder.
Two meta-analysis of genome wide association studies identified two variants at adenylate cyclase 5 (ADCY5) associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus, fasting and 2-hour glucose in non-pregnant individuals of European descent. The objective of our study was to explore the role of common variants in ADCY5 on gestational glycemic traits, including plasma glucose, insulin values, beta cell function and insulin resistance in the fasted state as well as plasma glucose 1 hour after a 50-gram glucose challenge test among Chinese Han women. Homoeostasis model assessment (HOMA) was used to quantify beta cell function (HOMA1-beta and HOMA2-beta) and insulin resistance (HOMA1-IR and HOMA2-IR). Thirty-five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in ADCY5 were genotyped in 929 unrelated Chinese Han women with singleton pregnancies. Three SNPs (rs6797915, rs9856662 and rs9875803) displayed evidence for association with plasma glucose 1 hour after a 50-gram glucose challenge test (P = 0.042, 0.018 and 0.018, respectively), one (rs6777397) displayed evidence for association with HOMA1-beta (P = 0.014), and one (rs6762009) displayed evidence for association with HOMA1-IR (P = 0.033). These results provide additional insight into the effects of genetic variation within ADCY5 in glucose metabolism, especially during pregnancy and in non-European descent populations.
Epidemiological studies have reported that the Mexican population is highly susceptible to dyslipidemia. The MARC1, ADCY5, and BCO1 genes have recently been involved in lipidic abnormalities. This study aimed to analyze the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2642438, rs56371916, and rs6564851 on MARC1, ADCY5, and BCO1 genes, respectively, with the lipid profile in a cohort of Mexican adults. We included 1900 Mexican adults from the Health Workers Cohort Study. Demographic and clinical data were collected through a structured questionnaire and standardized procedures. Genotyping was performed using a predesigned TaqMan assay. A genetic risk score (GRS) was created on the basis of the three genetic variants. Associations analysis was estimated using linear and logistic regression. Our results showed that rs2642438-A and rs6564851-A alleles had a risk association for hypertriglyceridemia (OR = 1.57, p = 0.013; and OR = 1.33, p = 0.031, respectively), and rs56371916-C allele a trend for low HDL-c (OR = 1.27, p = 0.060) only in men. The GRS revealed a significant association for hypertriglyceridemia (OR = 2.23, p = 0.022). These findings provide evidence of an aggregate effect of the MARC1, ADCY5, and BCO1 variants on the risk of hypertriglyceridemia in Mexican men. This knowledge could represent a tool for identifying at-risk males who might benefit from early interventions and avoid secondary metabolic traits.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Neonates at the highest and lowest percentiles of birth weight present an increased risk of developing metabolic diseases in adult life. While environmental events in utero may play an important role in this association, some genetic variants are associated both with birth weight and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), suggesting a genetic link between intrauterine growth and metabolism in adult life. Variants rs11708067 in ADCY5 and rs7754840 in CDKAL1 are associated with low birth weight, risk of T2DM, and lower insulin secretion in adults. We aimed to investigate whether, besides birth weight, these polymorphisms were related to insulin secretion at birth. METHODS: A cohort of 218 healthy term newborns from uncomplicated pregnancies were evaluated for anthropometric and biochemical variables. Cord blood insulin and C-peptide were analyzed by ELISA. Genotyping of rs11708067 in ADCY5 and rs7754840 in CDKAL1 was performed. RESULTS: Newborns carrying the A allele of ADCY5 rs11708067 had lower cord blood insulin and C-peptide, even after adjusting by maternal glycemia, HbA1c, and pregestational BMI. Lower birth weight was found for AA-AG genotypes compared to GG, but no differences were seen in adjusted birth weight or z-score. Variant rs7754840 in CDKAL1 was not associated with birth weight, neonatal insulin, or C-peptide for any genotype or genetic model. CONCLUSIONS: The variant rs11708067 in ADCY5 is associated with lower neonatal insulin and C-peptide concentrations. Our results suggest that the genetic influence on insulin secretion may be evident from birth, even in healthy newborns, independently of maternal glycemia and BMI.
BACKGROUND: Cerebral Palsy (CP) represents a frequent cause of disability in childhood. Early in life, genetic disorders may present with motor dysfunction and diagnosed as CP. Establishing the primary, genetic etiology allows more accurate prognosis, genetic counselling, and planning for symptomatic interventions in homogeneous etiological groups. Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is recommended in refractory movement disorders, including isolated pediatric dystonias. For dystonia evolving in more complex associations in genetic CP, the effect of DBS is still understudied and currently only sporadically described. OBJECTIVES: To report the effect of DBS applied to the globus pallidus pars interna (GPi) in children with complex movement disorders caused by pathogenic ADCY5 variants, diagnosed as dyskinetic CP previous to genetic diagnostic. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study on evolution of treatment with DBS in ADCY5-related disease. A standardized proforma including the different type of movement disorders and associated neurological signs was completed at each follow-up time, based on video recordings, as well as functional assessments used in children with CP. RESULTS: Four children (mean of age, 13 +/- 2.9 years) received GPi-DBS. The same de novo pathogenic missense variant (c.1252C > T, p.R418W) was identified in three out of four and a splice site variant (c.2088 + 2G > T) in one subject. Developmental delay and overlapping features including axial hypotonia, chorea, dystonic attacks, myoclonus, and cranial dyskinesia were present. The median age at DBS was 9 years and follow-up with DBS, 2.6 years. We identified a pattern of clinical response with early suppression of dystonic attacks, followed by improvement of myoclonus and facial dyskinesia. Effect on chorea was delayed and more limited. Two patients gained notable functional benefit related to sitting, standing, gait, use of upper limbs and speech. CONCLUSION: ADCY5-related disease may benefit from GPi-DBS. The most significant clinical response relates to the early and sustained benefit on dystonic attacks and a variable but still positive response on the other hyperkinetic features. Genetic etiology of CP will contribute to further elucidate genotype-phenotype correlations and to refine DBS indication as network-related symptomatic interventions.
