Alpha-2C adrenergic receptor; Alpha-2 adrenergic receptors mediate the catecholamine- induced inhibition of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA2C sub-subfamily.
Beta-blockers are widely used medications for a variety of indications, including heart failure, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypertension. Genetic variability in pharmacokinetic (e.g., CYP2D6) and pharmacodynamic (e.g., ADRB1, ADRB2, ADRA2C, GRK4, GRK5) genes have been studied in relation to beta-blocker exposure and response. We searched and summarized the strength of the evidence linking beta-blocker exposure and response with the six genes listed above. The level of evidence was high for associations between CYP2D6 genetic variation and both metoprolol exposure and heart rate response. Evidence indicates that CYP2D6 poor metabolizers experience clinically significant greater exposure and lower heart rate in response to metoprolol compared with those who are not poor metabolizers. Therefore, we provide therapeutic recommendations regarding genetically predicted CYP2D6 metabolizer status and metoprolol therapy. However, there was insufficient evidence to make therapeutic recommendations for CYP2D6 and other beta-blockers or for any beta-blocker and the other five genes evaluated (updates at www.cpicpgx.org).
Halperin et al. (Halperin JM. Newcorn JH, Koda VH, Pick L, McKay KE, Knott P. Noradrenergic mechanisms in ADHD children with and without reading disabilities: a replication and extension. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997: 36: 1688 1696) reported a significant increase in plasma norepinephrine (NE) in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) children with reading and other cognitive disabilities compared to ADHD children without learning disabilities (LD). We examined the hypothesis that ADHD + LD was associated with NE dysfunction at a molecular genetic level by testing for associations and additive effects between polymorphisms at three noradrenergic genes the adrenergic alpha2A receptor (ADRA2A), adrenergic alpha2C receptor (ADRA2C), and dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) genes. A total of 336 subjects consisting of 274 individuals with Tourette syndrome (TS) and 62 normal controls were genotyped. Regression analysis showed a significant correlation between scores for ADHD, a history of LD, and poor grade-school academic performance that was greatest for the additive effect of all three genes. Combined, these three genes accounted for 3.5% of the variance of the ADHD score (p = 0.0005). There was a significant increase in the number of variant NE genes progressing from subjects without ADHD (A-) or learning disorders (LD-) to A + LD - to A - LD + to A + LD + (p = 0.0017), but no comparable effect for dopamine genes. These data support an association between NE genes and ADHD, especially in ADHD + LD subjects.
