Alpha-1A adrenergic receptor; This alpha-adrenergic receptor mediates its action by association with G proteins that activate a phosphatidylinositol- calcium second messenger system. Its effect is mediated by G(q) and G(11) proteins. Nuclear ADRA1A-ADRA1B heterooligomers regulate phenylephrine(PE)-stimulated ERK signaling in cardiac myocytes. Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Adrenergic receptor subfamily. ADRA1A sub-subfamily.
OBJECTIVES: There is currently uncertainty about whether metabolic syndrome has a common underlying process. We performed a gene-centric association study of metabolic syndrome in 98 major cardiometabolic genes in the large, well phenotyped Pressioni Arteriose Monitorate e Loro Associazioni (PAMELA) study. We followed this with functional studies to elucidate a possible mechanism for the top association signal. METHODS: From the PAMELA cohort, we sampled 1407 individuals with information on the metabolic syndrome (ATPIII criteria). We analyzed 1324 tagging single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 98 candidate genes selected, based on known pathways involved in sympathetic nervous system, oxidative stress, renin-angiotensin system and sodium balance. RESULTS: The SNP rs17055869 near the alpha-1A-adrenoreceptor gene (ADRA1A) showed the strongest association with metabolic syndrome (odds ratio 1.7, CI 1.3-2.2; P = 0.00007, P = 0.000098 after permutation). In order to determine a functional basis for this association, we examined in a subgroup of metabolic syndrome patients whether the allelic distribution of the above-mentioned gene is different according to the different degree of the metabolic syndrome-related sympathetic activation, directly assessed by the gold standard method to assess neuroadrenergic drive, that is microneurographic recording of efferent postganglionic muscle sympathetic nerve traffic. All metabolic syndrome patients with a lesser degree of sympathetic activation were homozygous for the major allele (C), whereas those with a very pronounced sympathetic overdrive had an over-representation of the minor T allele (P < 0.0001). CONCLUSION: Thus, the rs17055869 SNP near the 3' end of ADRA1A is significantly associated with metabolic syndrome and it may be involved in determining a greater level of sympathetic activation in metabolic syndrome patients.
Noradrenaline (NA) regulates cold-stimulated adipocyte thermogenesis(1). Aside from cAMP signalling downstream of beta-adrenergic receptor activation, how NA promotes thermogenic output is still not fully understood. Here, we show that coordinated alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor (AR) and beta(3)-AR signalling induces the expression of thermogenic genes of the futile creatine cycle(2,3), and that early B cell factors, oestrogen-related receptors and PGC1alpha are required for this response in vivo. NA triggers physical and functional coupling between the alpha(1)-AR subtype (ADRA1A) and Galpha(q) to promote adipocyte thermogenesis in a manner that is dependent on the effector proteins of the futile creatine cycle, creatine kinase B and tissue-non-specific alkaline phosphatase. Combined Galpha(q) and Galpha(s) signalling selectively in adipocytes promotes a continual rise in whole-body energy expenditure, and creatine kinase B is required for this effect. Thus, the ADRA1A-Galpha(q)-futile creatine cycle axis is a key regulator of facultative and adaptive thermogenesis.
Opioid use disorder is a chronic brain disease influenced by genetic and epigenetic factors, accounting for approximately 50% of the liability. Adrenergic signaling is involved in opioid use disorder. To demonstrate the associations between methylation alterations in the alpha-1-adrenergic receptor (ADRA1A) gene and opioid use disorder, in the present study, we first examined and compared the methylation levels of 97 CpG sites in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene in the peripheral blood in 120 patients with heroin use disorder and 111 healthy controls. Correlations between methylation levels and duration of heroin/methadone use were then analyzed. Finally, the predicted binding transcription factors (TFs) and their target sequences in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene, which include the selected CpG sites, were screened in the JASPAR database. Our results demonstrated that hypermethylation in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene in the blood was associated with opioid use disorder. Correlations between methylation levels of several CpG sites and duration of heroin/methadone use were observed. TFs TFAP2A and RUNX1 were predicted to bind to the target sequences, which include the CpG sites selected in the current study, in the promoter region of the ADRA1A gene. Our findings further extend the associations between methylation alterations in the ADRA1A gene and opioid use disorder potentially through mechanisms of gene expression regulations in the ADRA1A gene.
The diving reflex is an oxygen-saving mechanism which is accompanied by apnea, reflex bradycardia development, peripheral vasoconstriction, spleen erythrocyte release, and selective redistribution of blood flow to the organs most vulnerable to lack of oxygen, such as the brain, heart, and lungs. However, this is a poorly studied form of hypoxia, with a knowledge gap on physiological and biochemical adaptation mechanisms. The reflective sympathetic constriction of the resistive vessels is realized via ADRA1A. It has been shown that ADRA1A SNP (p.Arg347Cys; rs1048101) is associated with changes in tonus in vessel walls. Moreover, the Cys347 allele has been shown to regulate systolic blood pressure. The aim of this work was to evaluate whether the ADRA1A polymorphism affected the pulmonary vascular reactions in men and women in response to the diving reflex. Men (n = 52) and women (n = 50) untrained in diving aged 18 to 25 were recruited into the study. The vascular reactions and blood flow were examined by integrated rheography and rheography of the pulmonary artery. Peripheral blood circulation was registered by plethysmography. The ADRA1A gene polymorphism (p.Arg347Cys; rs1048101) was determined by PCR-RFLP. In both men and women, reflective pulmonary vasodilation did occur in response to the diving reflex, but in women this vasodilation was more pronounced and was accompanied by a higher filling of the lungs with blood.. Additionally, ADRA1A SNP (p.Arg347Cys; rs1048101) is associated with sex. Interestingly, women with the Arg347 allele demonstrated the highest vasodilation of the lung vessels. Therefore, our data may help to indicate women with the most prominent adaptive reactions to the diving reflex. Our data also indicate that women and men with the Cys allele of the ADRA1A gene polymorphism have the highest risk of developing lung hypertension in response to the diving reflex. The diving reflex is an oxygen-saving mechanism which is accompanied by apnea, reflex bradycardia development, peripheral vasoconstriction, spleen erythrocyte release, and selective redistribution of blood flow to the organs most vulnerable to lack of oxygen, such as the brain, heart, and lungs. However, this is a poorly studied form of hypoxia, with a knowledge gap on physiological and biochemical adaptation mechanisms.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate miR-3682 as a biomarker in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: MiRNA and RNA profiles of 375 HCC tissues and 50 normal liver samples were downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Multivariate Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier analyses were applied to examine the prognostic value of factors. Target genes of miR-3682 were analyzed by TargetScan and dual-luciferase reporter assay. Online Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) to perform KEGG pathway enrichment. Cell counting kit-8, colony formation and migration and invasion assays were performed to analyze biological behaviors of HCC cells. RESULTS: MiR-3682 was identified to be highly expressed in HCC tissues and cell lines. And miR-3682 was negatively and independently associated with the outcome of HCC patients. Inhibition of miR-3682 suppressed HCC cell viability and mobility. ADRA1A, predicted and confirmed as the novel target of miR-3682, was an independent and positive prognostic predictor for HCC. In addition, the knockdown of ADRA1A partially offset the inhibitory effect of miR-3682 inhibitor on the growth and mobility of HCC cells. DAVID enrichment and western blot of key signaling-related proteins analyses revealed that miR-3682 inactivated 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signaling by negatively regulating ADRA1A. Mechanically, it was partially through suppressing AMPK signaling via targeting ADRA1A that miR-3682 supported the HCC cell malignant phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: This study implicates that miR-3682 plays an oncogenetic role in HCC and can be considered a novel therapeutic target and prognostic indicator of HCC.
The aim of our study was to explore the relationship between the methylation status of the alpha-1A adrenergic receptor (ADRA1A) gene and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We combined our in-house data-set with the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data-set to screen and identify the methylation status and expression of adrenergic receptor (AR) genes in HCC. Immunohistochemistry and western blot were performed to assess the expression of ADRA1A in HCC cell lines and tissues. We further evaluated the methylation levels of the ADRA1A promoter region in 160 HCC patients using the Sequenom MassARRAY(R) platform and investigated the association between methylation of ADRA1A and clinical characteristics. The expression levels of ADRA1A mRNA and protein were significantly decreased in HCC tissues. Compared with that in paired normal tissues, the mean methylation level of the ADRA1A promoter region was significantly increased in tumour tissues from 160 HCC patients (25.2% vs. 17.0%, P < 0.0001). We found that a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor (decitabine) could increase the expression of ADRA1A mRNA in HCC cell lines. Moreover, hypermethylation of the ADRA1A gene in HCC samples was associated with clinical characteristics, including alcohol intake (P = 0.0097) and alpha-fetoprotein (P = 0.0411). Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis demonstrated that the mean methylation levels of ADRA1A could discriminate between HCC tissues and adjacent non-cancerous tissues (AUC = 0.700, P < 0.0001). mRNA sequencing indicated that the main enriched pathways were pathways in cancer, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and metabolic pathways (P < 0.01). ADRA1A gene hypermethylation might contribute to HCC initiation and is a promising biomarker for the diagnosis of HCC.
Schizophrenia is a chronic psychiatry disorder with a strong genetic component. A recent association study of alpha(1A)-adrenoceptor gene (ADRA1A) involving an isolated Spanish population, focusing on the promoter region of the ADRA1A, genotyped eight single SNPs at the promoter region of ADRA1A and found that two SNPs, -563G/A and -9625G/A, were associated with schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders. We were interested in the two positive sites reported and selected five variants among the promoter region of ADRA1A, namely -563G/A, -9625G/A, -2760C/A, -4155G/C and a new substitution we detected between -508bp and -530bp upstream of the translation initiation site. Our sample consisted of 480 schizophrenia and 480 control subjects. All recruits were Han Chinese in Shanghai origin. However, neither individual SNP nor any haplotype was associated with schizophrenia in our study. These results suggest that the variants among the promoter of ADRA1A gene are unlikely to play a major role in the susceptibility to schizophrenia in the Chinese population.
Patients with schizophrenia have a higher risk of developing metabolic abnormalities and their associated diseases. Some studies found that the accumulative number of metabolic syndrome components was associated with the severity of metabolic abnormalities. The purpose of this study was to examine the roles of the ADRA1A, ADRA2A, ADRB3, and 5HT2A genes in the risk of having more severe metabolic abnormalities among patients with schizophrenia. We studied a sample of 232 chronic inpatients with schizophrenia (120 males and 112 females) to explore the associations between the four candidate genes and the severity of metabolic syndrome by accumulative number of the components. Four single nucleotide polymorphisms in the candidate genes were genotyped, including the Arg347Cys in ADRA1A, the C1291G in ADRA2A, the Try64Arg in ADRB3, and the T102C in 5HT2A. An association between the accumulative number of metabolic syndrome components and the ADRA1A gene was found after adjusting age, sex, and other related variables (p-value=0.036). Presence of the Arg347 allele in the ADRA1A gene is a risk factor for having more severe metabolic abnormalities. These findings suggest a medical attention of closely monitoring metabolic risks for schizophrenia patients with high-risk genotypes.
Noradrenaline and adrenaline are neurotransmitters of the sympathetic nervous system that interact with various adrenergic receptor (ADR) subtypes, and this regulates the basal metabolic rate, thermogenesis and efficiency of energy utilization. We examined a possible role of the gene coding for ADRA1A receptor in weight gain in schizophrenia subjects exposed to antipsychotics. A total of 401 schizophrenia in-patients treated with antipsychotics for >2 years were recruited and a final 394 DNA samples were genotyped. Their body mass indexes (BMIs) were recorded for 12 months and parameterized to be correlated in regression. Among the 58 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyped, 44 valid SNPs, which had minor allele frequency > or =0.03, were analyzed in statistics. Linear regression model with age, gender, diabetes, use of typical antipsychotics and use of atypical antipsychotics as covariates, with or without gender interaction, showed evidence of associations between the ADRA1A gene and BMI. Most of the SNPs associated with BMI are located in the promoter and intron regions, and being female appeared to enhance the gene effect. Our study suggests that the ADRA1A gene is involved in weight gain among schizophrenia patients treated with antipsychotics. Further molecular dissection of the ADRA1A gene warrants better understanding on weight gain mechanisms in schizophrenia.
OBJECTIVES: We examined whether a functional variant of the ADRA1A gene moderated cocaine-induced subjective effects in a group of cocaine-dependent individuals. METHODS: This study was a within-participant, double-blind, placebo-controlled inpatient human laboratory evaluation of 65 nontreatment-seeking, cocaine-dependent [Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. (DSM-IV)] individuals aged 18-55 years. Participants received both placebo (saline, IV) and cocaine (40 mg, IV), and subjective responses were assessed 15 min before receiving an infusion and at 5 min intervals for the subsequent 20 min. The rs1048101 variant of the alpha1A-adrenoceptor (ADRA1A) gene was genotyped and it was evaluated whether the Cys to Arg substitution at codon 347 in exon 2 (Cys347Arg) moderated the magnitude of the subjective effects produced by cocaine. RESULTS: Thirty (46%) participants were found to have the major allele CC genotype and 35 (44%) carried at least one minor T-allele of rs1048101 (TT or TC genotype). Individuals with the CC genotype showed greater responses for 'desire' (P<0.0001), 'high' (P<0.0001), 'any drug effect' (P<0.0001), 'like cocaine' (P<0.0001), and 'likely to use cocaine if given access' (P<0.05) with experiment-wise significance. CONCLUSION: This study indicates that the ADRA1A genotype could be used to identify individuals for whom acute cocaine exposure may be more rewarding and by inference may result in greater difficulty in establishing and/or maintaining abstinence from cocaine.
In men with a clinical diagnosis of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), polytomous logistic regression analysis was conducted to evaluate associations between two silent polymorphisms in SRD5A1 (codon positions 30 and 116), two polymorphisms in SRD5A2 (Val89Leu substitution and C to T transition in intron 1), a trinucleotide (CAG)n repeat in androgen receptor (AR), and an Arg492Cys substitution in ADRA1A and clinical parameters that characterize severity of BPH. Candidate gene selection was based on two mechanistic pathways targeted by pharmacotherapy for BPH: (1) androgen metabolic loci contributing to prostate growth (static obstruction); and (2) factors affecting smooth muscle tone (dynamic obstruction). Polymorphisms in SRD5A2 were not associated with severity of BPH; however, SRD5A1 polymorphisms were associated with severity of BPH. The process(es) in which these silent single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) influence BPH phenotypes is unknown and additional studies will be needed to assess whether these SNPs have direct functional consequences. The characterization of additional molecular factors that contribute to static and dynamic obstruction may help predict response to pharmacotherapy and serve to identify novel drug targets for the clinical management of BPH.
OBJECTIVES: Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a highly heritable, common developmental disorder. Although a few confirmed associations have emerged from candidate gene studies, these have shown the same limitations that have become evident in the study of other complex diseases, often with inconsistent and nonreplicated results across different studies. METHODS: In this report, 27 ADHD candidate genes were explored in greater depth using high-density tag single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping. Association with 557 SNPs was tested using the transmission disequilibrium test in 270 nuclear pedigrees selected from an ongoing ADHD genetic study that includes all disease subtypes. RESULTS: SNPs in seven genes including SLC1A3, SLC6A3, HTR4, ADRA1A, HTR2A, SNAP25, and COMT showed a nominal level of association with ADHD (P values <0.05), but none remained significant after a stringent correction for the total number of tests performed. CONCLUSION: The strongest signal emerged from SNPs in the promoter region (rs3808585) and in an intron (rs17426222, rs4732682, rs573514) of ADRA1A, all located within the same haplotype block. Some of the SNPs in HTR2A and COMT have already been reported by others, whereas other SNPs will need confirmation in independent samples.
