Androgen receptor; Steroid hormone receptors are ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate eukaryotic gene expression and affect cellular proliferation and differentiation in target tissues. Transcription factor activity is modulated by bound coactivator and corepressor proteins like ZBTB7A that recruits NCOR1 and NCOR2 to the androgen response elements/ARE on target genes, negatively regulating androgen receptor signaling and androgen-induced cell proliferation. Transcription activation is also down-regulated by NR0B2. Activated, but not phosphorylated, by HIPK3 and ZIPK/DA [...] 
The OSCE is a reliable evaluation method to estimate the preclinical examination of dental students. The most ideal assessment for OSCE is used the augmented reality simulator to evaluate. This literature review investigated a recently developed in virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) starting of the dental history to the progress of the dental skill. As result of the lacking of technology, it needs to depend on other device increasing the success rate and decreasing the risk of the surgery. The development of tracking unit changed the surgical and educational way. Clinical surgery is based on mature education. VR and AR simultaneously affected the skill of the training lesson and navigation system. Widely, the VR and AR not only applied in the dental training lesson and surgery, but also improved all field in our life.
Hippo signaling restricts tumor growth by inhibiting the oncogenic potential of YAP/TAZ-TEAD transcriptional complex. Here, we uncover a context-dependent tumor suppressor function of YAP in androgen receptor (AR) positive prostate cancer (PCa) and show that YAP impedes AR(+) PCa growth by antagonizing TEAD-mediated AR signaling. TEAD forms a complex with AR to enhance its promoter/enhancer occupancy and transcriptional activity. YAP and AR compete for TEAD binding and consequently, elevated YAP in the nucleus disrupts AR-TEAD interaction and prevents TEAD from promoting AR signaling. Pharmacological inhibition of MST1/2 or LATS1/2, or transgenic activation of YAP suppressed the growth of PCa expressing therapy resistant AR splicing variants. Our study uncovers an unanticipated crosstalk between Hippo and AR signaling pathways, reveals an antagonistic relationship between YAP and TEAD in AR(+) PCa, and suggests that targeting the Hippo signaling pathway may provide a therapeutical opportunity to treat PCa driven by therapy resistant AR variants.
BACKGROUND: The androgen-receptor isoform encoded by splice variant 7 lacks the ligand-binding domain, which is the target of enzalutamide and abiraterone, but remains constitutively active as a transcription factor. We hypothesized that detection of androgen-receptor splice variant 7 messenger RNA (AR-V7) in circulating tumor cells from men with advanced prostate cancer would be associated with resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone. METHODS: We used a quantitative reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction assay to evaluate AR-V7 in circulating tumor cells from prospectively enrolled patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer who were initiating treatment with either enzalutamide or abiraterone. We examined associations between AR-V7 status (positive vs. negative) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) response rates (the primary end point), freedom from PSA progression (PSA progression-free survival), clinical or radiographic progression-free survival, and overall survival. RESULTS: A total of 31 enzalutamide-treated patients and 31 abiraterone-treated patients were enrolled, of whom 39% and 19%, respectively, had detectable AR-V7 in circulating tumor cells. Among men receiving enzalutamide, AR-V7-positive patients had lower PSA response rates than AR-V7-negative patients (0% vs. 53%, P=0.004) and shorter PSA progression-free survival (median, 1.4 months vs. 6.0 months; P<0.001), clinical or radiographic progression-free survival (median, 2.1 months vs. 6.1 months; P<0.001), and overall survival (median, 5.5 months vs. not reached; P=0.002). Similarly, among men receiving abiraterone, AR-V7-positive patients had lower PSA response rates than AR-V7-negative patients (0% vs. 68%, P=0.004) and shorter PSA progression-free survival (median, 1.3 months vs. not reached; P<0.001), clinical or radiographic progression-free survival (median, 2.3 months vs. not reached; P<0.001), and overall survival (median, 10.6 months vs. not reached, P=0.006). The association between AR-V7 detection and therapeutic resistance was maintained after adjustment for expression of full-length androgen receptor messenger RNA. CONCLUSIONS: Detection of AR-V7 in circulating tumor cells from patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer may be associated with resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone. These findings require large-scale prospective validation. (Funded by the Prostate Cancer Foundation and others.).
S-nitrosylation of the beta(2)-adrenergic receptor induces its desensitization and internalization.
This brief article is a reflection of immersive technology in healthcare education that features a digital illustration to capture the frenetic clinical environment that is broadcast live using augmented reality with a virtual onlooker, portrayed as the all seeing eye. The purpose of the artwork is to promote a discussion over consent, reality, and psychological safety.
Tumor expression of prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) is lost in 15-20% of men with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), yet the underlying mechanisms remain poorly defined. In androgen receptor (AR)-positive CRPC, we observed lower PSMA expression in liver lesions versus other sites, suggesting a role of the microenvironment in modulating PSMA. PSMA suppression was associated with promoter histone 3 lysine 27 methylation and higher levels of neutral amino acid transporters, correlating with (18)F-fluciclovine uptake on positron emission tomography imaging. While PSMA is regulated by AR, we identified a subset of AR-negative CRPC with high PSMA. HOXB13 and AR co-occupancy at the PSMA enhancer and knockout models point to HOXB13 as an upstream regulator of PSMA in AR-positive and AR-negative prostate cancer. These data demonstrate how PSMA expression is differentially regulated across metastatic lesions and in the context of the AR, which may inform selection for PSMA-targeted therapies and development of complementary biomarkers.
Trans-esophageal echocardiography (TEE) is routinely used in valvular surgery in most institutions. The popularity of TEE stems from the fact that it can supplement or confirm information gained from other methods of evaluation or make completely independent diagnoses. Quantitative and qualitative assessment permits informed decisions regarding surgical intervention, type of intervention, correction of inadequate surgical repair and re-operation for complications. This review summarizes the various methods for quantification of aortic regurgitation and stenosis on TEE. The application of Doppler echo (pulsed wave, continuous wave and color) with two-dimensional echo allows the complete evaluation of AV lesions.
Synthesis of Ar@C60 is described, using a route in which high-pressure argon filling of an open-fullerene and photochemical desulfinylation are the key steps for >95% encapsulation of the noble gas. Enrichment by recycling HPLC leads to quantitative incorporation of argon in the product endofullerene, with a mass recovery of tens of milligrams, allowing the first characterisation of fine structure in the solution 13C NMR spectrum.
This report features the first catalytic asymmetric total synthesis of a sesquiterpene, (+)-ar-macrocarpene (1), in 7 steps with 42.1% overall yields from commercially available inexpensive 5,5-dimethylcyclohexane 1,3-dione. This strategy relies on a key [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement effecting reductive transposition through allylic diazene rearrangement (ADR) in a single step from intermediate allylic alcohol (+)-12 under the Mitsunobu reaction conditions with o-nitrobenzenesulfonyl hydrazide (o-NBSH). Enantioselective reduction of alpha-bromo vinylogous ester 16 under the Corey-Bakshi-Shibata reduction conditions forges the required stereocenter in the allylic alcohol (+)-12 in a highly enantioenriched manner (95% ee).
Eighteen new lanostane-type triterpenoids, namely leucocontextins A-R (1-18) were isolated from the fruiting bodies of Ganoderma leucocontextum. Their structures were established by 1D and 2D NMR data in conjunction with HRESIMS/HREIMS, X-ray single crystal diffraction analysis. Compound 18 exhibited weak cytotoxicity against K562 and MCF-7 cell lines with IC50 of 20-30 muM.
Androgen receptor alterations portend a poor prognosis in patients with advanced prostate cancer. A recent study identified a stemness signature enriched in cell-free DNA from androgen receptor-altered patients, associated with worse outcomes. These findings highlight the potential of epigenomic liquid biopsy tools to discover novel clinically relevant tumor molecular subtypes. See related article by Chauhan et al., p. 151.
The development and growth of a normal prostate gland, as well as its physiological functions, are regulated by the actions of androgens through androgen receptor (AR) signaling which drives multiple cellular processes including transcription, cellular proliferation, and apoptosis in prostate cells. Post-translational regulation of AR plays a vital role in directing its cellular activities via modulating its stability, nuclear localization, and transcriptional activity. Among various post-translational modifications (PTMs), acetylation is an essential PTM recognized in AR and is governed by the regulated actions of acetyltransferases and deacetyltransferases. Acetylation of AR has been identified as a critical step for its activation and depending on the site of acetylation, the intracellular dynamics and activity of the AR can be modulated. Various acetyltransferases such as CBP, p300, PCAF, TIP60, and ARD1 that are known to acetylate AR, may directly coactivate the AR transcriptional function or help to recruit additional coactivators to functionally regulate the transcriptional activity of the AR. Aberrant expression of acetyltransferases and their deregulated activities have been found to interfere with AR signaling and play a key role in development and progression of prostatic diseases, including prostate cancer (PCa). In this review, we summarized recent research advances aimed at understanding the role of various lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) in the regulation of AR activity at the level of post-translational modifications in normal prostate physiology, as well as in development and progression of PCa. Considering the critical importance of KATs in modulating AR activity in physiological and patho-physiological context, we further discussed the potential of targeting these enzymes as a therapeutic option to treat AR-related pathology in combination with hormonal therapy.
