Tyrosine-protein kinase receptor UFO; Receptor tyrosine kinase that transduces signals from the extracellular matrix into the cytoplasm by binding growth factor GAS6 and which is thus regulating many physiological processes including cell survival, cell proliferation, migration and differentiation. Ligand binding at the cell surface induces dimerization and autophosphorylation of AXL. Following activation by ligand, ALX binds and induces tyrosine phosphorylation of PI3-kinase subunits PIK3R1, PIK3R2 and PIK3R3; but also GRB2, PLCG1, LCK and PTPN11. Other downstream substrate candidates [...] 
AXL is a member of the TAM (TYRO3, AXL, and MERTK) receptor tyrosine kinases family (RTKs), and its abnormal expression has been linked to clinicopathological features and poor prognosis of cancer patients. There is mounting evidence supporting AXL's role in the occurrence and progression of cancer, as well as drug resistance and treatment tolerance. Recent studies revealed that reducing AXL expression can weaken cancer cells' drug resistance, indicating that AXL may be a promising target for anti-cancer drug treatment. This review aims to summarize the AXL's structure, the mechanisms regulating and activating it, and its expression pattern, especially in drug-resistant cancers. Additionally, we will discuss the diverse functions of AXL in mediating cancer drug resistance and the potential of AXL inhibitors in cancer treatment.
Patients with a mesenchymal subtype of ovarian cancer face a poor prognosis with limited treatment options to halt metastatic progression. In this issue of Science Signaling, Antony et al found that the kinase AXL drives the mesenchymal gene signature and motility of ovarian tumor cells. AXL inhibitors may thus slow tumor progression in this subset of patients.
Flaviviruses, as critically important pathogens, are still major public health problems all over the world. For instance, the evolution of ZIKV led to large-scale outbreaks in the Yap island in 2007. DENV was considered by the World Health Organization (WHO) as one of the 10 threats to global health in 2019. Enveloped viruses hijack a variety of host factors to complete its replication cycle. Phosphatidylserine (PS) receptor, AXL, is considered to be a candidate receptor for flavivirus invasion. In this review, we discuss the molecular structure of ZIKV and DENV, and how they interact with AXL to successfully invade host cells. A more comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms of flavivirus-AXL interaction will provide crucial insights into the virus infection process and the development of anti-flavivirus therapeutics.
AXL, a member of the TAM (TYRO3, AXL, MER) receptor tyrosine kinase family, and its ligand, GAS6, are implicated in oncogenesis and metastasis of many cancer types. However, the exact cellular processes activated by GAS6-AXL remain largely unexplored. Here, we identified an interactome of AXL and revealed its associations with proteins regulating actin dynamics. Consistently, GAS6-mediated AXL activation triggered actin remodeling manifested by peripheral membrane ruffling and circular dorsal ruffles (CDRs). This further promoted macropinocytosis that mediated the internalization of GAS6-AXL complexes and sustained survival of glioblastoma cells grown under glutamine-deprived conditions. GAS6-induced CDRs contributed to focal adhesion turnover, cell spreading, and elongation. Consequently, AXL activation by GAS6 drove invasion of cancer cells in a spheroid model. All these processes required the kinase activity of AXL, but not TYRO3, and downstream activation of PI3K and RAC1. We propose that GAS6-AXL signaling induces multiple actin-driven cytoskeletal rearrangements that contribute to cancer-cell invasion.
The TAM tyrosine kinases, Axl and MerTK, play an important role in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Here, using a unique synovial tissue bioresource of patients with RA matched for disease stage and treatment exposure, we assessed how Axl and MerTK relate to synovial histopathology and disease activity, and their topographical expression and longitudinal modulation by targeted treatments. We show that in treatment-naive patients, high AXL levels are associated with pauci-immune histology and low disease activity and inversely correlate with the expression levels of pro-inflammatory genes. We define the location of Axl/MerTK in rheumatoid synovium using immunohistochemistry/fluorescence and digital spatial profiling and show that Axl is preferentially expressed in the lining layer. Moreover, its ectodomain, released in the synovial fluid, is associated with synovial histopathology. We also show that Toll-like-receptor 4-stimulated synovial fibroblasts from patients with RA modulate MerTK shedding by macrophages. Lastly, Axl/MerTK synovial expression is influenced by disease stage and therapeutic intervention, notably by IL-6 inhibition. These findings suggest that Axl/MerTK are a dynamic axis modulated by synovial cellular features, disease stage and treatment.
High tumoral expression of AXL was associated with inferior response to anti-PD-1 therapy and increased tumoral programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma, with particularly poor outcomes in those with high AXL and PD-L1. AXL expression has potential as a biomarker and therapeutic target.See related article by Terry et al., p. 6749.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The AXL signaling pathway is associated with tumor growth as well as poor prognosis in cancer. Here, we highlight recent strategies for targeting AXL in the treatment of solid and hematological malignancies. RECENT FINDINGS: AXL is a key player in survival, metastasis, and therapeutic resistance in many cancers. A range of AXL-targeted therapies, including tyrosine kinase inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, antibody-drug conjugates, and soluble receptors, have entered clinical development. Notably, AXL inhibitors in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors demonstrate early promise; however, further understanding of predictive biomarkers and treatment sequencing is necessary. Based on its role in tumor growth and drug resistance, AXL represents a promising therapeutic target in oncology. Results from ongoing clinical trials will provide valuable insights into the role of AXL inhibitors, both as single agents and in combination with other therapies.
AXL is a member of the TAM (TYRO3, AXL, MER) subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases. It is upregulated in a variety of cancers and its overexpression is associated with poor disease prognosis and acquired drug resistance. Utilizing a fragment-based lead discovery approach, a new indazole-based AXL inhibitor was obtained. The indazole fragment hit 11, identified through a high concentration biochemical screen, was expeditiously improved to fragment 24 by screening our in-house expanded library of fragments (ELF) collection. Subsequent fragment optimization guided by docking studies provided potent inhibitor 54 with moderate exposure levels in mice. X-ray crystal structure of analog 50 complexed with the I650M mutated kinase domain of Mer revealed the key binding interactions for the scaffold. The good potency coupled with reasonable kinase selectivity, moderate in vivo exposure levels, and availability of structural information for the series makes it a suitable starting point for further optimization efforts.
HER2 is a driver in solid tumors, mainly breast, oesophageal and gastric cancer, through activation of oncogenic signaling pathways such as PI3K or MAPK. HER2 overexpression associates with aggressive disease and poor prognosis. Despite targeted anti-HER2 therapy has improved outcomes and is the current standard of care, resistance emerge in some patients, requiring additional therapeutic strategies. Several mechanisms, including the upregulation of receptors tyrosine kinases such as AXL, are involved in resistance. AXL signaling leads to cancer cell proliferation, survival, migration, invasion and angiogenesis and correlates with poor prognosis. In addition, AXL overexpression accompanied by a mesenchymal phenotype result in resistance to chemotherapy and targeted therapies. Preclinical studies show that AXL drives anti-HER2 resistance and metastasis through dimerization with HER2 and activation of downstream pathways in breast cancer. Moreover, AXL inhibition restores response to HER2 blockade in vitro and in vivo. Limited data in gastric and oesophageal cancer also support these evidences. Furthermore, AXL shows a strong value as a prognostic and predictive biomarker in HER2+ breast cancer patients, adding a remarkable translational relevance. Therefore, current studies enforce the potential of co-targeting AXL and HER2 to overcome resistance and supports the use of AXL inhibitors in the clinic.
Axl, a Receptor Tyrosine Kinase (RTK) belonging to the TAM (Axl, Mer, Tyro3) family, participates in many signal transduction cascades after mostly being stimulated by Growth arrestspecific 6(Gas6). Axl is widely expressed in many organs, such as macrophages, endothelial cells, heart, liver and skeletal muscle. Over-expression and activation of Axl are associated with promoting chemotherapy resistance, cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis in many human cancers, such as breast, lung, and pancreatic cancers. Therefore, the research and development of Axl inhibitors is of great significance to strengthen the means of cancer treatment, especially to solve the problem of drug resistance. Axl inhibitors have attracted more and more researchers' attention in recent years. This review discusses the research progress of Axl inhibitors in recent years.
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) play key roles in the initiation and progression of human skin cancers, yet the importance of some RTKs remains poorly understood. In this issue, Sensi et al. provide new insights into the expression and function of the RTK, Axl, in melanoma. The investigators show that Axl is frequently expressed in melanoma cell lines, particularly mutant NRAS-harboring lines, and that Axl activation by its ligand, Gas6, probably occurs via both autocrine and paracrine mechanisms. Gene signatures from Axl-expressing cell lines are similar to published signatures from poorly differentiated tumors displaying high metastatic potential. Functionally, Axl was required for the invasive and migratory properties of Axl-expressing melanoma cell lines. These data emphasize that targeting the Gas6-Axl signaling axis should be investigated as a strategy to inhibit prometastatic properties in poorly differentiated melanomas.
Recently, novel Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) inhibitors have been clinically developed to treat KRAS G12C-mutated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients. However, achieving complete tumor remission is challenging. Therefore, the optimal combined therapeutic intervention with KRAS G12C inhibitors has a potentially crucial role in the clinical outcomes of patients. We investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms of adaptive resistance to KRAS G12C inhibitors in KRAS G12C-mutated NSCLC cells to devise a strategy preventing drug-tolerant cell emergence. We demonstrate that AXL signaling led to the adaptive resistance to KRAS G12C inhibitors in KRAS G12C-mutated NSCLC, activation of which is induced by GAS6 production via YAP. AXL inhibition reduced the viability of AXL-overexpressing KRAS G12C-mutated lung cancer cells by enhancing KRAS G12C inhibition-induced apoptosis. In xenograft models of AXL-overexpressing KRAS G12C-mutated lung cancer treated with KRAS G12C inhibitors, initial combination therapy with AXL inhibitor markedly delayed tumor regrowth compared with KRAS G12C inhibitor alone or with the combination after acquired resistance to KRAS G12C inhibitor. These results indicated pivotal roles for the YAP-GAS6-AXL axis and its inhibition in the intrinsic resistance to KRAS G12C inhibitor.
Inhibition of the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL, a key molecular driver of ovarian cancer, has recently been highlighted as promising therapeutic strategy. In this issue of EMBO Reports, Antony et al 1 have identified a novel mechanism of inhibition of AXL, wherein the GPI-anchored tumour suppressor OPCML sequesters AXL into specialised plasma membrane domains where the phosphatase PTPRG is located, therefore facilitating AXL dephosphorylation. This attenuation of AXL signalling has translational implications for the design of synergistic therapies, to target the kinase for this aggressive malignancy.
A novel compound (1) and three known ones (2-4) were isolated from the fruiting bodies of Pleurocybella porrigens. The structure of the novel compound was determined by 1D and 2D NMR and HRESIMS data. The biological activity of 1-3 was evaluated using the A549 lung cancer cell line. The results showed the inhibitory activity of compounds 1-3 on the expression of Axl and immune checkpoint molecules.
