Cholinesterase; Esterase with broad substrate specificity. Contributes to the inactivation of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. Can degrade neurotoxic organophosphate esters; Belongs to the type-B carboxylesterase/lipase family.
Acetylcholine is a key neurotransmitter for brain and muscle function, that has its levels decreased in the brain of people with Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Cholinesterase inhibitors are medicines that decrease the breakdown of acetylcholine, through the inhibition of acetyl- and butyrylcholinesterase enzymes. Despite the fact that butyrylcholinesterase activity rises with the disease, while acetylcholinesterase activity declines, the cholinesterase inhibitors that are currently commercialized inhibit either acetylcholinesterase or both enzymes. The development of selective butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors is a promising strategy in the search for new drugs acting against AD. The marine environment is a rich source of molecules with therapeutic potential, which can provide compounds more easily than traditional methods, with reduced toxicity risks compared to synthetic molecules. This review comprises articles from 2003 to 2020, that assessed the butyrylcholinesterase inhibitory activities from marine organisms, considering their crude extracts and isolated compounds. Part of the articles reported a multi-target activity, inhibiting also other AD-related enzymes. Some of the marine compounds reported here have shown an excellent potential for butyrylcholinesterase inhibition compared to standard inhibitors. Further studies of some compounds reported here may lead to the development of a new treatment for AD.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a global health issue affecting millions of elderly people worldwide. The aim of the present study was to identify novel anti-AD peptides isolated from albumin. Anti-AD activities of the peptides were evaluated via inhibitory activities on acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE). Furthermore, the potential molecular mechanisms of the KLPGF/AChE were investigated by CDOCKER of Discovery studio 2017. The results revealed that peptide KLPGF could effectively inhibit AChE with an inhibition rate of 61.23% at a concentration of 50 mug mL(-1). In addition, the peptide KLPGF came in contact with acylation sites and peripheral anion sites of AChE. The present study demonstrates that the peptide KLPGF could become a potential functional food intervention in AD.
In humans, the plasma enzyme, butyrylcholinesterase (E.C. 3.1.1.8), metabolizes cocaine to the water-soluble, pharmacologically inactive compounds, ecgonine methylester and benzoic acid. Homogeneous enzyme was purified from human plasma and used to determine the enzyme kinetic parameters of Km and Vmax with cocaine as the substrate. The KM (11.9 microM) indicates that cocaine is tightly bound to the four active sites of the native tetramer. The Vmax (1.17 microM/min) is 50-fold greater than cocaine catalytic antibodies. Administration of purified human butyrylcholinesterase to a cocaine-intoxicated patient would be expected to shift the metabolism to the inactive metabolites and reduce the toxicity.
BACKGROUND: In developed countries, the most common gynecologic malignancy is endometrial carcinoma (EC), making the identification of EC biomarkers extremely essential. As a natural enzyme, butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE) is found in hepatocytes and plasma. There is a strong correlation between BCHE gene mutations and cancers and other diseases. The aim of this study was to analyze the role of BCHE in patients with EC. METHODS: A variety of analyses were conducted on The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data, including differential expression analysis, enrichment analysis, immunity, clinicopathology, and survival analysis. The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database was used to validate outcomes. Using R tools, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses revealed the potential mechanisms of BCHE in EC. Sangerbox tools were used to delve into the relations between BCHE expression and tumor microenvironment, including microsatellite instability (MSI), tumor neoantigen count (TNC), and tumor mutation burden (TMB). BCHE's genetic alteration analysis was conducted by cBioPortal. In addition, the Human Protein Atlas (HPA) was used to validate the outcomes by immunohistochemistry, and an analysis of the protein-protein interaction network (PPI) was performed with the help of the STRING database. RESULTS: Based on our results, BCHE was a significant independent prognostic factor for patients with EC. The prognosis with EC was affected by age, stage, grade, histological type, and BCHE. GSEA showed that BCHE was closely related to pathways regulating immune response, including transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathways and cancer immunotherapy through PD1 blockade pathways. The immune analysis revealed that CD4+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) were negatively correlated with BCHE expression and the immune checkpoint molecules CD28, ADORA2A, BTNL2, and TNFRSF18 were all significantly related to BCHE. BCHE expression was also associated with TMB by genetic alteration analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Identifying BCHE as a biomarker for EC might help predict its prognosis and could have important implications for immunotherapy.
Acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) typically hydrolyze the neurotransmitter acetylcholine. The multifunctional enzyme BChE is associated with lipid metabolism through an undefined mechanism. Based on lipid-related studies and by comparing the structural similarities between lipases and BChE we postulated that the association of BChE with lipid metabolism could occur through hydrolytic activity. Utilizing purified BChE enzymes from different sources and several lipases as controls, the ability of BChE to hydrolyze 4-methylumbelliferyl (4-mu) palmitate is investigated. Using lectin affinity, inhibition kinetics, and molecular modeling, we demonstrated that purified BChE hydrolyzed 4-mu palmitate at pH 8 as effectively as wheat germ lipase. The affinity K(m) value of the enzymes for 4-mu palmitate as substrate is found as 10.4 muM, 34.2 muM, 129.8 muM, and 186 muM for wheat germ lipase, purified BChE, pancreatic lipase, and commercial BChE, respectively. Analysis of the inhibitory effect of 4-mu palmitate on BChE using butyrylthiocholine as substrate revealed competitive inhibition with K(i) and IC(50) values of 448 muM and 987.2 muM, respectively. The binding affinity and interactions of 4-mu palmitate with BChE and pancreatic lipase were predicted by molecular docking. These results suggest that BChE possesses lipolytic activity. The possibility that BChE hydrolyzes not only 4-mu palmitate but also other types of lipids will lead to a new approach to those disease states associated with increased BChE activity/expression.
BACKGROUND: Globally, gastric cancer (GC) is a category of prevalent malignant tumors. Its high occurrence and fatality rates represent a severe threat to public health. According to recent research, lipid metabolism (LM) reprogramming impacts immune cells' ordinary function and is critical for the onset and development of cancer. Consequently, the article conducted a sophisticated bioinformatics analysis to explore the potential connection between LM and GC. METHODS: We first undertook a differential analysis of the TCGA queue to recognize lipid metabolism-related genes (LRGs) that are differentially expressed. Subsequently, we utilized the LASSO and Cox regression analyses to create a predictive signature and validated it with the GSE15459 cohort. Furthermore, we examined somatic mutations, immune checkpoints, tumor immune dysfunction and exclusion (TIDE), and drug sensitivity analyses to forecast the signature's immunotherapy responses. RESULTS: Kaplan-Meier (K-M) curves exhibited considerably longer OS and PFS (p<0.001) of the low-risk (LR) group. PCA analysis and ROC curves evaluated the model's predictive efficacy. Additionally, GSEA analysis demonstrated that a multitude of carcinogenic and matrix-related pathways were much in the high-risk (HR) group. We then developed a nomogram to enhance its clinical practicality, and we quantitatively analyzed tumor-infiltrating immune cells (TIICs) using the CIBERSORT and ssGSEA algorithms. The low-risk group has a lower likelihood of immune escape and more effective in chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Eventually, we selected BCHE as a potential biomarker for further research and validated its expression. Next, we conducted a series of cell experiments (including CCK-8 assay, Colony formation assay, wound healing assay and Transwell assays) to prove the impact of BCHE on gastric cancer biological behavior. DISCUSSION: Our research illustrated the possible consequences of lipid metabolism in GC, and we identified BCHE as a potential therapeutic target for GC. The LRG-based signature could independently forecast the outcome of GC patients and guide personalized therapy.
Goodyschle A (1), a new butenolide, was isolated from the whole grass of Goodyera schlechtendaliana, an orchidaceous edible medicinal plant. The structure of the new compound was elucidated by 1 D and 2 D NMR experiments in addition to HRESIMS analyses. Compound 1 was evaluated for its bioactivities including cytotoxic activity against human gastric cancer (SGC-7901) and human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cell lines, inhibitory activity on acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), and DPPH radical scavenging activity. As a result, compound 1 showed potent BChE inhibitory activity (IC(50) value = 6.88 +/- 1.63 muM), moderate DPPH radical scavenging activity (IC(50) value = 16.25 +/- 0.21 muM), and slight AChE inhibitory and cytotoxic activities. These findings suggest that compound 1 is worthy for further investigations in terms of its selective BChE inhibitory activity.
Farmers exposed to pesticides and classified as mildly poisoned and controls on the basis of erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity were examined for butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) genetic variability. The mildly poisoned group showed a significantly higher frequency of non-usual phenotypes (13.1%) than the control group (1.7%). These phenotypes showed a relative risk (RR) of 8.8 of erythrocyte AChE inhibition when compared to the usual phenotype. Among the subjects with the usual phenotype, the CHF2 C5- phenotype was more frequent in the mildly poisoned group (94.3%) than in the control group (81.0%), leading to an RR of 3.9 when compared to the CHE2 C5+ phenotype. When the total sample was classified into two groups (usual CHE2 C5+ and other phenotypes), the usual CHE2 C5+ phenotype was found to be responsible for a preventive fraction of about 14% of the cases of mild poisoning. The present data suggest that BChE genetic variability offers differential protection against erythrocyte AChE inhibition.
The genetic variation of human butyrylcholinesterase has been associated with height, body mass index, Alzheimer's disease, and response to xenobiotic agents. The present study reports four new mutations, found in the exon 2 of the BCHE gene, in a sample from 3001 Brazilian blood donors. The three nonsynonymous mutations and one synonymous mutation detected are: 223G-->C, G75R; 270A-->C, E90 D; 297T-->G, I99 M; 486T-->C, A162 A, respectively. All these variants are rare: 0.093+/-0.093% for the missense mutations and 0.137+/-0.137% for the synonymous mutation. A table with the 58 non-usual variants of butyrylcholinesterase is also presented.
A series of 14 target benzyl [2-(arylsulfamoyl)-1-substituted-ethyl]carbamates was prepared by multi-step synthesis and characterized. All the final compounds were tested for their ability to inhibit acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) in vitro, and the selectivity index (SI) was determined. Except for three compounds, all compounds showed strong preferential inhibition of BChE, and nine compounds were even more active than the clinically used rivastigmine. Benzyl (2S)-1-[(2-methoxybenzyl)sulfamoyl]-4-methylpentan-2-ylcarbamate (5k), benzyl (2S)-1-[(4-chlorobenzyl)sulfamoyl]-4-methylpentan-2-ylcarbamate (5j), and benzyl [(2S)-1-(benzylsulfamoyl)-4-methylpentan-2-yl]carbamate (5c) showed the highest BChE inhibition (IC(50) = 4.33, 6.57, and 8.52 microM, respectively), indicating that derivatives 5c and 5j had approximately 5-fold higher inhibitory activity against BChE than rivastigmine, and 5k was even 9-fold more effective than rivastigmine. In addition, the selectivity index of 5c and 5j was approx. 10 and that of 5k was even 34. The process of carbamylation and reactivation of BChE was studied for the most active derivatives 5k, 5j. The detailed information about the mode of binding of these compounds to the active site of both BChE and AChE was obtained in a molecular modeling study. In this study, combined techniques (docking, molecular dynamic simulations, and QTAIM (quantum theory of atoms in molecules) calculations) were employed.
Normal butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), but not several of its common genetic variants, serves as a scavenger for certain anti-cholinesterases (anti-ChEs). Consideration of this phenomenon becomes urgent in view of the large-scale prophylactic use of the anti-ChE, pyridostigmine, during the 1991 Persian Gulf War, in anticipation of nerve gas attack and of the anti-ChE, tacrine, for improving residual cholinergic neurotransmission in Alzheimer's disease patients. Adverse symptoms were reported for subjects in both groups, but have not been attributed to specific causes. Here, we report on an Israeli soldier, homozygous for 'atypical' BuChE, who suffered severe symptoms following pyridostigmine prophylaxis during the Persian Gulf War. His serum BuChE and recombinant 'atypical' BuChE were far less sensitive than normal BuChE to inhibition by pyridostigmine and several other carbamate anti-ChEs. Moreover, atypical BuChE demonstrated 1/200th the affinity for tacrine of normal BuChE or the related enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE). Genetic differences among BuChE variants may thus explain at least some of the adverse responses to anti-ChE therapies.
Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) deficiency is characterized by prolonged apnea after the use of muscle relaxants (suxamethonium or mivacurium) in patients who have mutations in the BCHE gene. Here, we report the characterization of four BCHE mutations associated with prolonged effect of suxamethonium (amino acid numbering based on the matured enzyme): p.20delValPheGlyGlyThrValThr, p.Leu88His, p.Ile140del and p.Arg386Cys. Expression of recombinant BCHE mutants, kinetic analysis and molecular dynamics were undertaken to understand how these mutations induce BChE deficiency. Three of the mutations studied (p.20delValPheGlyGlyThrValThr, p.Ile140del and p.Arg386Cys) lead to a "silent" BChE phenotype. Recombinant BCHE expression studies for these mutants revealed BChE activity levels comparable to untransfected cells. Only the last one (hBChE-L88H) presented BChE activity in the transfected cell culture medium. This BChE mutant (p.Leu88His) is associated with a lower k(cat) value compare to the wild-type enzyme. Molecular dynamics simulations analyses suggest that a destabilization of a structure implicated in enzyme activity (Omega-loop) can explain the modification of the kinetic parameter of the mutated protein.
BACKGROUND: We sought to identify gene polymorphisms that confer susceptibility to in-stent restenosis after coronary artery bare-metal stenting in a Central European population. METHODS: 160 controls without post-percutaneous coronary intervention in-stent restenosis were matched for age, sex, vessel diameter, and diabetes to 160 consecutive cases involving in-stent restenosis of the target lesion within 12 months. Using real time polymerase chain reaction and melting-curve analysis, we detected 13 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 11 candidate genes - rs1803274 (BCHE gene), rs529038 (ROS1), rs1050450 (GPX1), rs1800849 (UCP3), rs17216473 (ALOX5AP), rs7412, rs429358 (ApoE), rs2228570 (VDR), rs7041, rs4588 (GC), rs1799986 (LRP1) and rs2228671 (LDLR). Multivariable logistic regression was used to test for associations. RESULTS: The rs1803274 polymorphism of BCHE was significantly associated with in-stent restenosis (OR 1.934; 95 % CI: 1.181-3.166; p = 0.009). No association was found with the other studied SNPs. CONCLUSIONS: The A allele of rs1803274 represents a risk factor for in-stent restenosis in Central European patients after percutaneous coronary intervention with bare-metal stent implantation.
BACKGROUND: People in different occupations are exposed to a variety of xenobiotics which affect the health and physiological processes of the body. Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE), has been reported to play neuronal and non-neuronal roles, though its exact function is yet to be established. This study aimed to find the status and role of BChE in seven different occupational groups; gasoline fillers, auto-mechanics, carpenters, textile shop workers, furniture shop workers, electricians, and office workers. METHODS: A total of 400 samples were screened. BChE activity was determined by Worek et al. method based on Ellman's principle. Pro-inflammatory cytokines were determined by ELISA. Genotypic analysis of the K-variant of BCHE gene SNP was carried out by standard molecular methods. Among seven groups, office workers were taken as a control to compare the results with all other occupational groups. RESULTS: The results revealed a significant decrease in BChE activity in gasoline fillers (79.52%) followed by carpenters (73.49%), auto mechanics (39.76%), textile shop workers (18.07%), electricians (10.84%), and furniture shop workers (7.23%). TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL1-beta were elevated in all groups. IL-6 and IL1-beta in gasoline fillers, and electricians were not statistically significantly increased. Binomial regression to determine the odd ratio was found to be significant (p < 0.05) in all groups. However, correlation (Pearson) did not reveal significance between different biochemical parameters. Genotypic analysis of the K-variant SNP of the BCHE gene showed a significant association with occupational groups when compared with control which indicates a possible association with xenobiotics exposure and the physiological role of K-variant in understudied occupational groups. CONCLUSION: The study concluded that BChE and its gene SNP rs 1803274 and proinflammatory cytokines significantly dysregulates under the exposure to cumulative multiple xenobiotics in different occupational groups which may lead to pathophysiological conditions.
OBJECTIVE: Circulating biomarkers can be used as effective prediction tools for AMI diagnosis and prognosis, but their prediction efficiency is limited and still needs to be explored. The study aimed to investigate the changes of myocardial troponin I (cTn I), myoglobin (Mb), and butyryl cholinesterase (BChE) levels in patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and its clinical predictive efficacy. METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, fifty patients with AMI who received PCI (AMI group) and 50 healthy subjects who underwent physical examination (reference group) during the same period were included. According to the occurrence of short-term major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) during 6-month follow-up, they were divided into MACE group and non-MACE group . The difference of Mb, BChE, and cTnI levels was compared, and the ROC curve was drawn to analyze the prediction efficiency. RESULTS: Compared with the reference group or non-MACE group, Mb and cTnI significantly increased and BChE significantly decreased inAMI group and MACE group, respectively (P < .05). The AUC of Mb, cTnI and BChE in diagnosing AMI occurrence and prognosis were all > 0.75, and the sensitivity and specificity were all > 85.00%. cTnI, Mb and BChE have good diagnostic efficacy in disease occurrence and prognosis evaluation of AMI patients. CONCLUSIONS: High expression of Mb and cTnI and low expression of BChE can increase the risk of AMI incidence and MACE occurrence and have high diagnostic efficacy, which can be used as sensitive factors in clinical AMI diagnosis and evaluation. Thess provided a theoretical foundation for AMI diagnosis and MACE preventing in AMI patients.
