Complement C1q subcomponent subunit A; C1q associates with the proenzymes C1r and C1s to yield C1, the first component of the serum complement system. The collagen-like regions of C1q interact with the Ca(2+)-dependent C1r(2)C1s(2) proenzyme complex, and efficient activation of C1 takes place on interaction of the globular heads of C1q with the Fc regions of IgG or IgM antibody present in immune complexes.
Pancreatic Neuroendocrine tumors (PanNET) are challenging to diagnose and often detected at advanced stages due to a lack of specific and sensitive biomarkers. This study utilized proteomics as a valuable approach for cancer biomarker discovery; therefore, mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling was conducted on plasma samples from 12 subjects (3 controls; 5 Grade I, 4 Grade II PanNET patients) to identify potential proteins capable of effectively distinguishing PanNET from healthy controls. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD045045. 13.2% of proteins were uniquely identified in PanNET, while 60% were commonly expressed in PanNET and controls. 17 proteins exhibiting significant differential expression between PanNET and controls were identified with downstream analysis. Further, 5 proteins (C1QA, COMP, HSP90B1, ITGA2B, and FN1) were selected by pathway analysis and were validated using Western blot analysis. Significant downregulation of C1QA (p = 0.001: within groups, 0.03: control vs. grade I, 0.0013: grade I vs. grade II) and COMP (p = 0.011: within groups, 0.019: control vs grade I) were observed in PanNET Grade I & II than in controls. Subsequently, ELISA on 38 samples revealed significant downregulation of C1QA and COMP with increasing disease severity. This study shows the potential of C1QA and COMP in the early detection of PanNET, highlighting their role in the search for early-stage (Grade-I and Grade-II) diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets for PanNET.
Skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) is the most lethal form of skin cancers owing to high invasiveness and high metastatic potential. Tumor microenvironment (TME) provides powerful evidences for discerning SKCM, raising the prospect to identify biomarkers of SKCM. Based on the transcriptome profiles of patients with SKCM and the corresponding clinical information from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we used ESTIMATE algorithm to calculate ImmuneScore and StromalScore and identified the TME-Related differentially expressed genes (DEGs), than the intersected TME-Related DEGs were used for subsequent functional enrichment analysis. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was used to identify the functionality-related DEGs and univariate Cox regression analysis was used to identify the survival-related DEGs. Furthermore, SKCM-related DEGs were identified based on two Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets. Finally, we intersected functionality-related DEGs, survival-related DEGs, and SKCM-related DEGs, ascertaining that six DEGs (CCL4, CXCL10, CCL5, GZMB, C1QA, and C1QB) function as core TME-related genes (CTRGs). Significant differences of GZMB, C1QA, and C1QB expressions were found in gender and clinicopathologic staging of SKCM. High levels of GZMB, C1QA, and C1QB expressions were associated with favorable prognosis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that cell-cell interaction, cell behavior, and intracellular signaling transduction may be mainly involved in both C1QA, C1QB and GZMB expressions and metabolism of phospholipid and amino acid, transcription, and translation may be implicated in low GZMB expressions. C1QA, C1QB, and GZMB are novel SKCM-relating CTRGs, providing promising immune-related prognostic biomarkers for SKCM.
Increased cytokine and inflammatory-related transcripts are found in the ventral midbrain, a dopamine neuron-rich region associated with schizophrenia symptoms. In fact, half of schizophrenia cases can be defined as having a "high inflammatory/immune biotype." Recent studies implicate both complement and macrophages in cortical neuroinflammation in schizophrenia. Our aim was to determine whether measures of transcripts related to phagocytosis/macrophages (CD163, CD64, and FN1), or related to macrophage adhesion [intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1)], or whether CD163+ cell density, as well as protein and/or gene expression of complement pathway activators (C1qA) and mediators (C3 or C4), are increased in the midbrain in schizophrenia, especially in those with a high inflammatory biotype. We investigated whether complement mRNA levels correlate with macrophage and/or microglia and/or astrocyte markers. We found CD163+ cells around blood vessels and in the parenchyma and increases in ICAM1, CD163, CD64, and FN1 mRNAs as well as increases in all complement transcripts in the midbrain of schizophrenia cases with high inflammation. While we found positive correlations between complement transcripts (C1qA and C3) and microglia or astrocyte markers across diagnostic and inflammatory subgroups, the only unique strong positive correlation was between CD163 and C1qA mRNAs in schizophrenia cases with high inflammation. Our study is the first to suggest that more circulating macrophages may be attracted to the midbrain in schizophrenia, and that increased macrophages are linked to increased complement pathway activation in tissue and may contribute to dopamine dysregulation in schizophrenia. Single-cell transcriptomic studies and mechanistic preclinical studies are required to test these possibilities.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: A major challenge in spinal dural arteriovenous fistula (SDAVF) is timely diagnosis, but no specific predictive biomarkers are known. METHODS: In the discovery cohort (case, n = 8 vs. control, n = 8), we used cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and paired plasma samples to identify differentially expressed proteins by label-free quantitative proteomics. Further bioinformatics enrichment analyses were performed to screen target proteins. Finally, it was validated by ELISA in two of the new cohorts (case, n = 17 vs. control, n = 9), and univariate analysis, simple linear regression, and receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve analysis were performed to evaluate the diagnostic potential. RESULTS: In the discovery cohort, the most overexpressed proteins were APOB and C4BPA in CSF samples of patients. The GO/KEGG enrichment analysis indicated that the upregulated proteins were mainly involved in the acute inflammatory response and complement activation. Hub-gene analysis revealed that APP might be the key protein in the molecular interaction network. In the validation cohort, C4BPA and C1QA were significantly overexpressed in the CSF of patients, averaging 3046.9 ng/ml and 2167.2 ng/ml, respectively. Simple linear regression demonstrated that levels of C1QA and C4 were positively correlated with total protein in CSF (R(2) = 0.8021, p = 0.0005; R(2) = 0.7447, p = 0.0013). The areas under the ROC curves of C4BPA and C1QA were 0.86 and 1.00, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: This study was the first to identify C4BPA and C1QA as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of SDAVF and revealed that complement pathway activation might be one of the molecular mechanisms for venous hypertension myelopathy.
OBJECTIVES: Transthyretin (TTR) familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) (OMIM 176300) shows a variable age-at-onset (AO), including within families. We hypothesized that variants in C1QA and C1QC genes, might also act as genetic modifiers of AO in TTR-FAP Val30Met Portuguese patients. METHODS: We analyzed DNA samples of 267 patients (117 families). To search for variants, all exons and flanking regions were genotyped by automated sequencing. We used generalized estimating equations (GEEs) to take into account the non-independency of AO among relatives. Intensive in silico analyses were performed, using various software to assess miRNAs target sites, splicing sites, transcription factor binding sites alterations, and gene-gene interactions. RESULTS: Two variants for C1QA gene, GA genotype of rs201693493 (P < 0.001) and CT genotype of rs149050968 (P < 0.001), were significantly associated with later AO. In silico analysis demonstrated, that rs201693493 may alter splicing activity. Regarding C1QC, we found three statistically significant results: GA genotype of rs2935537 (P = 0.003), GA genotype of rs201241346 (P < 0.001) and GA genotype of rs200952686 (P < 0.001). The first two were associated with earlier AO, whereas the third was associated with later-onset. INTERPRETATION: C1QA was associated with later onset, whereas C1QC may have a double role: variants may confer earlier or later AO. As found in a study in Cyprus, we confirmed the role of complement C1Q genes (and thus of inflammation) as modulator of AO in Portuguese patients with TTR-FAP Val30Met.
Monogenic lupus is a rare variant of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) that develops in patients with a single gene disorder. Early complement component deficiencies were the first forms of monogenic lupus to be described, and C1Q gene mutations are one of the most common forms. C1QA complement deficiency has been reported to occur usually due to biallelic variants in C1QA gene, and compound heterozygous variants in C1QA gene have rarely been reported. A majority of monogenic lupus patients with C1Q deficiency present with mucocutaneous, renal, and musculoskeletal manifestations. Our patient is an unusual case of monogenic lupus with severe neurological manifestations along with cutaneous, haematological, and hepatic manifestations secondary to rare compound heterozygous variants in C1QA gene and antiribosomal P autoantibody positivity. She was treated with glucocorticoids, rituximab, and fresh frozen plasma with partial neurological recovery. Thus, we present a unique case of monogenic lupus due to a rare compound heterozygous variant in C1QA gene with a brief review of literature.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the C1qA gene region with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in a Chinese Han population. METHODS: Chinese SLE patients (n = 748) and ethnically- and geographically-matched healthy controls (n = 750) were genotyped for the C1qA region SNPs, rs172378 and rs665691, by using the Sequenom MassArray system. RESULTS: The Chinese Han SLE patients and controls had statistically similar frequencies of alleles, genotypes, and haplotypes of C1qA polymorphisms. Moreover, no association signal was detected on different genetic models (additive, dominant, and recessive) or in SLE subgroups stratified by various clinical manifestations. CONCLUSIONS: The C1qA SNPs, rs172378 and rs665691, confer no genetic predisposition to SLE in a Chinese Han population.
OBJECTIVES: Homozygous C1q deficiency is an extremely rare condition and strongly associated with systemic lupus erythematosus. To assess and characterize C1q deficiency in an African-American lupus pedigree, C1q genomic region was evaluated in the lupus cases and family members. METHODS: Genomic DNA from patient was obtained and C1q A, B and C gene cluster was sequenced using next generation sequencing method. The identified mutation was further confirmed by direct Sanger sequencing method in the patient and all blood relatives. C1q levels in serum were measured using sandwich ELISA method. RESULTS: In an African-American patient with lupus and C1q deficiency, we identified and confirmed a novel homozygote start codon mutation in C1qA gene that changes amino acid methionine to arginine at position 1. The Met1Arg mutation prevents protein translation (Met1Arg). Mutation analyses of the patient's family members also revealed the Met1Arg homozygote mutation in her deceased brother who also had lupus with absence of total complement activity consistent with a recessive pattern of inheritance. CONCLUSION: The identification of new mutation in C1qA gene that disrupts the start codon (ATG to AGG (Met1Arg)) has not been reported previously and it expands the knowledge and importance of the C1q gene in the pathogenesis of lupus especially in the high-risk African-American population.
BACKGROUND: A synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs172378 (A>G, Gly->Gly) in the complement component C1QA has been proposed to be associated with distant breast cancer metastasis. We previously reported overexpression of this gene to be significantly associated with better prognosis in oestrogen-receptor-negative tumours. The purpose of this study was to investigate the association of rs172378 with expression of C1QA and breast cancer survival. METHODS: We analysed the gene expression pattern of rs172378 in normal and tumour tissue samples, and further explored its involvement in relation to mortality in 2270 women with breast cancer participating in Studies of Epidemiology and Risk factors in Cancer Heredity, a population-based case-control study. RESULTS: We found that although rs172378 showed differential allelic expression significantly different between normal (preferentially expressing the G allele) and tumour tissue samples (preferentially expressing the A allele), there was no significant difference in survival by rs172378 genotype (per allele hazard ratio (HR) 1.02, 95% CI: 0.88-1.19, P=0.78 for all-cause mortality; HR 1.03, 95% CI: 0.87-1.22, P=0.72 for breast-cancer-specific mortality). CONCLUSION: Our study results show that rs172378 is linked to a cis-regulatory element affecting gene expression and that allelic preferential expression is altered in tumour samples, but do not support an association between genetic variation in C1QA and breast cancer survival.
Complement is one of primary defense mechanisms against intravascular microorganisms and could play a role in the immune response to malignancy and hence its clinical behavior. We evaluated if the sole coding polymorphism of C1qA associates with outcome in patients with breast carcinoma. Genotyping for C1qA[276A/G] was performed in 63 breast cancer subjects with localized tumor and compared with that in 38 breast cancer subjects with metastasis. Established risk factors for clinical outcome were considered and evaluated in multivariable analysis. Breast cancer subjects with heterozygous or homozygous C1qA[276G] genotype had a higher rate of metastasis than subjects with the homozygous C1qA[276A] genotype [hazard ratio (HR) 2.4, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.1-4.1]. This association was stronger when only metastatic sites associated with hematogenous spread, i.e., to the bone, liver, and brain, were considered (HR 3.5, 95% CI 1.4-5.6) and remained statistically significant after adjustment for the number of positive lymph nodes, estrogen receptor status, and progesterone receptor status. There was no statistical difference in the C1qA[276A/G] allelic distribution between all subjects with breast cancer and controls. These results suggest there could be an association of a single nucleotide polymorphism at position 276 of the C1qA component of complement with breast cancer metastasis to sites linked to hematogenous spread of disease. The C1qA polymorphism associated with decreased distant metastasis has also been correlated with an increased incidence of subcutaneous systemic lupus and C1q deficiencies, suggesting that an altered immune response may play a role in the observed association.
