Complement C1q subcomponent subunit B; C1q associates with the proenzymes C1r and C1s to yield C1, the first component of the serum complement system. The collagen-like regions of C1q interact with the Ca(2+)-dependent C1r(2)C1s(2) proenzyme complex, and efficient activation of C1 takes place on interaction of the globular heads of C1q with the Fc regions of IgG or IgM antibody present in immune complexes.
We analyzed postmortem tissues of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS) for mRNA levels of two inflammatory proteins, complement C1qB and clusterin (apoJ). By Northern blot hybridization, SALS was associated with increased mRNA for C1qB and clusterin in the motor cortex (Brodmann area A4), but not in superior temporal cortex (A17), relative to neurologically normal controls. By in situ hybridization, SALS spinal cords showed increased C1qB and clusterin mRNA in areas undergoing neurodegeneration. This evidence implicates inflammatory mechanisms during neurodegenerative processes in SALS.
Skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) is the most lethal form of skin cancers owing to high invasiveness and high metastatic potential. Tumor microenvironment (TME) provides powerful evidences for discerning SKCM, raising the prospect to identify biomarkers of SKCM. Based on the transcriptome profiles of patients with SKCM and the corresponding clinical information from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we used ESTIMATE algorithm to calculate ImmuneScore and StromalScore and identified the TME-Related differentially expressed genes (DEGs), than the intersected TME-Related DEGs were used for subsequent functional enrichment analysis. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis was used to identify the functionality-related DEGs and univariate Cox regression analysis was used to identify the survival-related DEGs. Furthermore, SKCM-related DEGs were identified based on two Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) datasets. Finally, we intersected functionality-related DEGs, survival-related DEGs, and SKCM-related DEGs, ascertaining that six DEGs (CCL4, CXCL10, CCL5, GZMB, C1QA, and C1QB) function as core TME-related genes (CTRGs). Significant differences of GZMB, C1QA, and C1QB expressions were found in gender and clinicopathologic staging of SKCM. High levels of GZMB, C1QA, and C1QB expressions were associated with favorable prognosis. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) showed that cell-cell interaction, cell behavior, and intracellular signaling transduction may be mainly involved in both C1QA, C1QB and GZMB expressions and metabolism of phospholipid and amino acid, transcription, and translation may be implicated in low GZMB expressions. C1QA, C1QB, and GZMB are novel SKCM-relating CTRGs, providing promising immune-related prognostic biomarkers for SKCM.
Neuropathic pain is a kind of pain caused by primary or secondary impairment or dysfunction of peripheral or central nervous system. Patients with neuropathic pain were often with poor clinical outcome. We screened the differentially expressed genes between sciatic nerve injury and dorsal root ganglion gene in the sham operation model. Microarray and the spared nerve injury module were used to explore the molecular mechanism of neuropathic pain by injuries and the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified out. Besides, the bioinformatics methods were used to figure out the signaling pathways and expression regulation pattern these DEGs were enriched in, which may provide a basis for the molecular research and medicine target of therapy. Besides, protein-protein interaction network analysis was performed on these selected intersection genes. A total of 40 DEGs were screened out and only pctp gene was down-regulated, the left 39 genes were all up-regulated. Then, GO and KEGG enrichment analysis were performed on these intersection genes by DAVID software. Furthermore, protein-protein interaction network analysis was used to analyze the critical genes of neuropathic pain. Finally, four genes, that is, Jun, Gal, Cd74, and C1qb were identified to have strong interactions with other genes, which may function as the prognostic and predictive genes of neuropathic pain caused by peripheral injuries. Our results suggested that four differentially expressed genes, Jun, Gal, Cd74, and C1qb, had the potential to serve as prognostic or predictive markers for neuropathic pain, suggesting a potential application in the improvement of prognostic tools and treatments.
Chimeric antigen receptor T (CAR-T) cell therapy has demonstrated promising efficacy in early trials for relapsed/refractory diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). However, its efficacy in treating primary refractory DLBCL has not been comprehensively investigated, and the underlying resistance mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we report the outcomes of a phase I, open-label, single-arm clinical trial of relmacabtagene autoleucel (relma-cel), a CD19-targeted CAR-T cell product, with safety and efficacy as primary endpoints. Among the 12 enrolled patients, 8 experienced grade 4 hematologic toxicity of treatment-emergent adverse event. No grade >/=3 cytokine release syndrome or neurotoxicity occurred. Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed an increase proportion of C1QB-expressing macrophages in patients with progressive disease before CAR-T cell therapy. Cholesterol efflux from M2 macrophages was found to inhibit CAR-T cells cytotoxicity by inducing an immunosuppressive state in CD8(+) T cells, leading to their exhaustion. Possible interactions between macrophages and CD8(+) T cells, mediating lipid metabolism (AFR1-FAS), immune checkpoint activation, and T cell exhaustion (LGALS9-HAVCR2, CD86-CTLA4, and NECTIN2-TIGIT) were enhanced during disease progression. These findings suggest that cholesterol efflux from macrophages may trigger CD8(+) T cell exhaustion, providing a rationale for metabolic reprogramming to counteract CAR-T treatment failure. Chinadrugtrials.org.cn identifier: CTR20200376.
Lupus nephritis is one of the most severe manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus. Higher titers of serum anti-C1q autoantibodies correlate with disease activity in patients with lupus nephritis. Anti-C1q autoantibodies have been shown to bind neo-epitopes within the collagen region of human C1q. In a preliminary study, we recently reported that the anti-C1q autoantibodies could also recognize epitopes within the globular domain (gC1q) of the C1q molecule. Here, 38 sera from patients with renal biopsy-proven lupus nephritis were screened for the presence of anti-gC1q autoantibodies, using recombinant globular head regions of individual A (ghA), B (ghB) and C (ghC) chains of human C1q. We isolated anti-gC1q autoantibodies from three selected patients. Human C1q was pre-incubated with increasing concentrations of the isolated anti-ghA, anti-ghB or anti-ghC autoantibodies and its binding to different C1q target molecules such as IgG and CRP was then evaluated. Anti-ghB, but not anti-ghA and anti-ghC autoantibodies, markedly inhibited C1q interaction with IgG as well as CRP. These results appear to suggest that the anti-ghB autoantibodies may partially induce acquired functional C1q deficiency and thus may interfere with the biological function of C1q.
BACKGROUND: Malignant melanoma is an aggressive skin cancer and a tumor of melanocytic origin. Recent studies have suggested that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play crucial regulatory roles in multiple malignancies, including melanoma. Testis expressed 41 (TEX41) is a relatively new lncRNA whose mechanism in melanoma remains vague. AIMS: This study aimed to explore the role and specific mechanism of TEX41 in melanoma. METHODS: The expression of genes involved in this study was determined by qRT-PCR. Functional assays were conducted to analyze the role of relevant genes in melanoma cells. The interaction between TEX41 promoter and IRF4 as well as the relationship among TEX41, miR-103a-3p and C1QB was verified by mechanism assays. RESULTS: IRF4 up-regulated TEX41 at the transcriptional level in melanoma cells. TEX41 knockdown hindered melanoma cell proliferation, migration and invasion while promoting cell apoptosis. TEX41 bound to miR-103a-3p and regulated C1QB. The suppressive impact of TEX41 depletion on melanoma cell malignant behaviors could be counteracted by miR-103a-3p inhibition or C1QB overexpression. Moreover, IRF4 could facilitate melanoma cell growth via up-regulating C1QB. CONCLUSIONS: IRF4-activated TEX41 sequestered miR-103a-3p and modulated C1QB to promote melanoma cell malignant behaviors, for which TEX41 might be regarded as a potential therapeutic target for melanoma.
BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a complex, multifactorial psychiatric disorder. Our previous findings indicated that altered functional activity of the complement system, a major mediator of the immune response, is implicated in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. In order to explore whether these alterations are genetically determined or not, in the present study we evaluated the possible association of complement C1Q component gene variants with susceptibility to schizophrenia in Armenian population, focusing on four frequent single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of C1QA and C1QB genes. METHODS: In the present study four SNPs of the complement C1Q component genes (C1QA: rs292001, C1QB rs291982, rs631090, rs913243) were investigated in schizophrenia-affected and healthy subjects. Unrelated Caucasian individuals of Armenian nationality, 225 schizophrenic patients and the same number of age- and sex-matched healthy subjects, were genotyped. Genotyping was performed using polymerase chain reaction with sequence-specific primers (PCR-SSP) and quantitative real-time (qRT) PCR methods. RESULTS: While there was no association between C1QA rs292001, C1QB rs913243 and rs631090 genetic variants and schizophrenia, the C1QB rs291982*G minor allele was significantly overrepresented in schizophrenic patients (G allele frequency 58%) when compared to healthy subjects (46%, OR = 1.64, p(corr) = 0.0008). Importantly, the susceptibility for schizophrenia was particularly associated with C1QB rs291982 GG genotype (OR = 2.5, p(corrected) = 9.6E-5). CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained suggest that C1QB gene may be considered as a relevant candidate gene for susceptibility to schizophrenia, and its rs291982*G minor allele might represent a risk factor for schizophrenia at least in Armenian population. Replication in other centers/populations is necessary to verify this conclusion.
INTRODUCTION: C1q deficiency is a rare genetic disorder that is strongly associated with development of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Several mutations in the coding regions of the C1q genes have been described that result in stop-codons or other genetic abnormalities ultimately leading to C1q deficiency. Here we report on a Dutch boy suffering from recurrent infections with a complete C1q deficiency, without any SLE symptoms. METHODS: The presence of C1q in serum was assessed using ELISA and hemolytic assay. By western blot we examined the different C1q chains in cell lysates. We identified the mutation using deep-sequencing. By qPCR we studied the mRNA expression of C1qA, C1qB and C1qC in the PBMCs of the patient. RESULTS: Deep-sequencing revealed a homozygous mutation in the non-coding region of C1qB in the patient, whereas both parents were heterozygous. The mutation is located two nucleotides before the splice site of the second exon. In-silico analyses predict a complete abrogation of this natural splice site. Analyses of in vitro cultured cells from the patient revealed a lack of production of C1q and intracellular absence of C1qB in the presence of C1qA and C1qC peptides. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed total absence of C1qB mRNA, a reduced level of C1qA mRNA and normal levels of C1qC mRNA. CONCLUSION: In this study we report a new mutation in the non-coding region of C1qB that is associated with C1q deficiency.
BACKGROUND: Developing analytical methodologies to identify biomarkers in easily accessible body fluids is highly valuable for the early diagnosis and management of cancer patients. Peripheral whole blood is a "nucleic acid-rich" and "inflammatory cell-rich" information reservoir and represents systemic processes altered by the presence of cancer cells. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We conducted transcriptome profiling of whole blood cells from melanoma patients. To overcome challenges associated with blood-based transcriptome analysis, we used a PAXgene tube and NuGEN Ovation globin reduction system. The combined use of these systems in microarray resulted in the identification of 78 unique genes differentially expressed in the blood of melanoma patients. Of these, 68 genes were further analyzed by quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR using blood samples from 45 newly diagnosed melanoma patients (stage I to IV) and 50 healthy control individuals. Thirty-nine genes were verified to be differentially expressed in blood samples from melanoma patients. A stepwise logit analysis selected eighteen 2-gene signatures that distinguish melanoma from healthy controls. Of these, a 2-gene signature consisting of PLEK2 and C1QB led to the best result that correctly classified 93.3% melanoma patients and 90% healthy controls. Both genes were upregulated in blood samples of melanoma patients from all stages. Further analysis using blood fractionation showed that CD45(-) and CD45(+) populations were responsible for the altered expression levels of PLEK2 and C1QB, respectively. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The current study provides the first analysis of whole blood-based transcriptome biomarkers for malignant melanoma. The expression of PLEK2, the strongest gene to classify melanoma patients, in CD45(-) subsets illustrates the importance of analyzing whole blood cells for biomarker studies. The study suggests that transcriptome profiling of blood cells could be used for both early detection of melanoma and monitoring of patients for residual disease.
