Carbonic anhydrase 12; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Compared with other molecular subtypes, hormone receptor-positive breast cancer often shows worse neoadjuvant chemotherapy efficacy. This study aims to explore the relationship between the oestrogen receptor (ER)-related genes carbonic anhydrase 12 (CA12) and trefoil factor 3 (TFF3) and their predictive value of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. METHODS: We investigated the relationships between CA12, TFF3 and ER status and their predictive value of anthracycline-taxane neoadjuvant chemotherapy in 115 female breast cancer patients via real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 4 GEO datasets: GSE41998, GSE25065, GSE20194 and GSE20271. Then, the effects of CA12 and TFF3 on the chemotherapy drugs doxorubicin and docetaxel were verified in vitro in the breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and BT474. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The GEO datasets and RT-PCR results showed that the relative expression of both CA12 and TFF3 was higher in oestrogen receptor-positive samples compared with the other samples (p < 0.05). CA12 was significantly correlated with TFF3 (p < 0.05). In MCF-7 cells, inhibition of TFF3 induced downregulation of CA12 and ESR1 (p < 0.05) at both the mRNA and the protein levels, while inhibition of CA12 also downregulated TFF3 and ESR1 (p < 0.05). In BT474 cells, inhibition of TFF3 downregulated CA12 and ESR1 (p < 0.05) at both the mRNA and the protein levels, while inhibition of CA12 led to slight upregulation of TFF3 and ESR1 (p > 0.05). Moreover, GEO datasets and RT-PCR results showed that CA12 and TFF3 were more highly expressed in nonpathological complete response (non-pCR) samples than in pCR samples (p < 0.05). Cell viability assays of MCF-7 and BT474 cells showed that inhibiting CA12 and TFF3 could enhance sensitivity to doxorubicin and docetaxel (p < 0.05). WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: CA12 and TFF3 were correlated with each other, and their high expression might explain the worse efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer patients.
A simple, reproducible and efficient assay was described for visual demonstration that triazole fluconazole interfered with the anti-Candida albicans activity of polyene amphotericin B. The assay also indicated the existence of more than one antifungal mechanism involving imidazole ketoconazole.
INTRODUCTION: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) is among the deadliest forms of cancer globally. Carbonic anhydrase 12 (CA12) is known to play central roles in regulating many cancers, but its function in the context of PAAD is rarely discussed. This study was, therefore, designed to assess the expression of CA12 in PAAD and to explore its underlying mechanistic role in this cancer type. METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was used to measure CA12 expression in PAAD samples. The functionality of pancreatic cancer cells expressing varying levels of CA12 was assessed through wound healing, Transwell, and CCK-8 assays. In addition, flow cytometry was used to measure apoptosis and cell cycle progression in these same cells, while Western blotting was used to analyze the expression of proteins associated with the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. RESULTS: PAAD tissue samples exhibited significant CA12 downregulation (P < 0.001), and lower CA12 expression was, in turn, associated with poorer overall survival (P < 0.001). CA12 overexpression significantly impaired the proliferation of PAAD cell lines, instead inducing their apoptotic death and G0/G1 phase cell cycle arrest (P < 0.05). We additionally found that CA12 may exert its tumor suppressive roles via modulating the NF-kappaB signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: These results indicate that CA12 functions as a tumor suppressor in PAAD and may thus be a novel therapeutic target that can be used to guide PAAD patient treatment.
PURPOSE: Carbonic anhydrase enzymes (CAs) are universally involved in many fundamental physiological processes, including acid base regulation and fluid formation and movement. In glaucoma patients, CA inhibitors are very effective in lowering intraocular pressure by reducing the rate of aqueous humour secretion mediated by the CAs in the ciliary epithelium. In this work, we investigated the expression and tissue distribution of two recently discovered CA genes CA9 (CAIX) and CA12 (CAXII) in fetal, neonatal, and adult human eyes with and without glaucoma. METHODS: CAIX and CAXII expression in 16 normal and 10 glaucomatous eyes, and in cultured non-pigmented ciliary epithelial cells (NPE) from normal and glaucoma eye donors was assessed by immunostaining. In addition, northern blot hybridisation was performed to assess expression of CA4, CA9, and CA12 mRNA in cultured NPE cells from normal and glaucoma donors. RESULTS: CAXII was localised primarily to the NPE with its expression prominent during embryonic eye development but which decreased significantly in adults. CAIX expression in the NPE was very low. The epithelium of cornea and lens occasionally expressed both enzymes at low levels during development and in adult eye, and no expression was detected in the retina. The NPE from glaucoma eyes expressed higher levels of CAXII, but not CAIX, in comparison with normal eyes. This expression pattern was retained in cultured NPE cell lines. NPE cells from a glaucoma patient showed a five-fold increase in the CA12 mRNA level with no detectable expression of CA9 mRNA. Also, no expression of the CA4 gene encoding a GPI anchored plasma membrane protein was detected on these northern blots. CONCLUSIONS: Transmembrane CAIX and CAXII enzymes are expressed in the ciliary cells and, thus, may be involved in aqueous humour production. CA12 may be a targeted gene in glaucoma.
The purpose of this research was to explore whether the expression of carbonic anhydrase 12 (CA12) and the prognosis had a significant relationship in breast cancer patients. A total of 262 breast cancer specimens and 75 normal breast tissue specimens were recruited in this study. The expression of CA12 was detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC), and its correlation with the clinicopathological characteristics of breast cancer patients and their prognosis were further analyzed through standard statistical algorithms. The result of immunohistochemical staining showed that CA12 was detected in both normal breast tissue and breast cancer tissue. Compared to normal breast tissue, CA12 was significant higher expressing in cancer tissues (P=0.009). Statistical analysis showed that the high expression of CA12 in breast cancer tissue was related to estrogen receptor expression level (P<0.001). The follow-up of 262 cases of breast cancer patients within 5 years showed that patients with high expression of CA12 had significant better outcome in DFS (P=0.020) and OS (P=0.019) than patients with low expression of CA12. Univariate analysis of DFS showed that lymph node metastasis (P=0.034) and CA12 (P=0.024) are prognostic indicators. Multivariate analysis manifested that the expression of CA12 (P=0.025) and lymph node metastasis (P=0.024) are two independent factors affecting the prognosis of breast cancer. Conclusion: In breast cancer patients, CA12 can be seen as a new prognostic indicator and even a new target for treatment.
BACKGROUND: This study explores the repurposing of Auranofin (AF), an anti-rheumatic drug, for treating non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) adenocarcinoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). Drug repurposing in oncology offers a cost-effective and time-efficient approach to developing new cancer therapies. Our research focuses on evaluating AF's selective cytotoxicity against cancer cells, identifying RNAseq-based biomarkers to predict AF response, and finding the most effective co-therapeutic agents for combination with AF. METHODS: Our investigation employed a comprehensive drug screening of AF in combination with eleven anticancer agents in cancerous PDAC and NSCLC patient-derived organoids (n = 7), and non-cancerous pulmonary organoids (n = 2). Additionally, we conducted RNA sequencing to identify potential biomarkers for AF sensitivity and experimented with various drug combinations to optimize AF's therapeutic efficacy. RESULTS: The results revealed that AF demonstrates a preferential cytotoxic effect on NSCLC and PDAC cancer cells at clinically relevant concentrations below 1 microM, sparing normal epithelial cells. We identified Carbonic Anhydrase 12 (CA12) as a significant RNAseq-based biomarker, closely associated with the NF-kappaB survival signaling pathway, which is crucial in cancer cell response to oxidative stress. Our findings suggest that cancer cells with low CA12 expression are more susceptible to AF treatment. Furthermore, the combination of AF with the AKT inhibitor MK2206 was found to be particularly effective, exhibiting potent and selective cytotoxic synergy, especially in tumor organoid models classified as intermediate responders to AF, without adverse effects on healthy organoids. CONCLUSION: Our research offers valuable insights into the use of AF for treating NSCLC and PDAC. It highlights AF's cancer cell selectivity, establishes CA12 as a predictive biomarker for AF sensitivity, and underscores the enhanced efficacy of AF when combined with MK2206 and other therapeutics. These findings pave the way for further exploration of AF in cancer treatment, particularly in identifying patient populations most likely to benefit from its use and in optimizing combination therapies for improved patient outcomes.
Amazonian palm berries (acai, Euterpe oleracea Mart.) are fruits with high nutritional value and antioxidant activity and have aroused the interest of consumers, popularizing fruit pulps enriched with probiotics. Amazonian palm berries (acai, Euterpe oleracea Mart.) are fruits with high nutritional potential, providing a source of carbohydrates, fibers, proteins, lipids, vitamins, and minerals. Furthermore, acai provides several health benefits, including antioxidant activity. Nutritionally enhanced foods have aroused the interest of consumers, popularizing fruit pulps enriched with probiotics. Probiotics are dietary supplements consisting of live, beneficial microorganisms in the host which improve the intestinal microbiota. The objective of this study was to isolate, identify, and characterize the probiotic potential of an isolated Schleiferilactobacillus harbinensis strain (dubbed Ca12) and provide an optimized bioprocess for its production, using the complete factorial and central rotational compound design to supplement the frozen acai pulp. The isolated strain S. harbinensis Ca12 presented adequate resistance to gastric juice and bile salts, microbial activity against different Candida strains, self-aggregation and coaggregation properties, high adhesion in HT-29 cells, and 35% inhibition of Salmonella in HT-29 cells. When optimized, the cellular biomass production of the S. harbinensis Ca12 strain was approximately 600% higher than the unsupplemented whey, with a production of 3.6 x 1010 CFU mL(-1). The S. harbinensis Ca12 strain's viability in the creamy and traditional frozen acai pulp was shown to be stable for up to 6 months at 20  degrees C. The impact of this study involved for the first time the S. harbinensis Ca12 described in the Brazilian cocoa pulp with activity against Candida albicans of clinical importance, creating the potential of a new functional food with important benefits to human health as prevention for candidiasis.
Excessive chloride secretion in sweat (hyperchlorhidrosis), leading to a positive sweat test, is most commonly indicative of cystic fibrosis yet is found also in conjunction with various metabolic, endocrine, and dermatological disorders. There is conflicting evidence regarding the existence of autosomal-recessive hyperchlorhidrosis. We now describe a consanguineous Israeli Bedouin kindred with autosomal-recessive hyperchlohidrosis whose sole symptoms are visible salt precipitates after sweating, a preponderance to hyponatremic dehydration, and poor feeding and slow weight gain at infancy. Through genome-wide linkage analysis, we demonstrate that the phenotype is due to a homozygous mutation in CA12, encoding carbonic anhydrase XII. The mutant (c.427G>A [p.Glu143Lys]) protein showed 71% activity of the wild-type enzyme for catalyzing the CO(2) hydration to bicarbonate and H(+), and it bound the clinically used sulfonamide inhibitor acetazolamide with high affinity (K(I) of 10 nM). Unlike the wild-type enzyme, which is not inhibited by chloride, bromide, or iodide (K(I)s of 73-215 mM), the mutant is inhibited in the submicromolar range by these anions (K(I)s of 0.37-0.73 mM).
BACKGROUND: To examine whether the combined detection of serum tumor markers (CEA, CA72-4, CA19-9, CA15-3 and CA12-5) improves the sensitivity and accuracy in the diagnosis of gastric cancer (GC). MATERIALS AND METHODS: An automatic chemiluminescence immune analyzer with matched kits was used to determine the levels of serum CEA, CA72-4, CA19-9, CA15-3, and CA12-5 in 87 patients with gastric cancer (GC group), 60 patients with gastric benign diseases (GBD group) who were hospitalized during the same period, and 40 healthy subjects undergoing a physical examination. The values of these 5 tumor markers in the diagnosis of gastric cancer were analyzed. RESULTS: The levels of serum CEA, CA72-4, CA19-9, and CA12-5 were higher in the GC group than in the GBD group and healthy subjects, and these differences were significant (P<0.001). Although the level of CA15-3 was higher than those of benign lesion and healthy control groups, the difference was not statistically significant (P>0.05). The combined detection of CEA, CA72-4, CA19-9, and CA12-5 had a higher diagnostic value for gastric cancer than did single detection, and the positive detection rate of the combined detection of the four tumor markers was 60.9%. The diagnostic power when using the combined detection of CA72-4, CEA, CA19-9, and CA12-5 was the best. CONCLUSIONS: The combined detection of serum CA72-4, CEA, CA19-9 and CA12-5 increases the sensitivity and accuracy in the diagnosis of GC and can thus be considered an important tool for early diagnosis.
This article reports a novel blue emission in a series of Ca(12) Al(10.6) Si(3.4) O(32) Cl(5.4) :Ce(3)(+) phosphor under excitation in the near-UV wavelength range. This phosphor was prepared using the combustion method. Here, the Ce(3)(+) emission band is observed over a broad range of 380-550 nm, under 365 nm excitation, and is due to 5d-4f transition. The effect of a Li(+) charge compensator on the emission properties of the phosphor was also investigated for the first time. X-Ray diffraction confirmed the phase purity of the synthesized phosphor. The surface morphology and elemental composition of the phosphor were studied using scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Copyright (c) 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
A blue-emitting phosphor Ca(12) Al(14) O(32) F(2) :Eu(2+) was synthesized using a high-temperature solid-state reaction under a reductive atmosphere. The X-ray diffraction measurements indicate that a pure phase Ca(12) Al(14) O(32) F(2) :Eu(2+) can be obtained for low doping concentration of Eu(2+) . The phosphor has a strong absorption in the range 270-420 nm with a maximum at ~340 nm and blue emission in the range 400-500 nm with chromatic coordination of (0.152, 0.045). The optimal doping concentration is ~0.24. In addition, the luminescence properties of the as-synthesized phosphor were evaluated by comparison with those of Ca(12) Al(14) O(32) Cl(2) :Eu(2+) and the commercially available phosphor BaMgAl(10) O(17) :Eu(2+) . The emission intensity of Ca(12) Al(14) O(32) F(2) :Eu(2+) was ~72% that of BaMgAl(10) O(17) :Eu(2+) under excitation at lambda = 375 nm. The results indicate that Ca(12) Al(14) O(32) F(2) :Eu(2+) has potential application as a near-UV-convertible blue phosphor for white light-emitting diodes.
In the present study, we have analyzed four highly polymorphic regions (STRs) chosen from four candidate genes involved in: (1) Platelet aggregation: alpha subunit of the platelet GpIIb/GpIIIa integrin complex (GpIIIa (CT)n; 17q21.31), (2) Coagulation fibrinolysis: Plasminogen Activator Tissue (PLAT5 (TG)14(TA)12; 8p12-q11.2) and Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 (PAI-1 (CA)n; 7q21.3-q22), (3) Oxidative metabolism: the inducible nitric oxide (NO) synthase (iNOS) gene (NOS2A (CCTTT)n; 17cen-q11.2). Allele frequencies for these four STR loci were investigated in several Mediterranean populations. The population data deviate from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in all populations for GpIIIa (CT)n polymorphism.
We measured in 193 patients, admitted to our wards for symptoms and signs suggestive of pancreatic or digestive malignancy, the serum levels of five tumor-associated antigens (CA 19-9, CA 50, CA 125, TPA, CEA) and we evaluated their diagnostic accuracy both when used alone and in combination. For CA 19-9 and CA 50 a sensitivity for pancreatic cancer as high as 92 and 88%, respectively, and specificity of 91.8% were found. A lower sensitivity vs. pancreatic cancer was found for the other tumor markers, and vs. the other digestive and nondigestive malignancies for all tumor markers (apart for CA 19-9 and CA 50 vs. biliary carcinomas). As for the combined assays, the best figures were found vs. pancreatic cancer for CA 19-9 plus CA 50, CA 50 plus CEA, CA 50 plus CA 125; a sensitivity by far worse vs. the other gastrointestinal cancers was found for all the possible combinations. We conclude that in selected symptomatic patients some tumor-marker determinations can be useful in identifying those with a high probability of harboring a pancreatic cancer, to be further studied or operated upon. The clinical relevance of this in patients already symptomatic is at present unclear.
RATIONALE: Reports of mature cystic teratomas (MCTs) with associated complications and changes in serum cancer antigen levels are rare. Herein, we report a rare case of MCT with associated complications (rupture and malignant transformation), high levels of serum cancer antigens (CA19-9, CA12, and CEA), and surgical therapy. PATIENT CONCERNS: An 81-year-old woman was referred to our emergency department because of diffuse abdominal pain and distension for 20 days. DIAGNOSES: Imaging findings, including transabdominal ultrasonography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging, revealed a complex solid cystic mass in the lower abdomen. Preoperative laboratory test results showed high levels of serum cancer antigens (CA19-9, CA12, and CEA) in MCT. Histopathological examination of the specimen revealed a MCT with rupture and malignant transformation. INTERVENTIONS: The patient underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral oophorectomy, and partial omentectomy. The patient did not undergo chemotherapy after surgery. OUTCOMES: The follow-up period was 12 months. The patient recovered well without focal local recurrence or distant metastasis after the surgery. LESSONS: The study aims to report a new case of MCT with associated complications (rupture and malignant transformation) and changes in serum cancer antigen levels. Although this tumor presents as a complex solid cystic mass, detection of the intratumoral fat component is a key diagnostic imaging feature. A high level of serum cancer antigen may indicate the malignant transformation of MCT. In this case, surgery was an effective treatment for the MCT.
