Carbonic anhydrase 3; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide.
There is enduring interest in why some of us have clearer memories than others, given the substantial individual variation that exists in retrieval ability and the precision with which we can differentiate past experiences. Here we report novel evidence showing that variation in the size of human hippocampal subfield CA3 predicted the amount of neural interference between episodic memories within CA3, which in turn predicted how much retrieval confusion occurred between past memories. This effect was not apparent in other hippocampal subfields. This shows that subtle individual differences in subjective mnemonic experience can be accurately gauged from measurable variations in the anatomy and neural coding of hippocampal region CA3. Moreover, this mechanism may be relevant for understanding memory muddles in aging and pathological states.
Why some of us remember events more clearly than others and why memory loses precision over time is a major focus in memory research. Here, we show that the recruitment of specific neuroanatomical pathways within the medial temporal lobe (MTL) of the brain defines the precision of the memory recalled over the lifespan. Using optogenetics, neuronal activity mapping, and studying recent to very remote memories, we report that the hippocampal subfield CA1 is necessary for retrieving the gist of events and receives maximal support from MTL cortical areas (MEC, LEC, PER, and POR) for recalling the most remote memories. In contrast, reduction of CA3's activity alone coincides with the loss of memory precision over time. We propose that a shift between specific MTL subnetworks over time might be a fundamental mechanism of memory consolidation.
Metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are a group of G-protein-coupled receptors that exert a broad array of modulatory actions at excitatory synapses of the central nervous system. In the hippocampus, the selective activation of the different mGluRs modulates the intrinsic excitability, the strength of synaptic transmission, and induces multiple forms of long-term plasticity. Despite the relevance of mGluRs in the normal function of the hippocampus, we know very little about the changes that mGluRs functionality undergoes during the non-pathological aging. Here, we review data concerning the physiological actions of mGluRs, with particular emphasis on hippocampal area CA3. Later, we examine changes in the expression and functionality of mGluRs during the aging process. We complement this review with original data showing an array of electrophysiological modifications observed in the synaptic transmission and intrinsic excitability of aged CA3 pyramidal cells in response to the pharmacological stimulation of the different mGluRs.
The hippocampus plays a critical role in spatial and episodic memory. Mechanistic models predict that hippocampal subfields have computational specializations that differentially support memory. However, there is little empirical evidence suggesting differences between the subfields, particularly in humans. To clarify how hippocampal subfields support human spatial and episodic memory, we developed a virtual reality paradigm where participants passively navigated through houses (spatial contexts) across a series of videos (episodic contexts). We then used multivariate analyses of high-resolution fMRI data to identify neural representations of contextual information during recollection. Multi-voxel pattern similarity analyses revealed that CA1 represented objects that shared an episodic context as more similar than those from different episodic contexts. CA23DG showed the opposite pattern, differentiating between objects encountered in the same episodic context. The complementary characteristics of these subfields explain how we can parse our experiences into cohesive episodes while retaining the specific details that support vivid recollection.
Associative memory develops into adulthood and critically depends on the hippocampus. The hippocampus is a complex structure composed of subfields that are functionally-distinct, and anterior-posterior divisions along the length of the hippocampal horizontal axis that may also differ by cognitive correlates. Although each of these aspects has been considered independently, here we evaluate their relative contributions as correlates of age-related improvement in memory. Volumes of hippocampal subfields (subiculum, CA1-2, CA3-dentate gyrus) and anterior-posterior divisions (hippocampal head, body, tail) were manually segmented from high-resolution images in a sample of healthy participants (age 8-25 years). Adults had smaller CA3-dentate gyrus volume as compared to children, which accounted for 67% of the indirect effect of age predicting better associative memory via hippocampal volumes. Whereas hippocampal body volume demonstrated non-linear age differences, larger hippocampal body volume was weakly related to better associative memory only when accounting for the mutual correlation with subfields measured within that region. Thus, typical development of associative memory was largely explained by age-related differences in CA3-dentate gyrus.
Episodic memories typically comprise multiple elements. A defining characteristic of episodic retrieval is holistic recollection, i.e., comprehensive recall of the elements a memorized event encompasses. A recent study implicated activity in the human hippocampus with holistic recollection of multi-element events based on cues (Horner et al., 2015). Here, we obtained ultra-high resolution functional neuroimaging data at 7 tesla in 30 younger adults (12 female) using the same paradigm. In accordance with anatomically inspired computational models and animal research, we found that metabolic activity in hippocampal subfield CA3 (but less pronounced in dentate gyrus) correlated with this form of mnemonic pattern completion across participants. Our study provides the first evidence in humans for a strong involvement of hippocampal subfield CA3 in holistic recollection via pattern completion.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Memories of daily events usually involve multiple elements, although a single element can be sufficient to prompt recollection of the whole event. Such holistic recollection is thought to require reactivation of brain activity representing the full event from one event element ("pattern completion"). Computational and animal models suggest that mnemonic pattern completion is accomplished in a specific subregion of the hippocampus called CA3, but empirical evidence in humans was lacking. Here, we leverage the ultra-high resolution of 7 tesla neuroimaging to provide first evidence for a strong involvement of the human CA3 in holistic recollection of multi-element events via pattern completion.
