Carbonic anhydrase 4; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. May stimulate the sodium/bicarbonate transporter activity of SLC4A4 that acts in pH homeostasis. It is essential for acid overload removal from the retina and retina epithelium, and acid release in the choriocapillaris in the choroid; Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
Combretastatin-4 (CA-4) as a tubulin polymerization inhibitor draws extensive attentions. However, due to its weak stability of cis-olefin and poor metabolic stability, structure modifications on cis-configuration are being performed. In this work, we constructed a series of novel CA-4 analogues with linkers on olefin containing diphenylethanone, cis-locked dihydrofuran, alpha-substituted diphenylethanone, cyclobutane and cyclohexane on its cis-olefin. Cytotoxic activity of all analogues was measured by an SRB assay. Among them, compound 6b, a by-product in the preparation of diphenylethanone analogues, was found to be the most potent cytotoxic agents against HepG2 cells with IC(50) values of less than 0.5 muM. The two isomers of 6b induced cellular apoptosis tested by Annexin V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI) double staining, arrested cells in the G2/M phase by PI staining analysis, and disrupted microtubule network by immunohistochemistry study in HepG2 cells. Moreover, 6b-(E) displayed a dose-dependent inhibition effect for tubulin assembly in in vitro tubulin polymerization assay. In addition, molecular docking studies showed that two isomers of 6b could bind efficiently at colchicine binding site of tubulin similar to CA-4.
Pseudomonas fluorescens strain CA-4 is a bioreactor isolate capable of ethylbenzene degradation. Transposon mutagenesis and enzyme assays have been performed which allow us to propose the ethylbenzene degradative pathway in operation in this strain. Ethylbenzene is initially converted to 2-phenylethanol. This is degraded to phenylacetaldehyde and then to phenylacetic acid. The major inducer of the pathway is ethylbenzene itself. The pathway is regulated by the presence of non-aromatic carbon sources. Oxidation of ethylbenzene is repressed by glutamate, but not by citrate or glucose. A clone from a chromosomal library has been found to complement a mutant deficient in the ability to convert ethylbenzene to 2-phenylethanol.
Hippocampus-related cognitive deficits in working and verbal memory are frequent in schizophrenia, and hippocampal volume loss, particularly in the cornu ammonis (CA) subregions, was shown by magnetic resonance imaging studies. However, the underlying cellular alterations remain elusive. By using unbiased design-based stereology, we reported a reduction in oligodendrocyte number in CA4 in schizophrenia and of granular neurons in the dentate gyrus (DG). Here, we aimed to replicate these findings in an independent sample. We used a stereological approach to investigate the numbers and densities of neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes in CA4 and of granular neurons in the DG of left and right hemispheres in 11 brains from men with schizophrenia and 11 brains from age- and sex-matched healthy controls. In schizophrenia, a decreased number and density of oligodendrocytes was detected in the left and right CA4, whereas mean volumes of CA4 and the DG and the numbers and density of neurons, astrocytes, and granular neurons were not different in patients and controls, even after adjustment of variables because of positive correlations with postmortem interval and age. Our results replicate the previously described decrease in oligodendrocytes bilaterally in CA4 in schizophrenia and point to a deficit in oligodendrocyte maturation or a loss of mature oligodendrocytes. These changes result in impaired myelination and neuronal decoupling, both of which are linked to altered functional connectivity and subsequent cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia.
Introduction There is evidence for hippocampal dysfunctions in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which may contribute to neuropsychiatric impairments. However, fine structural alterations of the hippocampus have not been investigated in SLE. Methods We measured the volume of hippocampal subfields in 18 SLE patients and 20 healthy control individuals matched for age, gender, and education. The MRI protocol included structural T1 volumes (Philips Achieva 3T scanner, magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE)). For image processing, we used the neuGRID platform and the longitudinal pipeline of FreeSurfer v6.0 with the "hipposubfields" flag. Results Patients with SLE showed reduced volumes of CA1 (Cornu Ammonis 1) and CA4-dentate gyrus subfields relative to the control individuals. Smaller CA1 volumes were associated with worse performance on the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination. Conclusions These preliminary results indicate a prominent vulnerability and functional relevance of the CA1 hippocampal subfield in SLE.
Type III-A CRISPR-Cas surveillance complexes containing multi-subunit Csm effector, guide, and target RNAs exhibit multiple activities, including formation of cyclic-oligoadenylates (cA(n)) from ATP and subsequent cA(n)-mediated cleavage of single-strand RNA (ssRNA) by the trans-acting Csm6 RNase. Our structure-function studies have focused on Thermococcus onnurineus Csm6 to deduce mechanistic insights into how cA(4) binding to the Csm6 CARF domain triggers the RNase activity of the Csm6 HEPN domain and what factors contribute to regulation of RNA cleavage activity. We demonstrate that the Csm6 CARF domain is a ring nuclease, whereby bound cA(4) is stepwise cleaved initially to ApApApA>p and subsequently to ApA>p in its CARF domain-binding pocket, with such cleavage bursts using a timer mechanism to regulate the RNase activity of the Csm6 HEPN domain. In addition, we establish T. onnurineus Csm6 as an adenosine-specific RNase and identify a histidine in the cA(4) CARF-binding pocket involved in autoinhibitory regulation of RNase activity.
Target RNA binding to crRNA-bound type III-A CRISPR-Cas multi-subunit Csm surveillance complexes activates cyclic-oligoadenylate (cA(n)) formation from ATP subunits positioned within the composite pair of Palm domain pockets of the Csm1 subunit. The generated cA(n) second messenger in turn targets the CARF domain of trans-acting RNase Csm6, triggering its HEPN domain-based RNase activity. We have undertaken cryo-EM studies on multi-subunit Thermococcus onnurineus Csm effector ternary complexes, as well as X-ray studies on Csm1-Csm4 cassette, both bound to substrate (AMPPNP), intermediates (pppA(n)), and products (cA(n)), to decipher mechanistic aspects of cA(n) formation and release. A network of intermolecular hydrogen bond alignments accounts for the observed adenosine specificity, with ligand positioning dictating formation of linear pppA(n) intermediates and subsequent cA(n) formation by cyclization. We combine our structural results with published functional studies to highlight mechanistic insights into the role of the Csm effector complex in mediating the cA(n) signaling pathway.
Carbonic anhydrases CA1 and CA4 attenuate plant immunity and can contribute to altered disease resistance levels in response to changing atmospheric CO(2) conditions. beta-Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) play an important role in CO(2) metabolism and plant development, but have also been implicated in plant immunity. Here we show that the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas syringae and application of the microbe-associated molecular pattern (MAMP) flg22 repress CA1 and CA4 gene expression in Arabidopsis thaliana. Using the CA double-mutant ca1ca4, we provide evidence that CA1 and CA4 play an attenuating role in pathogen- and flg22-triggered immune responses. In line with this, ca1ca4 plants exhibited enhanced resistance against P. syringae, which was accompanied by an increased expression of the defense-related genes FRK1 and ICS1. Under low atmospheric CO(2) conditions (150 ppm), when CA activity is typically low, the levels of CA1 transcription and resistance to P. syringae in wild-type Col-0 were similar to those observed in ca1ca4. However, under ambient (400 ppm) and elevated (800 ppm) atmospheric CO(2) conditions, CA1 transcription was enhanced and resistance to P. syringae reduced. Together, these results suggest that CA1 and CA4 attenuate plant immunity and that differential CA gene expression in response to changing atmospheric CO(2) conditions contribute to altered disease resistance levels.
We established a light-activatable prodrug strategy that produces the combination effect of photodynamic therapy (PDT) and site-specific chemotherapy. Prodrugs are activated by singlet oxygen (SO), generated from PS and visible or near IR light, in either intra- or inter-molecular manner. The goal of this study is to evaluate cytotoxic effects of nonmitochondria-targeted prodrugs of a number of anticancer drugs with different mechanisms of action. They were tested in both 2D and 3D in vitro conditions via inter-molecular activation of prodrugs by SO generated in mitochondria by protoporphyrin IX-PDT (PpIX-PDT). Prodrugs of anticancer drugs (paclitaxel, SN-38, combretastatin A4 and mitomycin C) were synthesized using facile and high-yielding reactions. Nonmitochondria-targeted prodrugs showed limited dark toxicity while all of them showed greatly enhanced phototoxicity compared to PpIX-PDT in the 2D culture model. Prodrugs generated up to about 95% cell killing at 2.5 muM when administered with hexyl-aminolevulinate (HAL) to produce Protoporphyrin IX in cancer cells in both 2D monolayer and 3D spheroids model. The data demonstrate that mitochondria-targeting of prodrugs is not fully essential for our inter-molecular activation prodrug strategy. The prodrug strategy also worked for anticancer drugs with diverse MOAs.
A series of Mg(21) Ca(4) Na(4) (PO(4) )(18) :Eu(2+) -Eu(3+) phosphors was successfully synthesized using a high-temperature solid-state method in an air atmosphere. The phase structures and luminescence properties of the samples were studied in detail. The phosphors exhibited strong visible light emission under different wavelengths of ultraviolet light excitation. By harmonizing the doping concentration of Eu(3+) to adjust the relative luminescence intensity of Eu(2+) and Eu(3+) , a colourful emission of phosphors could be achieved. In addition, the colour coordinates of the International Commission on lighting indicated that Mg(21) Ca(4) Na(4) (PO)(18) :Eu(2+) -Eu(3+) could be considered as a potential blue, orange and red phosphor for white light-emitting diode applications.
Pseudomonas fluorescens strain CA-4 is a bioreactor isolate previously characterised by the presence of a side chain oxidation pathway for ethylbenzene breakdown. In this report a second pathway involving ethylbenzene ring dioxygenation has been identified in this strain. We examine here second substrate inhibition of the genes encoding the initial enzymes of this pathway, using reverse transcription (RT)-PCR. The genes of the ring-dioxygenation have been cloned and sequenced. They exhibit near identity to the gene clusters encoding the aromatic ring dioxygenase enzymes of two previously described isopropyl degrading strains, Pseudomonas sp. strain JR1 and P. fluorescens IP01. This dioxygenase pathway appears to be the major pathway for ethylbenzene degradation in this strain. The expression of these genes appears to be affected by the presence of second carbon substrates. Using RT-PCR we demonstrate that the negative effect of glutamate present in the growth medium together with ethylbenzene on the rate of ethylbenzene metabolism is mediated at the transcriptional level on the ethylbenzene dioxygenase genes.
Contrast agents that go beyond qualitative visualization and enable quantitative assessments of functional tissue performance represent the next generation of clinically useful imaging tools. An optimized and efficient large-scale synthesis of a cationic iodinated contrast agent (CA4+) is described for imaging articular cartilage. Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) using CA4+ reveals significantly greater agent uptake of CA4+ in articular cartilage compared to that of similar anionic or nonionic agents, and CA4+ uptake follows Donnan equilibrium theory. The CA4+ CECT attenuation obtained from imaging ex vivo human hip cartilage correlates with the glycosaminoglycan content, equilibrium modulus, and coefficient of friction, which are key indicators of cartilage functional performance and osteoarthritis stage. Finally, preliminary toxicity studies in a rat model show no adverse events, and a pharmacokinetics study documents a peak plasma concentration 30 min after dosing, with the agent no longer present in vivo at 96 h via excretion in the urine.
The role of alpha-carbonic anhydrase 4 (alpha-CA4) in photosynthetic machinery functioning in thylakoid membranes was studied, using Arabidopsis thaliana wild type plants (WT) and the plants with knockout of At4g20990 gene encoding alpha-CA4 (alphaCA4-mut) grown both in low light (LL, 80 mumol quanta m(-2) s(-1)) or in high light (HL, 400 mumol quanta m(-2) s(-1)). It was found that a content of PsbS protein, one of determinants of non-photochemical quenching of chlorophyll fluorescence, increased in mutants by 30% and 100% compared with WT plants in LL and in HL, respectively. Violaxanthin cycle pigments content and violaxanthin deepoxidase activity in HL were also higher in alphaCA4-mut than in WT plants. The content of PSII core protein, D1, when adapting to HL, decreased in WT plants and remained unchanged in mutants. This indicates, that the decrease in the content of Lhcb1 and Lhcb2 proteins in HL (Rudenko et al. Protoplasma 55(1):69-78, 2018) in WT plants resulted from decrease of both Photosystem II (PSII) complex content and content of these proteins in this complex, whereas in alphaCA4-mut plants from the latter process only. The absence of alpha-CA4 did not affect the rate of electron transport through Photosystem I (PSI) in thylakoids of mutant vs. WT, but led to 50-80% increase in the rate of electron transport from H(2)O to Q(A), evidencing the location of alpha-CA4 close to PSII. The latter difference may raise the question about its causal connection with the difference in the D1 protein content change during adapting to increased illumination in the presence and the absence of alpha-CA4.
The type III-A (Csm) CRISPR-Cas systems are multi-subunit and multipronged prokaryotic enzymes in guarding the hosts against viral invaders. Beyond cleaving activator RNA transcripts, Csm confers two additional activities: shredding single-stranded DNA and synthesizing cyclic oligoadenylates (cOAs) by the Cas10 subunit. Known Cas10 enzymes exhibit a fascinating diversity in cOA production. Three major forms-cA3, cA4 and cA6have been identified, each with the potential to trigger unique downstream effects. Whereas the mechanism for cOA-dependent activation is well characterized, the molecular basis for synthesizing different cOA isoforms remains unclear. Here, we present structural characterization of a cA6-producing Csm complex during its activation by an activator RNA. Analysis of the captured intermediates of cA6 synthesis suggests a 3'-to-5' nucleotidyl transferring process. Three primary adenine binding sites can be identified along the chain elongation path, including a unique tyrosine-threonine dyad found only in the cA6-producing Cas10. Consistently, disrupting the tyrosine-threonine dyad specifically impaired cA6 production while promoting cA4 production. These findings suggest that Cas10 utilizes a unique enzymatic mechanism for forming the phosphodiester bond and has evolved distinct strategies to regulate the cOA chain length.
In this paper, the photoluminescence properties of Eu(2+) -activated greenish-blue-emitting halophosphate phosphor Na(5) Ca(4) (PO(4) )(4) F were studied to estimate electron-vibrational interaction (EVI) parameters such as the Huang-Rhys factor, effective phonon energy, Stokes shift and zero phonon line (ZPL) position for various concentrations of dopant. The validity of the results was established by modeling the emission spectra, which was found to be in good agreement with the experimental photoluminescence spectra. Copyright (c) 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
