Carbonic anhydrase 7; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide; Belongs to the alpha-carbonic anhydrase family.
Colorectal cancer affects the colon or rectum and is a common global health issue, with 1.1 million new cases occurring yearly. The study aimed to identify gene signatures for the early detection of CRC using machine learning (ML) algorithms utilizing gene expression data. The TCGA-CRC and GSE50760 datasets were pre-processed and subjected to feature selection using the LASSO method in combination with five ML algorithms: Adaboost, Random Forest (RF), Logistic Regression (LR), Gaussian Naive Bayes (GNB), and Support Vector Machine (SVM). The important features were further analyzed for gene expression, correlation, and survival analyses. Validation of the external dataset GSE142279 was also performed. The RF model had the best classification accuracy for both datasets. A feature selection process resulted in the identification of 12 candidate genes, which were subsequently reduced to 3 (CA2, CA7, and ITM2C) through gene expression and correlation analyses. These three genes achieved 100% accuracy in an external dataset. The AUC values for these genes were 99.24%, 100%, and 99.5%, respectively. The survival analysis showed a significant logrank p-value of 0.044 for the final gene signatures. The analysis of tumor immunocyte infiltration showed a weak correlation with the expression of the gene signatures. CA2, CA7, and ITM2C can serve as gene signatures for the early detection of CRC and may provide valuable information for prognostic and therapeutic decision making. Further research is needed to fully understand the potential of these genes in the context of CRC.
Vascular endothelial cells (VECs) that form the inner wall of blood vessels can be injured by high glucose-induced autophagy and apoptosis. Although the role of long noncoding RNA in regulating cell fate has received widespread attention, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) that can both regulate autophagy and apoptosis need to be discovered. In this study, we identified that a small chemical molecule, 3-benzyl-5-([2-nitrophenoxy] methyl)-dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one (3BDO), synthesized by us, could inhibit VEC autophagy and apoptosis induced by a high concentration of glucose. To find new lncRNAs that regulate autophagy and apoptosis in VECs, we performed lncRNA microarray analysis. We found and verified an upregulated lncRNA named CA7-4 that was induced by a high concentration of glucose could be downregulated by 3BDO most obviously among all of the detected lncRNAs. Meanwhile, we investigated the mechanism of CA7-4 in regulating VEC autophagy and apoptosis. The results showed that CA7-4 facilitated endothelial autophagy and apoptosis as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) by decoying MIR877-3P and MIR5680. Further study elucidated that MIR877-3P could trigger the decrease of CTNNBIP1 (catenin beta interacting protein 1) by combining with its 3' UTR and then upregulating CTNNB1 (catenin beta 1); MIR5680 inhibited the phosphorylation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) by targeting and decreasing DPP4 (dipeptidyl peptidase 4). Therefore, CA7-4, MIR877-3P and MIR5680 represent new signal pathways that regulate VEC autophagy and apoptosis under the high-glucose condition.Abbreviations: 3BDO: 3-benzyl-5-([2-nitrophenoxy] methyl)-dihydrofuran-2(3H)-one; 3' UTR: 3' untranslated region; AGO2: argonaute RISC catalytic component 2; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase/protein kinase AMP-activated; BAX/BCL2L4: BCL2 associated X, apoptosis regulator; BCL2: BCL2 apoptosis regulator; CASP3: caspase 3; ceRNA: competing endogenous RNA; CTNNB1: catenin beta 1; CTNNBIP1/ICAT: catenin beta interacting protein 1; DPP4: dipeptidyl peptidase 4; FGF2/FGF-2: fibroblast growth factor 2; HG: high concentration glucose (30 mM glucose); lncRNA: long noncoding RNA; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; miRNA: microRNA; MIR4778-3P: microRNA 4778-3p; MIR561-3P: microRNA 561-3p; MIR5680: microRNA 5680; MIR877-3P: microRNA 877-3p; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; Mut: mutant; NC: negative control; NG: normal concentration glucose (5.5 mM glucose); PARP1: poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1; qPCR: quantitative real-time PCR; RNA-FISH: RNA- fl uorescence in situ hybridization; ROS: reactive oxygen species; RT-PCR: reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction; siRNA: small interfering RNA; SQSTM1: sequestosome 1; TGFB2-OT1: TGFB2 overlapping transcript 1; TUNEL: terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling; VECs: vascular endothelial cells; WT: wild type.
A Eu(3+) -activated Ca(7) Mg(2) (PO(4) )(6) phosphor was prepared at high temperature (800 degrees C) using a solid-state reaction method. The crystal structure, phase formation of the prepared phosphor was characterized using X-ray diffraction patterns and Fourier transformed infrared analysis. The luminescence properties of the synthesized phosphor were characterized using photoluminescence and thermoluminescence techniques. The prepared phosphor showed two emission peaks at 594 nm with an orange colour due to the (5) D(0) -->(7) F(1) transition and at 612 nm a red colour due to the (5) D(0) -->(7) F(2) transition under 396 nm near-UV excitation. The prepared phosphors were irradiated with different doses of gamma-rays from a (60) Co gamma irradiation source. Thermoluminescence glow curves for this sample phosphor were obtained using a Nucleonix 1009I TL reader. Synthesized phosphor samples were exposed to a 3.6 kGy dose of gamma-rays. The thermoluminescence glow curve of the Ca(7) Mg(2) (PO(4) )(6) :0.05 mol%Eu(3+) phosphor showed maximum intensity at all concentrations of Eu(3+) ions. The Ca(7) Mg(2) (PO(4) )(6) :0.05 mol%Eu(3+) phosphor was irradiated with different doses of (60) Co gamma-irradiation and a linear response was observed between 0.6 kGy and 3.6 kGy. Trapping parameters such as activation energy, frequency factor and order of kinetics were calculated. The CIE chromaticity diagram showed the colour coordinates of the synthesized phosphor in the orange and red regions of the visible spectrum; this spectral feature revealed high colour purity and excellent chromaticity coordinate characteristics. Photoluminescence and thermoluminescence properties revealed that the prepared phosphor could be a potential red-emitting phosphor for eco-friendly white light generation and an excellent thermoluminescent dosimeter material for thermoluminescence dosimetric applications.
