Carbonic anhydrase 9; Reversible hydration of carbon dioxide. Participates in pH regulation. May be involved in the control of cell proliferation and transformation. Appears to be a novel specific biomarker for a cervical neoplasia.
Tobacco includes thousands of chemicals such as nicotine, which causes numerous diseases including oral cancer. We synthesized nicotinic acid based probes by chemical modification to identify the proteins expressed by the oral cancer cell line Ca9-22 that interact with the nicotinic functional group. Proteins belonging to human oral squamous cell carcinoma were pulled down by a probe carrier based on nicotinic acid, which was reacted with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane to compose nicotinic acid linked 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane exposed on the SiO2 surface. Oral cancer cell lysates were incubated with the nicotinic acid chemical probes to identify the interactions between the nicotinic group and oral cancer cell line extracted proteins. The interactions between the chemical probes and proteins identified as their targets were confirmed by consulting chemicals databases. Interestingly, chaperone proteins (e.g., heat-shock proteins and endoplasmin) that were found to interact with nicotinic acid were identified as binding partners in ribosomal and nucleosome assembly complexes.
BACKGROUND: Oral leukoplakia is one of the most common oral premalignant disorder. The classical evaluation through tissue biopsy is not always valid to evaluate the risk of malignization. MATERIAL AND METHODS: RT-qPCR was performed on 47 blood samples (21 patients with leukoplakia, 2 with oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), and 24 healthy patients) and on 11 tissue samples (3 leukoplakia, 4 OSCC, and 4 samples of healthy tissue). RESULTS: There are significant differences in expression between the different groups (F = 4.057, p = .006). The Duncan post hoc test shows that the only group that differentiates is the tumour tissue. Using Wilcoxon test, different covariables of patients with leukoplakia were analysed with respect to the group of healthy patients and no significant differences were observed. CONCLUSIONS: The diagnostic route through liquid biopsy has not been conclusive in this study, but there are significant differences in the levels analysed in the different tissue samples.
Regulation by hypoxia may underlie the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in bladder cancer. We have compared the distribution of vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA with a hypoxia marker, carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA IX). vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA was analysed by in situ hybridisation and CA IX by immunochemistry in 22 cases of bladder cancer. The relationship of microvessels to the distribution of CA IX was determined. In a separate series of 49 superficial tumours, CA IX immunostaining was compared with clinico-pathological outcome. In superficial and invasive disease there was overlap in the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and CA IX, CA IX being more widespread. Both were expressed predominantly on the luminal surface, and surrounding areas of necrosis (invasive tumours). Expression of both factors was greater in superficial disease. Expression was absent within approximately 80 microm of microvessels. Unlike vascular endothelial growth factor, CA IX did not predict outcome in superficial disease. Differential responses to reoxygenation provide one explanation: vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA declined rapidly, while CA IX expression was sustained for >72 h. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA in bladder tumours is consistent with hypoxic regulation and suggests differential regulation in superficial vs invasive disease. The expression of CA IX on the luminal surface justifies investigation of its utility as a therapeutic target/prognostic indicator.
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a standard chemotherapeutic drug used in the treatment of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM); however, resistance to this drug is common. SRY-Box 9 (SOX9) expression is associated with a poor prognosis of patients with GBM and with resistance to TMZ. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine the effects of SOX9 inhibition on the sensitivity of glioma cells to TMZ treatment. We knocked down the expression of SOX9 (SOX9KD) via lentiviral infection in two glioblastoma (U87 and U251) cell lines, and the cells were then subjected to gene microarray, Gene Ontology and KEGG analysis pathway, all of which revealed a close association between SOX9 and the carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) gene. The TMZ-mediated apoptosis of glioma cells was significantly increased in the cells in the SOX9KD group. The potential underlying mechanism involved the downregulation of SOX9 and CA9 expression, which in turn decreased Akt phosphorylation, downregulated BCL‑2 expression, and upregulated BAX expression, as assessed by western blot analysis and RT-qPCR. The effects were found to be substantially enhanced in the cells in the SOX9KD group treated with TMZ. Subsequently, considering the association between SOX9 and CA9, the effects of CA9 inhibition, using a CA9 inhibitor (U‑104), on the chemosensitivity of glioma cells to TMZ were assessed. The results revealed that the use of U‑104 + TMZ effectively induced glioma cell death, compared to treatment with TMZ alone. The underlying mechanisms were similar to those observed with the silencing of SOX9 in the TMZ-treated glioma cells. On the whole, the findings of this study establish the SOX9/CA9-mediated oncogenic pathway in glioma, the inhibition of which enhances the sensitivity of glioma cells to TMZ treatment, and thus highlights the value of developing small molecules or antibodies against the SOX9/CA9 pathway, for combination therapy with TMZ, in the more efficient management of glioma.
BACKGROUND: Surface nanostructures in titanium (Ti) oral implants are critical for rapid osseointegration. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the growth of osteoblast-like (Saos-2) and epithelial-like (Ca9-22) cells on nanopatterned Ti films. METHODS: Ti films with 500 nm grooves and pillars were fabricated by nanoimprinting, and seeded with Saos-2 and Ca9-22 cells. Cell viability and morphology were assessed by cell proliferation assay and scanning electron microscopy, respectively. RESULTS: As assessed after 1 hour, proliferation of Saos-2 cells was most robust on grooved films than on pillared and smooth films, in this order. These cells approximately doubled on grooved and pillared substrates in 24 hours and after 5 days, but not on smooth surfaces. In contrast, Ca9-22 cells favored smooth surfaces, followed by grooved and pillared films. Indeed, cells sparsely adhered to pillared films over 5 days of incubation (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The data show that Saos-2 and Ca9-22 cells respond differently to different nanostructures, and highlight the potential use of nanopatterns to promote bone regeneration or to prevent epithelial downgrowth at the implant-bone interface.
Hypoxia is a crucial factor in tumour aggressiveness and its treatment resistance, particularly in human brain cancer. Tumour resistance against radiation- and chemo- therapy is facilitated by oxygenation reduction at tumour areas. HIF-1alpha regulated genes are mostly responsible for this type of resistance. Among these genes, carbonic anhydrase isoform 9 (CA9) is highly overexpressed in many types of cancer especially in high grade brain cancer like GBM. CA IX contributes to tumour environment acidification by catalyzing the carbon dioxide hydration to bicarbonate and protons, leading to the acquisition of metastasic phenotypes and chemoresistance to weakly basic anticancer drugs and therefore to inadequate application of radio-therapeutic or chemotherapeutic anti-cancer treatment strategies. Inhibition of this enzymatic activity by application of specific chemical CA9 inhibitors (sulphonamide derivative compounds) or indirect inhibitors like HIF-1alpha inhibitors (chetomin) or molecular inhibitors like CA9-siRNA leads to reversion of these processes, leading to the CA9 functional role inhibition during tumourigenesis. Hypoxia significantly influences the tumour microenvironment behaviour via activation of genes involved in the adaptation to the hypoxic stress. It also represents an important cancer prognosis indicator and is associated with aggressive growth, malignant progression, metastasis and poor treatment response. The main objective in malignant GBM therapy is either to eradicate the tumour or to convert it into a controlled, quiescent chronic disease. Sulfonamide derivative compounds with CA9 inhibitory characteristics represent one of the optimal treatment options beside other CA9 inhibitory agents or chemical inhibitory compounds against its main regulating transcription factor which is the hypoxia induced HIF-1alpha when applied against human cancers with hypoxic regions like GBM, bearing potential for an effective role in human brain tumour therapeutic strategies. Glycolytic inhibitors, when added in controlled doses under hypoxia, lead to a reduced accumulation of HIF-1alpha and can function as indirect hypoxia regulated genes inhibitors like CA9. These may be used as alternative or in conjunction with other direct inhibitors like the sulphonamide derivate compounds, chetomin or specific siRNAs, or other different chemical compounds possessing similar functionality making them as optimal tools for optimized therapy development in cancer treatment, especially against human brain cancer. Further experimental analysis towards the tumour stage specific inhibitory CA9 characteristics determination are necessary to find the optimal therapeutic solutions among the different available modalities; whether they are direct or indirect chemical, molecular or natural inhibitors to be able to set up successful treatment approaches against the different human tumour diseases.
The water extract of Gracilaria tenuistipitata have been found to be protective against oxidative stress-induced cellular DNA damage, but the biological function of the ethanolic extracts of G. tenuistipitata (EEGT) is still unknown. In this study, the effect of EEGT on oral squamous cell cancer (OSCC) Ca9-22 cell line was examined in terms of the cell proliferation and oxidative stress responses. The cell viability of EEGT-treated OSCC cells was significantly reduced in a dose-response manner (p < 0.0001). The annexin V intensity and pan-caspase activity of EEGT-treated OSCC cells were significantly increased in a dose-response manner (p < 0.05 to 0.0001). EEGT significantly increased the reactive oxygen species (ROS) level (p < 0.0001) and decreased the glutathione (GSH) level (p < 0.01) in a dose-response manner. The mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) of EEGT-treated OSCC cells was significantly decreased in a dose-response manner (p < 0.005). In conclusion, we have demonstrated that EEGT induced the growth inhibition and apoptosis of OSCC cells, which was accompanied by ROS increase, GSH depletion, caspase activation, and mitochondrial depolarization. Therefore, EEGT may have potent antitumor effect against oral cancer cells.
Glioblastomas (GBM), the most common malignant primary adult brain tumors, are uniformly lethal and are in need of improved therapeutic modalities. GBM contain extensive regions of hypoxia and are enriched in therapy resistant brain tumor-initiating cells (BTICs). Carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) is a hypoxia-induced cell surface enzyme that plays an important role in maintenance of stem cell survival and therapeutic resistance. Here we demonstrate that CA9 is highly expressed in patient-derived BTICs. CA9(+) GBM BTICs showed increased self-renewal and proliferative capacity. To target CA9, we developed dual antigen T cell engagers (DATEs) that were exquisitely specific for CA9-positive patient-derived clear cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC) and GBM cells. Combined treatment of either ccRCC or GBM cells with the CA9 DATE and T cells resulted in T cell activation, increased release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and enhanced cytotoxicity in a CA9-dependent manner. Treatment of ccRCC and GBM patient-derived xenografts markedly reduced tumor burden and extended survival. These data suggest that the CA9 DATE could provide a novel therapeutic strategy for patients with solid tumors expressing CA9 to overcome treatment resistance. .
AIMS: Renal epithelial neoplasms (RENs) can be difficult to subclassify, owing to overlapping morphological features. Carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) is a common biomarker for clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC); however, the sensitivity and specificity across REN subtypes are less clear. The aim of this study was to investigate CA9 expression in RENs, especially those in the differential diagnosis with CCRCC and less common entities, to determine its reliability as a diagnostic biomarker. METHODS AND RESULTS: CA9 immunostaining was performed on 262 RENs, including 119 CCRCCs and 143 non-CCRCC. Immunostaining was evaluated as negative (0%), rare (1+, 1-10%), focal (2+, 11-50%), or diffuse (3+, >50%). CCRCCs were 3+ CA9-positive in 93% of cases; 4% were CA9-negative. Sixty-seven percent of papillary renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) were 1+/2+ CA9-positive, whereas 33% were CA9-negative. Chromophobe RCCs were nearly always CA9-negative (93%), with 7% showing rare cell reactivity. Clear cell tubulopapillary RCCs (CCTPRCCs) were consistently 3+ CA9-positive, but with a cup-like staining pattern. Fifty-three percent of Xp11.2 RCCs were CA9-negative; however, 6% were 3+ CA9-positive and 12% were 2+ CA9-positive. Two of eight fumarate hydratase-deficient RCCs were 3+ CA9-positive. A small subset of the remaining RCCs showed rare to focal CA9 expression. All oncocytomas and eosinophilic solid and cystic RCCs were CA9-negative. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, diffuse CA9 expression was identified in nearly all CCRCCs and in all CCTPRCCs (high sensitivity); however, CA9 was not entirely specific. At least focal CA9 expression can been seen in a subset of many RCCs, and such findings should be taken into consideration with other morphological, immunophenotypic and clinical findings.
The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt (PI3K) pathway regulates hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) activity. Higher expression of HIF-1alpha and carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), a hypoxia-inducible gene, in HT10806TG fibrosarcoma cells (mutant N-ras allele), compared to derivative MCH603 cells (deleted mutant N-ras allele), correlated with increased PI3K activity. Constitutive activation of the PI3K pathway in MCH603/PI3K(act) cells increased HIF-1alpha but, surprisingly, decreased CAIX levels. The cell-type specific inhibitory effect on CAIX was confirmed at the transcriptional level whereas epigenetic modifications of CA9 were ruled out. In summary, our data do not substantiate the generalization that PI3K upregulation leads to increased HIF activity.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Carbonic anhydrase IX (CA9) catalyses the interconversion of carbon dioxide to carbonic acid and bicarbonate and is considered a putative biomarker of tumour hypoxia. We set out to evaluate the prognostic significance of CA9 in prostate cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Plasma samples were assessed from 68 men with high-risk localised prostate cancer treated with radical prostatectomy (RP) or radiotherapy (RT), and 20 men with castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) treated with docetaxel chemotherapy between 2010 and 2012 at the Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Canada. RESULTS: Of the 68 patients with high-risk localised prostate cancer, 57 underwent RP and 11 underwent RT. Baseline CA9 was not associated with recurrence or prostate-specific antigen in either group (p=0.98 and 0.20, respectively). CA9 levels before chemotherapy correlated with overall survival (r=-0.37; two-sided p=0.11). CONCLUSION: Baseline CA9 in men with CRPC may portend a more aggressive prostate cancer phenotype with poorer survival.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the expression of carbonic anhydrase IX (CA9) and to identify its prognostic significance in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (IHCC). We performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CA9 in a total of 85 IHCCs. CA9 overexpression was observed in 38 of 85 (44.7%) IHCCs. CA9 overexpression was related to tumors with intraductal growth than mass forming or periductal infiltrative type. CA9 overexpression was more observed in tumors with well/moderate differentiation than poor differentiation and without lymph node metastasis. No significant correlation was observed in CA9 overexpression with tumor size, pT, stage and lymphovascular invasion. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas with CA9 overexpression showed better overall survival than that without expression (P = 0.001). In multivariate analysis, lymph node metastasis (95% CI: 2.103 (1.167-3.791), P = 0.013) was an independent poor prognostic factor. IHCC with CA9 overexpression showed a 0.5-fold (95% confidence interval, 0.328-0.944) lower risk of death compared with those of no or weak expression. CA9 overexpression was related to histologic differentiation and an independent good prognostic factor.
A strong hypoxic environment has been observed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, which contributes to drug resistance, tumor progression, and metastasis. Therefore, we performed bioinformatics analyses to investigate potential targets for the treatment of PDAC. To identify potential genes as effective PDAC treatment targets, we selected all genes whose expression level was related to worse overall survival (OS) in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and selected only the genes that matched with the genes upregulated due to hypoxia in pancreatic cancer cells in the dataset obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Although the extracted 107 hypoxia-responsive genes included the genes that were slightly enriched in angiogenic factors, TCGA data analysis revealed that the expression level of endothelial cell (EC) markers did not affect OS. Finally, we selected CA9 and PRELID2 as potential targets for PDAC treatment and elucidated that a CA9 inhibitor, U-104, suppressed pancreatic cancer cell growth more effectively than 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and PRELID2 siRNA treatment suppressed the cell growth stronger than CA9 siRNA treatment. Thus, we elucidated that specific inhibition of PRELID2 as well as CA9, extracted via exhaustive bioinformatic analyses of clinical datasets, could be a more effective strategy for PDAC treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the immunohistochemical expressions of HIF-1alpha, CA9 and CXCR4 in resected human CRC specimens in relation to clinicopathologic and prognostic variables. METHODS: A total of 186 patients (mean(SD) age: 56.7(12.6) years, 54.0% were males) with colorectal adenocarcinoma were included in this retrospective study. Resection specimens of the primary tumor were reviewed to confirm the diagnoses and the stage of the disease. Data on age, gender, tumor characteristics (localization, size, macroscopic growth pattern, histologic type, grade, angiolymphatic invasion, TNM stage), applied treatments and clinical outcome (overall survival, local recurrence and distant metastasis) were obtained from the hospital records. Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue specimens was performed to determine HIF-1alpha, CA9 and CXCR4 expressions. RESULTS: Overall, 94.0% of cases showed HIF-1alpha immunoreactivity, 89% showed CXCR4 immunoreactivity, and 15.6% showed CA9 immunoreactivity, while weak expression of immunohistochemical markers was noted in 51.1%, 93.0% and 50.5% of cases, respectively. HIF-1alpha expression was higher among males than in females (median (min-max) final score of 6 (0-9) vs. 3 (0-9), p=0.013). CA9 expressed at higher levels in ulcerovegetative and depressed tumors than in polypoid ones [0(0-9) vs. 0(0-6), p=0.039]. CXCR4 expression was significantly higher in tumors <5cm than >/=5cm [6(0-9) vs. 3(0-9), p=0.028] and in grade 1-2 than grade 3 tumors [4(0-9) vs. 3(0-9), p=0.030]. No significant difference was noted in survival with respect to strength of HIF-1alpha, CA9 and CXCR4 immunoreactivity. CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our findings revealed weak-to-moderate HIF-1alpha and CXCR4 immunoreactivity in majority of resection samples, and weak CA9 immunoreactivity in majority of CA9 positive cases. Other than gender (HIF-1alpha), macroscopic growth pattern (CA9) and tumor size and histologic grade (for CXCR4), none of the clinicopathologic and prognostic factors investigated were associated with expression of immunohistochemical markers and level of immunoreactivity had no impact on survival.
Low levels of oxygen (hypoxia) occurs in many (patho)physiological situations. Adaptation to hypoxia is in part mediated by proteins expressed in the extracellular space that mature in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) prior to traversing the secretory pathway. The majority of such ER cargo proteins require disulfide bonds for structural stability. Disulfide bonds are formed co- and posttranslationally in a redox relay that requires a terminal electron acceptor such as oxygen. We have previously demonstrated that some ER cargo proteins such as low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and influenza hemagglutinin (Flu-HA) are unable to complete disulfide bond formation in the absence of oxygen, limiting their ability to pass ER quality control and their ultimate expression. Here, using radioactive pulse-chase immunoprecipitation analysis, we demonstrate that hypoxia-induced ER cargo proteins such as carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) complete disulfide bond formation and mature with similar kinetics under hypoxia and normoxia. A global in silico analysis of ER cargo revealed that hypoxia-induced proteins on average contain fewer free cysteines and shorter-range disulfide bonds in comparison to other ER cargo proteins. These data demonstrate the existence of alternative electron acceptors to oxygen for disulfide bond formation in cellulo. However, the ability of different proteins to utilize an oxygen-independent pathway for disulfide bond formation varies widely, contributing to differential gene expression in hypoxia. The superior ability of hypoxia-induced proteins such as VEGF-A and CA9 to mature in hypoxia may be conferred by a simpler disulfide architecture.
