Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1S; Pore-forming, alpha-1S subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents in skeletal muscle. Calcium channels containing the alpha-1S subunit play an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in skeletal muscle via their interaction with RYR1, which triggers Ca(2+) release from the sarcplasmic reticulum and ultimately results in muscle contraction. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group.
A 15-year-old girl was admitted to emergency department with an acute flaccid tetraparesis with no other symptoms. A history of recurrent similar episodes with spontaneous recovery was reported and no family history was known. Laboratory tests revealed severe hypokalaemia and hypokaluria. Symptoms resolution occurred after potassium replacement. The diagnosis of hypokalaemic periodic paralysis (HPP) was confirmed by genetic testing, which revealed a not previously described mutation in CACNA1S gene (c.3715C>G p.Arg1239Gly). HPP is a rare neuromuscular disorder that causes episodic attacks of flaccid paralysis with concomitant hypokalaemia. Primary forms of the disease are skeletal muscle ion channelopathies. HPP occurs due to a problem in potassium distribution rather than a total body potassium deficiency. Therefore potassium replacement should be carefully performed because of the risk of rebound hyperkalaemia. Knowing this rare entity is important in order to avoid diagnostic delays and so that proper treatment can be initiated to reduce morbidity and mortality.
A review of the pharmacogenetics (PGt) and pathophysiology of calcium voltage-gated channel subunit alpha1 S (CACNA1S) mutations in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility type 5 (MHS5; MIM #60188) is presented. Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a life-threatening hypermetabolic state of skeletal muscle usually induced by volatile, halogenated anesthetics and/or the depolarizing neuromuscular blocker succinylcholine. In addition to ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) mutations, several CACNA1S mutations are known to be risk factors for increased susceptibility to MH (MHS). However, the presence of these pathogenic CACNA1S gene variations cannot be used to positively predict MH since the condition is genetically heterogeneous with variable expression and incomplete penetrance. At present, one or at most six CACNA1S mutations display significant linkage or association either to clinically diagnosed MH or to MHS as determined by contracture testing. Additional pathogenic variants in CACNA1S, either alone or in combination with genes affecting Ca(2+) homeostasis, are likely to be discovered in association to MH as whole exome sequencing becomes more commonplace.
Primary hypokalemic periodic paralysis is an autosomal dominant skeletal muscle channelopathy. In the present study, we investigated the genotype and phenotype of a Chinese hypokalemic periodic paralysis family. We used whole-exome next-generation sequencing to identify a mutation in the calcium channel, voltage-dependent, L type, alpha subunit gene (CACNA1S), R900S, which is a rare mutation associated with hypokalemic periodic paralysis. We first present a clinical description of hypokalemic periodic paralysis patients harboring CACNA1SR900S mutations: they were non-responsive to acetazolamide, but combined treatment with triamterene and potassium supplements decreased the frequency of muscle weakness attacks. All male carriers of the R900S mutation experienced such attacks, but all three female carriers were asymptomatic. This study provides further evidence for the phenotypic variation and pharmacogenomics of hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
BACKGROUND: Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is an inherited, potentially fatal, pharmocogenetic disorder triggered by certain anaesthetic agents. In light of the reported genetic heterogeneity for the disorder and the recent introduction of DNA testing guidelines for the trait, we have assessed the role of the CACNA1S gene in MH susceptibility in UK patients. Linkage to this locus has previously been demonstrated in several European MH families. METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened 200 unrelated MH-susceptible individuals for known CACNA1S mutations. With the aim to characterize further novel mutations at this locus, functionally relevant regions of the gene were also sequenced in 10 unrelated individuals from families where the involvement of other MH susceptibility loci was unlikely. No sequence variations were detected in any of the patients investigated. CONCLUSIONS: Defects in CACNA1S are not a major cause of MH in the UK population. Diagnostic screening of this gene is unlikely to be of value to UK MH patients in the near future.
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by periodic attacks of muscle weakness associated with a decrease in the serum potassium level. Several mutations in the skeletal muscle calcium channel alpha-subunit gene CACNA1S have been documented to be causative for HypoPP, but mutations in other genes have also been implicated in HypoPP. To further reveal the genetic causes of HypoPP, we genotyped members of a five-generational Chinese family with HypoPP patients and identified a novel His916Gln mutation in all male HypoPP patients of the family. Clinical analysis demonstrated that the penetrance of the mutation was complete in male carriers, but we did not find evident clinical features in female carriers. This study expanded the spectrum of CACNA1S mutations associated with HypoPP and demonstrated a gender difference in the penetrance of the disease.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to characterize the phenotype of a novel myalgic myopathy encountered in a Finnish family. METHODS: Four symptomatic and 3 asymptomatic individuals from 2 generations underwent clinical, neurophysiologic, imaging, and muscle biopsy examinations. Targeted sequencing of all known myopathy genes was performed. RESULTS: A very rare CACNA1S gene variant c.2893G>C (p.E965Q) was identified in the family. The symptomatic patients presented with exercise-induced myalgia, cramping, muscle stiffness, and fatigue and eventually developed muscle weakness. Examinations revealed mild ptosis and unusual muscle hypertrophy in the upper limbs. In the most advanced disease stage, muscle weakness and muscle atrophy of the limbs were evident. In some patients, muscle biopsy showed mild myopathic findings and creatine kinase levels were slightly elevated. DISCUSSION: Myalgia is a very common symptom affecting quality of life. Widespread myalgia may be confused with other myalgic syndromes such as fibromyalgia. In this study, we show that variants in CACNA1S gene may be one cause of severe exercise-induced myalgia.
Dominant mutations in CACNA1S gene mainly causes hypokalemic periodic paralysis (PP)(hypoPP). A 68-year-old male proband developed a progressive proximal weakness from the age of 35. Muscle biopsy showed atrophic fibers with vacuoles containing tubular aggregates. Exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous p.R528H (c.1583G>A) mutation in the CACNA1S gene. CACNA1S-related HypoPP evolving to persistent myopathy in late adulthood is a well-known clinical condition. However, isolated progressive myopathy (without PP) was only exceptionally reported and never with an early onset. Reporting a case of early onset CACNA1S-related myopathy in a patient with no HypoPP we intend to alert clinicians to consider it in the differential diagnosis of younger adult-onset myopathies especially when featuring vacuolar changes.
BACKGROUND: Congenital myopathies are a group of clinically, genetically, and histologically heterogeneous diseases caused by mutations in a large group of genes. One of these is CACNA1S, which is recognized as the cause of Dihydropyridine Receptor Congenital Myopathy. METHODS: To better characterize the phenotypic spectrum of CACNA1S myopathy, we conducted a systematic review of cases in the literature through three electronic databases following the PRISMA guidelines. We selected nine articles describing 23 patients with heterozygous, homozygous, or compound heterozygous mutations in CACNA1S and we added one patient with a compound heterozygous mutation in CACNA1S (c.1394-2A>G; c.1724T>C, p.L575P) followed at our Institute. We collected clinical and genetic data, muscle biopsies, and muscle MRIs when available. RESULTS: The phenotype of this myopathy is heterogeneous, ranging from more severe forms with a lethal early onset and mild-moderate forms with a better clinical course. CONCLUSIONS: Our patient presented a phenotype compatible with the mild-moderate form, although she presented peculiar features such as a short stature, myopia, mild sensorineural hearing loss, psychiatric symptoms, and posterior-anterior impairment gradient on thigh muscle MRI.
BACKGROUND: The CACNA1S gene encodes the alpha 1 S-subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel, which is primarily expressed in the skeletal muscle cells. Pathogenic variants of CACNA1S can cause hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP), malignant hyperthermia susceptibility, and congenital myopathy. We aimed to study the clinical and molecular features of a male child with a CACNA1S variant and depict the molecular sub-regional characteristics of different phenotypes associated with CACNA1S variants. CASE PRESENTATION: We presented a case of HypoPP with recurrent muscle weakness and hypokalemia. Genetic analyses of the family members revealed that the proband had a novel c.497 C > A (p.Ala166Asp) variant of CACNA1S, which was inherited from his father. The diagnosis of HypoPP was established in the proband as he met the consensus diagnostic criteria. The patient and his parents were informed to avoid the classical triggers of HypoPP. The attacks of the patient are prevented by lifestyle changes and nutritional counseling. We also showed the molecular sub-regional location of the variants of CACNA1S which was associated with different phenotypes. CONCLUSIONS: Our results identified a new variant of CACNA1S and expanded the spectrum of variants associated with HypoPP. Early genetic diagnosis can help avoid diagnostic delays, perform genetic counseling, provide proper treatment, and reduce morbidity and mortality.
We report a precocious and atypical form of hypokalaemic periodic paralysis, with clinical manifestations at birth and first episodes of paralysis occurring as early as 1 year of age, although onset of this disease usually occurs between 5-35 years. Extensive molecular analysis showed that the disease was caused by a novel de novo p.Arg897Ser mutation in the CACNA1S gene. The mutation mapped to a new region of the protein, the S4 voltage sensing segment of domain III, at odds with previously reported mutations that exclusively affected domains II and IV.
The CACNA1S gene encodes the alpha1s subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor (DHPR), a voltage-gated calcium channel and voltage sensor for Ca(2+) release in skeletal muscle. Variants in the CACNA1S gene have been linked to the pharmacogenetic disorder known as malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) and hypokalemic periodic paralysis (hypoPP). Two variants in CACNA1S are verified by the European Malignant Hyperthermia Group (EMHG) to be associated with MHS [1]. Although the occurrence of MHS during anesthesia is relatively rare, the genetic prevalence of MHS-causative mutations is estimated to be between 1 in 400 [2] to 1 in 2000-3000 [3]. The American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) "Guidelines for Reporting Incidental Findings in Clinical Exome and Genome Sequencing" includes "known pathogenic" and "likely pathogenic" variants in CACNA1S related to MHS in its list of genetic variants to report as incidental findings [4, 5]. In addition, 9 CACNA1S variants are linked to hypoPP [6]. Finally, several CACNA1S variants and polymorphisms are proposed to be associated with thyrotoxic periodic paralysis (TPP) [7], hyperCKemia [8] and statin-associated myopathy [9]. Thus, the CACNA1S gene is associated with an eclectic array of muscle disorders with clinical manifestations ranging from subclinical myopathies, episodic paralysis, and life-threatening response to anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Variants in RYR1 are associated with the majority of cases of malignant hyperthermia (MH), a form of heat illness pharmacogenetically triggered by general anesthetics, and they have also been associated with exertional heat illness (EHI). CACNA1S has also been implicated in MH. The authors applied a targeted next-generation sequencing approach to identify variants in RYR1 and CACNA1S in a cohort of unrelated patients diagnosed with MH susceptibility. They also provide the first comprehensive report of sequencing of these two genes in a cohort of survivors of EHI. METHODS: DNA extracted from blood was genotyped using a "long" polymerase chain reaction technique, with sequencing on the Illumina GAII or MiSeq platforms (Illumina Inc., USA). Variants were assessed for pathogenicity using bioinformatic approaches. For further follow-up, DNA from additional family members and up to 211 MH normal and 556 MH-susceptible unrelated individuals was tested. RESULTS: In 29 MH patients, the authors identified three pathogenic and four novel RYR1 variants, with a further five RYR1 variants previously reported in association with MH. Three novel RYR1 variants were found in the EHI cohort (n = 28) along with two more previously reported in association with MH. Two other variants were reported previously associated with centronuclear myopathy. The authors found one and three rare variants of unknown significance in CACNA1S in the MH and EHI cohorts, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Targeted next-generation sequencing proved efficient at identifying diagnostically useful and potentially implicated variants in RYR1 and CACNA1S in MH and EHI.
Mutations in CACNA1S (calcium channel, voltage‑dependent, L type, alpha 1S subunit) and SCN4A (sodium channel, voltage‑gated, type IV, alpha subunit) are associated with hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HPP). The aim of the current study was to investigate CACNA1S and SCN4A mutations in patients with HPP. Mutations in CACNA1S and SCN4A were detected in three familial hypokalemic periodic paralysis (FHPP) pedigrees and in two thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis (THPP) pedigrees using polymerase chain reaction, DNA sequencing and sequence alignment with GenBank data. A single base mutation from cytosine to guanine at site 1582 was identified in exon 11 of CACNA1S in one FHPP pedigree, resulting in an arginine to glycine (R528G) substitution. A single base mutation from thymine to cytosine at site 2012 was identified in exon 12 of SCN4A in one THPP pedigree, resulting in a phenylalanine to serine (F671S) substitution. No mutations in CACNA1S or SCN4A were identified in the remaining three pedigrees. The present study indicated that CACNA1S and SCN4A mutations are relatively rare in patients with HPP, and further studies are required to determine whether these mutation‑associated substitutions are representative of patients with HPP.
We identified four novel polymorphisms in the CACNA1S gene that encodes the alpha1-subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor. Mutations in this gene are associated with two genetic diseases: malignant hyperthermia and hypokalemic periodic paralysis. The nucleotide substitutions c2403T --> C and c5398T --> C did not result in amino acid replacement, the nucleotide substitution c4475C --> A caused the replacement of the Ala1492 with an Asp residue and an A insertion was identified in intron 36. By using methods based on digestion with restriction enzymes we calculated the frequencies of these novel polymorphisms, as well as heterozygosity, in normal subjects from southern Italy.
