Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1F; [Isoform 1]: Voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCC) mediate the entry of calcium ions into excitable cells and are also involved in a variety of calcium-dependent processes, including muscle contraction, hormone or neurotransmitter release, gene expression, cell motility, cell division and cell death. The isoform alpha-1F gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group. They are blocked by dihydropyridines (DHP), phenylalkylamines, and by benzot [...] 
Small in-frame insertion-deletion (indel) variants are a common form of genomic variation whose impact on rare disease phenotypes has been understudied. The prediction of the pathogenicity of such variants remains challenging. X-linked incomplete congenital stationary night blindness type 2 (CSNB2) is a nonprogressive, inherited retinal disorder caused by variants in CACNA1F, encoding the Ca(v)1.4alpha1 channel protein. Here, structural analysis was used through homology modeling to interpret 10 disease-correlated and 10 putatively benign CACNA1F in-frame indel variants. CSNB2-correlated changes were found to be more highly conserved compared with putative benign variants. Notably, all 10 disease-correlated variants but none of the benign changes were within modeled regions of the protein. Structural analysis revealed that disease-correlated variants are predicted to destabilize the structure and function of the Ca(v)1.4alpha1 channel protein. Overall, the use of structural information to interpret the consequences of in-frame indel variants provides an important adjunct that can improve the diagnosis for individuals with CSNB2.
PURPOSE: To describe a French family with the incomplete type of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2) associated with a novel mutation in the retina-specific calcium channel alpha(1) subunit gene (CACNA1F). DESIGN: Interventional case report. METHODS: Two family members with a history of nonprogressive night blindness and subnormal visual acuity were clinically examined and the genotype determined by molecular genetic analysis. RESULT: Both patients had clinical manifestations characteristic of CSNB2. Electrophysiologically, we found a predominant reduction of the ERG B-wave in the maximal response. Both rod and cone function were subnormal, with the latter tending to be more attenuated. We identified a C deletion at nucleotide position 4548, resulting in a frameshift with a predicted premature termination at codon 1524. CONCLUSIONS: The clinical and genetic study of a novel mutation in the CACNA1F gene adds further support to the contention that CSNB2 represents a genetically distinct retinal disorder of a calcium channel.
BACKGROUND: Incomplete X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) is a clinically variable condition that has been shown to be caused by mutations in the calcium-channel CACNA1F gene. We assessed the clinical variability in the expression of the incomplete CSNB phenotype in a subgroup of patients of Mennonite ancestry with the same founder mutation. METHODS: Sixty-six male patients from 15 families were identified with a common mutation in exon 27 of CACNA1F (L1056insC). Clinical variability in night blindness, reduced visual acuity, myopia, nystagmus and strabismus was examined. RESULTS: At least one of the major features of CSNB (night blindness, myopia and nystagmus) was absent in 72% of the patients. All the examined features varied widely, both between and within families. INTERPRETATION: Although the patients shared a common CACNA1F mutation, there was considerable variability in the clinical expression of the incomplete CSNB phenotype. These findings suggest the presence of other genetic factors modifying the phenotype of this disorder.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a retinal degenerative disorder that often causes complete blindness. Mutations of more than 50 genes have been identified as associated with RP, including the CACNA1F gene. In a recent study, by employing next-generation sequencing, we identified a novel mutation in the CACNA1F gene. In this study, we used the amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) and identified a single nucleotide change c.1555C>T in exon 13 of the CACNA1F gene, leading to the substitution of arginine by tryptophan (p.R519W) in a Chinese individual affected by RP. This study actually confirms this novel mutation, and establishes the ARMS technique for the detection of mutations in RP.
BACKGROUND: X-linked cone-rod dystrophy (CORDX) is one form of inherited retinal disorders (IRDs) characterized by progressive dysfunction of photoreceptor. Three types of CORDX were reported and CACNA1F gene defect can cause CORDX3. The aim of this study was to investigate the pathogenic variant in a Chinese family with IRD. METHODS: The two affected subjects including the proband and his elder sister underwent ophthalmic examinations. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed in the proband at first, then co-segregation analysis was performed in the family by Sanger sequencing. Minigene approach was used to verify the effect of the mutation on the splicing of CACNA1F. X-chromosomal inactivation assay was performed to evaluate the inactivation patterns of the female carriers. RESULTS: The ophthalmic examination results of the proband fit the clinical description of CORDX3, and the female patient presented with only mild symptoms due to mildly skewed X-chromosomal inactivation (ratio 67: 33). Molecular genetic testing identified a novel splice-site mutation c.3847-2A > G in CACNA1F (NM_005183.4) gene in the patients, which inherited from their asymptomatic mother. Minigene approach confirmed that c.3847-2A > G could affect the splicing of CACNA1F. CONCLUSION: Our study identified a novel splice-site mutation in the CACNA1F gene, which expanded the mutational spectrum of CACNA1F-releated diseases and demonstrated the importance of combining clinical and genetic testing in the diagnosis of IRDs.
BACKGROUND: Congenital Stationary Night Blindness (CSNB) constitutes a group of non-progressive retinal disorders characterized by disturbances in scotopic vision and/or by a delay in adaptation to darkness, as well as by low visual acuity, myopia, nystagmus, and strabismus. Color vision and fundus appearance tend to be normal. To date, several CACNA1F gene variants have been linked to a CSNB phenotype but only few reports have focused on the optic nerve in this disease. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve patients underwent standard ophthalmological and genetic evaluation including spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), full-field electroretinography (ffERG), kinetic perimetry, fundus photography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and next-generation sequencing (NGS). Bilateral thinning of the peripapillary nerve fiber layer (pRNFL) and the ganglion cell complex (GCC) supported involvement of the optic nerves. MRI, when available, was assessed for gross intracranial optic pathway abnormalities. RESULTS: All patients were shown to carry pathogenic variants in the CACNA1F gene, and all showed signs of optic nerve involvement. All patients showed a certain degree of myopic refractive error. Low average pRNFL thickness was evident in all patients. In three of them, pRNFL thickness was evaluated longitudinally and was proven to be stable over time. MRI imaging was unremarkable in all cases. CONCLUSION: Our data support the hypothesis that CACNA1F could be related to early-onset or congenital optic nerve involvement without any signs of a progressive optic neuropathy. Even though additional data from larger cohorts and longer follow-up periods are needed to further support and confirm our findings, there is a clear significance to our findings in the preparation for future CACNA1F gene therapy trials.
Calcium channels are an integral component in maintaining cellular function. Alterations may lead to channelopathies, primarily manifested in the central nervous system. This study describes the clinical and genetic features of a unique 12-year-old boy harboring two congenital calcium channelopathies, involving the CACNA1A and CACNA1F genes, and provides an unadulterated view of the natural history of sporadic hemiplegic migraine type 1 (SHM1) due to the patient's inability to tolerate any preventative medication. The patient presents with episodes of vomiting, hemiplegia, cerebral edema, seizure, fever, transient blindness, and encephalopathy. He is nonverbal, nonambulatory, and forced to have a very limited diet due to abnormal immune responses. The SHM1 manifestations apparent in the subject are consistent with the phenotype described in the 48 patients identified as part of a systematic literature review. The ocular symptoms of CACNA1F align with the family history of the subject. The presence of multiple pathogenic variants make it difficult to identify a clear phenotype-genotype correlation in the present case. Moreover, the detailed case description and natural history along with the comprehensive review of the literature contribute to the understanding of this complex disorder and point to the need for comprehensive clinical assessments of SHM1.
Hemizygous pathogenic variants in CACNA1F lead to defective signal transmission from retinal photoreceptors to bipolar cells and cause incomplete congenital stationary night blindness in humans. Although the primary defect is at the terminal end of first-order neurons (photoreceptors), there is limited knowledge of higher-order neuronal changes (inner retinal) in this disorder. This study aimed to investigate inner retinal changes in CACNA1F-retinopathy by analyzing macular ganglion cell layer-inner plexiform layer (GCL-IPL) thickness and optic disc pallor in 22 subjects with molecularly confirmed CACNA1F-retinopathy. Detailed ocular phenotypic data including distance and color vision, refraction and electroretinogram (ERG) were collected. Distance vision was universally reduced (mean: 0.42 LogMAR), six had abnormal color vision and myopia was common (n = 15; mean: -6.32 diopters). Mean GCL-IPL thickness was significantly lower in patients (55.00 microm) compared to age-matched controls (n = 87; 84.57 microm; p << 0.001). The GCL-IPL thickness correlated with scotopic standard (p = 0.04) and bright-flash (p = 0.014) ERG b/a ratios and photopic b-wave amplitudes (p = 0.05). Twenty-one patients had some degree of disc pallor (bilateral in 19). Fifteen putative disease-causing, including five novel variants were identified. This study establishes macular inner retinal thinning and optic atrophy as characteristic features of CACNA1F-retinopathy, which are independent of myopia and could impact potential future treatment strategies.
BACKGROUND: An estimated 10-15% of all genetic diseases are attributable to variants in noncanonical splice sites, auxiliary splice sites and deep-intronic variants. Most of these unstudied variants are classified as variants of uncertain significance (VUS), which are not clinically actionable. This study investigated two novel splice-altering variants, CHM NM_000390.4:c.941-11T>G and CACNA1F NM_005183.4:c.2576+4_2576+5del implicated in choroideremia and cone dystrophy (COD), respectively, resulting in significant visual loss. METHODS: Next-generation sequencing was employed to identify the candidate variants in CHM and CACNA1F, which were confirmed using Sanger sequencing. Cascade analysis was undertaken when additional family members were available. Functional analysis was conducted by cloning genomic regions of interest into gateway expression vectors, creating variant and wildtype midigenes, which were subsequently transfected into HEK293 cells. RNA was harvested and amplified by RT-PCR to investigate the splicing profile for each variant compared to the wildtype. Novel variants were reclassified according to ACMG/AMP and ClinGen SVI guidelines. RESULTS: Midigene functional analysis confirmed that both variants disrupted splicing. The CHM NM_000390.4:c.941-11T>G variant caused exon 8 skipping, leading to a frameshift and the CACNA1F NM_005183.4:c.2576+4_2576+5del variant caused a multimodal splice defect leading to an in-frame insertion of seven amino acids and a frameshift. With this evidence, the former was upgraded to likely pathogenic and the latter to a hot VUS. CONCLUSIONS: This study adds to the mutational spectrum of splicing defects implicated in retinal degenerations by identifying and characterising two novel variants in CHM and CACNA1F. Our results highlight the importance of conducting functional analysis to investigate the consequences of intronic splice-altering variants and the significance of reclassifying VUS to confirm a genetic diagnosis.
PURPOSE: To report a novel hemizygous nonsense variant in the CACNA1F gene associated with congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) in a pediatric patient, emphasizing the utility of portable electroretinography (ERG) and genetic testing in diagnosing unexplained visual impairments. METHODS: The patient, a 5-year-old male, underwent comprehensive clinical evaluation, including detailed anterior segment and fundus examinations, full-field electroretinogram (ffERG) using a RETeval portable device, and whole exome sequencing (WES) to elucidate the genetic basis of his visual impairment. Structural modeling of the mutated protein was performed using SWISS-MODEL and PYMOL. RESULTS: Best-corrected visual acuity was 0.4 logMAR bilaterally, with unremarkable anterior segment and fundus examinations. FFERG revealed significant abnormalities consistent with incomplete CSNB: severely reduced rod response in dark-adapted (DA) 0.01, negative waveform with b/a wave ratio < 1.0 in DA 3.0, and diminished cone response in light-adapted ERG. WES identified a novel pathogenic variant in the CACNA1F gene (c.1234G > T, p.E412*), inherited maternally. This variant introduces a premature stop codon at position 412, likely resulting in a truncated CACNA1F protein. CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights the importance of comprehensive clinical assessments and genetic testing in pediatric patients with unexplained visual impairments, revealing a novel CACNA1F variant that expands our understanding of CSNB. The use of a portable ERG device proved particularly valuable in assessing retinal function in this young patient. Further investigations are warranted to elucidate the clinical implications of this novel pathogenic variant.
Aland island eye disease (AIED), an incomplete form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2A), and X-linked cone-rod dystrophy type 3 (CORDX3) display many overlapping clinical findings. They result from mutations in the CACNA1F gene encoding the alpha(1F) subunit of the Cav1.4 channel, which plays a key role in neurotransmission from rod and cone photoreceptors to bipolar cells. Case report: A 57-year-old Caucasian man who had suffered since his early childhood from nystagmus, nyctalopia, low visual acuity and high myopia in both eyes (OU) presented to expand the diagnostic process, because similar symptoms had occurred in his 2-month-old grandson. Additionally, the patient was diagnosed with protanomalous color vision deficiency, diffuse thinning, and moderate hypopigmentation of the retina. Optical coherence tomography of the macula revealed retinoschisis in the right eye and foveal hypoplasia in the left eye. Dark-adapted (DA) 3.0 flash full-field electroretinography (ffERG) amplitudes of a-waves were attenuated, and the amplitudes of b-waves were abolished, which resulted in a negative pattern of the ERG. Moreover, the light-adapted 3.0 and 3.0 flicker ffERG as well as the DA 0.01 ffERG were consistent with severely reduced responses OU. Genetic testing revealed a hemizygous form of a stop-gained mutation (c.4051C>T) in exon 35 of the CACNA1F gene. This pathogenic variant has so far been described in combination with a phenotype corresponding to CSNB2A and CORDX3. This report contributes to expanding the knowledge of the clinical spectrum of CACNA1F-related disease. Wide variability and the overlapping clinical manifestations observed within AIED and its allelic disorders may not be explained solely by the consequences of different mutations on proteins. The lack of distinct genotype-phenotype correlations indicates the presence of additional, not yet identified, disease-modifying factors.
Background: Mutations in CACNA1F have been mainly associated with X-linked incomplete congenital stationary night blindness (icCSNB). Variable phenotypic expression in females was reported in some families. We report here three non-related Ashkenazi Jewish families originating in Eastern Europe, that included males and a many affected females, initially diagnosed with variable retinal phenotypes.Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES), Sanger sequencing and microsatellite haplotyping were used for genetic analysis. Complete ophthalmologic examination was performed including visual acuity, refraction, colour vision, slit-lamp, fundoscopy and electroretinography (ERG).Results: We identified four affected males, showing moderate visual impairment, and seven female carriers, six of them presenting mild to moderate visual impairment. Infantile nystagmus was found in all affected males and in 5/7 females. Nyctalopia and myopia were common in both males and females. Initial clinical differential diagnosis included cone-dystrophy, cone-rod dystrophy, cone-dystrophy with supernormal rod response or CSNB based on ERG results. WES and Sanger sequencing revealed a previously described missense mutation c.2225T>G; p.(F742C) in CACNA1F (NM_001256789.2) in all three families, encompassed by a shared haplotypeConclusions: Our data suggests that p.(F742C) in CACNA1F is an X-linked founder mutation in Ashkenazi Jews originating in Eastern Europe. This mutation causes a mild-to-moderate icCSNB phenotype, expressed in most female carriers. A targeted test for this variant in suspected patients may initiate diagnostic analysis. Our results highlight the relevance of WES in the clinic, allowing fast and accurate diagnosis for unclear and variable clinical phenotype and in pedigrees with multiple possible inheritance patterns.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this paper is to present a case study illustrating the importance of electrophysiological investigation in the diagnosis and serial monitoring of isolated congenital nystagmus. RESULTS: Serial electophysiological monitoring was undertaken in the male proband over a 9-year period commencing with initial assessment at 12 weeks of age: Skin electroretinograms (sERGs) were initially absent but subsequently revealed low-amplitude responses, electronegative morphologies and notched flicker responses suggestive of incomplete congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2), but with an absent dark-adapted rod-specific response, while flash visual evoked potentials (fVEPs) demonstrated persistent crossed asymmetry, typical of albinoid misrouting of the optic nerves. Molecular investigation confirmed a novel hemizygous frame shift mutation in the CACNA1F gene, considered to be pathogenic and causative of X-linked CSNB2; additionally, a novel heterozygous missense variation in one copy of the RIMS1 gene was identified, pathogenic mutations of which underpin late-onset autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy (type 7). Segregation studies confirmed maternal inheritance of both mutations in the clinically asymptomatic mother in whom depressed rod-specific responses were confirmed on sERG. The child's visual acuity has remained stable as have the sERGs which have been verified by recordings using scleral electrodes. CONCLUSIONS: The importance of recording ERGs as part of evaluating infants who present with nystagmus, even with a normal fundus appearance, is supported. Further, sERGs were able to distinguish an apparent variant of CSNB2 and could give consistent results over many years. FVEP results add to the evidence that albinoid misrouting of the optic nerves may occur in cases of CSNB2. ERGs and fVEPs can provide valuable information in discriminating the relative diagnostic importance of multiple genetic abnormalities.
