Voltage-dependent T-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1G; Voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCC) mediate the entry of calcium ions into excitable cells and are also involved in a variety of calcium-dependent processes, including muscle contraction, hormone or neurotransmitter release, gene expression, cell motility, cell division and cell death. The isoform alpha-1G gives rise to T-type calcium currents. T-type calcium channels belong to the 'low-voltage activated (LVA)' group and are strongly blocked by mibefradil. A particularity of this type of channel is an opening at quite neg [...] 
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are characterized by substantial phenotypic variability. Among them, SCA42 is a rare non-expansion entity presenting with slowly progressive cerebellar syndrome but whose clinical spectrum may be also wider. A 53-year-old male presented with progressive myoclonus-ataxia and intellectual disability. Genetic screening revealed a novel c.3835G > A (p. Asp1279Asn) variant in the CACNA1G gene. SCA42 is a rare non-expansion SCA caused by mutations in CACNA1G on chromosome 17q21, encoding the Ca(V)3.1, a low-threshold voltage-gated T-type calcium channel. The novel variant we identified is potentially involved in channel activity. This case expands the knowledge regarding CACNA1G-associated phenotype and highlights the importance of genetic screening in myoclonus-ataxia disorders.
Abnormalities in thalamocortical crosstalk can lead to neuropsychiatric disorders. Variants in CACNA1G, which encodes the alpha1G subunit of the thalamus-enriched T-type calcium channel, are associated with absence seizures, intellectual disability, and schizophrenia, but the cellular and circuit consequences of these genetic variants in humans remain unknown. Here, we developed a human assembloid model of the thalamocortical pathway to dissect the contribution of genetic variants in T-type calcium channels. We discovered that the M1531V CACNA1G variant associated with seizures led to changes in T-type currents in thalamic neurons, as well as correlated hyperactivity of thalamic and cortical neurons in assembloids. By contrast, CACNA1G loss, which has been associated with risk of schizophrenia, resulted in abnormal thalamocortical connectivity that was related to both increased spontaneous thalamic activity and aberrant axonal projections. These results illustrate the utility of multi-cellular systems for interrogating human genetic disease risk variants at both cellular and circuit level.
PURPOSE: Missense de novo variants in CACNA1G, which encodes the Cav3.1 T-type calcium channel, have been associated with a severe, early-onset form of cerebellar disorder with neurodevelopmental deficits (SCA42ND). We explored a large series of pediatric cases carrying heterozygous variants in CACNA1G to further characterize genotype-phenotype correlations in SCA42ND. METHODS: We describe 19 patients with congenital CACNA1G-variants, including 6 new heterozygotes of the recurrent SCA42ND variants, p.(Ala961Thr) and p.(Met1531Val), and 8 unreported variants, including 7 missense variants, mainly de novo. We carried out genetic and structural analyses of all variants. Patch-clamp recordings were performed to measure their channel activity. RESULTS: We provide a consolidated clinical description for the patients carrying p.(Ala961Thr) and p.(Met1531Val). The new variants associated with the more severe phenotypes are found in the Cav3.1 channel intracellular gate. Calcium currents of these Cav3.1 variants showed slow inactivation and deactivation kinetics and an increase in window current, supporting a gain of channel activity. On the contrary, the p.(Met197Arg) variant (IS4-S5 loop) resulted in a loss of channel activity. CONCLUSION: This detailed description of several de novo missense pathogenic variants in CACNA1G, including 13 previously reported cases, supports a clinical spectrum of congenital CACNA1G syndrome beyond spinocerebellar ataxia.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) CACNA1G-AS1 in regulating proliferative and invasive abilities of colorectal cancer (CRC) cells by mediating p53, thus influencing the progression of CRC. PATIENTS AND METHODS: CACNA1G-AS1 level in CRC tissues and adjacent normal tissues was first determined. Its level in CRC patients with different tumor stages was detected as well. Changes in proliferative and invasive abilities of HCT116 and SW480 cells influenced by CACNA1G-AS1 were evaluated. Subcellular distribution of CACNA1G-AS1 was analyzed. Through Western blot, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP), and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, the interaction between CACNA1G-AS1 and EZH2 was assessed. The biological function of the target gene of CACNA1G-AS1 was finally explored. RESULTS: CACNA1G-AS1 was upregulated in CRC tissues compared to adjacent normal ones. Its level remained higher in CRC patients with stage III-IV compared to those with stage I-II. Knockdown of CACNA1G-AS1 reduced proliferative and invasive abilities of HTC116 and SW480 cells. CACNA1G-AS1 was mainly distributed in the nucleus. Moreover, CACNA1G-AS1 was verified to interact with EZH2. Knockdown of CACNA1G-AS1 or EZH2 upregulated p53 level and decreased the recruitment ability of EZH2 on p53. Finally, p53 knockdown could partially reverse the regulatory effect of CACNA1G-AS1 on the proliferative ability of HCT116 cells. CONCLUSIONS: CACNA1G-AS1 downregulates p53 level by forming a carcinogenic complex with EZH2, thereby enhancing the proliferative and invasive abilities of CRC cells.
We describe the regulated transcriptome of CACNA1G, a human gene for T-type Ca(v)3.1 calcium channels that is subject to extensive alternative RNA splicing. Fifteen sites of transcript variation include 2 alternative 5'-UTR promoter sites, 2 alternative 3'-UTR polyadenylation sites, and 11 sites of alternative splicing within the open reading frame. A survey of 1580 fetal and adult human brain full-length complementary DNAs reveals a family of 30 distinct transcripts, including multiple functional forms that vary in expression with development. Statistical analyses of fetal and adult transcript populations reveal patterns of linkages among intramolecular splice site configurations that change dramatically with development. A shift from nearly independent, biased splicing in fetal transcripts to strongly concerted splicing in adult transcripts suggests progressive activation of multiple "programs" of splicing regulation that reorganize molecular structures in differentiating cells. Patch-clamp studies of nine selected variants help relate splicing regulation to permutations of the gating parameters most likely to modify T-channel physiology in expressing neurons. Gating behavior reflects combinatorial interactions between variable domains so that molecular phenotype depends on ensembles of coselected domains, consistent with the observed emergence of concerted splicing during development. We conclude that the structural gene and networks of splicing regulatory factors define an integrated system for the phenotypic variation of Ca(v)3.1 biophysics during nervous system development.
Recent studies have strongly implicated low voltage-activated/T-type calcium channels (T-channels) in the etiology of epilepsy. Here, we report the results of a mutational analysis of the CACNA1G gene, encoding the T-channel Ca(V)3.1/(1G) subunit, using a cohort of 123 mostly Japanese and Hispanic patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGE) and 360 healthy control individuals. We found 13 variants, including five which involved amino acid substitutions. One variant, c.1709C>T (Ala570Val), is present in a sporadic case of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) with early childhood absence and astatic seizures, but was not found in control samples. Another variant, c.3265G>T (Ala1089Ser), was observed in three family members affected with JME, and also in one control individual. Two JME patients and three control individuals harbored a third variant, c.2968G>A (Asp980Asn). Although not statistically significant, slightly faster inactivation decay rates were observed in some mutant channels. Our collective findings flag CACNA1G as a potential susceptibility locus for IGE subsyndromes that warrants closer investigation.
BACKGROUND: Congenital ataxias associated with cerebellar atrophy are clinically heterogeneous conditions with a variable age of onset and a diverse molecular basis. The hypothesis-free approach of genomic sequencing has led to the discovery of new genes implicated in these disorders and the identification of unexpected genotype-phenotype correlations. Although a recurrent heterozygous mutation (p.Arg1715His) in CACNA1G is known to cause adult-onset spinocerebellar ataxia 42 (SCA42*616795), gain-of-function mutations in this gene have recently been identified by whole exome sequencing (WES) in four children with cerebellar atrophy and ataxia, psychomotor delay, and other variable features. METHODS: We describe four children from unrelated families with cerebellar anomalies on magnetic resonance imaging (atrophy or hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis), hypertonia, psychomotor and speech delay, severe intellectual disability, ophthalmologic features and peculiar dysmorphic traits. All patients underwent a trio-based WES analysis. Clinical records were used to characterize the clinical profile of this newly recognized disorder. RESULTS: Two previously reported de novo disease-causing mutations in CACNA1G (c.2881G>A, p.Ala961Thr and c.4591A>G, p.Met1531Val) were identified in these patients, providing further evidence of the specific impact of these variants. All four patients exhibit distinctive dysmorphic and ectodermal features which overlap those of the previously reported patients, allowing us to define the major features characterizing this homogeneous neurodevelopmental syndromic disorder associated with upregulated CACNA1G function. CONCLUSION: Our findings confirm the specific association between a narrow spectrum of missense mutations in CACNA1G and a novel syndrome with infantile-onset cerebellar ataxiaand provide a dysmorphologic delineation of this novel neurodevelopmental trait.
INTRODUCTION: Variants of CACNA1G, which encodes Ca(V)3.1, have been reported to be associated with various neurological disorders. METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing of genomic DNA from 348 Japanese patients with neurodevelopmental disorders and their parents was conducted, and de novo variants of CACNA1G were extracted. The electrophysiological properties of each mutant channel were investigated by voltage-clamp and current-clamp analyses of HEK293T cells overexpressing these channels. RESULTS: Two patients diagnosed with Rett syndrome and West syndrome were found to have known pathological CACNA1G mutations reported in cerebellar ataxia cohorts: c.2881G > A, p.Ala961Thr and c.4591A > G, p.Met1531Val, respectively. One patient with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome was revealed to harbor a previously unreported heterozygous variant: c.3817A > T, p.Ile1273Phe. Clinical symptoms of the two patients with known mutations included severe developmental delay without acquisition of the ability to walk independently. The patient with a potentially novel mutation showed developmental delay, intractable seizures, and mild cerebral atrophy on MRI, but the severity of symptoms was milder than in the former two cases. Electrophysiological study using HEK293T cells demonstrated significant changes of T-type Ca(2+) currents by p.Ala961Thr and p.Met1531Val SNVs, which were likely to enhance oscillation of membrane potential at low frequencies. In contrast, p.Ile1273Phe showed no significant effects in our electrophysiological evaluations, with its pathogenesis remaining undetermined. CONCLUSION: De novo variants of CACNA1G explain some neurodevelopmental disorders. Our study further provides information to understand the genotype-phenotype correlations of patients with CACNA1G mutations.
Chromosome 17q11-q21 is a region of the genome likely to harbor susceptibility to autism (MIM(209850)) based on earlier evidence of linkage to the disorder. This linkage is specific to multiplex pedigrees containing only male probands (MO) within the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE). Earlier, Stone et al.(1) completed a high-density single nucleotide polymorphism association study of 13.7 Mb within this interval, but common variant association was not sufficient to account for the linkage signal. Here, we extend this single nucleotide polymorphism-based association study to complete the coverage of the two-LOD support interval around the chromosome 17q linkage peak by testing the majority of common alleles in 284 MO trios. Markers within an interval containing the gene, CACNA1G, were found to be associated with Autism Spectrum Disorder at a locally significant level (P=1.9 x 10(-5)). While establishing CACNA1G as a novel candidate gene for autism, these alleles do not contribute a sufficient genetic effect to explain the observed linkage, indicating that there is substantial genetic heterogeneity despite the clear linkage signal. The region thus likely harbors a combination of multiple common and rare alleles contributing to the genetic risk. These data, along with earlier studies of chromosomes 5 and 7q3, suggest few if any major common risk alleles account for Autism Spectrum Disorder risk under major linkage peaks in the AGRE sample. This provides important evidence for strategies to identify Autism Spectrum Disorder genes, suggesting that they should focus on identifying rare variants and common variants of small effect.
RATIONALE: Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), a genetically inherited heterogeneous disorder, is characterized by gait ataxia, dysarthria, parkinsonism, choreic movements, dystonia, epilepsy, cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. Spinocerebellar ataxia-42 (SCA42), caused by heterozygous mutation in the calcium channel 1G (CACNA1G) gene, is a rare SCA subtype and the transmission pattern is autosomal dominant inheritance. PATIENT CONCERNS: We presented a novel mutation (c.4721T>A; p.Met1574Lys) in 3 patients from a Chinese family using whole-exome sequencing. All patients exhibited cerebellar ataxia and the clinical manifestations were similar to those that were previously reported in the French and Japanese families. In addition, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed cerebellar atrophy, and the hot cross bun sign of brainstem was found in the proband and her sister. DIAGNOSES: The clinical features and MRI findings indicated the diagnosis of SCA. Taken together, the symptoms, MRI findings, as well as whole-exome sequencing made the diagnosis of SCA42 most likely candidate. INTERVENTIONS AND OUTCOMES: The patient was treated with cobamamide (1.5 mg once daily) for nerve nutrition and further physical therapy. At the 4-month follow-up visit, the patient's condition did not improve obviously. LESSONS: Recently, a missense mutation in CACNA1G gene (c.5144G4A; p.Arg1715His) was identified in French and Japanese families with SCA42. However, there has been no report of SCA42 or its mutant loci in Chinese patients. Our finding showed a novel mutation in CACNA1G gene and provided important insights into the pathogenesis of SCA42.
BACKGROUND: Paroxysmal tonic upgaze (PTU), defined as an involuntary upward movement of the eyes, has been considered as a benign phenomenon but may also be associated with ataxia and developmental delay. To date, CACNA1G mutations have been reported in autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia designated SCA42 and in early encephalopathies with cerebellar atrophy but never in periodic childhood manifestations of PTU type. METHODS AND RESULTS: We report the case of a two-month-old infant with a de novo pathogenic variation of CACNA1G who presented with PTU associated with congenital ataxia and other periodic neurological manifestations. CONCLUSIONS: Although the link between CACNA1G mutations and periodic neurological manifestations remains unclear, we provide detailed video documentations of PTU, paroxysmal torticollis, and ataxia in a patient with a CACNA1G mutation. This case allows a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of PTU and suggests potential new avenues for clinical treatments.
BACKGROUND: Keloid is a fibrous tissue proliferative disease in which proliferative scars grow beyond the boundary of the original wound skin. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), as competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs), bind to microRNAs (miRNAs) to regulate various biological processes. The present study was aim to illuminate the mechanism of calcium voltage-gated channel subunit alpha1 G antisense RNA 1 (CACNA1G-AS1) in human keloid fibroblasts. METHODS: CACNA1G-AS1 and miR-205 levels were detected using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay was used to measure the proliferation and transwell assay was performed to evaluate cell invasion. Furthermore, the apoptosis rates of cells were evaluated by flow cytometry analysis, and the activity of caspase-3 in keloid fibroblasts was tested by Caspase-3 activity assay. Dual luciferase reporter assay was carried out to examine the relationship between CACNA1G-AS1 and miR-205 and RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assay was conducted to further confirm the relation. RESULTS: CACNA1G-AS1 level was up-regulated in keloid tissues and keloid fibroblasts. CACNA1G-AS1 overexpression promoted proliferation and invasion and suppressed apoptosis of keloid fibroblasts. Moreover, miR-205 was targeted by CACNA1G-AS1 and miR-205 was markedly decreased in keloid tissues and keloid fibroblasts. Also, miR-205 expression was negatively regulated by CACNA1G-AS1 and miR-205 silencing enhanced proliferation and invasion and inhibited apoptosis. Furthermore, CACNA1G-AS1 and miR-205 played the antagonistic role in miR-205 expression, proliferation, invasion, and apoptosis of keloid fibroblasts. CONCLUSION: CACNA1G-AS1 suppressed miR-205 expression to promote proliferation and invasion and inhibit apoptosis in human keloid fibroblasts.
BACKGROUND: Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) is a genetically heterogeneous disease. To date, 36 dominantly inherited loci have been reported, and 31 causative genes have been identified. RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed a Japanese family with autosomal dominant SCA using linkage analysis and exome sequencing, and identified CACNA1G, which encodes the calcium channel CaV3.1, as a new causative gene. The same mutation was also found in another family with SCA. Although most patients exhibited the pure form of cerebellar ataxia, two patients showed prominent resting tremor in addition to ataxia. CaV3.1 is classified as a low-threshold voltage-dependent calcium channel (T-type) and is expressed abundantly in the central nervous system, including the cerebellum. The mutation p.Arg1715His, identified in this study, was found to be located at S4 of repeat IV, the voltage sensor of the CaV3.1. Electrophysiological analyses revealed that the membrane potential dependency of the mutant CaV3.1 transfected into HEK293T cells shifted toward a positive potential. We established induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from fibroblasts of the patient, and to our knowledge, this is the first report of successful differentiation from the patient-derived iPSCs into Purkinje cells. There was no significant difference in the differentiation status between control- and patient-derived iPSCs. CONCLUSIONS: To date, several channel genes have been reported as causative genes for SCA. Our findings provide important insights into the pathogenesis of SCA as a channelopathy.
The CACNA1G gene encodes the low-voltage-activated Ca(v)3.1 channel, which is expressed in various areas of the CNS, including the cerebellum. We studied two missense CACNA1G variants, p.L208P and p.L909F, and evaluated the relationships between the severity of Ca(v)3.1 dysfunction and the clinical phenotype. The presentation was of a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy without evident cerebellar atrophy. Both patients exhibited axial hypotonia, developmental delay, and severe to profound cognitive impairment. The patient with the L909F mutation had initially refractory seizures and cerebellar ataxia, whereas the L208P patient had seizures only transiently but was overall more severely affected. In transfected mammalian cells, we determined the biophysical characteristics of L208P and L909F variants, relative to the wild-type channel and a previously reported gain-of-function Ca(v)3.1 variant. The L208P mutation shifted the activation and inactivation curves to the hyperpolarized direction, slowed the kinetics of inactivation and deactivation, and reduced the availability of Ca(2+) current during repetitive stimuli. The L909F mutation impacted channel function less severely, resulting in a hyperpolarizing shift of the activation curve and slower deactivation. These data suggest that L909F results in gain-of-function, whereas L208P exhibits mixed gain-of-function and loss-of-function effects due to opposing changes in the biophysical properties. Our study expands the clinical spectrum associated with CACNA1G mutations, corroborating further the causal association with distinct complex phenotypes.
OBJECTIVE: In recent years, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been identified to participate in tumor progression. The purpose of this study was to investigate the role of CACNA1G-AS1 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to detect the CACNA1G-AS1 expression level in 122 pairs of NSCLC and para-carcinoma normal tissue samples as well as in NSCLC cell lines. Moreover, the relationship of clinical pathological features with CACNA1G-AS1 was analyzed. Functional experiment cell lines were established using lentivirus and siRNA to study the effects of CACNA1G-AS1 on cell invasion and migration abilities. Several epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers were measured using Western blotting. The expression level of HNRNPA2B1 was analyzed to further investigate the mechanism. RESULTS: The expression level of CACNA1G-AS1 in NSCLC tissues was significantly higher than that in para-carcinoma normal tissues, and the expression of CACNA1G-AS1 was higher in NSCLC cell lines than that in normal BEAS-2B cells. The higher CACNA1G-AS1 level was relative to more lymph node metastasis and distant metastasis. Function experiments revealed that CACNA1G-AS1 promoted cell invasion and migration. Also, CACNA1G-AS1 over-expression increased EMT in NSCLC cells. Besides, HNRNPA2B1 was regulated by CACNA1G-AS1 in NSCLC cells. CONCLUSIONS: CACNA1G-AS1 was identified as an oncogene in NSCLC for the first time, and could promote cell invasion, migration and EMT via increasing HNRNPA2B1 expression, providing a novel target for the biological therapy and prevention.
