Voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit alpha-2/delta-2; The alpha-2/delta subunit of voltage-dependent calcium channels regulates calcium current density and activation/inactivation kinetics of the calcium channel. Acts as a regulatory subunit for P/Q- type calcium channel (CACNA1A), N-type (CACNA1B), L-type (CACNA1C OR CACNA1D) and possibly T-type (CACNA1G). Overexpression induces apoptosis.
Cocaine abuse increases the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD) and causes acute coronary syndromes (ACS) and hypertension (HTN). Significant research has explored the role of the sympathetic nervous system mediating the cocaine effects on the cardiovascular (CV) system. However, the response of the sympathetic nervous system alone is insufficient to completely account for the CV consequences seen in cocaine users. In this study, we examined the role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in mediating the effect of cocaine on the CV system. MiRNAs regulate many important biological processes and have been associated with both response to cocaine and CV disease development. Multiple miRNAs have altered expression in the CV system (CVS) upon cocaine exposure. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the cocaine response in the CV system, we studied the role of miRNA-423-5p and its target Cacna2d2 in the regulation of intracellular calcium concentration and SMC contractility, a critical factor in the modulation of blood pressure (BP). We used in vivo models to evaluate BP and aortic stiffness. In vitro, cocaine treatment decreased miR-423-5p expression and increased Cacna2d2 expression, which led to elevated intracellular calcium concentrations and increased SMC contractility. Overexpression of miR-423-5p, silencing of its target Cacna2d2, and treatment with a calcium channel blocker reversed the elevated SMC contractility caused by cocaine. In contrast, suppression of miR-423-5p increased the intracellular calcium concentration and SMC contractibility. In vivo, smooth muscle-specific overexpression of miR-423-5p ameliorated the increase in BP and aortic stiffness associated with cocaine use. Thus, miR-423-5p regulates SMC contraction by modulating Cacna2d2 expression increasing intracellular calcium concentrations. Modulation of the miR-423-5p-Cacna2d2-Calcium transport pathway may represent a novel therapeutic strategy to improve cocaine-induced HTN and aortic stiffness.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the molecular and clinical phenotypic basis of developmental and epileptic encephalopathies caused by rare biallelic variants in CACNA2D2. METHODS: Two affected individuals from a family with clinical features of early onset epileptic encephalopathy were recruited for exome sequencing at the Centers for Mendelian Genomics to identify their molecular diagnosis. GeneMatcher facilitated identification of a second family with a shared candidate disease gene identified through clinical gene panel-based testing. RESULTS: Rare biallelic CACNA2D2 variants have been previously reported in three families with developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, and one family with congenital ataxia. We identified three individuals in two unrelated families with novel homozygous rare variants in CACNA2D2 with clinical features of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy and cerebellar atrophy. Family 1 includes two affected siblings with a likely damaging homozygous rare missense variant c.1778G>C; p.(Arg593Pro) in CACNA2D2. Family 2 includes a proband with a homozygous rare nonsense variant c.485_486del; p.(Tyr162Ter) in CACNA2D2. We compared clinical and molecular findings from all nine individuals reported to date and note that cerebellar atrophy is shared among all. INTERPRETATION: Our study supports the candidacy of CACNA2D2 as a disease gene associated with a phenotypic spectrum of neurological disease that include features of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, ataxia, and cerebellar atrophy. Age at presentation may affect apparent penetrance of neurogenetic trait manifestations and of a particular clinical neurological endophenotype, for example, seizures or ataxia.
Contribution to epileptic encephalopathy (EE) of mutations in CACNA2D2, encoding alpha2delta-2 subunit of Voltage Dependent Calcium Channels, is unclear. To date only one CACNA2D2 mutation altering channel functionality has been identified in a single family. In the same family, a rare CELSR3 polymorphism also segregated with disease. Involvement of CACNA2D2 in EE is therefore not confirmed, while that of CELSR3 is questionable. In a patient with epilepsy, dyskinesia, cerebellar atrophy, psychomotor delay and dysmorphic features, offspring to consanguineous parents, we performed whole exome sequencing (WES) for homozygosity mapping and mutation detection. WES identified extended autozygosity on chromosome 3, containing two novel homozygous candidate mutations: c.1295delA (p.Asn432fs) in CACNA2D2 and c.G6407A (p.Gly2136Asp) in CELSR3. Gene prioritization pointed to CACNA2D2 as the most prominent candidate gene. The WES finding in CACNA2D2 resulted to be statistically significant (p = 0.032), unlike that in CELSR3. CACNA2D2 homozygous c.1295delA essentially abolished alpha2delta-2 expression. In summary, we identified a novel null CACNA2D2 mutation associated to a clinical phenotype strikingly similar to the Cacna2d2 null mouse model. Molecular and statistical analyses together argued in favor of a causal contribution of CACNA2D2 mutations to EE, while suggested that finding in CELSR3, although potentially damaging, is likely incidental.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Despite improvements in surgical technique, 5%-8% of patients undergoing herniorrhaphy still suffer from clinically relevant persistent postherniotomy pain. This is a problem at both individual and society levels. The aim of this study was to determine whether or not a single nucleotide polymorphism in a specific gene contributes to the development of persistent pain after surgery. METHODS: One hundred individuals with persistent postherniotomy pain, along with 100 without pain matched for age, gender and type of surgery were identified in a previous cohort study on patients operated for groin hernia. All patients underwent a thorough sensory examination and blood samples were collected. DNA was extracted and analysed for single nucleotide polymorphism in the Mu opioid receptor, TNF-alpha, GRIK3, GCH1, BDNF and CACNA2D2 genes. RESULTS: Patients with neuropathic pain were found to have a homozygous single nucleotide polymorph in the TNF-alpha gene significantly more often than pain-free patients (P=0.036, one-tailed test). CONCLUSIONS: SNP in the TNF-alpha gene has a significant impact on the risk for developing PPSP. IMPLICATIONS: The result suggests the involvement of genetic variance in the development of pain and this requires further investigation.
