Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1D; Voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCC) mediate the entry of calcium ions into excitable cells and are also involved in a variety of calcium-dependent processes, including muscle contraction, hormone or neurotransmitter release, gene expression, cell motility, cell division and cell death. The isoform alpha-1D gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Long-lasting (L-type) calcium channels belong to the 'high-voltage activated' (HVA) group. They are blocked by dihydropyridines (DHP), phenylalkylamines, and by benzothiazepines. B [...] 
Tightly controlled Ca(2+) influx through voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels (Cavs) is indispensable for proper physiological function. Thus, it is not surprising that Cav loss and/or gain of function have been implicated in human pathology. Deficiency of Cav1.3 L-type Ca(2+) channels (LTCCs) causes deafness and bradycardia, whereas several genetic variants of CACNA1D, the gene encoding the pore-forming alpha1 subunit of Cav1.3, have been linked to various disease phenotypes, such as hypertension, congenital hypoglycemia, or autism. These variants include not only common polymorphisms associated with an increased disease risk, but also rare de novo missense variants conferring high risk. This review provides a concise summary of disease-associated CACNA1D variants, whereas the main focus lies on de novo germline variants found in individuals with a neurodevelopmental disorder of variable severity. Electrophysiological recordings revealed activity-enhancing gating changes induced by these de novo variants, and tools to predict their pathogenicity and to study the resulting pathophysiological consequences will be discussed. Despite the low number of affected patients, potential phenotype-genotype correlations and factors that could impact the severity of symptoms will be covered. Since increased channel activity is assumed as the disease-underlying mechanism, pharmacological inhibition could be a treatment option. In the absence of Cav1.3-selective blockers, dihydropyridine LTCC inhibitors clinically approved for the treatment of hypertension may be used for personalized off-label trials. Findings from in vitro studies and treatment attempts in some of the patients seem promising as outlined. Taken together, due to advances in diagnostic sequencing techniques the number of reported CACNA1D variants in human diseases is constantly rising. Evidence from in silico, in vitro, and in vivo disease models can help to predict the pathogenic potential of such variants and to guide diagnosis and treatment in the clinical practice when confronted with patients harboring CACNA1D variants.
BACKGROUND: As a new kind of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), tRNA derivatives play an important role in gastric carcinoma (GC). Nevertheless, the underlying mechanism tRNA derivatives were involved in was rarely illustrated. METHODS: We screened out the tRNA derivative, tRF-Val-CAC-016, based on the tsRNA sequencing and demonstrated the effect tRF-Val-CAC-016 exerted on GC proliferation in vitro and in vivo. We applied Dual-luciferase reporter assay, RIP assay, and bioinformatic analysis to discover the downstream target of tRF-Val-CAC-016. Then CACNA1d was selected, and the oncogenic characteristics were verified. Subsequently, we detected the possible regulation of the canonical MAPK signaling pathway to further explore the downstream mechanism of tRF-Val-CAC-016. RESULTS: As a result, we found that tRF-Val-CAC-016 was low-expressed in GC, and upregulation of tRF-Val-CAC-016 could significantly suppress the proliferation of GC cell lines. Meanwhile, tRF-Val-CAC-016 regulated the canonical MAPK signaling pathway by targeting CACNA1d. CONCLUSIONS: tRF-Val-CAC-016 modulates the transduction of CACNA1d-mediated MAPK signaling pathways to suppress the proliferation of gastric carcinoma. This study discussed the function and mechanism of tRF-Val-CAC-016 in GC for the first time. The pioneering work has contributed to our present understanding of tRNA derivative, which might provide an alternative mean for the targeted therapy of GC. Video abstract.
The Undiagnosed Disease Network (UDN) is comprised of clinical and research experts collaborating to diagnose rare disease. The UDN is funded by the National Institutes of Health and includes 12 different clinical sites (About Us, 2022). Here we highlight the success of collaborative efforts within the UDN Clinical Site at Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) in utilizing a cohort of experts in bioinformatics, structural biology, and genetics specialists in diagnosing rare disease. Our UDN team identified a de novo mosaic CACNA1D variant c.2299T>C in a 5-year-old female with a history of global developmental delay, dystonia, dyskinesis, and seizures. Using a collaborative multidisciplinary approach, our VUMC UDN team diagnosed the participant with Primary Aldosteronism, Seizures, and Neurologic abnormalities (PASNA) OMIM: 615474 due to a rare mosaic CACNA1D variant (O'Neill, 2013). Interestingly, this patient was mosaic, a phenotypic trait previously unreported in PASNA cases. This report highlights the importance of a multidisciplinary approach in diagnosing rare disease.
Congenital hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HH) is the most frequent cause of persistent and recurrent hypoglycemia. Peripheral mononuclear blood cells (PBMCs) from a patient diagnosed with HH, alongside autism-spectrum-disorder (ASD), carrying a heterozygous c.812 T>A (L271H) mutation in the voltage-gated calcium channel subunit Ca(v)1.3-encoding gene CACNA1D, were reprogrammed into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC). The CACNA1D L271H iPSC (IBKMOLi002-A) exhibit a normal karyotype, high expression of pluripotency-associated markers and the capacity to differentiate into cells of all three germ layers. We provide a novel patient-specific iPSC line, allowing to study HH, ASD, the associated neurodevelopmental disorder as well as CACNA1D-associated channelopathies in general.
Prostate cancer is often treated by perturbing androgen receptor signalling. CACNA1D, encoding Ca(V)1.3 ion channels is upregulated in prostate cancer. Here we show how hormone therapy affects CACNA1D expression and Ca(V)1.3 function. Human prostate cells (LNCaP, VCaP, C4-2B, normal RWPE-1) and a tissue microarray were used. Cells were treated with anti-androgen drug, Enzalutamide (ENZ) or androgen-removal from media, mimicking androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT). Proliferation assays, qPCR, Western blot, immunofluorescence, Ca(2+)-imaging and patch-clamp electrophysiology were performed. Nifedipine, Bay K 8644 (Ca(V)1.3 inhibitor, activator), mibefradil, Ni(2+) (Ca(V)3.2 inhibitors) and high K(+) depolarising solution were employed. CACNA1D and Ca(V)1.3 protein are overexpressed in prostate tumours and CACNA1D was overexpressed in androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells. In LNCaP, ADT or ENZ increased CACNA1D time-dependently whereas total protein showed little change. Untreated LNCaP were unresponsive to depolarising high K(+)/Bay K (to activate Ca(V)1.3); moreover, currents were rarely detected. ADT or ENZ-treated LNCaP exhibited nifedipine-sensitive Ca(2+)-transients; ADT-treated LNCaP exhibited mibefradil-sensitive or, occasionally, nifedipine-sensitive inward currents. CACNA1D knockdown reduced the subpopulation of treated-LNCaP with Ca(V)1.3 activity. VCaP displayed nifedipine-sensitive high K(+)/Bay K transients (responding subpopulation was increased by ENZ), and Ni(2+)-sensitive currents. Hormone therapy enables depolarization/Bay K-evoked Ca(2+)-transients and detection of Ca(V)1.3 and Ca(V)3.2 currents. Physiological and genomic CACNA1D/Ca(V)1.3 mechanisms are likely active during hormone therapy-their modulation may offer therapeutic advantage.
OBJECT: This comparative study clarified the clinical characteristics and in vitro steroidogenic activities of aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs) harboring ATPase or CACNA1D gene mutations. DESIGN AND PATIENTS: Genetic testing was performed on 159 unilateral APAs. Somatic ATPase and CACNA1D gene mutations were analyzed in 42 APA tissues without KCNJ5 gene mutations. RESULTS: ATP1A1, ATP2B3, and CACNA1D mutations were detected in one, four, and four patients, respectively. Compared with patients without KCNJ5, ATPase, or CACNA1D mutations (wild type), ATPase mutations tended to have more severe hyperaldosteronism and smaller tumors; those with CACNA1D mutations had clinical characteristics and tumor sizes similar to those with wild-type genes. APAs with ATPase mutations were composed mainly of compact eosinophilic tumor cells, whereas CACNA1D mutations resulted in predominantly clear tumor cells. Aldosterone production in APA cells with ATP2B3 mutations were more responsive to dibutyryl cAMP, whereas those with CACNA1D mutations were more responsive to adrenocorticotropic hormone than the wild-type cells. CONCLUSION: APAs with ATPase mutations demonstrated a potentially severe primary aldosteronism phenotype, whereas those with CACNA1D mutations displayed characteristics similar to wild-type APAs. The status of stimulated aldosterone production was also different according to the cell types, suggesting that the regulatory effects of adrenocorticotropic hormone on aldosterone synthesis could possibly vary according to the intracellular signaling involved in hormone production.
Germline gain-of-function missense variants in the pore-forming Cav1.3 alpha1-subunit (CACNA1D gene) confer high risk for a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with or without endocrine symptoms. Here, we report a 4-week-old new-born with the novel de novo missense variant F747S with a so far not described prominent jittering phenotype in addition to symptoms previously reported for CACNA1D mutations including developmental delay, elevated aldosterone level and transient hypoglycemia. We confirmed the pathogenicity of this variant in whole-cell patch-clamp experiments with wild-type and F747S mutant channels heterologously expressed together with alpha2delta1 and cytosolic beta3 or membrane-bound beta2a subunits. Mutation F747S caused the quantitatively largest shift in the voltage dependence of activation (-28 mV) reported so far for CACNA1D germline mutations. It also shifted inactivation to more negative voltages, slowed the time course of current inactivation and slowed current deactivation upon repolarization with both co-expressed beta-subunits. In silico modelling and molecular docking, simulations revealed that this gain-of-function phenotype can be explained by formation of a novel inter-domain hydrogen bond between mutant residues S747 (IIS6) with N1145 (IIIS6) stabilizing selectively the activated open channel state. F747S displayed 2-6-fold increased sensitivity for the L-type Ca2+ channel blocker isradipine compared to wild type. Our data confirm the pathogenicity of the F747S variant with very strong gain-of-function gating changes, which may contribute to the novel jittering phenotype. Increased sensitivity for isradipine suggests this drug for potential symptomatic off-label treatment for carriers of this mutation.
Progressive cardiac conduction defect often associated with variants in sodium voltage-gated channel SCN5A gene and variants in the L-type calcium voltage-gated channel CACNA1D gene are implicated in sinoatrial node dysfunction. We generated an induced pluripotent stem cell line (iPSC) from a 13-year-old patient with history of conduction system disease and ventricular tachycardia, carrying variants in SCN5A (c.2618C > G), CACNA1D (c.3786G > T), and DSP (c.1582C > G). The generated iPSC line exhibited pluripotency markers, differentiated into the three embryonic germ layers, and maintained a normal karyotype. This iPSC line offers insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms of cardiac arrhythmias and personalized therapies development.
Voltage-gated L-type Cav1.3 Ca(2+) channels support numerous physiological functions including neuronal excitability, sinoatrial node pacemaking, hearing, and hormone secretion. De novo missense mutations in the gene of their pore-forming alpha1-subunit (CACNA1D) induce severe gating defects which lead to autism spectrum disorder and a more severe neurological disorder with and without endocrine symptoms. The number of CACNA1D variants reported is constantly rising, but their pathogenic potential often remains unclear, which complicates clinical decision-making. Since functional tests are time-consuming and not always available, bioinformatic tools further improving pathogenicity potential prediction of novel variants are needed. Here we employed evolutionary analysis considering sequences of the Cav1.3 alpha1-subunit throughout the animal kingdom to predict the pathogenicity of human disease-associated CACNA1D missense variants. Co-variation analyses of evolutionary information revealed residue-residue couplings and allowed to generate a score, which correctly predicted previously identified pathogenic variants, supported pathogenicity in variants previously classified as likely pathogenic and even led to the re-classification or re-examination of 18 out of 80 variants previously assessed with clinical and electrophysiological data. Based on the prediction score, we electrophysiologically tested one variant (V584I) and found significant gating changes associated with pathogenic risks. Thus, our co-variation model represents a valuable addition to complement the assessment of the pathogenicity of CACNA1D variants completely independent of clinical diagnoses, electrophysiology, structural or biophysical considerations, and solely based on evolutionary analyses.
At least 5% of individuals with hypertension have adrenal aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs). Gain-of-function mutations in KCNJ5 and apparent loss-of-function mutations in ATP1A1 and ATP2A3 were reported to occur in APAs. We find that KCNJ5 mutations are common in APAs resembling cortisol-secreting cells of the adrenal zona fasciculata but are absent in a subset of APAs resembling the aldosterone-secreting cells of the adrenal zona glomerulosa. We performed exome sequencing of ten zona glomerulosa-like APAs and identified nine with somatic mutations in either ATP1A1, encoding the Na(+)/K(+) ATPase alpha1 subunit, or CACNA1D, encoding Cav1.3. The ATP1A1 mutations all caused inward leak currents under physiological conditions, and the CACNA1D mutations induced a shift of voltage-dependent gating to more negative voltages, suppressed inactivation or increased currents. Many APAs with these mutations were <1 cm in diameter and had been overlooked on conventional adrenal imaging. Recognition of the distinct genotype and phenotype for this subset of APAs could facilitate diagnosis.
Mutations in KCNJ5, ATP1A1, ATP2B3, CACNA1D, and CTNNB1 are thought to cause the excessive autonomous aldosterone secretion of aldosterone-producing adenomas (APAs). The histopathology of KCNJ5 mutant APAs, the most common and largest, has been thoroughly investigated and shown to have a zona fasciculata-like composition. This study aims to characterize the histopathologic spectrum of the other genotypes and document the proliferation rate of the different sized APAs. Adrenals from 39 primary aldosteronism patients were immunohistochemically stained for CYP11B2 to confirm diagnosis of an APA. Twenty-eight adenomas had sufficient material for further analysis and were target sequenced at hot spots in the 5 causal genes. Ten adenomas had a KCNJ5 mutation (35.7%), 7 adenomas had an ATP1A1 mutation (25%), and 4 adenomas had a CACNA1D mutation (14.3%). One novel mutation in exon 28 of CACNA1D (V1153G) was identified. The mutation caused a hyperpolarizing shift of the voltage-dependent activation and inactivation and slowed the channel's inactivation kinetics. Immunohistochemical stainings of CYP17A1 as a zona fasciculata cell marker and Ki67 as a proliferation marker were used. KCNJ5 mutant adenomas showed a strong expression of CYP17A1, whereas ATP1A1/CACNA1D mutant adenomas had a predominantly negative expression (P value =1.20x10(-4)). ATP1A1/CACNA1D mutant adenomas had twice the nuclei with intense staining of Ki67 than KCNJ5 mutant adenomas (0.7% [0.5%-1.9%] versus 0.4% [0.3%-0.7%]; P value =0.04). Further, 3 adenomas with either an ATP1A1 mutation or a CACNA1D mutation had >30% nuclei with moderate Ki67 staining. In summary, similar to KCNJ5 mutant APAs, ATP1A1 and CACNA1D mutant adenomas have a seemingly specific histopathologic phenotype.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a complex chronic disease characterized by decreased insulin secretion and the development of insulin resistance. Previous genome-wide association studies demonstrated that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) present in genes coding for ion channels involved in insulin secretion increase the risk of developing this disease. We determined the association of 16 SNPs found in CACNA1D, KCNQ1, KCNJ11, and CACNA1E genes and the increased probability of developing T2DM. In this work, we performed a case-control study in 301 Mexican adults, including 201 cases with diabetes and 100 controls without diabetes. Our findings indicate a moderate association between T2DM and the C allele, and the C/C genotype of rs312480 within CACNA1D. The CAG haplotype surprisingly showed a protective effect, whereas the CAC and CGG haplotypes have a strong association with T2DM. The C allele and C/C genotype of rs5219 were significantly associated with diabetes. Also, an association was observed between diabetes and the A allele and the A/A genotype of rs3753737 and rs175338 in CACNA1E. The TGG and CGA haplotypes were also found to be significantly associated. The findings of this study indicate that the SNPs examined could serve as a potential diagnostic tool and contribute to the susceptibility of the Mexican population to this disease.
CACNA1D encodes the pore-forming alpha1-subunit of Cav1.3, an L-type voltage-gated Ca2+-channel. Despite the recent discovery of two de novo missense gain-of-function mutations in Cav1.3 in two individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability CACNA1D has not been considered a prominent ASD-risk gene in large scale genetic analyses, since such studies primarily focus on likely-disruptive genetic variants. Here we report the discovery and characterization of a third de novo missense mutation in CACNA1D (V401L) in a patient with ASD and epilepsy. For the functional characterization we introduced mutation V401L into two major C-terminal long and short Cav1.3 splice variants, expressed wild-type or mutant channel complexes in tsA-201 cells and performed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings. Mutation V401L, localized within the channel's activation gate, significantly enhanced current densities, shifted voltage dependence of activation and inactivation to more negative voltages and reduced channel inactivation in both Cav1.3 splice variants. Altogether, these gating changes are expected to result in enhanced Ca2+-influx through the channel, thus representing a strong gain-of-function phenotype. Additionally, we also found that mutant channels retained full sensitivity towards the clinically available Ca2+ -channel blocker isradipine. Our findings strengthen the evidence for CACNA1D as a novel candidate autism risk gene and encourage experimental therapy with available channel-blockers for this mutation. The additional presence of seizures and neurological abnormalities in our patient define a novel phenotype partially overlapping with symptoms in two individuals with PASNA (congenital primary aldosteronism, seizures and neurological abnormalities) caused by similar Cav1.3 gain-of-function mutations.
