Voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel subunit alpha-1C; Pore-forming, alpha-1C subunit of the voltage-gated calcium channel that gives rise to L-type calcium currents. Mediates influx of calcium ions into the cytoplasm, and thereby triggers calcium release from the sarcoplasm (By similarity). Plays an important role in excitation-contraction coupling in the heart. Required for normal heart development and normal regulation of heart rhythm. Required for normal contraction of smooth muscle cells in blood vessels and in the intestine. Essential for normal blood pressure regulation via  [...] 
The CACNA1C gene encodes the pore-forming subunit of the Ca(V)1.2 L-type Ca(2+) channel, a critical component of membrane physiology in multiple tissues, including the heart, brain, and immune system. As such, mutations altering the function of these channels have the potential to impact a wide array of cellular functions. The first mutations identified within CACNA1C were shown to cause a severe, multisystem disorder known as Timothy syndrome (TS), which is characterized by neurodevelopmental deficits, long-QT syndrome, life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias, craniofacial abnormalities, and immune deficits. Since this initial description, the number and variety of disease-associated mutations identified in CACNA1C have grown tremendously, expanding the range of phenotypes observed in affected patients. CACNA1C channelopathies are now known to encompass multisystem phenotypes as described in TS, as well as more selective phenotypes where patients may exhibit predominantly cardiac or neurological symptoms. Here, we review the impact of genetic mutations on Ca(V)1.2 function and the resultant physiological consequences.
PURPOSE: CACNA1C encodes the alpha-1-subunit of a voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel expressed in human heart and brain. Heterozygous variants in CACNA1C have previously been reported in association with Timothy syndrome and long QT syndrome. Several case reports have suggested that CACNA1C variation may also be associated with a primarily neurological phenotype. METHODS: We describe 25 individuals from 22 families with heterozygous variants in CACNA1C, who present with predominantly neurological manifestations. RESULTS: Fourteen individuals have de novo, nontruncating variants and present variably with developmental delays, intellectual disability, autism, hypotonia, ataxia, and epilepsy. Functional studies of a subgroup of missense variants via patch clamp experiments demonstrated differential effects on channel function in vitro, including loss of function (p.Leu1408Val), neutral effect (p.Leu614Arg), and gain of function (p.Leu657Phe, p.Leu614Pro). The remaining 11 individuals from eight families have truncating variants in CACNA1C. The majority of these individuals have expressive language deficits, and half have autism. CONCLUSION: We expand the phenotype associated with CACNA1C variants to include neurodevelopmental abnormalities and epilepsy, in the absence of classic features of Timothy syndrome or long QT syndrome.
Genome-wide association studies suggest that genetic variation within L-type calcium channel subunits confer risk to psychosis. The single nucleotide polymorphism at rs1006737 in CACNA1C has been associated with both schizophrenia and bipolar disorder and with several intermediate phenotypes that may serve as neurobiological antecedents, linking psychosis to genetic aetiology. Amongst others, it has been implicated in alterations in amygdala structure and function. In the present study, we show that the risk allele (A) is associated with increased amygdala volume in healthy individuals (n = 258). This observation reinforces a hypothesis that genetic variation may confer risk to psychosis via alterations in limbic structures. Further study of CACNA1C using intermediate phenotypes for psychosis will determine the mechanisms by which variation in this gene confers risk.
The variant at rs1006737 in the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel (alpha 1c subunit) CACNA1C gene is reliably associated with both bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. We investigated whether this risk variant affects reward responsiveness because reward processing is one of the central cognitive-motivational domains implicated in both disorders. In a sample of 164 young, healthy individuals, we show a dose-dependent response, where the rs1006737 risk genotype was associated with blunted reward responsiveness, whereas discriminability did not significantly differ between genotype groups. This finding suggests that the CACNA1C risk locus may have a role in neural pathways that facilitate value representation for rewarding stimuli. Impaired reward processing may be a transdiagnostic phenotype of variation in CACNA1C that could contribute to anhedonia and other clinical features common to both affective and psychotic disorders.
The SNP rs1006737 in CACNA1C gene has been significantly associated with psychiatric disorders (e.g., schizophrenia and bipolar disorder) in European populations. In Han Chinese, rs1006737 is also strongly associated with schizophrenia, although the effects of the psychosis risk SNP on related brain functions and structures in this population remain unclear. Here, we examined the association of rs1006737 with gray matter volume in a sample of 278 healthy Han Chinese. A whole-brain voxel-based morphometry (VBM) analysis revealed a significant association in the region around right superior occipital gyrus (family-wise error corrected, P = 0.023). Our data provides initial evidence for the involvement of this psychosis genetic risk locus in brain structure variations in Chinese population, and calls for further investigations.
Recent genetic association studies have identified the A-allele of rs1006737 within CACNA1C as a risk factor for schizophrenia as well as mood disorders. Some evidence suggests that this polymorphism plays a role in cognitive function both in schizophrenia patients and healthy individuals; however, the precise nature of this association remains unclear. Here we investigated the possible association of this polymorphism with a wide range of neurocognitive functions in schizophrenia patients and in healthy subjects. Schizophrenia patients exhibited significantly poorer performance on all the cognitive domains as compared to healthy controls. In patients, A-allele carriers demonstrated significantly worse logical memory performance than the G-allele homozygotes. In controls, no significant association was observed between the genotype and any of the cognitive domains examined. These results add to the literature suggesting that rs1006737 may be associated with schizophrenia through its detrimental effect on endophenotypic traits.
BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric disorders are highly heritable and have overlapping genetic underpinnings. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene CACNA1C have been associated with several neuropsychiatric disorders, across multiple genome-wide association studies. METHOD: A total of 70,711 subjects from 37 independent cohorts with 13 different neuropsychiatric disorders were meta-analyzed to identify overlap of disorder-associated SNPs within CACNA1C. The differential expression of CACNA1C mRNA in five independent postmortem brain cohorts was examined. Finally, the associations of disease-sharing risk alleles with total intracranial volume (ICV), gray matter volumes (GMVs) of subcortical structures, cortical surface area (SA), and average cortical thickness (TH) were tested. RESULTS: Eighteen SNPs within CACNA1C were nominally associated with more than one neuropsychiatric disorder (P < .05); the associations shared among schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and alcohol use disorder survived false discovery rate correction (five SNPs with P < 7.3 x 10-4 and q < 0.05). CACNA1C mRNA was differentially expressed in brains from individuals with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and Parkinson's disease, relative to controls (three SNPs with P < .01). Risk alleles shared by schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, substance dependence, and Parkinson's disease were significantly associated with ICV, GMVs, SA, or TH (one SNP with P </= 7.1 x 10-3 and q < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Integrating multiple levels of analyses, we identified CACNA1C variants associated with multiple psychiatric disorders, and schizophrenia and bipolar disorder were most strongly implicated. CACNA1C variants may contribute to shared risk and pathophysiology in these conditions.
BACKGROUND: CACNA1C, as a type of voltage-dependent calcium ion transmembrane channel, played regulatory roles in the development and progress of multiple tumors. This study was aimed to analyze the roles of CACNA1C in ovarian cancer (OC) of overall survival (OS) and to explore its relationships with immunity. METHODS: Single gene mRNA sequencing data and corresponding clinical information were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas Database (TCGA) and the International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) datasets. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was used to identify CACNA1C-related signal pathways. Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses were applied to evaluate independent prognostic factors. Besides, associations between CACNA1C and immunity were also explored. RESULTS: CACNA1C had a lower expression in OC tumor tissues than in normal tissues (P < 0.001), with significant OS (P = 0.013) and a low diagnostic efficiency. We further validated the expression levels of CACNA1C in OC by means of the ICGC dataset (P = 0.01), qRT-PCR results (P < 0.001) and the HPA database. Univariate and multivariate Cox hazard regression analyses indicated that CACNA1C could be an independent risk factor of OS for OC patients (both P < 0.001). Five significant CACNA1C-related signaling pathways were identified by means of GSEA. As for genetic alteration analysis, altered CACNA1C groups were significantly associated with OS (P = 0.0169), progression-free survival (P = 0.0404), disease-free survival (P = 0.0417) and disease-specific survival (P = 9.280e-3), compared with unaltered groups in OC. Besides, CACNA1C was dramatically associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) and immunity. CONCLUSIONS: Our results shed light on that CACNA1C could be a prognostic predictor of OS in OC and it was closely related to immunity.
Retrospective pharmacogenetic analysis was performed on 120 Caucasian subjects. Subjects were obtained in collaboration with the Estonian Genome Project and Egeen Inc. (CA, USA), who provided blinded medical record and genetic data to the researchers, respectively. Subjects selected from the Estonian Genome Project had a diagnosis of hypertension confirmed by at least two blood pressure measurements and multiple follow-up measurements for assessing calcium channel blocker antihypertensive treatment outcome. Treatment outcome was scored positive if at least three follow-up blood pressure measurements were nonhypertensive and no more than one follow-up measurement was hypertensive (>140/90). The genotypes of 62 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the calcium channel, voltage-dependent, L type, alpha 1C subunit (CACNA1C) gene were obtained for each subject from a blood sample. Univariate analyses with multiple test correction were conducted using family-wise error rate and false discovery rate methods. Three SNPs in CANCA1C had significant associations with antihypertensive outcome, combining to yield a positive treatment outcome of less than 15 to 80%.
OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified Ankyrin-G (ANK3) and the alpha-1C subunit of the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel (CACNA1C) as susceptibility genes for bipolar disorder. Available biological information on these genes suggests a potential molecular mechanism involving ion channel dysfunction. The associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at ANK3 (rs10994336) and CACNA1C (rs1006737) are both intronic with no obvious impact on gene function. We investigated whether, instead of affecting protein function, these risk variants might impact on gene regulation affecting expression. METHODS: We have done this by testing for allelic expression imbalance (AEI) to identify cis-acting regulatory polymorphisms. RESULTS: We identified evidence of cis-acting variation at both loci in HapMap Caucasian Europeans from Utah (CEU) lymphoblastoid cell lines. There was considerable evidence of AEI at ANK3 with more than half of all heterozygous samples (21 out of 34) for marker SNP rs3750800 showing AEI and a small number of samples showing near monoallelic expression. The AEI at either gene could not be attributed to the GWAS-associated SNPs. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that there is genetic variation local to both genes affecting their expression, but that this variation is not responsible for increasing risk of bipolar disorder.
One of the most consistent genetic findings to have emerged from bipolar disorder genome wide association studies (GWAS) is with CACNA1C, a gene that codes for the alpha(1C) subunit of the Ca(v)1.2 voltage-dependent L-type calcium channel (LTCC). Genetic variation in CACNA1C have also been associated with depression, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, as well as changes in brain function and structure in control subjects who have no diagnosable psychiatric illness. These data are consistent with a continuum of shared neurobiological vulnerability between diverse-Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) defined-neuropsychiatric diseases. While involved in numerous cellular functions, Ca(v)1.2 is most frequently implicated in coupling of cell membrane depolarization to transient increase of the membrane permeability for calcium, leading to activation and, potentially, changes in intracellular signaling pathway activity, gene transcription, and synaptic plasticity. Ca(v)1.2 is involved in the proper function of numerous neurological circuits including those involving the hippocampus, amygdala, and mesolimbic reward system, which are strongly implicated in psychiatric disease pathophysiology. A number of behavioral effects of LTCC inhibitors have been described including antidepressant-like behavioral actions in rodent models. Clinical studies suggest possible treatment effects in a subset of patients with mood disorders. We review the genetic structure and variation of CACNA1C, discussing relevant human genetic and clinical findings, as well as the biological actions of Ca(v)1.2 that are most relevant to psychiatric illness.
OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies have identified a significant risk gene, CACNA1C, for schizophrenia. In this study, we comprehensively investigated a large set of CACNA1C single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to identify the replicable risk alleles for schizophrenia and explore their biological functions. METHODS: One Jewish (1044 cases vs 2052 controls), one European (1350 cases vs 1378 controls) and one exploratory African American samples (98 cases vs 20 controls) were analyzed to identify replicable single-nucleotide polymorphism-schizophrenia associations. The regulatory effects of risk alleles on CACNA1C messenger RNA expression were examined. The most robust risk tagSNP (rs1006737) was meta-analyzed on 17 studies (74,122 cases vs 109,062 controls), and associated with the gray matter volumes of seven subcortical structures in 38,258 Europeans, and the surface areas and thickness of 34 cortical regions in 33,992 Europeans and 2944 non-Europeans. RESULTS: Forty-seven replicable risk single-nucleotide polymorphisms, including a 20-single-nucleotide polymorphism haplotype block, were identified in our samples (1.8 x 10(-4) ⩽ p ⩽ 0.049). This variant block was consistently associated with schizophrenia across four independent Psychiatric Genomics Consortium cohorts (79,645 cases vs 109,590 controls; 2.5 x 10(-17) ⩽ p ⩽ 0.017). This block showed significant expression quantitative trait loci in three independent European brain cohorts (5.1 x 10(-12) ⩽ p ⩽ 8.3 x 10(-3)) and could be tagged by the most significant risk single-nucleotide polymorphism rs1006737. The minor allele A of rs1006737 significantly increased risk for schizophrenia across the Jewish and European samples (p = 0.029 and 0.004, respectively), and this association was highly significant in the meta-analysis (p = 1.62 x 10(-42)). This allele also significantly altered the CACNA1C messenger RNA expression in five brain regions (5.1 x 10(-12) ⩽ p ⩽ 0.05), decreased the gray matter volume of thalamus (p = 0.010), the surface area of isthmus cingulate cortex (p = 0.013) and the thickness of transverse temporal and superior temporal sulcus cortexes (0.005 ⩽ p ⩽ 0.043). CONCLUSION: We identified an independent, replicable, functional, and significant risk variant block at CACNA1C for schizophrenia, which could be tagged by the most robust risk marker rs1006737, suggesting an important role of CACNA1C in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.
Several genome-wide association studies and case-control studies have associated the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs1006737, situated in CACNA1C encoding the alpha 1C subunit of the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel, with bipolar disorder and other psychiatric disorders. However, the causal pathway linking genetic variants in CACNA1C with increased risk for developing brain disorders remains unclear. Here, we explored the association between the rs1006737 SNP and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers. We found a significant association between the risk allele in rs1006737 and a decreased CSF hyperphosphorylated tau/total tau ratio in patients with bipolar disorder, thus linking variation in the CACNA1C gene to a neurochemical marker of neuroaxonal plasticity in those with this disorder.
To identify susceptibility loci for bipolar disorder, we tested 1.8 million variants in 4,387 cases and 6,209 controls and identified a region of strong association (rs10994336, P = 9.1 x 10(-9)) in ANK3 (ankyrin G). We also found further support for the previously reported CACNA1C (alpha 1C subunit of the L-type voltage-gated calcium channel; combined P = 7.0 x 10(-8), rs1006737). Our results suggest that ion channelopathies may be involved in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder.
Bipolar disorder (BD) is a complex, severe mental illness with cognitive impairment. Impairments in attention and memory are particularly evident. A large number of previous studies have identified CACNA1C and ANK3 gene variants as risk factors for BD and both affect cognitive function in people with BD. However, it is unclear whether there is an interaction effects between the two genes on cognitive impairment in patients. We used 153 Chinese Han Chinese patients with BD to explore the association of CACNA1C and ANK3 variants with attention and immediate memory using Plink software and and performed a epistatic interaction effects analysis. We found that CACNA1C and ANK3 gene variants respectively affected patients' scores on attention and memory tests. The significant SNP in the CACNA1C and ANK3 genes are rs73042126(P = 3.16 x 10(-5),FDR = 0.0253) and rs2393640(P = 1.50 x 10(-4),FDR = 0.0353) respectively. And they also interacted to affect cognitive functioning in BD patients (attention: P = 0.0289; immediate memory: P = 0.0398). Follow-up studies should increase the sample size, improve the assessment methods and experimental design, and further explore the pathogenic mechanisms of BD.
