Voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit alpha-2/delta-1; The alpha-2/delta subunit of voltage-dependent calcium channels regulates calcium current density and activation/inactivation kinetics of the calcium channel. Plays an important role in excitation- contraction coupling (By similarity).
BACKGROUND: Calcium voltage-gated channel auxiliary subunit alpha 2/delta 1 (CACNA2D1), a gene encoding a voltage-gated calcium channel, has been reported as an oncogene in several cancers. However, its role in colon cancer (CC) remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the function of CACNA2D1 and its effect on the microenvironment in CC. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis was performed on samples collected from 200 patients with CC who underwent curative colectomy. Knockdown experiments were performed using CACNA2D1 siRNA in the human CC cell lines HCT116 and RKO, and cell proliferation, cycle, apoptosis, and migration were then analyzed. The fibroblast cell line CCD-18Co was co-cultured with CC cell lines to determine the effect of CACNA2D1 on fibroblasts and the relationship between CACNA2D1 and the cancer microenvironment. Gene expression profiles of cells were analyzed using microarray analysis. RESULTS: IHC revealed that high CACNA2D1 expression was an independent poor prognostic factor in patients with CC and that CACNA2D1 expression and the stroma are correlated. CACNA2D1 depletion decreased cell proliferation and migration; CACNA2D1 knockdown increased the number of cells in the sub-G1 phase and induced apoptosis. CCD-18Co and HCT116 or RKO cell co-culture revealed that CACNA2D1 affects the cancer microenvironment via fibroblast regulation. Furthermore, microarray analysis showed that the p53 signaling pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal transition-associated pathways were enhanced in CACNA2D1-depleted HCT116 cells. CONCLUSIONS: CACNA2D1 plays an important role in the progression and the microenvironment of CC by regulating fibroblasts and may act as a biomarker for disease progression and a therapeutic target for CC.
A female baby suffered from a rare association between histiocytoid cardiomyopathy, left ventricular non-compaction, and Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome causing severe and recurrent arrhythmic storms. Antiarrhythmic drugs, radiofrequency ablation of Purkinje tissue, and sympathetic denervation were ineffective. The implant of a cardiac defibrillator allowed her to survive till heart transplant. Compound mutation of CACNA2D1 and RANGRF genes were found. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive description of the concurrence of these two mutations and histiocytoid cardiomyopathy.
BACKGROUND: Primary electrical disorders (PEDs) are a group of cardiac rhythm abnormalities that occur in the absence of detectable structural heart disease and are a significant cause of sudden cardiac death (SCD). The initiation of cardiac muscle contraction and relaxation is orchestrated by the action potential (AP), generated through ionic changes across the membrane. Mutations in the AP-related gene CACNA2D1 have been identified as a causative factor for PED. METHODS: We recruited a Chinese family with a history of arrhythmia. The proband has experienced palpitations and chest tightness for over 40 years, with symptoms worsening over the past year. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was used to determine the genetic etiologies in this family. RESULTS: A novel heterozygous missense mutation (NM_000722.3: c.1685G > C;p.G562A) of CACNA2D1 gene was detected. Genotyping of the proband's parents indicated that the arrhythmia phenotype in the proband was caused by a de novo mutation. CONCLUSIONS: WES was utilized to explore the genetic etiology in a family with arrhythmia, leading to the identification of a novel mutation in the CACNA2D1 gene. This study not only expands the mutation spectrum of the CACNA2D1 gene but also contributes to genetic counseling and clinical diagnosis for this family.
Our previous studies have confirmed that alpha2delta1 has the potential to function as a cancer stem cell marker, and CACNA2D1 is the coding gene of alpha2delta1. But it is unclear how microRNAs regulate the expression of the CACNA2D1 gene in laryngeal cancer cells. We detected the expressions of alpha2delta1 protein, microRNA-107, and CACNA2D1 in 40 pairs of laryngeal cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues. Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cells, TU212 and TU686, were cultured and transfected in the blank control group, the agomiR negative control group, the agomiR-107 group, the antagomiR negative control group, or the antagomiR-107 group, and the dual-luciferase reporter assay was employed to assess the regulatory effect of microRNA-107 on CACNA2D1. Then, the effects of microRNA-107 on the biological function of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma cells were detected by qRT-PCR, Western blot, MTT, cell migration/invasion assay, and cell colony-formation assay. Our data suggested that the protein level of alpha2delta1, encoded by CACNA2D1, in laryngeal carcinoma tissues was higher than that in adjacent normal tissues, while the expression of microRNA-107 was significantly decreased in laryngeal carcinoma tissues. The dual-luciferase reporter gene assay confirmed that microRNA-107 bound to the 3'-UTR two positions (202-209, 902-908) of CACNA2D1 mRNA. Moreover, the expression of CACNA2D1 and alpha2delta1 protein were significantly decreased in TU212 and TU686 cells transfected with microRNA-107 expression vectors (P < 0.05), and proliferation, clone formation, migration, and invasion of these cells were also reduced. Furthermore, after knocking down microRNA-107, exactly opposite results were obtained. Overexpression of microRNA-107 can inhibit the proliferation and invasion of laryngeal carcinoma cells in vitro.
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been reported to be involved in various human diseases. They may have uses in diagnosis and as therapeutic targets, thus the discovery of novel miRNAs has the potential to provide clinical tools or shed light on novel mechanisms. In the current study, miR‑107 was revealed to be downregulated in chronic myeloid leukemia cells. Overexpression of miR‑107 in K562 and KCL‑22 chronic myeloid leukemia cells promotes erythroid differentiation, while having no effect on cell proliferation. Further bioinformatics predicted that one target of miR‑107 may be Cacna2d1, a calcium channel protein. A luciferase reporter assay and quantitative polymerase chain reaction were utilized to confirm that Cacna2d1 is a target molecule of miR-107. The effect of miR‑107 on K562 and KCL‑22 cells was mediated through the downregulation of Cacna2d1, as rescued expression of Cacna2d1 reversed the effects of miR‑107. In summary, the current study identified a novel miRNA that is involved in chronic myeloid leukemia cell erythroid differentiation and the associated mechanisms, making it a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia.
It is widely accepted that the incidence of chromosomal aberration is 10-15.2% in the azoospermic male; however, the exact genetic damages are currently unknown for more than 40% of azoospermia. To elucidate the causative gene defects, we used the next generation sequencing (NGS) to map the breakpoints of a chromosome insertion from an azoospermic male who carries a balanced, maternally inherited karyotype 46, XY, inv ins (18,7) (q22.1; q36.2q21.11). The analysis revealed that the breakage in chromosome 7 disrupts two genes, dipeptidyl aminopeptidase-like protein 6 (DPP6) and contactin-associated protein-like 2 (CACNA2D1), the former participates in regulation of voltage-gated potassium channels, and the latter is one of the components in voltage-gated calcium channels. The deletion and duplication were not identified equal or beyond 100 kb, but 4 homologous DNA elements were verified proximal to the breakpoints. One of the proband's sisters inherited the same aberrant karyotype and experienced recurrent miscarriages and consecutive fetus death, while in contrast, another sister with a normal karyotype experienced normal labor and gave birth to healthy babies. The insertional translocation is confirmed with FISH and the Y-chromosome microdeletions were excluded by genetic testing. This is the first report describing chromosome insertion inv ins (18,7) and attributes DPP6 and CACNA2D1 to azoospermia.
Voltage-gated calcium channels have an important role in neurotransmission. Aberrations affecting genes encoding the alpha subunit of these channels have been associated with epilepsy and neuropsychiatric disorders such as autism or schizophrenia. Here we report three patients with a genomic aberration affecting the CACNA2D1 gene encoding the alpha2delta subunit of these voltage-gated calcium channels. All three patients present with epilepsy and intellectual disability pinpointing the CACNA2D1 gene as an interesting candidate gene for these clinical features. Besides these characteristics, patient 2 also presents with obesity with hyperinsulinism, which is very likely to be caused by deletion of the CD36 gene.
