Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type IV; Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase that operates in the calcium-triggered CaMKK-CaMK4 signaling cascade and regulates, mainly by phosphorylation, the activity of several transcription activators, such as CREB1, MEF2D, JUN and RORA, which play pivotal roles in immune response, inflammation, and memory consolidation. In the thymus, regulates the CD4(+)/CD8(+) double positive thymocytes selection threshold during T-cell ontogeny. In CD4 memory T-cells, is required to link T-cell antigen receptor (TCR) signaling to the productio [...] 
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the potential influences of miR-507 and CAMK4 on the progression of preeclampsia (PE). PATIENTS AND METHODS: Placental tissues were collected from 24 PE pregnancies and 24 healthy pregnancies. The relative levels of miR-507 and CAMK4 in placental tissues were detected. In addition, expressions of apoptosis-associated genes in collected tissues were examined by both quantitative Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The influences of miR-507 and CAMK4 on proliferative and migratory abilities in HTR-8/SVneo cells were assessed by CCK-8 and transwell assay, respectively. The target relationship between miR-507 and CAMK4 was detected by Luciferase assay. RESULTS: MiR-507 was upregulated in placental tissues collected from PE pregnancies. Overexpression of miR-507 suppressed proliferative and migratory abilities, and stimulated apoptosis in HTR-8/SVneo cells. CAMK4 was the target gene of miR-507, which was downregulated in placental tissues collected from PE pregnancies and negatively correlated to miR-507 level. The knockdown of CAMK4 suppressed proliferative and migratory abilities, and stimulated apoptosis in HTR-8/SVneo cells, and these trends were abolished by silence of miR-507. CONCLUSIONS: Highly expressed miR-507 in PE pregnancies inhibits proliferative and migratory potentials, and induces apoptosis in trophoblasts by targeting CAMK4.
Acute and chronic kidney failure is common in hospitalized patients with COVID-19, yet the mechanism of injury and predisposing factors remain poorly understood. We investigated the role of complement activation by determining the levels of deposited complement components (C1q, C3, FH, C5b-9) and immunoglobulin along with the expression levels of the injury-associated molecules spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk), mucin-1 (MUC1) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMK4) in the kidney tissues of people who succumbed to COVID-19. We report increased deposition of C1q, C3, C5b-9, total immunoglobulin, and high expression levels of Syk, MUC1 and CaMK4 in the kidneys of COVID-19 patients. Our study provides strong rationale for the expansion of trials involving the use of inhibitors of these molecules, in particular C1q, C3, Syk, MUC1 and CaMK4 to treat patients with COVID-19.
High fructose has been reported to drive glomerular podocyte oxidative stress and then induce podocyte foot process effacement in vivo, which could be partly regarded as podocyte hypermotility in vitro. Atractylodin possesses anti-oxidative effect. The aim of this study was to explore whether atractylodin prevented against fructose-induced podocyte hypermotility via anti-oxidative property. In fructose-exposed conditionally immortalized human podocytes, we found that atractylodin inhibited podocyte hypermotility, and up-regulated slit diaphragm proteins podocin and nephrin, and cytoskeleton protein CD2-associated protein (CD2AP), alpha-Actinin-4 and synaptopodin expression, which were consistent with its anti-oxidative activity evidenced by up-regulation of catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) 1 expression, and reduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Atractylodin also significantly suppressed expression of transient receptor potential channels 6 (TRPC6) and phosphorylated Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMK4) in cultured podocytes with fructose exposure. Additionally, in fructose-exposed podocytes, CaMK4 siRNA up-regulated synaptopodin and reduced podocyte hypermotility, whereas, silencing of TRPC6 by siRNA decreased p-CaMK4 expression, inhibited podocyte hypermotility, showing TRPC6/p-CaMK4 signaling activation in podocyte hypermotility under fructose condition. Just like atractylodin, antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) could inhibit TRPC6/p-CaMK4 signaling activation to reduce fructose-induced podocytes hypermotility. These results first demonstrated that the anti-oxidative property of atractylodin may contribute to the suppression of podocyte hypermotility via inhibiting TRPC6/p-CaMK4 signaling and restoring synaptopodin expression abnormality.
