Soluble calcium-activated nucleotidase 1; Calcium-dependent nucleotidase with a preference for UDP. The order of activity with different substrates is UDP > GDP > UTP > GTP. Has very low activity towards ADP and even lower activity towards ATP. Does not hydrolyze AMP and GMP. Involved in proteoglycan synthesis. Belongs to the apyrase family.
BACKGROUND: CANT1, calcium-activated nucleotidase 1, was reported to be upregulated in certain tumors. However, the function mechanism of CANT1 in pan-cancer is still unclear. METHODS: We utilized the Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) and UALCAN databases to analyze CANT1 expression at the level of mRNA, protein, and promoter methylation in pan-cancer, and the cBioportal database to study the frequency of gene changes for CANT1. Wilcoxon test was applied to discuss the correlation between CANT1 and clinicopathological features in different tumor types. The prognosis of CANT1 in pan-cancer was discussed by Cox regression. Spearman analysis was applied to discuss the relationship of CANT1 with tumor mutation burden(TMB), microsatellite instability(MSI), immune cell infiltration, and immune checkpoints. The association between CANT1 expression and drug sensitivity for pan-cancer was investigated by the GSCALite database. In addition, we collected 40 cases of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and adjacent normal tissues for immunohistochemical staining and investigated the relationship between CANT1 and clinicopathology and prognosis in LUAD. Finally, the molecular pathways involved in CANT1-related genes in LUAD were analyzed by gene set enrichment analysis(GSEA). RESULTS: The CANT1 mRNA level was significant higher in 14 tumors, and CANT1 protein level was significant higher in 7 tumors compared with normal tissues. CANT1 expression was linked with the T stage, N stage, and pathological stage in some tumors, and overexpression CANT1 was associated with adverse overall survival(OS) and disease-specific survival(DSS) in kidney renal papillary cell carcinoma(KIRP), brain lower grade glioma(LGG), and LUAD. By Spearman correlation analysis, the results showed that CANT1 had a positive correlation with TMB and MSI in bladder urothelial carcinoma(BLCA), breast invasive carcinoma(BRCA), esophageal carcinoma(ESCA), LGG, and sarcoma(SARC). Furthermore, CANT1 was related to immune cell infiltration and immune checkpoints in several cancers. Drug sensitivity analysis suggested that CANT1 was inversely linked with three drugs. Immunohistochemical staining analysis showed that CANT1 expression was higher in LUAD than in normal tissues, and was related to N stage and pathological stage. Survival curves showed that CANT1 overexpression had poor OS and DSS. Time-dependent ROC curves revealed that the 1-year, 5-year, and 10-year OS and DSS in LUAD were above 0.5. CANT1-related genes in LUAD mainly participated in the pathway of dorso ventral axis formation, small cell lung cancer, DNA replication, O-glycan biosynthesis, and cell cycle. CONCLUSION: CANT1 is considered a potential marker for prognosis in several tumors, and a promising target for tumor immunological treatment.
Desbuquois dysplasia is an autosomal recessive dysplasia characterized by severe growth restriction and distinct hand and proximal femur appearance in addition to cognitive impairment. The critical interval for this disease has been mapped to 17q25.3 using homozygosity mapping. We have identified a newborn with classical features of the disease whose parents are first cousins. Assuming genetic homogeneity of this disorder, we were able to narrow the critical interval to a region that only contained 10 annotated genes by combining the results of our homozygosity mapping with those of others. Serial sequencing of the genes contained within the interval revealed a 5 bp duplication in Calcium-Activated Nucleotidase 1 gene (CANT1), consistent with the very recent report by Huber et al. [Huber et al. (2009); Am J Hum Genet 85:706-710]. This report cements the role of CANT1 in the causation of this dysplasia and demonstrates the high value of even single cases in the setting of genetically homogeneous disorders when homozygosity mapping is used.
Lung squamous carcinoma (LUSC) is the second most frequent subtype of non-small cell lung cancer. Rarely gene alterations are identified in LUSC. Therefore, identifying LUSC-related genes to explain the relevant molecular mechanism is urgently needed. A potential biomarker, calcium-activated nucleotidase 1 (CANT1), was elevated in tissues of LUSC patients relative to normal cases based on the TCGA and/or GTEx database. CCK-8 and transwell tests were then implemented to measure the proliferative, invasive and migratory capacities, and showed that knockdown of CANT1 blocked LUSC cells proliferation. miR-607, predicted as an upstream factor for CANT1, was declined in LUSC using TargetScan analysis and luciferase activity test. Low miR-607 expression was related with unfavorable outcomes of LUSC patients. Moreover, miR-607 downregulation elevated cell viability, invasion and migration in LUSC cells, which was antagonized by si-CANT1. GEPIA website was accessed to estimate the relevance between CANT1 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related positive factors. The protein levels of Fibronectin, Vimentin, Snail and beta-catenin were altered due to the abnormal CANT1 and miR-607 expression. Together, these data unveiled that miR-607/CANT1 pair may exert a vital role in the progression of LUSC through mediating EMT process, which would furnish an available therapeutic therapy for LUSC.
Desbuquois dysplasia (DD) is characterized by antenatal and postnatal short stature, multiple dislocations, and advanced carpal ossification. Two forms have been distinguished on the basis of the presence (type 1) or the absence (type 2) of characteristic hand anomalies. We have identified mutations in calcium activated nucleotidase 1 gene (CANT1) in DD type 1. Recently, CANT1 mutations have been reported in the Kim variant of DD, characterized by short metacarpals and elongated phalanges. DD has overlapping features with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with congenital joint dislocations (SDCD) due to Carbohydrate (chondroitin 6) Sulfotransferase 3 (CHST3) mutations. We screened CANT1 and CHST3 in 38 DD cases (6 type 1 patients, 1 Kim variant, and 31 type 2 patients) and found CANT1 mutations in all DD type 1 cases, the Kim variant and in one atypical DD type 2 expanding the clinical spectrum of hand anomalies observed with CANT1 mutations. We also identified in one DD type 2 case CHST3 mutation supporting the phenotype overlap with SDCD. To further define function of CANT1, we studied proteoglycan synthesis in CANT1 mutated patient fibroblasts, and found significant reduced GAG synthesis in presence of beta-D-xyloside, suggesting that CANT1 plays a role in proteoglycan metabolism.
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common malignant intraocular tumor of childhood. Recent studies have shown that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are longer than 200 bp and without protein-coding ability, are key regulators of tumorigenesis. However, the role of lncRNAs in retinoblastoma remains to be elucidated. In this study, we found that the expression of lncRNA CASC15-New-Transcript 1 (CANT1) was significantly downregulated in RB. Notably, overexpression of CANT1 significantly inhibited RB growth both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, lncRNA CANT1, which was mainly located in the nucleus, occupied the promoter of phosphoinositide 3-kinase gamma (PI3Kgamma) and blocked histone methyltransferase hSET1 from binding to the PI3Kgamma promoter, thus abolishing hSET1-mediated histone H3K4 trimethylation of the PI3Kgamma promoter and inhibiting PI3Kgamma expression. Furthermore, we found that silencing PI3Kgamma either by lncRNA CANT1 overexpression or by PI3Kgamma siRNA, reduced the activity of PI3K/Akt signaling and suppressed RB tumorigenesis. In summary, lncRNA CANT1 acts as a suppressor of RB progression by blocking gene-specific histone methyltransferase recruitment. These findings outline a new CANT1 modulation mechanism and provide an alternative option for the RB treatment.
BACKGROUND: CANT1, as calcium-activated protein nucleotidase 1, is a kind of phosphatase. It is overexpressed in some tumors and related to poor prognosis, but few studies explore its function and carcinogenic mechanism in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). METHODS: The expression of CANT1 mRNA and protein was analyzed by the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database and immunohistochemistry(IHC) staining. The relationship between CANT1 expression and clinicopathology was evaluated by various public databases. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to assess the diagnostic accuracy of CANT1 by the area under curve (AUC). Univariate, multivariate Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier curves were applied to evaluate the predictive value of CANT1 on the prognosis of HCC. Methsurv was used to analyze gene changes and DNA methylation, and its impact on prognosis. The enrichment analysis of DEGs associated with CANT1 revealed the biological process of CANT1 based on Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). The relationship between immune cell infiltration level and CANT1 expression in HCC was investigated using the single-sample GSEA (ssGSEA) method and the Tumor Immune Estimation Resource (TIMER) database. Finally, the association between CANT1 and immune checkpoints and drug sensitivity was also analyzed. RESULTS: CANT1 was highly expressed in 22 cancers, including HCC, and CANT1 overexpression in HCC was confirmed by IHC. The expression of CANT1 was correlated with clinical features, such as histologic grade. Highly expressed CANT1 caused poor overall survival (OS) of HCC patients. Univariate and multivariate regression analysis suggested that CANT1 was an independent prognostic marker. Of the 31 DNA methylation at CpG sites, three CpG sites were associated with the prognosis of HCC. GSEA indicated that CANT1 was mainly involved in the cell cycle, DNA replication, and etc. Moreover, CANT1 expression was correlated with immune cell infiltration and independently associated with the prognosis of HCC patients. Finally, CANT1 expression was correlated with most immune checkpoints and drug sensitivity. CONCLUSION: CANT1 may be a latent oncogene of HCC, and associated with immune cells and immune checkpoints, which may assist in HCC treatment.
BACKGROUND: Calcium-activated nucleotidase 1 (CANT1), functions as a calcium-dependent nucleotidase with a preference for UDP. However, the potential clinical value of CANT1 in lung adenocarcinoma (LA) has not been fully clarified. Thus, we sought to identify its potential biological function and mechanism through bioinformatics analysis and in vitro experiments in LA. METHODS: In the present study, we comprehensively investigated the prognostic role of CANT1 in LA patients through bioinformatics analysis and in vitro experiments. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) were utilized to analyze the expression of CANT1 in LA patients and their clinical-prognostic value. The immunohistochemistry staining was obtained from the Human Protein Atlas (HPA). A Cox regression model was used to evaluate prognostic factors. Gene ontology (GO) and Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed to explore the potential regulatory mechanism of CANT1 in the development of LA. Moreover, we also examined the relationship between CANT1 expression and DNA methylation. Finally, we did in vitro experiments to evaluate the biological behavior and role of CANT1 in LA cells (LACs). RESULTS: Our study showed that the CANT1 expression was significantly elevated in the LA tissues compared with the normal lung tissues. Increased CANT1 expression was significantly associated with the TN stage. A univariate Cox analysis indicated that high CANT1 expression levels were correlated with poor overall survival (OS) in LA. Besides, CANT1 expression was independently associated with OS in multivariate analysis. GO and GSEA analysis showed the enrichment of mitotic nuclear division, DNA methylation, and DNA damage. Then we found that the high expression of CANT1 is positively correlated with hypomethylation. The methylation level was associated with prognosis in LA patients. Finally, in vitro experiments indicated that knockdown of CANT1 resulted in decreased cell proliferation, invasion, and G1 phase cell-cycle arrest in LACs. CONCLUSION: The present study suggested that CANT1 may serve as a potential prognosis biomarker in patients with LA. High CANT1 expression and promoter demethylation was associated with worse outcome. Finally, in vitro experiments verified the biological functions and behaviors of CANT1 in LA.
Desbuquois dysplasia (DBQD) is a severe skeletal dysplasia of autosomal recessive inheritance. DBQD is classified into types 1 and 2 based on presence or absence of hand anomalies. In a previous study, we found a CANT1 (for calcium-activated nucleotidase 1) mutation, c.676G>A in five DBQD families. They were all East Asians (Japanese or Korean). The high prevalence of the same mutation among Japanese and Korean suggested that it is a common founder mutation in the two populations. To examine a possible common founder, we examined the region around CANT1 in chromosomes with c.676G>A mutation by genotyping polymorphic markers in the region for the families. We examined their haplotypes using the family data. We identified in all families a common haplotype containing the CANT1 mutation that ranged up to 550 kb. The two unrelated carriers of the mutation in general populations in Korea and Japan could also have the haplotype. We estimated the age of the founder mutation as  approximately  1420 years (95% CI=880-1940 years). The c.676G>A mutation of CANT1 commonly seen in Japanese and Korean DBQD should be derived from a common founder.
Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia (MED) is a relatively mild skeletal dysplasia characterized by mild short stature, joint pain, and early-onset osteoarthropathy. Dominantly inherited mutations in COMP, MATN3, COL9A1, COL9A2, and COL9A3, and recessively inherited mutations in SLC26A2, account for the molecular basis of disease in about 80-85% of the cases. In two families with recurrent MED of an unknown molecular basis, we used exome sequencing and candidate gene analysis to identify homozygosity for recessively inherited missense mutations in CANT1, which encodes calcium-activated nucleotidase 1. The MED phenotype is thus allelic to the more severe Desbuquois dysplasia phenotype and the results identify CANT1 as a second locus for recessively inherited MED.
Desbuquois dysplasia (DBQD) is a rare skeletal dysplasia characterized by severe short stature, laxity, dislocation of multiple joints and developmental delay. DBQD is clinically heterogeneous. Distinct radiographic hand abnormalities such as the presence of extra-ossification distal to the second metacarpal or normal hand has led to its classification into types 1 and 2. Furthermore, the third type of DBQD, Kim type has been reported which is characterized by short metacarpals and elongated phalanges. However, DBQD Kim type has been exclusively reported in Japanese and Korean and its clinical characteristics remain to be delineated. Mutations in the calcium-activated nucleotidase 1 (CANT1) gene have been reported in all three types of DBQD. Previously reported patients with DBQD Kim type had a common mutation c.676G>A (p.Val226Met), which had a common founder between Japanese and Korean. Here, we report 3 Indian patients with DBQD, Kim type from 2 families which were unrelated to each other. We identified a novel mutation of CANT1, c.467C>T (p.Ser156Phe), in all the patients in the homozygous form. Our results show that DBQD Kim type is not exclusive to East Asians and also report a novel mutation from the Indian subcontinent.
Desbuquois dysplasia is a severe condition characterized by short stature, joint laxity, scoliosis, and advanced carpal ossification with a delta phalanx. Studying nine Desbuquois families, we identified seven distinct mutations in the Calcium-Activated Nucleotidase 1 gene (CANT1), which encodes a soluble UDP-preferring nucleotidase belonging to the apyrase family. Among the seven mutations, four were nonsense mutations (Del 5' UTR and exon 1, p.P245RfsX3, p.S303AfsX20, and p.W125X), and three were missense mutations (p.R300C, p.R300H, and p.P299L) responsible for the change of conserved amino acids located in the seventh nucleotidase conserved region (NRC). The arginine substitution at position 300 was identified in five out of nine families. The specific function of CANT1 is as yet unknown, but its substrates are involved in several major signaling functions, including Ca2+ release, through activation of pyrimidinergic signaling. Importantly, using RT-PCR analysis, we observed a specific expression in chondrocytes. We also found electron-dense material within distended rough endoplasmic reticulum in the fibroblasts of Desbuquois patients. Our findings demonstrate the specific involvement of a nucleotidase in the endochondral ossification process.
Previously, we identified the calcium-activated nucleotidase 1 (CANT1) transcript as up-regulated in prostate cancer. Now, we studied CANT1 protein expression in a large cohort of nearly 1000 prostatic tissue samples including normal tissue, prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN), primary carcinomas, metastases, and castrate-resistant carcinomas, and further investigated its functional relevance. CANT1 displayed predominantly a Golgi-type immunoreactivity with additional and variable cytoplasmic staining. In comparison to normal tissues, the staining intensity was significantly increased in PIN lesions and cancer. In cancer, high CANT1 levels were associated with a better prognosis, and castrate-resistant carcinomas commonly showed lower CANT1 levels than primary carcinomas. The functional role of CANT1 was investigated using RNA interference in two prostate cancer cell lines with abundant endogenous CANT1 protein. On CANT1 knockdown, a significantly diminished cell number and DNA synthesis rate, a cell cycle arrest in G(1) phase, and a strong decrease of cell transmigration rate and wound healing capacity of CANT1 knockdown cells was found. However, on forced CANT1 overexpression, cell proliferation and migration remained unchanged. In summary, CANT1 is commonly overexpressed in the vast majority of primary prostate carcinomas and in the precursor lesion PIN and may represent a novel prognostic biomarker. Moreover, this is the first study to demonstrate a functional involvement of CANT1 in tumor biology.
