Calpain-2 catalytic subunit; Calcium-regulated non-lysosomal thiol-protease which catalyzes limited proteolysis of substrates involved in cytoskeletal remodeling and signal transduction. Proteolytically cleaves MYOC at 'Arg-226'. Proteolytically cleaves CPEB3 following neuronal stimulation which abolishes CPEB3 translational repressor activity, leading to translation of CPEB3 target mRNAs (By similarity).
Apalutamide, a novel endocrine therapy agent, has been shown to significantly improve the prognosis of patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC). However, resistance to apalutamide has also been reported, and the underlying mechanism for this response has yet to be clearly elucidated. First, this study established apalutamide-resistant prostate cancer (PCa) cells, and confirmed that apalutamide activated the release of calcium ions (Ca(2+)) and endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) to enhance autophagy. Second, RNA sequencing, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry revealed significantly decreased Calpain 2 (CAPN2) expression in the apalutamide-resistant PCa cells and tissues. Furthermore, immunofluorescence and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showed that CAPN2 promoted apalutamide resistance by activating protective autophagy. CAPN2 promoted autophagy by reducing Forkhead Box O1 (FOXO1) degradation while increasing nuclear translocation via nucleoplasmic protein isolation and immunofluorescence. In addition, FOXO1 promoted protective autophagy through the transcriptional regulation of autophagy-related gene 5 (ATG5). Furthermore, a dual-fluorescence assay confirmed that transcription factor 3 (ATF3) stimulation promoted CAPN2-mediated autophagy activation via transcriptional regulation. In summary, CAPN2 activated protective autophagy by inhibiting FOXO1 degradation and promoting its nuclear translocation via transcriptional ATG5 regulation. ATF3 activation and transcriptional CAPN2 regulation jointly promoted this bioeffect. Thus, our findings have not only revealed the mechanism underlying apalutamide resistance, but also provided a promising new target for the treatment of metastatic PCa.
Type V collagen is known to be over-deposited in the stroma of ductal infiltrating carcinomas of the breast. When used as a substrate, type V collagen restrains growth and invasion, and affects gene expression of 8701-BC ductal infiltrating carcinomas cells. Here we supplement existing data by demonstrating type V collagen dependent upregulation of capn2 gene expression in 8701-BC cells through differential display-PCR and Western blot assays. Furthermore, we suggest that our data obtained by centrifugal sedimentation and electrophoresis strongly suggest a correlation between calpain overproduction and DNA fragmentation, since the incubation with calpain inhibitor partly reverts the latter.
BACKGROUND: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD) is a highly aggressive cancer with a poor prognosis, highlighting an urgent requirement for effective biomarkers for its early diagnosis and prognosis prediction. CAPN2, a calcium-dependent protease, has been implicated in various cancers, but its role in PAAD remains unclear. METHODS: In this study, we utilized multiple bioinformatics methods, including differential expression, survival, correlation, and enrichment analyses, to investigate the prognostic value of CAPN2 in PAAD using data from the TCGA and GEO databases. Additionally, the correlation between CAPN2 expression and the tumor microenvironment (TME), immunotherapy potential, and drug sensitivity was also explored. RESULTS: CAPN2 was upregulated in PAAD tissues and was correlated with higher tumor grade. And high expression of CAPN2 was significantly associated with reduced overall survival, establishing it as an independent prognostic biomarker for PAAD. Enrichment analysis implicated that CAPN2 was involved in multiple biological processes and pathways associated with tumor immunity. Furthermore, CAPN2 expression had a negative correlation with immune cell infiltration and a positive association with tumor mutational burden, which may have potential implications for immunotherapy strategies. CONCLUSIONS: CAPN2 is a promising biomarker for PAAD prognosis and a potential therapeutic target. Its association with the TME and immunotherapy response highlights its importance in PAAD progression and patient outcomes, warranting further investigation into its role and potential clinical applications.
This study is aimed to investigate whether calpain 2 (CAPN2) serves as an indicator of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) to induce hepatic fibrosis. Differentially-expressed genes (DEGs) in HBV-induced hepatic fibrosis and normal liver tissues were analyzed, and signal pathway which was analyzed by the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis using DEGs. Next, the gene-related network map was constructed using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes. Moreover, CAPN2 protein expression, level of hepatic fibrosis, CAPN2 messenger RNA level, and protein levels of CAPN2, a-SAM, COL3A1, COL1A1, and MAPK1 were determined using Immunohistochemistry (IHC), hematoxylin and eosin, RT-qPCR, and western blot (WB), respectively. There were 420 DEGs screened in HBV-induced hepatic fibrosis and normal liver tissues, among which, 373 were significantly upregulated and 47 were obviously downregulated. KEGG analysis showed that the upregulated DEGs were mainly concentrated in extracellular matrix-receptor interaction, protein digestion, and absorption signaling pathways. The network diagram analysis showed that the DEGs, such as CAPN2, ITGAV, and CCR2, play the key role in the DEG network map, and CAPN2 related to hepatic fibrosis via MAPK1. The increased CAPN2 expression and obvious hepatic fibrosis was displayed in the HBV-induced hepatic fibrosis tissues. In addition, HBV could induce CAPN2 expression, and the interference of CAPN2 could inhibit the expression of hepatic fibrosis markers, including a-SAM, COL3A1, COL1A1, and MAPK1. CAPN2 is regarded as a biomarker of hepatic fibrosis induced by HBV.
Malignant characteristics of cancers, represented by rapid cell proliferation and high metastatic potential, are a major cause of high cancer-related mortality. As a multifunctional RNA-binding protein, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNPK) is closely associated with cancer progression in various types of cancers. In this study, we sought to identify hnRNPK-regulated long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) that play a critical role in the regulation of cancer malignancy. We found that hnRNPK controlled malignant phenotypes including invasiveness, proliferation, and clonogenicity. RNA sequencing and functional studies revealed that LINC00263, a novel target of hnRNPK, is involved in the oncogenic functions of hnRNPK. Knockdown of LINC00263 mitigated the malignant capabilities. Conversely, increased malignant phenotypes were observed in LINC00263-overexpressing cells. Since LINC00263 was mainly localized in the cytosol and highly enriched in Argonaute 2-immunoprecipitation (Ago2-IP), we hypothesized that LINC00263 acts as a competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA), and thus sought to identify LINC00263-associated microRNAs. Using small RNA sequencing followed by antisense oligonucleotide pull-down, miR-147a was selected for further study. We found that miR-147a negatively regulates LINC00263 via direct interaction, thus suppressing malignant capabilities. Moreover, knockdown of hnRNPK and LINC00263 upregulated miR-147a, indicating that LINC00263 serves as a ceRNA for miR-147a. By analyzing RNA sequencing data and miRNA target prediction, calpain 2 (CAPN2) was identified as a putative target of miR-147a. Ago2-IP and luciferase reporter assay revealed that miR-147a suppressed CAPN2 expression by directly binding to the 3'UTR of CAPN2 mRNA. In addition, we found that the weakened malignant capabilities following knockdown of hnRNPK or LINC00263 were restored by miR-147a inhibition or CAPN2 overexpression. Furthermore, our findings were validated in various other types of cancer cells including lung cancer, colorectal cancer, neuroblastoma, and melanoma. Collectively, we demonstrate that hnRNPK-regulated LINC00263 plays an important role in cancer malignancy by acting as a miR-147a decoy and thus upregulating CAPN2.
OBJECTIVE: IR emerges as a feature in the pathophysiology of PCOS, precipitating ovulatory anomalies and endometrial dysfunctions that contribute to the infertility challenges characteristic of this condition. Despite its clinical significance, a consensus on the precise mechanisms by which IR exacerbates PCOS is still lacking. This study aims to harness bioinformatics tools to unearth key IR-associated genes in PCOS patients, providing a platform for future therapeutic research and potential intervention strategies. METHODS: We retrieved 4 datasets detailing PCOS from the GEO, and sourced IRGs from the MSigDB. We applied WGCNA to identify gene modules linked to insulin resistance, utilizing IR scores as a phenotypic marker. Gene refinement was executed through the LASSO, SVM, and Boruta feature selection algorithms. qPCR was carried out on selected samples to confirm findings. We predicted both miRNA and lncRNA targets using the ENCORI database, which facilitated the construction of a ceRNA network. Lastly, a drug-target network was derived from the CTD. RESULTS: Thirteen genes related to insulin resistance in PCOS were identified via WGCNA analysis. LASSO, SVM, and Boruta algorithms further isolated CAPN2 as a notably upregulated gene, corroborated by biological verification. The ceRNA network involving lncRNA XIST and hsa-miR-433-3p indicated a possible regulatory link with CAPN2, supported by ENCORI database. Drug prediction analysis uncovered seven pharmacological agents, most being significant regulators of the endocrine system, as potential candidates for addressing insulin resistance in PCOS. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the pivotal role of CAPN2 in insulin resistance within the context of PCOS, emphasizing its importance as both a critical biomarker and a potential therapeutic target. By identifying CAPN2, our research contributes to the expanding evidence surrounding the CAPN family, particularly CAPN10, in insulin resistance studies beyond PCOS. This work enriches our understanding of the mechanisms underlying insulin resistance, offering insights that bridge gaps in the current scientific landscape.
OBJECTIVE: Our research group was aim to explore the molecular mechanism of Talin-1 protein affecting gastric cancer progression through PTK2-PXN-VCL-E-Cadherin-CAPN2-MAPK1 signal axis. METHODS: 12 cases of patients with gastric cancer in this hospital from 2018 to 2019 were collected. Immunohistochemistry assay and Western blotting were used to detect the expression of Talin-1, PXN, E-Cadherin, CAPN2, MAPK1 protein in gastric cancer tissue. Cell migration and invasion were measured by Transwell. RESULTS: The results showed that the expression levels of protein Talin-1, PXN and MAPK1 in gastric cancer tissues were significantly higher than that in normal tissue. The number of cell adhesion in the model group was significantly lower than that in the normal group. However, the cell adhesion number in ov-TLN1 was the highest. Transwell results showed that TLN1 could accelerate the migration and invasion abilities of gastric cancer MKN-45 cells. Moreover, Western blotting showed that protein Talin-1, PXN, E-Cadherin, CAPN2, MAPK1 in model group all increased compared with normal group. CONCLUSION: It indicated that talin-1 protein influenced the development of gastric cancer through PTK2-PXN-VCL-E-Cadherin-CAPN2-MAPK1 signal axis.
Esophageal cancer is the seventh most common cancer globally. Chemotherapy resistance remains a significant challenge in the treatment of esophageal cancer patients. Cisplatin can damage tumor cells by inducing pyroptosis. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. In this work, we aim to investigate pyroptosis-dependent molecular mechanisms underlying cisplatin sensitivity and find potential biomarkers to predict response to cisplatin-based chemotherapy for esophageal cancer patients. Pyroptosis-associated proteins were screened via proteomics for esophageal cancer (n = 124) and bioinformatics analysis. We observed that high calpain-1 (CAPN1) and calpain-2 (CAPN2) expression were associated with favorable clinical outcomes and prolonged survival in esophageal cancer patients. We employed immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expression of CAPN1 and CAPN2 in pretreatment tumor biopsies from 108 patients with esophageal cancer who received concurrent chemoradiotherapy (CCRT). These results suggested that esophageal cancer patients with high expression of both CAPN1 and CAPN2 are likely to experience a complete response to CCRT and have significantly better survival. Western blotting, LDH release, calpain activity and cell viability assays indicated that cisplatin could activate calpain activity, while calpain inhibition or knockout suppressed cisplatin-induced pyroptosis. Mechanistically, we uncovered a novel mechanism whereby cisplatin induced pyroptosis via activation of a CAPN1/CAPN2-BAK/BAX-caspase-9-caspase-3-GSDME signaling axis in esophageal cancer cells. Collectively, this study is the first to explore the effects of calpain on cisplatin-induced pyroptosis in esophageal cancer cells. Further, our findings also imply that the combination of CAPN1 and CAPN2 could be considered as a promising biomarker of cisplatin sensitivity and prognosis in patients with esophageal cancer, providing a possibility to guide individualized treatment.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Alpha-carotene is a provitamin A carotenoid present in fruits and vegetables. Higher serum concentrations of alpha-carotene have been associated with lower risk of cancer and all-cause mortality. Previous studies have suggested that genetic variants influence serum concentrations of provitamin A carotenoids, but to date no variants have been robustly associated with serum alpha-carotene concentrations. The aim of this study was to identify genetic associations with serum alpha-carotene concentrations using the genome-wide association study (GWAS) approach. METHODS: A GWAS of serum alpha-carotene concentrations was conducted in 433 Old Order Amish adults who had consumed a 6-day controlled diet. Linear regression models adjusting for age, gender, and family structure were utilized to evaluate associations between genetic variants and serum alpha-carotene concentrations. RESULTS: Genome-wide significant associations with alpha-carotene concentrations were observed for loci on chromosome 1q41 between the genes CAPN2 and CAPN8 (rs12137025, p = 3.55 x 10-8), chromosome 2p21 in PRKCE (rs2594495, p = 1.01 x 10-8), and chromosome 4q34 (rs17830069, p = 2.89 x 10-8). CONCLUSIONS: We identified 3 novel loci associated with serum alpha-carotene concentrations among a population that consumed a controlled diet. While replication is necessary, the CAPN2/CAPN8 locus provides compelling evidence for an association with serum alpha-carotene concentrations and may suggest a relationship with the development and progression of cancers.
The mRNA expression of CAPN2 was upregulated in CRPC cells (DU145 and PC3) than that in non-CRPC cells. Silencing CAPN2 expression could inhibit DU145 and PC3 cells proliferation by cell cycle arrest at G1 phase. Knockdown of CPAN2 level suppressed the migration and invasion capacity of CRPC cells by reducing matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9 activation, as well as repressing the phosphorylation protein expression of AKT and mTOR. In addition, we found that the expression of CAPN2 was elevated in Pca tissues than that in normal control tissues. Therefore, we showed the important roles of CAPN2 in the development and progression in CRPC cells, suggesting a new therapeutic intervention for treating castration-resistant prostate cancer patients.
Proteolysis affects every protein at some point in its life cycle. Many biomarkers of disease or cancer are stable proteolytic fragments in biological fluids. There is great interest and a challenge in proteolytically modified protein study to identify physiologic protease-substrate relationships and find potential biomarkers. In this study, two human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines with different metastasis potential, MHCC97L, and HCCLM6, were researched with a high-throughput and sensitive PROTOMAP platform. In total 391 proteins were found to be proteolytically processed and many of them were cleaved into persistent fragments instead of completely degraded. Fragments related to 161 proteins had different expressions in these two cell lines. Through analyzing these significantly changed fragments with bio-informatic tools, several bio-functions such as tumor cell migration and anti-apoptosis were enriched. A proteolysis network was also built up, of which the CAPN2 centered subnetwork, including SPTBN1, ATP5B, and VIM, was more active in highly metastatic HCC cell line. Interestingly, proteolytic modifications of CD44 and FN1 were found to affect their secretion. This work suggests that proteolysis plays an important role in human HCC metastasis.
