Cyclin-dependent-like kinase 5; Proline-directed serine/threonine-protein kinase essential for neuronal cell cycle arrest and differentiation and may be involved in apoptotic cell death in neuronal diseases by triggering abortive cell cycle re-entry. Interacts with D1 and D3-type G1 cyclins. Phosphorylates SRC, NOS3, VIM/vimentin, p35/CDK5R1, MEF2A, SIPA1L1, SH3GLB1, PXN, PAK1, MCAM/MUC18, SEPT5, SYN1, DNM1, AMPH, SYNJ1, CDK16, RAC1, RHOA, CDC42, TONEBP/NFAT5, MAPT/TAU, MAP1B, histone H1, p53/TP53, HDAC1, APEX1, PTK2/FAK1, huntingtin/HTT, ATM, MAP2, NEFH and NEFM. Regulates several neu [...] 
CDK1 has been known to be the sole cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) partner of cyclin B1 to drive mitotic progression(1). Here we demonstrate that CDK5 is active during mitosis and is necessary for maintaining mitotic fidelity. CDK5 is an atypical CDK owing to its high expression in post-mitotic neurons and activation by non-cyclin proteins p35 and p39(2). Here, using independent chemical genetic approaches, we specifically abrogated CDK5 activity during mitosis, and observed mitotic defects, nuclear atypia and substantial alterations in the mitotic phosphoproteome. Notably, cyclin B1 is a mitotic co-factor of CDK5. Computational modelling, comparison with experimentally derived structures of CDK-cyclin complexes and validation with mutational analysis indicate that CDK5-cyclin B1 can form a functional complex. Disruption of the CDK5-cyclin B1 complex phenocopies CDK5 abrogation in mitosis. Together, our results demonstrate that cyclin B1 partners with both CDK5 and CDK1, and CDK5-cyclin B1 functions as a canonical CDK-cyclin complex to ensure mitotic fidelity.
Cdk5 is a proline-directed serine/threonine protein kinase that governs a variety of cellular processes in neurons, the dysregulation of which compromises normal brain function. The mechanisms underlying the modulation of Cdk5, its modes of action, and its effects on the nervous system have been a great focus in the field for nearly three decades. In this review, we provide an overview of the discovery and regulation of Cdk5, highlighting recent findings revealing its role in neuronal/synaptic functions, circadian clocks, DNA damage, cell cycle reentry, mitochondrial dysfunction, as well as its non-neuronal functions under physiological and pathological conditions. Moreover, we discuss evidence underscoring aberrant Cdk5 activity as a common theme observed in many neurodegenerative diseases.
Recent studies have uncovered various physiological functions of CDK5 in many nonneuronal tissues. Upregulation of CDK5 and/or its activator p35 in neurons promotes healthy neuronal functions, but their overexpression in nonneuronal tissues is causally linked to cancer of many origins. This review focuses on the molecular mechanisms by which CDK5 recruits diverse tissue-specific substrates to elicit distinct phenotypes in sixteen different human cancers. The emerging theme suggests that CDK5's role as an oncogene or anti-oncogene depends upon its subcellular localization. CDK5 mostly acts as an oncogene, but in gastric cancer, it is a tumor suppressor due to its unique nuclear localization. This indicates that CDK5's access to certain nuclear substrates converts it into an anti-oncogenic kinase. While acting as a bonafide oncogene, CDK5 also activates a few cancer-suppressive pathways in some cancers, presumably due to the mislocalization of nuclear substrates in the cytoplasm. Therefore, directing CDK5 to the nucleus or exporting tumor-suppressive nuclear substrates to the cytoplasm may be promising approaches to combat CDK5-induced oncogenicity, analogous to neurotoxicity triggered by nuclear CDK5. Furthermore, while p35 overexpression is oncogenic, hyperactivation of CDK5 by inducing p25 formation results in apoptosis, which could be exploited to selectively kill cancer cells by dialing up CDK5 activity, instead of inhibiting it. CDK5 thus acts as a molecular rheostat, with different activity levels eliciting distinct functional outcomes. Finally, as CDK5's role is defined by its substrates, targeting them individually or in conjunction with CDK5 should create potentially valuable new clinical opportunities.
Dysfunction of E-cadherins often results in metastasis of cancerous cells. Here we show that p35, a critical regulator of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), specifically depletes the precursor form of E-cadherin, but not the mature form, by using a precursor-specific antibody. Most intriguingly, this downregulation of precursor E-cadherin by p35 is unequivocally independent of CDK5. Moreover, we found that p35 forms complexes with E-cadherin proteins. We also found that p35 co-expression can target E-cadherin to lysosomes and that p35-triggered disappearance of E-cadherin precursor can be blocked specifically by lysosomal protease inhibitors, indicating that p35 induces endocytosis and subsequent degradation of precursor E-cadherin.
Selective abrogation of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) activity is a highly promising strategy in cancer treatment. The atypical CDK, CDK5 has long been known for its role in neurodegenerative diseases, and is becoming an attractive drug target for cancer therapy. Myriads of recent studies have uncovered that aberrant expression of CDK5 contributes to the oncogenic initiation and progression of multiple solid and hematological malignancies. CDK5 is also implicated in the regulation of cancer stem cell biology. In this review, we present the current state of knowledge of CDK5 as a druggable target for cancer treatment. We also provide a detailed outlook of designing selective and potent inhibitors of this enzyme.
Mitotic cells attenuate the DNA damage response (DDR) by phosphorylating 53BP1, a critical DDR mediator, to prevent its localization to damaged chromatin. Timely dephosphorylation of 53BP1 is critical for genome integrity, as premature recruitment of 53BP1 to DNA lesions impairs mitotic fidelity. Protein phosphatase 4 (PP4) dephosphorylates 53BP1 in late mitosis to allow its recruitment to DNA lesions in G1. How cells appropriately dephosphorylate 53BP1, thereby restoring DDR, is unclear. Here, we elucidate the underlying mechanism of kinetic control of 53BP1 dephosphorylation in mitosis. We demonstrate that CDK5, a kinase primarily functional in post-mitotic neurons, is active in late mitotic phases in non-neuronal cells and directly phosphorylates PP4R3beta, the PP4 regulatory subunit that recognizes 53BP1. Specific inhibition of CDK5 in mitosis abrogates PP4R3beta phosphorylation and abolishes its recognition and dephosphorylation of 53BP1, ultimately preventing the localization of 53BP1 to damaged chromatin. Our results establish CDK5 as a regulator of 53BP1 recruitment.
