CHRNA7-FAM7A fusion protein; CHRNA7 fusion.
The alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRNA7) modulates the inflammatory response by activating the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. CHRFAM7A, the human-restricted duplicated form of CHRNA7, has a negative effect on the functioning of alpha7 receptors, suggesting that CHRFAM7A expression regulation may be a key step in the modulation of inflammation in the human setting. The analysis of the CHRFAM7A gene's regulatory region reveals some of the mechanisms driving its expression and responsiveness to LPS in human immune cell models. Moreover, given the immunomodulatory potential of donepezil we show that it differently modulates CHRFAM7A and CHRNA7 responsiveness to LPS, thus contributing to its therapeutic potential.
The alpha7 nicotinic receptor (alpha7 nAChR) is an important entry point for Ca(2+) into the cell, which has broad and important effects on gene expression and function. The gene (CHRNA7), mapping to chromosome (15q14), has been genetically linked to a large number of diseases, many of which involve defects in cognition. While numerous mutations in CHRNA7 are associated with mental illness and inflammation, an important control point may be the function of a recently discovered partial duplication CHRNA7, CHRFAM7A, that negatively regulates the function of the alpha7 receptor, through the formation of heteropentamers; other functions cannot be excluded. The deregulation of this human specific gene (CHRFAM7A) has been linked to neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative, and inflammatory disorders and has important copy number variations. Much effort is being made to understand its function and regulation both in healthy and pathological conditions. However, many questions remain to be answered regarding its functional role, its regulation, and its role in the etiogenesis of neurological and inflammatory disorders. Missing knowledge on the pharmacology of the heteroreceptor has limited the discovery of new molecules capable of modulating its activity. Here we review the state of the art on the role of CHRFAM7A, highlighting unanswered questions to be addressed. A possible therapeutic approach based on genome editing protocols is also discussed.
Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury is an inflammation-related disease. CHRFAM7A can regulate inflammatory responses. Therefore, the present study investigated the mechanism of CHRFAM7A in cerebral I/R injury. CHRFAM7A expression and inflammatory cytokine levels in patients with cerebral I/R injury and oxygen-glucose deprivation/reperfusion (OGD/R)-treated microglia were detected. The proliferation, inflammatory cytokine expressions, nod-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) level, cell pyroptosis, and viability and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity in OGD/R-treated microglia were detected after CHRFAM7A overexpression. The NLRP3/Caspase-1 pathway was activated to assess the effect of CHRFAM7A on microglia. Expressions of microglial M1 phenotype marker iNOS and M2 marker Arg1 were detected. Downregulated CHRFAM7A and elevated inflammatory cytokine levels were observed in patients with cerebral I/R injury and OGD/R-treated microglia. In OGD/R-treated microglia, CHRFAM7A overexpression promoted cell proliferation and viability, reduced inflammation and LDH activity, and inhibited NLRP3 inflammasome activation and cell pyroptosis. Mechanically, CHRFAM7A inhibited microglia pyroptosis via inhibiting the NLRP3/Caspase-1 pathway and reduced cell inflammatory injury via promoting microglia polarization from M1 to M2. Overall, CHRFAM7A overexpression attenuated cerebral I/R injury by inhibiting microglia pyroptosis in a NLRP3/Caspase-1 pathway-dependent manner and promoting microglia polarization to M2 phenotype.
BACKGROUND: Human restricted genes contribute to human specific traits in the immune system. CHRFAM7A, a uniquely human fusion gene, is a negative regulator of the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (alpha7 nAChR), the highest Ca(2+) conductor of the ACh receptors implicated in innate immunity. Understanding the mechanism of how CHRFAM7A affects the immune system remains unexplored. METHODS: Two model systems are used, human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) and human primary monocytes, to characterize alpha7 nAChR function, Ca(2+) dynamics and decoders to elucidate the pathway from receptor to phenotype. FINDINGS: CHRFAM7A/alpha7 nAChR is identified as a hypomorphic receptor with mitigated Ca(2+) influx and prolonged channel closed state. This shifts the Ca(2+) reservoir from the extracellular space to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) leading to Ca(2+) dynamic changes. Ca(2+) decoder small GTPase Rac1 is then activated, reorganizing the actin cytoskeleton. Observed actin mediated phenotypes include cellular adhesion, motility, phagocytosis and tissue mechanosensation. INTERPRETATION: CHRFAM7A introduces an additional, human specific, layer to Ca(2+) regulation leading to an innate immune gain of function. Through the actin cytoskeleton it drives adaptation to the mechanical properties of the tissue environment leading to an ability to invade previously immune restricted niches. Human genetic diversity predicts profound translational significance as its understanding builds the foundation for successful treatments for infectious diseases, sepsis, and cancer metastasis. FUNDING: This work is supported in part by the Community Foundation for Greater Buffalo (Kinga Szigeti) and in part by NIH grant R01HL163168 (Yongho Bae).
We investigated the expression of the partially duplicated alpha7 nAChR subunit gene in three monocytic cell lines: THP-1, U937 and Mono-Mac-6. Qualitative PCR revealed the presence of the classic alpha7 gene in these lineages, but real-time PCR showed the exclusive expression of alpha7dup. Both mRNA and protein levels were reduced in THP-1 upon LPS challenge, and it was found that transcriptional down-regulation was mediated by a direct mechanism dependent on NF-kappaB as its specific inhibitor parthenolide prevented the reduction in the alpha7dup transcript. Such precise regulation suggests that alpha7dup may specifically participate in the inflammatory response of the innate immune system.
CHRFAM7A is a relatively recent and exclusively human gene arising from the partial duplication of exons 5 to 10 of the alpha7 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit (alpha7 nAChR) encoding gene, CHRNA7. CHRNA7 is related to several disorders that involve cognitive deficits, including neuropsychiatric, neurodegenerative, and inflammatory disorders. In extra-neuronal tissues, alpha7nAChR plays an important role in proliferation, differentiation, migration, adhesion, cell contact, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and tumor progression, as well as in the modulation of the inflammatory response through the "cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway". CHRFAM7A translates the dupalpha7 protein in a multitude of cell lines and heterologous systems, while maintaining processing and trafficking that are very similar to the full-length form. It does not form functional ion channel receptors alone. In the presence of CHRNA7 gene products, dupalpha7 can assemble and form heteromeric receptors that, in order to be functional, should include at least two alpha7 subunits to form the agonist binding site. When incorporated into the receptor, in vitro and in vivo data showed that dupalpha7 negatively modulated alpha7 activity, probably due to a reduction in the number of ACh binding sites. Very recent data in the literature report that the presence of the duplicated gene may be responsible for the translational gap in several human diseases. Here, we will review the studies that have been conducted on CHRFAM7A in different pathologies, with the intent of providing evidence regarding when and how the expression of this duplicated gene may be beneficial or detrimental in the pathogenesis, and eventually in the therapeutic response, to CHRNA7-related neurological and non-neurological diseases.
The role of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) in nicotine dependence (ND) is well established; CHRNA7, encoding the alpha7 subunit, has a still uncertain role in ND, although it is implicated in a wide range of neuropsychiatric conditions. CHRFAM7A, a hybrid gene containing a partial duplication of CHRNA7, is possibly involved in modulating alpha7 nAChR function. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A genetic variants in ND and to test the hypothesis that alpha7 nAChR variation may modulate the efficacy of varenicline treatment in smoking cessation. We assessed CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A copy number, CHRFAM7A exon 6 ∆2 bp polymorphism, and sequence variants in the CHRNA7 proximal promoter in an Italian sample of 408 treatment-seeking smokers. We conducted case-control and quantitative association analyses using two smoking measures (cigarettes per day, CPD, and Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence, FTND). Next, driven by the hypothesis that varenicline may exert some of its therapeutic effects through activation of alpha7 nAChRs, we restricted the analysis to a subgroup of 142 smokers who received varenicline treatment. The CHRNA7 promoter variant rs28531779 showed association with both smoking quantitative measures (FNTD p = 0.026, beta = 0.89, 95% CI 0.11-1.67; CPD p = 0.006, beta = 4.82 95% CI 1.42-8.22). Moreover, in the varenicline-treated subgroup we observed association of CHRFAM7A copy number with 6 months smoking abstinence (p = 0.035, OR = 3.18, 95% CI = 1.09-9.30). Thus, our study points to a possible role of genetic variation in CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A in tobacco addiction mechanisms and response to varenicline treatment.
Earlier studies have implicated CHRNA7, coding alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (alpha7 nAChR), and its partially duplicated chimeric gene CHRFAM7A in schizophrenia. However, the relationship between the alterations in peripheral gene expression of CHRFAM7A and severity of clinical symptoms has not been examined. Furthermore, potential influence of the antipsychotic medication on CHRFAM7A expression in drug-naive or drug-free schizophrenia is an unexplored area. CHRFAM7A gene expression in lymphocytes was analyzed in 90 antipsychotic-naive or free schizophrenia patients using TaqMan-based quantitative RT-PCR. Psychotic symptoms were assessed using Scale for Assessment of Positive Symptoms and Scale for Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS). The relationship between psychopathology and CHRFAM7A expression was examined. In addition, measurement of CHRFAM7A gene expression was repeated during follow-up after short-term antipsychotic treatment in 38 patients. There was significant inverse correlation between CHRFAM7A expression and total negative psychopathology score-SANS, and this relationship persisted after accounting for possible confounders such as age, sex and smoking. On exploration of the factor structure of psychopathology using principal component analysis, all the negative symptoms-affective flattening, alogia, apathy, anhedonia and inattention were found to be inversely associated with CHRFAM7A expression. Furthermore, analysis of repeated measures revealed a significant increase in CHRFAM7A expression in patients after short-term administration of antipsychotic medication. Our study observations support the role for CHRFAM7A gene in schizophrenia pathogenesis and suggest a potential novel link between deficient CHRFAM7A expression and negative psychopathology. Furthermore, up-regulation of CHRFAM7A gene expression by antipsychotics suggests that it could be a potential state marker for clinical severity.
OBJECTIVE: CHRNA7, coding alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (alpha7 nAChR), is involved in cognition through interneuron modulation of dopamine and glutamate signaling. CHRNA7 and its partially duplicated chimeric gene CHRFAM7A have been implicated in schizophrenia through linkage and association studies. METHOD: Expression of CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A mRNA was measured in the postmortem prefrontal cortex in more than 700 subjects, including patients with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, major depression, and normal comparison subjects. The effects of antipsychotics and nicotine, as well as associations of CHRNA7 SNPs with gene expression, were explored. Fluorescent in-situ hybridization was used to examine coexpression of both transcripts in the human cortex. RESULTS: CHRFAM7A expression and CHRFAM7A/CHRNA7 ratios were higher in fetal compared with postnatal life, whereas CHRNA7 expression was relatively stable. CHRFAM7A expression was significantly elevated in all diagnostic groups, while CHRNA7 expression was reduced in the schizophrenia group and increased in the major depression group compared with the comparison group. CHRFAM7A/CHRNA7 ratios were significantly increased in the schizophrenia and bipolar disorder groups compared with the comparison group. There was no effect of nicotine or antipsychotics and no association of SNPs in CHRNA7 with expression. CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A mRNAs were expressed in the same neuronal nuclei of the human neocortex. CONCLUSIONS: These data show preferential fetal CHRFAM7A expression in the human prefrontal cortex and suggest abnormalities in the CHRFAM7A/CHRNA7 ratios in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, due mainly to overexpression of CHRFAM7A. Given that these transcripts are coexpressed in a subset of human cortical neurons and can interact to alter function of nAChRs, these results support the concept of aberrant function of nAChRs in mental illness.
Conventional wisdom presumes that the alpha7nAChR product of CHRNA7 expression mediates the ability of the vagus nerve to regulate the inflammatory response to injury and infection. Yet, 15 years ago, a 2nd structurally distinct and human-specific alpha7nAChR gene was discovered that has largely escaped attention of the inflammation research community. The gene, originally called dupalpha7nAChR but now known as CHRFAM7A, has been studied exhaustively in psychiatric research because of its association with mental illness. However, dupalpha7nAChR/CHRFAM7A expression is relatively low in human brain but elevated in human leukocytes. Furthermore, alpha7nAChR research in human tissues has been confounded by cross-reacting antibodies and nonspecific oligonucleotide primers that crossreact in immunoblotting, immunohistochemistry, and RT-PCR. Yet, 3 independent reports show the human-specific CHRFAM7A changes cell responsiveness to the canonical alpha7nAChR/CHRNA7 ion-gated channel. Because of its potential for the injury research community, its possible significance to human leukocyte biology, and its relevance to human inflammation, we review the discovery and structure of the dupalpha7nAChR/CHRFAM7A gene, the distribution of its mRNA, and its biologic activities and then discuss its possible role(s) in specifying human inflammation and injury. In light of emerging concepts that point to a role for human-specific genes in complex human disease, the existence of a human-specific alpha7nAChR regulating inflammatory responses in injury underscores the need for caution in extrapolating findings in the alpha7nAChR literature to man. To this end, we discuss the translational implications of a uniquely human alpha7nAChR-like gene on new drug target discovery and therapeutics development for injury, infection, and inflammation.
Chromosome 15q13-q14 harbours the gene for the alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit (CHRNA7) and a related gene (CHRFAM7A) which arises from a partly duplicated portion of CHRNA7. Recent evidence suggests that CHRFAM7A is a locus with a possible role in schizophrenia and cognitive functioning. We studied an antisaccade task as a fronto-parietal measure of executive function that reflects risk for schizophrenia. Association of CHRFAM7A genotype with antisaccade performance was assessed in 103 healthy Caucasian individuals. No significant associations of 2-bp deletion or CHRFAM7A copy number with antisaccade performance parameters were observed. The failure to observe an association between antisaccade performance and polymorphisms in CHRFAM7A gene is consistent with specificity of the gene effects on hippocampal and memory functions as previously demonstrated.
