Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M4; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is inhibition of adenylate cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subfamily. CHRM4 sub-subfamily.
Current treatment options for prostate cancer focus on targeting androgen receptor (AR) signaling. Inhibiting effects of AR may activate neuroendocrine differentiation and lineage plasticity pathways, thereby promoting the development of neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). Understanding the regulatory mechanisms of AR has important clinical implications for this most aggressive type of prostate cancer. Here, we demonstrated the tumor-suppressive role of the AR and found that activated AR could directly bind to the regulatory sequence of muscarinic acetylcholine receptor 4 (CHRM4) and downregulate its expression. CHRM4 was highly expressed in prostate cancer cells after androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT). CHRM4 overexpression may drive neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer cells and is associated with immunosuppressive cytokine responses in the tumor microenvironment (TME) of prostate cancer. Mechanistically, CHRM4-driven AKT/MYCN signaling upregulated the interferon alpha 17 (IFNA17) cytokine in the prostate cancer TME after ADT. IFNA17 mediates a feedback mechanism in the TME by activating the CHRM4/AKT/MYCN signaling-driven immune checkpoint pathway and neuroendocrine differentiation of prostate cancer cells. We explored the therapeutic efficacy of targeting CHRM4 as a potential treatment for NEPC and evaluated IFNA17 secretion in the TME as a possible predictive prognostic biomarker for NEPC.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) contributes to the progression of malignancy. However, the functional role and regulatory mechanisms of NGF in the development of neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) are unclear. Here, we show that an androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT)-stimulated transcription factor, ZBTB46, upregulated NGF via ZBTB46 mediated-transcriptional activation of NGF. NGF regulates NEPC differentiation by physically interacting with a G-protein-coupled receptor, cholinergic receptor muscarinic 4 (CHRM4), after ADT. Pharmacologic NGF blockade and NGF knockdown markedly inhibited CHRM4-mediated NEPC differentiation and AKT-MYCN signaling activation. CHRM4 stimulation was associated with ADT resistance and was significantly correlated with increased NGF in high-grade and small-cell neuroendocrine prostate cancer (SCNC) patient samples. Our results reveal a role of the NGF in the development of NEPC that is linked to ZBTB46 upregulation and CHRM4 accumulation. Our study provides evidence that the NGF-CHRM4 axis has potential to be considered as a therapeutic target to impair NEPC progression.
