Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is Pi turnover; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subfamily. CHRM1 sub-subfamily.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common neurodegenerative disease characterized by neuronal degeneration and hyperphosphorylated Tau. Magnolol is an active component isolated from Magnolia officinalis with potential neuroprotection activity. However, the function and mechanism of magnolol in AD progression is largely uncertain. In present study, the biomarkers related to AD and magnolol were predicted by bioinformatics analyses. The key biomarker levels were predicted by GSE5281 and GSE36980 using AlzData. Cell viability was detected by CCK-8 assay. mRNA and protein levels were examined by qRT-PCR and western blotting assays. Cell apoptosis was investigated by caspase-3 activity and flow cytometry analyses. The cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling was evaluated by ELISA and western blotting analyses. The results showed that CHRM1 was a key biomarker for magnolol against AD progression. Magnolol attenuated Abeta-induced viability inhibition, Tau hyperphosphorylation and apoptosis in SH-SY5Y cells by upregulating CHRM1. In addition, the cAMP signaling might be a potential pathway of CHRM1 in AD. Magnolol contributed to activation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway through enhancing CHRM1 level. Inactivation of the cAMP/PKA/CREB signaling reversed the suppressive effect of magnolol on Tau hyperphosphorylation and apoptosis in Abeta-treated SH-SY5Y cells. As a conclusion, magnolol mitigated Abeta-induced Tau hyperphosphorylation and neuron apoptosis by upregulating CHRM1 and activating the cAMP/PKA/CREB pathway.
BACKGROUND: Cholinergic hypofunction and sleep disturbance are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive disorder leading to neuronal deterioration. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (M1-5 or mAChRs), expressed in hippocampus and cerebral cortex, play a pivotal role in the aberrant alterations of cognitive processing, memory, and learning, observed in AD. Recent evidence shows that two mAChRs, M1 and M3, encoded by CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes, respectively, are involved in sleep functions and, peculiarly, in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. METHODS: We used twenty microarray datasets extrapolated from post-mortem brain tissue of nondemented healthy controls (NDHC) and AD patients to examine the expression profile of CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. Samples were from eight brain regions and stratified according to age and sex. RESULTS: CHRM1 and CHRM3 expression levels were significantly reduced in AD compared with ageand sex-matched NDHC brains. A negative correlation with age emerged for both CHRM1 and CHRM3 in NDHC but not in AD brains. Notably, a marked positive correlation was also revealed between the neurogranin (NRGN) and both CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. These associations were modulated by sex. Accordingly, in the temporal and occipital regions of NDHC subjects, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3, respectively, than females. In AD patients, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3 in the temporal and frontal regions, respectively, than females. CONCLUSION: Thus, substantial differences, all strictly linked to the brain region analyzed, age, and sex, exist in CHRM1 and CHRM3 brain levels both in NDHC subjects and in AD patients.
BACKGROUND: Dysfunction of cholinergic neurotransmission is a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD); forming the basis for using acetylcholine (ACh) esterase (AChE) inhibitors to mitigate symptoms of ACh deficiency in AD. The Cholinergic Receptor Muscarinic 1 (CHRM1) is highly expressed in brain regions impaired by AD. Previous analyses of postmortem AD brains revealed unaltered CHRM1 mRNA expression compared to normal brains. However, the CHRM1 protein level in AD and other forms of dementia has not been extensively studied. Reduced expression of CHRM1 in AD patients may explain the limited clinical efficacy of AChE inhibitors. OBJECTIVE: To quantify CHRM1 protein in the postmortem hippocampus and temporal cortex of AD, Parkinson's disease (PD), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) patients. METHODS: Western blotting was performed on postmortem hippocampus (N = 19/73/7/9: unaffected/AD/FTD/PD) and temporal cortex (N = 9/74/27: unaffected/AD/PD) using a validated anti-CHRM1 antibody. RESULTS: Quantification based on immunoblotting using a validated anti-CHRM1 antibody revealed a significant loss of CHRM1 protein level (<50%) in the hippocampi (78% AD, 66% PD, and 85% FTD) and temporal cortices (56% AD and 42% PD) of dementia patients. Loss of CHRM1 in the temporal cortex was significantly associated with early death (<65-75 years) for both AD and PD patients. CONCLUSION: Severe reduction of CHRM1 in a subset of AD and PD patients can explain the reported low efficacy of AChE inhibitors as a mitigating treatment for dementia patients. Based on this study, it can be suggested that future research should prioritize therapeutic restoration of CHRM1 protein levels in cholinergic neurons.
Asthma is a complex disease for which genetic predisposition has been widely documented. Considerable evidence supports the hypothesis that polymorphisms in the muscarinic-cholinergic (CHRM) genes could be involved in asthma pathogenesis, bronchial hyperresponsiveness, and mucus secretion. To determine whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or haplotypes in CHRM1, CHRM2, or CHRM3 are associated with asthma in Mexican pediatric population. We performed a case-control study including 398 pediatric cases with asthma and 450 healthy controls. We analyzed 19 SNPs distributed among these three genes. Two of the seven SNPs located in CHRM2, the 3' untranslated region rs8191992 and rs6962027, differed significantly in allele frequencies between patients with asthma and healthy controls [odds ratio (OR) 1.42, 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) 1.14-1.77, P = 0.001, and OR 1.50, 95 % CI 1.21-1.87, P = 0.0002, respectively]. Statistical significance remained after multiple comparison corrections (P = 0.003 and P = 0.005, respectively). The haplotypes AA and TT, containing both major and minor alleles from rs8191992 and rs6962027, also differed between cases and controls. The haplotype AA occurred at a lower frequency in cases (OR 0.67, 95 % CI 0.53-0.85, P = 0.001) whereas the haplotype TT was overrepresented in cases compared to controls (28 vs 21 %, respectively; OR 1.46, 95 % CI 1.15-1.85, P = 0.002). No association was observed between CHRM1 or CHRM3 SNPs or haplotypes and asthma. CHRM2 polymorphisms are implicated in the genetic etiology of asthma.
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) is a leading cause of chronic liver disease with few therapeutic options. To narrow the translational gap in the development of pharmacological MASH treatments, a 3D liver model from primary human hepatocytes and non-parenchymal cells derived from patients with histologically confirmed MASH was established. The model closely mirrors disease-relevant endpoints, such as steatosis, inflammation and fibrosis, and multi-omics analyses show excellent alignment with biopsy data from 306 MASH patients and 77 controls. By combining high-content imaging with scalable biochemical assays and chemogenomic screening, multiple novel targets with anti-steatotic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic effects are identified. Among these, activation of the muscarinic M(1) receptor (CHRM1) and inhibition of the TRPM8 cation channel result in strong anti-fibrotic effects, which are confirmed using orthogonal genetic assays. Strikingly, using biosensors based on bioluminescence resonance energy transfer, a functional interaction along a novel MASH signaling axis in which CHRM1 inhibits TRPM8 via G(q/11) and phospholipase C-mediated depletion of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate can be demonstrated. Combined, this study presents the first patient-derived 3D MASH model, identifies a novel signaling module with anti-fibrotic effects, and highlights the potential of organotypic culture systems for phenotype-based chemogenomic drug target identification at scale.
BACKGROUND: Improper use of strychnine can cause death. The aim of this study was to identify and evaluate toxic mechanisms of action associated with active compounds in strychnine using a network toxicology approach, and explore potential pathogenic targets. METHODS: In the present study, strychnine target and central nervous system-related gene set were established using the Traditional Chinese Medicine Systems Pharmacology (TCMSP) database and four disease gene databases (Genecards, OMIM, PharmGkb, TTD). An "ingredient-target" interactive active network map was constructed using Cytoscape software (version 3.8.0). Functional enrichment analysis was performed based on the hub genes. A protein-protein interaction network was constructed using STRING database. The pharmacokinetics (ADMET) properties of strychnine were evaluated using SwissADME tool. Molecular docking was performed using Autodock Vina to explore the interactions between the active compounds and the target protein. RESULTS: Five strychnine toxicity-related components and a gene set of 40 genes were obtained. GO and KEGG analyses showed that Strychnine acts on the central nervous system through G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathway. Analysis of "ADMET" related parameters showed a high gastrointestinal tract absorption of (S)-stylopine and isobrucine and the compounds could cross the blood brain barrier. CHRM1 was selected as a key gene in strychnine toxicity. Molecular docking results showed that the co-crystalized ligands did not form hydrogen bond with CHRM1. (S)-stylopine had the highest binding affinity (binding energy = - 8.5 kcal/mol) compared with the other two compounds. CONCLUSION: Network toxicology and molecular docking reveal the toxicity mechanisms of strychnine active compounds. The findings showed that CHRM1 is a potential neurotoxic target. (S)-stylopine showed stronger neurotoxic effect compared with the other ligands.
Objectives: Acetylcholine M (muscarinic) receptors are possibly involved in tardive dyskinesia (TD). The authors tried to verify this hypothesis by testing for possible associations between two muscarinic receptor genes (CHRM1 and CHRM2) polymorphisms and TD in patients with schizophrenia.Methods: A total of 472 patients with schizophrenia were recruited. TD was assessed cross-sectionally using the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale. Fourteen allelic variants of CHRM1 and CHRM2 were genotyped using Applied Biosystems amplifiers (USA) and the MassARRAY System by Agena Bioscience.Results: The prevalence of the rs1824024*GG genotype of the CHRM2 gene was lower in TD patients compared to the group without it (chi2 = 6.035, p = 0.049). This suggested that this genotype has a protective effect for the development of TD (OR = 0.4, 95% CI: 0.19-0.88). When age, gender, duration of schizophrenia and dosage of antipsychotic treatment were added as covariates in regression analysis, the results did not reach statistical significance.Conclusions: This study did identify associations between CHRM2 variations and TD; the results of logistic regression analysis with covariates suggest that the association is, however, likely to be secondary to other concomitant factors.
Alterations in muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRM) populations have been implicated in the pathology of schizophrenia. Here we have assessed whether the receptor function of the M(1) subtype (CHRM1) is altered in a sub-population of patients with schizophrenia, defined by marked (60-80%) reductions in cortical [3H]-pirenzepine (PZP) binding, and termed 'muscarinic receptor-deficit schizophrenia' (MRDS). Using a [35S]-GTPgammaS-Galpha(q/11) immunocapture method we have assessed whether CHRM1 signalling in human cortex (Brodmann area 9 (BA9)) is altered in post mortem tissue from a MRDS group compared with a subgroup of patients with schizophrenia displaying normal PZP binding, and controls with no known history of psychiatric or neurological disorders. The CHRM agonist (oxotremorine-M) and a CHRM1-selective agonist (AC-42) increased Galpha(q/11)-[35S]-GTPgammaS binding, with AC-42 producing responses that were approximately 50% of those maximally evoked by the full agonist, oxotremorine-M, in control and subgroups of patients with schizophrenia. However, the potency of oxotremorine-M to stimulate Galpha(q/11)-[35S]-GTPgammaS binding was significantly decreased in the MRDS group (pEC(50) (M)=5.69+/-0.16) compared with the control group (6.17+/-0.10) and the non-MRDS group (6.05+/-0.07). The levels of Galpha(q/11) protein present in BA9 did not vary with diagnosis. Maximal oxotremorine-M-stimulated Galpha(q/11)-[35S]-GTPgammaS binding in BA9 membranes was significantly increased in the MRDS group compared with the control group. Similar, though non-statistically significant, trends were observed for AC-42. These data provide evidence that both orthosterically and allosterically acting CHRM agonists can stimulate a receptor-driven functional response ([35S]-GTPgammaS binding to Galpha(q/11)) in membranes prepared from post mortem human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of patients with schizophrenia and controls . Furthermore, in a subgroup of patients with schizophrenia displaying markedly decreased PZP binding (MRDS) we have shown that although agonist potency may decrease, the efficacy of CHRM1-Galpha(q/11) coupling increases, suggesting an adaptative change in receptor-G protein coupling efficiency in this endophenotype of patients with schizophrenia.
Based on our previously identified linkage regions for nicotine dependence (ND), we selected six and five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the muscarinic cholinergic receptor subtype M1 (CHRM1) and nicotinic cholinergic receptor beta1 (CHRNB1), respectively, to determine the association of the two genes with ND in a total of 2,037 subjects from 602 nuclear families of either African-American (AA) or European-American (EA) origin. Individual SNP- and/or haplotype-based analyses indicated that the CHRNB1 was significantly associated with ND, which was assessed by smoking quantity (SQ), the Heaviness of Smoking Index (HSI), and the Fagerstrom Test for ND (FTND), in both ethnic samples. The association of rs2302763 in the CHRNB1 was significant with adjusted SQ in the EA sample after correction for multiple testing (P=0.013). Haplotype A-T-A formed by SNPs rs2302765, rs2302762, and rs9217 in the CHRNB1 was significantly associated with the high risk allele for all the three ND measures (minimum P=0.009, 0.006, and 0.008 for SQ, HSI and FTND, respectively) in the AA sample while haplotype A-T-A formed by rs2302765, rs2302763, and rs9217 was significantly positively associated with ND (minimum P=0.005, 0.016, and 0.016 for SQ, HSI and FTND, respectively) in the EA sample. The CHRM1 exhibited significant protective associations of haplotype C-C-A-T-G-G formed by all six SNPs of this gene with at least one ND measure in the AA sample after Bonferroni correction (minimum P=0.008, 0.013, and 0.009 for SQ, HSI and FTND, respectively), but no significant association was found in the EA sample. The significant associations, together with their location of linked region to ND, suggest that the CHRNB1 and CHRM1 are likely candidates for further investigation.
