Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M3; The muscarinic acetylcholine receptor mediates various cellular responses, including inhibition of adenylate cyclase, breakdown of phosphoinositides and modulation of potassium channels through the action of G proteins. Primary transducing effect is Pi turnover.
CHRM3 codes for the M3 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor that is located on the surface of smooth muscle cells of the detrusor, the muscle that effects urinary voiding. Previously, we reported brothers in a family affected by a congenital prune belly-like syndrome with mydriasis due to homozygous CHRM3 frameshift variants. In this study, we describe two sisters with bladders that failed to empty completely and pupils that failed to constrict fully in response to light, who are homozygous for the missense CHRM3 variant c.352G > A; p.(Gly118Arg). Samples were not available for genotyping from their brother, who had a history of multiple urinary tract infections and underwent surgical bladder draining in the first year of life. He died at the age of 6 years. This is the first independent report of biallelic variants in CHRM3 in a family with a rare serious bladder disorder associated with mydriasis and provides important evidence of this association.
BACKGROUND: Cholinergic hypofunction and sleep disturbance are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), a progressive disorder leading to neuronal deterioration. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (M1-5 or mAChRs), expressed in hippocampus and cerebral cortex, play a pivotal role in the aberrant alterations of cognitive processing, memory, and learning, observed in AD. Recent evidence shows that two mAChRs, M1 and M3, encoded by CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes, respectively, are involved in sleep functions and, peculiarly, in rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. METHODS: We used twenty microarray datasets extrapolated from post-mortem brain tissue of nondemented healthy controls (NDHC) and AD patients to examine the expression profile of CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. Samples were from eight brain regions and stratified according to age and sex. RESULTS: CHRM1 and CHRM3 expression levels were significantly reduced in AD compared with ageand sex-matched NDHC brains. A negative correlation with age emerged for both CHRM1 and CHRM3 in NDHC but not in AD brains. Notably, a marked positive correlation was also revealed between the neurogranin (NRGN) and both CHRM1 and CHRM3 genes. These associations were modulated by sex. Accordingly, in the temporal and occipital regions of NDHC subjects, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3, respectively, than females. In AD patients, males expressed higher levels of CHRM1 and CHRM3 in the temporal and frontal regions, respectively, than females. CONCLUSION: Thus, substantial differences, all strictly linked to the brain region analyzed, age, and sex, exist in CHRM1 and CHRM3 brain levels both in NDHC subjects and in AD patients.
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) has been used globally among infertile couples. However, many epidemiological investigations have indicated that ART is associated with a range of long-term adverse health outcomes in offspring, including cardiovascular disease, obesity, and increased plasma lipid levels. Until now, direct evidence has been limited regarding the pathological changes in vascular function in fetuses with ART. In this study, human umbilical cords were collected from healthy normal pregnancies and in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) pregnancies. Vascular functional studies involving acetylcholine (ACh), antagonists of its specific receptors, and L-type calcium channel/PKC-MLC20 phosphorylation pathway specific inhibitors were conducted. Quantitative real-time PCR, Western blotting, and methylation analyses were performed on umbilical vein samples. We found that the umbilical vein constriction induced by ACh in the IVF-ET group was significantly attenuated compared with that in the healthy normal pregnancy group, which was not only associated with the hypermethylation of ACh muscarinic receptor subtype 3 (CHRM3) and decreased expression of CHRM3, PKCbeta, and CaV1.2, but was also related to the reduced phosphorylation of MLC20. This study revealed that the hypermethylation of CHRM3, leading to a reduction in CHRM3 expression and downregulation of the CaV1.2/PKC-MLC20 phosphorylation pathway, was responsible for the decreased sensitivity to ACh observed in the umbilical vein under IVF-ET conditions. The hypermethylation of CHRM3 caused by IVF-ET might play an important role in altered vasoconstriction and impact cardiovascular systems in the long run.
Cholinergic receptor muscarinic 3 (CHRM3)-mediated focal adhesion kinase/YES-associated protein (YAP) signalling is essential for the growth of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cells. Here, we evaluated the molecular mechanisms through which CHRM3 overexpression facilitates castration-resistant growth. Small RNA sequencing combined with in silico analyses revealed that CHRM3 was a putative target of miR-15b-5p. Notably, androgen deprivation suppressed miR-15b-5p expression and increased CHRM3 expression. Moreover, miR-15b-5p bound directly to CHRM3 and inhibited YAP activation induced by CHRM3 stimulation. Furthermore, miR-15b-5p abolished the growth of CRPC cells induced by CHRM3 stimulation. We conclude that the miR-15b-5p/CHRM3/YAP signalling axis promotes the castration-resistant growth of prostate cancer.
BACKGROUND: It was well defined that proliferative effects of bile acids on colon epithelium are through interaction with muscarinic-3 receptors. Recently, microRNA emerged as an important regulator of gene expression and has been implicated in pathogenesis of many malignancies. However, the interaction of CHRM3 and microRNAs and their potential effects on colon carcinogenesis remains to be elucidated. METHODS: In the current study, analysis of cell proliferation for 6 days after treatment with sodium taurolithocholate was analyzed by using WST-1 method. microRNAs which possibly target CHRM3 were identified by in silico analyses. Expression profiling of these microRNAs, expression changes of CHRM3 gene at mRNA level for H508 and SNU-C4 colon cancer cells were analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction; the protein level of CHRM3 was analyzed using Western blot; apoptotic experiments were analyzed using the Annexin V assay. The Gene Ontology and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses were performed using the miRPath v3.0. RESULTS: It was found that the expression level of CHRM3 gene was 6.133 +/- 0.698-fold in H508 cells compared with SNU-C4 cells (P =.004). Treatment of H508 cells with sodium taurolithocholate caused 1.34 +/- 0.4156-fold change in the expression level of CHRM3 gene (P =.0448). No apoptotic changes were observed in both colon cancer cells after treatment with sodium taurolithocholate. Different expression changes were detected of hsa-miR-129-5p, hsa-miR-30c-5p, hsa-miR-224-5p, hsa-miR-30b-5p, hsa-miR-522-3p, and hsa-miR-1246. Finally, hsa-miR-1246 and hsa-miR-522-3p could play a critical role in tumor development via bile acid-related genes in colon cancer. CONCLUSION: These findings reflected that CHRM3-dependent oncogenetic pathways might be in charge of colon cancer. We suggest that the microRNA expression profile of each individual colon cancer tissue is a unique digital signature.
Asthma is a complex disease for which genetic predisposition has been widely documented. Considerable evidence supports the hypothesis that polymorphisms in the muscarinic-cholinergic (CHRM) genes could be involved in asthma pathogenesis, bronchial hyperresponsiveness, and mucus secretion. To determine whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or haplotypes in CHRM1, CHRM2, or CHRM3 are associated with asthma in Mexican pediatric population. We performed a case-control study including 398 pediatric cases with asthma and 450 healthy controls. We analyzed 19 SNPs distributed among these three genes. Two of the seven SNPs located in CHRM2, the 3' untranslated region rs8191992 and rs6962027, differed significantly in allele frequencies between patients with asthma and healthy controls [odds ratio (OR) 1.42, 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) 1.14-1.77, P = 0.001, and OR 1.50, 95 % CI 1.21-1.87, P = 0.0002, respectively]. Statistical significance remained after multiple comparison corrections (P = 0.003 and P = 0.005, respectively). The haplotypes AA and TT, containing both major and minor alleles from rs8191992 and rs6962027, also differed between cases and controls. The haplotype AA occurred at a lower frequency in cases (OR 0.67, 95 % CI 0.53-0.85, P = 0.001) whereas the haplotype TT was overrepresented in cases compared to controls (28 vs 21 %, respectively; OR 1.46, 95 % CI 1.15-1.85, P = 0.002). No association was observed between CHRM1 or CHRM3 SNPs or haplotypes and asthma. CHRM2 polymorphisms are implicated in the genetic etiology of asthma.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative nausea and vomiting are common complications after surgery, and female patients are more likely to experience these adverse events. The goal of this study was to explore the relationship between the CHRM3 rs2165870 polymorphism and postoperative vomiting incidence in female patients who underwent laparoscopic surgery. METHODS: Two hundred female patients who underwent elective laparoscopic surgery with subsequent patient-controlled intravenous analgesia using dexmedetomidine and sufentanil were prospectively enrolled. The CHRM3 rs2165870 and KCNB2 rs349358 polymorphisms were genotyped using MassARRAY SNP typing technology. Demographic data and preoperative laboratory results of all patients were recorded. Postoperative analgesia-related information, incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting, and other adverse events were followed up and recorded for analysis. RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in any of the demographic characteristics of these patients among the different genotype carriers (P>0.05). The percentages of patients with each genotype of CHRM3 were 67% (GG), 28.5% (GA) and 4.5% (AA). We found that the AA or A allele of the CHRM3 rs2165870 polymorphism elevated the risk of postoperative vomiting (AA versus GG; OR, 6.94; 95% CI, 1.49-32.46; P = 0.014; A versus G; OR, 2.52; 95% CI, 1.22-5.19; P = 0.012). The percentages of patients with each genotype of KCNB2 were 84.5% (TT), 15.5% (CT) and 0% (CC). There were no significant differences in the postoperative nausea or vomiting rate across the KCNB2 rs349358 polymorphisms (P>0.05). CONCLUSION: The CHRM3 rs2165870 polymorphism is associated with the occurrence of postoperative vomiting in female patients who have undergone laparoscopic surgery. The AA genotype or A allele of the CHRM3 rs2165870 polymorphism elevates the risk of postoperative vomiting. TRIAL REGISTRATION: www.chictr.org.cn, registration number: ChiCTR2200062425.
BACKGROUND: Cholinergic urticaria (CholU), a frequent form of chronic inducible urticaria, is characterized by itchy wheals and angioedema in response to sweating. As of now, the rate and pathophysiological relevance of impaired sweating in patients with CholU are ill-defined. AIM: To assess in CholU patients the rate and extent of impaired sweating and its links to clinical and pathophysiological features of CholU. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We assessed sweating in patients with CholU (n = 13) subjected to pulse-controlled ergometry (PCE) provocation testing. Pre- and post-PCE biopsies of lesional (L) and non-lesional (NL) skin were analyzed for the expression of acetylcholine receptor M3 (CHRM3) and acetylcholine esterase (ACh-E) by quantitative histomorphometry and compared to those of healthy control subjects (HCs). CholU patients were assessed for disease duration and severity as well as other clinical features. RESULTS: Of the 13 patients with CholU, 10 showed reduced sweating in response to PCE provocation, and 3 had severely reduced sweating. Reduced sweating was linked to long disease duration and high disease severity. CholU patients with impaired sweating responses showed reduced sweat gland epithelial expression of CHRM3 and ACh-E. CONCLUSION: Reduced sweating is common in CholU patients, especially in those with long-standing and severe disease, and it can be severe. Reduced expression of CHRM3 and ACh-E may be the cause or consequence of CholU in patients with impaired sweating, and this should be explored by further studies.
BACKGROUND: The genetic influences in human brain structure and function and impaired functional connectivities are the hallmarks of the schizophrenic brain. To explore how common genetic variants affect the connectivities in schizophrenia, we applied genome-wide association studies assaying the abnormal neural connectivities in schizophrenia as quantitative traits. METHOD: We recruited 161 first-onset and treatment-naive patients with schizophrenia and 150 healthy controls. All the participants underwent scanning with a 3 T-magnetic resonance imaging scanner to acquire structural and functional imaging data and genotyping using the HumanOmniZhongHua-8 BeadChip. The brain-wide association study approach was employed to account for the inherent modular nature of brain connectivities. RESULTS: We found differences in four abnormal functional connectivities [left rectus to left thalamus (REC.L-THA.L), left rectus to right thalamus (REC.L-THA.R), left superior orbital cortex to left thalamus (ORBsup.L-THA.L) and left superior orbital cortex to right thalamus (ORBsup.L-THA.R)] between the two groups. Univariate single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based association revealed that the SNP rs6800381, located nearest to the CHRM3 (cholinergic receptor, muscarinic 3) gene, reached genomic significance (p = 1.768 x 10-8) using REC.L-THA.R as the phenotype. Multivariate gene-based association revealed that the FAM12A (family with sequence similarity 12, member A) gene nearly reached genomic significance (nominal p = 2.22 x 10-6, corrected p = 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we identified the first evidence that the CHRM3 gene plays a role in abnormal thalamo-orbital frontal cortex functional connectivity in first-episode treatment-naive patients with schizophrenia. Identification of these genetic variants using neuroimaging genetics provides insights into the causes of variability in human brain development, and may help us determine the mechanisms of dysfunction in schizophrenia.
Bladder cancer is one of the major cancer types and both environmental factors and genetic background play important roles in its pathology. Kaohsiung is a high industrialized city in Taiwan, and here we focused on this region to evaluate the genetic effects on bladder cancer. Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M3 (CHRM3) was reported as a key receptor in different cancer types. CHRM3 is located at 1q42-43 which was reported to associate with bladder cancer. Our study attempted to delineate whether genetic variants of CHRM3 contribute to bladder cancer in Chinese Han population in south Taiwan. Five selected SNPs (rs2165870, rs10802789, rs685550, rs7520974, and rs3738435) were genotyped for 30 bladder cancer patients and 60 control individuals and genetic association studies were performed. Five haplotypes (GTTAT, ATTGT, GCTAC, ACTAC, and ACCAC) were found significantly associated with low CHRM3 mRNA level and contributed to increased susceptibility of bladder cancer in Kaohsiung city after rigid 10000 consecutive permutation tests. To our knowledge, this is the first genetic association study that reveals the genetic contribution of CHRM3 gene in bladder cancer etiology.
