Neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit alpha-4; After binding acetylcholine, the AChR responds by an extensive change in conformation that affects all subunits and leads to opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane permeable to sodium ions; Belongs to the ligand-gated ion channel (TC 1.A.9) family. Acetylcholine receptor (TC 1.A.9.1) subfamily. Alpha-4/CHRNA4 sub- subfamily.
Knock-out studies in mice suggest a role of the CHRNA4 gene in anxiety. In the present study we extend this finding to humans by means of a genetic association study. In a sample of N = 574 healthy White participants, the CHRNA4 rs1044396 polymorphism is related to the common variance of several conceptualizations of negative emotionality. Compared to carriers of at least one T-allele, carriers of the homozygous C/C genotype described themselves as more anxious and emotionally unstable on various psychometric personality questionnaires. The scope of the genetic effect is remarkable because other prominent genetic markers for anxiety show specificity for the diagnostic tool used. The present study is the first study that demonstrates the relevance of the CHRNA4 gene for negative emotionality in humans and sets a starting point for further investigations that could inform on the treatment of various affective psychiatric disorders.
41 patients (19 sporadic and 22 familial) affected by autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) were analyzed for the presence of two mutations (Ser252Phe, 776ins3) in the CHRNA4 gene, reported to be associated with this disease. Electroclinical findings of sporadic forms were indistinguishable from familial ones. In none of the patients, these mutations were found by dot blot analysis with allele specific oligonucleotides. These data, obtained on the largest group so far studied, suggest the rarity of the reported mutations.
The human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha 4 subunit gene (CHRNA4) is located in the candidate region for three different phenotypes: benign familial neonatal convulsions, autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, and low-voltage EEG. Recently, a missense mutation in transmembrane domain 2 of CHRNA4 was found to be associated with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy in one extended pedigree. We have determined the genomic organization of CHRNA4, which consists of six exons distributed over approximately 17 kb of genomic DNA. The nucleotide sequence obtained from the genomic regions adjacent to the exon boundaries enabled us to develop a set of primer pairs for PCR amplification of the complete coding region. The sequence analysis provides the basis for a comprehensive mutation screening of CHRNA4 in the above-mentioned phenotypes and possibly in other types of idiopathic epilepsies.
Drawing on converging behavioral, electrophysiological, and imaging evidence, we advance an hypothesis for a cognitive phenotype of a SNP in the CHRNA4 gene encoding the alpha(4) subunit of alpha(4)beta(2) nicotinic receptors. First, we review evidence that visuospatial attention can be decomposed into several component processes. Secondly, we consider evidence that one component, redirection of attention, is modulated by the nicotinic cholinergic system. Third, we review evidence that nicotinic stimulation exerts effects at the network level. Fourth, we consider evidence that normal variation in this SNP exerts nicotine-like modulatory effects on visuospatial attention. Fifth, we hypothesize that the cognitive phenotype of the CHRNA4 rs1044396 SNP is characterized by greater ability of T allele carriers to preferentially process events in the attentional focus compared to events outside the attentional focus. Finally, we consider effects of the CHNRA4 rs1044396 SNP on brain activity and cognition in light of our hypothesized cognitive phenotype. This hypothesis makes an important contribution to the development of cognitive phenomics by arguing for a cognitive phenotype of CHRNA4.
Sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy, or nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, as it was formerly called, is a focal epilepsy with mostly sleep-related seizures of hypermotor, tonic or dystonic semiology. Sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy may be attributed to a monogenetic cause with autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations are described in different genes, including the genes for three subunits of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. We present a family with members over four generations exhibiting sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy. Genetic testing was available for three members from three generations, and revealed two variants in the alpha-4 subunit of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (one of them being novel) which are likely to be disease-causing. As these mutations were identified in cis configuration (on the same allele), we do not know whether one of the variants alone or a combination of the two is responsible for the pathogenicity.
The alpha4beta2 nAChRs are crucial ion channels that control neurotransmitter release and play a role in various physiologic and pathologic processes. CHRNA4 encodes the alpha4-nAChRs, while CHRNB2 encodes the beta2-nAChRs. Recent studies have found different variants of alpha4beta2-nAChRs in individuals with conditions such as AD, ADHD, ALS, PD, and brain abnormalities. We conducted a scoping review following a six-stage methodology structure and adhering to PRISMA guidelines. We systematically reviewed articles using relevant keywords up to October 2, 2023. In this summary, we cover the clinical symptoms reported, the genes and protein structure of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2, mutations in these genes, inheritance patterns, the functional impact of mutations and polymorphisms in CHRNA4 and CHRNB2, and the epidemiology of these diseases. Recent research indicates that nAChRs may play a significant role in neurodegenerative disorders, possibly impacting neuronal function through yet undiscovered regulatory pathways. Studying how nAChRs interact with disease-related aggregates in neurodegenerative conditions may lead to new treatment options for these disorders.
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is the first, and to date only, idiopathic epilepsy for which a specific mutation has been found. A missense mutation in the critical M2 domain of the alpha4 subunit of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRNA4) has been recently identified in one large Australian pedigree. Here we describe a novel mutation in the M2 domain of the CHRNA4 gene in a Norwegian family. Three nucleotides (GCT) were inserted at nucleotide position 776 into the coding region for the C-terminal end of the M2 domain. Physiological investigations of the receptor reconstituted with the mutated CHRNA4 subunit reveal that this insertion does not prevent the receptor function but increases its apparent affinity for ACh. In addition, this mutant receptor shows a significantly lower calcium permeability that, at the cellular level, may correspond to a loss of function. Comparison of the two mutations identified so far in families with ADNFLE illustrates that different mutations can result in similar phenotypes.
The gene coding for the alpha 4 subunit of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRNA4) has been recently mapped in the candidate region for benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) on chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3. The region is only partially covered with polymorphic markers, and so far no PCR-based polymorphisms have been described in the critical region for BFNC. We now report the first polymorphic marker in the coding region of CHRNA4. The new marker, which is detected by PCR, will be useful for evaluation of the role of CHRNA4 as a candidate gene for BFNC. It will further enable the investigation of this important brain-specific gene in association studies with different types of epileptic diseases and other neurological disorders.
Benign Familial Neonatal Convulsions (BFNC) is an epileptic disorder with an autosomal dominant mode of transmission. It has been shown that about 80% of BFNC pedigrees are linked to a genetic defect on chromosome 20q13.3. A candidate gene for the epilepsies, the gene coding for the alpha4 subunit of the nicotinic cholinergic receptor (CHRNA4), has previously been localized on chromosome 20. Here we report a single point mutation converting a serine codon to a stop codon in the exon 5 of CHRNA4, in one BFNC family. Identification of CHRNA4 as the defective gene in 20q-BFNC represents the first example of a human idiopathic epilepsy caused by a mutation directly affecting a neurotransmitter receptor in the central nervous system.
PURPOSE: Our purpose was to determine the role of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 in insular epilepsy. METHOD: We identified two patients with drug-resistant predominantly sleep-related hypermotor seizures, one harboring a heterozygous missense variant (c.77C>T; p. Thr26Met) in the CHRNB2 gene and the other a heterozygous missense variant (c.1079G>A; p. Arg360Gln) in the CHRNA4 gene. The patients underwent electrophysiological and neuroimaging studies, and we performed functional characterization of the p. Thr26Met (c.77C>T) in the CHRNB2 gene. RESULTS: We localized the epileptic foci to the left insula in the first case (now seizure-free following epilepsy surgery) and to both insulae in the second case. Based on tools predicting the possible impact of amino acid substitutions on the structure and function of proteins (sorting intolerant from tolerant and PolyPhen-2), variants identified in this report could be deleterious. Functional expression in human cell lines of alpha4beta2 (wild-type), alpha4beta2-Thr26Met (homozygote), and alpha4beta2/beta2-Thr26Met (heterozygote) nicotinic acetylcholine receptors revealed that the mutant subunit led to significantly higher whole-cell nicotinic currents. This feature was observed in both homo- and heterozygous conditions and was not accompanied by major alterations of the current reversal potential or the shape of the concentration-response relation. CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that variants in CHRNB2 and CHRNA4, initially linked to autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, are also found in patients with predominantly sleep-related insular epilepsy. Although the reported variants should be considered of unknown clinical significance for the moment, identification of additional similar cases and further functional studies could eventually strengthen this association.
Despite claims concerning biological mechanisms sub-serving infant attention, little experimental work examines its underpinnings. This study examines how candidate polymorphisms from the cholinergic (CHRNA4 rs1044396) and dopaminergic (COMT rs4680) systems, respectively indicative of parietal and prefrontal/anterior cingulate involvement, are related to 6-month-olds' (n=217) performance during a visual expectation eye-tracking paradigm. As previous studies suggest that both cholinergic and dopaminergic genes may influence susceptibility to the influence of other genetic and environmental factors, we further examined whether these candidate genes interact with one another and/or with early caregiving experience in predicting infants' visual attention. We detected an interaction between CHRNA4 genotype and observed maternal sensitivity upon infants' orienting to random stimuli and a CHRNA4-COMT interaction effect upon infants' orienting to patterned stimuli. Consistent with adult research, we observed a direct effect of COMT genotype on anticipatory looking to patterned stimuli. Findings suggest that CHRNA4 genotype may influence susceptibility to other attention-related factors in infancy. These interactions may account for the inability to establish a link between CHRNA4 and orienting in infant research to date, despite developmental theorizing suggesting otherwise. Moreover, findings suggest that by 6months, dopamine, and relatedly, the prefrontal cortex/anterior cingulate, may be important to infant attention.
Potential genomic changes leading to decreased nicotine binding, crucial for cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease (AD), have not yet been studied. A search for mutations of the genes coding for the most widely distributed nicotinic receptor subtype alpha4beta2 (CHRNA4/CHRNB2) has been performed in AD patients by screening the coding regions of both genes by single strand conformation analysis and heteroduplex analysis of fibroblast-derived genomic DNA. Polymorphisms in CHRNA4, none of which led to amino acid changes in the predicted sequence, were found in three patients. Although the other receptor subunits have yet to be screened, it appears likely that the reduction of nicotine binding sites in AD is not due to genomic changes.
Consistent deficits in the cholinergic system are evident in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, including selective loss of alpha4beta2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the brains of AD patients. Knockout mice for the beta2 subunit have impaired neuronal survival in ageing. Accordingly, we have analysed polymorphisms in the genes that encode the alpha4 and beta2 subunits, CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 respectively, for genetic associations with late-onset AD. A significant association for disease was observed for a non-coding polymorphism in CHRNB2 (odds ratio=0.57, 95% confidence interval=0.35-0.95, P=0.024). Replication analysis was performed in two further sample sets. While these did not individually yield significant results, a significant association remained when all samples were pooled (odds ratio=0.70, 95% confidence interval=0.52-0.95, P=0.019). These data suggest that this variant warrants further examination in large case-control series.
INTRODUCTION: Tobacco smoking leads to increased numbers of beta2*-containing nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (beta2*-nAChRs) throughout the brain, which return to nonsmoker levels over extended abstinence. The goal of the current study was to determine whether the degree of tobacco smoking-induced changes in beta2*-nAChR availability is genetically influenced. METHODS: In this study, 113 European Americans participated in one or two [(123)I]5-IA-85380 single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) brain scans. Smokers (n = 58) participated in one scan at 7-9 days of abstinence and those who remained abstinent (n = 27) were imaged again at 6-8 weeks of abstinence. Age- and sex-matched nonsmokers (n = 55) participated in one scan. Blood samples were collected for DNA analysis and genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CHRNA4 and ANKK1 gene loci. beta2*-nAChR availability was measured in the thalamus, striatum, cortical regions, and cerebellum. RESULTS: The CHRNA4 SNP rs2236196 and ANKK1 SNP rs4938015 were associated with significantly higher cerebellar and cortical beta2*-nAChR availability in smokers versus nonsmokers for specific genotypes. There were no significant differences by carrier status in the change in beta2*-nAChR availability in smokers from 7-9 days to 6-8 weeks of abstinence. CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence for genetic regulation of tobacco smoking-induced changes in beta2*-nAChR availability and suggests that beta2*-nAChR availability could be an endophenotype mediating influences of CHRNA4 variants on nicotine dependence. These results highlight individual differences in the neurochemistry of nicotine dependence and may suggest the need for individualized programs for smoking cessation. IMPLICATIONS: This study demonstrates genetic regulation of smoking-induced changes in beta2*-nAChRs throughout the brain and highlights the need for personalized programs for smoking cessation.
We assessed the CHRNA4 exon 5 rs1044396 and rs1044397 polymorphisms and investigated their relationship with Parkinson's disease (PD) severity and several non-motor symptoms. Ninety-seven patients with primary PD and 108 controls were recruited, and their smoking history identified. Patients with PD were assessed using the unified PD rating scale (UPDRS), Hoehn & Yahr (H&Y) grade, Hamilton depression rating scale (HAMD), visual analogue 10-points scale (VAS), and the Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI). Polymerase chain reaction amplification and direct sequencing was performed on genomic DNA to identify polymorphic variants. Statistical analysis demonstrated that there were no gender differences in rs1044396(C-->T) and rs1044397(G-->A) frequencies. More smokers were identified among carriers of rs1044396 CT/TT genotypes. We also found no differences between PD and control groups in frequencies of either polymorphism. However, in women, PD onset was latest in rs1044397 GA/AA (P = 0.015). rs1044396 CT/TT genotype carriers and rs1044397 GG genotype patients with PD had higher VAS scores. No differences were found on the course of PD, H&Y grade, or UPDRS-II or -III scores between various genotypes, nor were differences found on scores of HAMD, nocturia, or PSQI in PD patients. Our results suggested that the CHRNA4 rs1044396 CT/TT genotype is related to cigarette smoking, that the rs1044397 polymorphism may associate with PD age of onset in women, and that rs1044396 and rs1044397 may relate to pain in PD patients, but not to the course or severity of disease, or to depression or nocturnal or sleeping disorders.
Autosomal dominant sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy (ADSHE) is a rare heritable form of epilepsy. It is characterized by hypermotor seizures occurring mainly during sleep. Seizures are typically abrupt in onset and offset and tend to increase in complexity and duration during the night. ADSHE is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, and penetrance is estimated to be 70%. We describe two brothers with ADSHE with a previously unreported variant in CHRNA4, and the effect of medical treatment with carbamazepine. We highlight the relevance of genetic testing in patients with atypical and clustering episodes of nightmares, night terrors, or panic attacks, as these patients could be misdiagnosed, and instead be suffering from ADSHE, a potentially treatable condition.
OBJECTIVE: To screen a three-generation familial partial epilepsy with variable foci (FPEVF) family with epilepsy to identify the cHRNA4 gene (a candidate gene). PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 18 members of the three-generation FPEVF family with partial epilepsy were selected, and 18 blood samples were collected for investigation. Among them, five members were affected by epilepsy, and another 13 members were not affected. A pedigree chart was mapped to comprehensively analyze the clinical characteristics of each member, including ictal semiology, electroencephalogram (EEG), past medical history, MRI features, neuropsychological MMSE (mini-mental state examination) scores, etc. PCR and Sanger sequencing method were used to screen the mutant gene cHRNA4. RESULTS: cHRNA4 genes of all affected members were positively mutated, and that of the unaffected members were negative. The positive mutation was base A instead of base G. CONCLUSIONS: cHRNA4 is the causative gene of FPEVF, and genes of the affected members are all heterozygotes mutations.
