Neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit alpha-2; After binding acetylcholine, the AChR responds by an extensive change in conformation that affects all subunits and leads to opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane; Belongs to the ligand-gated ion channel (TC 1.A.9) family. Acetylcholine receptor (TC 1.A.9.1) subfamily. Alpha-2/CHRNA2 sub- subfamily.
The contribution of thermogenic adipocytes to maintain systemic metabolic homeostasis has been increasingly appreciated in recent years. It is now recognized that different types (e.g., brown, beige) and subtypes of thermogenic adipocytes may arise from various developmental origins. In addition to the adrenergic pathway, other signals can activate thermogenesis, including paracrine communication between immune cells within the adipose tissue niche and thermogenic adipocytes. In this opinion article we highlight the recently discovered beige-selective signaling between acetylcholine from immune cells and cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha 2 subunit (CHRNA2) in activated beige adipocytes. We present our current knowledge of how this previously unrecognized adipose non-neuronal cholinergic signaling pathway mediates beige thermoregulation, and discuss its impact on whole-body fitness and its therapeutic potential as a novel target for combating metabolic disease.
Cannabis is the most frequently used illicit psychoactive substance worldwide; around one in ten users become dependent. The risk for cannabis use disorder (CUD) has a strong genetic component, with twin heritability estimates ranging from 51 to 70%. Here we performed a genome-wide association study of CUD in 2,387 cases and 48,985 controls, followed by replication in 5,501 cases and 301,041 controls. We report a genome-wide significant risk locus for CUD (P = 9.31 x 10(-12)) that replicates in an independent population (P(replication) = 3.27 x 10(-3), P(meta-analysis) = 9.09 x 10(-12)). The index variant (rs56372821) is a strong expression quantitative trait locus for cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha2 subunit (CHRNA2); analyses of the genetically regulated gene expression identified a significant association of CHRNA2 expression with CUD in brain tissue. At the polygenic level, analyses revealed a significant decrease in the risk of CUD with increased load of variants associated with cognitive performance. The results provide biological insights and inform on the genetic architecture of CUD.
OBJECTIVE: Forty-six nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (NFLE) patients (in which the involvement of the CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 genes coding for neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChRs) subunits associated to the disease were previously excluded) were analyzed for the presence of mutations in the CHRNA2 gene coding for the alpha2 subunit of the same receptor, which has been recently associated with the disease. METHODS: Mutational screening was performed by sequencing two polymerase chain reaction-amplified CHRNA2 DNA fragments, spanning the whole exon 6 and exon 7, respectively, which code for approximately 75% of the mature protein and contain all four transmembrane domains contributing to the ion pore. RESULTS: No mutations were identified in the analyzed region of CHRNA2. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate the rarity of the identified CHRNA2 mutations in NFLE patients, supporting the recently reported hypothesis of a restricted role for this gene in the disease.
The direct physiological effects that promote nicotine dependence (ND) are mediated by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). In line with the genetic and pharmacological basis of addiction, many previous studies have revealed significant associations between variants in the nAChR subunit genes and various measures of ND in different ethnic samples. In this study, we first examined the association of variants in nAChR subunits alpha2 (CHRNA2) and alpha6 (CHRNA6) genes on chromosome 8 with ND using a family sample consisting of 1,730 European Americans (EAs) from 495 families and 1,892 African Americans (AAs) from 424 families (defined as the discovery family sample). ND was assessed by two standard quantitative measures: smoking quantity (SQ) and the Fagerstrom Test for ND (FTND). We found nominal associations for all seven tested SNPs of the genes with at least one ND measure in the EA sample and for two SNPs in CHRNA2 in the AA sample. Of these, associations of SNPs rs3735757 with FTND (P = 0.0068) and rs2472553 with both ND measures (with a P value of 0.0043 and 0.00086 for SQ and FTND, respectively) continued to be significant in the EA sample even after correction for multiple tests. Further, we found several haplotypes that were significantly associated with ND in the EA sample in CHRNA6 and in the both EA and AA samples in CHRNA2. To confirm the associations of the two genes with ND, we conducted a replication study with an independent case-control sample from the SAGE study, which showed a significant association of the two genes with ND, although the significantly associated SNPs were not always the same in the two samples. Together, these findings indicate that both CHRNA2 and CHRNA6 play a significant role in the etiology of ND in AA and EA smokers. Further replication in additional independent samples is warranted.
BACKGROUND: Genes correlated with nicotine may be important in obesity because of the role of nicotine in food intake. METHODS: To determine if single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha2 subunit gene (CHRNA2) are associated with overweight/obesity, 156 non-obese and 200 overweight/obese Koreans were genotyped for four CHRNA2 SNPs using an Affymetrix Array Chip. RESULTS: Of four SNPs, only one, rs2043063, was associated with overweight/obesity in the study population (co-dominant, p=0.049; dominant, p=0.027). Associations between the significant SNP and obesity-related clinical characteristics were observed, but these were not significant. CONCLUSIONS: The CHRNA2 rs2043063 SNP might be a risk factor for overweight/obesity in Koreans. Therefore, further studies are needed to investigate whether mutations or common polymorphisms of the CHRNA2 gene represent a risk factor for obesity.
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes are involved mainly in nocturnal frontal epilepsy. Despite extensive studies, to date, the alpha2 subunit did not show a strong association with this peculiar epileptic phenotype. We report CHRNA2 missense mutation in a family with benign familial infantile seizures (BFIS). TrueSeq Custom Amplicon (TSCA) sequencing approach was used to screen 10 ion channel genes in patients with idiopathic epilepsies. TSCA revealed a heterozygous single-nucleotide substitution in CHRNA2 gene (c.1126 C>T; p. Arg376Trp) that segregated in a family with BFIS; based on bio-informatics inspection, the change was predicted to be pathogenic. The investigated family includes parents and their three daughters. In affected individuals, seizures started between 6 and 24 months of age. Seizures were mainly in cluster and well-controlled. Outcome was good in all subjects. Even if nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes are traditionally associated with autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), this single-family description can open new possibilities in the genetic diagnosis, molecular characterization, and management of CHRNA2-related epilepsy. The pathogenic conversion of arginine 376 to tryptophan alters all of these interactions in the cytoplasmic domain, never reported to be involved in epileptogenic mechanism. Further functional tests will be necessary to strongly relate CHRNA2 mutation with BFIS phenotype.
BACKGROUND: Febrile seizures (FSs) are the most common form of epilepsy in children aged between six months and five years. The exact cause is unknown, but several studies have demonstrated the importance of genetic predisposition, with increasing involvement of receptors and ion channels. The present study aims to identify novel pathogenic variants in Italian patients with FSs. METHODS: We performed targeted panel sequencing in a cohort of 21 patients with FSs. In silico analysis was performed to predict the pathogenic role of the resulting variants. RESULTS: We found two novel variants segregating in two families with FSs: c.1021C>G (p.Leu341Val) in the CHRNA2 gene and c.140A>G (p.Glu47Gly) in SCN2A. CONCLUSIONS: The c.1021C>G (p.Leu341Val) variant leads to a codon change of highly conserved leucine to valine at position 341 and is located in segments M3 of the subunit, which is important for channel gating. The c.140A>G (p.Glu47Gly) variant causes a substitution of glutamic acid with glycine at position 47 of the protein, which is highly conserved across the species. Moreover, it is located in the N-terminal domain, a region commonly affected in ASD, which impacts the inactivation kinetics and voltage dependence of steady-state activation. Further analyses are needed to better explain the role of CHRNA2 and SCN2A in the development of febrile seizures.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the mutation frequency in nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits CHRNA4, CHRNB2, and CHRNA2 in a cohort including autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) and sporadic nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (NFLE). Upon finding a novel mutation in CHRNA2 in a large family, we tested in vitro its functional effects. METHODS: We sequenced all the coding exons and their flanking intronic regions in 150 probands (73 NFLE, 77 ADNFLE), in most of whom diagnosis had been validated by EEG recording of seizures. Upon finding a missense mutation in CHRNA2, we measured whole-cell currents in human embryonic kidney cells in both wild-type and mutant alpha2beta4 and alpha2beta2 nAChR subtypes stimulated with nicotine. RESULTS: We found a c.889A>T (p.Ile297Phe) mutation in the proband ( approximately 0.6% of the whole cohort) of a large ADNFLE family (1.2% of familial cases) and confirmed its segregation in all 6 living affected individuals. Video-EEG studies demonstrated sleep-related paroxysmal epileptic arousals in all mutation carriers. Oxcarbazepine treatment was effective in all. Whole-cell current density was reduced to about 40% in heterozygosity and to 0% in homozygosity, with minor effects on channel permeability and sensitivity to nicotine. CONCLUSION: ADNFLE had previously been associated with CHRNA2 dysfunction in one family, in which a gain of function mutation was demonstrated. We confirm the causative role of CHRNA2 mutations in ADNFLE and demonstrate that also loss of function of alpha2 nAChRs may have pathogenic effects. CHRNA2 mutations are a rare cause of ADNFLE but this gene should be included in mutation screening.
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is known to be caused by mutations in the transmembrane regions of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) genes CHRNA4 and CHRNB2. A third nAChR gene, CHRNA2, has been recently reported as mutated in an Italian family with nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, nocturnal wandering and ictal fear. We have now evaluated the role of CHRNA2 in families with "classical" ADNFLE. Mutation screening was performed in 47 families by amplification and subsequent sequencing of part of CHRNA2 exon 6 containing transmembrane regions 1-3. Detected variants were tested in a case-control association study. No mutations were identified in the parts of CHRNA2 that contribute to the ion pore. Sequencing identified a novel synonymous nucleotide exchange (c.771C/T) that was also present in two of 78 controls and is therefore likely to be non-pathogenic. The absence of mutations in our sample of 47 families renders a major role of CHRNA2 in ADNFLE unlikely.
Schizophrenia is a common, genetically heterogeneous disorder with a lifetime prevalence of approximately 1% in the general population. Linkage studies of affected families have now strongly implicated a susceptibility locus on chromosome 8p21-22. Tests of allelic association with markers on 8p21-22 should be able to localise any quantitative trait nucleotides (QTN's) or susceptibility mutations to within a few hundred kilobases. Three brain expressed candidate susceptibility genes, prepronociceptin (PNOC), neuronal cholinergic receptor, nicotinic, alpha polypeptide 2 (CHRNA2) and arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) have been mapped to chromosome 8p21-22. A case-control, allelic association study was performed using a novel highly polymorphic dinucleotide repeat, D8S2611 near the PNOC gene, two previously characterised dinucleotide repeats, D8S131 and D8S131P at the CHRNA2 locus and an RFLP at the 3'UTR of the arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) gene. No differences were found in allele frequencies between the patient and control groups. DNA variations or mutations at or near the three genes under study are unlikely to increase susceptibility to schizophrenia in our population sample.
The neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha2 subunit gene (CHRNA2) maps to the bipolar susceptibility locus on chromosome 8p21-22. Given the biological role of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and the substantial comorbidity of nicotine dependence in psychiatric disorders, the CHRNA2 gene is a plausible candidate gene for bipolar disorder (BPD). We tested the hypothesis that variations in the CHRNA2 gene confer susceptibility to bipolar I disorder in a case-control association study. Genotypes of one amino acid substitution polymorphism (Ala125Thr) and five non-coding variations across the CHRNA2 gene were obtained from 345 unrelated bipolar I patients and 273 control samples. Genotypes and allele frequencies were compared between groups using chi-square contingency analysis. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) between markers was calculated, and estimated haplotype frequencies were compared between groups. We observed no statitistically significant difference in genotype and allele frequencies for all six variations between bipolar patients and controls, but we did demonstrate strong LD throughout the gene. Haplotype analysis showed that no combinations of alleles were associated with illness. Our results suggest that common variations in the CHRNA2 gene are unlikely to confer susceptibility to BPD in this sample. Further studies are required to elucidate the susceptibility locus for BPD on chromosome 8p21-22.
