Neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit beta-2; After binding acetylcholine, the AChR responds by an extensive change in conformation that affects all subunits and leads to opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane permeable to sodiun ions.
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE; MIM 600513) has been associated with mutations in the genes coding for the alfa-4 (CHRNA4), beta-2 (CHRNB2), and alpha-2 (CHRNA2) subunits of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) and for the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH). A four-generation ADNFLE family with six affected members was identified. All affected members presented the clinical characteristics of ADNFLE. Interictal awake and sleep EEG recordings showed no epileptiform abnormalities. Ictal video-EEG recordings showed focal seizures with frontal lobe semiology. Mutation analysis of the CHRNB2 gene revealed a c.859G>A transition (Val287Met) within the second transmembrane domain, identical to that previously described in a Scottish ADNFLE family. To our knowledge, this is the third family reported presenting a mutation in CHRNB2. The clinical phenotype appears similar to that described with mutations in CHRNA4, suggesting that mutations in these two subunits lead to similar functional alterations of the nAChR.
Potential genomic changes leading to decreased nicotine binding, crucial for cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease (AD), have not yet been studied. A search for mutations of the genes coding for the most widely distributed nicotinic receptor subtype alpha4beta2 (CHRNA4/CHRNB2) has been performed in AD patients by screening the coding regions of both genes by single strand conformation analysis and heteroduplex analysis of fibroblast-derived genomic DNA. Polymorphisms in CHRNA4, none of which led to amino acid changes in the predicted sequence, were found in three patients. Although the other receptor subunits have yet to be screened, it appears likely that the reduction of nicotine binding sites in AD is not due to genomic changes.
The alpha4beta2 nAChRs are crucial ion channels that control neurotransmitter release and play a role in various physiologic and pathologic processes. CHRNA4 encodes the alpha4-nAChRs, while CHRNB2 encodes the beta2-nAChRs. Recent studies have found different variants of alpha4beta2-nAChRs in individuals with conditions such as AD, ADHD, ALS, PD, and brain abnormalities. We conducted a scoping review following a six-stage methodology structure and adhering to PRISMA guidelines. We systematically reviewed articles using relevant keywords up to October 2, 2023. In this summary, we cover the clinical symptoms reported, the genes and protein structure of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2, mutations in these genes, inheritance patterns, the functional impact of mutations and polymorphisms in CHRNA4 and CHRNB2, and the epidemiology of these diseases. Recent research indicates that nAChRs may play a significant role in neurodegenerative disorders, possibly impacting neuronal function through yet undiscovered regulatory pathways. Studying how nAChRs interact with disease-related aggregates in neurodegenerative conditions may lead to new treatment options for these disorders.
Mutations in nAChRs are found in a rare form of nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE). Previously, some nAChR mutations have been described that are associated with additional neurological features such as psychiatric disorders or cognitive defects. Here, we report a new CHRNB2 mutation located in transmembrane region 3 (M3), outside the known ADNFLE mutation cluster. The CHRNB2 mutation I312M, which occurred de novo in twins, markedly increases the receptor's sensitivity to acetylcholine. Phenotypically, the mutation is associated not only with typical ADNFLE, but also with distinct deficits in memory. The cognitive problems are most obvious in tasks requiring the organization and storage of verbal information.
Consistent deficits in the cholinergic system are evident in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, including selective loss of alpha4beta2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in the brains of AD patients. Knockout mice for the beta2 subunit have impaired neuronal survival in ageing. Accordingly, we have analysed polymorphisms in the genes that encode the alpha4 and beta2 subunits, CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 respectively, for genetic associations with late-onset AD. A significant association for disease was observed for a non-coding polymorphism in CHRNB2 (odds ratio=0.57, 95% confidence interval=0.35-0.95, P=0.024). Replication analysis was performed in two further sample sets. While these did not individually yield significant results, a significant association remained when all samples were pooled (odds ratio=0.70, 95% confidence interval=0.52-0.95, P=0.019). These data suggest that this variant warrants further examination in large case-control series.
BACKGROUND: The genetic understanding of primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) has increased considerably in recent years due to the finding of causal genes like SLC20A2, PDGFRB and PDGFB. The phenotype of PFBC is complex and has as of yet been poorly delineated. The most common clinical presentations include movement disorders, cognitive symptoms and psychiatric conditions. We report a family including two sisters with brain calcifications due to a variant in SLC20A2 and generalized tonic-clonic seizures as the principal phenotypic trait. METHODS: The affected siblings underwent whole exome sequencing and candidate variants and cosegregation in the family were validated by Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: Both siblings and their asymptomatic father were heterozygous for a variant in SLC20A2. The siblings also had a variant in CHRNB2, a known epilepsy gene associated with autosomal dominant frontal lobe epilepsy, which they had inherited from the mother. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, the reported siblings represent the third and fourth subjects with confirmed SLC20A2 variants exhibiting epilepsy as a phenotypic trait. Our findings support seizures as part of the phenotypic spectrum of SLC20A2-related PFBC. However, the present phenotype may also result from additional genetic influence, such as the identified missense variant in CHRNB2.
PURPOSE: Our purpose was to determine the role of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 in insular epilepsy. METHOD: We identified two patients with drug-resistant predominantly sleep-related hypermotor seizures, one harboring a heterozygous missense variant (c.77C>T; p. Thr26Met) in the CHRNB2 gene and the other a heterozygous missense variant (c.1079G>A; p. Arg360Gln) in the CHRNA4 gene. The patients underwent electrophysiological and neuroimaging studies, and we performed functional characterization of the p. Thr26Met (c.77C>T) in the CHRNB2 gene. RESULTS: We localized the epileptic foci to the left insula in the first case (now seizure-free following epilepsy surgery) and to both insulae in the second case. Based on tools predicting the possible impact of amino acid substitutions on the structure and function of proteins (sorting intolerant from tolerant and PolyPhen-2), variants identified in this report could be deleterious. Functional expression in human cell lines of alpha4beta2 (wild-type), alpha4beta2-Thr26Met (homozygote), and alpha4beta2/beta2-Thr26Met (heterozygote) nicotinic acetylcholine receptors revealed that the mutant subunit led to significantly higher whole-cell nicotinic currents. This feature was observed in both homo- and heterozygous conditions and was not accompanied by major alterations of the current reversal potential or the shape of the concentration-response relation. CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that variants in CHRNB2 and CHRNA4, initially linked to autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy, are also found in patients with predominantly sleep-related insular epilepsy. Although the reported variants should be considered of unknown clinical significance for the moment, identification of additional similar cases and further functional studies could eventually strengthen this association.
OBJECTIVES: Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholinergic receptors (nAChR) and especially alpha4beta2 nAChRs are the major targets for cessation medications and also for some promising antidepressant agents. Furthermore, depressive symptoms pose multifacet difficulties during cessation therapy. However, gene encoding for the beta2 subunit of nAChRs has been poorly investigated in association with depression. Since both nicotine dependence (ND) and depressive phenotype are complex disorders, we investigated the effects of a significant early life experience, maternal bonding style (MB) and CHRNB2 gene SNPs on smoking-related depression. METHODS: We recruited two hundred and thirty-two treatment-seeking smokers in our study. Phenotypic variants were evaluated using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND), the Zung Self-Rating Depression Scale (ZSDS) and the Parental Bonding Instrument (PBI). Besides the total score (TS) of ZSDS, impulsivity (ZSDS-I) and suicidal ideation (ZSDS-S) were distinguished as phenotypic variable. DNAs were extracted from buccal mucosa samples and one SNP in promoter and two SNPs in 3' UTR of CHRNB2 gene were genotyped. GLM and ANOVA tests were performed for genotype associations and interaction analyses. RESULTS: Maternal bonding had a significant impact on depressive phenotypes. Low care, high protection and affectionless control (ALC) were associated with ZSDS-TS and all subphenotypes of ZSDS. One SNP, the rs2072660 in 3' UTR, had a significant effect on the FTND score (p=0.010). Direct association of CHRNB2 variants and depressive phenotypes were not significant. However, in interaction with ALC, rs2072660 was significantly associated with ZSDS-S (p=0.005). MB had no significant effect on smoking-related phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: Our results highlight the important role of 3' UTR in the CHRNB2 gene in the shared molecular background of ND and depressive phenotype. Parental bonding style can be suggested as a significant environmental factor in further GxE studies of depression. The presented significant GxE interaction on smoking-related suicidal subphenotype may help establish further investigations on development of more effective and safer smoking cessation and antidepressant agents.
INTRODUCTION: Smoking is a leading global cause of avoidable mortality. It has been reported that the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (CHRNA4 and CHRNB2) genes might be associated with smoking behavior in several ethnic populations. However, no study between the 2 genes and nicotine dependence (ND) using a Japanese population has been reported. METHODS: We examined the association between ND and 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the CHRNA4 and 3 SNPs within the CHRNB2 using a well characterized sample of 558 Japanese healthy male workers with a relatively homogeneous background. The Fagerstrom test for nicotine dependence (FTND) was used to quantify the degree of ND. Additionally, we explored the effect of gene-gene interactions of the 2 genes on ND. RESULTS: We found CHRNB2 rs4845652 genotypes to be associated with FTND scores under an additive genetic model: rs4845652 T-allele carriers had lower ND levels (p=0.038; when adjusted for smoking duration: p=0.052). Furthermore, we demonstrated a possible gene-gene interaction of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 on ND in a dose-dependent manner: those smokers with CHRNA4 rs1044397 GG or GA genotypes along with CHRNB2 rs4845652 CC genotype are likely to demonstrate higher ND scores. DISCUSSION: These findings suggest that CHRNB2 rs4845652 T-allele carriers may be associated with lower levels of ND, and that certain allelic combinations of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 might be correlated with higher ND levels. This preliminary study has certain limitations (issues such as sample size/power and multiple testing) that need to be taken into account, and the present work thus has an experimental nature.
BACKGROUND: Epidemiological data indicate that nicotine dependence (ND) are influenced by genes, environmental factors, and their interactions. Although it has been documented from molecular experiments that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) exerts its functions via neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor 2 (NTRK2) and both alpha 4 (CHRNA4) and beta 2 (CHRNB2) subunits are required to form functional alpha 4 beta 2-containing nicotinic receptors (nAChRs), no study is reported demonstrating that there exist gene-gene interactions among the four genes in affecting ND. METHODS: To determine if gene-gene interactions exist among the four genes, we genotyped six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for CHRNA4 and BDNF, nine SNPs for NTRK2, and four SNPs for CHRNB2 in a case-control sample containing 275 unrelated smokers with a Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence score of 4.0 or more and 348 unrelated nonsmokers. RESULTS: By using a generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction algorithm recently developed by us, we found highly significant gene-gene interactions for the gene pairs of CHRNA4 and CHRNB2, CHRNA4 and NTRK2, CHRNB2 and NTRK2, and BDNF and NTRK2 (p < .01 for all four gene pairs) and significant gene-gene interaction between CHRNA4 and BDNF (p = .031) on ND. No significant interaction was detected for CHRNB2 and BDNF (p = .068). CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides first evidence on the presence of gene-gene interaction among the four genes in affecting ND. Although CHRNB2 alone was not significantly associated with ND in several previously reported association studies on ND, we found it affects ND through interactions with CHRNA4 and NTRK2.
Twenty-four autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) probands were analyzed for the presence of V287L and V287M mutations in the CHRNB2 gene, which have been recently associated with the disease. In all patients, the involvement of the two additional loci reported as being associated with ADNFLE (CHRNA4 gene and chromosome 15q24 region) had been previously excluded. Mutational screening was performed by sequencing a polymerase chain reaction-amplified CHRNB2 DNA fragment, spanning the whole exon 5, which contains the V287L and V287M mutations and codes for approximately 65% of the mature protein. In none of the patients were mutations in the analyzed region of CHRNB2 found. These data, obtained in the largest ADNFLE cohort so far analyzed, demonstrate the rarity of the identified CHRNB2 mutations in ADNFLE patients.
Smoking behavior is a complex, which includes multiple stages in the progression from experimentation to continued use and dependence. The experience of subjective effects, such as dizziness, euphoria, heart pounding, nausea and high, have been associated with varying degrees of persistence and subsequent abuse/dependence of marijuana, cocaine, tobacco and alcohol (Grant et al. 2005, Wagner & Anthony 2002). Previous studies have reported associations between neuronal nicotinic receptor (CHRN) genes and subjective effects to nicotine. We sought to replicate and expand this work by examining eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a sample of adult smokers (n = 316) who reported subjective effects following cigarette smoking in a controlled laboratory environment. Two SNPs each in the CHRNB2, CHRNB3, CHRNA6 and CHRNA4 genes were examined. A significant association was found between two SNPs and physical effects reported after smoking the first experimental cigarette. SNP rs2072658 is upstream of CHRNB2 (P-value = 0.0046) and rs2229959 is a synonymous change in exon 5 of CHRNA4 (P value = 0.0051). We also examined possible functional relevance of SNP rs2072658 using an in vitro gene expression assay. These studies provided evidence that the minor allele of rs2072658 may lead to decreased gene expression, using two separate cell lines, P19 and SH-SY5Y (18% P < 0.001 and 26% P < 0.001 respectively). The human genetic study and functional assays suggest that variation in the promoter region of CHRNB2 gene may be important in mediating levels of expression of the beta2 nicotinic receptor subunit, which may be associated with variation in subjective response to nicotine.
Genes coding for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors may influence response to nicotine replacement therapy for smoking cessation. We examined the association of a 3' untranslated region polymorphism (rs2072661) in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor beta2 subunit (CHRNB2) gene with quitting success in response to nicotine versus placebo patch during a short-term test of patch effects. In a within-subjects cross-over design, smokers of European descent (n = 156) received 21 mg nicotine and placebo patch in counter-balanced order, during two separate 5-day simulated quit attempts, each preceded by a week of ad libitum smoking. Abstinence was assessed daily by CO < 5 ppm. Smokers with the CHRNB2 GG genotype had more days of abstinence during the nicotine versus placebo patch week compared with those with the AG or AA genotypes (P < 0.01). Moreover, nicotine patch increased the probability of quitting on the target quit day, quitting anytime during the patch week, and avoiding relapse among those with the GG genotype but not the AA/AG genotypes, although the nicotine x genotype interaction was significant only for quitting on the target quit day (P < 0.05). Regardless of patch condition, quitting on the target quit day was more likely in those with the GG genotype versus AA/AG genotypes (P < 0.05). Genetic associations were not observed for craving or withdrawal responses to nicotine versus placebo patch. These findings are consistent with previous evidence of association of this variant with smoking cessation and suggest that polymorphisms in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor beta2 subunit gene may influence therapeutic responsiveness to cessation medications.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is a distinct epileptic syndrome with a broad range of severity even amongst affected members of the same pedigree, and the level of pharmacoresistance may reach 30%, close to that seen in sporadic focal epilepsies. METHODS: To investigate this issue of phenotypic heterogeneity, we prospectively carried out a high-resolution 3-T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study in an ADNFLE family containing 10 affected members including one pharmacoresistant patient and carrying the V287L mutation of the CHRN beta2 subunit (CHRNB2). MRI studies were evaluated in a manner blinded to the electro-clinical data. RESULTS: The brain MRI showed normal results in all affected individuals except the 22-year-old right-handed woman (member III-7) who had refractory seizures and typical radiological signs of left hippocampal sclerosis. She also had a simple febrile seizure at the age of 10 months. CONCLUSION: The results of this study illustrate that hippocampal sclerosis has offered a fertile substrate for intractable ADNFLE to develop. The present findings also highlight the importance of acquired factors that are directly relevant to the epilepsy phenotype and its severity even in monogenic epilepsies.
The alpha4-subunit gene (CHRNA4) of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunit family has recently been identified in two families as the gene responsible for autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE), a rare monogenic idiopathic epilepsy. As a result of this finding, other subunits of the neuronal nAChR gene family are being considered as candidate genes for ADNFLE in families not linked to CHRNA4 and for other idiopathic epilepsies. Alpha4-subunits often assemble together with beta2-subunits (gene symbol CHRNB2) to build heteromeric nAChRs. The gene encoding another abundant AChR subunit, the alpha3-subunit gene (CHRNA3), is present with those encoding two other subunits, CHRNB4 and CHRNA5, in a gene cluster whose functional role is still unclear. Here we provide the information on the genomic structures of both the CHRNB2 and the CHRNA3 genes that is necessary for comprehensive mutational analyses, and we refine the genomic assignment of CHRNB2 on chromosome 1.
Autosomal dominant sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy is a rare disease caused by pathogenic variants of CHRNB2, CHRNA4, and CHRNA2 genes, with nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy as the main symptoms. Syntaxin binding protein 1 (STXBP1) gene mutation can cause developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 4, mainly presenting as a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy. We performed the exome-targeted next-generation sequencing in our patient and identified two heterozygous variants: c.963 + 2T>C of STXBP1 and c.520_527delinsTGCTAC (p.R174Cfs*16) of CHRNB2. Molecular analysis was performed of the variant c.963 + 2T>C. Aberrantly spliced products were observed, proving the pathogenicity of this variant. Refractory seizures and developmental delay could be explained. Although the variant c.520_527delinsTGCTAC could cause the truncation of the proteins, it was ultimately determined to be nonpathogenic. The startle-like responses that occurred occasionally during the night were ultimately determined to be an uncommon phenotype caused by the STXBP1 variant.
