Neuronal acetylcholine receptor subunit alpha-6; After binding acetylcholine, the AChR responds by an extensive change in conformation that affects all subunits and leads to opening of an ion-conducting channel across the plasma membrane; Belongs to the ligand-gated ion channel (TC 1.A.9) family. Acetylcholine receptor (TC 1.A.9.1) subfamily. Alpha-6/CHRNA6 sub- subfamily.
Although numerous studies have revealed significant associations between variants in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) subunits and nicotine dependence (ND), only few studies were performed in Chinese subjects. Here, we performed association and interaction analysis for 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CHRNB3-CHRNA6 gene cluster with ND in a Chinese Han population (N = 5,055). We found nominally significant associations for all tested SNPs with ND measured by the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence score; of these, 11 SNPs remained significant after Bonferroni correction for multiple tests (p = 9 x 10(-4)~2 x 10(-3)). Further conditional analysis indicated that no other SNP was significantly associated with ND independent of the most-highly significant SNP, rs6474414. Also, our haplotype-based association analysis indicated that each haplotype block was significantly associated with ND (p < 0.01). Further, we provide the first evidence of the genetic interaction of these two genes in affecting ND in this sample with an empirical p-value of 0.0015. Finally, our meta-analysis of samples with Asian and European origins for five SNPs in CHRNB3 showed significant associations with ND, with p-values ranging from 6.86 x 10(-14) for rs13280604 to 6.50 x 10(-8) for rs4950(.) This represents the first study showing that CHRNB3/A6 are highly associated with ND in a large Chinese Han sample.
Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma (EMC) is an uncommon mesenchymal neoplasm characteristically composed of uniform-appearing round to spindle-shaped cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and abundant myxoid extracellular matrix. Although the majority of cases harbor a pathognomonic t(9;22) translocation that fuses EWSR1 with the orphan nuclear receptor NR4A3, there are less common variants that partner NR4A3 with TAF15, TCF12, or TFG. By immunohistochemistry, EMC has features of both cartilaginous and neuroendocrine differentiation, as evidenced by inconsistent expression of S100 protein and synaptophysin or INSM1, respectively, in a subset of cases. Given the limitations of available immunohistochemical stains for the diagnosis of EMC, we analyzed genome-wide gene expression microarray data to identify candidate biomarkers based on differential expression in EMC in comparison with other mesenchymal neoplasms. This analysis pointed to CHRNA6 as the gene with the highest relative expression in EMC (96-fold; P = 8.2 x 10(-26)) and the only gene with >50-fold increased expression in EMC compared with other tumors. Using RNA chromogenic in situ hybridization, we observed strong and diffuse expression of CHRNA6 in 25 cases of EMC, including both EWSR1-rearranged and TAF15-rearranged variants. All examined cases of histologic mimics were negative for CHRNA6 overexpression; however, limited CHRNA6 expression, not reaching a threshold of >5 puncta or 1 aggregate of chromogen in >25% of cells, was observed in 69 of 685 mimics (10.1%), spanning an array of mesenchymal tumors. Taken together, these findings suggest that, with careful interpretation and the use of appropriate thresholds, CHRNA6 RNA chromogenic in situ hybridization is a potentially useful ancillary histologic tool for the diagnosis of EMC.
In the U.S.A., cocaine is the second most abused illicit drug. Variants within the CHRNB3-A6 gene cluster have been associated with cigarette consumption in several GWAS. These receptors represent intriguing candidates for the study of cocaine dependence because nicotinic receptors are thought to be involved in generalized addiction pathways. Using genotypic data from a GWAS of the Study of Addiction: Genetics and Environment (SAGE) dataset, we tested for association of CHRNB3-A6 SNPs with DSM-5 cocaine use disorder. Multiple SNPs in the region were significantly associated with increased risk of cocaine use disorder. Inclusion of the most significant SNP as a covariate in a linear regression model provided evidence for an additional independent signal within this locus for cocaine use disorder. These results suggest that the CHRNB3-A6 locus contains multiple variants affecting risk for vulnerability to cocaine and nicotine dependence as well as bipolar disorder, suggesting that they have pleiotropic effects.
BACKGROUND: Lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) is a subtype of lung cancer with a poor prognosis and limited treatment options. Previous studies show that some components of the cholinergic pathway may play important roles in the tumorigenesis of lung cancer, including LUSC. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to investigate the involvement of cholinergic genes in immune infiltration in LUSC, and identify the key genes in the pathway and analyze their potential as targets for LUSC treatment and novel drugs. METHODS: We first screened the cholinergic genes associated with immune infiltration in LUSC based on transcriptomic samples and explored the correlation between the key genes and immune infiltrating cells and immune pathways. Then, we assessed the effect of immunotherapeutic response in the high and low-expression groups of key genes in vitro. And finally, we screened potential drugs for the treatment of LUSC. RESULTS: We found that the expression of CHRNA6, the gene encoding the alpha6 subunit of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR), was significantly correlated with the proportion of immune infiltrating cells in LUSC, and the high expression level of the gene was associated with poor prognosis of the disease. Also, the proportion of Tregs, M1 macrophages, and resting mast cells was correlated with the expression of CHRNA6. In addition, LUSC patients with higher CHRNA6 expression levels had better immunotherapy responses. Furthermore, we found that the drugs, i.e., adavosertib, varbulin and pyrazoloacridine, had a strong affinity with CHRNA6, with adavosertib binding most stably with the protein. CONCLUSION: CHRNA6 may be associated with immune infiltration in LUSC and affects patient prognosis and immunotherapeutic response by regulating immune cells and immune pathways. In addition, adavosertib may be a potential drug for the treatment of LUSC.
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are important regulators of smoking behavior and tobacco carcinogenesis. We studied the association of the CHRNB3-A6 variant rs13280604 in relation to esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) in Chinese populations. Two independent case-control studies were conducted. The first case-control study, consisted of 866 ESCC patients and 1621 healthy controls from Northern China, and the second case-control study consisted of 853 ESCC patients and 860 unrelated controls from Southern China. A logistic regression model was used to evaluate the associations of rs13280604 with cancer risk. We found that Rs13280604 GG/AG genotypes were significantly associated with increased risk for ESCC in both case-control studies from Northern [odds ratio (OR), 1.42, 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.19-1.70, P = 1.1x10(-4)], Southern China (OR, 1.56, 95% CI, 1.26-1.93, P = 5.2x10(-5)), and the combined population of both studies (OR, 1.44, 95% CI, 1.26-1.65, P = 8.7x10(-8)), respectively. Our results suggest that this CHRNB3-A6 variant confers susceptibility to ESCC risk. However, future larger studies are needed to validate our finding.
The direct physiological effects that promote nicotine dependence (ND) are mediated by nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs). In line with the genetic and pharmacological basis of addiction, many previous studies have revealed significant associations between variants in the nAChR subunit genes and various measures of ND in different ethnic samples. In this study, we first examined the association of variants in nAChR subunits alpha2 (CHRNA2) and alpha6 (CHRNA6) genes on chromosome 8 with ND using a family sample consisting of 1,730 European Americans (EAs) from 495 families and 1,892 African Americans (AAs) from 424 families (defined as the discovery family sample). ND was assessed by two standard quantitative measures: smoking quantity (SQ) and the Fagerstrom Test for ND (FTND). We found nominal associations for all seven tested SNPs of the genes with at least one ND measure in the EA sample and for two SNPs in CHRNA2 in the AA sample. Of these, associations of SNPs rs3735757 with FTND (P = 0.0068) and rs2472553 with both ND measures (with a P value of 0.0043 and 0.00086 for SQ and FTND, respectively) continued to be significant in the EA sample even after correction for multiple tests. Further, we found several haplotypes that were significantly associated with ND in the EA sample in CHRNA6 and in the both EA and AA samples in CHRNA2. To confirm the associations of the two genes with ND, we conducted a replication study with an independent case-control sample from the SAGE study, which showed a significant association of the two genes with ND, although the significantly associated SNPs were not always the same in the two samples. Together, these findings indicate that both CHRNA2 and CHRNA6 play a significant role in the etiology of ND in AA and EA smokers. Further replication in additional independent samples is warranted.
The CHRNA6 and CHRNB3 genes have been associated with nicotine dependence and early subjective response to nicotine. Here we present evidence, using a nationally representative sample of adults, that this region is also associated with alcohol behaviors. Six SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) spanning the CHRNB3/A6 genes were analyzed using the statistical genetics software FBAT-PC, which allows one to examine a collection of multiple phenotypes to generate a maximally heritable composite phenotype for each SNP. The six SNPs were tested using FBAT-PC including four alcohol phenotypes: average number of drinks, blackouts, total number of DSM-IV abuse and dependence symptoms endorsed, and quit attempts. Three SNPs in CHRNA6 (rs1072003, P = 0.015; rs892413, P = 0.0033 and rs2304297, P = 0.012) and one SNP in CHRNB3 (rs13280604, P = 0.0053) were associated with a composite of the alcohol phenotypes. The association was primarily driven by the average number of drinks.
BACKGROUND: Many factors associated with causing psoriasis have been reported, such as the genetic and environmental factors. Smoking is one of the well-established environmental risk factors for psoriasis and also associated with the disease severity. In addition, several studies of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis have documented gene-environment interactions involving smoking behavior. Although gene polymorphisms on nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits CHRNB3-CHRNA6 region gene have been found to correlate with smoking behavior and lung cancer susceptibility in Chinese Han population, the combined effect between the smoking-related genetic variants and smoking behavior on psoriasis vulgaris (PV) has been unreported. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the combined effect of the smoking-related (rs6474412-C/T) polymorphism on CHRNB3-CHRNA6 region gene and smoking behavior on PV risk and clinic traits in Chinese Han population. METHODS: A hospital-based case-control study including 672 subjects (355 PV cases and 317 controls) was conducted. The variant of rs6474412 was typed by SNaPshot Multiplex Kit (Applied Biosystems Co., USA). RESULTS: The higher body mass index (BMI>/=25), smoking behavior and alcohol consumption were risk factors for PV, and the estimated ORs were 1.55 (95% CI, 1.09-2.29), 1.74 (95% CI, 1.22-2.49) and 1.81 (95% CI, 1.25-2.62) respectively. The smoking patients had more severe conditions than non-smokers (OR=1.71, 95% CI, 1.08-2.70, P=0.020). The alleles and genotypes of rs6474412 were not associated with risk of PV, but the combined effect of rs6474412 genotype (TT) and smoking behavior increased severity of PV (OR=5.95; 95% CI, 1.39-25.31; P<0.05; adjusted OR=2.20; 95% CI, 1.55-3.14; P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the combined effect of rs6474412-C/T polymorphism in smoking-related CHRNB3-CHRNA6 region gene and smoking behavior may not confer risk to PV, but may have impact on PV severity in Chinese Han population.
Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors are activated by both endogenous acetylcholine and exogenous nicotine, making sequence variations in these receptors likely candidates for association with tobacco phenotypes. Previous studies have found evidence for significant association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genomic region containing the CHRNA6 and CHRNB3 genes and tobacco behaviors. In this study, we provide support for an association between these genes and tobacco dependence in the National Youth Survey Family Study wave 10, a nationally representative sample of households. Eight SNPs in the CHRNA6 and CHRNB3 genomic region were genotyped in 1051 subjects, approximately half of whom are members of sibling pairs. Genetic association with DSM-IV dependence was assessed using a family-based approach as implemented in the statistical package PBAT. Individual SNPs were tested for association with quit attempts and overall dependence. Variation in CHRNA6 was found to be associated with tobacco dependence (p=0.007 in Caucasians). SNPs in CHRNB3 were found to be associated with the number of quit attempts (p=0.0024). Together these results further implicate the region downstream of CHRNA6 and the region upstream of CHRNB3 in risk of nicotine dependence.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular cause(s) underlying a severe form of infantile-onset parkinsonism and characterize functionally the identified variants. METHODS: A trio-based whole exome sequencing (WES) approach was used to identify the candidate variants underlying the disorder. In silico modeling, and in vitro and in vivo studies were performed to explore the impact of these variants on protein function and relevant cellular processes. RESULTS: WES analysis identified biallelic variants in WARS2, encoding the mitochondrial tryptophanyl tRNA synthetase (mtTrpRS), a gene whose mutations have recently been associated with multiple neurological phenotypes, including childhood-onset, levodopa-responsive or unresponsive parkinsonism in a few patients. A substantial reduction of mtTrpRS levels in mitochondria and reduced OXPHOS function was demonstrated, supporting their pathogenicity. Based on the infantile-onset and severity of the phenotype, additional variants were considered as possible genetic modifiers. Functional assessment of a selected panel of candidates pointed to a de novo missense mutation in CHRNA6, encoding the alpha6 subunit of neuronal nicotinic receptors, which are involved in the cholinergic modulation of dopamine release in the striatum, as a second event likely contributing to the phenotype. In silico, in vitro (Xenopus oocytes and GH4C1 cells) and in vivo (C. elegans) analyses demonstrated the disruptive effects of the mutation on acetylcholine receptor structure and function. CONCLUSION: Our findings consolidate the association between biallelic WARS2 mutations and movement disorders, and suggest CHRNA6 as a genetic modifier of the phenotype.
Common SNPs in nicotinic acetylcholine receptor genes (CHRN genes) have been associated with drug behaviors and personality traits, but the influence of rare genetic variants is not well characterized. The goal of this project was to identify novel rare variants in CHRN genes in the Center for Antisocial Drug Dependence (CADD) and Genetics of Antisocial Drug Dependence (GADD) samples and to determine if low frequency variants are associated with antisocial drug dependence. Two samples of 114 and 200 individuals were selected using a case/control design including the tails of the phenotypic distribution of antisocial drug dependence. The capture, sequencing, and analysis of all variants in 16 CHRN genes (CHRNA1-7, 9, 10, CHRNB1-4, CHRND, CHRNG, CHRNE) were performed independently for each subject in each sample. Sequencing reads were aligned to the human reference sequence using BWA prior to variant calling with the Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK). Low frequency variants (minor allele frequency < 0.05) were analyzed using SKAT-O and C-alpha to examine the distribution of rare variants among cases and controls. In our larger sample, the region containing the CHRNA6/CHRNB3 gene cluster was significantly associated with disease status using both SKAT-O and C-alpha (unadjusted p values <0.05). More low frequency variants in the CHRNA6/CHRNB3 gene region were observed in cases compared to controls. These data support a role for genetic variants in CHRN genes and antisocial drug behaviors.
Smoking is a common risk factor for many diseases. We conducted genome-wide association meta-analyses for the number of cigarettes smoked per day (CPD) in smokers (n = 31,266) and smoking initiation (n = 46,481) using samples from the ENGAGE Consortium. In a second stage, we tested selected SNPs with in silico replication in the Tobacco and Genetics (TAG) and Glaxo Smith Kline (Ox-GSK) consortia cohorts (n = 45,691 smokers) and assessed some of those in a third sample of European ancestry (n = 9,040). Variants in three genomic regions associated with CPD (P < 5 x 10(-8)), including previously identified SNPs at 15q25 represented by rs1051730[A] (effect size = 0.80 CPD, P = 2.4 x 10(-69)), and SNPs at 19q13 and 8p11, represented by rs4105144[C] (effect size = 0.39 CPD, P = 2.2 x 10(-12)) and rs6474412-T (effect size = 0.29 CPD, P = 1.4 x 10(-8)), respectively. Among the genes at the two newly associated loci are genes encoding nicotine-metabolizing enzymes (CYP2A6 and CYP2B6) and nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits (CHRNB3 and CHRNA6), all of which have been highlighted in previous studies of smoking and nicotine dependence. Nominal associations with lung cancer were observed at both 8p11 (rs6474412[T], odds ratio (OR) = 1.09, P = 0.04) and 19q13 (rs4105144[C], OR = 1.12, P = 0.0006).
Neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors have been implicated in various measures of nicotine dependence. In this paper, we present findings from an exploratory study of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the CHRNB3 and CHRNA6 genes with tobacco and alcohol phenotypes, including frequency of use and three subjective response factors occurring shortly after initiation of use. Subjects were 1056 ethnically diverse adolescents ascertained from clinical and community settings. The most significant associations were found between two CHRNB3 SNPs (rs4950 and rs13280604) and the three subjective response factors to initial tobacco use. These findings were replicated in a separate community sample of 1524 families participating in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. Both CHRNB3 SNPs were found to be associated with similar measures of subjective response to tobacco. These results indicate that early subjective response to nicotine may be a valuable endophenotype for genetic studies aimed at uncovering genes contributing to nicotine use and addiction.
AIMS: Studies have shown association between common variants in the alpha6-beta3 nicotinic receptor subunit gene cluster and nicotine dependence in European ancestry populations. We investigate whether this generalizes to African Americans, whether the association is specific to nicotine dependence and whether this region contains additional genetic contributors to nicotine dependence. DESIGN: We examined consistency of association across studies and race between the alpha6beta3 nicotinic receptor subunit locus and nicotine, alcohol, marijuana and cocaine dependence in three independent studies. SETTING: United States of America. PARTICIPANTS: European Americans and African Americans from three case-control studies of substance dependence. MEASUREMENTS: Subjects were evaluated using the Semi-Structured Assessment for the Genetics of Alcoholism. Nicotine dependence was determined using the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence. FINDINGS: The single nucleotide polymorphism rs13273442 was associated significantly with nicotine dependence across all three studies in both ancestry groups [odds ratio (OR) = 0.75, P = 5.8 x 10(-4) European Americans; OR = 0.80, P = 0.05 African Americans]. No other substance dependence was associated consistently with this variant in either group. Another SNP in the region, rs4952, remains modestly associated with nicotine dependence in the combined data after conditioning on rs13273442. CONCLUSIONS: The common variant rs13273442 in the CHRNB3-CHNRA6 region is associated significantly with nicotine dependence in European Americans and African Americans across studies recruited for nicotine, alcohol and cocaine dependence. Although these data are modestly powered for other substances, our results provide no evidence that correlates of rs13273442 represent a general substance dependence liability. Additional variants probably account for some of the association of this region to nicotine dependence.
