cGMP-gated cation channel alpha-1; Subunit of the rod cyclic GMP-gated cation channel, which is involved in the final stage of the phototransduction pathway. When light hits rod photoreceptors, cGMP concentrations decrease causing rapid closure of CNGA1/CNGB1 channels and, therefore, hyperpolarization of the membrane potential.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a heterogenous hereditary disorder leading to blindness. Despite using next-generation sequencing technologies, causal variants in about 60% of RP cases remain unknown. The heterogeneous genetic inheritance pattern makes it difficult to pinpoint causal variants. Besides, rare penetrating variants are hardly observed in general case-control studies. Thus, a family-based analysis, specifically in a consanguineous family, is a clinically and genetically valuable approach for RP. We analyzed a Japanese consanguineous family with a member suffering from RP with a typical autosomal recessive pattern. We sequenced five direct descendants and spouse using Whole-exome sequencing (WES) and Whole-genome sequencing (WGS). We identified a homozygous pathogenic missense variant in CNGA1 (NM_000087.3, c.839G > A, p.Arg280His) in the proband, while we found no homozygous genotypes in the other family members. CNGA1 was previously reported to be associated with RP. We confirmed the genotypes by the Sanger sequencing. Additionally, we assessed the homozygous genotype in the proband for the possibility of a founder mutation using homozygosity analysis. Our results suggested the two copies of the variant derived from a founder mutation. In conclusion, we found the homozygotes for c.839G > A in CNGA1 as causal for RP.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the most common inherited retinal diseases, characterized by photoreceptor cell death and retinal pigment epithelial atrophy. Mutations in cyclic nucleotide gated channel subunit alpha 1 (CNGA1) have been reported to cause retinitis pigmentosa. Here, we established the human induced pluripotent stem cell line (iPSC) SJTUGHi002-A, generated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of a 36-year-old male RP patient, who carried a homozygous frameshift variant in CNGA1 gene (c.265delC; p.L89Ffs*4). The cell line can serve as a patient-derived disease model for exploring the pathogenesis and drug development of CNGA1-RP.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) describes a group of inherited retinopathies that are characterized by the progressive degeneration of photoreceptor neurons, which causes night blindness, a reduction in the peripheral visual field and decreased visual acuity. More than 50 RP-related genes have been identified. In the present study, we analysed a Chinese family with autosomal recessive RP. We identified a compound heterozygous mutation, c.265delC and c.1537G>A, in CNGA1 using targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) of RP-causing genes. The mutations were validated in the family members by Sanger sequencing. The mutations co-segregated with the RP phenotype and were absent from ethnically-matched control chromosomes. The mutant (mut) CNGA1 p.(G513R) protein caused by the mis-sense novel mutation c.1537G>A was expressed in vitro. The mut CNGA1 p.(G513R) protein was largely retained inside the cell rather than being targeted to the plasma membrane, suggesting the absence of cGMP-gated cation channels in the plasma membrane would be deleterious to rod photoreceptors, leading lead to RP.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a complex group of hereditary retinal dystrophies. Although >60 genes have been identified to be associated with non‑syndromic RP, the exact genetic variant remains elusive in numerous cases of RP. In the present study, a Chinese pedigree affected by RP with autosomal recessive inheritance, including a total of seven members with one affected patient and six unaffected individuals, was recruited. Comprehensive ophthalmic examinations were performed on the proband and the proband's unaffected daughter. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. Whole‑exome sequencing (WES) was performed for the affected individual. The candidate pathogenic variant was verified by direct Sanger sequencing. The affected individual presented with classical clinical symptoms of RP. A novel homozygous variant, c.265delC (p.L89Ffs*3) in the cyclic nucleotide‑gated channel subunit alpha 1 gene was identified in the affected patient. This homozygous variant was absent in other unaffected family members and 600 ethnicity‑matched healthy controls. The variant was co‑segregated with the disease phenotype in an autosomal recessive manner.
Mammalian cyclic nucleotide-gated (CNG) channels play an essential role in the signal transduction of the visual and olfactory sensory systems. Here we reveal the structural mechanism of ligand gating in human rod CNGA1 channel by determining its cryo-EM structures in both the apo closed and cGMP-bound open states. Distinct from most other members of voltage-gated tetrameric cation channels, CNGA1 forms a central channel gate in the middle of the membrane, occluding the central cavity. Structural analyses of ion binding profiles in the selectivity filters of the wild-type channel and the E365Q filter mutant allow us to unambiguously define the two Ca(2+) binding sites inside the selectivity filter, providing structural insights into Ca(2+) blockage and permeation in CNG channels. The structure of the E365Q mutant also reveals two alternative side-chain conformations at Q365, providing a plausible explanation for the voltage-dependent gating of CNG channel acquired upon E365 mutation.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate frequent disease-causing gene mutations in autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) in the Japanese population. METHODS: In total, 99 Japanese patients with non-syndromic and unrelated arRP or sporadic RP (spRP) were recruited in this study and ophthalmic examinations were conducted for the diagnosis of RP. Among these patients, whole exome sequencing analysis of 30 RP patients and direct sequencing screening of all CNGA1 exons of the other 69 RP patients were performed. RESULTS: Whole exome sequencing of 30 arRP/spRP patients identified disease-causing gene mutations of CNGA1 (four patients), EYS (three patients) and SAG (one patient) in eight patients and potential disease-causing gene variants of USH2A (two patients), EYS (one patient), TULP1 (one patient) and C2orf71 (one patient) in five patients. Screening of an additional 69 arRP/spRP patients for the CNGA1 gene mutation revealed one patient with a homozygous mutation. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first identification of CNGA1 mutations in arRP Japanese patients. The frequency of CNGA1 gene mutation was 5.1% (5/99 patients). CNGA1 mutations are one of the most frequent arRP-causing mutations in Japanese patients.
The recently reported structure of the human CNGA1/CNGB1 CNG channel in the open state (Xue et al., 2021a) shows that one CNGA1 and one CNGB1 subunit do not open the central hydrophobic gate completely upon cGMP binding. This is different from what has been reported for CNGA homomeric channels (Xue et al., 2021b; Zheng et al., 2020). In seeking to understand how this difference is due to the presence of the CNGB1 subunit, we find that the deposited density map (Xue et al., 2021a) (EMDB 24465) contains an additional density not reported in the images of the original publication. This additional density fits well the structure of calmodulin (CaM), and it unambiguously connects the newly identified D-helix of CNGB1 to one of the CNGA1 helices (A1(R)) participating in the coiled-coil region. Interestingly, the CNGA1 subunit that engages in the interaction with this additional density is the one that, together with CNGB1, does not open completely the central gate. The sequence of the D-helix of CNGB1 contains a known CaM-binding site of exquisitely high affinity - named CaM2 (Weitz et al., 1998) -, and thus the presence of CaM in that region is not surprising. The mechanism through which CaM reduces currents across the membrane by acting on the native channel (Bauer, 1996; Hsu and Molday, 1993; Weitz et al., 1998) remains unclear. We suggest that the presence of CaM may explain the partially open central gate reported by Xue et al. (2021a). The structure of the open and closed states of the CNGA1/CNGB1 channel may be different with and without CaM present.
