Catechol O-methyltransferase; Catalyzes the O-methylation, and thereby the inactivation, of catecholamine neurotransmitters and catechol hormones. Also shortens the biological half-lives of certain neuroactive drugs, like L-DOPA, alpha-methyl DOPA and isoproterenol; Belongs to the class I-like SAM-binding methyltransferase superfamily. Cation-dependent O-methyltransferase family.
Change-related potentials elicited by an abrupt sound feature's change are attenuated by a leading weak sound (prepulse inhibition: PPI). We investigated whether the PPI index is associated with the catechol-methyltransferase (COMT) Val158Met polymorphism (rs4680), which is involved in the metabolism of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex. Healthy subjects with normal hearing were recruited (n = 70). A train of 100-Hz clicks 650 ms in duration was used. The test stimulus was an abrupt increase in sound intensity (+10 dB) from the baseline (70 dB) provided at 400 ms after the sound onset. Three consecutive clicks at 30, 40, and 50 ms before the change's onset were greater (+3 or +5 dB) from the baseline as a prepulse. The targeting auditory evoked potential component was Change-N1 peaking approx. 130 ms after the change onset. We calculated the inhibition level as the% inhibition of the Change-N1 amplitude by a prepulse. The %PPI in the Met-carriers was significantly greater than that in the Val/Val-individuals. Our results suggest that dopamine might play a role in the PPI of the change-related response. We propose that this index has the potential to identify an intermediate phenotype in psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia.
Increasing evidence from cross-sectional and longitudinal molecular-genetic studies suggests that effects of common genetic variations on cognitive functioning increase with aging. We review the influence of candidate genes on brain functioning in old age, focusing on four genetic variations that have been extensively investigated: APOE, BDNF, COMT, and KIBRA. Similar to the behavioral evidence, there are reports from age-comparative studies documenting stronger genetic effects on measures of brain functioning in older adults compared to younger adults. This pattern suggests disproportionate impairments of neural processing among older individuals carrying disadvantageous genotypes. We discuss various factors, including gene-gene interactions, study population characteristics, lifestyle factors, and diseases, that need to be considered in future studies and may help understand inconsistent findings in the extant literature.
Recent studies have shown the contribution of genetic determinants to athletes' physical ability. However, despite the fact that cognitive abilities like self-control and stress-tolerance influence athletes' competitive performance, few studies to date have investigated the association between genetic polymorphism, which is linked to cognitive ability and athletic performance. The present study investigated the link between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which are known to exert influences on dopaminergic neural function and competitive performance of swimmers. The results have revealed superior competitive performance in competitive swimmers with Met allele of catechol-O-methyltransferase Val158Met polymorphism than those with Val/Val genotype. The investigated SNPs of DRD2 and DRD3 were not associated with swimmer's competitive performance. This finding indicates that genetic polymorphism linked to cognitive ability influences the athletes' performance.
OBJECTIVE: Leadership styles can influence subordinates' health. We investigated how the gene encoding the Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme (ie, COMT rs4680 Val158Met) influenced effects of abusive supervision and transformational leadership on subordinates' headache and neck pain. METHODS: Multiple group structural equation modeling (SEM) was employed to test associations of leadership with subordinates' pain 6 months after in a representative sample of the Norwegian working population (n = 996). Genotyping was performed by TaqMan technology. RESULTS: Abusive supervision was associated with increased risk, and transformational leadership with decreased risk, of headache and neck pain. Both leadership styles exhibited more pronounced effects in individuals with the Met/Met genotype. CONCLUSION: Met/Met employees were relatively vulnerable to adversity, but also relatively responsive to constructive leadership. Many workers may benefit more from constructive leadership than population-averaged associations might suggest.
OBJECTIVE: Previous studies have been indicated that catechol-O-methyltransferase gene (COMT) might play a significant role in the development of preeclampsia (PE). Our study aims to investigate the association between polymorphism in COMT with the susceptibility to PE in Chinese Han women. METHOD: A total of 1028 PE patients and 1399 normal pregnant women were enrolled. We detected the genotyping of COMT Val158Met loci by the TaqMan allelic discrimination real-time PCR . RESULTS: No significant difference in the genotypic and allelic distribution was found between the two groups (genotype: X(2) = 0.583, p = 0.747; allele:X(2) = 0.526, p = 0.468). CONCLUSION: The COMT Val158Met polymorphism might not be associated with PE in Chinese women.
This paper reviews the issue of hepatotoxicity with the use of the catechol-O-methly transferase (COMT) inhibitors tolcapone and entacapone. Neither drug caused hepatotoxicity in preclinical toxicity testing. However, in clinical trials of tolcapone, liver chemistry tests were elevated more than 3 times above the upper limit of normal in approximately 1% of patients who took the 100 mg dose and in approximately 3% of patients who took the 200 mg dose. These observations led to the recommendation that periodic monitoring of liver function be performed. Post-marketing surveillance studies noted 3 instances of acute liver failure with death after 60,000 patients had received tolcapone for a total of 40,000 patient-years. For this reason, the drug was withdrawn from the market in Europe and Canada, and a black box warning issued in the United States. In contrast, clinical trials with entacapone demonstrated no increase in liver enzymes above those observed with placebo. Further, no instances of acute liver failure or death attributed to the drug have been observed in post-marketing surveillance studies. Consequently, liver monitoring is not required with this agent. These data demonstrate that tolcapone is associated with a risk of hepatotoxicity but that no such risk has been detected with entacapone.
Predicting events in the ever-changing environment is a fundamental survival function intrinsic to the physiology of sensory systems, whose efficiency varies among the population. Even though it is established that a major source of such variations is genetic heritage, there are no studies tracking down auditory predicting processes to genetic mutations. Thus, we examined the neurophysiological responses to deviant stimuli recorded with magnetoencephalography (MEG) in 108 healthy participants carrying different variants of Val158Met single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene, responsible for the majority of catecholamines degradation in the prefrontal cortex. Our results showed significant amplitude enhancement of prediction error responses originating from the inferior frontal gyrus, superior and middle temporal cortices in heterozygous genotype carriers (Val/Met) vs homozygous (Val/Val and Met/Met) carriers. Integrating neurophysiology and genetics, this study shows how the neural mechanisms underlying optimal deviant detection vary according to the gene-determined cathecolamine levels in the brain.
Several lines of evidence suggest that catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) may be associated with treatment response in depression. We conducted a study on 119 patients with treatment-refractory depression admitted consecutively for electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). The COMT high/high genotype leads to a higher enzyme activity and thus lowers dopaminergic activity in the prefrontal cortex. In the present sample, those homozygous to high-active allele of COMT responded significantly more frequently to ECT.
Genetic variants of DCX, COMT and FMR1 have been linked to neurodevelopmental disorders related to intellectual disability and social behavior. In this systematic review we examine the roles of the DCX, COMT and FMR1 genes in the context of hippocampal neurogenesis with respect to these disorders with the aim of identifying important hubs and signaling pathways that may bridge these conditions. Taken together our findings indicate that factors connecting DCX, COMT, and FMR1 in intellectual disability and social behavior may converge at Wnt signaling, neuron migration, and axon and dendrite morphogenesis. Data derived from genomic research has identified a multitude of genes that are linked to brain disorders and developmental differences. Information about where and how these genes function and cooperate is lagging behind. The approach used here may help to shed light on the biological underpinnings in which key genes interface and may prove useful for the testing of specific hypotheses.
PURPOSE: Parkinson's disease (PD), a common neurodegenerative disorder, is usually treated with Levodopa (L-DOPA). The use of this drug, however, is severely limited by the development of side effects of the motor system: Levodopa-induced dyskinesia (LID). The aim of this study is to investigate the association between seven COMT gene single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the development of LID in patients with PD. METHODS: 232 Caucasian patients with PD were investigated. 212 patients with PD received Levodopa therapy. Dyskinesia was assessed with the use of the Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS). Genotyping was carried out on seven SNPs of the COMT gene (rs4680, rs6269, rs4633, rs4818, rs769224, rs165774, rs174696) using a real-time PCR method, and blind to the clinical status of the subjects. RESULTS: We found association between four SNPs, rs165774, rs4818, rs4633, rs4680, and LID. When the duration of disease was added as a covariate in regression analysis, however, the results did not reach statistical significance. Only the additive model for rs165774 was found to be close to be statistical significance (OR = 1.627 [0.976-2.741], permutation p = 0.057). CONCLUSIONS: The results failed to clearly support a contribution of the studied polymorphisms; this may be related to a dominant relationship with the disease duration confounding the effect on the prevalence of LID.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is an enzyme that catalyses the methylation of catechol substrates, classically in catecholamine metabolism, but also acting upon other substrates such as oestrogen and polyphenols. Although its classical function has been established for more than five decades, an ever expanding COMT role in other pathways and diseases has become a subject of active study in recent years. The most highlighted domains are related with COMT involvement in neuropsychiatric disorders and its role in the neurobiology of cognition, behaviour, emotions, pain processing and perception, sleep regulation, addictive behaviour and neurodegeneration. Nonetheless, great attention is also being devoted to a possible COMT contribution to the development of cardiovascular disorders and hormonally influenced diseases, including cancer. This review aims to update the role of COMT function and its involvement in cardiovascular and neurological disorders.
Genetic variation in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) Val158Met polymorphism has been shown to influence performance on cognitive and emotional tasks. Specifically, it has been suggested that the Met allele might be less advantageous than the Val allele with respect to emotional processing. This study addresses the question whether the presence of the Met allele is directly related to both lower emotional verbalizing proficiency and differences in brain activation during emotional processing. Specifically, we investigated whether COMT genotype would be associated with differences in activation in cortical midline structures during valence evaluation of words. Forty participants ranging from low to high on the verbalizing subscale of the Bermond-Vorst Alexithymia Questionnaire (BVAQ) were genotyped for the COMT Val158Met polymorphism. During fMRI, they evaluated the valence of emotional words. Met homozygotes reported more difficulties in verbalizing their feelings. In addition, the Met allele was associated with attenuated brain activation in posterior cingulate gyrus and precuneus during valence evaluation. We conclude that the Met allele modulates neural activation in regions associated with emotional awareness. Our findings may contribute to understanding the neural correlates of susceptibility for affective disorders.
In recent years, L-Dopa treatment has been indicated as an acquired cause of hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy). The mechanism underlying L-Dopa-related HHcy is the O-methylation of the drug catalyzed by the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Folate and cobalamin status also influences the effects of L-Dopa on plasma homocysteine (Hcy) levels. Although clinical correlations of HHcy in Parkinson's disease still remain uncertain, management of elevated plasma Hcy levels has been advocated, due to multiple cytotoxic effects of Hcy on neurons. This review summarizes data available in the literature concerning the two main therapeutic approaches to L-Dopa-related HHcy (use of COMT inhibitors or B vitamins diet supplementation).
OBJECTIVE: In the prefrontal cortex, the enzyme catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) is critical in the metabolic degradation of dopamine, a neurotransmitter hypothesized to influence human cognitive function. The COMT gene contains a functional polymorphism, Val158Met, that exerts a fourfold effect on enzyme activity. The current study investigated whether prefrontal cognition varies with COMT genotype. METHOD: Val158Met was genotyped in 73 healthy volunteers. A task of prefrontal cognition, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, was also administered. RESULTS: Subjects with only the low-activity met allele made significantly fewer perseverative errors on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test than did subjects with the val allele. CONCLUSIONS: These data are consistent with those of previous studies, suggesting that a functional genetic polymorphism may influence prefrontal cognition.
This study investigated the association between the catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) Val158Met polymorphism and executive functions in 101 patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and 100 healthy-control subjects (HS). Results showed that there was no significant difference for the genotype distributions between the OCD and HS groups. OCD-Met carrier subgroup's TMT B-A difference and lexical fluency scores were found to be significantly poorer than both HS subgroups. These findings suggest that lower activity of COMT associated with the Met allele, leading to higher levels of dopamine in the prefrontal cortex, lead to poorer executive function in OCD.
Antidepressant drugs are the preferred choice for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). However, the choice of pharmacotherapy is determined on a trial-and-error basis, as the underlying mechanisms of treatment response are unknown. We examined whether the COMT gene, which has been known to play a role in antidepressant treatment response in major depressive disorder (MDD), has a pharmacogenetic effect in antidepressant treatment response in GAD. In our study, 156 patients diagnosed with GAD received venlafaxine XR treatment as part of an 18-month relapse prevention study. Genotypes were obtained for the COMT functional variant rs4680 (Val158Met) for all patients; however, pharmacogenetic analysis was only conducted for the European American population (n=112). We found no significant association between our primary Hamilton Anxiety Scale outcome measure and rs4680. However, we did find a nominally significant allelic association between this variant and a secondary treatment outcome measure (CGI-I) in our European American population (n=112). Furthermore, we show a slight dominant effect of the A-allele with the CGI-I measure in the European American population indicating a possible pharmacogenetic role of rs4680 in antidepressant treatment outcome in GAD. Further studies in a larger population are needed to confirm this effect.
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) metabolizes catechol neurotransmitters dopamine, noradrenaline and adrenaline that are involved in various physiological functions including mood, cognition and stress response. Human pain is closely related to all these functions. The gene encoding the COMT enzyme (COMT) has functional polymorphisms that contribute to the interindividual variability in human pain phenotypes such as pain sensitivity, chronicity, severity and response to pain medicine. This review outlines pain symptoms and syndromes that are affected by COMT functional variation, summarizes findings of genetic association studies and provides critical outlook on reported results. Although the exact mechanism of the effect of COMT on human pain is currently uncertain, it has a clear potential to predict clinical outcomes and identify patients at risk for developing pain conditions.
BACKGROUND: Exposure to stressful life events increases the risk of developing a psychotic disorder. Moreover, increased reactivity to stress seems to represent part of the vulnerability for psychosis. This study aimed to investigate whether a functional polymorphism in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT Val(158)Met) gene moderates the psychosis-inducing effects of stress. METHOD: A semi-experimental stress exposure paradigm was used in a sample of 306 genotyped young men (aged 19-24 years), in whom measures of psychotic symptoms were obtained at recruitment in the Greek army (exposed condition) and again after 18 months of military training (unexposed condition). RESULTS: Stress exposure at army induction was associated with an increased level of psychotic symptoms. In addition, carriers of the COMT Val(158)Met Val allele were more susceptible to the effect of stress on the psychosis outcome than those with the Met/Met genotype (test for interaction: chi2 = 5.02, df = 1, p = 0.025). CONCLUSION: The COMT Val(158)Met genotype may moderate the effect of stress on psychotic symptoms.
