Macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for CSF1 and IL34 and plays an essential role in the regulation of survival, proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic precursor cells, especially mononuclear phagocytes, such as macrophages and monocytes. Promotes the release of proinflammatory chemokines in response to IL34 and CSF1, and thereby plays an important role in innate immunity and in inflammatory processes. Plays an important role in the regulation of osteoclast proliferation and differentiation, the regulat [...] 
Colony-Stimulating Factor-1 Receptor (CSF1R) is a receptor tyrosine kinase that controls the differentiation and maintenance of most tissue-resident macrophages and bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Mutations of CSF1R have been implicated in neurodegeneration, skeletal anomalies, and cancers. Activation of CSF1R by endogenous cytokine ligation to the ectodomain triggers the autophosphorylation of the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain, and thereafter, activation of several downstream pro-survival kinase cascades, including PI3K, ERK1/2, and JNK. The immunological role of CSF1R in regulating tumor-associate macrophages (TAMs) have been well-documented. TAMs harboring activated CSF1R release tumorigenic cytokines, which further deconditioning tumor microenvironment to a protumoral phenotype. Pharmacological inhibition of CSF1R has emerged as a promising antitumor strategy, with PLX3397 (pexidartinib) been approved by the FDA for the treatment of tenosynovial giant cell tumor in 2019. Research around developing novel small-molecule CSF1R inhibitors, as well as expanding their potential indications, have drawn numerous attentions thenceforward. Herein, we've comprehensively reviewed the latest progression of CSF1R inhibitors under clinical and preclinical studies. Key findings of CSF1R targeted therapies either as monotherapy or combinatorial therapy have also been discussed.
The tumor-permissive and immunosuppressive characteristics of tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) have fueled interest in therapeutically targeting these cells. In this context, the colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF1)/colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) axis has gained the most attention, and various approaches targeting either the ligands or the receptor are currently in clinical development. Emerging data on the tolerability of CSF1/CSF1R-targeting agents suggest a favorable safety profile, making them attractive combination partners for both standard treatment modalities and immunotherapeutic agents. The specificity of these agents and their potent blocking activity has been substantiated by impressive response rates in diffuse-type tenosynovial giant cell tumors, a benign connective tissue disorder driven by CSF1 in an autocrine fashion. In the malignant disease setting, data on the clinical activity of immunotherapy combinations with CSF1/CSF1R-targeting agents are pending. As our knowledge of macrophage biology expands, it becomes apparent that the complex phenotypic and functional properties of macrophages are heavily influenced by a continuum of survival, differentiation, recruitment, and polarization signals within their specific tissue environment. Thus, the role of macrophages in regulating tumorigenesis and the impact of depleting and/or reprogramming TAM as therapeutic approaches for cancer patients may vary greatly depending on organ-specific characteristics of these cells. We review the currently available clinical safety and efficacy data with CSF1/CSF1R-targeting agents and provide a comprehensive overview of ongoing clinical studies. Furthermore, we discuss the local tissue macrophage and tumor-type specificities and their potential impact on CSF1/CSF1R-targeting treatment strategies for the future.
Histiocytoses are clonal hematopoietic disorders frequently driven by mutations mapping to the BRAF and MEK1 and MEK2 kinases. Currently, however, the developmental origins of histiocytoses in patients are not well understood, and clinically meaningful therapeutic targets outside of BRAF and MEK are undefined. In this study, we uncovered activating mutations in CSF1R and rearrangements in RET and ALK that conferred dramatic responses to selective inhibition of RET (selpercatinib) and crizotinib, respectively, in patients with histiocytosis.
BACKGROUND: Tumor-associated macrophages play a significant role in tumor progression. CSF-1/CSF-1R is one of the most primary regulators of macrophage physiology in immune system. The expression of CSF-1/CSF-1R in nasopharyngeal carcinoma is unclear. OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to compare the expression of CSF-1R in nasopharyngeal carcinoma to nasopharyngitis for assessing the role CSF-1/CSF-1R in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Diagnostic tissues from 56 nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients and 32 nasopharyngitis patients were evaluated retrospectively by immunohistochemical analysis for the expression of CSF-1R. RESULTS: Significant differences of CSF-1R expression exists between nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients and nasopharyngitis patients (p<0.001). However, there is no relevance between CSF-1R and worse survival.
Hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS) is an adult-onset autosomal dominant leukoencephalopathy resulting from mutations affecting the tyrosine kinase domain of the colony stimulating factor receptor 1 protein (encoded by CSF1R). The clinical phenotypes reported with CSF1R mutations are variable. We present a case of a patient with a pathogenic variant in the CSF1R gene with clinical and imaging features suggestive of Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB). This case expands the known clinical presentations associated with CSF1R mutations.
BACKGROUND: Tumor-associated macrophages participate in the complex network of support that favors tumor growth. Among the various strategies that have been developed to target these cells, the blockade of the colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R) receptor is one of the most promising ones. Here, we characterize the resulting state of human macrophages exposed to a CSF-1R kinase inhibitor. METHODS: Using RNA sequencing and metabolomics approach, we characterize the reprogramming of human monocyte-derived macrophages under CSF-1R targeting. RESULTS: We find that CSF-1R receptor inhibition in human macrophages is able to impair cholesterol synthesis, fatty acid metabolism and hypoxia-driven expression of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, an enzyme responsible for the 5-fluorouracil macrophage-mediated chemoresistance. We show that this inhibition of the CSF-1R receptor leads to a downregulation of the expression of sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2, a transcription factor that controls cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis. We also show that the inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation resulting from targeting the CSF-1R receptor destabilizes the expression of hypoxic induced factor 2 alpha in hypoxia resulting in the downregulation of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase expression restoring the sensitivity to 5-fluorouracil in colorectal cancer. CONCLUSIONS: These results reveal the unexpected metabolic rewiring resulting from the CSF-1R receptor targeting of human macrophages and its potential to reverse macrophage-mediated chemoresistance in colorectal tumors.
