Cathepsin G; Serine protease with trypsin- and chymotrypsin-like specificity. Cleaves complement C3. Has antibacterial activity against the Gram-negative bacterium P.aeruginosa, antibacterial activity is inhibited by LPS from P.aeruginosa, Z-Gly-Leu-Phe-CH2Cl and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride.
Chromatin undergoes extensive reprogramming during immune cell differentiation. Here we report the repression of controlled histone H3 amino terminus proteolytic cleavage (H3DeltaN) during monocyte-to-macrophage development. This abundant histone mark in human peripheral blood monocytes is catalyzed by neutrophil serine proteases (NSPs) cathepsin G, neutrophil elastase and proteinase 3. NSPs are repressed as monocytes mature into macrophages. Integrative epigenomic analysis reveals widespread H3DeltaN distribution across the genome in a monocytic cell line and primary monocytes, which becomes largely undetectable in fully differentiated macrophages. H3DeltaN is enriched at permissive chromatin and actively transcribed genes. Simultaneous NSP depletion in monocytic cells results in H3DeltaN loss and further increase in chromatin accessibility, which likely primes the chromatin for gene expression reprogramming. Importantly, H3DeltaN is reduced in monocytes from patients with systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis, an autoinflammatory disease with prominent macrophage involvement. Overall, we uncover an epigenetic mechanism that primes the chromatin to facilitate macrophage development.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most common gastrointestinal tumor worldwide, which is a severe malignant disease that threatens mankind. Cathepsin G (CTSG) has been reported to be associated with tumorigenesis, whereas its role in CRC is still unclear. This investigation aims to determine the function of CTSG in CRC. Our results indicated that CTSG was inhibited in CRC tissues, and patients with CTSG low expression have poor overall survival. Functional experiments revealed that CTSG overexpression suppressed CRC cell progression in vitro and in vivo, whereas CTSG suppression supports CRC development cells in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, CTSG overexpression suppressed Akt/mTOR signaling mechanism and elevated apoptotic-associated markers, and CTSG silencing activated Akt/mTOR signaling mechanisms and inhibited apoptotic-associated markers. Furthermore, the Akt suppression signaling pathway by MK2206 abolishes CTSG-silenced expression-induced cell viability and Bcl2 up-regulation in vitro and in vivo. Altogether, these outcomes demonstrate that CTSG may act as a tumor suppressor gene via Akt/mTOR/Bcl2-mediated anti-apoptotic signaling inactivation, and CTSG represents a potential therapeutic target in CRC.
Cathepsin G (CTSG) plays an important role in the regulation of immune processes. Accumulated studies show that CTSG is involved in the onset and development of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). As the genetic background of T1DM varies widely among populations, we aimed to study the relationship between genetic polymorphisms in CTSG and T1DM susceptibility in Chinese populations. A total of 141 patients with T1DM and 200 healthy controls were enrolled in the study. Serum CTSG expression was detected using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Genotyping of two selected single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs2236742 and rs2070697) of CTSG was performed using PCR and Sanger sequencing. CTSG expression in patients with T1DM was significantly higher than in the control group. Alleles C and T of CTSG SNP rs2236742 were increased in T1DM. No significant associations were found for the SNP rs2070697. Our results indicate that the CTSG rs2236742 allele (C/T) is associated with T1DM in Chinese children and may serve as a new biomarker for predicting T1DM susceptibility.
Dermatomyositis (DM) is a multifactorial chronic autoimmune disorder with characteristic skin and muscle pathological changes and involvement of other organ systems. Cathepsin G (CTSG) contributes to the risk of developing DM, which is likely to be associated with inflammatory cytokines. Differential DNA methylation on CTSG has been determined to be implicated in DM in vivo. However, the underlying mechanism of this epigenetic regulation on CTST in DM is poorly explored. In this study, we investigated DNA methylation signature on CTSG at single-nucleotide resolution in quadriceps femoris of six DM patients and paracancerous muscles of three patients with rhabdomyosarcoma on inner thigh using pyrosequencing and observed that the overall DNA methylation level of CTSG was increased in DM compared with control, in which CpG loci at third and fourth exons but not promoter contributed to the significant hypermethylation. Furthermore, we observed that transcription and DNA methylation of CTSG were both declined in DNMT3a knockdown compared with DNMT1 and DNMT3b knockdown in human skeletal muscle SJCRH30 and A-204 cell lines exposed to tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Furthermore, Bortezomib (NF-kappaB inhibitor) and Brevilin A (JAK/STAT inhibitor) were employed to treat SJCRH30 and A-204 cells, respectively, and we observed that CTSG was hypomethylated and silenced after Bortezomib treatment compared with untreatment and Brevilin A. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation-quantitative polymerase chain reaction indicated that DNMT3a could bind to the coding regions of CTSG and the interaction was dependent on NF-kappaB activity. Taken together, our results determined a novel regulatory mechanism of DNA methylation on CTSG in DM.
Dermatomyositis (DM) is characterized as a chronic autoimmune disorder with multiple organ involvement. Our previous study has revealed that Cathepsin G (CTSG) highly expressed in dermatomyositic in vivo is regulated by DNMT3a through DNA methylation of 5'-C-phosphate-G-3' loci at exons and introns. However, the mechanism of gene body methylation on regulating CTSG transcription remains unknown. In this study, we studied quadriceps femoris tissues of six DM patients, and observed that antisense long noncoding RNA AL136018.1 contiguous to CTSG was highly expressed in skeletal muscle tissues of DM and positively correlated with the transcription level and DNA methylation level in gene body of CTSG in vivo. Moreover, we observed that the longer transcript of AL136018.1 (AL136018.1-201) could bind to third and fourth exons and third intron of CTSG via the 3'-end. Finally, AL136018.1-201 could recruit DNMT3a towards gene body via 5'-terminal for adding DNA methylation and facilitating transcription of CTSG. Taken together, our data uncovered a novel epigenetic mechanism behind the gene body methylation for transcriptional regulation of CTSG in DM.
