C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; Receptor for the C-X-C chemokine CXCL12/SDF-1 that transduces a signal by increasing intracellular calcium ion levels and enhancing MAPK1/MAPK3 activation. Involved in the AKT signaling cascade. Plays a role in regulation of cell migration, e.g. during wound healing. Acts as a receptor for extracellular ubiquitin; leading to enhanced intracellular calcium ions and reduced cellular cAMP levels. Binds bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) et mediates LPS-induced inflammatory response, including TNF secretion by monocytes. Involved in hematopoiesis and in car [...] 
Chemokines, small proinflammatory chemoattractant cytokines that bind to specific G-protein-coupled seven-span transmembrane receptors, are major regulators of cell trafficking and adhesion. The chemokine CXCL12 [stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1)] binds primarily to CXC receptor 4 (CXCR4; CD184). The binding of CXCL12 to CXCR4 induces intracellular signaling through several divergent pathways initiating signals related to chemotaxis, cell survival and/or proliferation, increase in intracellular calcium, and gene transcription. CXCR4 is expressed on multiple cell types including lymphocytes, hematopoietic stem cells, endothelial and epithelial cells, and cancer cells. The CXCL12/CXCR4 axis is involved in tumor progression, angiogenesis, metastasis, and survival. This pathway is a target for therapeutics that can block the CXCL12/CXCR4 interaction or inhibit downstream intracellular signaling.
Fibrosis is a pathological process caused by abnormal wound healing response, which often leads to excessive deposition of extracellular matrix, distortion of organ architecture, and loss of organ function. Aging is an important risk factor for the development of organ fibrosis. C-X-C receptor 4 (CXCR4) is the predominant chemokine receptor on fibrocytes, C-X-C motif ligand 12 (CXCL12) is the only ligand of CXCR4. Accumulated evidence have confirmed that CXCL12/CXCR4 can be involved in multiple pathological mechanisms in fibrosis, such as inflammation, immunity, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and angiogenesis. In addition, CXCL12/CXCR4 have also been shown to improve fibrosis levels in many organs including the heart, liver, lung and kidney; thus, they are promising targets for anti-fibrotic therapy. Notably, inhibitors of CXCL12 or CXCR4 also play an important role in various fibrosis-related diseases. In summary, this review systematically summarizes the role of CXCL12/CXCR4 in fibrosis, and this information is of great significance for understanding CXCL12/CXCR4. This will also contribute to the design of further studies related to CXCL12/CXCR4 and fibrosis, and shed light on potential therapies for fibrosis.
A growing body of literature reports on the upregulation of C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) in a variety of cancer entities, rendering this receptor as suitable target for molecular imaging and endoradiotherapy in a theranostic setting. For instance, the CXCR4-targeting positron emission tomography (PET) agent [(68) Ga]PentixaFor has been proven useful for a comprehensive assessment of the current status quo of solid tumors, including adrenocortical carcinoma or small-cell lung cancer. In addition, [(68) Ga]PentixaFor has also provided an excellent readout for hematological malignancies, such as multiple myeloma, marginal zone lymphoma, or mantle cell lymphoma. PET-based quantification of the CXCR4 capacities in vivo allows for selecting candidates that would be suitable for treatment using the theranostic equivalent [(177)Lu]/[(90)Y]PentixaTher. This CXCR4-directed theranostic concept has been used as a conditioning regimen prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and to achieve sufficient anti-lymphoma/-tumor activity in particular for malignant tissues that are highly sensitive to radiation, such as the hematological system. Increasing the safety margin, pretherapeutic dosimetry is routinely performed to determine the optimal activity to enhance therapeutic efficacy and to reduce off-target adverse events. The present review will provide an overview of current applications for CXCR4-directed molecular imaging and will introduce the CXCR4-targeted theranostic concept for advanced hematological malignancies.
Chemokines, which have chemotactic abilities, are comprised of a family of small cytokines with 8-10 kilodaltons. Chemokines work in immune cells by trafficking and regulating cell proliferation, migration, activation, differentiation, and homing. CXCR-4 is an alpha-chemokine receptor specific for stromal-derived-factor-1 (SDF-1, also known as CXCL12), which has been found to be expressed in more than 23 different types of cancers. Recently, the SDF-1/CXCR-4 signaling pathway has emerged as a potential therapeutic target for human tumor because of its critical role in tumor initiation and progression by activating multiple signaling pathways, such as ERK1/2, ras, p38 MAPK, PLC/ MAPK, and SAPK/ JNK, as well as regulating cancer stem cells. CXCL12/CXCR4 antagonists have been produced, which have shown encouraging results in anti-cancer activity. Here, we provide a brief overview of the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis as a molecular target for cancer treatment. We also review the potential utility of targeting CXCL12/CXCR4 axis in combination of immunotherapy and/or chemotherapy based on up-to-date literature and ongoing research progress.
Metastasis occurs when cancer cells leave the primary tumor site and migrate to distant parts of the body. The CXCR4-SDF-1 pathway facilitates this migration, and its expression has become the hallmark of several metastatic cancers. Targeted approaches are currently being developed to inhibit this pathway, and several candidates are now in clinical trials. Continued exploration of CXCR4 inhibitors will generate compounds that have improved activity over current candidates.
Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a highly aggressive malignancy with high recurrence rates and poor prognosis. There are only limited treatment options with poor response rates. ACCs are documented to express chemokine receptor CXCR4, which can be visualized using 68 Ga-pentixafor PET/CT. We herein present a case of ACC with local recurrence and peritoneal metastases, which was well visualized on FDG and pentixafor PET/CT. The high expression of CXCR4 offers the potential of theranostics and targeted endoradiotherapy in patients with metastatic ACC. We also observed thymic rebound to illustrate mild to moderate grade uptake of 68 Ga-pentixafor in this patient.
This article focuses on the possible application of antagonists of the G-protein coupled chemokine receptor, CXCR4, for the treatment of glioblastoma and summarises the evidence for CXCR4 antagonism being a viable therapeutic approach. Particular attention is paid to the role of this receptor in cancer stem cell biology, and the maintenance of CXCR4 expression by the glioblastoma key driver mutations. The expression of the CXCR4 receptor, and of its ligand stromal derived factor 1 (SDF-1, CXCL12), is maintained by intracellular pathways via positive feedback loops, and is associated with the epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the generation and self-renewal of cancer stem cells. SDF-1 and CXCR4 also play a role in the generation and maintenance of the perivascular stem cell niche which contains these cancer stem cells. The available data suggest that most, if not all, glioblastoma cancer stem cells rely on CXCR4 mediated signalling to maintain their phenotype. SDF-1 and CXCR4 are alsoinvolved in many other aspects of brain tumour biology including resistance to radio- and chemotherapy, the migration of cancer cells through the brain, the generation of the tumour blood supply and the recruitment of vascular progenitor cells. These properties suggest that a CXCR4 antagonist would help in the control of this disease.
The evolutionarily conserved chemokine superfamily encodes small peptide molecules that bind G-protein-coupled receptors. In humans, this superfamily includes at least 46 ligands and 18 receptors. In general, chemokines and their receptors form a chemotactic network that regulates the migration of cells to specific micro-anatomical destinations within an organism in an organized and non-random manner. Recent studies place chemokine-chemokine receptor pairs at the centre of not only physiological cell migration, but also pathological processes such as metastasis. This mini review considers some recent data on how chemokines regulate tumour cells during metastasis. These observations suggest novel ways for pharmacological intervention.
Therapeutic delivery of regeneration-promoting biological factors directly to the site of injury has demonstrated its efficacy in various injury models. Several reports describe improved tissue regeneration following local injection of tissue specific growth factors, cytokines and chemokines. Evidence exists that combined cytokine/growth factor treatment is superior for optimizing tissue repair by targeting different aspects of the regeneration response. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the therapeutic potential of the controlled delivery of stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha) alone or in combination with insulin-like growth factor-I (SDF-1alpha/IGF-I) for the treatment of tourniquet-induced ischemia/reperfusion injury (TK-I/R) of skeletal muscle. We hypothesized that SDF-1alpha will promote sustained stem cell recruitment to the site of muscle injury, while IGF-I will induce progenitor cell differentiation to effectively restore muscle contractile function after TK-I/R injury while concurrently reducing apoptosis. Utilizing a novel poly-ethylene glycol PEGylated fibrin gel matrix (PEG-Fib), we incorporated SDF-1alpha alone (PEG-Fib/SDF-1alpha) or in combination with IGF-I (PEG-Fib/SDF-1alpha/IGF-I) for controlled release at the site of acute muscle injury. Despite enhanced cell recruitment and revascularization of the regenerating muscle after SDF-1alpha treatment, functional analysis showed no benefit from PEG-Fib/SDF-1alpha therapy, while dual delivery of PEG-Fib/SDF-1alpha/IGF-I resulted in IGF-I-mediated improvement of maximal force recovery and SDF-1alpha-driven in vivo neovasculogenesis. Histological data supported functional data, as well as highlighted the important differences in the regeneration process among treatment groups. This study provides evidence that while revascularization may be necessary for maximizing muscle force recovery, without modulation of other effects of inflammation it is insufficient.
BACKGROUND: Despite intensive research and novel adjuvant therapies, there is currently no cure for metastatic melanoma. The chemokine receptor CXCR4 controls metastasis to sites such as the liver; however, the therapeutic blockade with the existing agents has proven difficult. METHODS: AMD11070, a novel orally bioavailable inhibitor of CXCR4, was tested for its ability to inhibit the migration of melanoma cells compared with the commonly described antagonist AMD3100. RESULTS: AMD11070 abrogated melanoma cell migration and was significantly more effective than AMD3100. Importantly for the clinical context, the expression of B-RAF-V600E did not the affect the sensitivity of AMD11070. CONCLUSION: Liver-resident myofibroblasts excrete CXCL12, which is able to promote the migration of CXCR4-expressing tumour cells from the blood into the liver. Blockade of this axis by AMD11070 thus represents a novel therapeutic strategy for both B-RAF wild-type and mutated melanomas.
The chemokine receptor CXCR4 belongs to the large superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors and has been identified to play a crucial role in a number of biological processes, including the trafficking and homeostasis of immune cells such as T lymphocytes. CXCR4 has also been found to be a prognostic marker in various types of cancer, including leukemia and breast cancer, and recent evidence has highlighted the role of CXCR4 in prostate cancer. Furthermore, CXCR4 expression is upregulated in cancer metastasis, leading to enhanced signaling. These observations suggest that CXCR4 is important for the progression of cancer. The CXCR4-CXCL12 (stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1)) axis has additionally been identified to have a role in normal stem cell homing. Interestingly, cancer stem cells also express CXCR4, indicating that the CXCR4-SDF-1 axis may direct the trafficking and metastasis of these cells to organs that express high levels of SDF-1, such as the lymph nodes, lungs, liver, and bone. This review focuses on the current knowledge of CXCR4 regulation and how deregulation of this protein may contribute to the progression of cancer.
