Cytochrome P450 2C8; A cytochrome P450 monooxygenase involved in the metabolism of various endogenous substrates, including fatty acids, steroid hormones and vitamins. Mechanistically, uses molecular oxygen inserting one oxygen atom into a substrate, and reducing the second into a water molecule, with two electrons provided by NADPH via cytochrome P450 reductase (NADPH--hemoprotein reductase). Primarily catalyzes the epoxidation of double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) with a preference for the last double bond. Catalyzes the hydroxylation of carbon-hydrogen bonds. Metabol [...] 
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8 is a drug metabolizing enzyme of major importance. The lipid-lowering drug gemfibrozil has been identified as a strong inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo. This effect is due to mechanism-based inhibition of CYP2C8 by gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide. In vivo, gemfibrozil is a fairly selective CYP2C8 inhibitor, which lacks significant inhibitory effect on other CYP enzymes. Gemfibrozil can, however, have a smaller but clinically meaningful inhibitory effect on membrane transporters, such as organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 and organic anion transporter 3. Areas covered: This review describes the inhibitory effects of gemfibrozil on CYP enzymes and membrane transporters. The clinical drug interactions caused by gemfibrozil and the different mechanisms contributing to the interactions are reviewed in detail. Expert opinion: Gemfibrozil is a useful probe inhibitor of CYP2C8 in vivo, but its effect on membrane transporters has to be taken into account in study design and interpretation. Moreover, gemfibrozil could be used to boost the pharmacokinetics of CYP2C8 substrate drugs. Identification of gemfibrozil 1-O-beta-glucuronide as a potent mechanism-based inhibitor of CYP2C8 has led to recognition of glucuronide metabolites as perpetrators of drug-drug interactions. Recently, also acyl glucuronide metabolites of clopidogrel and deleobuvir have been shown to strongly inhibit CYP2C8.
Cinitapride is a gastrointestinal prokinetic drug, prescribed for the treatment of functional dyspepsia, and as an adjuvant therapy for gastroesophageal reflux disease. In this study, we aimed to explore the impact of relevant variants in CYP3A4 and CYP2C8 and other pharmacogenes, along with demographic characteristics, on cinitapride pharmacokinetics and safety; and to evaluate the impact of CYP2C8 alleles on the enzyme's function. Twenty-five healthy volunteers participating in a bioequivalence clinical trial consented to participate in the study. Participants were genotyped for 56 variants in 19 genes, including cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes (e.g., CYP2C8 or CYP3A4) or transporters (e.g., SLC or ABC), among others. CYP2C8*3 carriers showed a reduction in AUC of 42% and C(max) of 35% compared to *1/*1 subjects (p = 0.003 and p = 0.011, respectively). *4 allele carriers showed a 45% increase in AUC and 63% in C(max) compared to *1/*1 subjects, although these differences did not reach statistical significance. CYP2C8*3 and *4 alleles may be used to infer the following pharmacogenetic phenotypes: ultrarapid (UM) (*3/*3), rapid (RM) (*1/*3), normal (NM) (*1/*1), intermediate (IM) (*1/*4), and poor (PM) metabolizers (*4/*4). In this study, we properly characterized RMs, NMs, and IMs; however, additional studies are required to properly characterize UMs and PMs. These findings should be relevant with respect to cinitapride, but also to numerous CYP2C8 substrates such as imatinib, loperamide, montelukast, ibuprofen, paclitaxel, pioglitazone, repaglinide, or rosiglitazone.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) superfamily members CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 are polymorphically expressed enzymes that are involved in the metabolic inactivation of several drugs, including, among others, antiepileptics, NSAIDs, oral hypoglycemics, and anticoagulants. Many of these drugs have a narrow therapeutic index, and growing evidence indicates a prominent role of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 polymorphisms in the therapeutic efficacy and in the development of adverse effects among patients treated with drugs that are CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 substrates. In this review, we summarize present knowledge on human variability in the frequency of variant CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 alleles. Besides an expected interethnic variability in allele frequencies, a large intraethnic variability exists. Among Asian subjects, for example, statistically significant differences (p < 0.0001) in CYP2C9*3 allele frequencies between Chinese and Japanese individuals have been reported. In addition, individuals from East Asia present different allele frequencies for CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 compared with South Asian subjects (p < 0.0001). Among Caucasian Europeans, statistically significant differences for the frequency of CYP2C8*3, CYP2C9*2, and CYP2C9*3 exist (p < 0.0001). This indicates that Asian individuals or Caucasian European individuals cannot be considered as homogeneous groups regarding CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 allele frequencies. Caucasian American subjects also show a large variability in allele frequencies, which is likely to be related to ethnic ancestry. A higher frequency of variant CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 alleles is expected among Caucasian Americans with South European ancestry than in individuals with North European ancestry. The findings summarized in this review suggest that among individuals with Asian or European ancestry, intraethnic differences in the risk of developing adverse effects with drugs that are CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 substrates are to be expected. In addition, the observed intraethnic variability reinforces the need for proper selection of control subjects and points against the use of surrogate control groups for studies involving association of CYP2C8 or CYP2C9 alleles with adverse drug reactions or spontaneous diseases.
The lipid-regulating drug gemfibrozil is a useful medication for reducing high cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood. In addition to oxidation, it undergoes extensive glucuronidation to produce gemfibrozil acyl glucuronide, which is a known mechanism-based inactivator of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C8. Such selective and time-dependent inhibition results in clinically important drug-drug interactions (DDI) with the drugs metabolized by CYP2C8. Similarly, the acyl glucuronide of clopidogrel, a widely used antiplatelet agent, is a potent time-dependent inhibitor of CYP2C8 that demonstrated significant DDI with the substrates of CYP2C8. Current progress in atomic-level understanding mostly involves studying how different drugs bind and undergo oxidation in the active site of CYPs. It is not clear how an acyl glucuronide metabolite of the drug gemfibrozil or clopidogrel interacts in the active site of CYP2C8 and selectively inhibit the enzyme. This mini-review summarizes the current knowledge on some of the important clinical DDI caused by gemfibrozil and clopidogrel due to the inhibition of CYP2C8 by acyl glucuronide metabolites of these drugs. Importantly, it examines recent developments and potential applications of structural biology tools to elucidate the binding and orientation of gemfibrozil acyl glucuronide and clopidogrel acyl glucuronide in the active site near heme that contributes to the inhibition and inactivation of CYP2C8.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to summarize the potential impact of CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 genetic polymorphisms on repaglinide pharmacokinetics. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted using electronic databases. Eligible studies reported data from pharmacokinetic evaluations of repaglinide in healthy adults according to different categories of CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 genetic polymorphisms. RESULTS: Six studies including a total of 191 participants met the inclusion criteria. We noted that CYP2C8 *1/*3 carriers exhibited lower AUC(0-infinity) (SMD: -0.77; 95%CI: -1.23 to -0.30; P=0.001) and Cmax (SMD: -0.94; 95%CI: - 1.41 to -0.47; P<0.001) than CYP2C8 *1/*1 carriers. There were no significant differences in AUC(0-infinity), Cmax, t1/2 and mean change in blood glucose concentration between *1/*4 and *1/*1 carriers. Further, *3/*3 carriers had lower Cmax (SMD: -1.42; 95%CI: -2.66 to -0.17; P=0.026) than *1/*1 carriers. Additionally, *3/*3 carriers had lower Cmax than *1/*3 carriers (SMD: -1.20; 95%CI: -2.40 to -0.00; P=0.050). Finally, we noted that repaglinide pharmacokinetics did not differ by SLCO1B1 genotype. CONCLUSION: The current systematic review and meta-analysis indicated that the genotype of CYP2C8, but not SLCO1B1, may affect repaglinide pharmacokinetics. However, because of the comparatively insufficient number of published studies included, our conclusions require support from additional studies.
AIMS: Patients on treatment with oral fixed dose imatinib are frequently under- or overexposed to the drug. We investigated the association between the gene activity score (GAS) of imatinib-metabolizing cytochromes (CYP3A4, CYP3A5, CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2C8) and imatinib and nor-imatinib exposure. We also investigated the impact of concurrent drug-drug-interactions (DDIs) on the association between GAS and imatinib exposure. METHODS: Serial plasma samples were collected from 33 GIST patients treated with imatinib 400 mg daily within a prospective clinical trial. Imatinib and nor-imatinib C(trough) were quantified by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Genetic polymorphisms with a functional impact on imatinib-metabolizing cytochromes were identified and a GAS was calculated for each gene. A DDI-adjusted GAS was also generated. RESULTS: Imatinib and nor-imatinib C(trough) were measured in 161 plasma samples. CYP2D6 GAS and metabolizer status based on genotype were associated with imatinib and (imatinib + nor-imatinib) C(trough) . CYP2D6 poor and intermediate metabolizers were predicted to have a lower nor-imatinib/imatinib metabolic ratio than normal metabolizers (0.197 and 0.193 vs. 0.247, P = .0205), whereas CYP2C8*3 carriers had a higher ratio than CYP2C8*1/*1 patients (0.263 vs. 0.201, P = .0220). CYP2C9 metabolizer status was inversely related to the metabolic ratio with an effect probably driven by the linkage disequilibrium between CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C8*3. The CYP2D6 DDI-adjusted GAS was still predictive of imatinib exposure. CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight that CYP2D6 plays a major role in imatinib pharmacokinetics, but other players (i.e., CYP2C8) may influence imatinib exposure. These findings could drive the selection of patients more susceptible to imatinib under- or overexposure who could be candidates for personalized treatment and intensified monitoring strategies.
AIM: To better understand the relationship between the interactions among rs17110453, rs751141, and rs9333025 variants and plasma levels of cytochrome P450 (CYP) metabolites, i.e.,20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE), epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), and dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (DiHETEs) in ischemia stroke (IS). METHODS: We measured plasma CYP metabolite levels in 218 acute IS cases and 126 controls, and a subset of samples were assessed to further understand the association between relevant variants and IS risk in our previous study. We assessed the associations between variant interactions and levels of 20-HETE, EETs, and DiHETEs as well as the associations between levels of 20-HETE, EETs, and DiHETEs and IS risk after adjusting for other potential confounders. Furthermore, the association between variant interactions and IS risk after adjusting for other covariates, including CYP metabolites levels, was evaluated. RESULTS: The interactions among variants rs17110453, rs751141, and rs9333025 were significantly associated with high 20-HETE, high DiHETEs, and low EETs after adjusting for the status of diabetes mellitus and hypertension. High 20-HETE, high DiHETEs, and low EETs were independent risk factors for IS after adjusting for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and the interactions among rs17110453, rs751141, and rs9333025. Furthermore, the interactions among rs17110453, rs751141, and rs9333025 were significantly associated with a higher risk of IS after adjusting for CYP metabolites (OR=2.02, 95% CI: 1.28-5.27, P=0.007). CONCLUSION: The association between the interactions among rs17110453, rs751141, and rs9333025 and IS risk in Chinese population may be partly but not exclusively mediated by plasma levels of 20-HETE, EETs, and DHETs. Further well-designed studies are warranted to replicate this finding.
Pharmacogenetic tests typically target selected sequence variants to identify haplotypes that are often defined by star ( *) allele nomenclature. Due to their design, these targeted genotyping assays are unable to detect novel variants that may change the function of the gene product and thereby affect phenotype prediction and patient care. In the current study, 137 DNA samples that were previously characterized by the Genetic Testing Reference Material (GeT-RM) program using a variety of targeted genotyping methods were recharacterized using targeted and whole genome sequencing analysis. Sequence data were analyzed using three genotype calling tools to identify star allele diplotypes for CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19. The genotype calls from next-generation sequencing (NGS) correlated well to those previously reported, except when novel alleles were present in a sample. Six novel alleles and 38 novel suballeles were identified in the three genes due to identification of variants not covered by targeted genotyping assays. In addition, several ambiguous genotype calls from a previous study were resolved using the NGS and/or long-read NGS data. Diplotype calls were mostly consistent between the calling algorithms, although several discrepancies were noted. This study highlights the utility of NGS for pharmacogenetic testing and demonstrates that there are many novel alleles that are yet to be discovered, even in highly characterized genes such as CYP2C9 and CYP2C19.
Aim: The influence of variants in pharmacokinetics-related genes on long-term exposure to tacrolimus (TAC)-based therapy and clinical outcomes was investigated. Patients & methods: Brazilian kidney recipients were treated with TAC combined with everolimus (n = 178) or mycophenolate sodium (n = 97). The variants in CYP2C8, CYP2J2, CYP3A4, CYP3A5, POR, ABCB1, ABCC2, ABCG2, SLCO1B1 and SLCO2B1 were analyzed. Main results:CYP3A5*3/*3 genotype influenced increase in TAC concentration from week 1 to month 6 post-transplantation (p < 0.05). The living donor and CYP2C8*3 variant were associated with reduced risk for delayed graft function (OR = 0.07; 95% CI = 0.03-0.18 and OR = 0.45; 95% CI = 0.20-0.99, respectively, p < 0.05). Conclusion: The CYP3A5*3 variant is associated with increased early exposure to TAC. Living donor and CYP2C8*3 variant seem to be protective factors for delayed graft function in kidney recipients.
OBJECTIVE: Thiazolidinediones (TZDs) are putatively transported into the liver by OATP1B1 (encoded by SLCO1B1) and metabolized by CYP450 2C8 enzyme (encoded by CYP2C8). While CYP2C8*3 has been shown to alter TZD pharmacokinetics, it has not been shown to alter efficacy. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 833 Scottish patients with type 2 diabetes treated with pioglitazone or rosiglitazone and jointly investigated association of variants in these two genes with therapeutic outcome. RESULTS: The CYP2C8*3 variant was associated with reduced glycemic response to rosiglitazone (P = 0.01) and less weight gain (P = 0.02). The SLCO1B1 521T>C variant was associated with enhanced glycemic response to rosiglitazone (P = 0.04). The super responders defined by combined genotypes at CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 had a 0.39% (4 mmol/mol) greater HbA(1c) reduction (P = 0.006) than the poor responders. Neither of the variants had a significant impact on pioglitazone response. CONCLUSIONS: These results show that variants in CYP2C8 and SLCO1B1 have a large clinical impact on the therapeutic response to rosiglitazone and highlight the importance of studying transporter and metabolizing genes together in pharmacogenetics.
PURPOSE: Eltrombopag (ELT) is an effective drug for relapsed/refractory aplastic anemia (AA). Our previous study showed that ELT concentration was correlated with the effects of ELT. However, the factors affecting ELT concentration in patients with relapsed/refractory AA were not clarified. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate correlations between drug disposition-related gene polymorphisms and the concentration, efficacy, and toxicity of ELT. METHODS: Forty-five patients who underwent ELT administration from January 2018 to January 2019 at Peking Union Medical Colleague Hospital (PUMCH) were included. The corresponding clinical information was also collected. ELT plasma concentrations were detected by high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC/MS). CYP2C8, (UGT)1A1, and ABCG21 were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The influence of gene polymorphisms on the plasma concentration, efficacy, and toxicity of ELT was analyzed. RESULTS: The mean dose required to obtain the optimal effects was significantly lower in the UGT1A1*6 variant carriers than in the UGT1A1*6 WT carriers. There was a significant correlation between the (UGT)1A1*6 polymorphism and higher ELT plasma concentrations (> 11.2 mug/mL). By logistic regression analysis, the efficacy of ELT was related to plasma concentration and a combined genotype of (UGT)1A1*6 and ABCG2. There were no significant associations between genotypes and adverse drug reactions (ADRs) or ELT concentrations and ADRs. CONCLUSION: UGT1A1*6 is a predictor of the ELT plasma concentration and may help to determine the initial therapeutic dose in relapsed/refractory AA patients. Both drug exposure and patient genotype should be considered for better responses to ELT.
AIM: To evaluate the effect of polymorphisms in CYP2C9 and CYP2C8 and gender on the pharmacokinetics of the enantiomeric forms of ibuprofen. MATERIALS & METHODS: 122 healthy volunteers were genotyped for polymorphisms in CY2C8 and CYP2C9 using real-time PCR. RESULTS: CYP2C8 polymorphisms affected neither R- nor S-ibuprofen. CYP2C9*3 and CYP2C9*2 carriers had a lower S-ibuprofen clearance and a higher S-ibuprofen AUC and half-life. R-ibuprofen clearance was decreased in CYP2C9*3 carriers. Gender affected R-ibuprofen and S-ibuprofen pharmacokinetics. Multiple regression analysis showed that CYP2C9*2, CYP2C9*3 and gender were associated with S-ibuprofen clearance, but only CYP2C9*3 was associated with R-ibuprofen clearance. CONCLUSION: The pharmacokinetics of S-ibuprofen and R-ibuprofen is affected by CYP2C9 polymorphisms and gender. CYP2C8 polymorphisms do not have a significant role. Original submitted 6 February 2015; Revision submitted 1 April 2015.
The tyrosine kinase inhibitor sorafenib (SOR) is being used increasingly in combination with other anticancer agents like paclitaxel, but this increases the potential for drug toxicity. SOR inhibits several human CYPs, including CYP2C8, which is a major enzyme in the elimination of oncology drugs like paclitaxel and imatinib. It has been reported that CYP2C8 inhibition by SOR in human liver microsomes is potentiated by NADPH-dependent biotransformation. This implicates a SOR metabolite in enhanced inhibition, although the identity of that metabolite is presently unclear. The present study evaluated the capacity of the major N-oxide metabolite of SOR (SNO) to inhibit CYP2C8-dependent paclitaxel 6alpha-hydroxylation. The IC(50) of SNO against CYP2C8 activity was found to be 3.7-fold lower than that for the parent drug (14 muM versus 51 muM). In molecular docking studies, both SOR and SNO interacted with active site residues in CYP2C8, but four additional major hydrogen and halogen bonding interactions were identified between SNO and amino acids in the B-B' loop region and helixes F' and I that comprise the catalytic region of the enzyme. In contrast, the binding of both SOR and SNO to active site residues in the closely related human CYP2C9 enzyme was similar, as were the IC(50)s determined against CYP2C9-mediated losartan oxidation. These findings suggest that the active metabolite SNO could impair the elimination of coadministered drugs that are substrates for CYP2C8, and mediate toxic adverse events, perhaps in those individuals in whom SNO is formed extensively.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Although the anticancer potentials of water-insoluble drugs are improved by nanoformulation, other intervening factors may contribute in the drug efficacy. This work was designated to explore the effect of paclitaxel-loaded Poly(Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles on the viability of cancer cells, the expression of Taxol Resistance gene I (TXR1) and paclitaxel metabolizing genes. METHODS: Paclitaxel loaded PLGA Nanoparticles (PTX-NPs) were prepared, physically characterized and used in the treatment of breast adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7) and hepatoma cells (HepG2). Cells viability and apoptosis were investigated. In parallel, RNA was isolated, reverse transcribed and used to monitor the expression levels of TXR1, CYP 3A4 and CYP2C8 genes. RESULTS: PTX-NPs were characterized by transmission electron microscopy to be of a nano-size sphere-like shape. FTIR analysis revealed good coupling between PTX and PLGA. The encapsulation efficiency was 99% and the drug release demonstrated a progressive releasing phase followed by slower and sustained releasing phases. Although HepG2 cells demonstrated more resistance to PTX than MCF-7 cells, both cell types were more responsive to PTX-NPS compared to PTX. The IC50 values decreased from 19.3 to 6.7 in breast cancer cells and from 42.5 to 13.1mug/ml in hepatoma cells. The apoptosis was the key mechanism in both cells, where at least 44% of cells underwent apoptosis. The expression of TXR1 decreased when either cells were treated with PTX-NPs, respectively, meanwhile the expressions of CYP3A4 and CYP2C8 were increased. CONCLUSION: Taken together, this in vitro study reports the associations between the enhanced responsiveness of MCF-7 and HepG2 cells to PLGA-loaded paclitaxel nanoparticles and the accompanying decrease in the cells resistance to the PTX and its enhanced metabolism.
In vitro data support involvement of cytochrome P450 (CYP)2C8 and CYP3A4 in the metabolism of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitor brigatinib. A 3-arm, open-label, randomized, single-dose, fixed-sequence crossover study was conducted to characterize the effects of the strong inhibitors gemfibrozil (of CYP2C8) and itraconazole (of CYP3A) and the strong inducer rifampin (of CYP3A) on the single-dose pharmacokinetics of brigatinib. Healthy subjects (n = 20 per arm) were administered a single dose of brigatinib (90 mg, arms 1 and 2; 180 mg, arm 3) alone in treatment period 1 and coadministered with multiple doses of gemfibrozil 600 mg twice daily (BID; arm 1), itraconazole 200 mg BID (arm 2), or rifampin 600 mg daily (QD; arm 3) in period 2. Compared with brigatinib alone, coadministration of gemfibrozil with brigatinib did not meaningfully affect brigatinib area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC(0-inf) ; geometric least-squares mean [LSM] ratio [90%CI], 0.88 [0.83-0.94]). Coadministration of itraconazole with brigatinib increased AUC(0-inf) (geometric LSM ratio [90%CI], 2.01 [1.84-2.20]). Coadministration of rifampin with brigatinib substantially reduced AUC(0-inf) (geometric LSM ratio [90%CI], 0.20 [0.18-0.21]) compared with brigatinib alone. The treatments were generally tolerated. Based on these results, strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers should be avoided during brigatinib treatment. If concomitant use of a strong CYP3A inhibitor is unavoidable, the results of this study support a dose reduction of brigatinib by approximately 50%. Furthermore, CYP2C8 is not a meaningful determinant of brigatinib clearance, and no dose modifications are needed during coadministration of brigatinib with CYP2C8 inhibitors.
Inactivation of Cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes can lead to significant increases in exposure of comedicants. The majority of reported in vitro to in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) data have historically focused on CYP3A, leaving the assessment of other CYP isoforms insubstantial. To this end, the utility of human hepatocytes (HHEP) and human liver microsomes (HLM) to predict clinically relevant drug-drug interactions was investigated with a focus on CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6. Evaluation of IVIVE for CYP2B6 was limited to only weak inhibition. A search of the University of Washington Drug-Drug Interaction Database was conducted to identify a clinically relevant weak, moderate, and strong inhibitor for selective substrates of CYP1A2, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP2D6, resulting in 18 inhibitors for in vitro characterization against 119 clinical interaction studies. Pooled human hepatocytes and HLM were preincubated with increasing concentrations of inhibitors for designated timepoints. Time dependent inhibition was detected in HLM for four moderate/strong inhibitors, suggesting that some optimization of incubation conditions (i.e., lower protein concentrations) is needed to capture weak inhibition. Clinical risk assessment was conducted by incorporating the in vitro derived kinetic parameters maximal rate of enzyme inactivation (min(-1)) (k(inact)) and concentration of inhibitor resulting in 50% of the maximum enzyme inactivation (K(I)) into static equations recommended by regulatory authorities. Significant overprediction was observed when applying the basic models recommended by regulatory agencies. Mechanistic static models, which consider the fraction of metabolism through the impacted enzyme, using the unbound hepatic inlet concentration lead to the best overall prediction accuracy with 92% and 85% of data from HHEPs and HLM, respectively, within twofold of the observed value. SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Coupling time-dependent inactivation parameters derived from pooled human hepatocytes and human liver microsomes (HLM) with a mechanistic static model provides an easy and quantitatively accurate means to determine clinical drug-drug interaction risk from in vitro data. Optimization is needed to evaluate time-dependent inhibition (TDI) for weak and moderate inhibitors using HLM. Recommendations are made with respect to input parameters for in vitro to in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE) of TDI with non-CYP3A enzymes using available data from HLM and human hepatocytes.
STUDY OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes encoding metabolizing enzymes (CYP2C8, CYP2J2, and UGT2B7) and transporters (ABCC2 and ABCG2) on dose and dose-adjusted trough blood concentrations (C:D ratio), clinical outcomes, and occurrence of adverse events of tacrolimus and mycophenolate sodium in Brazilian kidney transplant recipients. DESIGN: Pharmacogenetic analysis of patients enrolled in a previously published study. PATIENTS: One hundred forty-eight adult kidney transplant recipients treated with tacrolimus, enteric-coated mycophenolate sodium, and prednisone for 90 days posttransplantation. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: ABCC2 c.-24C>T and c.3972C>T, ABCG2 c.421C>A, CYP2C8*3, CYP2J2 c.-76G>T, and UGT2B7 c.372A>G SNPs were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction. The CYP3A5*3C SNP data were used to eliminate the confounding effect of this variant on the results. ABCC2 c.3972T allele carriers showed higher tacrolimus C:D values than did carriers of the c.3972CC genotype. The CYP2C8*3 variant was also associated with slightly higher tacrolimus C:D values and higher estimated glomerular filtration rate but only in CYP3A5-nonexpressing patients (CYP3A5*3C/*3C carriers). None of the SNPs were associated with mycophenolate sodium dose or episodes of biopsy-confirmed acute rejection or delayed graft function. The CYP2J2 c.-76T allele was associated with increased risk for treatment-induced nausea and/or vomiting (OR: 5.30, 95% confidence interval 1.49-18.79, p<0.05). CONCLUSION: The ABCC2 c.3972C >T polymorphism affected tacrolimus C:D in Brazilian kidney transplant recipients. Further, CYP2C8*3 and CYP2J2 c.-76G>T SNPs influenced the renal function of these patients and the occurrence of adverse events during treatment with tacrolimus and mycophenolate sodium.
