Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1; Receptor for cysteinyl leukotrienes mediating bronchoconstriction of individuals with and without asthma. Stimulation by LTD4 results in the contraction and proliferation of smooth muscle, edema, eosinophil migration and damage to the mucus layer in the lung. This response is mediated via a G-protein that activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. The rank order of affinities for the leukotrienes is LTD4 >> LTE4 = LTC4 >> LTB4.
The endosomal-lysosomal system (ELS), which carries out cellular processes such as cellular waste degradation via autophagy, is essential for cell homeostasis. ELS inefficiency leads to augmented levels of damaged organelles and intracellular deposits. Consequently, the modulation of autophagic flux has been recognized as target to remove damaging cell waste. Recently, we showed that cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CysLTR1) antagonist application increases the autophagic flux in the retinal pigment epithelial cell line ARPE-19. Consequently, we investigated the effect of CysLTR1 inhibition-driven autophagy induction on aggregated proteins in ARPE-19 cells using flow cytometry analysis. A subset of ARPE-19 cells expressed CysLTR1 on the surface (SE+); these cells showed increased levels of autophagosomes, late endosomes/lysosomes, aggregated proteins, and autophagy as well as decreased reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation. Furthermore, CysLTR1 inhibition for 24 h using the antagonist zafirlukast decreased the quantities of autophagosomes, late endosomes/lysosomes, aggregated proteins and ROS in CysLTR1 SE- and SE+ cells. We concluded that high levels of plasma membrane-localized CysLTR1 indicate an increased amount of aggregated protein, which raises the rate of autophagic flux. Furthermore, CysLTR1 antagonist application potentially mimics the physiological conditions observed in CysLTR1 SE+ cells and can be considered as strategy to dampen cellular aging.
Uveal Melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular malignancy in adults. Although rare, it is a deadly tumor, with a long-term prognosis of death occurring in more than 50% of the cases. It is characterized by frequent ( approximately 80%) driver mutations in GNAQ and GNA11 genes, both of which are activated by cysteinyl leukotriene receptors (CYSLTRs). CYSLTR1 is upregulated and participated in the progression of several cancers. In the present study, we sought to determine the expression levels of CYSLTR1 in 31 human UM specimens and cell lines (3 primary and 1 metastatic), and its role in the proliferation and viability of these cells by analyzing cell metabolic activity, cell confluence and apoptosis levels. We show that all analyzed UM specimens and cells expressed CYSLTR1 at high levels. Notably, the pharmacological blockage of this receptor, using the inverse agonist MK571, reduced the growth and metabolic activity, and increased the apoptotic cell death of all analyzed UM cell lines. We provide evidence that CYSLTR1 is expressed in human UM and plays a significant role in UM progression behavior. Our data highlight the potential beneficial effects of targeting CYSLTR1 in the control of UM progression.
Pharmacologic studies have revealed that cysteinyl leukotrienes (CYSLTs) act through two receptors, cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (CYSLTR1) and CYSLTR2. CYSLTR1 antagonists are widely used to treat asthma and rhinitis. In this study, we characterized the genomic structure and transcriptional regulation of CYSLTR1 and examined associations between CYSLTR1 polymorphisms and asthma/rhinitis. The experiment of rapid amplification of cDNA end revealed that CYSLTR1 contains three exons and that the entire open reading frame is located in exon 3. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction showed that there were multiple splice variants of CYSLTR1 and that the transcript expression patterns differed from tissues and cell types. The promoter region of CYSLTR1 is from -665 to -30 bp relative to the transcription start site. We identified four polymorphisms (c.-618-434T/C, c.-618-275C/A, c.-618-136G/A, and 927C/T), and transmission disequilibrium tests revealed that none of these polymorphisms was associated with the development of asthma/rhinitis. However, the TCG and CAA haplotypes in the promoter region caused different transcriptional activity. Our findings indicate that CYSLTR1 polymorphisms are not likely to be involved in the development of asthma/rhinitis, but it is possible that these polymorphisms could influence drug responses in individuals with atopic diseases.
PURPOSE: The etiology of allergic rhinitis (AR) is closely correlated with the complex interactions between genetic and environmental factors. This study explored the effect of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CYSLTR1 gene on the risk of AR and clinical response to montelukast treatment in children. METHODS: A total of 135 children with AR and 100 healthy children were included for subsequent analyses. Genotype and allele distribution of rs321029 SNP of CYSLTR1 gene and inflammatory mediators were detected and compared between AR and healthy children. RESULTS: Genotype and allele frequency of rs321029 SNP of CYSLTR1 gene showed no difference between children with AR and controls or between AR cases with different severity. The total montelukast effective rate of wide-type genotype TT children was significantly higher than variants genotype CC children. CONCLUSION: Polymorphism of rs321029 on CYSLTR1 gene is not related to the susceptibility and severity of AR in children, but it is closely related with the efficacy of montelukast on AR.
Aging is closely associated with osteoarthritis (OA). Although its underlying mechanisms remain unknown, cellular senescence in chondrocytes has become an important therapeutic target for the treatment of OA. Cysteinyl leukotriene receptors (cysLTRs) mediate the pathobiological function of cysteinyl leukotrienes (cysLTs). However, the roles of cysLTRs in the pathogenesis of OA have not been reported before. In the current study, we found that cysLTR1 but not cysLTR2 is expressed in human primary chondrocytes. In addition, stimulation with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) resulted in a significant increase in the expression of cysLTR1. Interestingly, montelukast, a specific cysLTR1 antagonist, attenuated TNF-alpha-induced up-regulation of the activity of senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-Gal). In addition, TNF-alpha led to cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 phase, which was prevented by treatment with montelukast. Notably, montelukast reduced expression of the senescence markers p53, p21 and PAI-1. In addition, montelukast ameliorated TNF-alpha-induced K382 acetylation of p53 by promoting the expression of SIRT1. Silencing of SIRT1 using SIRT1 siRNA broke the inhibitory effects of montelukast on K382 acetylation of p53. Importantly, silencing of cysLTR1 reversed the reduction of SIRT1 expression as well as the K382 acetylation of p53. Our findings strongly implicate that cysLTR1 has the capacity to regulate cellular senescence in chondrocytes. It is suggested that montelukast may be a potential therapeutic agent for chondro-protective therapy.
BACKGROUND: Cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 and 2 (CysLTR1 and CysLTR2) are involved in allergic processes and play a role in adenotonsillar hyperplasia (AH). Clinically, only CysLTR1 may be blocked by montelukast. Our objective was to compare the expression of CysLTR1 and CysLTR2 in the B and T cells of hyperplasic tonsils of sensitized (SE) and control (NS) snoring children. METHODS: Sixty children, 5 to 10 years of age, referred for adenotonsillectomy, were divided into SE and NS groups, according to their responses to the skin-prick test. Cells from the removed tissues were stained for CysLTR1, CysLTR2, CD19, and CD3 and counted via flow cytometry. messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of the CysLTRs genes was measured real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). RESULTS: The SE group showed reduced expression of the small CD3+/CysLTR1+ lymphocytes (4.6 +/- 2.2 vs 6.5 +/- 5.0; p = 0.04). Regarding the large lymphocytes, the SE group showed lower expression of CD3+/CysLTR1+ (40.9 +/- 14.5 vs 47.6 +/- 11.7; p = 0.05), CD19+/CysLTR1+ (44.6 +/- 16.9 vs 54.1 +/- 12.4; p = 0.01), and CD19+/CysLTR2+ (55.3 +/- 11.3 vs 61.5 +/- 12.6; p = 0.05) lymphocytes. Considering the total number of lymphocytes, the SE group had fewer CD3+/CysLTR1+ lymphocytes (11.1 +/- 5.5 vs 13.7 +/- 6.2; p = 0.04). All other cell populations exhibited reduced expression in the SE group without statistical significance. The expression of CysLTR2 was significantly higher (p < 0.05) than CysLTR1 in most studied cell populations. The mRNA expression did not show significant differences between the groups. CONCLUSION: The expression of CysLTR is higher in the lymphocytes of the NS children, and CysLTR2 shows greater expression than CysLTR1 Respiratory allergies do not appear to be a stimulus for AH occurrence. Newer drugs capable of blocking both CysLTRs warrant further study.
OBJECTIVES: Leukotriene receptor antagonists (LTRA), such as montelukast, have been used as a first-line treatment for patients with aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA). This study evaluated associations between the clinical requirement for LTRA and genetic polymorphisms of the ALOX5, LTC4S, COX-2, CysLTR1 and TBXA2R genes in the arachidonic acid cascade in the long-term management of 89 AIA patients from a Korean population. METHODS: Asthma control status was monitored for 1 year with maintenance medications of inhaled corticosteroid and oral LTRA, and AIA patients were classified into three groups according to the mean montelukast dose required per month to maintain asthma control for 1 year: group I (> or = 200 mg montelukast/month; n = 37), group II (5-150 mg/month; n = 25) and group III (< 5 mg/month; n = 27). Genetic polymorphisms in the arachidonic acid cascade were determined using a single-base extension method. RESULTS: We found that there was a significant difference in the genotype frequency of the CysLTR1 promoter polymorphism -634C > T among the three groups (p = 0.007 for group I vs group II, p = 0.017 for group I vs group III), while there were no significant associations between LTRA requirements and polymorphisms of the other genes. The patients with the variant genotype (CT or TT) of the -634C = T CysLTR1 promoter polymorphism showed a higher expression level than those with the common genotype (CC). CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the CysLTR1 promoter polymorphism is a useful genetic marker for predicting LTRA requirements in the long-term management of AIA patients.
In this study, we compared the roles of CysLT receptor type 1 (CysLTR1) and leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S) gene polymorphisms in two major aspirin-related allergic diseases, aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA) and aspirin-induced chronic urticaria/angioedema (AICU). CysLTR1-634C>T and LTC4S-444A>C polymorphisms were genotyped and its functional effect on the promoter activity was compared. As in vivo functional study, changes of peripheral mRNA level of CysLTR1 were measured by real-time PCR before and after aspirin challenge. A significant association was found for the CysLTR1 promoter polymorphism and the AIA phenotype compared to AICU (P = 0.015). In U937 cells, the variant genotype reporter construct showed significantly higher promoter activity than the common genotype (P < 0.05). The CysLTR1 mRNA levels increased significantly after aspirin challenge in AIA patients (P = 0.013). In conclusion, the CysLTR1 polymorphism may contribute to develop to the AIA phenotype and be used as a genetic marker for differentiating two major aspirin hypersensitivity phenotypes.
Cysteinyl leukotrienes play an important role in the pathophysiology of many inflammatory disorders, including asthma. The aim of this study was to characterize the mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation of the human cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 (hCYSLTR1) gene. 5'RACE was performed on human airway smooth muscle (HASM) and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. A1128-bp region of the hCYSLTR1 main putative promoter was screened for polymorphisms by sequencing of 48 individuals. Luciferase reporter gene assays were performed using fragments of the core promoter (232 bp to 1128 bp) in HASM and THP1 cells. Three hCYSLTR1 transcripts were found, one representing 90% of all messenger RNA identified. The genomic location of the transcription start sites suggested there are two putative hCYSLTR1 promoters. The majority of the transcriptional activity of the main putative promoter was detected between -232 and -679 bp. Four singlenucleotide polymorphisms in strong linkage disequilibrium were found in the region studied: -561 (rs7066737), -642 (rs2806489), -781 (rs2637204), and -940 (rs321029), with three haplotypes observed. In THP1 cells, the G allele (-642) caused a twofold decrease in luciferase expression compared to the Aallele. These data suggest that the majority of hCYSLTR1 transcripts in HASM and monocytes arise from a single promoter located immediately upstream of the 5\' untranslated region, although rarer transcripts can also occur. This study also raises the possibility that cell-type-dependent differences in transcriptional activity caused by the presence of specific haplotypes within the main CYSLTR1 promoter may be a predictor of disease risk or treatment response.
INTRODUCTION: The cysteinyl leukotrienes (Cys-LTs) are potent inflammatory mediators in asthma. It has been suggested that the different response of patients to Cys-LTs inhibitors could be due to the presence of polymorphisms in the genes implicated in this pathway. METHODS: In this study, polymorphisms 927T > C CYSLTR1 and -444A > C LTC4S were analysed in a Spanish population of 188 individuals (109 asthmatic children and 79 controls). Standardised history, skin prick tests and lung function measurements were performed in all patients. Genotypes were determined by sequencing after PCR amplification. RESULTS: Differences were observed in 927T > C CYSLTR1, regarding the severity of asthma in males. A greater presence of allele C in the population with persistent asthma versus the control group (Fisher's p-value = 0.001; Monte Carlo p-value = 0.003; OR: 12.35; 95 %CI: 2.18-70.00) was observed. Differences were also detected in the combined study of both polymorphisms, among controls and asthmatic patients (Monte Carlo p-value = 0.0002). In the group of males with asthma, an increase of AC variant (-444A LTC4S and 927C CYSLTR1) and a reduction in the AT genetic combination were detected. CONCLUSIONS: The combined study of polymorphisms in genes of the leukotriene pathway could explain the differences observed in the studies reported on polymorphism -444A < C LTC4S individually analysed.
Asthma and atopic dermatitis share several common features and Cysteinyl-leukotrienes are mediators that participate in the pathogenesis of both diseases. Recently, a new polymorphism (927T>C) has been identified in cysteinyl-leukotriene type-1 receptor (CYSLTR1) gene. This gene is found on the X chromosome. The aim of this study was to analyze this SNP in a population of children with asthma and atopic dermatitis. In this study, 166 individuals, 79 adult controls (CTR) and 87 children with asthma (AA) were included. Forty-one patients with asthma presented atopic dermatitis (AA-AD). Adults were chosen as controls to confirm lack of development of asthma and allergy during childhood. Standardized history, physical examination, skin prick tests, and lung function measurements were performed in all patients. The 927T>C CYSLTR1 SNP was analyzed by direct sequencing after PCR amplification. In males (53 individuals), the C allele was significantly more common among AA-AD patients (47%) than in CTR (8%) (Fisher's p < 0.005; Monte Carlo p < 0.008; OR:9.78; 95%CI: 1.73-55.30). When comparing AA-AD vs. AA-NAD (patients with asthma but not atopic dermatitis), significant differences were observed, (47% vs. 15%, Fisher's p = 0.014; Monte Carlo p = 0.022; OR: 4.97; 95%CI: 1.29-19.13). No differences in allele distribution were observed between these disease sub-groups in females. The 927T>C is a silent SNP; however, it could affect transcription or translation or may be linked to an unidentified, functional polymorphism and thus may pre-dispose male children to asthma and atopic dermatitis in our population. Further studies are needed to confirm these findings.
BACKGROUND: Sensitization to Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxin (SE) is a known risk factor for asthma susceptibility and severity. However, how SE sensitization is involved in asthma, particularly nonatopic asthma and/or late-onset asthma, remains uncertain. OBJECTIVE: To clarify the involvement of SE sensitization in nonatopic and/or late-onset asthma and its association with a polymorphism of the cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 1 gene (CysLTR1), which was examined because CysLT signaling is closely associated with late-onset eosinophilic asthma. METHODS: We assessed associations between sensitization to SE (A and/or B) and clinical indexes in 224 patients with asthma (mean age, 62.3 years; 171 women) from a cohort of the Kinki Hokuriku Airway Disease Conference, particularly those with nonatopic asthma (not sensitized to common aeroallergens) and/or late-onset asthma. Associations between SE sensitization and CysLTR1 polymorphism (rs2806489), a potential regulatory variant for atopic predisposition in women, were also assessed in a sex-stratified manner. RESULTS: A total of 105 patients (47%) with asthma were sensitized to SE. Among patients with nonatopic asthma (n = 67) or with late-onset asthma (n = 124), those sensitized to SE had significantly higher serum total IgE and periostin levels than those not sensitized. In nonatopic patients, a rapid decrease in forced expiratory volume in 1 second was associated with SE sensitization. In women with asthma, rs2806489 was associated with sensitization to SEB and age at asthma onset. CONCLUSION: SE sensitization contributes to T(H)2 inflammation in nonatopic and/or late-onset asthma. In women with asthma, the CysLTR1 variant might be associated with sensitization to SEB and age at asthma onset.
