Dihydrofolate reductase; Key enzyme in folate metabolism. Contributes to the de novo mitochondrial thymidylate biosynthesis pathway. Catalyzes an essential reaction for de novo glycine and purine synthesis, and for DNA precursor synthesis. Binds its own mRNA and that of DHFR2.
Antifolates are a class of drugs used as antibacterial, antiparasitic, and anticancer agents. This review focuses on 2-substituted-mercapto-quinazolin-4(3H)-one analogues as dihydrofolatereductase (DHFR) inhibitors. Several research work have concluded a structural model for this class of 2-thio-quinazoline derivatives to get compounds with remarkable biological activity. The pattern and orientation of the p-system substitutions with regard to the quinazoline nucleus manipulate the activity. The application of the obtained model criteria produced compounds 18, 20 and 21, which proved to be 4-8 times more active than the reference drug methotrexate (MTX, 1).
In this issue of Structure, Kampmeyer et al. provide detailed mechanistic insights into how structural changes in disease-associated dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) missense variants affect their cellular protein abundance and discuss implications for hereditary megaloblastic anemia disease.
Methotrexate, a structural analogue of folic acid, is one of the most frequently used chemotherapeutics, especially in haematological malignancies, various solid tumours and also inflammatory disorders. Methotrexate interferes with folate metabolism, mainly by inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase, resulting in the suppression of purine and pyrimidine precursor synthesis. The depletion of nucleic acid precursors seems to be responsible for the cytostatic, cytotoxic and differentiation effects of methotrexate. Methylation of biomolecules represents another folate-dependent pathway that is also affected by methotrexate. Furthermore, methotrexate is able to modify metabolic pathways and cellular processes independently of folate metabolism. Based on the similar structure of methotrexate and of functional groups of certain histone deacetylase inhibitors, the ability of methotrexate to inhibit histone deacetylases was predicted and consequently verified. Recently published findings also suggest that methotrexate affects glyoxalase and antioxidant systems. Although methotrexate has been used as a folate metabolism antagonist in anticancer therapy for more than 60 years, the identification of its'other molecular targets in cellular metabolism still continues.
Development of new drugs is a time-consuming, hugely expensive and an uncertain endeavor. The pharmaceutical industry is looking for cost-effective alternatives with reduced risks of drug failure. Validated target machinery along with established inhibitors indicates usefulness in drug design, discovery and further development. Folate metabolism, found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, represents an essential druggable target for chemotherapy. Numerous enzymes in the cell replication cycle use folate either as a cofactor or as a substrate. DHFR, an enzyme of the folate biosynthesis pathway is an established chemotherapeutic target, initially explored for anti-cancer drug discovery. Diaminopteridines e.g. methotrexate and aminopterin, primarily used as anti-cancer agents, are folic acid analogues, first reported in late 1940's, used to produce temporary remission of acute leukaemia in children. However, due to the toxicity of these drugs, they could not be used for other therapeutic implications such as in the treatment of infectious diseases. Development of newer diaminopteridine derivatives has helped in repositioning their therapeutic usefulness. These analogues have now been proven as anti-parasitic, immuno-suppressants, anti-bacterial agents, to enlist a few therapeutic applications. Likewise, diaminopyrimidine, diaminoquinazoline and diaminodihydrotriazines are being explored for structural modifications by which they can be repurposed from their originally developed medicinal applicability and exploited for various other infectious disease conditions. In this review, we encompass the study of DHFR inhibitors potentially to be repurposed for different infectious disease case scenario and also highlight the novel anti-infective drug discovery benefits therein.
Methotrexate (MTX) during maintenance therapy is essential for curing acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), but dosing strategies aiming at adequate treatment intensity are challenged by interindividual differences in drug disposition. To evaluate genetic factors associated with MTX metabolism, we performed a genome-wide association study in 447 ALL cases from the Nordic Society for Pediatric Haematology and Oncology ALL2008 study, validating results in an independent set of 196 patients. The intergenic single-nucleotide polymorphism rs1382539, located in a regulatory element of DHFR, was associated with increased levels of short-chain MTX polyglutamates (P = 1.1 x 10-8) related to suppression of enhancer activity, whereas rs35789560 in FPGS (p.R466C, P = 5.6 x 10-9) was associated with decreased levels of long-chain MTX polyglutamates through reduced catalytic activity. Furthermore, the FPGS variant was linked with increased relapse risk (P = .044). These findings show a genetic basis for interpatient variability in MTX response and could be used to improve future dosing algorithms.
Drug resistance impacts the effectiveness of many new therapeutics. Mutations in the therapeutic target confer resistance; however, deciphering which mutations, often remote from the enzyme active site, drive resistance is challenging. In a series of Pneumocystis jirovecii dihydrofolate reductase variants, we elucidate which interactions are key bellwethers to confer resistance to trimethoprim using homology modeling, molecular dynamics, and machine learning. Six molecular features involving mainly residues that did not vary were the best indicators of resistance.
Antibiotic resistance is a global health problem in which mutations occurring in functional proteins render drugs ineffective. The working mechanisms of the arising mutants are seldom apparent; a methodology to decipher these mechanisms systematically would render devising therapies to control the arising mutational pathways possible. Here we utilize C(alpha)-C(beta) bond vector relaxations obtained from moderate length MD trajectories to determine conduits for functionality of the resistance conferring mutants of Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase. We find that the whole enzyme is synchronized to the motions of the substrate, irrespective of the mutation introducing gain-of-function or loss-of function. The total coordination of the motions suggests changes in the hydrogen bond dynamics with respect to the wild type as a possible route to determine and classify the mode-of-action of individual mutants. As a result, nine trimethoprim-resistant point mutations arising frequently in evolution experiments are categorized. One group of mutants that display the largest occurrence (L28R, W30G) work directly by modifying the dihydrofolate binding region. Conversely, W30R works indirectly by the formation of the E139-R30 salt bridge which releases energy resulting from tight binding by distorting the binding cavity. A third group (D27E, F153S, I94L) arising as single, resistance invoking mutants in evolution experiment trajectories allosterically and dynamically affects a hydrogen bonding motif formed at residues 59-69-71 which in turn modifies the binding site dynamics. The final group (I5F, A26T, R98P) consists of those mutants that have properties most similar to the wild type; these only appear after one of the other mutants is fixed on the protein structure and therefore display clear epistasis. Thus, we show that the binding event is governed by the entire enzyme dynamics while the binding site residues play gating roles. The adjustments made in the total enzyme in response to point mutations are what make quantifying and pinpointing their effect a hard problem. Here, we show that hydrogen bond dynamics recorded on sub-mus time scales provide the necessary fingerprints to decipher the various mechanisms at play.
Cryo-cooling is routinely performed before x-ray diffraction image collection to reduce the damage to crystals due to ionizing radiation. It has been suggested that although backbone structures are usually very similar between room temperature and cryo-temperature, cryo-cooling may hamper biologically relevant dynamics. In this study, the crystal of Escherichia coli dihydrofolate reductase is studied with replica-exchange molecular dynamics simulation, and the results are compared with the crystal structure determined at cryo-temperature and room temperature with the time-averaged ensemble method. Although temperature dependence of unit cell compaction and root mean-square fluctuation of Calpha is found in accord with experiment, it is found that the protein structure at low temperature can be more heterogeneous than the ensemble of structures reported by using the time-averaged ensemble method, encouraging further development of the time-averaged ensemble method and indicating that data should be examined carefully to avoid overinterpretation of one average structure.
Osteosarcoma patients are commonly treated with high doses of methotrexate (MTX). MTX is an analog of folate, which is essential for DNA synthesis. Genetic polymorphism at single nucleotide can be indicative to the prognostic outcome in patients. Germ-line variants in candidate genes, coding for enzymes active in the metabolism of MTX, were studied in 62 osteosarcoma patients. Patients harboring the GG genotype in reduced folate carrier 1 (RFC1) rs1051266 had significantly better survival in comparison with patients having the AA genotype (P=0.046). These patients also had a lower frequency of metastasis (15%, P=0.029). Also patients homozygous for the G allele of rs1053129 in the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) gene were more likely to have a metastasis (45%, P= 0.005), and the methylenetetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C allele was associated with higher degree of liver toxicity (88%, P=0.007). The study suggests that germ-line variants in the MTX metabolic pathway are associated with survival and side effects in patients treated with MTX.
The emergence of drug-resistant Plasmodium vivax poses problems for malaria control and elimination in some parts of the world, especially in developing countries where individuals are routinely exposed to the infection. The aim of this study was to determine the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in dihydropteroate synthase (pvdhps) and dihydrofolate reductase (pvdhfr) genes associated with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (SP) drug resistance among P. vivax isolates collected in Palawan, Philippines. Genetic polymorphisms of pvdhps and pvdhfr were analysed by nested PCR. Analysis at specific codons I(13)P(33)F(57)S(58)T(61)S(117)I(173) associated with pyrimethamine resistance in the pvdhfr gene revealed that most of the samples (66/87, 75.9%) carried double mutation at positions I(13)P(33)F(57)R(58)T(61)N(117)I(173), while only 18.4% (16/87) of the isolates carried the wild-type haplotype (I(13)P(33)F(57)S(58)T(61)S(117)I(173)). For the pvdhps gene, the codons involved in sulfadoxine resistance S(382)A(383)K(512)A(553)V(585) were investigated. Single mutation at position S(382)G(383)K(512)A(553)V(585) was most observed in 68.0% (68/100) of the samples, whereas wild-type haplotype was found in 26.0% (26/100) of samples. The pvdhps and pvdhfr combination S(382)A(383)K(512)A(553)V(585)/I(13)P(33)F(57)S(58)T(61)S(117)I(173) (wild-type), S(382)G(383)K(512)A(553)V(585)/I(13)P(33)F(57)R(58)T(61)N(117)I(173), and S(382)A(383)K(512)A(553)V(585)-I(13)P(33)F(57)R(58)T(61)N(117)I(173) were the most frequently observed combination haplotypes from the three study sites. The information on molecular markers associated with antifolate drug-resistance could help better understanding ofthe molecular epidemiology and situation of SP resistant P. vivax malaria in the country. Continuous surveillance of these genetic markers is necessary to monitor the evolution of SP resistance in the Philippines.
In various malaria-endemic regions, the appearance of resistance has precluded the use of pyrimidine-based antifolate drugs. Here, a three-step fragment screening was used to identify new non-pyrimidine Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase (PfDHFR) inhibitors. Starting from a 1163-fragment commercial library, a two-step differential scanning fluorimetry screen identified 75 primary fragment hits. Subsequent enzyme inhibition assay identified 11 fragments displaying IC(50) in the 28-695 muM range and selectivity for PfDHFR. In addition to the known pyrimidine, three new anti-PfDHFR chemotypes were identified. Fragments from each chemotype were successfully co-crystallized with PfDHFR, revealing a binding in the active site, in the vicinity of catalytic residues, which was confirmed by molecular docking on all fragment hits. Finally, comparison with similar non-hit fragments provides preliminary input on available growth vectors for future drug development.
Methotrexate (MTX) is a tight-binding dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) inhibitor, used as both an antineoplastic and immunosuppressant therapeutic. MTX, like folate undergoes folylpolyglutamate synthetase-mediated gamma-glutamylation, which affects cellular retention and target specificity. Mechanisms of MTX resistance in cancers include a decrease in MTX poly-gamma-glutamylation and an upregulation of DHFR. Here, we report a series of potent MTX-based proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) to investigate DHFR degradation pharmacology and one-carbon biochemistry. These on-target, cell-active PROTACs show proteasome- and E3 ligase-dependent activity, and selective degradation of DHFR in multiple cancer cell lines. By comparison, treatment with MTX increases cellular DHFR protein expression. Importantly, these PROTACs produced distinct, less-lethal phenotypes compared to MTX. The chemical probe set described here should complement conventional DHFR inhibitors and serve as useful tools for studying one-carbon biochemistry and dissecting complex polypharmacology of MTX and related drugs. Such compounds may also serve as leads for potential autoimmune and antineoplastic therapeutics.
Recently we identified cycloguanil-like dihydrotriazine derivatives, which provided host-factor directed antiviral activity against influenza viruses and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), by targeting the human dihydrofolate reductase (hDHFR) enzyme. In this context we deemed interesting to further investigate the structure activity relationship (SAR) of our first series of cycloguanil-like dihydrotriazines, designing two novel azaspiro dihydrotriazine scaffolds. The present study allowed the exploration of the potential chemical space, around these new scaffolds, that are well tolerated for maintaining the antiviral effect by means of interaction with the hDHFR enzyme. The new derivatives confirmed their inhibitory profile against influenza viruses, especially type B. In particular, the two best compounds shared potent antiviral activity (4: EC(50) = 0.29 muM; 6: EC(50) = 0.19 muM), which was comparable to that of zanamivir (EC(50) = 0.14 muM), and better than that of ribavirin (EC(50) = 3.2 muM). In addition, these two compounds proved to be also effective against RSV (4: EC(50) = 0.40 muM, SI >/= 250; 6: EC(50) = 1.8 muM, SI >/= 56), surpassing the potency and selectivity index (SI) of ribavirin (EC(50) = 5.8 muM, SI > 43). By a perspective of these results, the above adequately substituted azaspiro dihydrotriazines may represent valuable hit compounds worthy of further structural optimization to develop improved host DHFR-directed antiviral agents.
