Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (quinone), mitochondrial; Catalyzes the conversion of dihydroorotate to orotate with quinone as electron acceptor.
Cell death under stress conditions like hypoxia, involves multiple interconnected pathways. In this study, a stable dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) knockdown human corneal epithelial cell line was established to explore the regulation of hypoxic cell death, which was mitigated by various cell death inhibitors, particularly by a lipid peroxyl radical scavenger liproxstatin-1 (Lip-1), suggesting that hypoxic cell death involves crosstalk of ferroptosis and PANoptosis. We discovered that both DHODH and Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) protected cells from hypoxic death by inhibiting lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) and maintaining mitochondrial membrane potential. However, upregulation of DHODH suppressed GPX4 upstream, exhibiting a trade-off in the expression levels between DHODH and GPX4 under hypoxia, with DHODH exerting a more decisive impact on cell survival. DHODH knockdown under hypoxia did not significantly alter lipid peroxidation levels, demonstrating the balance between DHODH and GPX4 expression finely regulated cellular ferroptosis homeostasis. This study highlights the complex interplay between ferroptosis and PANoptosis in hypoxic cell death, particularly the dual role of DHODH in regulating both pathways. DHODH is not merely maintaining the quantity of mitochondria but is promoting the selection of mitochondria favorable to cell survival. These findings not only deepen our understanding of cell death but also suggest potential therapeutic strategies for diseases involving oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction.
Malaria is a lethal disease that claims thousands of lives worldwide annually. The objective of this study was to identify new natural compounds that can target two P. falciparum enzymes; P. falciparum Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (PfDHODH) and P. falciparum phosphoethanolamine methyltransferase (PfPMT). To accomplish this, e-pharmacophore modelling and molecular docking were employed against PfDHODH. Following this, 1201 natural compounds with docking scores of </= -7 kcal/mol were docked into the active site of the second enzyme PMT. The top nine compounds were subjected to further investigation using MM-GBSA free binding energy calculations and ADME analysis. The results revealed favourable free binding energy values better than the references, as well as acceptable pharmacokinetic properties. Compounds ZINC000013377887, ZINC000015113777, and ZINC000085595753 were scrutinized to assess their interaction stability with the PfDHODH enzyme, and chemical stability reactivity using molecular dynamics (MD) simulation and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. These findings indicate that the three natural compounds are potential candidates for dual PfDHODH and PfPMT inhibitors for malaria treatment.
PURPOSE: Major human parasitic protozoans, such as Plasmodium falciparum and Trypanosoma brucei, cause malaria and trypanosomiasis also known as sleeping sickness. In anti-parasitic drug discovery research, trypanothione reductase (TryR) and P. falciparum dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (Pf-DHODH) enzymes are key drug targets in T. brucei and P. falciparum, respectively. The possibility of co-infection of single host by T. brucei and P. falciparum is because both parasites exist in sub-Saharan Africa and the problem of parasite drug resistance necessitates the discovery of new scaffolds, which are strange to the organisms causing these infectious diseases-new scaffolds may help overcome established resistance mechanisms of the organisms. METHOD: In this study, N,N'-bis[2-(5-bromo-7-azabenzimidazol-1-yl)-2-oxoethyl]ethylene-1,3-diamine and its cyclohexyl-1,2-diamine analogue were explored for their inhibitory potential against TryR and Pf-DHODH by engaging density functional study, molecular dynamic simulations, drug-likeness, in silico and in vitro studies RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Results obtained indicated excellent binding potential of the ligands to the receptors and good ADMET (adsorption, desorption, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity) properties.
Introduction: Leflunomide is one of the commonly used drugs in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), which on administration is converted into its active metabolite teriflunomide. Aim: Our aim is to evaluate the frequencies of dihydrooroate dehydrogenase (DHODH) (rs3213422), ABCG2 (rs2231142) and CYP2C19 (rs4244285) allele distribution among patients receiving leflunomide for RA and their possible impact on leflunomide performance in disease control. Patients & methods: Patients (>18 years) who fulfilled the 2010 ACR classification criteria for RA receiving leflunomide (20 mg/day) were included in the study. Disease activity score 28 was used to assess patients disease activity. Blood samples were collected for full blood count and blood chemistry. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. The selection of SNPs was based on the criteria of minor allele frequency among Caucasians. Results: A significant association between the therapeutic outcome of leflunomide and DHODH genotyping was observed but not with CYP2C19 and ABCG2. Importantly, there is a significant association between DHODH (rs3213422) CC genotype and the number of patients with controlled disease. Conclusion: We strongly suggest that polymorphisms in the DHODH are the major factor affecting leflunomide pharmacogenetics and therapeutic efficacy.
OBJECTIVE: Leflunomide is a commonly used disease-modifying drug in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Its effects are mediated via inhibition of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) by its active metabolite teriflunomide, and the pharmacokinetics of teriflunomide are highly variable. Our objective was to examine the association between the DHODH haplotype and plasma teriflunomide concentration with response to leflunomide in patients with RA where leflunomide was added to an existing disease-modifying drug regimen after failure to achieve an adequate response with conventional triple therapy. METHODS: Patients with RA who were taking, or were about to initiate, leflunomide were included. Participant characteristics, including the DHODH haplotype, were determined. Up to 5 plasma samples were collected after leflunomide was initiated for assays of total and free teriflunomide concentration. Disease activity was determined via the 28-joint Disease Activity Score (DAS28). The association between DAS28 scores and patient covariates was determined by linear mixed-effects modeling. RESULTS: A total of 67 patients were included in the study. The DAS28 score after initiation of leflunomide was associated with the baseline DAS28 score (beta = 0.70, P < 0.001) and was higher in those who carried the DHODH haplotype 2 (beta = 0.56. P = 0.01) and did not carry the shared epitope (beta = 0.56, P = 0.013). As total and free plasma teriflunomide concentration increased, the DAS28 score was significantly lower (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). When considering threshold concentrations, teriflunomide concentrations >16 mg/liter were associated with a DAS28 score that was 0.33 lower, and when free teriflunomide concentration was >35 microg/liter, the DAS28 score was 0.32 lower. CONCLUSION: Teriflunomide concentration and carriage of the DHODH haplotype 2 are associated with response to leflunomide in patients with RA, and a total plasma teriflunomide concentration of at least 16 mg/liter is needed to maximize the likelihood of response.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by arrested differentiation making differentiation therapy a promising treatment strategy. Recent success of inhibitors of mutated isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) invigorated interest in differentiation therapy of AML so that several new drugs have been proposed, including inhibitors of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), an enzyme in pyrimidine synthesis. Cytarabine, a backbone of standard AML therapy, is known to induce differentiation at low doses, but the mechanism is not completely elucidated. We have previously reported that 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleoside (AICAr) and brequinar, a DHODH inhibitor, induced differentiation of myeloid leukemia by activating the ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR)/checkpoint kinase 1 (Chk1) via pyrimidine depletion. In this study, using immunoblotting, flow cytometry analyses, pharmacologic inhibitors and genetic inactivation of Chk1 in myeloid leukemia cell lines, we show that low dose cytarabine induces differentiation by activating Chk1. In addition, cytarabine induces differentiation ex vivo in a subset of primary AML samples that are sensitive to AICAr and DHODH inhibitor. The results of our study suggest that leukemic cell differentiation stimulated by low doses of cytarabine depends on the activation of Chk1 and thus shares the same pathway as pyrimidine synthesis inhibitors.
