D(2) dopamine receptor; Dopamine receptor whose activity is mediated by G proteins which inhibit adenylyl cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Intermediate phenotypes may contribute to elucidate the genetic determinants of schizophrenia. A regulatory dopamine 2-receptor gene (DRD2) polymorphism (rs1076560; G>T) has been identified as a genetic risk factor for schizophrenia. Studies report conflicting results on its involvement in schizophrenia intermediate phenotypes and no systematic review on this topic has been published. Therefore, we aimed to assess whether this polymorphism is implicated in schizophrenia intermediate phenotypes by performing a systematic review and meta-analysis. Alternative allele carrier status negatively affected all intermediate phenotypes except for brain morphology, for which inconsistent genotype effects were found. Specifically, alternative allele carriers showed inefficient brain recruitment in healthy subjects and decreased brain recruitment in schizophrenia patients. Finally, significant results of the meta-analysis on functional magnetic resonance imaging in healthy subjects pinpointed rs1076560-associated brain regions, in particular the fronto-striatal network. To increase homogeneity and thus improve comparability in future genetic studies investigating SCZ intermediate phenotypes, we highlight methodological caveats and provide suggestions to circumvent such pitfalls.
Most classification approaches for idiopathic Parkinson's disease subtypes primarily focus on motor and non-motor symptoms. Besides these characteristics, other features, including gender or genetic polymorphism of dopamine receptors are potential factors influencing the disease's phenotype. By utilizing a kmeans-clustering algorithm we were able to identify three subgroups mainly characterized by gender, DRD2 Taq1A (rs1800497) polymorphism-associated with changes in dopamine signaling in the brain-and disease progression. A subsequent regression analysis of these subgroups further suggests an influence of their characteristics on the daily levodopa dosage, an indicator for medication response. These findings could promote further enhancements in individualized therapies for idiopathic Parkinson's disease.
Recent work highlights the importance of genetic variants that influence brain structure and function in conferring risk for polygenic obesity. The neurotransmitter dopamine (DA) has a pivotal role in energy balance by integrating metabolic signals with circuits supporting cognitive, perceptual, and appetitive functions that guide feeding. It has also been established that diet and obesity alter DA signaling, leading to compulsive-like feeding and neurocognitive impairments. This raises the possibility that genetic variants that influence DA signaling and adaptation confer risk for overeating and cognitive decline. Here, we consider the role of two common gene variants, FTO and TaqIA rs1800497 in driving gene x environment interactions promoting obesity, metabolic dysfunction, and cognitive change via their influence on DA receptor subtype 2 (DRD2) signaling.
PURPOSE: The dopamine agonists (DA) have been used widely to treat prolactinomas. However, it is difficult to predict whether the patient will be responsive to DA treatment. METHODS: We aimed to investigate whether the in vivo expression of DRD2 based on (18)F-fallypride PET/MR could predict the therapeutic effect of DA on prolactinomas. Seven patients with prolactinomas completed (18)F-fallypride PET/MR. Among them, three patients underwent surgery and further tumor immunohistochemistry. Imaging findings and immunohistochemical staining were compared with treatment outcomes. RESULTS: (18)F-fallypride PET/MR was visually positive in 7 of 7 patients, and DRD2 target specificity could be confirmed by immunohistochemical staining. A significantly lower tracer standard uptake value (SUV) could be detected in the resistant patients (n = 3) than in the sensitive patients (n = 4; SUV(mean), 4.67 +/- 1.32 vs. 13.57 +/- 2.42, p < 0.05). DRD2 expression determined by (18)F-fallypride PET/MR corresponded with the DA treatment response. CONCLUSION: (18)F-fallypride PET/MR may be a promising technique for predicting DA response in patients with prolactinoma.
Schizophrenia is a complex multifactorial disorder for which the pathobiology still remains elusive. Dysfunction of the dopamine D2 receptor signaling has been associated with the illness, but numerous studies provide confounding results. This study investigates the association of synonymous polymorphisms (His313 and Pro319) in the dopamine D2 receptor gene with schizophrenia using a case-control approach, with 101 cases and 145 controls. Our results demonstrated that genotype distribution for the His313 polymorphism was significantly different between schizophrenia patients and control subjects (p=0.0012), while the Pro319 polymorphism did not show any association with the disease. The results suggest that the synonymous SNP His313 in DRD2 may be associated with the illness. However, there is a need for further replication studies with larger sample sets.
Total sleep deprivation (TSD) and time-on-task (TOT), especially in combination, increase cognitive instability and cause performance impairment. There are large inter-individual differences in TSD and TOT effects which, in part, have a genetic basis. Here, we show that the dopamine receptor D(2) C957T genetic polymorphism predicts the magnitude of the TOT effect on a psychomotor vigilance test (PVT) during 38 h of TSD. This finding indicates that dopamine availability in the striatum, where the dopamine receptor D(2) is most prevalent, influences the TOT effect, suggesting a role for dopaminergic pathways in sustained attention deficits during sleep loss.
Loss aversion is the tendency to overweight losses compared with gains in decision situations. Several studies have investigated the neurobiological background of this phenomenon and it was found that activation in the mesolimbic-mesocortical dopamine system during a gambling decision correlates with loss aversion. In a behavioral experiment with N = 143 subjects, the present study investigates the influence of 2 functional single-nucleotide polymorphisms on the BDNF gene (BDNF Val66Met polymorphism) and ANKK1 gene (DRD2 Taq1a/ANKK1 polymorphism), that are known to affect the dopamine system, on loss aversion. Additionally, associations of alexithymia, a personality construct describing the disability to consciously experience emotions in the self, with loss aversion and with the mentioned polymorphisms were assessed using the TAS-20 questionnaire, to replicate associations that have been reported before. Results revealed a significant interaction effect of the 2 polymorphisms on loss aversion. Carriers of the genetic constellation 66Met+/A1+ had the lowest loss aversion scores, compared with all other allelic groups. According to the literature this allelic configuration is characterized by a relatively low D2/3 receptor binding in the striatum and an impaired activity-dependent secretion of BDNF. This is the first study showing that loss aversion is related to naturally occurring differences in dopamine function.
Dopaminergic neuromodulation is critically important for brain and cognitive integrity. The DRD2/ANKK1 Taq1A polymorphism is associated with striatal dopamine (DA) D2 receptor availability. Some previous studies have found that the A allele of the Taq1A polymorphism influences brain structure, but the results are inconsistent, likely due to population heterogeneity and small sample sizes. We investigated the genetic effect on caudate volume in a large sample of older adults without dementia. Results show that A-allele carriers have smaller caudate volume compared to non-carriers in relatively older adults (n = 167; Mage = 77.8 years), whereas the genotype did not influence caudate volume in a younger age group (n = 220; Mage = 62.8 years). Cognitive performance was not significantly affected by the DRD2 gene. Our findings extend previous observations by showing magnified genetic effects on brain volume in old age, and provide evidence for a link between a DA-related genetic polymorphism and grey matter volume in a brain region within the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway.
Significantly diminished intellectual functioning, as indicated by appropriately administered IQ tests with scores below 70, is a frequent mental handicap leading to severe social disadvantages and serves as a paradigm for molecular genetic research of complex disorders and traits due to its multitude of known and unknown, genetic as well as environmental causes. Since the number of confounding variables is expected to be considerably reduced in the normal population at the opposite ends of the IQ distribution, we employed a contrast of extremes approach by comparing adults of high (N = 71) and average IQ (N = 78) in association studies to search for genes involved in the multigenic forms of familial mental retardation. The dopamine D2 receptor gene (DRD2) was chosen as a candidate gene for general cognitive ability (g) since it has been found to be associated with visuospatial ability which in turn is highly correlated with g. Confirming two similar studies in children, however, no significant differences were obtained. Given three negative studies, the DRD2 gene is unlikely to pay a major role in g.
PURPOSE: Filamin A (FLNA) expression is related to dopamine receptor type 2 (DRD2) expression in prolactinomas. Nevertheless, in corticotrophinomas, there are few studies about DRD2 expression and no data on FLNA. Therefore, we evaluated FLNA and DRD2 expression in corticotrophinomas and their association with tumor characteristics. METHODS: DRD2 and FLNA expression by immunohistochemistry, using H-score, based on the percentage of positive cells in a continuous scale of 0-300, were evaluated in 23 corticotrophinomas samples from patients submitted to neurosurgery. In six patients, treatment with cabergoline was indicated after non curative surgery. RESULTS: Twenty-two patients were female and one male. Regarding tumor size, 10 were micro and 12 were macroadenomas. DRD2 expression was found in 89% of cases and did not correlate with FLNA expression. Moreover, the response to cabergoline, observed in 33% of the cases, did not correlate with DRD2 nor FLNA expression. FLNA expression was not associated with clinical and tumor characteristics, except for sphenoid sinus invasion. CONCLUSIONS: In our cohort of corticotrophinomas, DRD2 expression was not associated with FLNA expression nor to the response to CAB. Nonetheless, FLNA expression could be related to tumor invasiveness.
Subjects on an addiction treatment unit who had been exposed to severe combat conditions in Vietnam were screened for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Of 24 with PTSD, 58.3% carried the D2A1 allele. Of the remaining eight who did not meet PTSD criteria, 12.5% carried the D2A1 allele (p = 0.04). In a replication study of 13 with PTSD, 61.5% carried the D2A1 allele. Of the remaining 11 who did not meet criteria for PTSD, 0% carried the D2A1 allele (p = 0.002). For the combined group 59.5% of those with PTSD carried the D2A1 allele versus 5.3% of those who did not have PTSD (p = 0.0001). These results suggest that a DRD2 variant in linkage disequilibrium with the D2A1 allele confers an increased risk to PTSD, and the absence of the variant confers a relative resistance to PTSD.
AIM: The recent Psychiatric Genomics Consortium genome-wide association study identified an SNP, rs2514218, located 47kb upstream of the DRD2 gene to be associated with risk for schizophrenia (p = 2.75e-11). Since all antipsychotics bind to dopamine D2 receptors, we examined rs2514218 in relation to response to antipsychotic treatment. PATIENTS & METHODS: We investigated the SNP in relation to treatment response in a prospective study consisting of 208 patients (151 Caucasians, 42 African-Americans and 15 others) treated with clozapine for 6 months. RESULTS: rs2514218 was associated with total score change in the brief psychiatric rating scale under an additive model (pcorr= 0.033). CONCLUSION: Our finding provides evidence for rs2514218 association with antipsychotic response, but further replication is required before firm conclusions can be drawn.
