D(3) dopamine receptor; Dopamine receptor whose activity is mediated by G proteins which inhibit adenylyl cyclase. Promotes cell proliferation.
The SNP rs167771 of the dopamine-3-receptor gene (DRD3) has been associated with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in samples from the United Kingdom, The Netherlands and Spain. The DRD3 polymorphisms of rs167771 are significantly associated with a specific type of repetitive and stereotyped behavior, called sameness. Repetitive and stereotyped behavior occurs in several neuropsychiatric disorders and the combined picture across these disorders strongly suggests the involvement of the basal ganglia - frontal lobe circuitry. In autism, abnormalities of the basal ganglia, in particular the caudate nucleus, are the best replicated findings in neuroimaging studies. Interestingly, the DRD3 gene is highly expressed in the basal ganglia, most notably the caudate nucleus. The rs167771 SNP was recently also found to be related to risperidone-induced extra-pyramidal side effects (EPS) in patients with autism, which is important since risperidone is approved for the treatment of aggression, irritability and rigid behavior in ASD. To conclude, striatum abnormalities in autism are associated with repetitive and stereotyped behavior in autism and may be related to DRD3 polymorphisms.
The ventral pallidum (VP) is a key hub within the reward system that mediates drug-seeking behaviors. However, molecular and cellular adaptations within the VP following drug use are not fully elucidated. In this issue of Neuron, Pribiag et al. (2021) demonstrate how cocaine induces circuit-specific changes within the VP via dopamine-receptor-D3-dependent processes to promote cocaine seeking.
Recently the DRD3 gene has been associated with ASD in two independent samples. Follow up analysis of the risk allele of the SNP rs167771 in 91 subjects revealed a significant association with a specific type of repetitive behavior: the factor "insistence on sameness" (IS) derived from the Autism Diagnostic Interview. This risk allele was associated with a decreased risk for IS, but not with any other symptomatology. Further study and replication of this finding is necessary, bearing in mind that these results would not be statistically significant if corrected for multiple testing.
The current study was the first one to reveal the contribution of DRD3 methylation to the risk of different (SCZ) subtypes. This study comprised a total of 30 paranoid (15 males and 15 females) and 29 undifferentiated (15 males and 14 females) SCZ patients and 26 age- and gender-matched controls. Our results showed a significant association of CpG2 with SCZ. A breakdown analysis by gender showed that CpG2 and CpG3 methylation were significantly higher in male patients than male controls, and that CpG5 methylation was significantly higher in female patients than female controls. A further breakdown analysis by both gender and SCZ subtype showed that CpG2 and CpG3 methylation were significantly higher in male paranoid SCZ and male undifferentiated SCZ than male controls. In contrast, CpG2 and CpG3 methylation were significantly lower in female undifferentiated SCZ than female controls. Additionally, CpG5 methylation was significantly higher in female paranoid SCZ than female controls. In conclusion, our findings supported that DRD3 gene body hypermethylation was significantly associated with the risk of SCZ. Future study is needed to clarify the mechanisms by which DRD3 gene body hypermethylation contributes to the risk of SCZ.
We have carried out an association study of a polymorphism in the 3'UTR of the dopamine transporter gene (DAT) and a polymorphism in the coding region of the D3 receptor gene (DRD3) in Spanish patients with manic depression and in controls. No significant differences in allelic and genotypic frequencies of either of these polymorphisms was found in patients compared with controls.
Schizophrenia is a heritable, complex mental disorder. We analysed the DRD3 gene as a candidate to be related to schizophrenia and clinical features in affected sib-pairs. A positive association with the -250A/Ser9 haplotype and a trend toward an association with formal thought disorder were observed. A synergic effect of DRD3 polymorphisms on schizophrenia susceptibility is suggested.
Results of candidate gene investigations in ADHD have been difficult to replicate. The complexity of the phenotypes and their underlying determinants, and the relatively small effect sizes of genetic variants may, in part, be contributing to these inconsistencies. The objective of this study is to conduct an exploratory analysis using a comprehensive approach to investigate the role of candidate genes. This approach combines a dimensional behavioural approach akin to Research Domain Criteria (RDoC), a pharmaco-dynamic evaluation of behaviours relevant to ADHD, together with association and linkage testing in a large sample of children with ADHD. Parents, teachers, and research staff evaluated children with ADHD under three experimental conditions (EC): 1 week of baseline observation, followed by 1 week of methylphenidate (MPH) and 1 week of placebo, administered in a double-blind crossover order. Several quantitative behavioural and cognitive dimensions relevant for ADHD were also assessed. We combined family-based (FBAT) and quantitative trait genetic analyses (n = 575 probands with members of their nuclear families) to investigate the role of DRD3 (Ser-9-Gly) in ADHD and its relevant behavioural dimensions. Comparing the behaviours of children with different genotypes under the three EC showed a nominal association between the T allele and poorer behavioural scores during the MPH week (as assessed by teachers), particularly in boys. With the family-based analysis, the T allele showed a nominal association with increased risk for ADHD, response to placebo and MPH as assessed by research staff, and the modulation of other behavioural and cognitive dimensions. These results provide convergent, albeit preliminary evidence for the implication of the DRD3 (Ser-9-Gly) polymorphism in the aetiology of ADHD and the modulation of its various behavioural dimensions, including RDoC cognitive constructs and response to pharmacological probes. This illustrative example suggests that this research paradigm might help to reliably uncover the role of other candidate genes in ADHD.
The association between dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) Ser9Gly polymorphism and treatment response to antipsychotic drugs (APDs) in schizophrenia (SCZ) has been widely reported with inconsistent results, thus we performed an updated meta-analysis to derive a more precise estimation of the relationship. PubMed, Cochrane Library, Medline, Embase, CNKI, Weipu and Wanfang databases were searched for eligible studies published until March 2022. Odds ratios (ORs) with 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of the associations in four genetic models. A total of 13 studies with 1769 patients were included in this meta-analysis. Our findings suggested that Ser9Gly polymorphism was significantly associated with treatment response to APDs in SCZ in allele model (Ser vs Gly, OR = 0.72, 95 % CI = 0.58-0.89, P = 0.002), recessive model (Ser/Ser vs Ser/Gly + Gly/Gly, OR = 0.55, 95 % CI = 0.36-0.86, P = 0.008) and co-dominant model (Ser/Ser vs Gly/Gly, OR = 0.57, 95 % CI = 0.33-0.99, P = 0.045) in Caucasians, but not in Asians. meta-regression revealed that the associations were not confounded by mean age, male ratio and treatment duration (P > 0.05). In summary, our results indicated the DRD3 Ser9Gly may influence the efficacy of APDs in specific genetic models, of which Ser allele and Ser/Ser genotype contributed to poor treatment response in Caucasians.
BACKGROUND: A possible genetic contribution of dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) to cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD) has yet to be investigated. OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of rs6280 (Ser9Gly) genotype on PD patients' cognitive performance and to clarify possible interactions with psychopathology. METHODS: Two hundred and fifty-three consecutive PD patients underwent neurological and neuropsychological evaluations, which included: Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), Hoehn & Yahr scale (H&Y), Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS-2), and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS). rs6280 polymorphism was genotyped for all PD patients and for 270 ethnically matched healthy volunteers (HC). Non-parametric group comparisons and logistic regressions were used for data analyses. RESULTS: rs6280 genotype did not differ between PD and HC groups. PD patients with rs6280 CC genotype had more impaired cognitive performance (i.e., <1st percentile of demographically adjusted norms) on DRS-2 subscales Initiation/Perseveration and Construction than those with TT genotype. These associations remained statistically significant when other covariates (e.g., demographic features, disease duration, severity of motor symptoms in OFF and ON states, anti-parkinsonian medication, and psychopathology symptoms) were taken into consideration. PD patients with rs6280 TC had less anxiety (i.e., HADS Anxiety>/=11) than those with TT (p = 0.012). This association was also independent of other covariates. CONCLUSIONS: Study findings suggest that rs6280 CC genotype predisposes to executive dysfunction and visuoconstructional deficits, whereas the heterozygous genotype protects from anxiety in PD. These effects do not appear to be dependent of one another. rs6280 is not a genotypic susceptibility factor for PD.
A previous exploratory analysis of a COMT gene single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and a DRD3 SNP by our group suggested possible contributions to pain-related acute care utilization in people with sickle cell disease (SCD). Our aim was to extend the analysis to gene-spanning haplotypes of COMT SNPs and DRD3 SNPs to investigate possible associations with pain intensity and pain-related acute care utilization in an SCD cohort. Genotyping was conducted, and clinical data were collected, including self-reported pain intensity using PAINReportIt((R)) (average of current pain and least and worst in past 24 hours, average pain intensity [API]) and medical record-extracted, pain-related acute care utilization data of 130 adults with SCD. Haplotype blocks were identified based on linkage disequilibria (COMT = 7 haploblocks; DRD3 = 8 haploblocks). Regression analyses were tested for association between haplotypes and API and utilization, yielding several significant findings. For COMT block 1 (rs2075507, rs4646310, rs737865), the A-G-G haplotype was associated with higher API compared to the reference A-G-A (p = 0.02), whereas the A-A-A haplotype was associated with higher utilization (p = 0.02). For DRD3 block 2 (rs9817063, rs2134655, rs963468, and rs3773679), relative to reference T-C-G-C, the T-T-G-C haplotype was associated with higher utilization (p = 0.01). For DRD3 block 4 (rs167770, rs324029, and rs324023), the A-G-T haplotype was associated with higher API (p = 0.04) and utilization (p < 0.001) relative to reference G-A-T, whereas the A-A-T haplotype was associated with higher utilization (p = 0.01). We found COMT and DRD3 haplotypes associated with pain-related SCD features, suggesting that in future studies more emphasis be placed on cis effects of SNP alleles in evaluating genetic contributions to SCD pain and acute care utilization for pain.
A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the DRD3 gene (rs167771) was recently associated with autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Different polymorphisms of rs167771 corresponded to varying degrees of stereotyped behaviour. As DRD3 receptors are relatively overexpressed in the striatum, we investigated whether striatal volume was related to these polymorphisms in autism. We assessed volumes of caudate nucleus and putamen in 86 participants with ASD (mean age 15.3 years). MANCOVA showed an association between alleles of the rs167771 SNP and the volume of striatal structures. Furthermore, greater caudate nucleus volume correlated with stereotyped behaviour. These findings support a relationship between DRD3 gene SNPs, striatum and stereotyped behaviour in ASD.
Molecular components of the dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) may play an important role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Previous studies have demonstrated an association between DRD3 Ser9Gly and cathechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT, SNP = rs165656) polymorphisms and schizophrenia but the results were inconclusive. We investigated this apparent association between Ser9Gly (A/G) polymorphism and an intronic SNP (dbSNP or rs165656) in 261 Malay patients diagnosed with schizophrenia and 216 controls, using PCR-RFLP. The genotype distribution of the polymorphism DRD3 Ser9Gly was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for patients (P = 0.1251) and out of HWE for controls (P = 0.0137). However, both healthy controls and schizophrenia patients were out of HWE for the polymorphism COMT rs165656. Based on allele and genotype frequencies in both groups, we found no significant association of DRD3 Ser9Gly polymorphisms and COMT (rs165656) with schizophrenia in Malays. Further studies should examine the association between other dopamine-related genes and the behavioral phenotypes of schizophrenia.
PURPOSE: Autism, a neuropsychiatric illness, is a complex ailment of mainly indefinite cause. Although precise pathophysiological mechanism is unclear but the role of genetics is undeniable therefore pharmacogenetics may assist to a better management of symptoms. Risperidone is widely used in autism. Considering the significance of dopaminergic system in psychological and neurological diseases and its association with autism, the hypothesis that genetic variant of dopamine receptor (DRD3), Ser9Gly (rs6280), may influence treatment of autism may be assumed. METHOD: In the present study, 56 autistic Persian children within the age range of 2.5 to 14 years were included. Diagnosis of autism was based on DSM-V criteria and the severity degree was measured by ABC-C checklists at base line and after 8 weeks of treatment with risperidone. Based on their scores patients were categorized as responsive and non-responsive groups. DRD3 Ser9Gly (rs6280) was determined by PCR-RFLP. RESULTS: Carriers of Gly allele as well as carriers of Gly/Gly and Ser/Gly genotypes showed significantly better response to risperidone compared with carriers of Ser allele and Ser/Ser genotype (P=0.027; OR= 4.18; 95%CI=1.16-15.03 and P=0.014; OR=6.825; 95%CI=1.36-34.13). CONCLUSION: Our results advocate the possible influence of genetic variation of DRD3 in clinical response to antipsychotics like risperidone in autistic individuals. This article is open to POST-PUBLICATION REVIEW. Registered readers (see "For Readers") may comment by clicking on ABSTRACT on the issue's contents page.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenetics of tardive dyskinesia and dopamine D3 (DRD3), serotonin 2A (HTR2A), and 2C (HTR2C) receptors has been examined in various populations, but not in Russians. PURPOSE: To investigate the association between orofaciolingual (TDof) and limb-truncal dyskinesias (TDlt) and Ser9Gly (DRD3), -1438G>A (HTR2A), and Cys23Ser (HTR2C) polymorphisms in Russian psychiatric inpatients from Tomsk, Siberia. METHODS: In total, 146 subjects were included. Standard protocols were applied for genotyping. TDof and TDlt were assessed with AIMS items 1-4 and 5-7, respectively. Two-part model, logistic and log-normal regression analyses were applied to assess different variables (e.g., allele-carriership status, age, gender, and medication use). RESULTS: TDlt, but not TDof, exhibited an association with Ser9Gly and Cys23Ser (with 9Gly and 23Ser alleles exhibiting opposite effects). However, -1438G>A was not associated with TDof and Dlt. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first pharmacogenetic report on tardive dyskinesia in Russians. Subject to further replication, our findings extend and support the available data.
The involvement of dopamine in the etiology of schizophrenia is suggested by a number of neurobiological and pharmacological data, the dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) being selectively expressed in brain regions which may be specifically involved in the risk for schizophrenia. The gene coding for DRD3 has thus been extensively analyzed. Since the initial report providing substantial evidence for an association of homozygosity of either allele of the gene coding for DRD3 (BalI polymorphisms) with schizophrenia, a flurry of replicating studies has appeared, which have been split into confirmations and nonreplications in North European Caucasian, Mediterranean, Asian, American, and African populations. The involvement of DRD3 polymorphisms thus remains questionable, particularly as no linkage studies have favored a nonrandom segregation of DRD3 alleles and schizophrenia. We performed a metaanalysis from 29 independent samples, from 24 different association studies so far published, allowing the examination of 2,619 schizophrenic patients and 2,517 controls. No significant differences of genotype counts were noted between patients and controls for the whole sample, considering frequency of any genotype. Starting from the high variability of the genotypes in different geographical areas, the impact of ethnic heterogeneity was taken into account. When the studies were reorganized in five groups according to geographical origin of samples, both homozygosity and 1-1 genotype revealed significant heterogeneity (P < 0.05). We specifically found an excess of homozygosity and 1-1 genotype in schizophrenic patients only in the African and Caucasian groups (P < 0.05). The present analysis suggests a small but significant effect of DRD3 in the susceptibility to schizophrenia, at least in Caucasians.
To investigate the possible association between dopamine receptor D3 genotype (DRD3) and allelic variants and the risk for developing essential tremor (ET). Leukocytary DNA from 201 patients with ET and 282 healthy controls was studied for the genotype DRD3 and the occurrence of DRD3 allelic variants by using allele-specific PCR amplification and MslI-RFLP's analyses. A meta-analysis of previous studies was performed. The frequencies of the DRD3Ser/Gly genotype and of the allelic variant DRDGly were significantly higher in patients with ET than in controls (P < 0.017 and <0.005, respectively), These findings were especially relevant in women (OR = 1.73, 95% CI: 1.15-2.59, P = 0.008), and in patients with earlier onset of the disease with (P = 0.014). The frequencies of the DRD3Ser/Gly and DRD3Gly/Gly genotypes and of the allelic variant DRD3Gly in patients were significantly higher in patients with voice tremor, but not with head, tongue, or chin tremor, than in controls. The meta-analysis indicated association of variant genotypes with ET risk (OR = 1.18, 95% CI 1.01-1.38). These results suggest that DRD3 genotype and the variant DRD3Gly allelic variant is associated with the risk for and age at onset of ET, and with the risk for voice tremor, in Caucasian Spanish people.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the dopamine receptor 3 (DRD3) and transporter 1 (DAT1) genes in schizophrenia or in modulating its phenotype. METHODS: a Ser9Gly polymorphism in codon 9 of the DRD3 and a VNTR polymorphism in the DAT1genes were examined in two groups of schizophrenic patients, one of excellent neuroleptic responders (N=42) and one of nonresponders (N=64). A group of healthy volunteers screened for major psychiatric disorders was also included (N=89). In addition, age at onset of psychotic symptoms, attention performance and family loading for schizophrenia spectrum disorders were compared between patients with different genotypes in the DRD3 and DAT1 genes. RESULTS: No significant differences in the allelic distribution of the DRD3 and DAT1 polymorphisms were detected between schizophrenic patients and controls. A trend toward an excess of DRD3 genotype Gly/Gly was observed in neuroleptic nonresponder schizophrenic patients compared to controls (chi(2)=3. 30, df=1, p=0.07). No significant differences in age at onset of psychotic symptoms, attention task performance or family loading for schizophrenia spectrum disorders were observed between groups with different DRD3 and DAT1 genotypes. CONCLUSION: These results do not support the role of either of these genes in increasing susceptibility to schizophrenia or in modulating its phenotype in the studied population.
We investigated whether polymorphisms of the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) and polymorphisms of the dopamine D3 receptor (DRD3) were associated with personality disorder symptomatology rather than with personality traits such as novelty seeking. DNA was obtained from 145 depressed patients in a clinical trial. These patients were assessed for the presence of personality disorder symptoms and disorders. The 2-repeat allele of the DRD4 exon III polymorphism was associated with increased rates of avoidant and obsessive personality disorder symptomatology. The T,T genotype of the DRD4 -521 C>T polymorphism was also associated with increased rates of avoidant and obsessive personality disorder symptomatology. The Gly9,Gly9 genotype of the DRD3 Ser9Gly polymorphism was associated with increased rates of obsessive personality disorder symptomatology. None of these three polymorphisms were associated with novelty seeking or other temperament traits on the Temperament and Character Inventory. Our results suggest that genetic polymorphisms of DRD4 and DRD3 may well be associated with personality traits, and that conflicting findings to date may arise from the problem of phenotype definition.
