D(1B) dopamine receptor; Dopamine receptor whose activity is mediated by G proteins which activate adenylyl cyclase; Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
Aberrant DNA methylation is thought to be an early event in cancer development. Thus, identification of DNA methylation-based markers may provide valuable evidence in clinical decision-making. In this study, a DNA methylation dataset from 514 normal-tumor pairs is used to explore possible shared differentially methylated regions (DMRs) across 12 cancer types. Results showed that DMR in Dopamine receptor D5 (DRD5) promoter may be serviced as a good candidate biomarker across different cancer types. We further validated the extended DMR (292bp) in DRD5 promoter using SEQUENOM MassARRAY platform. Detection of DRD5 promoter dynamic methylation will allow rapid risk assessment at diagnosis, for suspicious tumor with the tissue biopsies.
Abnormalities in dopamine neurotransmission are thought to underlie the generation of dystonic movements. The authors performed a case-control allelic association study in patients with the focal dystonia blepharospasm, using polymorphisms in the dopamine receptor and transporter genes. Allele 2 of a DRD5 dinucleotide repeat was significantly associated with blepharospasm. This may indicate a pathogenic role for this receptor.
Although multiple studies have shown the role genetics plays in personality disorders and in addictions, few have studied the genetic aspects of their comorbidity. Here, we carried out a cross-sectional study in a sample comprising 303 Caucasian polydrug-consuming patients. The presence of personality disorders was evaluated using the International Personality Disorder Examination, and genes related to dopamine, serotonin and monoamine oxidase (MAO) were genotyped. A significant relationship was observed between the bp 279 DRD5 variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism and paranoid personality disorder (OR(95%CI) = 2.186 (1.074; 4.449); p = 0.006) . The bp 182 (OR(95%CI) = 0.407 (0.178; 0.931); p = 0.033) and bp 184 (OR(95%CI) = 0.391 (0.188; 0.813); p = 0.012) alleles of the MAOB VNTR were also associated with antisocial personality disorder. Among patients with addictions, paranoid personality disorder should also be considered in addition to the importance of antisocial and borderline personality disorders. The higher frequency of the bp 279 DRD5 VNTR allele found in patients with paranoid personality disorder, as well as the associations between alleles of the MAOB VNTR and antisocial personality disorder, support the monoaminergic bases of these personality disorders, especially when dealing with patients with addictions.
The dopaminergic system has been implicated in the aetiology of mood disorders. We conducted family-based association studies for polymorphisms at three genes involved in the metabolism of dopamine: dopamine transporter (DAT1), dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DBH) and catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT); and three dopamine receptors: DRD2, DRD3 and DRD5. We used a sample of 122 parent-offspring trios of British Caucasian origin where the proband had bipolar disorder I (BPI), and analysed the results with the transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) which is robust to hidden population stratification. No statistically significant differences were found between transmitted and not transmitted alleles for any of the polymorphisms studied.
OBJECTIVE: The authors investigated the possibility that genetic variation or mutation of the dopamine D5 receptor gene might modify susceptibility to schizophrenia. METHOD: Twenty-three Icelandic and English pedigrees containing multiple cases of schizophrenia were genotyped by using a highly informative microsatellite for the D5 dopamine receptor gene DRD5. RESULTS: By means of three different affection models, negative lod scores were obtained under assumptions of autosomal dominant and recessive inheritance. There was no evidence for locus heterogeneity. Nonparametric extended relative pair analysis also produced negative results. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that mutations of the D5 dopamine receptor gene are not a major cause of schizophrenia in these pedigrees. Because of the probable existence of locus heterogeneity, the D5 receptor gene may be of etiologic importance in other families with schizophrenia.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is a common neuropsychiatric disorder with a complex genetic background. DRD5, the gene encoding the dopamine receptor D5, was recently confirmed as a candidate gene for ADHD in children through meta-analysis. In this study, we aimed at studying the association of the ADHD-associated variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism upstream of DRD5 with adult ADHD. We compiled data from six sites of the International Multicentre persistent ADHD CollaboraTion (IMpACT) and reached N=6979 (3344 cases and 3635 healthy participants), the largest sample investigated so far. We tested the association of the common DRD5 alleles with categorically defined ADHD and with inattentive and hyperactive/impulsive symptom counts. Our findings provide evidence that none of the common DRD5 alleles are associated with ADHD risk or ADHD symptom counts in adults.
Primary blepharospasm is a common adult-onset focal dystonia. Polymorphisms of the genes encoding TorsinA (DYT1) and the D5 dopamine receptor (DRD5) have previously been associated with lifetime risk for focal dystonia. We describe here experiments testing common variability within these two genes in two independent cohorts of Italian and North American patients with primary blepharospasm. We have failed to identify a consistent association with disease in the two patient groups examined here; however, analysis of the Italian group reveals an association with the same risk genotype in DYT1 as previously described in an Icelandic population. We have also found global significant DYT1 haplotype differences between patients and controls in the Italian series. These data suggest that further examination is warranted of the role genetic variability at this locus plays in the risk for primary dystonia.
The dopamine receptor 5 gene (DRD5) holds much promise as a candidate locus for contributing to neuropsychiatric disorders and other diseases influenced by the dopaminergic system, as well as having potential to affect normal behavioral variation. However, detailed analyses of this gene have been complicated by its location within a segmentally duplicated chromosomal region. Microsatellites and SNPs upstream from the coding region have been used for association studies, but we find, using bioinformatics resources, that these markers all lie within a previously unrecognized second segmental duplication (SD). In order to accurately analyze the DRD5 locus for polymorphisms in the absence of contaminating pseudogene sequences, we developed a fast and reliable method for sequence analysis and genotyping within the DRD5 coding region. We employed restriction enzyme digestion of genomic DNA to eliminate the pseudogenes prior to PCR amplification of the functional gene. This approach allowed us to determine the DRD5 haplotype structure using 31 trios and to reveal additional rare variants in 171 unrelated individuals. We clarify the inconsistencies and errors of the recorded SNPs in dbSNP and HapMap and illustrate the importance of using caution when choosing SNPs in regions of suspected duplications. The simple and relatively inexpensive method presented herein allows for convenient analysis of sequence variation in DRD5 and can be easily adapted to other duplicated genomic regions in order to obtain good quality sequence data.
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common and highly heritable psychiatric disorder in children and adults. Recent meta-analyses have indicated an association between genes involved in dopaminergic signaling and childhood ADHD, but little is known about their possible role in adult ADHD. In this study of adults with ADHD, we evaluated the three most commonly studied ADHD candidate genetic polymorphisms; the dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) exon 3 VNTR repeat, a microsatellite repeat 18.5 kb upstream of the DRD5 locus and the 3'UTR dopamine transporter SLC6A3 (DAT 1) VNTR. We examined 358 clinically diagnosed adult Norwegian ADHD patients (51% males) and 340 ethnically matched controls. We found a nominally significant overall association with adult ADHD for the DRD5 microsatellite marker (P = 0.04), and a trend toward increased risk associated with the 148-bp allele consistent with recent meta-analyses. The strongest overall association (P = 0.02) and increased risk for the 148-bp allele [odds ratio (OR) = 1.27 (95% CI: 1.00-1.61)] were seen in the inattentive and combined inattentive/hyperactive group as previously reported for childhood ADHD. No association was found for the DRD4 or SLC6A3 polymorphisms in this patient sample. In conclusion, our results among adults with a clinical diagnosis of ADHD support an association between ADHD and the DRD5 locus, but not the DRD4 or SLC6A3 loci. It is possible that the latter polymorphisms are associated with a transient form of ADHD with better long-term clinical outcome.
It has been widely postulated that the categorical diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) should be seen as the extreme end of a set of traits quantitatively distributed in the general population. A consequence of this is that the genes associated with DSM-IV ADHD should also influence these underlying traits in non-affected individuals. The aim of this study was to examine if specific candidate loci previously shown to be associated with DSM-IV ADHD, also act as quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for ADHD-symptoms in the general population. We have genotyped five candidate markers in a population-based sample of male dizygous twin-pairs (n = 329 pairs). We found little evidence to support a role for the previously-nominated alleles of a DRD4 VNTR, a 5HT1B SNP, or a microsatellite marker near to DRD5, in the distribution of ADHD-symptoms scores; however, we found some evidence to suggest that the DAT1 3'UTR VNTR and weak evidence that a microsatellite in SNAP-25 may have a role in continuous measures of ADHD-symptoms hyperactivity above and beyond their role in clinical ADHD.
Following the description of linkage of markers at chromosome 4p16 to bipolar disorder in several families [Blackwood et al., 1996], and the association of the alleles of a polymorphism closely linked to D5 dopamine receptor gene with schizophrenia [Williams et al., 1997], we have looked for linkage disequilibrium between a series of microsatellite markers from this region and major psychoses including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and unipolar major depressive disorder. A significant increase in the frequency of the 148 bp allele of DRD5 (P = 0.024) and the 244 bp allele of D4S615 (P = 0.001) was found in patients with schizophrenia (n = 158 DRD5; n = 133 D4S615), compared with patients with bipolar disorder (n = 270 DRD5; n = 107 D4S615), or controls without psychiatric illness (n = 437 DRD5; n = 309 D4S615). The frequency of the 148 bp allele of DRD5 was also increased in schizophrenia over unipolar major depressive disorder (n = 65). D4S615 was not typed in unipolar disorder. The estimated odds ratios confirmed that the 148 bp allele of DRD5 and the 244 bp allele of D4S615 conferred increased risk of schizophrenia. Estimated Haplotype (EH) analysis of 174 controls and 128 patients with schizophrenia who were typed for both markers confirmed the strong associations with these alleles but did not show evidence that the markers were in linkage disequilibrium with each other even though they lie approximately 150 kb apart. The data are consistent with an association between markers close to the D5 dopamine receptor and schizophrenia, but not bipolar disorder or unipolar major depression.
Dopamine (DA) has been implicated in the pathophysiol-ogy of several psychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia. Thus, genes related to the dopaminergic (DAergic) system are good candidate genes for schizophrenia. One of receptors of the DA receptor system is dopa-mine receptor 5 (DRD5). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the regulatory regions of DRD5 gene may affect gene expression, influence biosynthesis of DA and underlie various neuropsychiatric disorders re-lated to DA dysfunction. The present study explored the association of SNPs within the DRD5 gene with paranoid schizophrenia in Han Chinese. A total of 176 patients with schizophrenia and 206 healthy controls were genotyped for four DRD5 SNPs (rs77434921, rs2076907, rs6283, and rs1800762). Significant group differences were observed in the allele and genotype frequencies of rs77434921 and rs1800762 and in the frequen-cies of GC haplotypes corresponding to rs77434921-rs1800762. Our find-ings suggest that common genetic variations of DRD5 are likely to con-tribute to genetic susceptibility to paranoid schizophrenia in Han Chinese. Further studies in larger samples are needed to replicate this association.
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among females worldwide and a most prevalent malignancy in Iranian women. Chronic stress may make an important contribution to cancer, especially in the breast. Numerous studies showed roles of neurotransmitters in the occurrence and progression of cancers which are mediated by their various types of receptors. This study was conducted to evaluate alterations in the expression profile of dopamine receptor genes in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) as stress factors in breast cancer patients and the human breast cancer cell line (MCF-7). Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 30 patients and 30 healthy individuals. Total mRNA was extracted from PBMC and MCF-7 cells and RT-PCR was performed to confirm the presence of five dopamine receptors (DRD1-DRD5). Expression changes of dopamine receptor genes were evaluated by real time PCR. We observed that DRD2-DRD4 in PBMCs of breast cancer patients were increased compared to healthy individuals. In addition, all dopamine receptor subtypes but DRD1 were expressed in MCF-7 cells. Therefore, alterations of these receptors as stress factorsshould be assessed for selecting appropriate drugs such as D2-like agonists for treatment of breast cancer after performing complimentary tests. Determining the expression profile of dopamine receptor genes thus seems promising.
We identified a cosmid clone with exact sequence homology to part of the human dopamine D5 receptor gene (DRD5) after screening a cosmid library with the human DRD1 gene. The dopamine D5 receptor was mapped to chromosome 4p15.1-p15.3 by in situ hybridization and using a somatic cell hybrid panel. We report here the further localization of the DRD5 gene following identification of a highly polymorphic dinucleotide repeat sequence in the cosmid clone. The microsatellite (D5(CT/GT/GA)n) had 12 alleles with a polymorphic information content value of 0.77. Linkage analysis in 39 CEPH pedigrees demonstrated tight linkage to the chromosome 4p reference marker RAF1P1 (Zmaxf 20.66 at theta f 0.05 and ZmaxM 16.57 at theta m 0.07).
A large body of genetic epidemiological data strongly implicate genetic factors in the etiology of smoking behavior. Polymorphisms of genes in the dopaminergic system are plausible functional candidate genes and a linkage and an association study suggested that the type 5 dopamine receptor gene (DRD5) may be etiologically involved. We investigated the association of four DRD5 polymorphisms with smoking initiation and progression to nicotine dependence in a population-based sample of over 900 subjects. For smoking initiation, there was no significant association with the four DRD5 markers we studied; however, maximum likelihood analyses suggested the presence of a haplotype protective against smoking initiation. For progression to nicotine dependence, there were no strongly significant associations with the four DRD5 markers or for the estimated haplotypes. These data are not consistent with a strong etiological role for DRD5 in the etiology of these complex smoking behaviors.
