Ephrin type-A receptor 2; Receptor tyrosine kinase which binds promiscuously membrane- bound ephrin-A family ligands residing on adjacent cells, leading to contact-dependent bidirectional signaling into neighboring cells. The signaling pathway downstream of the receptor is referred to as forward signaling while the signaling pathway downstream of the ephrin ligand is referred to as reverse signaling. Activated by the ligand ephrin- A1/EFNA1 regulates migration, integrin-mediated adhesion, proliferation and differentiation of cells. Regulates cell adhesion and differentiation through DS [...] 
More than 25 years of research and preclinical validation have defined EphA2 receptor tyrosine kinase as a promising molecular target for clinical translation in cancer treatment. Molecular, genetic, biochemical, and pharmacological targeting strategies have been extensively tested in vitro and in vivo, and drugs like dasatinib, initially designed to target SRC family kinases, have been found to also target EphA2 activity. Other small molecules, therapeutic targeting antibodies, and peptide-drug conjugates are being tested, and more recently, approaches harnessing antitumor immunity against EphA2-expressing cancer cells have emerged as a promising strategy. This review will summarize preclinical studies supporting the oncogenic role of EphA2 in breast cancer, lung cancer, glioblastoma, and melanoma, while delineating the differing roles of canonical and noncanonical EphA2 signaling in each setting. This review also summarizes completed and ongoing clinical trials, highlighting the promise and challenges of targeting EphA2 in cancer.
The ephrin type-A 2 receptor tyrosine kinase (EPHA2) is involved in the development and progression of various cancer types, including colorectal cancer (CRC). There is also evidence that EPHA2 plays a key role in the development of resistance to the endothelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) monoclonal antibody Cetuximab used clinically in CRC. Despite the promising pharmacological potential of EPHA2, only a handful of specific inhibitors are currently available. In this concept paper, general strategies for EPHA2 inhibition with molecules of low molecular weight (small molecules) are described. Furthermore, available examples of inhibiting EPHA2 in CRC using small molecules are summarized, highlighting the potential of this approach.
Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EphA2) is a receptor tyrosine kinase that initiates both ligand-dependent tumor-suppressive and ligand-independent oncogenic signaling. We used time-resolved, live-cell fluorescence spectroscopy to show that the ligand-free EphA2 assembles into multimers driven by two types of intermolecular interactions in the ectodomain. The first type entails extended symmetric interactions required for ligand-induced receptor clustering and tumor-suppressive signaling that inhibits activity of the oncogenic extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and protein kinase B (AKT) protein kinases and suppresses cell migration. The second type is an asymmetric interaction between the amino terminus and the membrane proximal domain of the neighboring receptors, which supports oncogenic signaling and promotes migration in vitro and tumor invasiveness in vivo. Our results identify the molecular interactions that drive the formation of the EphA2 multimeric signaling clusters and reveal the pivotal role of EphA2 assembly in dictating its opposing functions in oncogenesis.
Therapy resistance is the primary problem in treating late-stage colorectal cancer (CRC). Claudins are frequently dysregulated in cancer, and several are being investigated as novel therapeutic targets and biomarkers. We have previously demonstrated that Claudin-1 (CLDN1) expression in CRC promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition, metastasis, and resistance to anoikis. Here, we hypothesize that CLDN1 promotes cancer stemness and chemoresistance in CRC. We found that high CLDN1 expression in CRC is associated with cancer stemness and chemoresistance signaling pathways in patient datasets, and it promotes chemoresistance both in vitro and in vivo. Using functional stemness assays, proteomics, biophysical binding assays, and patient-derived organoids, we found that CLDN1 promotes properties of cancer stemness including CD44 expression, tumor-initiating potential, and chemoresistance through a direct interaction with ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EPHA2) tyrosine kinase. This interaction is dependent on the CLDN1 PDZ-binding motif, increases EPHA2 protein expression by inhibiting its degradation, and enhances downstream AKT signaling and CD44 expression to promote stemness and chemoresistance. These results suggest CLDN1 is a viable target for pharmacological intervention and/or biomarker development.
Platelet-derived growth subunit A (PDGFA) plays critical roles in development of glioblastoma (GBM) with substantial evidence from TCGA database analyses and in vivo mouse models. So far, only platelet-derived growth receptor alpha (PDGFRA) has been identified as receptor for PDGFA. However, PDGFA and PDGFRA are categorized into different molecular subtypes of GBM in TCGA_GBM database. Our data herein further showed that activity or expression deficiency of PDGFRA did not effectively block PDGFA activity. Therefore, PDGFRA might be not necessary for PDGFA function.To profile proteins involved in PDGFA function, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and Mass Spectrum (MS) and delineated the network of PDGFA-associated proteins for the first time. Unexpectedly, the data showed that EPHA2 could be temporally activated by PDGFA even without activation of PDGFRA and AKT. Furthermore, MS, Co-IP, in vitro binding thermodynamics, and proximity ligation assay consistently proved the interaction of EPHA2 and PDGFA. In addition, we observed that high expression of EPHA2 leaded to upregulation of PDGF signaling targets in TCGA_GBM database and clinical GBM samples. Co-upregulation of PDGFRA and EPHA2 leaded to worse patient prognosis and poorer therapeutic effects than other contexts, which might arise from expression elevation of genes related with malignant molecular subtypes and invasive growth. Due to PDGFA-induced EPHA2 activation, blocking PDGFRA by inhibitor could not effectively suppress proliferation of GBM cells, but simultaneous inhibition of both EPHA2 and PDGFRA showed synergetic inhibitory effects on GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, our study provided new insights on PDGFA function and revealed EPHA2 as a potential receptor of PDGFA. EPHA2 might contribute to PDGFA signaling transduction in combination with PDGFRA and mediate the resistance of GBM cells to PDGFRA inhibitor. Therefore, combination of inhibitors targeting PDGFRA and EHA2 represented a promising therapeutic strategy for GBM treatment.
This work aims at the theoretical description of EphA2-ephrin A1 inhibition by small molecules. Recently proposed ab initio-based scoring models, comprising long-range components of interaction energy, is tested on lithocholic acid class inhibitors of this protein(-)protein interaction (PPI) against common empirical descriptors. We show that, although limited to compounds with similar solvation energy, the ab initio model is able to rank the set of selected inhibitors more effectively than empirical scoring functions, aiding the design of novel compounds.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: The highly proliferative nature of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) frequently results in a hypoxic intratumoural microenvironment, which creates a therapeutic challenge owing to a lack of mechanistic understanding of the phenomenon. We aimed to identify critical drivers of HCC development and progression in the hypoxic microenvironment. METHODS: We performed integrative analysis of multiple transcriptomic and genomic profiles specific for HCC and hypoxia and identified the Ephrin-A3/Eph receptor A2 (EphA2) axis as a clinically relevant and hypoxia-inducible signalling axis in HCC. The functional significance and mechanistic consequences of the Ephrin-A3/EphA2 axis were examined in EFNA3- and EPHA2- knockdown/overexpressing HCC cells. The potential downstream pathways were investigated by transcriptome sequencing, quantitative reverse-transcription PCR, western blotting analysis and metabolomics. RESULTS: EFNA3 was frequently upregulated in HCC and its overexpression was associated with more aggressive tumour behaviours. HIF-1alpha directly and positively regulated EFNA3 expression under hypoxia. EFNA3 functionally contributed to self-renewal, proliferation and migration in HCC cells. EphA2 was identified as a key functional downstream mediator of EFNA3. Functional characterisation of the Ephrin-A3/EphA2 forward-signalling axis demonstrated a promotion of self-renewal ability and tumour initiation. Mechanistically, the Ephrin-A3/EphA2 axis promoted the maturation of SREBP1 and expression of its transcriptional target, ACLY, was significantly associated with the expression of EFNA3 and hypoxia markers in clinical cohorts. The metabolic signature of EPHA2 and ACLY stable knockdown HCC cells demonstrated significant overlap in fatty acid, cholesterol and tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolite profiles. ACLY was confirmed to mediate the self-renewal function of the Ephrin-A3/EphA2 axis. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed the novel role of the Ephrin-A3/EphA2 axis as a hypoxia-sensitive modulator of HCC cell metabolism and a key contributor to HCC initiation and progression. LAY SUMMARY: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a fast-growing tumour; hence, areas of the tumour often have insufficient vasculature and become hypoxic. The presence of hypoxia within tumours has been shown to negatively impact on the survival of patients with tumours, including HCC. Herein, we identified the Ephrin-A3/EphA2 axis as a key functional driver of tumour initiation and progression in response to hypoxia. Additionally, we showed that SREBP1-ACLY-mediated metabolic rewiring was an important downstream effector that induced cancer stemness in response to Ephrin-A3/EphA2 forward-signalling.
Ephs are transmembrane receptors that mediate cell-cell signaling. The N-terminal ectodomain binds ligands and enables receptor clustering, which activates the intracellular kinase. Relatively little is known about the function of the membrane-proximal fibronectin domain 2 (FN2) of the ectodomain. Multiscale molecular dynamics simulations reveal that FN2 interacts with lipid bilayers via a site comprising K441, R443, R465, Q462, S464, S491, W467, F490, and P459-461. FN2 preferentially binds anionic lipids, a preference that is reduced in the mutant K441E + R443E. We confirm these results by measuring the binding of wild-type and mutant FN2 domains to lipid vesicles. In simulations of the complete EphA2 ectodomain plus the transmembrane region, we show that FN2 anchors the otherwise flexible ectodomain at the surface of the bilayer. Altogether, our data suggest that FN2 serves a dual function of interacting with anionic lipids and constraining the structure of the EphA2 ectodomain to adopt membrane-proximal configurations.
Ubiquitin-specific protease 3 (USP3) plays an important role in the progression of various tumors. However, the role of USP3 in osteosarcoma (OS) remains poorly understood. The aim of this study was to explore the biological function of USP3 in OS and the underlying molecular mechanism. We found that OS had higher USP3 expression compared with that of normal bone tissue, and high expression of USP3 was associated with poor prognosis in patients with OS. Overexpression of USP3 significantly increased OS cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically, USP3 led to the activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in OS by binding to EPHA2 and then reducing its protein degradation. Notably, the truncation mutant USP3-F2 (159-520) interacted with EPHA2, and amino acid 203 was found to play an important role in this process. And knockdown of EPHA2 expression reversed the pro-tumour effects of USP3-upregulating. Thus, our study indicates the USP3/EPHA2 axis may be a novel potential target for OS treatment.
