Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that plays an essential role as cell surface receptor for neuregulins. Binds to neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and is activated by it; ligand-binding increases phosphorylation on tyrosine residues and promotes its association with the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. May also be activated by CSPG5. Involved in the regulation of myeloid cell differentiation.
BACKGROUND: In contrast to lung cancer, few precision treatments are available for colorectal cancer (CRC). One rapidly emerging treatment target in CRC is ERBB2 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 [HER2]). Oncogenic alterations in HER2, or its dimerization partner HER3, can underlie sensitivity to HER2-targeted therapies. METHODS: In this study, 8887 CRC cases were evaluated by comprehensive genomic profiling for genomic alterations in 315 cancer-related genes, tumor mutational burden, and microsatellite instability. This cohort included both colonic (7599 cases; 85.5%) and rectal (1288 cases; 14.5%) adenocarcinomas. RESULTS: A total of 569 mCRCs were positive for ERBB2 (429 cases; 4.8%) and/or ERBB3 (148 cases; 1.7%) and featured ERBB amplification, short variant alterations, or a combination of the 2. High tumor mutational burden (>/=20 mutations/Mb) was significantly more common in ERBB-mutated samples, and ERBB3-mutated CRCs were significantly more likely to have high microsatellite instability (P<.002). Alterations affecting KRAS (27.3%) were significantly underrepresented in ERBB2-amplified samples compared with wild-type CRC samples (51.8%), and ERBB2- or ERBB3-mutated samples (49.0% and 60.8%, respectively) (P<.01). Other significant differences in mutation frequency were observed for genes in the PI3K/MTOR and mismatch repair pathways. CONCLUSIONS: Although observed less often than in breast or upper gastrointestinal carcinomas, indications for which anti-HER2 therapies are approved, the percentage of CRC with ERBB genomic alterations is significant. Importantly, 32% of ERBB2-positive CRCs harbor short variant alterations that are undetectable by routine immunohistochemistry or fluorescence in situ hybridization testing. The success of anti-HER2 therapies in ongoing clinical trials is a promising development for patients with CRC. Cancer 2018;124:1358-73. (c) 2018 Foundation Medicine, Inc. Cancer published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of American Cancer Society.
Trastuzumab (Herceptin(R)) has demonstrated clinical potential in several types of HER2-overexpressing human cancers. However, primary and acquired resistance occurs in many HER2-positive patients with regimens. To investigate the possible mechanism of acquired therapeutic resistance to trastuzumab, we have developed a preclinical model of human ovarian cancer cells, SKOV3/T, with the distinctive feature of stronger carcinogenesis. The differences in gene expression between parental and the resistant cells were explored by microarray analysis, of which IGF-1R and HER3 were detected to be key molecules in action. Their correctness was validated by follow-up experiments of RT-PCR, shRNA-mediated knockdown, downstream signal activation, cell cycle distribution and survival. These results suggest that IGF-1R and HER3 differentially regulate trastuzumab resistance and could be promising targets for trastuzumab therapy in ovarian cancer.
The ErbB2 receptor tyrosine kinase plays a key role in mammary gland development. It forms large clusters which serve as signaling platforms for integration of extracellular information. The discoidin domain receptor (DDR) family are collagen receptor tyrosine kinases which, together with ErbB2, are involved in many physiological and pathological processes. Here, we investigated the interaction of ErbB2 and DDR1 receptors in breast cancer cells. In contrast to beta1-integrin, DDR1 colocalizes with ErbB2 in membrane clusters regardless of their expression levels. We demonstrated that this spatial coexistence is a consequence of the physical interaction between these receptors. In addition, these receptors are coexpressed in the normal mammary gland but not in breast tumor samples. Together, these results present DDR1 as a novel modulator of the ErbB2/ErbB3 signaling pathway.
Nectin-like molecule 4 (Necl-4)/CADM4, a transmembrane cell-cell adhesion molecule with three Ig-like domains, was shown to serve as a tumor suppressor, but its mode of action has not been elucidated. In this study, we showed that Necl-4 interacted in cis with ErbB3 through their extracellular regions, recruited PTPN13 and inhibited the heregulin-induced activation of the ErbB2/ErbB3 signaling. In addition, we extended our previous finding that Necl-4 interacts in cis with integrin alpha6 beta4 through their extracellular regions and found that Necl-4 inhibited the phorbol ester-induced disassembly of hemidesmosomes. These results indicate that Necl-4 serves as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting the ErbB2/ErbB3 signaling and hemidesmosome disassembly.
Epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR) are associated with a number of biological processes and are becoming increasingly recognized as important therapeutic targets against cancer. In this work, we provide models based on homology for the extracellular domains (ECD) of ErbB3 and ErbB4 in their active conformations, including a Heregulin ligand, followed by further refinement of the models by molecular dynamics simulations at atomistic scale. We compare the results with a model built for ErbB2 based on crystallographic information and analyze the common features observed among members of the family, namely, the periscope movement of the dimerization arm and the hinge displacement of domain IV. Finally, we refine a model for the interaction of the ECDs corresponding to a ErbB2-ErbB3 heterodimer, which is widely recognized to have a high impact in cancer development.
Abnormalities of the type 1 growth factor receptor family have been implicated in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. There is evidence for a potential autocrine loop involving overexpression of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and its ligands, as well as overexpression of the erbB-2 receptor. A third member of this receptor family, erbB-3, has recently been recognized and found to be abnormally expressed in some types of human cancer. In this study we show that overexpression of the erbB-3 protein occurs very frequently in carcinoma of the exocrine pancreas and also in chronic pancreatitis. We found no evidence of amplification or rearrangement of the erbB-3 gene by Southern blot analysis of DNA from pancreatic cancer cells lines.
The erbB-3 gene encodes a transmembrane protein that is related to the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor and erbB-2. We compared erbB-3 expression in the normal human pancreas, human pancreatic carcinomas, and cultured human pancreatic cancer cell lines. Northern blot analysis of total RNA revealed the anticipated 6.2-kb mRNA transcript in all 19 normal pancreatic samples. In 17 of 27 pancreatic cancers, there was a 6.7-fold increase (P < 0.001) in erbB-3 mRNA levels. Southern blot analysis did not reveal erbB-3 gene amplification. Four of six pancreatic cancer cell lines exhibited the 6.2-kb erbB-3 mRNA transcript, and all four cell lines coexpressed the epidermal growth factor receptor and erbB-2. Using a highly specific antibody, we determined that faint to moderate erbB-3 immunoreactivity was present in the ductal cells in the normal pancreas. In 47% (27/58) of the pancreatic cancers, there were many cancer cells with intense erbB-3 immunostaining. The presence of erbB-3 in the cancer cells was associated with advanced tumor stage and shorter survival postoperatively. These data indicate that a significant proportion of human pancreatic cancers overexpress erbB-3, and that erbB-3 may contribute to disease progression in this disorder.
ErbB3 receptors are unique members of the erbB receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), which are often aberrantly expressed and/or activated in human cancers. Unlike other members in the family, erbB3 lacks or has impaired kinase activity. To transduce cell signaling, erbB3 has to interact with other RTKs and to be phosphorylated by its interactive partners, of those, erbB2 is the most important one. ErbB3 is frequently co-expressed with other RTKs in cancer cells to activate oncogenic signaling, such as phosphoinositide-3-kinase/protein kinase B (Akt) pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, Janus kinase (Jak)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat) pathway, etc. and thereby promote tumorigenesis. Numerous studies have demonstrated that activation of erbB3 signaling plays an important role in the progression of a variety of tumor types, such as erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer, castration-resistant prostate cancer, platinum refractory/resistant ovarian cancer, epidermal growth factor receptor TKI-resistant non-small-cell lung cancer, and others. Basic research on the underlying mechanisms implicated the functions of erbB3 as a major cause of treatment failure in cancer therapy. Thus, concomitant inhibition of erbB3 is thought to be required to overcome the resistance and to effectively treat human cancers. This review focuses on the latest advances in our understanding of erbB3-initiated signaling in the development of resistance to cancer treatments.
