S-formylglutathione hydrolase; Serine hydrolase involved in the detoxification of formaldehyde.
Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) are two well-known endoscopic resection procedures used for advance gastrointestinal lesions. As compared to standard polypectomy techniques, EMR and ESD provide wider and deeper resection margins and allow en bloc removal of lesions for more detailed pathology with curative intent for early neoplastic gastrointestinal lesions. Both procedures have their advantages and disadvantages which will be discussed in detail in this review article. Recently there have been advancements in the techniques of EMR and ESD with addition in new equipment. We will also discuss current guidelines recommending use of EMR and/or ESD in various clinical scenarios.
The advantage of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is the ability to achieve high R0 resection, providing low local recurrence rate. Esophageal ESD is technically more difficult than gastric ESD due to the narrower space of the esophagus for endoscopic maneuvers. Also, the risk of perforation is higher because of the thin muscle layer of the esophageal wall. Blind dissection should be avoided to prevent perforation. A clip with line method is useful to keep a good endoscopic view with countertraction. Only an operator who has adequate skill should perform esophageal ESD.
Endoscopic treatment of malignant lesions in the gastrointestinal tract can be treated curatively if the risk for lymph node metastasis is lower than 1%. In the lower gi-tract (colon and rectum) the low risk criteria for this situation are well-defined (G1/G2, LO, invasion depth </=1000mum). However, en-bloc R0-resection is also mandatory. Benign lesions such as lateral spreading tumors (granular-type) can be also treated with piecemeal EMR, however, recurrence rate is up to 30%. All other cases, regardless of size, such as non-granular type lesions or mixed type lesions should be treated with endoscopic submucosal dissection. The definitive histopathology of the resected specimen allows further decision (e.g., surgery if invasion depth of tumor is >1000mum).
The number of medical facilities that perform colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) has been growing, and its effectiveness has been increasingly reported in recent years. Indications approved by the Japanese government's medical insurance system are early colorectal cancers with a maximum tumor size of 2-5 cm. ESD was an effective procedure for treating noninvasive colorectal tumors difficult to resect en bloc by conventional EMR, resulting in a higher en bloc resection rate that is less invasive than surgery. Based on the excellent clinical results of colorectal ESDs, the Japanese health care insurance system has approved colorectal ESD for coverage.
Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) is an evolving minimally invasive endoscopic surgical procedure, with no skin incision, intended for long-term recovery from symptoms of esophageal achalasia. POEM was developed based on both the already established surgical principles of esophageal myotomy and the advanced techniques of endoscopic submucosal dissection. This article relates how POEM was developed, and its use in practice is reported and discussed. As an extension of the POEM technique, submucosal endoscopic tumor resection is introduced.
Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is useful for submucosal tumors (SMTs) within the superficial submucosal layer, but perforation frequently occurs during ESD for SMTs located at the deeper layer. Endoscopic resection for small esophageal SMTs is acceptable, although candidates for endoscopic removal are rare. Laparoscopic assistance will be effective for minimally invasive endoscopic local resection for certain types of gastric SMT. Endoscopic mucosal resection with a ligation device would be better than ESD for rectal carcinoid in terms of simplicity and effectiveness.
This work presents a novel dual-segment flexible robotic endoscope designed to enhance reachability and dexterity during ESD surgery. The proposed system is capable of executing multi-angle cutting operations at a small angle relative to the lesion surface, allowing for efficient en-bloc resection. Additionally, the system incorporates two calibrated RGB cameras and a depth estimation algorithm to provide detailed 3D information of the tumour, which is used to guide the control framework. A stereo visual servoing controller is also implemented to improve path-following performance during surgery. Experiments results indicate that the proposed system improves motion stability and precision. The root means square error (RMSE) of circle path following is 1.1991mm with a maximum of 1.4751mm. Ex-vivo testing demonstrates its significant potential for use in endoscopic surgery.
Endoscopic full-thickness resection for subepithelial tumors is one of the more attractive proposed methods for less-invasive transluminal surgery but remains challenging in terms of safety and feasibility. Currently, laparoscopic endoscopic cooperative surgery is thought to be a more clinically acceptable approach. In targeting cancers, however, more advanced nonexposure techniques are required to avoid the risk of iatrogenic tumor seeding. By combining these techniques with possible regional lymphadenectomy using sentinel node navigation surgery, an ideal minimally invasive, function-preserving gastric resection can be achieved even in possible node-positive cancers. Further development for this type of advanced endoscopic surgery is expected.
Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells have captured the world's attention and directed an unprecedented focus on regenerative medicine. The potential of iPS cells to aid in the development of new treatments for various diseases is exciting, and researchers are only beginning to discover their potential benefits for humans. iPS cells are more effective if they are interconnected with tissues; however, new technologies are needed to create and transplant these tissues. This study introduces a new connection between endoscopy and regenerative medicine in gastroenterology through specifically addressing how cell sheet technology can be a viable method of tissue creation and transplantation.
Nintedanib is a novel antifibrotic agent used in the treatment of interstitial lung diseases. It has been associated with delayed wound healing and wound dehiscence in case reports after major surgeries when used perioperatively. This report presents an unprecedented case of a non-healing ulcer following an endorobotic submucosal dissection of a recurrent, adenomatous rectal polyp, likely due to nintedanib use. In this article, key components of the case were described with the aim to highlight a noteworthy differential diagnosis when suspecting recurrent rectal polyps as well as the need for further research on the effects of nintedanib on healing of polypectomy sites postoperatively.
OBJECTIVE: To discuss persistent facial nerve stimulation (FNS) related to repeated electrostatic discharge (ESD) shock following cochlear implantation. METHODS: Single case report with literature review. RESULTS: FNS is a feared complication after cochlear implantation, occurring in approximately 7% of cases, with most patients having anatomic abnormalities. The presented case has no anatomical abnormalities but reported frequent environmental static shock. FNS during the first 1 to 3 seconds of processor attachment caused a significant decrease in the patient's quality of life, requiring subsequent re-implantation with full resolution. CONCLUSIONS: FNS is a complication of cochlear implantation that can cause a great deal of distress and discomfort. Frequent electrostatic discharge (ESD) contributed to device malfunctioning and FNS in a patient with otherwise normal anatomy and should be avoided if possible.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss endoscopic resection techniques of early gastrointestinal malignancy. The review will focus on the indications and outcomes of endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). RECENT FINDINGS: EMR is indicated for upper GI lesions less than 20 mm provided they can be easily lifted and have a low risk of submucosal invasion (SMI). ESD should be considered for esophageal and gastric lesions that are bulky, show intramucosal carcinoma, or have a risk of superficial submucosal invasion. With regard to colonic polyps, EMR is acceptable for the removal of large colonic polyps using a piecemeal technique. ESD can be reserved for rectal neuroendocrine tumors, fibrotic polyps, or polyps harboring early malignancy. In selected cases, particularly in lesions less than 2 cm in size, EMR can be safe and effective. For larger lesions or lesions with submucosal invasion, ESD is effective and curative. Choosing the best approach can be tailored for each patient depending on lesion size, pathology, and availability of local expertise.
Duodenal endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is technically difficult due to the unique anatomic features. The risks include intraprocedural complications, delayed bleeding, and perforation. A small-caliber-tip transparent hood is useful. Mechanical stretching of the submucosal tissue allows safe dissection and effective prevention of bleeding with minimum muscle injury under direct visualization of the submucosal tissue and blood vessels. A short double-balloon endoscope is useful to stabilize control of the endoscope tip in distal duodenal ESD. Selection of ESD in the duodenum should be made cautiously considering both benefits and risks of the procedure.
Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is an interventional procedure for en-bloc resection of gastrointestinal lesions. ESD is a challenging and can involve a reasonable degree of risk, therefore case selection is of crucial importance, especially in the colo-rectum. This procedure should be mainly used for dissection of lesions when there is a high suspicion of superficial malignant invasion; several classifications have been proposed in order to better identify lesions suitable for ESD. However, case selection is still an issue, since only about 8-10% of dissected lesions are superficially invading cancer and most of cases involve benign or massively invading cancer. In addition, significant differences have been reported between Asian and Western countries in regard to main outcomes, and therefore measures should be adopted as soon as possible to reduce this discrepancy.
Endoscopic intervention is evolving into an established therapeutic alternative for small superficial lesions, and an eventual application for en bloc resection of large lesions, deeper layers, and a reliable access to lesions outside of the gastrointestinal wall. Although further developmental and clinical evaluation is necessary, we believe endoscopic resection by the submucosal route and by full-thickness approaches will replace standard surgical procedures in the next several years.
Endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) is a popular technique for resecting duodenal tumors. However, there is a risk of losing resected specimens during the procedure, particularly for lesions in the descending part of the duodenum. This study aims to introduce a simple and effective method for specimen collection after descending duodenal ESD using a self-made balloon occluder. The balloon occluder, made from a spray pipe and sterile rubber glove, is utilized to prevent the loss of resected specimens. The balloon is inflated under endoscopic visualization, occluding the descending lumen. With careful timing, the resected specimen can be safely collected by grasping it from the balloon using foreign forceps. This method has been successfully applied in several cases, demonstrating its practicality and efficacy. Further evaluation and validation of this technique in a larger patient population are warranted to establish its wider application in clinical practice.
Oesophageal stricture, especially circumferential lesions, is a common complication of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD). However, the exact mechanisms underlying its development remain unclear. Consequently, understanding tissue microenvironment changes is crucial for identifying therapeutic targets. To address this, single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) was performed on oesophageal stricture samples and normal controls. Alterations in cellular composition were observed, particularly in epithelial, endothelial, fibroblast and immune cells. A notable increase was observed in the number of differentiating suprabasal cell_2 (DFSC_2), which displayed pro-keratinizing traits. Detailed investigations revealed augmentation in a subset of these cells, characterised by elevated FTH1 and ECM1 expression, indicating their role in epithelial remodelling. Furthermore, fibroblast heterogeneity was demonstrated, with significant activation of myofibroblasts within stricture tissues. MDK-NCL, CXCL5/6-CXCR2, and TGFA-EGFR ligand-receptor pairs were enhanced in stricture tissues, mediating epithelial-stromal interactions. This study dissected the transcriptional landscape of postoperative oesophageal stricture tissues, providing valuable insights into stricture mechanisms and potential preventive strategies.
The development of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) has enabled en bloc resection of lesions regardless of size and shape. However, ESD of colorectal tumors is technically difficult. Early stage colorectal tumors can be removed by endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) but larger tumors may require piecemeal resection. Therefore, ESD with snaring has been proposed for more reliable EMR and easier ESD. This is a good option to fill the gap between EMR and ESD, and a good step to the introduction of full ESD.
Endoscopic submucosal dissection can remove large superficial gastrointestinal lesions in en bloc. A detailed pathological evaluation of the resected specimen is required to assess the risk of recurrence after treatment. However, the current method of sectioning specimens to a thickness of a few millimeters does not provide information between the sections that are lost during the preparation. In this study, we have produced three-dimensional images of the entire dissected lesion for nine samples by using micro-CT imaging system. Although it was difficult to diagnose histological type on micro-CT images, it successfully evaluates the extent of the lesion and its surgical margins. Micro-CT images can depict sites that cannot be observed by the conventional pathological diagnostic process, suggesting that it may be useful to use in a complementary manner.
