Coagulation factor XIa heavy chain; Factor XI triggers the middle phase of the intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation by activating factor IX.
Diclofenac (DCF) is a widely used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory pharmaceutical which is detected in the environment at concentrations which can pose a threat to living organisms. In this study, biodegradation of DCF was assessed using the bacterial strain Labrys portucalensis F11. Biotransformation of 70% of DCF (1.7-34 muM), supplied as the sole carbon source, was achieved in 30 days. Complete degradation was reached via co-metabolism with acetate, over a period of 6 days for 1.7 microM and 25 days for 34 muM of DCF. The detection and identification of biodegradation intermediates was performed by UPLC-QTOF/MS/MS. The chemical structure of 12 metabolites is proposed. DCF degradation by strain F11 proceeds mainly by hydroxylation reactions; the formation of benzoquinone imine species seems to be a central step in the degradation pathway. Moreover, this is the first report that identified conjugated metabolites, resulting from sulfation reactions of DCF by bacteria. Stoichiometric liberation of chlorine and no detection of metabolites at the end of the experiments are strong indications of complete degradation of DCF by strain F11. To the best of our knowledge this is the first report that points to complete degradation of DCF by a single bacterial strain isolated from the environment.
An arabinanase was purified from the culture fluid of Bacillus subtilis F-11. The process was as follows: salting out by (NH4)2SO4, repeated chromatography on hydroxy apatite and gel filtration on Sepharose-6B. The purified enzyme was demonstrated to be homogeneous by disc electrophoresis. The enzyme was found to be active on arabinan and 1,5-arabinan, but inactive on phenyl alpha-L-arabinofuranoside, p-nitrophenyl beta-D-galactopyranoside, arabinoxylan, gum arabic. The enzyme released arabinose, arabinobiose, arabinotriose and higher oligosaccharides during the course of hydrolysis of 1,5-arabinan. The end products were found to be arabinose and arabinobiose after 144 h of hydrolysis.
The regeneration of the nervous system is a challenging task. Currently, regenerative medicine approaches that exploit nature-inspired cues are being studied and hold great promise. The possibility to use protein-based matrices functionalized with small oligo- and monosaccharides is of interest since these can be finely tuned to better mimic the native environment. Collagen has been selected as a promising material that has the potential to be further tailored to incorporate carbohydrates in order to drive cell behavior towards neuroregeneration. Indeed, the grafting of carbohydrates to collagen 2D matrices is proved to enhance its biological significance. In the present study, collagen 2D matrices were grafted with different carbohydrate epitopes, and their potential to drive F-11 neuroblastoma cells towards neuronal differentiation was evaluated. Collagen functionalized with alpha-glucosides was able to differentiate neuroblastoma cells into functional neurons, while sialyl alpha-(2-->6)-galactosides stimulated cell proliferation.
Factor XI deficiency is an autosomal bleeding disorder of variable severity. It is particularly common in the Ashkenazi Jewish population, the result of two founder mutations - E117X and F283L. Recent studies have shown the causative mutations of Factor XI deficiency, outside the Ashkenazi Jewish population, to be highly heterogeneous. We have studied 116 index cases, mostly from an ethnically diverse UK population, in order to better understand the spectrum of mutations responsible for factor XI deficiency. A total of 140 causative mutations of the F11 gene were identified in 109 patients. Fifty-five (39.3%) of the mutations were one of three common mutations--E117X (Type II), F283L (Type III), or C128X. The remaining 85 (60.7%) mutations comprised at least 57 variants including 31 novel mutations and whole gene deletions. This large study reconfirms that, despite the presence of founder mutations in discrete populations, factor XI deficiency remains a highly heterogeneous disease at the molecular level. .
The F11 Receptor (F11R), also called Junctional Adhesion Molecule-A (JAM-A) (F11R/JAM-A), is a transmembrane glycoprotein of the immunoglobulin superfamily, which is mainly located in epithelial and endothelial cell tight junctions and also expressed on circulating platelets and leukocytes. It participates in the regulation of various biological processes, as diverse as paracellular permeability, tight junction formation and maintenance, leukocyte transendothelial migration, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, angiogenesis, reovirus binding, and platelet activation. Dysregulation of F11R/JAM-A may result in pathological consequences and disorders in normal cell function. A growing body of evidence points to its role in carcinogenesis and invasiveness, but its tissue-specific pro- or anti-tumorigenic role remains a debated issue. The following review focuses on the F11R/JAM-A tissue-dependent manner in tumorigenesis and metastasis and also discusses the correlation between poor patient clinical outcomes and its aberrant expression. In the future, it will be required to clarify the signaling pathways that are activated or suppressed via the F11R/JAM-A protein in various cancer types to understand its multiple roles in cancer progression and further use it as a novel direct target for cancer treatment.
Two new compounds, penicillone A (1) and penicillactam (2), were isolated together with 17 known compounds from a marine-derived fungus Penicillium sp. F11. The structures of the new compounds as well as a firstly literatural reported known compound (3) were assigned by spectroscopic methods including 1D/2D NMR and MS analysis techniques. Their cytotoxicities against HT1080, Cne2, and Bel7402 cell lines were also evaluated.
The aerobic metabolism of fluorobenzene by Rhizobiales sp. strain F11 was investigated. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis showed that 4-fluorocatechol and catechol were formed as intermediates during fluorobenzene degradation by cell suspensions. Both these compounds, unlike 3-fluorocatechol, supported growth and oxygen uptake. Cells grown on fluorobenzene contained enzymes for the ortho pathway but not for meta ring cleavage of catechols. The results suggest that fluorobenzene is predominantly degraded via 4-fluorocatechol with subsequent ortho cleavage and also partially via catechol.
Study of the interaction of glutathione transferase F1-1 from Zea mays (ZmGSTF1-1) with Cu(II), in the presence of ascorbate showed that the enzyme was rapidly inactivated. The inactivation was time and Cu(II) concentration dependent. The rate of inactivation showed non-linear dependence on Cu(II) concentration, indicating that a reversible complex with the enzyme (K(D) 84.5 +/- 6.5 muM) was formed. The inhibitors S-nitrobenzyl-glutathione or S-methyl-glutathione competes with Cu(II), suggesting the specificity of the chemical modification reaction. SDS-PAGE analysis of the inactivated enzyme showed that the enzyme is fragmented and two new bands of 13 and 11 kDa are formed. This shows that ZmGSTF1-1 was specifically cleaved at a single site, by the locally generated free radicals, through a Fenton-type reaction. Sequencing of the fragments allowed the identification of the Cu(II) binding site on ZmGSTF1-1. The three-dimensional structure of ZmGSTF1-1 reveals that the Cu(II) binding site is localized within the glutathione-binding site (G-site) and His40 and Gln53 are most likely the residues that provide the coordination sites for the Cu(II) binding. These findings were confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis. This copper-induced oxidative cleavage reaction of ZmGSTF1-1 may function as a detoxification route for Cu(II) for protecting plant cells from copper-induced deleterious effects.
The aim of this study was to investigate a mutation spectrum of F11 among Korean patients with factor XI (FXI) deficiency and to determine the haplotypes of mutations frequently found in Koreans. Thirteen unrelated patients from non-consanguineous families with FXI deficiency were included in the study. In the mutation analysis, the most frequently found mutations were Q263X (four cases; 31%) and Q226X (three cases; 23%). The frequency of Q263X-bearing haplotype was significantly different between normal and patient groups (p = 0.001), which is consistent with a founder effect of Q263X mutation. Testing for the presence of these two mutations should be the first genetic screening in Korean patients with FXI deficiency.
Factor XI (FXI) deficiency is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder associated with bleeding of variable severity. However, many cases of dominant disease transmission have been recently described. This disorder is rare in the general population, whereas it is commonly found in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry. This study reports the molecular genetic analysis of FXI deficiencies in 11 unrelated families of different origin. Five novel mutations have been identified. Severe FXI deficiency of two unrelated patients resulted from two novel mutations: one deletion (960-961delGT) in exon 9 predicting a frameshift, and a Ser-4Leu mutation located in the signal peptide. In addition, three novel missense mutations associated with partial FXI deficiency have been identified: Cys122Tyr, Glu297Lys and Glu579Lys.
Terpenoids are a vast group of natural products known for their remarkable biological properties and structural diversity. UbiA terpene synthases are increasingly recognized for producing various terpenoids. In this study, we identified a biosynthetic gene cluster (bgt) encoding a UbiA terpene synthase BgtA in the genome of the marine-derived fungus Trichoderma erinaceum F1-1. The gene bgtA was validated to encode the biosynthesis of (-)-alpha-trans-bergamotene (1). Heterologous expression of the bgt gene cluster in the characterized host Aspergillus nidulans LO8030 activated the biosynthetic pathway, leading to the isolation of eight previously undocumented bergamotene-derived sesquiterpenoids (2-9). Their structures, including the absolute configurations, were elucidated by a combination of spectroscopic analysis, ECD spectra, chemical hydrolysis, single-crystal X-ray diffraction, and biosynthetic considerations. We further demonstrated that the production of these structurally intricate sesquiterpenoids in heterologous expression is attributable to the concerted action of the UbiA terpene synthase BgtA, the cytochrome P450 BgtC, and endogenous enzymes. This study underscores the immense biosynthetic potential of fungal UbiA terpene synthase gene clusters and shows genome mining is a promising strategy for the discovery of novel terpenoids from fungi.
Chromosomal localization of the gene for human coagulation factor XI (F11) was determined by in situ hybridization using a genomic DNA probe which contained exons VIII, IX, and X of the gene. The results indicate that the gene is located at 4q35.
