Activation peptide fragment 1; Thrombin, which cleaves bonds after Arg and Lys, converts fibrinogen to fibrin and activates factors V, VII, VIII, XIII, and, in complex with thrombomodulin, protein C. Functions in blood homeostasis, inflammation and wound healing; Belongs to the peptidase S1 family.
Influenza A virus (IAV) infection induces mitophagy, which is essential for the clearance of damaged mitochondria. Dysfunctional mitochondria can be selectively targeted by PINK1, which recruits PRKN/PARK2 and leads to subsequent mitochondrial sequestration within autophagosomes. The IAV PB1-F2 protein translocates to mitochondria, accelerates the mitochondrial fragmentation and impairs the innate immunity. However, whether PB1-F2 mediates IAV-induced mitophagy and the relation between mitophagy and PB1-F2-attenuated innate immunity remain obscure. Here, we showed that PB1-F2 translocated to mitochondria by interacting and colocalizing with TUFM (Tu translation elongation factor, mitochondrial). Further studies revealed that PB1-F2 induced complete mitophagy, which required the interactions of PB1-F2 with both TUFM and MAP1LC3B/LC3B that mediated the autophagosome formation. PB1-F2-induced mitophagy was critical for the MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein) degradation and led to its suppression of the type I IFN production. Importantly, the C-terminal LIR motif of PB1-F2 protein was demonstrated to be essential for its mitophagy induction and attenuated innate immunity. In conclusion, PB1-F2-induced mitophagy strongly correlates with impaired cellular innate immunity, revealing it is a potential therapeutic target.Abbreviations: BCL2L13: BCL2 like 13; BECN1: beclin 1; BNIP3L/Nix: BCL2 interacting protein 3 like; CQ: chloroquine; DDX58: DExD/H-box helicase 58; eGFP: enhanced green fluorescent protein; hpi: hours post infection; IAV: influenza A virus; IFN: interferon; IP: immunoprecipitation; LIR: LC3-interacting region; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MAVS: mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein; MMP: mitochondrial membrane potential; MOI, multiplicity of infection; mRFP: monomeric red fluorescent protein; NBR1: NBR1 autophagy cargo receptor; NC: negative control; NLRP3: NLR family pyrin domain containing 3; PINK1: PTEN induced kinase 1; PRKN/PARK2: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase; RLR: RIG-I-like-receptor; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SEV: sendai virus; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TAX1BP1: Tax1 binding protein 1; TM: transmembrane; TOMM20/40: translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20/40; TUFM: Tu translation elongation factor, mitochondrial.
We report a general, catalyst-controlled route to prostaglandin F2(alpha) and its analogues. The approach uses a Rh-catalyzed dynamic kinetic asymmetric Suzuki-Miyaura coupling reaction between a racemic bicyclic allyl chloride and alkenyl boronic esters bearing chiral alcohols to give cyclopentyl intermediates bearing 3 contiguous stereocenters. The route provides advanced intermediates in 99% ee as a single diastereoisomer in all cases examined, with the absolute stereochemistry of the cyclopentane core controlled by the ligand. Intermediates that could be used to produce prostaglandin analogues such as bimatoprost, latanoprost, fluprostenol, and cloprostenol were synthesized. The final two stereocenters were installed via Pd-catalyzed Tsuji-Trost alkylation and iodolactonization. The synthesis of PG F2(alpha) was achieved in 19% yield in 16 longest linear steps.
Exercise induces a post-exercise decline in the number of circulating lymphocytes. The aim of the present study was to investigate whether strenuous exercise induces lymphocyte apoptosis and generation of reactive oxygen species. Eleven healthy male subjects exercised for 2.5 h on a treadmill. Apoptotic lymphocytes were defined by being annexin positive and 7-aminoactinomycin-D negative. Measurement of F(2)-isoprostanes was used as a marker of oxidant stress in vivo. An increase (60%, P<0.05) in the percentage of apoptotic circulating lymphocytes was found 2 h post-exercise, whereas the total number of apoptotic cells did not change in relation to exercise. The concentration of plasma F(2)-isoprostanes increased approximately 1.6-fold in response to exercise, but declined towards pre-exercise values within the 1st h of recovery. The plasma concentrations of adrenaline, noradrenaline and cortisol increased during exercise. In conclusion, the results of the present study demonstrate that even in a study design in which high levels of apoptosis-inducing factors are generated, such as cortisol and isoprostanes, lymphocyte apoptosis does not contribute to post-exercise lymphocytopenia.
In searching for symbionts derived from bioactive natural products, six sulfureous diketopiperazines designated as lasiodiplines A-F (1-6) were characterized from the culture of Lasiodiplodia pseudotheobromae F2, previously residing in the apparently normal flower of Illigera rhodantha (Hernandiaceae). Identification of structures was accomplished by a combination of spectroscopic and computational approaches, in conjunction with the low-temperature (100K) single-crystal X-ray diffraction with Cu Kalpha radiation. Lasiodipline E (5) was demonstrated to be antibacterial against the clinical strains Streptococcus sp., Bacteroides vulgates, Peptostreptococcus sp. and Veillonella parvula, respectively, with an minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) range of 0.12-0.25 mug/mL. In addition, compounds 4 and 6 exemplify two unusual architectures of natural cyclodipeptides, signifying the unique biochemical characteristics of the producing fungus.
In this article, we investigate the algebraic structure of double cyclic codes of length (alpha, beta) over F2 + uF2 with u2 = 0 and construct DNA codes from these codes. The theory of constructing double cyclic codes suitable for DNA codes is studied. We provide the necessary and sufficient conditions for the double cyclic codes to be reversible and reversible-complement codes. As an illustration, we present some of the DNA codes generated from our results.
This chapter covers the procedure of mapping quantitative trait loci (QTLs) in an F(2) breeding design. I describe genetic design, general methods and software, and several commonly used approaches. The genetic design section includes F(2) population construction. Widely used methods and software are introduced in the section of general methods and software. Finally, composite interval mapping, penalized maximum likelihood, and empirical Bayes are described in detail. Some issues related to the F(2) design are discussed.
8-Iso-PGF2alpha is formed in vivo by non-enzymatic free radical catalysed oxidation of arachidonic acid. Urinary measurement of this compound has previously been shown to reflect the oxidative stress of the body in human and animal studies. To investigate the normal excretion rate and a possible diurnal variation of 8-iso-PGF2alpha excretion in humans urinary samples were collected from ten healthy volunteers of both sexes at different times during a day and as a 24-h urine sample. The samples were analyzed by a newly developed radioimmunoassay with a specific antibody against free 8-iso-PGF2alpha. There was no diurnal variation in the urinary levels of 8-iso-PGF2alpha during the day in this study. Neither was there any statistically significant difference between the 8-iso-PGF2alpha levels at any time of the day or in the morning urine samples compared to the 24-h urine samples. In conclusion, all urine samples collected at any time of the day, preferably a morning urine sample (representative urine from 6-8 hours), can thus be used to obtain a reliable and adequate value of the amount of the 8-iso-PGF2alpha excretion in urine in healthy individuals.
Peritoneal endometriotic implants and adjacent normal peritoneum from five patients were analyzed for prostaglandin (PG) release. Each tissue biopsy was incubated using medium 199 in triplicate at 37 degrees C for six hours, and PGF2 alpha and PGE2 concentrations were measured in the incubation medium every two hours. This study demonstrates that peritoneum involved with endometriosis releases significantly more PGF2 alpha and PGE2 (P less than .05) than adjacent normal peritoneum, and suggests that peritoneal endometriotic implants may be a source of the elevated peritoneal fluid PG levels previously reported in patients with endometriosis.
For the first time, the 16O(3He,p)18F reaction has been used for the production of 18F electrophilic reagents. The predominant reactive chemical specie recovered in the single-step postirradiation gases was [18F]F2. Decay curve and Ge(Li) analyses established the main radionuclidic impurities in this nuclear reaction as 11C and 15O. Recovery of the 18F activity was exceptionally high, approaching 90% using an electroformed nickel target body. Consistent 18F recoveries for this nuclear reaction (approximately 70%) were realized with a novel aluminum target body. The utility of the [18F]F2 recovered from this oxygen gas target system in radiopharmaceutical preparations is demonstrated by the successful synthesis of 6-[18F]fluoro-L-dopa (11.0 mCi at EOB) via a fluorodemercuration method.
A model system was designed to measure viral uptake through the roots of plants and translocation to distal plant parts. For this study, uptake of bacteriophage f2 was measured in corn and bean plants growing in hydroponic solutions. Few phage were detected in plants with uncut roots. However, when roots of both plant types were cut just before exposure to very high concentrations of phage, the amount of phage uptake was several orders of magnitude greater than with uncut roots, but still was considerably less than that which was theoretically possible. Furthermore, cut roots were rapidly repaired, thus inhibiting uptake, and the amount of uptake in plants with cut roots was proportional to phage exposure levels. Finally, phage were transported to all plant parts examined, but their survival times within each portion of the plants appeared to be of limited duration. All of these factors tend to minimize the possible public health significance associated with viral uptake through the root systems of plants.
The concentrations of prostaglandin F2 alpha (PGF2 alpha) and E2 (PGE2) in menstrual fluid collected daily from 13 women with primary dysmenorrhoea and 11 matched controls, were compared with the pattern of uterine contractility during the hour following the menstrual fluid collection. The intra-uterine pressure (IUP) was measured using a micro-transducer catheter and the tracings analysed. On Day 2 the concentration of PGF2 alpha correlated with the peak area, but not with amplitude, duration or rate of contraction. These findings add additional support to the hypothesis that increased production of PGF2 alpha could contribute to the increased uterine contractility in primary dysmenorrhoea.
Cellular systems are essential model systems to study reactive oxygen species and oxidative damage but there are widely accepted technical difficulties with available methods for quantifying endogenous oxidative damage in these systems. Here we present a stable isotope dilution UPLC-MS/MS protocol for measuring F2-isoprostanes as accurate markers for endogenous oxidative damage in cellular systems. F2-isoprostanes are chemically stable prostaglandin-like lipid peroxidation products of arachidonic acid, the predominant polyunsaturated fatty acid in mammalian cells. This approach is rapid and highly sensitive, allowing for the absolute quantification of endogenous lipid peroxidation in as little as ten thousand cells as well as damage originating from multiple ROS sources. Furthermore, differences in the endogenous cellular redox state induced by transcriptional regulation of ROS scavenging enzymes were detected by following this protocol. Finally we showed that the F2-isoprostane 5-iPF2alpha-VI is a metabolically stable end product, which is excreted from cells. Overall, this protocol enables accurate, specific and sensitive quantification of endogenous lipid peroxidation in cellular systems.
Agrobacterium tumefaciens F2 is an efficient bioflocculant-producing bacterium. But the genes related to the metabolic pathway of bioflocculant biosynthesis in strain F2 are unknown. We present the draft genome of A. tumefaciens F2. It could provide further insight into the biosynthetic mechanism of polysaccharide-like bioflocculant in strain F2.
This study was aimed at investigating oxidative stress in thalassemic patients by measurement of the oxidative damage biomarker, F(2)-isoprostanes (F(2)-IsoPs), using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The results showed that the mean value of urinary F(2)-IsoPs, normalized with creatinine, in the thalassemic group was significantly higher than that from healthy subjects (3.38+/-2.15 ng/mg creatinine vs 0.86+/-0.55 ng/mg creatinine, respectively), and the mean value of plasma total F(2)-IsoPs in the thalassemic group was also significantly higher than that from healthy subjects (0.39+/-0.15 ng/ml vs 0.18+/-0.03 ng/ml, respectively). Serum ferritin, erythrocyte superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase, glutathione, and TBARS levels after treatment of erythrocytes with H(2)O(2) were also investigated, and serum ferritin and erythrocyte SOD levels were significantly higher in thalassemic patients. Our findings are consistent with oxidative stress in thalassemia patients.
