Coagulation factor V heavy chain; Central regulator of hemostasis. It serves as a critical cofactor for the prothrombinase activity of factor Xa that results in the activation of prothrombin to thrombin.
Among the numerous adhesion G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), adhesion G protein-coupled estrogen receptor F5 (ADGRF5) contains unique domains in the long N-terminal tail which can determine cell-cell and cell-matrix interaction as well as cell adhesion. Nevertheless, the biology of ADGRF5 is complex and still poorly explored. Accumulating evidence suggests that the ADGRF5 activity is fundamental in health and disease. For instance, ADGRF5 is essential in the proper function of lungs and kidney as well as the endocrine system, and its signification in vascularization and tumorigenesis has been demonstrated. The most recent studies have provided findings about the diagnostic potential of ADGRF5 in osteoporosis and cancers, and ongoing studies suggest other diseases as well. Here, we elaborate on the current state of knowledge about the ADGRF5 in the physiology and pathophysiology of human diseases and highlight its high potential as a novel target in various therapeutic areas.
Herein, we report the B(C(6) F(5) )(3) -catalyzed E-selective isomerization of alkenes. The transition-metal-free method is applicable across a diverse array of readily accessible substrates, giving access to a broad range of synthetically useful products containing versatile stereodefined internal alkenes. The reaction mechanism was investigated by using synthetic and computational methods.
Botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) cause botulism by cleaving proteins necessary for nerve transmission. There are seven serotypes of BoNT, A-G, characterized by their response to antisera. Many serotypes are further distinguished into differing subtypes based on amino acid sequence, some of which result in functional differences. Our laboratory previously reported that all tested subtypes within each serotype have the same site of enzymatic activity. Recently, three new subtypes of BoNT/F; /F3, /F4, and /F5, were reported. Here, we report that BoNT/F5 cleaves substrate synaptobrevin-2 in a different location than the other BoNT/F subtypes, between (54)L and (55)E. This is the first report of cleavage of synaptobrevin-2 in this location.
Halophage SNJ1 was induced with mitomycin C from Natrinema sp. strain F5. The phage produces plaques on Natrinema sp. strain J7 only. The phage has a head of about 67 nm in diameter and a tail of 570 nm in length and belongs morphologically to the family Siphoviridae. The phage is strongly salt dependent; NaCl concentration affects the integrity of SNJ1, phage adsorption, and plaque formation. The optimal NaCl concentration for phage adsorption and plaque formation is 30% and 25%, respectively.
Most breast cancers express estrogen receptor (ER) where estrogen signaling plays an important role. Cancer contributes to activation of the coagulation system leading to an imbalance in the hemostatic system, and coagulation factor (F) V, which is a key regulator of blood coagulation, has been shown to be increased in breast tumors. Thus, the molecular association between estrogens and FV was explored. Stimulation with 17-beta-estradiol (E2) or 17-beta-ethinylestradiol (EE2) resulted in a time- and dose-dependent increase in F5 messenger RNA and FV protein in ERalpha-positive MCF-7 cells. Pretreatment with the ER antagonist fulvestrant or knockdown of ERalpha prior to stimulation with E2 counteracted this effect. Three ERalpha-binding half-sites were identified in the promoter region of the F5 gene in silico. Reporter gene analysis showed that all three half-sites were involved in the estrogen-induced gene regulation in vitro, as the effect was abolished only when all half-sites were mutated. High F5 levels in ER-positive breast tumors were associated with increased relapse-free survival of breast cancer patients.
Described herein is a B(C(6) F(5) )(3) -catalyzed S-H insertion reaction of thiophenols and thiols with alpha-diazoesters to access valuable alpha-thioesters. With the established protocol, an array of alpha-thioester products are generated in moderate to good yields with broad scope and functional group tolerance. In addition, this reaction maintains its high efficiency on gram scale and the product can be easily transformed into other useful motifs. This reaction proceeds under solvent-free conditions at room temperature, and generally finishes in twenty minutes upon magnet stirring, which offers an expedient way for the synthesis of thioether-containing compounds.
Anilines are core motifs in a variety of important molecules including medicines, materials and agrochemicals. We report a straightforward procedure that allows access to new chemical space of anilines via their para-C-H alkylation. The method utilizes commercially available catalytic H(2) O ⋅ B(C(6) F(5) )(3) and is highly selective for para-C-alkylation (over N-alkylation and ortho-C-alkylation) of anilines, with a wide scope in both the aniline substrates and alkene coupling partners. Readily available alkenes are used, and include new classes of alkene for the first time. The mild reaction conditions have allowed the procedure to be applied to the late-stage-functionalization of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including fenamic acids and diclofenac. The formed novel NSAID derivatives display improved anti-inflammatory properties over the parent NSAID structure.
Powdery mildew (PM) is a common fungal disease infecting pepper plants worldwide. Molecular breeding of pepper cultivars with powdery mildew resistance is desirable for the economic improvement of pepper cultivation. In the present study, 188 F(5) population derived from AR1 (PM resistant) and TF68 (PM sensitive) parents were subjected to high-throughput genotyping by sequencing (GBS) for the identification of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers. Further, the identified SNP markers were utilized for the construction of genetic linkage map and QTL analysis. Overall read mapping percentage of 87.29% was achieved in this study with the total length of mapped region ranging from 2,956,730 to 25,537,525 bp. A total of 41,111 polymorphic SNPs were identified, and a final of 1,841 SNPs were filtered for the construction of a linkage map. A total of 12 linkage groups were constructed corresponding to each chromosome with 1,308 SNP markers with the map length of 2506.8 cM. Further, two QTLs such as Pm-2.1 and Pm-5.1 were identified in chromosomes 2 and 5, respectively, for the PM resistance. Overall, the outcomes of the present endeavor can be utilized for the marker-assisted selection of pepper with powdery mildew-resistant trait.
We describe a new hemoglobin (Hb) variant, found in a 6-year-old Italian male living in Pistoia, Italy. An abnormal pattern compatible with a Hb A(2) variant was observed on capillary electrophoresis (CE); direct sequencing revealed a transition at codon 89 of the delta gene (HBD: c.269G>A) changing serine into asparagine. The variant was also identified as Hb A(2)-Pistoia according to the traditional nomenclature and no other globin defect was present. The observation and description of this Hb A(2) variant contributes to the number and heterogeneity of mutations of the delta-globin gene in the Mediterranean Area.
High oxygen affinity hemoglobins (Hbs), characterized by a decreased ability to release oxygen to the tissues and a left-shifted oxygen dissociation curve, are a rare cause of secondary erythrocytosis. Here, we report a base substitution in the beta-globin gene at codon 89 (AGT>AGG) in a kindred with familial erythrocytosis resulting in Hb Vanderbilt, a high oxygen affinity variant.
Several types of Escherichia coli O-antigens form highly effective shields protecting the bacterial cell surface and preventing bacteriophages from interacting directly with their secondary (terminal) receptors. However, it is not clear if O-antigens of various types (O-serotypes) differ in their anti-phage protection efficacy. Here, we describe a new E. coli strain, F5, which has an E. coli O28ab-related O-antigen. Although the amount of O-antigen produced by this strain is comparable to that produced by other E. coli strains we tested, it appears to give the cells significantly lower protection against phage attack than other O-antigen types, such as the O-polysaccharide of E. coli F17, which we studied earlier.
We report a systematic evaluation of phenylalanine-to-pentafluorophenylalanine (Phe --> F5-Phe) mutants for the 35-residue chicken villin headpiece subdomain (c-VHP), the hydrophobic core of which features a cluster of three Phe side chains (residues 6, 10, and 17). Phe --> F5-Phe mutations are interesting because aryl-perfluoroaryl interactions of optimal geometry are intrinsically more favorable than aryl-aryl interactions and because perfluoroaryl units are more hydrophobic than are analogous aryl units. One mutant, Phe-10 --> F5-Phe, provides enhanced tertiary structural stability relative to the native sequence. The other six mutants analyzed caused a decrease in stability.
We describe a high oxygen affinity hemoglobin (Hb) variant (Hb Vanderbilt) as a result of a heterozygous novel base change from T to A at codon 89 (AGT>AGA) leading to an amino acid change from serine to arginine.
Nigrospoxydons A-C (1- 3) and nigrosporapyrone (4), four new metabolites, were isolated from the marine-derived fungus Nigrospora sp. PSU-F5 together with nine known compounds. Their structures were elucidated by spectroscopic methods, mainly 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopic techniques. The antibacterial activity against the standard Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923 and methicillin-resistant S. aureus was evaluated.
