Factor VIIIa heavy chain, 200 kDa isoform; Factor VIII, along with calcium and phospholipid, acts as a cofactor for F9/factor IXa when it converts F10/factor X to the activated form, factor Xa.
Intron-22-inversion patients express the entire Factor VIII (FVIII)-amino-acid sequence intracellularly as 2 non-secreted polypeptides and have a positive "intracellular (I)-FVIII-CRM" status. Mutations conferring a positive I-FVIII-CRM status are associated with low inhibitor risk and are pharmacogenetically relevant because inhibitor risk may be affected by the nature of the therapeutic FVIII-protein (tFVIII), the affinity of any tFVIII-derived foreign peptide (tFVIII-fp) for any HLA class-II isomer (HLA-II) comprising individual major histocompatibility complex (MHC) repertoires, and the stability of any tFVIII-fp/HLA-II complex. We hypothesize that mutations conferring a completely or substantially negative I-FVIII-CRM status are pharmacogenetically irrelevant because inhibitor risk is high with any tFVIII and individual MHC repertoire.
In hemophilia A, F8 nonsense variants, and particularly those affecting the large factor VIII (FVIII) B domain that is dispensable for coagulant activity, display lower association with replacement therapy-related anti-FVIII inhibitory antibodies as retrieved from multiple international databases. Since null genetic conditions favor inhibitor development, we hypothesized that translational readthrough over premature termination codons (PTC) may contribute to immune tolerance by producing full-length proteins through the insertion of amino acid subset(s). To quantitatively evaluate the readthrough output in vitro, we developed a very sensitive luciferase-based system to detect very low full-length FVIII synthesis from a wide panel (n=45; ~60% patients with PTC) of F8 nonsense variants. PTC not associated with inhibitors displayed higher readthrough-driven expression levels than inhibitor-associated PTC, a novel observation. Particularly, higher levels were detected for B-domain variants (n=20) than for variants in other domains (n=25). Studies on plasma from six hemophilia A patients with PTC, integrated by expression of the corresponding nonsense and readthrough-deriving missense variants, consistently revealed higher FVIII levels for B-domain variants. Only one B-domain PTC (Arg814*) was found among the highly represented PTC not sporadically associated with inhibitors, but with the lowest proportion of inhibitor cases (4 out of 57). These original insights into the molecular genetics of hemophilia A, and particularly into genotype-phenotype relationships related with disease treatment, demonstrate that B-domain features favor PTC readthrough output. This provides a potential molecular mechanism contributing to differential PTC-associated inhibitor occurrence, with translational implications for a novel, experimentally based classification of F8 nonsense variants.
This retrospective cohort study investigated the association between factor 8 (F8) genotype severity and factor VIII (FVIII) levels during pregnancy for 52 women (64 pregnancies) who were heterozygous carriers of mild, moderate or severe haemophilia A. There were no significant differences in FVIII levels for carriers of mild, moderate or severe haemophilia A at baseline [mean (SD) level: mild, 0.78 (0.22); moderate, 0.83 (0.33); severe, 0.70 (0.25) iu/ml; P = 0.81] or in the third trimester [mean (SD) level: mild, 1.42 (0.28); moderate, 1.47 (0.41); severe, 1.37 (0.49) iu/ml; P = 0.80). Post-partum haemorrhage rates were higher for carriers of severe haemophilia A (13/24; 54.2%) compared to carriers of mild haemophilia A (four of 14; 28.6%).
Approximately 150 variants described in the HbVar database have been found to be unstable and about 80.0% of these are on the beta-globin gene. We describe the case of a 3-year-old child who presented at the emergency room with fever and asthenia. Hematological data suggested severe hemolytic anemia. Sequencing of the beta-globin gene revealed the mutation HBB: c.278A>G at codon 92 in a heterozygous state, reported as Hb Mozhaisk in the HbVar database. Other family members did not have Hb Mozhaisk, thus, this variant is due to a de novo mutation. Because of the rarity of this globin variant, we believe it is important to report similar cases, to have a more complete phenotype description of the pathology and define an adequate reproductive risk for couples, considering the dominant inheritance pattern (hence an inheritance risk of 50.0%).
One of the challenges of genetic testing in patients with hemophilia A is the interpretation of sequence variants. Here we report a silent variant found in exon 2 in the F8 gene in a 47-year-old patient with a previous von Willebrand disease (VWD) type 1 diagnosis. Clinically he had mild bleeding symptoms restricted to prolonged bleeding from minor wounds. Sanger sequencing of F8 gene using genomic DNA showed a hemizygous silent variant in exon 2: c.222G>T, p.Thr74Thr. When applying ACMG criteria, the variant was predicted to be "likely benign" in the analyzing software or VUS after curating. Sanger sequencing of the patient's cDNA after nested polymerase chain reaction showed that the patient had both a normal transcript containing exons 1-4 and a defect transcript lacking exon 2. These findings explain the patient's low FVIII:C level and led to the diagnosis of mild hemophilia A instead of VWD type 1. This case illustrates that mRNA work-up may be needed to clarify a patient's phenotype-genotype.
In hemophilia A, bleeding mostly correlates with factor VIII activity (FVIII:C), although some patients show discrepancy in bleeding severity and FVIII:C. We report a novel procoagulant mechanism associated with F8 p.H118R (c.353A > G) in a young Japanese man with few bleeding episodes despite low levels of FVIII:C (< 1 IU/dL). Plasma FVIII:C was < 1 IU/dL measured by one-stage clotting assay (OSA) and chromogenic substrate assay (CSA), whereas FVIII antigen (FVIII:Ag) was 9.7%. The global coagulation assay showed higher max speed in clot waveform analysis (CWA), shorter clotting time in rotation thromboelastometry (ROTEM) (1605 vs. > 5000 s), shorter lag time (4.87 vs. 12.47 min) and larger ETP (207.9 vs. 53.3 nM*min) in thrombin generation assay, compared with FVIII-deficient control. Expressed recombinant H118R mutant in culture media showed low FVIII:C (1-5 IU/dL) by OSA, with non-hemophilia level of FVIII:Ag. Western blot analysis using recombinant H118R showed longer persistence of heavy-chain of H118R after incubation with alpha-thrombin, compared with wild-type. Incubation of H118R with activated protein C (APC) also showed longer persistence of A1-A2 domain. In conclusion, H118R showed prolonged activation by alpha-thrombin and delayed APC-related FVIII degradation. These properties may confer the procoagulant activity and few bleeding episodes despite low FVIII:C.
This systematic review was designed to provide more precise effect estimates of inhibitor development for the various types of F8 gene mutations in patients with severe hemophilia A. The primary outcome was inhibitor development and the secondary outcome was high-titer-inhibitor development. A systematic literature search was performed to include cohort studies published in peer-reviewed journals with data on inhibitor incidences in the various F8 gene mutation types and a mutation detection rate of at least 80%. Pooled odds ratios (ORs) of inhibitor development for different types of F8 gene mutations were calculated with intron 22 inversion as the reference. Data were included from 30 studies on 5383 patients, including 1029 inhibitor patients. The inhibitor risk in large deletions and nonsense mutations was higher than in intron 22 inversions (pooled OR = 3.6, 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 2.3-5.7 and OR = 1.4, 95% CI, 1.1-1.8, respectively), the risk in intron 1 inversions and splice-site mutations was equal (pooled OR = 0.9; 95% CI, 0.6-1.5 and OR = 1.0; 95% CI, 0.6-1.5), and the risk in small deletions/insertions and missense mutations was lower (pooled OR = 0.5; 95% CI, 0.4-0.6 and OR = 0.3; 95% CI, 0.2-0.4, respectively). The relative risks for developing high titer inhibitors were similar.
The aim of this study was to detect the genetic alterations in the Factor 8 gene in 26 patients from Western Algeria. We detected the presence of "intron 22 inversion" with long-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Negative patients for this inversion were analyzed for "intron 1 inversion" using multiplex PCR. Patients who were negative for both inversions were analyzed using a direct sequencing. Deleterious effects of novel mutations on protein were assayed with bioinformatics tools. Causing mutations were identified in 85.71% of the families, including 11 "intron 22 inversion," 1 "intron 1 inversion," and 6 different point mutations (2 nonsense, 1 splice site, and 3 missense mutations). Among these mutations, c.2189G > A (p.Cys711Tyr) and c.5219+1G>T are novel. This is the first study that reports spectrum of mutations in the Factor 8 gene in the Western Algerian population. Knowledge of these mutations is important for genetic counseling and medical care of affected families.
F8 is the defective gene of Hemophilia A (HA). The F8 genotype correlates well with the clinical phenotype in most cases. However, phenotypic variation has been found in some rare cases with patients who have the same genotype. In this study, we generatedinduced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from a Hemophilia A patient with F8 (p. R391C) mutation. The clinical phenotype of this patient is moderate, compared to the more severe phenotypes found in other patients. This iPSCs line could be used as a valuable diseased cell model for gene therapy and will facilitate future mechanism research.
The genetic and physical structures of commonly used F-prime factors carrying the galactose region of the Escherichia coli chromosome were analyzed. Deletions in the chromosomal DNA sequences in the F-prime factors were found to be frequent events. A genetic method was developed to reconstruct the original F-prime factors from deletion variants. Heteroduplex analysis of the reconstructed F-prime factors confirmed the derivation of the F-prime factors F100 and F152, from the same Hfr, and finally determined the normal E. coli chromosomal sequence in the region between fep and uvrB, containing about 5 min in genetic units and about 246.5 in kilobase units (kb). This sequence could be connected with the DNA sequences of the lac-purE region, which had been physically determined previously. Together they constituted a total of 528.6 kb. From these combined sequences, the distance from lacPO to galK was calculated to be 412.9 kb, which corresponds to 8.8 min in genetic units.
A BaY(2) F(8) :Yb(3+) ,Ho(3+) phosphor was synthesized using a simple precipitation method. The temperature-sensing properties of BaY(2) F(8) :Yb(3+) ,Ho(3+) phosphor were investigated using the fluorescence intensity ratio (FIR) of the thermally coupled energy levels ((5) F(4) and (5) S(2) ) of Ho(3+) . Energy transitions (5) F(4) -->(5) I(8) and (5) S(2) -->(5) I(8) gave rise to emission peaks at 538 nm and 549 nm, respectively. The areas under these two emission peaks were used to calculate the FIR. Temperature-dependent upconversion luminescence was recorded in the temperature range 303-623 K using a 980 nm laser excitation source. The results suggested that the BaY(2) F(8) :Yb(3+) , Ho(3+) phosphor has the potential to be used as a non-contact optical temperature sensor.
Haemophilia A is a common X-linked recessive disorder caused by mutations in F8 leading to deficiency or dysfunction of coagulant factor VIII (FVIII). Despite tremendous improvements in mutation screening methods, in a small group of patients with FVIII deficiency suffering from haemophilia A, no DNA change can be found. In these patients, analysis reveals no causal mutations even after sequencing the whole coding region of F8 including the flanking splice sites, as well as the promoter and the 3' untranslated region (UTR). After excluding the mutations mimicking the haemophilia A phenotype in interacting partners of the FVIII protein affecting the half life and transport of the protein, mutations or rearrangements in non-coding regions of F8 have to be considered responsible for the haemophilia A phenotype. In this review, we present the experiences with molecular diagnosis of such cases and approaches to be applied for mutation negative patients.
In 1972, Perutz proposed that the low affinity of T-state haemoglobin is caused by tension in the bond between the iron and the proximal histidine, restraining the Fe from moving into the porphyrin plane on binding oxygen. This proposal has often been disputed. If such tension does exist, it will be manifest in the liganded T-state. Here we describe the structure of the fully liganded T-state cyanide complex of haemoglobin, in which the Fe-proximal histidine bond in the alpha-subunits, but not in the beta-subunits, is ruptured. This rupture uncouples the structural changes at the alpha-haem from those in the globin and the beta-haem, and demonstrates unequivocally the existence of tension and its transmission through this bond.
FVIII inhibitor development in haemophilia A (HA) patients, especially those with severe manifestations is a serious adverse effect in patients with haemophilia A, and the clinical management of these patients is very difficult as most don't respond to conventional treatment. Many genetic and non-genetic risk factors have been proposed however, these are diverse in different population groups, highlighting the importance of determining specific risk factors for each population. F8 mutations and especially inversions, which are the most common causative mutation in severe HA, have been significantly associated with inhibitor development earlier, however there is no conclusive data so far with regard to Indian haemophiliacs. This study provides novel evidence that intron 22 inversions in the F8 gene are indeed significantly associated with FVIII inhibitor development in Indian haemophiliacs. Further studies with other risk factors would enable better insights into the immune response towards FVIII in these patients, and possibly help to characterize patients at a higher risk for inhibitor development.
Intron 1 and intron 22 inversions, two large rearrangements of the factor VIII gene, are generally associated with a severe phenotype of haemophilia A and a high risk of inhibitor formation. In several haemophiliacs, diagnostic analyses for detection of these inversions revealed unusual band patterns. Upon further examination, different copy number variations were detected in the factor VIII gene of these patients by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Since these duplications or deletions alone could not sufficiently explain the abnormal band patterns of the first analyses, we assumed a combination of intron 1 or intron 22 inversions together with a copy number variation. RESULT: We could confirm this hypothesis by specific long range PCRs but a detailed characterization of the breakpoints and the mechanisms for these complex rearrangements have yet to be elucidated.
A presumably spontaneous mutation has resulted in the formation of Hemoglobin (Hb) Istanbul in which glutamine is substituted for histidine in the proximal position of the beta-chain (F8(92)). The anemia and other physiological effects that occur in the presence of Hb Istanbul were much ameliorated by splenectomy. Hb Istanbul is a relatively unstable molecule which produces a rather moderate case of "unstable hemoglobin hemolytic anemia."In the determination of structure, a method of preferential cleavage of an aspartyl-proline bond at residues 99-100 of the beta-chain was used.
We have identified a second baby with the fetal methemoglobin F-M-Fort Ripley. It was observed in a Caucasian infant from Canada; at least eleven additional members of that family were known to have had a neonatal cyanosis similar to that seen in the propositus and in a previously described baby (2). Sequencing of amplified DNA that included (part of) the G gamma gene greatly facilitated the characterization. The G gamma X chain was readily isolated by reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography; its quantity was approximately 12.5% of total gamma. Interestingly, the baby also carried the A gamma T mutation on one chromosome, either in cis or in trans to the G gamma X mutation. Hb F-M-Fort Ripley could be isolated in reasonably pure form by DEAE-cellulose chromatography. The isolated Hb FX was unstable, had spectral changes characteristic for the M-hemoglobins, while its methemoglobin derivative reacted rapidly with cyanide. Oxygen affinity data could not be obtained. It is suggested that the formation of a rather large amount (approximately 25%) of mixed hybrids (alpha 2G gamma X.gamma) with low oxygen affinity is the main cause for the occurrence of the neonatal cyanosis.
BACKGROUND: Recently, our group has reported a 13-bp deletion in a poly(T)-track in the F8 intron 13 as the causative variant in approximately 6% of all cases of mild haemophilia A (HA) in France. The systematic screening of mild HA patients for this deletion identified individuals carrying deletions from 9 to 14-bp in the same region. AIMS: To demonstrate that these highly prevalent deletions could result from a recurrent molecular mechanism and to determine the clinical significance of deletions other than 13-bp in size. METHODS: Haplotype analysis using five polymorphic markers was performed in 71 unrelated French mild hemophilia A patients. Minigene analysis was performed to study the splicing impact of deletions from 1 to 14-bp. RESULTS: A peculiar haplotype (H1) was identified in 22.5% of patients carrying the 13-bp deletion. Haplotypes differing from H1 only for the two most distal markers were found in more than the half of patients. These results confirmed the founder effect origin for the 13-bp deletion. However, the 9 patients carrying other sizes of deletion had a different haplotype suggesting that these deletions arose independently. Supporting the recurrent mechanism hypothesis, similar deletions were also found in 3/19 genetically unresolved mild Canadian patients. In vitro splicing analysis confirmed that deletions larger than 9-bp had a deleterious impact on splicing of F8 transcript. CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that the poly(T)-track in F8 intron 13 is a deletion hotspot. We recommend that deletions in this region should be specifically investigated in all genetically unresolved mild HA patients.
