Coagulation factor IXa heavy chain; Factor IX is a vitamin K-dependent plasma protein that participates in the intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation by converting factor X to its active form in the presence of Ca(2+) ions, phospholipids, and factor VIIIa. Belongs to the peptidase S1 family.
Infusing CRISPR/donor-loaded adeno-associated viral vectors (AAV/CRISPR) could enable in vivo hepatic gene editing to remedy hemophilia B (HB) with inherited deficiency of clotting factor IX (FIX). Yet, current regimens focus on correcting HB with simple mutations in the coding region of the F9, overlooking those carrying complicated mutations involving the regulatory region. Moreover, a possible adverse effect of treatment-related inflammation remains unaddressed. Here we report that a single DNA cutting-mediated long-range replacement restored the FIX-encoding function of a mutant F9 (mF9) carrying both regulatory and coding defects in a severe mouse HB model, wherein incorporation of a synthetic Alb enhancer/promoter-mimic (P2) ensured FIX elevation to clinically meaningful levels. Through single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of liver tissues, we revealed that a subclinical hepatic inflammation post-AAV/CRISPR administration regulated the vulnerability of the edited mF9-harboring host cells to cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and the P2 activity in a hepatocytic subset-dependent manner via modulating specific sets of liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs). Collectively, our study establishes an AAV/CRISPR-mediated gene-editing protocol applicable to complicated monogenetic disorders, underscoring the potentiality of improving therapeutic benefits through managing inflammation.
In hemophilia B (HB), factor IX gene (F9) genotyping is used for molecular confirmation of affected individuals, for carrier testing, to facilitate the identification of those at risk for anaphylaxis/inhibitors (associated with large deletions), and to assist in assigning disease severity. Owing to test costs, optimal test utilization involves pre/post-test counseling and appropriate patient and test selection (e.g., mutation screening [F9MS] vs. known mutation [F9KM] testing). This article aims to review the trends and outcomes of F9-genotyping orders and describe the spectrum of variants identified in a sample of individuals in our reference laboratory. We performed a retrospective review of consecutive orders submitted to the Special Coagulation DNA Diagnostic Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, between 2012 and 2015. A total of 133 orders (38%) were identified for men: 118 (88%) were F9MS and 15 (12%) were F9KM. Thirteen orders (10%) were cancelled. A total of 209 orders were identified for women: 178 (85%) were F9MS and 31 (15%) were F9KM. Thirty-seven orders (18%) were cancelled and 30% of the tests performed yielded negative results. A total of 164 samples (47%) were received without clinical information. Seventeen previously unreported variants were identified. F9 genotyping provides useful information for HB management; however, 18% of our orders were cancelled and almost half were received without relevant clinical information, thus reaffirming the need for ongoing scrutiny of submitted orders. Optimal patient and test selection is important as is the accurate interpretation of variants identified. Most of the pathogenic variants identified were point mutations, with very few large deletions, consistent with the literature.
Large deletions in the F9 gene are detected in approximately 5% of patients with severe haemophilia B, but only a few deletion breakpoints have been characterised precisely until now. In this study we identified a total of seven large F9 deletions in the index patients and nine female carriers by the AccuCopy technique. We also successfully characterised the exact breakpoints for each large deletion including four deletions encompassing the entire F9 gene by the genome walking method combined with primer walking strategy. The extents of deletion regions ranged from 11.1 to 884 kb. Microhomologies ranged from 2 to 6 bp were identified in the breakpoint junctions of six deletions. The other deletion occurred between two highly homologous sequences of the same long interspersed nuclear element 1 (LINE/L1). Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) and microhomology-mediated break-induced replication (MMBIR) may be the main causative mechanisms for the six large deletions with microhomologies. Non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) may mediate the deletion occurred between the two tandem LINEs in the other large deletion. Repetitive elements and non-B DNA forming motifs identified in the junction regions may contribute to DNA breakage leading to large deletions.
Non-reducing and reducing sodium dodecyl sulphate/polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis of laminin synthesized in parietal endoderm-like F9 cells demonstrated that only AB1B2 complex goes through intracellular traffic for oligosaccharide side-chain processing and secretion. Glycosylation was not necessary for subunit assembly. Assembly was suggested to proceed through B1B2 to AB1B2. Among the pools of monomer subunits, the B2 pool was smallest.
The factor IX gene (F9) is a valuable model for studying germ-line mutations. Nine mutations were detected in nine Mexican patients with hemophilia B by direct sequencing using genomic amplification with transcript sequencing (GAWTS): six single base changes, one micro-deletion, and two large deletions. Germline origins of mutations were found in three of six families with sporadic cases. Curiously, the four independent single base substitutions which were not at CpG dinucleotides occurred at only two different nucleotide positions (17,678 and 17,747) one transition and one transversion at each. The two remaining substitutions were identical changes at a CpG dinucleotide, but were determined to be independent by germline origin analysis. A statistical analysis suggests that the independent recurrence of mutations at these locations may reflect an unusual aspect of F9 mutagenesis in the Mexican population. These data raise the possibility of population-specific differences in human germline mutations.
An Eco RV-Cla I fragment containing the gene encoding the F9 fimbrial subunit of the human uropathogenic Escherichia coli strain C1018 and a PstI-PstI fragment containing the F12 fimbrial subunit gene of the dog uropathogenic strain 1442 have been cloned and the nucleotide sequence of the fragments determined. The structural gene of the F9 fimbriae (FniA) codes for a protein of 165 amino acid residues with a signal peptide of 25 amino acids. The F12 fimbrial gene (FtwA) codes for a protein of 155 amino acids which is preceded by a single peptide of 21 amino acids. The amino acid sequences of the FniA and FtwA proteins deduced from the nucleotide sequence were compared with sequences of other known P-fimbrial subunit proteins. As expected, most differences between the various proteins were found in the hypervariable regions defined by van Die et al. (1987). The N-terminal sequence of the FtwA protein differs from the one published by Klemm et al. (1983). FtwA contains two deletions found in comparison to the other fimbrial subunits.
Hb Cleveland is characterized by two amino acid substitutions, namely beta 121(GH4)Glu----Gln as in Hb D-Los Angeles and beta 93(F9)Cys----Arg as in Hb Okazaki, and shares with Hb Okazaki a decreased stability, an increase in oxygen affinity, and decreases in Bohr effect and heme-heme interaction. It is the 13th beta chain variant with two substitutions that has been described thus far.
