Farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase; Key enzyme in isoprenoid biosynthesis which catalyzes the formation of farnesyl diphosphate (FPP), a precursor for several classes of essential metabolites including sterols, dolichols, carotenoids, and ubiquinones. FPP also serves as substrate for protein farnesylation and geranylgeranylation. Catalyzes the sequential condensation of isopentenyl pyrophosphate with the allylic pyrophosphates, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, and then with the resultant geranylpyrophosphate to the ultimate product farnesyl pyrophosphate; Belongs to the FPP/GGPP synthase family.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the 5-year survival of metal-ceramic and all-ceramic tooth-supported single crowns (SCs) and to describe the incidence of biological, technical and esthetic complications. METHODS: Medline (PubMed), Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) searches (2006-2013) were performed for clinical studies focusing on tooth-supported fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) with a mean follow-up of at least 3 years. This was complimented by an additional hand search and the inclusion of 34 studies from a previous systematic review [1,2]. Survival and complication rates were analyzed using robust Poisson's regression models to obtain summary estimates of 5-year proportions. RESULTS: Sixty-seven studies reporting on 4663 metal-ceramic and 9434 all-ceramic SCs fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Seventeen studies reported on metal-ceramic crowns, and 54 studies reported on all-ceramic crowns. Meta-analysis of the included studies indicated an estimated survival rate of metal-ceramic SCs of 94.7% (95% CI: 94.1-96.9%) after 5 years. This was similar to the estimated 5-year survival rate of leucit or lithium-disilicate reinforced glass ceramic SCs (96.6%; 95% CI: 94.9-96.7%), of glass infiltrated alumina SCs (94.6%; 95% CI: 92.7-96%) and densely sintered alumina and zirconia SCs (96%; 95% CI: 93.8-97.5%; 92.1%; 95% CI: 82.8-95.6%). In contrast, the 5-year survival rates of feldspathic/silica-based ceramic crowns were lower (p<0.001). When the outcomes in anterior and posterior regions were compared feldspathic/silica-based ceramic and zirconia crowns exhibited significantly lower survival rates in the posterior region (p<0.0001), the other crown types performed similarly. Densely sintered zirconia SCs were more frequently lost due to veneering ceramic fractures than metal-ceramic SCs (p<0.001), and had significantly more loss of retention (p<0.001). In total higher 5 year rates of framework fracture were reported for the all-ceramic SCs than for metal-ceramic SCs. CONCLUSIONS: Survival rates of most types of all-ceramic SCs were similar to those reported for metal-ceramic SCs, both in anterior and posterior regions. Weaker feldspathic/silica-based ceramics should be limited to applications in the anterior region. Zirconia-based SCs should not be considered as primary option due to their high incidence of technical problems.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the 5-year survival of metal-ceramic and all-ceramic tooth-supported fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) and to describe the incidence of biological, technical and esthetic complications. METHODS: Medline (PubMed), Embase and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) searches (2006-2013) were performed for clinical studies focusing on tooth-supported FDPs with a mean follow-up of at least 3 years. This was complemented by an additional hand search and the inclusion of 10 studies from a previous systematic review [1]. Survival and complication rates were analyzed using robust Poisson's regression models to obtain summary estimates of 5-year proportions. RESULTS: Forty studies reporting on 1796 metal-ceramic and 1110 all-ceramic FDPs fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Meta-analysis of the included studies indicated an estimated 5-year survival rate of metal-ceramic FDPs of 94.4% (95% CI: 91.2-96.5%). The estimated survival rate of reinforced glass ceramic FDPs was 89.1% (95% CI: 80.4-94.0%), the survival rate of glass-infiltrated alumina FDPs was 86.2% (95% CI: 69.3-94.2%) and the survival rate of densely sintered zirconia FDPs was 90.4% (95% CI: 84.8-94.0%) in 5 years of function. Even though the survival rate of all-ceramic FDPs was lower than for metal-ceramic FDPs, the differences did not reach statistical significance except for the glass-infiltrated alumina FDPs (p=0.05). A significantly higher incidence of caries in abutment teeth was observed for densely sintered zirconia FDPs compared to metal-ceramic FDPs. Significantly more framework fractures were reported for reinforced glass ceramic FDPs (8.0%) and glass-infiltrated alumina FDPs (12.9%) compared to metal-ceramic FDPs (0.6%) and densely sintered zirconia FDPs (1.9%) in 5 years in function. However, the incidence of ceramic fractures and loss of retention was significantly (p=0.018 and 0.028 respectively) higher for densely sintered zirconia FDPs compared to all other types of FDPs. CONCLUSIONS: Survival rates of all types of all-ceramic FDPs were lower than those reported for metal-ceramic FDPs. The incidence of framework fractures was significantly higher for reinforced glass ceramic FDPs and infiltrated glass ceramic FDPs, and the incidence for ceramic fractures and loss of retention was significantly higher for densely sintered zirconia FDPs compared to metal-ceramic FDPs.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this systematic review was to assess and compare the 5- and 10-year survival of different types of tooth-supported and implant-supported fixed dental prosthesis (FDPs) and single crowns (SCs) and to describe the incidence of biological and technical complications. METHODS: Three electronic searches complemented by manual searching were conducted to identify prospective and retrospective cohort studies on FDPs and SCs with a mean follow-up time of at least 5 years. Patients had to have been examined clinically at the follow-up visit. Failure and complication rates were analyzed using random-effects Poisson's regression models to obtain summary estimates of 5- and 10-year survival proportions. RESULTS: Meta-analysis of the included studies indicated an estimated 5-year survival of conventional tooth-supported FDPs of 93.8%, cantilever FDPs of 91.4%, solely implant-supported FDPs of 95.2%, combined tooth-implant-supported FDPs of 95.5% and implant-supported SCs of 94.5%. Moreover, after 10 years of function the estimated survival decreased to 89.2% for conventional FDPs, to 80.3% for cantilever FDPs, to 86.7% for implant-supported FDPs, to 77.8% for combined tooth-implant-supported FDPs and to 89.4% for implant-supported SCs. Despite high survival rates, 38.7% the patients with implant-supported FDPs had some complications after the 5-year observation period. This is compared with 15.7% for conventional FDPs and 20.6% for cantilever FDPs, respectively. For conventional tooth-supported FDPs, the most frequent complications were biological complications like caries and loss of pulp vitality. Compared with tooth-supported FDPs, the incidence of technical complications was significantly higher for the implant-supported reconstructions. The most frequent technical complications were fractures of the veneer material (ceramic fractures or chipping), abutment or screw loosening and loss of retention. CONCLUSION: On the basis of the results of the present systematic review, planning of prosthetic rehabilitations should preferentially include conventional end abutment tooth-supported FDPs, solely implant-supported FDPs or implant-supported SCs. Only for reasons of anatomical structures or patient-centered preferences and as a second option should cantilever tooth-supported FDPs or FDPs supported by combination of implants and teeth be chosen.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this systematic review was to assess the 5- and 10-year survival of implant-supported fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) and to describe the incidence of biological and technical complications. METHODS: An electronic Medline search complemented by manual searching was conducted to identify prospective and retrospective cohort studies and case series on FDPs with a mean follow-up time of at least 5 years. Patients had to have been examined clinically at the follow-up visit. Failure and complication rates were analyzed using standard and random-effects Poisson regression models to obtain summary estimates of 5-year and 10-year survival and complication rates. RESULTS: The updated search provided 979 titles and 257 abstracts. Full-text analysis was performed for 90 articles resulting in a total 32 studies that met the inclusion criteria. Meta-analysis of these studies indicated an estimated survival of implants supporting FDPs of 95.6% after 5 years and 93.1% after 10 years. When machined surface implants were excluded from the analysis and only rough surface implants included, the survival rate increased to 97.2% after 5 years. The survival rate of implant-supported FDPs was 95.4% after 5 years and 80.1% after 10 years of function. When the analysis was done exclusively for metal-ceramic FDPs, hence the old gold-acrylic FDPs were excluded, the survival rate increased significantly. The survival rate of metal-ceramic implant-supported FDPs was 96.4% after 5 years and 93.9% after 10 years. Only 66.4% of the patients were free of any complications after 5 years. The most frequent complications over the 5-year observation period were fractures of the veneering material (13.5%), peri-implantitis and soft tissue complications (8.5%), loss of access hole restoration (5.4%), abutment or screw loosening (5.3%), and loss of retention of cemented FDPs (4.7%). CONCLUSION: It may be concluded that implant-supported fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) are a safe and predictable treatment method with high survival rates. However, biological and technical complications were frequent (33.6%). To minimize the incidence of complications, dental professionals should make great effort in choosing reliable components and materials for implant-supported FDPs and the patients should be placed in well-structured maintenance system after treatment.
This clinical study evaluated posterior three-unit fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) made of zirconia substructures veneered with pressable glass-ceramic. Nineteen patients received 21 FDPs replacing either the second premolar, first molar, or second molar. The FDPs were cemented with glass ionomer. Recall examinations were performed every 12 months. The mean service time of the FDP was 40 months. At 30 months, one maxillary FDP exhibited zirconia framework fracture at a thinned occlusal area of the abutment. Loss of retention led to the removal of one FDP after 38 months. The Kaplan-Meier survival probability was 90.5% after 40 months for all types of failures and 95.2% concerning framework fractures. The overpressing technique appears to be reliable in terms of the veneering material. However, one framework fracture was observed in this study.
AIM: To evaluate the Implant Disease Risk Assessment (IDRA) tool for the prediction of peri-implantitis in treated periodontitis patients with implant-supported fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) after at least 5 years of function. MATERIAL AND METHODS: From the patient pool of implant patients enrolled in a regular supportive periodontal therapy programme (SPT) for at least 5 years, 239 patients were screened. Eighty patients met the inclusion criteria and underwent evaluation through the criteria of the IDRA tool. Areas under the curve (AUCs) for receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves including 95% confidence intervals were estimated. RESULTS: Seventy-nine patients (43 males and 36 females, 8 smokers), aged on average 59.0 years (range: 40-79 years) at baseline (i.e. FDP delivery) were analysed. The calculated IDRA-risk was in 34 patients (42.5%) a moderate risk, while 45 patients (56.3%) were considered at high IDRA-risk. One patient categorized at low IDRA-risk was excluded from the analysis. The AUC was 0.613 (95% CI: 0.464-0.762) if the IDRA-risk was associated with prevalence of peri-implantitis at the most recent follow-up. Peri-implantitis was diagnosed in 4 patients (12%) at moderate and in 12 patients (27%) at high IDRA-risk, respectively. The calculated odds ratio for developing peri-implantitis in patients with high IDRA-risk compared with patients with moderate IDRA-risk was 2.727 with no statistically significant difference between the two groups (95% CI: 0.793-9.376). CONCLUSION: Within the limitations of the present retrospective study, the IDRA algorithm might represent a promising tool to assess patients at moderate or high risk of developing peri-implantitis.
PURPOSE: To review methods used to investigate marginal adaptation of crowns and fixed dental prostheses (FDPs), and to discuss testing variables employed and their influence on results. METHODS: Online libraries including PubMed, Scopus, and Ovid were searched for articles evaluating the marginal adaptation of crowns and FDPs using a combination of the keywords: "marginal accuracy," "marginal fit," "marginal gap," "marginal discrepancy," "fitting accuracy," "crown," and "FPD." Peer-reviewed publications in English in the period 1970 to December 2011 were collected, evaluated by their abstract, and included if they met the inclusion criteria. The criteria involved studies evaluating marginal adaptation of crowns and FDPs through clear experimental protocols. Exclusion criteria involved longitudinal prospective and retrospective clinical evaluations, studies using subjective tactile sensation, and other predefined criteria. RESULTS: A total of 277 papers were identified; only 183 met the inclusion criteria. Direct view technique was used by 47.5% of the articles followed by cross-sectioning (23.5%), and impression replica (20.2%) techniques. The marginal gap values reported by these techniques varied among individual crown systems and across different systems because of variations in study type (in vivo vs. in vitro), sample size and measurements per specimen, finish line design, and stage at which the marginal gap was measured. CONCLUSION: There was a substantial lack of consensus relating to marginal adaptation of various crown systems due to differences in testing methods and experimental protocols employed. Direct view technique was the most commonly used method of reproducible results. Also, conducting an experimental set-up of testing a minimum of 30 specimens at 50 measurements per specimen should produce reliable results. Additionally, using a combination of two measurement methods can be useful in verification of results.
Glioblastoma (GBM), the most aggressive brain cancer, is highly dependent on the mevalonate (MVA) pathway for the synthesis of lipid moieties critical for cell proliferation but the function and regulation of key intermediate enzymes like farnesyl-diphosphate synthase (FDPS), up to now, remained unknown. A deregulated expression and activity of FDPS was the central research idea of the present study. FDPS mRNA, protein and enzyme activity were analyzed in a cohort of stage III-IV glioma patients (N = 49) and primary derived cells. FDPS silencing helped to clarify its function in the maintenance of malignant phenotype. Interestingly, compared to tumor-free peripheral (TFB) brain and normal human astrocytes (NHA), FDPS protein expression and enzyme activity were detected at high degree in tumor mass where a correlation with canonical oncogenic signaling pathways such as STAT3, ERK and AKT was also documented. Further, FDPS knockdown in U87 and GBM primary cells but not in NHA, enhanced apoptosis. With the effort to develop a more refined map of the connectivity between signal transduction pathways and metabolic networks in cancer FDPS as a new candidate metabolic oncogene in glioblastoma, might suggest to further target MVA pathway as valid therapeutic tool.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this retrospective clinical study was to evaluate the survival and the occurrence of technical and biological complications of zirconia crowns and fixed dental prostheses made in the student clinic of Turku University, Finland, between April 2009 and September 2017. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty-seven patients (19 female, 8 male), with zirconia crowns or FDPs, participated in the follow-up investigation. The mean age of patients was 64.6 years. Of the 40 restorations, 17 were single crowns and 23 FDPs. Twenty-seven restorations were anterior and 13 posterior. Restorations were investigated according to modified USPHS criteria. RESULTS: The survival rate of zirconia restorations after 2-8 years (average 5.7 years) of clinical use was 95%. Survival rate of single crowns was 94.2% and of FDPs 95.7%, respectively. The overall complication rate was 26% for FDPs and 5.8% for crowns. One posterior crown was lost due to a vertical root fracture and one FDP showed a framework fracture. Veneering ceramic fractures were detected in 12% of all cases (0% for crowns and 22% for FDPs). Bleeding on probing was present in 38.1% of restored teeth and 13.9% of control teeth. Embrasure space was insufficient in 52% of zirconia FDPs and 81% of these restorations showed elevated BOP values. CONCLUSIONS: Zirconia crowns and FDPs survived well in this retrospective follow-up study. Chipping of veneering ceramic and bleeding on probing were the most common complications. Thick connector areas made according to material demands resulted in insufficient embrasure spaces and inflammation of marginal gingiva.
PURPOSE: To investigate the impact of inlay design and number of retainer wings on the failure load of all-ceramic resin-bonded inlay-retained cantilever fixed dental prostheses (IRCFDPs) made from a computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) yttrium-oxide partially-stabilized zirconia framework(Y-TZP). METHODS: Sixty-four extracted human first molars were divided according to preparation design into four groups. Teeth were provided with IRCFDPs representing a premolar pontic and a retainer of variable design: (R1S) shallow inlay/one lingual retainer wing, (R2S) shallow inlay/two retainer wings (lingual/buccal), (R1D) deep inlay/one lingual retainer wing and (R2D) deep inlay/two retainer wings (lingual/buccal). All IRCFDPs were cemented using adhesive resin. Quasi-static fracture strength (QSFS) was tested for 32 specimens after 3 days in a universal testing machine (UTM). The other specimens were stored in a water bath (150 days/37  degrees C) and thermocycled (37,500 times, 5-55  degrees C); then exposed to dynamic loading in a chewing simulator (50 N/1,200,000 cycles). RESULTS: The median QSFS (N) for the different designs were: R1S:105.1, R1D:167.5, R2S:147.9, R2D:232.3. The number of retainer wings had a statistically significant influence on the fracture load of both groups, whereas the inlay design had an impact only in the double-retainer wing group. Under dynamic loading, lower failure loads within all groups were reported except for the group R2S. The number of retainer wings continued to significantly influence the failure loads of both groups, whereas no influence of inlay design could be revealed. CONCLUSIONS: Double-retainer IRCFDPs showed promising results for replacing single premolars. The inlay design seems to have no significant influence on the fracture strength of these restorations.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Porokeratosis (PK) is a heterogeneous group of cutaneous keratinization disorders and has five clinical subtypes. DSAP is the most common clinical subtype and is characterized by multiple small, annular, anhidrotic, keratotic lesions predominantly on sun-exposed areas of the skin. It is an autosomal dominantly inherited epidermal keratinization disorder. However, studies on its molecular basis is limited. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed mutation analysis of genes in four pedigrees and three sporadic cases of DSAP in the Chinese population. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples obtained from patients, unaffected family members, and 100 unrelated individuals. All exons and flanking intron sequences of the mevalonate kinase (MVK) and farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FDPS) genes were amplified. RESULTS: One missense mutation in exon 7 (C.G677A) of the MVK gene was identified in pedigree 3, and one missense mutation in exon 5 (C.C535T) of the FDPS gene was identified in sporadic case 3. No mutation was detected in the MVK and FDPS genes in the remaining three pedigrees and two sporadic cases with DSAP. CONCLUSION: Our results may be useful for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis of affected families and for expanding the repertoire of MVK and FDPS mutations underlying DSAP.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the marginal and internal fit of CAD/CAM-generated frameworks for 4-unit, fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) from zirconia (Z) and cobalt-chromium alloy (C) made with conventional (CI) and digital impressions (DI). MATERIALS AND METHODS: A titanium model was digitized with an intraoral scanner (DI, LAVA C.O.S.; 3M ESPE; Seefeld, Germany; n = 12). Additionally, 12 conventional impressions were taken, and referring plaster casts were digitized by a laboratory-scanner (CI, LAVA Scan ST; 3M ESPE; n = 12). Frameworks were fabricated (3M ESPE) from cobalt-chromium (DI-C, n = 12; CI-C, n = 12) and zirconia (DI-Z, n = 12; CI-Z, n = 12) from the same datasets. A replica technique was applied to measure the accuracy. The Mann-Whitney U statistical test was applied to detect statistical differences between each material and methodology groups in terms of fit. RESULTS: Frameworks from DI-C (median 19.07 mum) showed significantly better marginal fit than CI-C (median 64.64 mum, p < 0.001). Frameworks from DI-Z (median 52.50 mum) showed significantly better marginal fit than CI-Z (median 72.94 mum, p = 0.001). Additionally, frameworks from DI-C showed a significantly better marginal fit than DI-Z (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: CI and DI led to a clinically acceptable marginal fit of 4-unit FDPs from cobalt-chromium and zirconia. DI leads to better marginal fit of the cobalt-chromium frameworks; however, no effect on zirconia was found. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The results indicate that DI is suitable for fabricating 4-unit, cobalt-chromium and zirconia frameworks with regard to fit requirements.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to assess the relationship between bone mineral density and genotypes of four polymorphisms in previously detected osteoporosis-candidate genes (FDPS rs2297480, LRP5 rs3736228, SOST rs1234612, VKORC1 rs9934438) in postmenopausal Romanian women with primary osteoporosis. METHODS: An analytical, prospective, transversal, observational, case-control study on 364 postmenopausal Romanian women was carried out between June 2016 and August 2017 in Cluj Napoca, Romania. Clinical data and blood samples were collected from all study participants. Four polymorphisms were genotyped using TaqMan SNP Genotyping assays, run on a QuantStudio 3 real-time PCR machine. RESULTS: Women with TT genotype in FDPS rs2297480 had significantly lower bone mineral density values in the lumbar spine and total hip, and the presence of the T allele was significantly associated with the osteoporosis. Women carrying the CC genotype in LRP5 rs3736228 tend to have lower bone mineral density values in the femoral neck and total hip. No significant association was found for the genotypes of SOST rs1234612 or VKORC1 rs9934438. CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed a strong association between bone mineral density and polymorphisms in the FDPS gene, and a borderline association with LRP5 and SOST polymorphisms in postmenopausal Romanian women with osteoporosis. No association was found for VKORC1.
OBJECTIVE: In recent decades, CAD/CAM-fabricated lithium disilicate restorations have become popular and have been approved for fixed dental protheses (FDPs) up to the second premolar since 2013. This multicenter follow-up study collected long-term clinical data on three-unit anterior and premolar FDPs made of lithium disilicate to evaluate the material's suitability over >10 years. METHODS: Thirty-two patients received a total of 32 three-unit anterior or premolar monolithic lithium disilicate FDPs. In exceptional aesthetically demanding cases, the labial cut back technique was used for minimal additional veneering. The study was conducted at University Hospital Aachen and three external private dental practices. Failure was defined as any event leading to the loss of an FDP. The survival and success rates were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method. At the last follow-up examination in 2023 and 2024, 17 of the 32 patients (53,1 %) were re-examined. RESULTS: The average observation period was 10 years and the longest follow-up period was 15 years. The cumulative survival rate after 10 years was 84.4 %. In detail the five failures recorded were due to one fracture of the connector, one repeated loss of retention, two cases of persistent pain and one loss of an abutment tooth. The cumulative success rate was 75 %. CONCLUSION: Within the limitations of this study, lithium disilicate for CAD/CAM manufacturing appears to be a reliable material for full-contour three-unit FDPs, provided that the most posterior abutment tooth does not extend beyond the second premolar and that minimum connector thicknesses are maintained. In aesthetically demanding cases, the labial cut back technique combined with additional veneering can be used. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This study is one of the few to provide long-term data on the clinical performance of three-unit FDPs made from lithium disilicate, specifically examining cases with premolar abutments. The findings highlight the reliability of this material under the specified conditions.
OBJECTIVE: Evaluation of the effect of different framework designs and of fatigue on the fracture-load values of cantilevered fixed dental prostheses (FDPs). The load values were compared with those for lithium disilicate ceramic and metal-ceramic FDPs. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty cantilevered FDPs were manufactured using a zirconia framework veneered with a feldspathic ceramic. Ten FDPs were made from a lithium disilicate ceramic and 10 were designed as metal-ceramic FDPs. All FDPs were anchored by two premolar crowns to replace a missing premolar. Twenty of the 50 zirconia FDPs were regarded as the control groups; these were divided into two groups-with and without fatigue. The other 30 zirconia FDPs were divided into three test groups with different framework designs. The load to fracture was measured and fracture sites were identified. The Kruskal-Wallis test and the Mann-Whitney U-test were used for statistical analysis. RESULTS: Most of the all-ceramic FDPs fractured within the distal wall of the terminal crown abutment. The mean fracture-load ranged between 346-493 N for the FDPs with the 0.7 mm framework. Mean values for the three zirconia test groups ranged from 529-590 N. Reinforcement of the framework resulted in significantly higher fracture-loads than for the control group. Values for lithium disilicate restorations were significantly lower than those for the test groups and the values for the metal-ceramic group were significantly higher than those for the test groups. CONCLUSION: Although reinforcement of the distal crown core might enhance the fracture resistance of all-ceramic cantilever FPDs, they cannot yet be unreservedly recommended for clinical use.
BACKGROUND: In subjects suffering from generalized severe periodontitis, only a few teeth may be treated and used as abutments for fixed dental prostheses (FDPs). OBJECTIVE: To systematically review the impact of severely reduced, but healthy periodontal tissue support on the survival rate and complications of FDPs after a mean follow-up time of at least 5 years. SEARCH STRATEGY: Publications considered for inclusion were searched in MEDLINE (PubMed) and relevant journals were hand searched. The search was performed in duplicate and was limited to human studies published in the dental literature from 1966 up to and including September 2006. Only publications in English, in peer-reviewed journals, were considered. Abstracts were excluded. SELECTION CRITERIA: Prospective and retrospective cohort studies were included. The primary outcome measure included survival rates of FDPs and abutment teeth, whereas biological and technical complications of FDPs and abutment teeth represented secondary outcome measures. DATA ANALYSIS: Summary estimates of survival rates and of biological and technical complications were calculated after 5 and 10 years. RESULTS: The search provided 860 titles of which six publications were included. A total of 579 FDPs were incorporated and followed up to 25 years. Meta-analysis yielded an estimated FDP survival rate of 96.4% [95% confidence interval (95% CI): 94.6-97.6%] after five and of 92.9% (95% CI: 89.5-95.3%) after 10 years, respectively. After 10 years, the estimated rate of abutment teeth without endodontic complications amounted to 93% (95% CI: 62.6-98.9%). The 10-year estimated rate of caries-free abutment teeth was 98.1% (95% CI: 88.2-99.7%). FDPs without loss of retention were estimated to occur in 95.4% (95% CI: 92.6-97.2%) of cases after 10 years. CONCLUSIONS: These results showed that (i) masticatory function could be established and maintained in subjects receiving FDPs on abutment teeth with severely reduced but healthy periodontal tissue support and (ii) FDPs survival rates compared favourably with those of FDPs incorporated in subjects without severely periodontally compromised dentitions.
PURPOSE: To retrospectively evaluate the survival rate and technical and biologic complications of feather-edge zirconia and metal-ceramic implant restorations cemented on conical titanium abutments. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients rehabilitated with implant-supported single crowns or fixed dental prostheses (FDPs) were divided into four groups: ZR-TL = tissue-level implant with a convergent collar and zirconia restoration; ZR-BL = bone-level implant and zirconia restoration; MC-TL = tissue-level implant with a convergent collar and metal-ceramic restoration; MC-BL = bone-level implant and metal-ceramic restoration. All of the restorations were cemented onto conical titanium abutments and had feather-edge margins, following the biologically oriented preparation technique (BOPT). Crown-level survival rates, technical and biologic complications, and bone resorption were registered. Chi-square test was performed to analyze all evaluated parameters among the groups. Nonparametric Mann-Whitney test was performed to analyze changes in bone level. RESULTS: A total of 85 patients (133 implants, 66 single crowns, and 28 FDPs) were included in the present study with a mean follow-up time of 4.98 years. The overall survival rate was 98.2% for zirconia and 97.5% for metal-ceramic restorations at the crown level. No significant differences were found between the zirconia (ZR-BL and ZR-TL) and the metal-ceramic (MC-BL and MC-TL) groups for technical complications (P > .05). Bone resorption was 0.33 (0.37) mm in MC-TL; 0.61 (0.52) mm in MC-BL; 0.39 (0.51) mm in ZR-TL; and 0.77 (0.64) mm in ZR-BL, showing significantly greater bone loss in bone-level implants (P = .011). CONCLUSION: Zirconia implant restorations with feather-edge margins seem to be a viable alternative in cases of both tissue-level and bone-level implants.
