Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for VEGFA, VEGFB and PGF, and plays an essential role in the development of embryonic vasculature, the regulation of angiogenesis, cell survival, cell migration, macrophage function, chemotaxis, and cancer cell invasion. May play an essential role as a negative regulator of embryonic angiogenesis by inhibiting excessive proliferation of endothelial cells. Can promote endothelial cell proliferation, survival and angiogenesis in adulthood. Its function in promoting cell proliferati [...] 
Less than 5 years ago, it was still not clear whether anti-angiogenic drugs would prove successful in the clinic. After numerous patients with cancer or age-related macular degeneration have been treated with these drugs, they have now become part of the standard range of therapeutic tools. Despite this milestone, anti-angiogenic therapy still faces a number of clinical hurdles, such as improving efficacy, avoiding escape and resistance, and minimizing toxicity. Hopefully, other agents with complementary mechanisms, such as those that target placental growth factor, will offer novel opportunities for improved treatment.
Mature mRNA is generated by the 3' end cleavage and polyadenylation of its precursor pre-mRNA. Eukaryotic genes frequently have multiple polyadenylation sites, resulting in mRNA isoforms with different 3'-UTR lengths that often encode different C-terminal amino acid sequences. It is well-known that this form of post-transcriptional modification, termed alternative polyadenylation, can affect mRNA stability, localization, translation, and nuclear export. We focus on the alternative polyadenylation of pre-mRNA for vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1 (VEGFR-1), the receptor for VEGF. VEGFR-1 is a transmembrane protein with a tyrosine kinase in the intracellular region. Secreted forms of VEGFR-1 (sVEGFR-1) are also produced from the same gene by alternative polyadenylation, and sVEGFR-1 has a function opposite to that of VEGFR-1 because it acts as a decoy receptor for VEGF. However, the mechanism that regulates the production of sVEGFR-1 by alternative polyadenylation remains poorly understood. In this review, we introduce and discuss the mechanism of alternative polyadenylation of VEGFR-1 mediated by protein arginine methylation.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has shown great promise as a gene therapy vector in multiple aspects of preclinical and clinical applications. Many developments including new serotypes as well as self-complementary vectors are now entering the clinic. With these ongoing vector developments, continued effort has been focused on scalable manufacturing processes that can efficiently generate high-titer, highly pure, and potent quantities of rAAV vectors. Utilizing the relatively simple and efficient transfection system of HEK293 cells as a starting point, we have successfully adapted an adherent HEK293 cell line from a qualified clinical master cell bank to grow in animal component-free suspension conditions in shaker flasks and WAVE bioreactors that allows for rapid and scalable rAAV production. Using the triple transfection method, the suspension HEK293 cell line generates greater than 1 x 10(5) vector genome containing particles (vg)/cell or greater than 1 x 10(14) vg/l of cell culture when harvested 48 hours post-transfection. To achieve these yields, a number of variables were optimized such as selection of a compatible serum-free suspension media that supports both growth and transfection, selection of a transfection reagent, transfection conditions and cell density. A universal purification strategy, based on ion exchange chromatography methods, was also developed that results in high-purity vector preps of AAV serotypes 1-6, 8, 9 and various chimeric capsids tested. This user-friendly process can be completed within 1 week, results in high full to empty particle ratios (>90% full particles), provides postpurification yields (>1 x 10(13) vg/l) and purity suitable for clinical applications and is universal with respect to all serotypes and chimeric particles. To date, this scalable manufacturing technology has been utilized to manufacture GMP phase 1 clinical AAV vectors for retinal neovascularization (AAV2), Hemophilia B (scAAV8), giant axonal neuropathy (scAAV9), and retinitis pigmentosa (AAV2), which have been administered into patients. In addition, we report a minimum of a fivefold increase in overall vector production by implementing a perfusion method that entails harvesting rAAV from the culture media at numerous time-points post-transfection.
We intended to investigate the underlying mechanism of action of long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) HOX transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR) in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression, especially in tumor cell stemness. For that purpose, different assays were performed such as real-time PCR and western blotting to determine the expression of target genes. Cell stemness was determined by sphere formation assay, flow cytometry assay, and the analysis of stemness-related markers. The interplay among target genes was evaluated using bioinformatics analyses, luciferase reporter and biotin-labeled RNA pull down assays. We found that HOTAIR was highly expressed and predicted poor prognosis survival in CRC. Downregulation of HOTAIR repressed tumor malignant behaviors and cancer stemness. Mechanistically, HOTAIR facilitated the expression of the microRNA (miR)-211-5p target gene fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (FLT-1), thereby modulating cancer stem cell (CSC) properties in CRC. We conclude that HOTAIR/miR-211-5p/FLT-1 axis contributes to CRC cancer stemness.
Angiogenesis plays an important role in cancer progression and involves activation of multiple signaling cascades. This study investigated the relationships between microvessel density, expression of VEGF and VEGFR1 (FLT1), and gastric cancer (GC) recurrence. Twenty-nine surgically treated GC cases with similar initial clinical presentation were selected for the study; 11 of these cases recurred within 3 years, while the remaining 18 did not. Microvessel density correlated with VEGF mRNA content, but neither of these parameters was associated with the disease outcome. When tumors were ranked according to the level of expression of angiogenic molecules, 9 out of 10 cases with the highest VEGFR1 expression belonged to the recurrence group, while none of the 10 GC with the lowest content of VEGFR1 mRNA had the disease relapse (p = 0.000). VEGFR1 expression did not show even a trend to correlation with the level of cancer tissue vascularization. Immunofluorescent staining by anti-VEGFR1 antibody revealed VEGFR1 expression in tumor cells but not in other cell types. Our data provide indirect support to the evidence for a non-angiogenic contribution of VEGFR1 in cancer pathogenesis.
Soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) functions as a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis by trapping vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). However, the precise regulatory mechanism of sFlt-1 production is unknown. Here, we report that vascular sFlt-1 production is regulated by heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein D (hnRNP D) and arginine methylation. We showed that hnRNP D bound to Flt-1 pre-mRNA and that hnRNP D overexpression decreased sFlt-1 mRNA in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs). In contrast, the reduction of hnRNP D levels induced an increase in sFlt-1 production. Overexpression of an hnRNP D mutant in which the arginine residue of the known arginine methylation motif (arginine-glycine-glycine; RGG) was replaced with alanine did not reduce the level of soluble-form RNA produced from the Flt-1 minigene. Moreover, we demonstrated that overexpression of arginine methyltransferase decreased the soluble-form RNA level, whereas overexpression of arginine demethylase and addition of methyltransferase inhibitors increased sFlt-1 mRNA levels. These findings indicate that hnRNP D and arginine methylation play important roles in the regulation of Flt-1 mRNA alternative polyadenylation.
Endothelial dysfunction is a hallmark of preeclampsia, a life-threatening complication of pregnancy characterised by hypertension and elevated soluble Fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase-1 (sFlt-1). Dysregulation of hydrogen sulfide (H(2)S) by inhibition of cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE) increases sFlt-1 and soluble endoglin (sEng) release. We explored whether compromise in CSE/H(2)S pathway is linked to dysregulation of the mitochondrial bioenergetics and oxidative status. We investigated whether these effects were linked to CSE-induced sFlt-1 and sEng production in endothelial cells. Here, we demonstrate that CSE/H(2)S pathway sustain endothelial mitochondrial bioenergetics and loss of CSE increases the production of mitochondrial-specific superoxide. As a compensatory effect, low CSE environment enhances the reliance on glycolysis. The mitochondrial-targeted H(2)S donor, AP39, suppressed the antiangiogenic response and restored the mitochondrial bioenergetics in endothelial cells. AP39 revealed that upregulation of sFlt-1, but not sEng, is independent of the mitochondrial H(2)S metabolising enzyme, SQR. These data provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms for antiangiogenic upregulation in a mitochondrial-driven environment. Targeting H(2)S to the mitochondria may be of therapeutic benefit in the prevention of endothelial dysfunction associated with preeclampsia.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a potent angiogenic molecule specific for vascular endothelial cells, is overexpressed in most tumors and closely associated with tumor growth and metastasis. It has been shown that a soluble fragment of VEGF receptor Flt-1 (sFlt-1) has anti-angiogenic properties by way of its antagonist activity against VEGF. In the present study, we demonstrated that the stable expression of sFlt-1 by endothelial cell targeted non-viral gene delivery inhibited the angiogenesis of endothelial cells. A targeted polymeric gene delivery system, PEI-g-PEG-RGD, was developed by incorporating the alphanubeta3/alphanubeta5 integrin-binding RGD peptide, ACDCRGDCFC (single-letter amino acid code), into the cationic polymer, polyethylenimine (PEI) via a hydrophilic polyethylene glycol (PEG) spacer. The functional analysis of therapeutic gene encoding sFlt-1/carrier complex was performed with an endothelial cell proliferation assay. The complex of sFlt-1 gene with PEI-g-PEG-RGD conjugate efficiently inhibited the proliferation of cultured endothelial cells, representing that expressed sFlt-1 predominantly bound to exogenous VEGF and blocked the binding of VEGF to the full-length Flt-1 receptor. These findings suggest that the combination of targeted gene carrier and sFlt-1 possesses the potential to be an efficient tool for the anti-angiogenic gene therapy to treat cancer.
