Receptor-type tyrosine-protein kinase FLT3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for the cytokine FLT3LG and regulates differentiation, proliferation and survival of hematopoietic progenitor cells and of dendritic cells. Promotes phosphorylation of SHC1 and AKT1, and activation of the downstream effector MTOR. Promotes activation of RAS signaling and phosphorylation of downstream kinases, including MAPK1/ERK2 and/or MAPK3/ERK1. Promotes phosphorylation of FES, FER, PTPN6/SHP, PTPN11/SHP-2, PLCG1, and STAT5A and/or STAT5B. Activation of wild-type FLT3 causes only m [...] 
FLT3 mutations are the most common genetic aberrations found in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and associated with poor prognosis. Since the discovery of FLT3 mutations and their prognostic implications, multiple FLT3-targeted molecules have been evaluated. Midostaurin is approved in the U.S. and Europe for newly diagnosed FLT3 mutated AML in combination with standard induction and consolidation chemotherapy based on data from the RATIFY study. Gilteritinib is approved for relapsed or refractory FLT3 mutated AML as monotherapy based on the ADMIRAL study. Although significant progress has been made in the treatment of AML with FLT3-targeting, many challenges remain. Several drug resistance mechanisms have been identified, including clonal selection, stromal protection, FLT3-associated mutations, and off-target mutations. The benefit of FLT3 inhibitor maintenance therapy, either post-chemotherapy or post-transplant, remains controversial, although several studies are ongoing.
Genomic investigations of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have demonstrated that several genes are recurrently mutated, leading to new genomic classifications, predictive biomarkers, and new therapeutic targets. Mutations of the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) gene occur in approximately 30% of all AML cases, with the internal tandem duplication (ITD) representing the most common type of FLT3 mutation (FLT3-ITD; approximately 25% of all AML cases). FLT3-ITD is a common driver mutation that presents with a high leukemic burden and confers a poor prognosis in patients with AML. The prognostic value of a FLT3 mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain (FLT3-TKD), which has a lower incidence in AML (approximately 7-10% of all cases), is uncertain. Accumulating evidence demonstrates that FLT3 mutational status evolves throughout the disease continuum. This so-called clonal evolution, together with the identification of FLT3-ITD as a negative prognostic marker, serves to highlight the importance of FLT3-ITD testing at diagnosis and again at relapse. Earlier identification of FLT3 mutations will help provide a better understanding of the patient's disease and enable targeted treatment that may help patients achieve longer and more durable remissions. First-generation FLT3 inhibitors developed for clinical use are broad-spectrum, multikinase inhibitors; however, next-generation FLT3 inhibitors are more specific, more potent, and have fewer toxicities associated with off-target effects. Primary and secondary acquired resistance to FLT3 inhibitors remains a challenge and provides a rationale for combining FLT3 inhibitors with other therapies, both conventional and investigational. This review focuses on the pathological and prognostic role of FLT3 mutations in AML, clinical classification of the disease, recent progress with next-generation FLT3 inhibitors, and mechanisms of resistance to FLT3 inhibitors.
Resistance to FLT3 inhibition is a prevalent challenge in managing FLT3-mutant acute myeloid leukemia (AML). A recent study by Sabatier et al. discovered ferroptosis vulnerability in FLT3-mutant AML and they propose a promising therapeutic approach of combining FLT3 inhibitors with ferroptosis inducers for treating this type of cancer.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to summarize the pathophysiology, clinical presentation, and management of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) mutations. RECENT FINDINGS: The recent European Leukemia Net (ELN2022) recommendations re-classified AML with FLT3 internal tandem duplications (FLT3-ITD) as intermediate risk regardless of Nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1) co-mutation or the FLT3 allelic ratio. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation (alloHCT) is now recommended for all eligible patients with FLT3-ITD AML. This review outlines the role of FLT3 inhibitors in induction and consolidation, as well as for post-alloHCT maintenance. It outlines the unique challenges and advantages of assessing FLT3 measurable residual disease (MRD) and discusses the pre-clinical basis for the combination of FLT3 and menin inhibitors. And, for the older or unfit patient ineligible for upfront intensive chemotherapy, it discusses the recent clinical trials incorporating FLT3 inhibitors into azacytidine- and venetoclax-based regimens. Finally, it proposes a rational sequential approach for integrating FLT3 inhibitors into less intensive regimens, with a focus on improved tolerability in the older and unfit patient population. The management of AML with FLT3 mutation remains a challenge in clinical practice. This review provides an update on the pathophysiology and therapeutic landscape of FLT3 AML, as well as a clinical management framework for managing the older or unfit patient ineligible for intensive chemotherapy.
Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is frequently mutated in haematological malignancies. Although canonical FLT3 mutations including internal tandem duplications (ITDs) and tyrosine kinase domains (TKDs) have been extensively studied, little is known about the clinical significance of non-canonical FLT3 mutations. Here, we first profiled the spectrum of FLT3 mutations in 869 consecutively newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), myelodysplastic syndrome and acute lymphoblastic leukaemia patients. Our results showed four types of non-canonical FLT3 mutations depending on the affected protein structure: namely non-canonical point mutations (NCPMs) (19.2%), deletion (0.7%), frameshift (0.8%) and ITD outside the juxtamembrane domain (JMD) and TKD1 regions (0.5%). Furthermore, we found that the survival of patients with high-frequency (>1%) FLT3-NCPM in AML was comparable to those with canonical TKD. In vitro studies using seven representative FLT3-deletion or frameshift mutant constructs showed that the deletion mutants of TKD1 and the FLT3-ITD mutant of TKD2 had significantly higher kinase activity than wild-type FLT3, whereas the deletion mutants of JMD had phosphorylation levels comparable with wild-type FLT3. All tested deletion mutations and ITD were sensitive to AC220 and sorafenib. Collectively, these data enrich our understanding of FLT3 non-canonical mutations in haematological malignancies. Our results may also facilitate prognostic stratification and targeted therapy of AML with FLT3 non-canonical mutations.
FLT3 is the most frequently mutated gene in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), with FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutations being associated with a more aggressive clinical course. While two large, randomized clinical trials have shown a survival benefit with the frontline use of an oral FLT3 inhibitor (midostaurin or quizartinib) in patients with FLT3-mutated AML, the role of FLT3 inhibitors in older adults with newly diagnosed FLT3-mutated AML remains unclear. A definitive improvement in survival has not been observed in intensively treated patients over 60 years of age receiving frontline FLT3 inhibitors. Furthermore, many patients with FLT3-mutated AML are unsuitable for intensive chemotherapy due to age and/or comorbidities, and this population represents a particular unmet need. For these older patients who are unfit for intensive approaches, azacitidine + venetoclax is a new standard of care and is used by many clinicians irrespective of FLT3 mutation status. However, FLT3-ITD mutations confer resistance to venetoclax and are a well-established mechanism of relapse to lower-intensity venetoclax-based regimens, leading to short durations of remission and poor survival. Preclinical and clinical data suggest synergy between FLT3 inhibitors and venetoclax, providing rationale for their combination. Novel strategies to safely incorporate FLT3 inhibitors into the standard hypomethylating agent + venetoclax backbone are now being explored in this older, less fit population with newly diagnosed FLT3-mutated AML, with encouraging early results. Herein, we discuss the frontline use of FLT3 inhibitors in older adults with FLT3-mutated AML, including the potential role of FLT3 inhibitors in combination with intensive chemotherapy and as part of novel, lower-intensity doublet and triplet regimens in this older population.
Midostaurin was recently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of FLT3-mutant acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This is the first drug to receive regulatory approval for AML in the United States since the year 2000. Midostaurin is a small-molecule kinase inhibitor with activity against the receptor tyrosine kinase FLT3, and its approval will hopefully mark the beginning of an era of targeted agents for the treatment of molecularly defined subtypes of AML.
Determining which FLT3 inhibitor holds the greatest promise is a difficult task, as the drugs vary according to potency, specificity, protein-binding, drug interactions, and side effect profile. The best choice depends on when in the course of the disease the inhibitor will be used. Moreover, as the results of ongoing trials become available, newer agents could supplant former 'best' drugs. This paper reviews FLT3 inhibitors in combination with chemotherapy early in the disease in FLT3 mutant patients, as single agents or in combination in advanced disease, or in the post-transplant setting to provide separate answers to the main question.
Internal tandem duplication mutations of FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) have been associated with poor outcomes in acute myelogenous leukemia. Over the course of the last several years, multiple agents have been developed and studied as potential inhibitors of FLT3 with the hope of providing clinical benefit for these patients. Lestaurtinib, a multi-targeted indolocarbazole derivative that potently inhibits FLT3 autophosphorylation in vitro, has been the most extensively studied agent in clinical trials to date. Multiple late-phase trials are underway to study this agent in adult and pediatric leukemia. This article will summarize the historical development of the pharmacology of lestaurtinib, as well as the ongoing investigation of the agent in preclinical and clinical studies.
Recent advances in FLT3 and IDH targeted inhibition have improved response rates and overall survival in patients with mutations affecting these respective proteins. Despite this success, resistance mechanisms have arisen including mutations that disrupt inhibitor-target interaction, mutations impacting alternate pathways, and changes in the microenvironment. Here we review the role of these proteins in leukemogenesis, their respective inhibitors, mechanisms of resistance, and briefly ongoing studies aimed at overcoming resistance.
Three receptor molecules, belonging to the class III of receptor tyrosine kinases, namely the receptors for colony-stimulating factor 1, CSF1R (product of the FMS proto-oncogene) and Steel factor, SLFR (product of the KIT proto-oncogene), as well as the recently identified FLT3/FLK2 gene product, appear to play distinct roles in normal hematopoietic differentiation. Their potential role in leukemic hematopoiesis has been approached by expression studies in hematopoietic malignancies, especially in acute leukemias of the myeloid and lymphoid lineages. We present here a review of available data, and discuss the possible significance and potential applications of these results.
Patients with FLT3-mutated AML have a high relapse rate and suboptimal outcomes. Many have co-mutations suitable for measurable residual disease (MRD) monitoring by RT-qPCR and those destined to relapse can be identified by high or rising levels of MRD, called molecular failure.  This provides a window for pre-emptive intervention, but there is little evidence to guide treatment. The use of FLT3 inhibitors (FLT3i) appears attractive but their use has not yet been evaluated.  We identified 56 patients treated with FLT3i at molecular failure.  The FLT3 mutation was an ITD in 52, TKD in 7 and both in 3. Over half of patients had previously received midostaurin. Molecular failure occurred at a median 9.2 months from diagnosis and was treated with gilteritinib (n = 38), quizartinib (n = 7) or sorafenib (n = 11). 60% achieved a molecular response, with 45% reaching MRD negativity. Haematological toxicity was low, and 22 patients were bridged directly to allogeneic transplant with another 6 to donor lymphocyte infusion. 2-year overall survival was 80% (95%CI 69-93) and molecular event-free survival 56% (95%CI 44-72). High-sensitivity next-generation sequencing for FLT3-ITD at molecular failure identified patients more likely to benefit. FLT3i monotherapy for molecular failure is a promising strategy which merits evaluation in prospective studies.
FLT3-mutated acute myeloid leukemia (AML), despite not being recognized as a distinct entity in the World Health Organization (WHO) classification system, is readily recognized as a particular challenge by clinical specialists who treat acute leukemia. This is especially true with regards to the patients harboring the most common type of FLT3 mutation, the internal tandem duplication (FLT3-ITD) mutation. Here we present 4 patient cases from our institution and discuss how our management reflects what we have learned about this subtype of the disease. We also reflect on how we anticipate the management might change in the near future, with the emergence of clinically useful tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Normal haematopoietic cells use complex systems to control proliferation, differentiation and cell death. The control of proliferation is, in part, accomplished through the ligand-induced stimulation of receptor tyrosine kinases, which signal to downstream effectors through the RAS pathway. Recently, mutations in the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) gene, which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, have been found to be the most common genetic lesion in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), occurring in approximately 25% of cases. Exploring the mechanism by which these FLT3 mutations cause uncontrolled proliferation might lead to a better understanding of how cells become cancerous and provide insights for the development of new drugs.
