Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for VEGFC and VEGFD, and plays an essential role in adult lymphangiogenesis and in the development of the vascular network and the cardiovascular system during embryonic development. Promotes proliferation, survival and migration of endothelial cells, and regulates angiogenic sprouting. Signaling by activated FLT4 leads to enhanced production of VEGFC, and to a lesser degree VEGFA, thereby creating a positive feedback loop that enhances FLT4 signaling. Modulates KDR signaling by  [...] 
Macrophages rapidly undergo glycolytic reprogramming in response to macroautophagy/autophagy, inflammasome activation and pyroptosis for the clearance of bacteria. Identification the key molecules involved in these three events will provide critical potential therapeutic applications. Upon S. typhimurium infection, FLT4/VEGFR3 and its ligand VEGFC were inducibly expressed in macrophages, and FLT4 signaling inhibited CASP1 (caspase 1)-dependent inflammasome activation and pyroptosis but enhanced MAP1LC3/LC3 activation for elimination of the bacteria. Consistently, FLT4 mutants lacking the extracellular ligand-binding domain increased production of the proinflammatory metabolites such as succinate and lactate, and reduced antimicrobial metabolites including citrate and NAD(P)H in macrophages and liver upon infection. Mechanistically, FLT4 recruited AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and phosphorylated Y247 and Y441/442 in the PRKAA/alpha subunit for AMPK activation. The AMPK agonist AICAR could rescue glycolytic reprogramming and inflammasome activation in macrophages expressing the mutant FLT4, which has potential translational application in patients carrying Flt4 mutations to prevent recurrent infections. Collectively, we have elucidated that the FLT4-AMPK module in macrophages coordinates glycolytic reprogramming, autophagy, inflammasome activation and pyroptosis to eliminate invading bacteria.Abbreviations: 3-MA: 3-methyladenine; AICAR: 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide1-beta-D-ribofuranoside; AMP: adenosine monophosphate; AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; ATP: adenosine triphosphate; BMDM: bone marrow-derived macrophage; CASP1: caspase 1; CFUs: colony-forming units; FLT4/VEGFR3: FMS-like tyrosine kinase 4; GFP: green fluorescent protein; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; PEM: peritoneal exudate macrophage; PRKAA1/AMPKalpha1: protein kinase, AMP-activated, alpha 1 catalytic subunit; PYCARD/ASC: PYD and CARD domain containing; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TLR4: toll-like receptor 4; ULK1: unc-51 like autophagy activating kinase 1; VEGFC: vascular endothelial growth factor C; WT: wild type.
Milroy disease is an autosomal dominant disorder generally presenting with below the knee lymphedema at birth. It is linked to mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the VEGFR3 protein which is encoded in the FLT4 gene. Here we report a case of Milroy disease in a patient with a dominant pattern of inheritance, classical physical findings, and lymphatic system imaging demonstrating lack of tracer transport in the lower limbs. Genetic analysis revealed a novel missense mutation compared to a summary of reported mutations causing Milroy Disease.
Hereditary lymphedema type I (Milroy disease) is a rare autosomal dominant disease resulting from mutations of FLT4 encoding the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3. Patients develop edema of the legs and feet, resulting in chronic swelling of the lower extremities from the neonatal period. Here we report a Japanese family with 10 affected members of five generations of hereditary lymphedema type I. We identified a previously reported missense mutation of G857R in one allele of FLT4 from three affected individuals of three generations, the mother of whom presented only hemi-lymphedema of the left foot. Thus, the clinical features of hereditary lymphedema type I caused by a FLT4 mutation are heterogeneous and it would be appropriate to consider FLT4 mutations even in a patient with hemi-lymphedema of the foot.
Previously, we found that dysfunctional natural killer (NK) cells with low interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) were restored in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by the FLT4 antagonist MAZ51. Here, we developed 12 peptides targeting FLT4 for clinical application and examined whether they restored the frequency of lymphocytes, especially T cells and NK cells, and high IFN-gamma expression, as MAZ51 treatment did in our previous study. Although clinical data from using peptides are currently available, peptides targeting FLT4 to modulate immune cells have not been fully elucidated. In this study, we focus on novel peptide 4 (P4) from the intracellular domain of FLT4 because it had dominant negative activity. Similar to MAZ51, high IFN-gamma levels were expressed in AML-mononuclear cells exposed to P4. Additionally, T and NK cell levels were restored, as were high IFN-gamma levels, in a leukemic environment when P4 was treated. Interestingly, the regulatory T cells were significantly decreased by P4, implying the role of peptide in tumor niche. Overall, we demonstrated the therapeutic value of functionally modulating lymphocytes using a peptide targeting FLT4 and proposed the development of advanced therapeutic approaches against AML by using immune cells.
Milroy disease is a congenital onset lymphedema linked to FLT4 gene mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain. So far, a total of 59 different FLT4 variants have been identified. Here, we report a novel FLT4 gene mutation in a Chinese family with Milroy disease and present their clinical symptoms and MR lymphangiographic findings.
Lymphatic filariasis is the leading cause of secondary lymphedema wherein lymph transport is impaired due to lymphatic damage. FLT4 signaling and transcription factors such as FOXC2 play an important role in this type of lymphangiogenesis process induced by filarial parasites. The present study aims to assess the association of FLT4 and FOXC2 genes in lymphatic development/remodeling in lymphatic filariasis. A total of 118 lymphatic filariasis patients and 100 non-endemic and 50 endemic healthy subjects were enrolled for the present study. Allele-specific PCR and PCR-RFLP were adopted for the genotyping, and screening of FLT4 and FOXC2 genes was carried out by PCR-SSCP, followed by in-silico and statistical analysis. A novel variation (G357A SNP) was identified on FOXC2 gene screening that may have an effect on codon usage frequency during translational process. In FLT4, A3123G mutation was found in 3.39% of the case subjects but the functional role of this mutation, along with subject's clinical presentations and patient's age, emphasize its pathogenic role in lymphedema development. Two of the subjects exhibit compound heterozygosity (A3123G FLT4 mutation and G357A SNP of FOXC2 gene). As these two genes share a common pathway, we hypothesise a synergistic interaction of these two SNPs in inhibiting the downstream signaling resulting in lymphedema progression.
This study explored mutations in the Fms-related tyrosine kinase 4/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 gene (FLT4) and lymphatic defects in patients with Milroy disease (MD). Twenty-nine patients with lower limb lymphedema were enrolled. Sixteen patients had a familial history of MD, while 13 patients exhibited sporadic MD. Clinical signs, FLT4 mutations, indocyanine green (ICG) lymphography findings, and skin tissue immunohistochemical staining results were evaluated. Twenty-eight variants in FLT4 were identified. Twelve of these have previously been reported, while 16 are novel. Of the 28 variants, 26 are missense mutations, and the remaining two comprise a splicing mutation and a non-frame shift mutation. Twenty-five variants are located in the intracellular protein tyrosine kinase domain; three are located in the extracellular immunoglobulin domain. Substantially delayed contrast-enhanced tortuous lymphatic vessels were visualized to the ankle or knee level in 15 of 23 patients who underwent ICG lymphography. No initial lymphatic vessels were visualized in skin specimens from four patients who did not exhibit lymphatic vessels during imaging analyses. No specific variant was identified in relation to the unique clinical phenotype. Segmental dysfunction of lymphatic vessels and initial lymphatic aplasia are present in MD patients with FLT4 mutations.
BACKGROUND: Hereditary lymphedema 1 is a rare congenital condition, characterized by the development of chronic swelling in body parts. It is highly variable in expression and age of onset with different presentations: from feet edema to hydrops fetalis. This affection is genetically heterogeneous with autosomal dominant inheritance and incomplete penetrance due to a mutation in the FLT4 gene in most cases. CASES: In our study, we report on two fetuses harboring congenital lymphedema with FLT4 variation and review the prenatal confirmed ones of the literatures. Our cases were selected within fetuses explored by exome sequencing in a diagnosis setting. Prenatal ultrasonography showed hydrops fetalis in one case and an increased nuchal translucency with hydrothorax in the other. Comparative genomic hybridization array on amniocentesis was normal in both cases. Exome sequencing identified a variation p.(Ser1275Thr) and p.(Ser1275Arg) in fetus 1 and fetus 2 in the FLT4 gene, respectively. A de novo mutation at the same codon was reported in prenatal literature suggesting possible genotype phenotype correlation. CONCLUSION: Cystic hygroma/hydrops fetalis are possible manifestations of several disorders. This study illustrates how the integration of exome sequencing in prenatal clinical practice can facilitate the diagnosis and genetic counseling of heterogeneous developmental affections.
Atypical vascular lesions (AVLs) and angiosarcomas (ASs) are well-recognized complications of radiotherapy for breast cancer. Early diagnosis may be challenging, particularly on small biopsies, and the treatment options are limited. Recently, MYC and sometimes FLT4 gene amplification has been reported in AS, but not in AVL, and FLT4 may be a target for therapy. We evaluated the MYC/FLT4 status in AVL and AS by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), determined its utility in differentiating these 2 entities in small biopsies, and ascertained the value of FLT4 as a potential marker for targeted therapy. Thirty-five vascular neoplasms were reviewed from 21 breast cancer patients who received radiotherapy (AVL, n = 18; AS, n = 17). MYC expression by IHC and/or gene amplification by FISH were identified in 13 (77%) of 17 ASs, but none of the AVL cases. Four patients had biopsies with follow-up excisions, of which 1 showed the morphology of an AVL on biopsy and AS on excision, both positive for MYC. Of 17 ASs, 3 (18%) showed strong and diffuse 3+ cytoplasmic FLT4 staining by IHC and FLT4 gene amplification by FISH. All 3 cases were coamplified for the MYC gene. Focal and weak FLT4 cytoplasmic immunoreactivity was present in 2 (12%) of 17 AVL cases and 12 (70%) of 17 AS cases. Although MYC is a valuable ancillary tool in distinguishing AS from AVL, FLT4 IHC may be used to screen for patients with FLT4 gene amplification who might benefit from targeted therapy, as only diffuse strong FLT4 immunoreactivity correlated with FLT4 gene amplification.
