Tyrosine-protein kinase Fyn; Non-receptor tyrosine-protein kinase that plays a role in many biological processes including regulation of cell growth and survival, cell adhesion, integrin-mediated signaling, cytoskeletal remodeling, cell motility, immune response and axon guidance. Inactive FYN is phosphorylated on its C-terminal tail within the catalytic domain. Following activation by PKA, the protein subsequently associates with PTK2/FAK1, allowing PTK2/FAK1 phosphorylation, activation and targeting to focal adhesions. Involved in the regulation of cell adhesion and motility through  [...] 
BACKGROUND: Tyrosine kinase Fyn is a member of the Src family of kinases. In addition to the wild type, three mRNA splice isoforms of Fyn have been identified; Fyn-B, Fyn-T, and Fyn-C. Fyn-T is highly expressed in T lymphocytes, and its expression level is significantly higher in mature T cells than in immature T cells. The abnormal expression of Fyn is closely related to the metabolism, proliferation, and migration of tumor cells. Recent studies have shown that Fyn is expressed in a variety of tumor tissues, and its expression and function vary among different tumors. In some tumors, Fyn acts as a pro-oncogene to promote tumor proliferation and metastasis. Moreover, Fyn mutations have been detected in many hematological tumors in recent years, suggesting a critical regulatory role of Fyn in the development of malignancies. METHODS: This review analyzed the relevant literature in PubMed and other databases. PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to systemically review recent research findings on various aspects of Fyn in the pathogenesis and treatment of different types of hematological malignancies and suggests possible future research directions for targeted tumor therapy. CONCLUSION: Fyn could be a novel prognostic marker and therapeutic target. Treatment option targeting Fyn might be beneficial for future studies.
The tyrosine kinase Fyn is a member of the SRC family of kinases, and its sustained activation is closely linked to tumor cell migration, proliferation, and cell metabolism. Recently, Fyn has been found to be expressed in various tumor tissues, and the expression and function of Fyn vary between tumors, with Fyn acting as an oncogene to promote proliferation and metastasis in some tumors. This article summarizes the recent studies on the role of Fyn in different human tumors, focusing on the role of Fyn in melanoma, breast cancer, glioma, lung cancer, and peripheral T-cell lymphoma in order to provide a basis for future research and targeted therapy in different human tumors.
Fyn is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase that belongs to the Src family kinases (SFKs) which under normal physiological conditions is involved in signal transduction pathways in the nervous system, as well as the development and activation of T lymphocytes. In cancer, Fyn contributes to the development and progression of several cancer types through its involvement in the control of cell growth, death, morphogenic transformation and cellular motility. Enhanced expression and/or activation of Fyn is observed in various cancers, including melanoma, glioblastoma, squamous cell carcinoma, prostate and breast cancers. Recent studies have demonstrated the importance of Fyn in the resistance or susceptibility of cancer cells to some anti-cancer treatments. We have recently shown that Fyn is upregulated in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cell lines and demonstrated that it plays a key role in the resistance mechanism. Further, we found that the cellular localization of Fyn within cancer cells of primary ER+ breast tumor tissue may serve as a prognostic marker. Understanding the role of Fyn in initiation and progression of cancer and its contribution to resistance against anti-cancer therapeutic agents may facilitate the development and use of novel drugs targeting Fyn for better management of malignancies.
Src family protein kinases (SFKs) play a key role in cell adhesion, invasion, proliferation, survival, apoptosis, and angiogenesis during tumor development. In humans, SFKs consists of eight family members with similar structure and function. There is a high level of overexpression or hyperactivity of SFKs in tumor, and they play an important role in multiple signaling pathways involved in tumorigenesis. FYN is a member of the SFKs that regulate normal cellular processes. Additionally, FYN is highly expressed in many cancers and promotes cancer growth and metastasis through diverse biological functions such as cell growth, apoptosis, and motility migration, as well as the development of drug resistance in many tumors. Moreover, FYN is involved in the regulation of multiple cancer-related signaling pathways, including interactions with ERK, COX-2, STAT5, MET and AKT. FYN is therefore an attractive therapeutic target for various tumor types, and suppressing FYN can improve the prognosis and prolong the life of patients. The purpose of this review is to provide an overview of FYN's structure, expression, upstream regulators, downstream substrate molecules, and biological functions in tumors.
Src homology 2 (SH2) domains are key modulators in various signaling pathways allowing the recognition of phosphotyrosine sites of different proteins. Despite the fact that SH2 domains acquire their biological functions in a monomeric state, a multitude of reports have shown their tendency to dimerize. Here, we provide a technical description on how to isolate and characterize by gel filtration, circular dichroism (CD), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) each conformational state of p59(fyn) SH2 domain.
Fyn kinase is a member of the Src non-receptor tyrosine kinase family. Fyn is involved in multiple signaling pathways extending from cell proliferation and differentiation to cell adhesion and cell motility, and it has been found to be overexpressed in various types of cancers. In the central nervous system, Fyn exerts several different functions such as axon-glial signal transduction, oligodendrocyte maturation, and myelination, and it is implicated in neuroinflammatory processes. Based on these premises, Fyn emerges as an attractive target in cancer and neurodegenerative disease therapy, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD), based on its activation by Abeta via cellular prion protein and its interaction with tau protein. However, Fyn is also a challenging target since the Fyn inhibitors discovered so far, due to the relevant homology of Fyn with other kinases, suffer from off-target effects. This review covers the efforts performed in the last decade to identify and optimize small molecules that effectively inhibit Fyn, both in enzymatic and in cell assays, including drug repositioning practices, as an opportunity for therapeutic intervention in neurodegeneration.
Ischemic stroke caused by arterial occlusion is the most common type of stroke and is one of the leading causes of disability and death, with the incidence increasing each year. Fyn is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase belonging to the Src family of kinases (SFKs), which is related to many normal and pathological processes of the nervous system, including neurodevelopment and disease progression. In recent years, more and more evidence suggests that Fyn may be closely related to cerebral ischemia-reperfusion, including energy metabolism disorders, excitatory neurotoxicity, intracellular calcium homeostasis, free radical production, and the activation of apoptotic genes. This paper reviews the role of Fyn in the pathological process of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion, including neuroexcitotoxicity and neuroinflammation, to explore how Fyn affects specific signal cascades and leads to cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury. In addition, Fyn also promotes the production of superoxide and endogenous NO, so as to quickly react to produce peroxynitrite, which may also mediate cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury, which is discussed in this paper. Finally, we revealed the treatment methods related to Fyn inhibitors and discussed its potential as a clinical treatment for ischemic stroke.
The putative membrane protein U24 from HHV-6A shares a seven-residue sequence identity (which includes a PxxP motif) with myelin basic protein (MBP), a protein responsible for the compaction of the myelin sheath in the central nervous system. U24 from HHV-6A also shares a PPxY motif with U24 from the related virus HHV-7, allowing them both to block early endosomal recycling. Recently, MBP has been shown to have protein-protein interactions with a range of proteins, including proteins containing SH3 domains. Given that this interaction is mediated by the proline-rich segment in MBP, and that similar proline-rich segments are found in U24, we investigate here whether U24 also interacts with SH3 domain-containing proteins and what the nature of that interaction might be. The implications of a U24-Fyn tyrosine kinase SH3 domain interaction are discussed in terms of the hypothesis that U24 may function like MBP through molecular mimicry, potentially contributing to the disease state of multiple sclerosis or other demyelinating disorders.
The balance of cellular energy levels in response to changes of nutrient availability, stress stimuli or exercise is a critical step in maintaining tissue and whole body homeostasis. Disruption of this balance is associated with various pathologies, including the metabolic syndrome. Recently, accumulating evidence has demonstrated that the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) plays a central role in sensing changes in energy levels. The regulation of AMPK activity is currently the subject of significant investigation since this enzyme is a potential therapeutic target in both metabolic disorders and tumorigenesis. In this review, we present novel evidence of crosstalk between Fyn, one member of the Src kinase family, and AMPK.
