Gamma-aminobutyric acid type B receptor subunit 2; Component of a heterodimeric G-protein coupled receptor for GABA, formed by GABBR1 and GABBR2. Within the heterodimeric GABA receptor, only GABBR1 seems to bind agonists, while GABBR2 mediates coupling to G proteins. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase, stimulates phospholipase A2, activates potassium channels, inactivates voltage-depend [...] 
During latent infection, the HSV-1 virus generates only a single transcript, LAT, which encodes six miRNAs. The GABAergic pathway signaling system is an essential cell signaling pathway influenced by various therapeutic targets and some brain disorders, such as epilepsy. This study found that miRNAs encoding LAT might target the STXBP1 and GABBR2 genes, which are among the significant genes in the GABAergic pathway. Bioinformatic analysis utilizing TargetScan version 5.2 and the RNA22 tools uncovered miRNAs encoding LAT that can influence STXBP1 and GABBR2 transcripts. To evaluate the targeting effect of candidate microRNAs encoding LAT, namely, miR-H3 and miR-H4, LAT constructs were transfected into HEK 293T cells. The expression levels of microRNAs encoding LAT, as well as STXBP1 and GABBR2, were assayed by real-time PCR. Finally, the targeting potential of STXBP1 and GABBR2 3'UTR by LAT-encoded microRNAs was evaluated by the luciferase assay. In the current study, the bioinformatic tool TargetScan demonstrated that miR-H3 has the potential to target the transcripts of the STXBP1 and GABBR2 genes, whereas miR-H4 solely targeted GABBR2. On the other hand, the bioinformatic tool RNA22 validated the potential targeting of STXBP1 and GABBR2 by miR-H3 and miR-H4. Our findings showed that overexpression of miR-H4, miR-H3, or LAT significantly decreased STXBP1 gene expression by an average of 0.0593-fold, 0.237-fold, and 0.84-fold, respectively. Similarly, overexpression of miR-H3 or miR-H4 decreased GABBR2 expression by an average of 0.055- or 0.687-fold, respectively. Notably, targeting the GABBR2 3'UTR with the LAT transcript had no detectable effect. The evaluation of the targeting potential of STXBP1 and GABBR2 3'UTR by microRNAs encoded by LAT was conducted with a luciferase assay. Our results showed that miR-H3 overexpression reduces Renilla expression in psiCHECK2 plasmids with STXBP1 or GABBR2 3'UTR genes by 0.62- and 0.55-fold, respectively. miR-H4 reduced Renilla gene expression regulated by GABBR2's 3'UTR plasmid but had no effect on the Renilla gene expression regulated by STXBP1's 3'UTR. When the LAT transcript was overexpressed, there was a decrease in Renilla expression by 0.44-fold because of the regulation of STXBP1's 3'UTR. However, there was no significant effect observed through the control of GABBR2's 3'UTR.
BACKGROUND: De novo mutations in the GABBR2 (Gamma-Aminobutyric acid Type B Receptor Subunit 2) gene have recently been reported to be associated with a form of early-infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE59; OMIM# 617904), as well as a Rett syndrome (RTT)-like disorder defined as a neurodevelopmental disorder with poor language and loss of hand skills (NDPLHS; OMIM# 617903). METHODS: We describe a pediatric case carrying a de novo GABBR2 pathogenic variant and showing a phenotype encompassing RTT, epilepsy, generalized hypotonia with a paroxysmal limb dystonia. RESULTS: A 11-year-old girl, born to non-consanguineous parents after an uneventful pregnancy, had developmental delay and generalized hypotonia. At age 3.5 months she presented with infantile spasms with an electroencephalographic pattern of hypsarrhythmia. After treatment with clonazepam and prednisolone, she became seizure-free with a slow background electrical activity. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal. Paroxysmal dystonic posturing of the extremities, especially the upper limbs, have been observed since the age of 3 years. Motor stereotypies, non-epileptic episodes of hyperventilation and breath-holding were also reported. The girl suffered from feeding difficulties requiring gastrostomy at the age of 8. Exome sequencing (ES) revealed a de novo GABBR2 pathogenic variant (NM_005458:c.G2077T:p.G693W). CONCLUSION: Paroxysmal limb dystonias, especially in the context of neurodevelopmental disorder featuring epilepsy, generalized hypotonia and RTT-like features should lead to the suspect of GABBR2 mutations.
The precise molecular mechanisms responsible for resistance to cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with bladder cancer remain elusive, while we have indicated that androgen receptor (AR) activity in urothelial cancer is associated with its sensitivity. Our DNA microarray analysis in control vs. AR-knockdown bladder cancer sublines suggested that the expression of a GABA B receptor GABBR2 and AR was correlated. The present study aimed to determine the functional role of GABBR2 in modulating cisplatin sensitivity in bladder cancer. AR knockdown and dihydrotestosterone treatment considerably reduced and induced, respectively, GABBR2 expression, and the effect of dihydrotestosterone was at least partially restored by an antiandrogen hydroxyflutamide. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay further revealed the binding of AR to the promoter region of GABBR2 in bladder cancer cells. Meanwhile, GABBR2 expression was significantly elevated in a cisplatin-resistant bladder cancer subline, compared with control cells. In AR-positive bladder cancer cells, knockdown of GABBR2 or treatment with a selective GABA B receptor antagonist, CGP46381, considerably enhanced the cytotoxic activity of cisplatin. However, no additional effect of CGP46381 on cisplatin-induced growth suppression was seen in GABBR2-knockdown cells. Moreover, in the absence of cisplatin, CGP46381 treatment and GABBR2 knockdown showed no significant changes in cell proliferation or migration. These findings suggest that GABBR2 represents a key downstream effector of AR signaling in inducing resistance to cisplatin treatment. Accordingly, inhibition of GABBR2 has the potential of being a means of chemosensitization, especially in patients with AR/GABBR2-positive bladder cancer.
OBJECTIVE: Rett syndrome (RTT) and epileptic encephalopathy (EE) are devastating neurodevelopmental disorders with distinct diagnostic criteria. However, highly heterogeneous and overlapping clinical features often allocate patients into the boundary of the two conditions, complicating accurate diagnosis and appropriate medical interventions. Therefore, we investigated the specific molecular mechanism that allows an understanding of the pathogenesis and relationship of these two conditions. METHODS: We screened novel genetic factors from 34 RTT-like patients without MECP2 mutations, which account for  approximately 90% of RTT cases, by whole-exome sequencing. The biological function of the discovered variants was assessed in cell culture and Xenopus tropicalis models. RESULTS: We identified a recurring de novo variant in GABAB receptor R2 (GABBR2) that reduces the receptor function, whereas different GABBR2 variants in EE patients possess a more profound effect in reducing receptor activity and are more responsive to agonist rescue in an animal model. INTERPRETATION: GABBR2 is a genetic factor that determines RTT- or EE-like phenotype expression depending on the variant positions. GABBR2-mediated gamma-aminobutyric acid signaling is a crucial factor in determining the severity and nature of neurodevelopmental phenotypes. Ann Neurol 2017;82:466-478.
Striatal degeneration in Huntington's disease (HD) causes changes in cortico-subcortical pathways. Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a valuable tool for assessing pathophysiology within these pathways, yet has had limited application in HD. As cortico-subcortical pathways are largely mediated by GABA and dopamine receptor genes, understanding how these genes modulate neurophysiology in HD may provide new insights into how underlying pathology maps onto clinical phenotype. Twenty-nine participants with HD underwent motor cortex stimulation, while corticospinal excitability, cortical inhibition and intracortical facilitation were indexed via peripheral electromyography. Single-nucleotide polymorphism mapping was performed across six genes that are known to modulate cortico-subcortical pathways (GABRA2, GABBR1, GABBR2, DRD1, DRD2, DRD4). Genetic associations with six TMS measures and age at onset were investigated. Our hierarchical multiple regression analysis, controlling for CAG and age, revealed that a GABBR2 variant, predicted to be disease-causative, was significantly associated with corticospinal excitability at corrected levels. A subsequent uncorrected exploratory analysis revealed associations between GABBR2, GABRA2 and DRD2 variants with TMS measures of corticospinal excitability and cortical inhibition in HD, as well as with age at onset. Our findings support the notion that uncovering genetic associations with pathophysiological measures and age at onset is an important way forward in terms of generating meaningful biomarkers with diagnostic and prognostic sensitivity, and identifying novel human-validated targets for future clinical trials.
Previous studies have demonstrated that the gamma-aminobutyric acid type B (GABA(B)) receptor plays an essential role in modulating neurotransmitter release and regulating the activity of ion channels and adenyl cyclase. However, whether the naturally occurring polymorphisms in the two GABA(B) receptor subunit genes interact with each other to alter susceptibility to nicotine dependence (ND) remains largely unknown. In this study, we genotyped 5 and 33 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for GABA(B) receptor subunit 1 and 2 genes (GABBR1, GABBR2), respectively, in a sample of 2037 individuals from 602 nuclear families of African- American (AA) or European-American (EA) origin. We conducted association analyses to determine (1) the association of each subunit gene with ND at both the individual SNP and haplotype levels and (2) the collective effect(s) of SNPs in both GABA(B) subunits on the development of ND. Several individual SNPs and haplotypes in GABBR2 were significantly associated with ND in both ethnic samples. Two haplotypes in AAs and one haplotype in EAs showed a protective effect against ND, whilst two other haplotypes in AAs and three haplotypes in EAs showed a risk effect for developing ND. Interestingly, these significant haplotypes were confined to two regions of GABBR2 in the AA and EA samples. Additionally, we found two minor haplotypes in GABBR1 to be positively associated with Heaviness of Smoking Index (HSI) in the EA sample. Finally, we demonstrated the presence of epistasis between GABBR1 and GABBR2 for developing ND. The variants of GABBR1 and GABBR2 are significantly associated with ND, and the involvement of GABBR1 is most likely through its interaction with GABBR2, whereas GABBR2 polymorphisms directly alter susceptibility to ND. Future studies are needed with more dense SNP coverage of GABBR1 and GABBR2 to verify the epistatic effects of the two subunit genes.
Purpose: The past decade has witnessed the rapid development of personalized targeted therapies in lung cancer. It is still unclear whether epigenetic changes are involved in the response to tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) treatment in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutated lung cancer.Experimental Design: Methyl-sensitive cut counting sequencing (MSCC) was applied to investigate the methylation changes in paired tissues before and after erlotinib treatment for 42 days with partial response (PR) from stage IIIa (N2) lung adenocarcinoma patients (N = 2) with EGFR 19 deletion. The Sequenom EpiTYPER assay was used to validate the changed methylated candidate genes. Up- or downregulation of the candidate gene was performed to elucidate the potential mechanism in the regulation of erlotinib treatment response.Results: Sixty aberrant methylated genes were screened using MSCC sequencing. Two aberrant methylated genes, CBFA2T3 and GABBR2, were clearly validated. A same differential methylated region (DMR) between exon 2 and exon 3 of GABBR2 gene was confirmed consistently in both patients. GABBR2 was significantly downregulated in EGFR 19 deletion cells, HCC4006 and HCC827, but remained conserved in EGFR wild-type A549 cells after erlotinib treatment. Upregulation of GABBR2 expression significantly rescued erlotinib-induced apoptosis in HCC827 cells. GABBR2 was significantly downregulated, along with the reduction of S6, p-p70 S6, and p-ERK1/2, demonstrating that GABBR2 may play an important role in EGFR signaling through the ERK1/2 pathway.Conclusions: We demonstrated that GABBR2 gene might be a novel potential epigenetic treatment target with induction erlotinib treatment for stage IIIa (N2) EGFR 19 deletion lung adenocarcinoma. Clin Cancer Res; 23(17); 5003-14. (c)2017 AACR.
