Non-lysosomal glucosylceramidase; Non-lysosomal glucosylceramidase that catalyzes the hydrolysis of glucosylceramide (GlcCer) to free glucose and ceramide. Glucosylceramides are membrane glycosphingolipids that have a wide intracellular distribution (By similarity). They are the main precursors of more complex glycosphingolipids that play a role in cellular growth, differentiation, adhesion, signaling, cytoskeletal dynamics and membrane properties (By similarity). Also involved in the transglucosylation of cholesterol, transferring glucose from glucosylceramides, thereby modifying its  [...] 
Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPCD) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder most commonly caused by mutations in the lysosomal protein Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1), which is implicated in cholesterol export. Mitochondrial insufficiency forms a significant feature of the pathology of this disease, yet studies attempting to address this are rare. The working hypothesis is that mitochondria become overloaded with cholesterol which renders them dysfunctional. We examined two potential protein targets-translocator protein (TSPO) and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein D1 (StARD1)-which are implicated in cholesterol transport to mitochondria, in addition to glucocerbrosidase 2 (GBA2), the target of miglustat, which is currently the only approved treatment for NPCD. However, inhibiting these proteins did not correct the mitochondrial defect in NPC1-deficient cells.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a heterogeneous group of neurological disorders characterized primarily by a pyramidal syndrome with lower limb spasticity, which can manifest as pure HSP or associated with a number of neurological or non-neurological signs (i.e., complicated HSPs). The clinical variability of HSPs is associated with a wide genetic heterogeneity, with more than eighty causative genes known. Recently, next generation sequencing (NGS) has allowed increasing genetic definition in such a heterogeneous group of disorders. We report on a 56- year-old man affected by sporadic complicated HSP consisting of a pyramidal syndrome, cerebellar ataxia, congenital cataract, pes cavus, axonal sensory-motor peripheral neuropathy and cognitive decline. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy and thin corpus callosum. By NGS we found a novel homozygous biallelic c.452-1G > C mutation in the b-glucosidase 2 gene (GBA2), known to be causative for autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia type 46 (SPG46). The rarity of this inherited form besides reporting on a novel mutation, expands the genetic and clinical spectrum of SPG46 related HSP.
Hereditary spastic paraparesis (HSP) is a group of central nervous system diseases primarily affecting the spinal upper motor neurons, with different inheritance patterns and phenotypes. SPG46 is a rare, early-onset and autosomal recessive HSP, linked to biallelic GBA2 mutations. About thirty families have been described worldwide, with different phenotypes like complicated HSP, recessive cerebellar ataxia or Marinesco-Sjogren Syndrome. Herein, we report five SPG46 patients harbouring five novel GBA2 mutations, the largest series described in Italy so far. Probands were enrolled in five different centres and underwent neurological examination, clinical cognitive assessment, column imaging for scoliosis assessment, ophthalmologic examination, brain imaging, GBA2 activity in peripheral blood cells and genetic testing. Their phenotype was consistent with HSP, with notable features like upper gaze palsy and movement disorders. We review demographic, genetic, biochemical and clinical information from all documented cases in the existing literature, focusing on the global distribution of cases, the features of the syndrome, its variable presentation, new potential identifying features and the significance of measuring GBA2 enzyme activity.
BACKGROUND: With the advent new sequencing technologies, we now have the tools to understand the phenotypic diversity and the common occurrence of phenocopies. We used these techniques to investigate two Norwegian families with an autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia with cataracts and mental retardation. METHODS AND RESULTS: Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip analysis followed by Exome sequencing identified a 2 bp homozygous deletion in GBA2 in both families, c.1528_1529del [p.Met510Valfs*17]. Furthermore, we report the biochemical characterization of GBA2 in these patients. Our studies show that a reduced activity of GBA2 is sufficient to elevate the levels of glucosylceramide to similar levels as seen in Gaucher disease. Furthermore, leucocytes seem to be the proper enzyme source for in vitro analysis of GBA2 activity. CONCLUSIONS: We report GBA2 mutations causing a Marinesco-Sjogren-like syndrome in two Norwegian families. One of the families was originally diagnosed with Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome based on an autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia with cataracts and mental retardation. Our findings highlight the phenotypic variability associated with GBA2 mutations, and suggest that patients with Marinesco-Sjogren-like syndromes should be tested for mutations in this gene.
Current anti-inflammatory strategies for the treatment of pulmonary disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) are limited; thus, there is continued interest in identifying additional molecular targets for therapeutic intervention. Given the emerging role of sphingolipids (SLs) in various respiratory disorders, including CF, drugs that selectively target the enzymes associated with SL metabolism are under development. Miglustat, a well-characterized iminosugar-based inhibitor of beta-glucosidase 2 (GBA2), has shown promise in CF treatment because it reduces the inflammatory response to infection by P. aeruginosa and restores F508del-CFTR chloride channel activity. This study aimed to probe the molecular basis for the anti-inflammatory activity of miglustat by examining specifically the role of GBA2 following the infection of CF bronchial epithelial cells by P. aeruginosa. We also report the anti-inflammatory activity of another potent inhibitor of GBA2 activity, namely N-(5-adamantane-1-yl-methoxy)pentyl)-deoxynojirimycin (Genz-529648). In CF bronchial cells, inhibition of GBA2 by miglustat or Genz-529648 significantly reduced the induction of IL-8 mRNA levels and protein release following infection by P. aeruginosa. Hence, the present data demonstrate that the anti-inflammatory effects of miglustat and Genz-529648 are likely exerted through inhibition of GBA2.
Analogues of N-butyl-1-deoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ) were prepared and assayed for inhibition of ceramide-specific glucosyltransferase (CGT), non-lysosomal beta-glucosidase 2 (GBA2) and the lysosomal beta-glucosidase 1 (GBA1). Compounds 5 a-6 f, which carry sterically demanding nitrogen substituents, and compound 13, devoid of the C3 and C5 hydroxy groups present in DNJ/NB-DGJ (N-butyldeoxygalactojirimycin) showed no inhibitory activity for CGT or GBA2. Inversion of stereochemistry at C4 of N-(n-butyl)- and N-(n-nonyl)-DGJ (compounds 24) also led to a loss of activity in these assays. The aminocyclopentitols N-(n-butyl)- (35 a), N-(n-nonyl)-4-amino-5-(hydroxymethyl)cyclopentane- (35 b), and N-(1-(pentyloxy)methyl)adamantan-1-yl)-1,2,3-triol (35 f), were found to be selective inhibitors of GBA1 and GBA2 that did not inhibit CGT (>1 mm), with the exception of 35 f, which inhibited CGT with an IC(50) value of 1 mm. The N-butyl analogue 35 a was 100-fold selective for inhibiting GBA1 over GBA2 (K(i) values of 32 nm and 3.3 mum for GBA1 and GBA2, respectively). The N-nonyl analogue 35 b displayed a K(i) value of <<14 nm for GBA1 inhibition and a K(i) of 43 nm for GBA2. The N-(1-(pentyloxy)methyl)adamantan-1-yl) derivative 35 f had K(i) values of  approximately 16 and 14 nm for GBA1 and GBA2, respectively. The related N-bis-substituted aminocyclopentitols were found to be significantly less potent inhibitors than their mono-substituted analogues. The aminocyclopentitol scaffold should hold promise for further inhibitor development.
INTRODUCTION: Spastic paraplegia type 46 (SPG46) is a rare autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia, caused by mutations in the non-lysosomal glucosylceramidase beta2 (GBA2) gene. Worldwide, approximately twenty SPG46 families have been identified so far. CASE REPORT: We describe a compound heterozygous Italian patient carrying a novel (p.Arg879Gln) and a recurrent (p.Arg399 *) GBA2 gene variant. The patient presented unsteady gait at age 2, and progressively manifested spastic-ataxia, scoliosis, mild intellectual decline, and bilateral cataract. DISCUSSION: Clinical manifestations associated with GBA2 gene variants encompass a spectrum of overlapping phenotypes including cerebellar ataxia, spastic paraplegia, and Marinesco-Sjogren-like syndrome. We review previously reported cases of SPG46 and discuss possible genetic differential diagnosis.
Autosomal-recessive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA) comprises a large and heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders with more than 20 different forms currently recognized, many of which are also associated with increased tone and some of which have limb spasticity. Gaucher disease is a lysosomal storage disease resulting from a defect in the enzyme acid beta-glucosidase 1. beta-glucosidase 2 is an enzyme with similar glucosylceramidase activity but to date has not been associated with a monogenic disorder. We studied four unrelated consanguineous families of Tunisian decent diagnosed with cerebellar ataxia of unknown origin. We performed homozygosity mapping and whole-exome sequencing in an attempt to identify the genetic origin of their disorder. We were able to identify mutations responsible for autosomal-recessive ataxia in these families within the gene encoding beta-glucosidase 2, GBA2. Two nonsense mutations (c.363C>A [p.Tyr121( *)] and c.1018C>T [p.Arg340( *)]) and a substitution (c.2618G>A [p.Arg873His]) were identified, probably resulting in nonfunctional enzyme. This study suggests GBA2 mutations are a cause of recessive spastic ataxia and responsible for a form of glucosylceramide storage disease in humans.
The enzyme beta-glucosidase 2 (GBA2) is clinically relevant because it is targeted by the drug miglustat (Zavesca(R)) and because it is involved in inherited diseases. Mutations in the GBA2 gene are associated with two neurological diseases on the ataxia-spasticity spectrum, hereditary spastic paraplegia 46 (SPG46) and Marinesco-Sjogren-like syndrome (MSS). To establish how GBA2 mutations give rise to neurological pathology, we have begun to investigate mutant forms of GBA2 encoded by disease-associated GBA2 alleles. Previously, we found that five GBA2 missense mutants and five C-terminally truncated mutants lacked enzyme activity. Here we have examined the cellular locations of wild-type (WT) and mutant forms of GBA2 by confocal and electron microscopy, using transfected cells. Similar to GBA2-WT, the D594H and M510Vfs*17 GBA2 mutants were located at the plasma membrane, whereas the C-terminally truncated mutants terminating after amino acids 233 and 339 (GBA2-233 and -339) were present in the mitochondrial matrix, induced mitochondrial fragmentation and loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential. Deletional mutagenesis indicated that residues 161-200 are critical for the mitochondrial fragmentation of GBA2-233 and -339. Considering that the mitochondrial fragmentation induced by GBA2-233 and -339 is consistently accompanied by their localization to the mitochondrial matrix, our deletional analysis raises the possibility that that GBA2 residues 161-200 harbor an internal targeting sequence for transport to the mitochondrial matrix. Altogether, our work provides new insights into the behaviour of GBA2-WT and disease-associated forms of GBA2.
The GBA2 gene encodes the non-lysosomal glucosylceramidase (NLGase), an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of glucosylceramide (GlcCer) to ceramide and glucose. Mutations in GBA2 have been associated with the development of neurological disorders such as autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia, hereditary spastic paraplegia, and Marinesco-Sjogren-Like Syndrome. Our group has previously identified the GBA2 c.1780G>C [p.Asp594His] missense mutation, in a Cypriot consanguineous family with spastic ataxia. In this study, we carried out a biochemical characterization of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) derived from three patients of this family. We found that the mutation strongly reduce NLGase activity both intracellularly and at the plasma membrane level. Additionally, we observed a two-fold increase of GlcCer content in LCLs derived from patients compared to controls, with the C(16) lipid being the most abundant GlcCer species. Moreover, we showed that there is an apparent compensatory effect between NLGase and the lysosomal glucosylceramidase (GCase), since we found that the activity of GCase was three-fold higher in LCLs derived from patients compared to controls. We conclude that the c.1780G>C mutation results in NLGase loss of function with abolishment of the enzymatic activity and accumulation of GlcCer accompanied by a compensatory increase in GCase.
