Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase; Catalyzes the trans-addition of the three molecules of IPP onto DMAPP to form geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate, an important precursor of carotenoids and geranylated proteins.
Congenital muscular dystrophies are a group of progressive disorders with wide range of symptoms associated with diverse cellular mechanisms. Recently, biallelic variants in GGPS1 were linked to a distinct autosomal recessive form of muscular dystrophy associated with hearing loss and ovarian insufficiency. In this report, we present a case of a young patient with a homozygous variant in GGPS1. The patient presented with only proximal muscle weakness, and elevated liver transaminases with spared hearing function. The hepatic involvement in this patient caused by a novel deleterious variant in the gene extends the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of GGPS1 related muscular dystrophy.
Ultra-rare biallelic pathogenic variants in geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase 1 (GGPS1) have recently been associated with muscular dystrophy/hearing loss/ovarian insufficiency syndrome. Here, we describe 11 affected individuals from four unpublished families with ultra-rare missense variants in GGPS1 and provide follow-up details from a previously reported family. Our cohort replicated most of the previously described clinical features of GGPS1 deficiency; however, hearing loss was present in only 46% of the individuals. This report consolidates the disease-causing role of biallelic variants in GGPS1 and demonstrates that hearing loss and ovarian insufficiency might be a variable feature of the GGPS1-associated muscular dystrophy.
Perrault syndrome is a rare heterogeneous condition characterised by sensorineural hearing loss and premature ovarian insufficiency. Additional neuromuscular pathology is observed in some patients. There are six genes in which variants are known to cause Perrault syndrome; however, these explain only a minority of cases. We investigated the genetic cause of Perrault syndrome in seven affected individuals from five different families, successfully identifying the cause in four patients. This included previously reported and novel causative variants in known Perrault syndrome genes, CLPP and LARS2, involved in mitochondrial proteolysis and mitochondrial translation, respectively. For the first time, we show that pathogenic variants in PEX6 can present clinically as Perrault syndrome. PEX6 encodes a peroxisomal biogenesis factor, and we demonstrate evidence of peroxisomal dysfunction in patient serum. This study consolidates the clinical overlap between Perrault syndrome and peroxisomal disorders, and highlights the need to consider ovarian function in individuals with atypical/mild peroxisomal disorders. The remaining patients had variants in candidate genes such as TFAM, involved in mtDNA transcription, replication, and packaging, and GGPS1 involved in mevalonate/coenzyme Q(10) biosynthesis and whose enzymatic product is required for mouse folliculogenesis. This genomic study highlights the diverse molecular landscape of this poorly understood syndrome.
