Lactoylglutathione lyase; Catalyzes the conversion of hemimercaptal, formed from methylglyoxal and glutathione, to S-lactoylglutathione. Involved in the regulation of TNF-induced transcriptional activity of NF-kappa-B. Required for normal osteoclastogenesis.
BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a malignant tumor characterized by a high mortality rate. The occurrence and progression of HCC are linked to oxidative stress. Glyoxalase-1 (GLO1) plays an important role in regulating oxidative stress, yet the underlying mechanism remains unclear. GLO1 may serve as a prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for HCC. METHODS: Based on TCGA database hepatocellular carcinoma samples, we conducted a bioinformatics analysis to explore the correlation between GLO1 expression and HCC cell proliferation and viability. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis revealed that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly enriched in the cell cycle pathway. We analyzed the relationships between GLO1 and 24 genes enriched in the cell cycle pathway using a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. Finally, experimental validation was performed to assess GLO1's impact on the distribution of cells at different cell cycle stages and on the proliferation and migration of HCC cells. RESULTS: Our study demonstrated that GLO1 was overexpressed in HCC tissues and was associated with a poor prognosis. Data analysis indicated that overexpression of GLO1 activated the cell cycle pathway and positively correlated with expression of the majority of key cell cycle genes. Experimental validation showed that GLO1 expression affects the number of HCC cells in G2 and S phases and regulates HCC cell proliferation and migration. CONCLUSIONS: GLO1 represents a promising therapeutic target for HCC, providing valuable insights into its role in the viability and proliferation of HCC cells.
Glyoxalase I (GLO1) is the primary enzyme for detoxification of the reactive dicarbonyl methylglyoxal (MG). Loss of GLO1 promotes accumulation of MG resulting in a recapitulation of diabetic phenotypes. We previously demonstrated attenuated GLO1 protein in skeletal muscle from individuals with type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, whether GLO1 attenuation occurs prior to T2D and the mechanisms regulating GLO1 abundance in skeletal muscle are unknown. GLO1 expression and activity were determined in skeletal muscle tissue biopsies from 15 lean healthy individuals (LH, BMI: 22.4 +/- 0.7) and 5 individuals with obesity (OB, BMI: 32.4 +/- 1.3). GLO1 protein was attenuated by 26 +/- 0.3 % in OB compared to LH skeletal muscle (p = 0.019). Similar reductions for GLO1 activity were observed (p = 0.102). NRF2 and Keap1 expression were equivocal between groups despite a 2-fold elevation in GLO1 transcripts in OB skeletal muscle (p = 0.008). GLO1 knock-down (KD) in human immortalized myotubes promoted downregulation of muscle contraction and organization proteins indicating the importance of GLO1 expression for skeletal muscle function. SIRT1 KD had no effect on GLO1 protein or activity whereas, SIRT2 KD attenuated GLO1 protein by 28 +/- 0.29 % (p < 0.0001) and GLO1 activity by 42 +/- 0.12 % (p = 0.0150). KD of NAMPT also resulted in attenuation of GLO1 protein (28 +/- 0.069 %, p = 0.003), activity (67 +/- 0.09 %, p = 0.011) and transcripts (50 +/- 0.13 %, p = 0.049). Neither the provision of the NAD(+) precursors NR nor NMN were able to prevent this attenuation in GLO1 protein. However, NR did augment GLO1 specific activity (p = 0.022 vs NAMPT KD). These perturbations did not alter GLO1 acetylation status. SIRT1, SIRT2 and NAMPT protein levels were all equivocal in skeletal muscle tissue biopsies from individuals with obesity and lean individuals. These data implicate NAD(+)-dependent regulation of GLO1 in skeletal muscle independent of altered GLO1 acetylation and provide rationale for exploring NR supplementation to rescue attenuated GLO1 abundance and activity in conditions such as obesity.
BACKGROUNDS: Glyoxalase I (GLO1), a ubiquitous enzyme involved in the process of detoxification of methylglyoxal in the cellular glycolysis pathway, was reported to be highly expressed in human tumor. It has also been found that GLO1 is associated with tumor cell survival and proliferation in some types of cancer, such as pancreatic cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma and gastric cancer. However, the role of GLO1 in glioma has not been clarified. The purpose of the present study was to explore the expression pattern of GLO1 and whether the expression level of GLO1 is associated with the unfavorable clinical outcomes of patients with glioma. METHODS: Quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry staining were used to investigate the mRNA and protein level of GLO1 in glioma tissues together with normal brain tissues. The prognostic role of GLO1 in glioma patients was assessed using univariate and multivariate analyses. Clinical outcomes were estimated by using the Kaplan-Meier analysis and the log-rank test. The function of GLO1 in glioma cell lines were investigated by in-vitro experiments. RESULTS: Expression level of GLO1 was higher in glioma tissues than that in normal brain tissues. High GLO1 expression was significantly correlated with WHO grade and the poor overall survival time in glioma patients. Moreover, GLO1 was also defined as an unfavorable prognosis factor. Overexpression of GLO1 in the glioma cell line U87 can enhance the tumor cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Whereas knockdown of GLO1 can suppress those abilities. CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrated that GLO1 was highly expressed in glioma tissues and significantly correlated with the poor prognosis of glioma patients. It indicated that GLO1 might serve as a new prognostic predictor and therapeutic target for glioma treatment.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is characterized by recurrent chromosomal translocations. T(4;14) MM overexpresses multiple myeloma SET domain-containing protein (MMSET). MMSET has three major isoforms: the full-length form MMSET II and the short isoforms REIIBP and MMSET I. Here we show that the short isoform MMSET I is an oncoprotein that promoted cell survival and tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo. Gene expression array analysis indicated that MMSET I increased glyoxalase I (GLO1) expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with qPCR indicated that MMSET I bound upstream of the GLO1 transcription start site. Ectopic overexpression of MMSET I or its mutants showed MMSET I depended on its C terminus to regulate GLO1 expression. GLO1 knockdown (KD) induced apoptosis and reduced colony formation. MMSET I or GLO1 KD reduced the levels of anti-apoptosis factors such as MCL1 and BCL2. Ectopic overexpression of GLO1 resulted in the significant rescue of KMS11 cells from MMSET I KD-induced apoptosis and glycolysis inhibition. This suggested that GLO1 may be of functional importance target downstream of MMSET I. Cumulatively, our study suggests that MMSET I is an oncoprotein and potential therapeutic target for t(4;14) MM.
The distribution of glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) phenotypes in eight geographical regions of Turkey was studied. The GLO1*1 allele frequency varies from 0.3630 to 0.4118, which is in good agreement with the previously estimated range of variability. Excess numbers of heterozygotes compared to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were observed in all regions. The reason of this requires further investigations.
Late-stage melanoma is refractory to current therapies. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can modulate many physiological and pathological processes of melanoma. Studies have demonstrated that miR-137 acts as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting the proliferation of melanoma cells through targeting multiple mRNAs. The glyoxalase system member glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) is the principal scavenging enzyme of methylglyoxal (MG), a toxic byproduct of glycolysis. Using (35)S in vivo/vitro labelling analysis for dynamic proteomics (SiLAD), we found that miR-137 downregulated the expression of GLO1 in melanoma cells. Bioinformatics analysis predicted that GLO1 is a direct target of miR-137. This was validated by dual luciferase reporter assay. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and western blot analysis indicated that miR-137 could decrease endogenous GLO1 expression. Furthermore, siRNA targeting of GLO1 mimicked inhibition of melanoma cell proliferation caused by miR-137 overexpression. Re-expression of GLO1 was able to restore miR-137-mediated suppression of melanoma cell proliferation. Therefore, these results suggest that miR-137 inhibits the proliferation of melanoma cells by targeting GLO1.
BACKGROUND: Glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) plays a crucial role in defending against glycation. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variants in the GLO1 gene may affect gene expression and alter enzyme activity. However, there have been limited studies evaluating the association between GLO1 and diabetes, especially gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Therefore, this study is the first to explore the association of GLO1 SNPs and GDM risk. METHODS: The study included a total of 500 GDM patients and 502 control subjects. The SNPscan genotyping assay was used to genotype rs1781735, rs4746 and rs1130534. To assess the disparities in genotype, allele, and haplotype distributions and their correlation with GDM risk, the independent sample t-test, logistic regression, and chi-square test were employed during the data processing phase. Furthermore, one-way ANOVA was conducted to determine the differences in genotype and blood glucose and methylglyoxal(MG) levels. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in prepregnancy body mass index (pre-BMI), age, systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and parity between GDM and healthy subjects (P < 0.05). After adjusting for these factors, GLO1 rs1130534 TA remained associated with an increased risk of GDM (TA vs. TT + AA: OR = 1.320; 95% CI: 1.008-1.728; P = 0.044), especially in the pre-BMI >/= 24 subgroup (TA vs. TT + AA: OR = 2.424; 95% CI: 1.048-5.607; P = 0.039), with fasting glucose levels being significantly elevated in the TA genotype compared to the TT genotype (P < 0.05). Conversely, the GLO1 rs4746 TG was associated with a decreased risk of GDM (TG vs. TT: OR = 0.740; 95% CI: 0.548-0.999; P = 0.049; TG vs. TT + GG: OR = 0.740; 95% CI: 0.548-0.998; P = 0.048). Additionally, the haplotype T-G-T of rs1781735, rs4746 and rs1130534 was associated with a decreased risk of GDM among individuals with a pre-BMI >/= 24 (OR = 0.423; 95% CI: 0.188-0.955; P = 0.038). Furthermore, the rs1781735 GG genotype was found to be more closely related to maternal MG accumulation and neonatal weight gain (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Our findings suggested that GLO1 rs1130534 was associated with an increased susceptibility to GDM and higher blood glucose levels, but GLO1 rs4746 was associated with a decreased risk of GDM. The rs1781735 has been associated with the accumulation of maternal MG and subsequent weight gain in neonates.
Cancer cells are characterized by increased glycolysis, known as the Warburg effect, which leads to increased production of cytotoxic methylglyoxal (MGO) and apoptotic cell death. Cancer cells often activate the protective nuclear factor erythroid 2‑related factor2 (Nrf2)/glyoxalase1 (Glo1) system to detoxify MGO. The effects of sodium butyrate (NaB), a product of gut microbiota, on Nrf2/Glos/MGO pathway and the underlying mechanisms in prostate cancer (PCa) cells were investigated in the present study. Treatment with NaB induced the cell death and reduced the proliferation of PCa cells (DU145 and LNCap). Moreover, the protein kinase RNA-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase/Nrf2/Glo1 pathway was greatly inhibited by NaB, thereby accumulating MGO-derived adduct hydroimidazolone (MG-H1). In response to a high amount of MGO, the expression of Nrf2 and Glo1 was attenuated, coinciding with an increased cellular death. NaB also markedly inhibited the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)/Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) pathway. Conversely, co‑treatment with Colivelin, a Stat3 activator, significantly reversed the effects of NaB on Glo1 expression, MG-H1 production, and the cell migration and viability. As expected, overexpression of Stat3 or Glo1 reduced NaB‑induced cell death. The activation of calcium/calmodulin dependent protein kinase II gamma and reactive oxygen species production also contributed to the anticancer effect of NaB. The present study, for the first time, demonstrated that NaB greatly increases MGO production through suppression of the JAK2/Stat3/Nrf2/Glo1 pathway in DU145 cells, a cell line mimicking castration‑resistant PCa (CRPC), suggesting that NaB may be a potential agent for PCa therapy.
Esterase D (ESD), glyoxalase 1 (GLO1), phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (PGD) and phosphoglucomutase 1 and 2 (PGM1 and PGM2) systems have been studied in the Salerno province (Campania, Southern Italy). The mean weighted frequencies for the Campania region were calculated. These frequencies show a general similarity to those reported for the other Italian regions.
BACKGROUND: Glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) is an enzyme involved in removal of toxic byproducts accumulating during glycolysis from the cell. GLO1 is up regulated in many cancer types but its role in prostate cancer is largely unknown. METHODS: Here, we employed GLO1 immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray including 11 152 tumors and an attached clinical and molecular database. RESULTS: Normal prostate epithelium was negative for GLO1, whereas 2059 (27.3%) of 7552 interpretable cancers showed cytoplasmic GLO1 staining, which was considered weak in 8.8%, moderate in 12.5%, and strong in 6.1% of tumors. Up regulation of GLO1 was significantly linked to high original Gleason grade, advanced pathological tumor stage and positive lymph node status (P < 0.0001 each). Comparison of GLO1 staining with several common genomic alterations of prostate cancers revealed a strong link between GLO1 up regulation and TMPRSS2:ERG fusion (P < 0.0001) and an ERG-independent association with PTEN deletion (P < 0.0001). GLO1 up regulation was strongly linked to early biochemical recurrence in univariate analysis (P < 0.0001) and predicted poor prognosis independent from most (except from nodal stage) established prognostic parameters in multivariate analysis (P </= 0.03). CONCLUSIONS: GLO1 upregulation is linked to aggressive prostate cancers characterized by ERG fusion and PTEN deletion. The strong and independent prognostic value makes it a promising candidate for routine diagnostic applications either alone or in combination with other markers.
