Glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta; Constitutively active protein kinase that acts as a negative regulator in the hormonal control of glucose homeostasis, Wnt signaling and regulation of transcription factors and microtubules, by phosphorylating and inactivating glycogen synthase (GYS1 or GYS2), EIF2B, CTNNB1/beta-catenin, APC, AXIN1, DPYSL2/CRMP2, JUN, NFATC1/NFATC, MAPT/TAU and MACF1. Requires primed phosphorylation of the majority of its substrates. In skeletal muscle, contributes to insulin regulation of glycogen synthesis by phosphorylating and inhibiting GYS1 activity and hence glyc [...] 
BACKGROUND: Paclitaxel treatment produces dose-limiting peripheral neurotoxicity, which adversely affects treatment and long-term outcomes. In the present study, the contribution of genetic polymorphisms to paclitaxel-induced neurotoxicity were assessed in 21 patients, focusing on polymorphisms involved in the tau-microtubule pathway, an important target of paclitaxel involved in neurotoxicity development. METHODS: Polymorphisms in the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene (haplotype 1 and rs242557 polymorphism) and the glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) gene (rs6438552 polymorphism) were investigated. Neurotoxicity was assessed using neuropathy grading scales, neurophysiological studies and patient questionnaires. RESULTS: A significant relationship between the GSK-3B rs6438552 polymorphism and paclitaxel-induced neurotoxicity was evident. CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in tau-associated genes may contribute to the development of paclitaxel-induced neurotoxicity, although larger series will be necessary to confirm these findings.
GSK3B is the mRNA form of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK-3beta), which is a critical repressor of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway and generally inhibited in cancer cells. Plenty of researches have disclosed that circular RNAs, namely circRNAs exert important functions in the progression of various human malignancies including lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Therefore, we attempted to explore whether there existed certain circRNAs that could mediate LUAD development by regulating GSK3B expression and Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. In the present research, circ-GSK3B (hsa_circ_0066903) was found to be significantly down-regulated in LUAD tissues and cells and it suppressed the proliferation, migration and stemness of LUAD cells. Furthermore, it was discovered that circ-GSK3B competitively sponged miR-3681-3p and miR-3909 to elevate GSK3B expression. Circ-GSK3B could impair the binding ability of FKBP51 to GSK-3beta to inhibit the phosphorylation of GSK-3beta(S9), resulting in the inactivation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. In addition, the regulatory effect of circ-GSK3B on LUAD tumorigenesis and cell progression was testified through in vitro and in vivo rescue experiments. In conclusion, circ-GSK3B suppressed LUAD development through up-regulating and activating GSK3B.
Hyperphosphorylated tau protein is a major component of neurofibrillary tangles, a prominent intracellular hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. Both hyperphosphorylated tau and neurofibrillary tangles have been shown to correlate with dementia in Alzheimer's disease, but the relationship between hyperphosphorylation and tangle formation is not clear. Using a cell-free in vitro model system, in which tau polymerization is induced by arachidonic acid, we show that GSK-3beta phosphorylation of pre-assembled tau filaments makes those filaments prone to coalesce into large neurofibrillary tangle-like structures. Five phosphorylation sites, S199, T205, T231, S396 and S404, were identified in the phosphorylated filaments; many of the five are within epitopes recognized by Alzheimer's disease-associated antibodies. These tangle-like structures are optically visible and are similar to those formed by polymerization of GSK-3beta phosphorylated tau monomer and to those isolated from Alzheimer's disease tissue. We conclude that the phosphorylation of tau by GSK-3beta either prior to or following polymerization promotes polymer/polymer interactions that result in stable clusters of tau filaments.
In this study, we investigated the associations between single-nucleotide polymorphisms in GAB2 (rs2373115), GSK3B (rs6438552) and SORL1 (rs641120) and Alzheimer's disease (AD), both alone and in combination with the APOE*4 allele.
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the nasal mucosa. M2 macrophage polarization can reduce inflammation and repair tissue injury during AR development. Studies have substantiated the involvement of miRNAs in AR pathogenesis. Herein, the molecular mechanism of miR-214-3p in AR development was explored. To mimic the AR environment, ovalbumin (OVA) was used to treat macrophages. MiR-214-3p and glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3B) expression in nasal mucus tissues and macrophages was assessed by RT-qPCR. The M2 phenotypic signature of CD206 in macrophages was assessed by flow cytometry. The protein expression of GSK3B and M2 macrophage markers (ARG-1 and IL-10) was evaluated by western blotting. The correlation between miR-214-3p and GSK3B was validated by a luciferase reporter assay. We found that miR-214-3p was overexpressed in macrophages and nasal mucus tissues from AR patients. MiR-214-3p facilitated M2 polarization of macrophages upon OVA stimulation. Mechanistically, miR-214-3p targeted the GSK3B 3' untranslated region in macrophages. In addition, GSK3B was downregulated in macrophages and nasal mucus tissues from AR patients. In rescue assays, GSK3B downregulation reversed the inhibitory effects of miR-214-3p silencing on M2 polarization of macrophages treated with OVA. Overall, miR-214-3p facilitates M2 macrophage polarization by targeting GSK3B.
To explore the effects of beta-Sitosterol upon hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, invasion, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and to investigate the underlying mechanism using network pharmacology. Human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Huh-7 and HCCLM3) were expose to gradient concentrations of beta-Sitosterol (5 mug/mL, 10 mug/mL, and 20 mug/mL). Cell viability and proliferation were assessed using MTT, CCK-8, colony formation, and EdU assays.Flow cytometry was employed to evaluate cell cycle and apoptosis. Scratch and Transwell assays were performed, respectively, to detect cell migration and invasion. The levels of apoptosis-associated proteins (BAX, BCL2, and cleaved caspase3) as well as EMT-associated proteins (E-cadherin, N-cadherin, Snail, and Vimentin) were detected in Huh-7 and HCCLM3 cell lines using Western blot analysis. The drug target gene for beta-Sitosterol was screened via PubChem and subsequently evaluated for expression in the GSE112790 dataset. In addition, the expression level of glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3B) within the Cancer Genome Atlas-Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (TCGA-LIHC) database was analyzed, along with its correlation to the survival outcomes of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. The diagnostic efficiency of GSK3B was assessed by analyzing the ROC curve. Subsequently, Huh-7 and HCCLM3 cell lines were transfected with the overexpression vector of GSK3B and then treated with beta-Sitosterol to further validate the association between GSK3B and beta-Sitosterol. GSK3B demonstrated a significantly elevated expression in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, which could predict hepatocellular carcinoma patients' impaired prognosis based on GEO dataset and TCGA database. GSK3B inhibitor (CHIR-98014) notably inhibited cell proliferation and invasion, promoted cell apoptosis and cell cycle arrest at G0/G1 phase in hepatocellular carcinoma cells. beta-Sitosterol treatment further promoted the efffects of GSK3B inhibitor on hepatocellular carcinoma cells. GSK3B overexpression has been found to enhance the proliferative and invasive capabilities of hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Furthermore it has been observed that GSK3B overexpression, it has been obsear can partially reverse the inhibitory effect of beta-Sitosterol upon hepatocellular. beta-Sitosterol suppressed hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and invasion, and enhanced apoptosis via inhibiting GSK3B expression.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3B (GSK-3B) is thought to be involved in numerous neuronal functions and is implicated in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Interestingly, a functional polymorphism, rs3755557, in the GSK3B promoter region has been consistently reported to be a risk factor for schizophrenia in southwestern and northwestern Han Chinese individuals. In this study, we carried out a comprehensive analysis of the association of the rs3755557 polymorphism within GSK3B and schizophrenia in Han Chinese individuals. We recruited 782 patients with schizophrenia and 807 healthy controls from eastern China. In total, 143 drug-naive patients with first-episode schizophrenia were enrolled for the evaluation of clinical features. We did not observe significant differences in genotype or allele distribution of the rs3755557 polymorphism between the schizophrenia and control groups in eastern Chinese individuals. After pooling these data of 2188 subjects with schizophrenia and 2885 healthy controls, we observed a significant difference in the A allele distribution of the rs3755557 polymorphism between schizophrenia patients and controls (Z = 4.13 P < 0.01). We further examined the relationship between the rs3755557 polymorphism and the clinical features of schizophrenia by comparing scores of the The Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and The Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) with the genotypes of the rs3755557 polymorphism. There were significant differences in the scores of RBANS attention, delayed memory and total scores between the patients with the A allele and those without the A allele (P = 0.03, 0.01 and 0.01 after Bonferroni correction, respectively). Our eQTL analysis showed a significant association between the rs3755557 polymorphism and GSK3B expression in the hippocampus (P = 0.027). Our findings indicated that the rs3755557 polymorphism may confer susceptibility to schizophrenia and cognitive dysfunction in Han Chinese individuals.
We analyzed mutation of the APC, AXIN1, and GSK3genes in 14 pituitary adenomas with abnormal nuclear accumulations of CTNNB1. These tumors did not harbor mutation of the CTNNB1 gene. The genes analyzed encode proteins associated with ubiquitin-mediated degradation of CTNNB1. Although the regions encoding functional domains of these protein products were analyzed, no significant genetic alterations were found. Furthermore, the antibody for the C-terminus of APC detected normal expression of the APC protein in these pituitary adenomas. Our present results imply that an unknown mechanism(s) accelerates the accumulation of CTNNB1 that plays an important role in the pathogenesis of human pituitary adenomas. However, the possibility that mutation of regions outside of our survey or epigenetic mechanism play an important role cannot be excluded.
OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been confirmed to play an essential role in modulating cancer cell proliferation, metastasis, and sensitivity to chemotherapy. However, the correlation between miR-132-3p expression and etoposide (VP16) induced apoptosis in human breast cancer cells remains poorly understood. METHODS: Six datasets, including three gene expression profile datasets and three microRNA (miRNA) expression profile datasets, were downloaded from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database to identify miR-132-3p and GSK3B expression in breast cancer. Kaplan-Meier and log-rank testing were performed to evaluate the effect of miR-132-3p and GSK3B on the survival of breast cancer. Flow cytometry analysis was used to determine the effects of miR-132-3p and GSK3B on breast cancer cell apoptosis. Luciferase reporter assay, Western blot, and real-time PCR were used to determine the regulatory effect of miR-132-3p on GSK3B. RESULTS: miR-132-3p was significantly downregulated in breast cancer tissues compared with normal breast epithelial cells, whereas GSK3B expression was remarkably over-expressed in breast cancer tissues. The patients with low miR-132-3p or high GSK3B expression had worse overall survival. Luciferase reporter assay, Western blot, and real-time PCR confirmed that miR-132-3p could inhibit GSK3B protein and mRNA expression via binding to the 3'-UTR of GSK3B. Furthermore, miR-132-3p enhanced VP16-induced breast cancer cell apoptosis through targeting GSK3B. CONCLUSION: Collectively, the results of this study indicated that miR-132-3p was downregulated in breast cancer tissues and directly targeted GSK3B to be implicated in the modulation of breast cancer cell apoptosis, suggesting that miR-132-3p/GSK3B might be a novel, effective therapeutic target for treating patients with breast cancer.
The microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) codes for a protein that plays an integral role in stabilisation of microtubules and axonal transport in neurons. As well as its role in susceptibility to neurodegeneration, previous studies have found an association between the MAPT haplotype and intracranial volume and regional grey matter volumes in healthy adults. The glycogen synthase kinase-3beta gene (GSK3B) codes for a serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates various proteins, including tau, and has also been associated with risk for neurodegenerative disorders and schizophrenia. We examined the effects of MAPT and two functional promoter polymorphisms in GSK3B (rs3755557 and rs334558) on total grey matter and intracranial volume in three independent cohorts totaling 776 neurologically healthy individuals. In vitro analyses revealed a significant effect of rs3755557 on gene expression, and altered binding of at least two transcription factors, Octamer transcription factor 1 (Oct-1) and Pre-B-cell leukemia transcription factor 1 (Pbx-1), to the GSK3B promoter. Meta-analysis across the three cohorts revealed a significant effect of rs3755557 on total grey matter volume (summary B = 0.082, 95% confidence interval = 0.037-0.128) and intracranial volume (summary B = 0.113, 95% confidence interval = 0.082-0.144). No significant effect was observed for MAPT H1/H2 diplotype or GSK3B rs334558 on total grey matter or intracranial volume. Our genetic and biochemical analyses have identified a role for GSK3B in brain development, which could have important aetiological implications for neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental disorders.
