Gelsolin; Calcium-regulated, actin-modulating protein that binds to the plus (or barbed) ends of actin monomers or filaments, preventing monomer exchange (end-blocking or capping). It can promote the assembly of monomers into filaments (nucleation) as well as sever filaments already formed. Plays a role in ciliogenesis.
Apoptosis is thought to play a role in neuronal pathology in schizophrenia. Recently, the GSN gene was reported to have anti-apoptotic properties. In a genome-wide expression analysis on schizophrenia, GSN was also found to be significantly down-regulated in schizophrenia. All the hints suggest that GSN is a novel candidate gene in occurrence of schizophrenia. In this work, we genotyped 3 SNPs around the GSN locus in 493 sets of the Han Chinese trio sample using allele-specific PCR. A weak association or a marginally positive result was detected (0.05 for P-value of the overtransmitted haplotype and 0.02 for a global P-value).
BACKGROUND: The pathogenic missense mutations of the gelsolin (GSN) gene lead to familial amyloidosis of the Finnish type (FAF); however, our previous study identified GSN frameshift mutations existed in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The GSN genotype-phenotype heterogeneity and the role of GSN frameshift mutations in patients with AD are unclear. METHOD: In total, 1192 patients with AD and 1403 controls were screened through whole genome sequencing, and 884 patients with AD were enrolled for validation. Effects of GSN mutations were evaluated in vitro. GSN, Abeta42, Abeta40 and Abeta42/40 were detected in both plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). RESULTS: Six patients with AD with GSN P3fs and K346fs mutations (0.50%, 6/1192) were identified, who were diagnosed with AD but not FAF. In addition, 13 patients with AD with GSN frameshift mutations were found in the validation cohort (1.47%, 13/884). Further in vitro experiments showed that both K346fs and P3fs mutations led to the GSN loss of function in inhibiting Abeta-induced toxicity. Moreover, a higher level of plasma (p=0.001) and CSF (p=0.005) GSN was observed in AD cases than controls, and a positive correlation was found between the CSF GSN and CSF Abeta42 (r=0.289, p=0.009). Besides, the GSN level was initially increasing and then decreasing with the disease course and cognitive decline. CONCLUSIONS: GSN frameshift mutations may be associated with AD. An increase in plasma GSN is probably a compensatory reaction in AD, which is a potential biomarker for early AD.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that the ability of tumor cells to move and migrate is related to the molecular chain pathway mediated by actin. This study focused on the molecular mechanism of gelsolin (GSN) as an important actin-binding protein in promoting HCC invasion and metastasis. METHODS: The relationship between GSN expression and clinical characteristics was observed by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed the role of GSN in HCC metastasis. Dual-immunoprecipitation (IP), immunofluorescence (IF), western blotting, and the gelatinase activity assay were used to investigate the mechanism of GSN-promoting metastasis. PEX fusion proteins were used to intervene in the transfer molecular chain. RESULTS: Our study found that GSN promoted HCC invasion and metastasis through its synergistic effect with actin-related transfer molecular chain (actin-CD44-MMPs). Concretely, as an important binding molecule of actin, GSN activated MMP2 by interacting with MMP14. Furthermore, CD44 might be a key node in the above-mentioned mechanism. The use of MMP14 domain (PEX fusion protein) to competitively bind to CD44 helped to inhibit the activation of downstream MMP2. CONCLUSIONS: GSN played crucial roles in HCC metastatic process. An improved understanding of the multiple effects of GSN in HCC might facilitate a deeper appreciation of GSN as an important HCC regulator. The study identified GSN and its regulated transfer molecular chain as potential therapeutic targets for HCC.
The present study aimed to identify molecules associated with lymphovascular invasion (LVI) and perineural invasion (PNI) and to examine their biological behavior in colorectal cancer (CRC). LVI- and PNI-associated molecules were identified and verified using sequential processes including (1) identification of 117 recurrence-associated genes differentially expressed on RNA-seq analysis using primary cancer tissues from 130 CRC patients with and without systemic recurrence; (2) analysis of molecules associated with LVI and PNI; (3) assessment of biological properties by measuring proliferation, anoikis, invasion/migration, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and autophagy flux; and (4) verification of disease-free survival using public datasets. Gelsolin (GSN) and 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 2 (OAS2) were associated with PNI and LVI, respectively. Invasion potential was >2-fold greater in GSN-overexpressing LoVo cells than in control cells (p<0.001-0.005), whereas OAS2-overexpressing RKO cells showed reduced invasion (p<0.001-0.005). GSN downregulated E-cadherin, beta-catenin, claudin-1 and snail, and upregulated N-cadherin and ZEB1, whereas OAS2 overexpression had the opposite effects. Several autophagy-related proteins including ATG5-12, ATG6/BECN1, ATG7 and ATG101 were downregulated in GSN-overexpressing LoVo cells, whereas the opposite pattern was observed in OAS2-overexpressing RKO cells. Patients with low GSN expression had significantly higher 5-year recurrence-free survival (RFS) rates than those with GSN overexpression (73.6% vs. 64.7%, p = 0.038), whereas RFS was longer in patients with OAS2 overexpression than in those with underexpression (73.4% vs. 63.7%, p = 0.01). In conclusion, GSN and OAS2 were positively and negatively associated with recurrence, respectively, suggesting their potential value as predictors of recurrence or therapeutic targets in CRC patients.
Gelsolin (GSN) is an actin filament-capping protein that plays a key role in cell migration. Here we show that heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNPK) regulates GSN expression level by binding to the 3'-untranslated region (3'UTR) of GSN mRNA in non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) H1299 cells which are highly metastatic and express high level of GSN. We found that hnRNPK overexpression increased the mRNA and protein level of GSN, whereas hnRNPK knockdown by siRNA decreased the mRNA and protein level of GSN in both H1299 and A549 cells, indicating a positive role of hnRNPK in the regulation of GSN expression. Furthermore, hnRNPK knockdown affected the migration ability of H1299 and A549 cells which could be rescued by ectopic expression of GSN in those cells. Conversely, GSN knockdown in hnRNPK-overexpressing cells could abort the stimulatory effect of hnRNPK on the cell migration. These results suggest that hnRNPK function in the regulation of cell migration is GSN-dependent. Taken together, these data unveiled a new mechanism of regulation of the GSN expression by hnRNPK and provides new clues for the discovery of new anti-metastatic therapy.
Hereditary gelsolin amyloidosis (HGA) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease characterized by corneal lattice dystrophy, peripheral neuropathy, and cutis laxa. So far, no Korean patients with HGA have been reported. A 58-yr-old man presented with involuntary facial twitching, progressive bilateral facial weakness, and tongue atrophy. His mother, maternal uncle, two sisters, and son suffered from the same symptoms. Electrophysiological studies revealed signs of chronic denervation in the cervical and lumbar regions, mild sympathetic autonomic dysfunction, and bilateral facial nerve dysfunction. Diagnostic whole-exome sequencing (WES) revealed a p.D214Y heterozygous mutation in the gelsolin gene in affected members. We present the first report of a Korean family with HGA diagnosed by WES. WES facilitated a clinical diagnosis of HGA in patients with undiagnosed neuropathies.
Nucleic acid oxidation plays an important role in the pathophysiology progress of a variety of diseases. 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dGsn) and 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanosine (8-oxo-Gsn), which originate from DNA and RNA oxidation, were the most widely used indicators for oxidative stress. The study investigated the relation between 8-oxo-dGsn, 8-oxo-Gsn, and CKD. 146 patients with CKD were divided into five disease stages, and their fasting blood and morning urine were collected. The levels of 8-oxo-dGsn and 8-oxo-Gsn in plasma and urine were quantified by LC-MS/MS. The ratio of urinary 8-oxo-Gsn to creatinine increased from stages 1 to 4 corresponding to the increased severity of CKD, but it decreased in stage 5. And plasma 8-oxo-Gsn gradually increased with the decline of renal function. In particular, the increased ratio of plasma and urine 8-oxo-Gsn in stage 5 exceeded the concentration of creatinine. This trend was similar to the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), which indicates that 8-oxo-Gsn could be an appropriate indicator for renal function. Our finding indicates that as the disease progresses, RNA oxidation is increased. The significant increase in the ratio of plasma and urinary 8-oxo-Gsn is a novel evaluation index of end-stage renal disease.
Cardiomyocyte hypertrophy is an adaptive response of the heart to various types of stress. During the period of stress accumulation, the transition from physiological hypertrophy to pathological hypertrophy results in the promotion of heart failure. Gelsolin (GSN) is a member of the actin-binding proteins, which regulate dynamic actin filament organization by severing and capping. Moreover, GSN also regulates cell morphology, differentiation, movement, and apoptosis. In this study, we used H9c2 and H9c2-GSN stable clones in an attempt to understand the mechanisms of GSN overexpression in cardiomyocytes. These data showed that the overexpression of GSN in H9c2-induced cardiac hypertrophy and increased the pathological hypertrophy markers atrial natriuretic peptide brain natriuretic peptide. Furthermore, we found that E-cadherin expression decreased with the overexpression of GSN in H9c2, but beta-catenin expression increased. These data presume that the cytoskeleton is loose. Further, previous studies show that the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway can induce cardiac hypertrophy. Our data showed that p-p38 expression increased with the overexpression of GSN in H9c2, and the transcription factor p-GATA4 expression also increased, suggesting that the overexpression of GSN in H9c2-induced cardiac hypertrophy seemed to be regulated by the p38/GATA4 pathway. Moreover, we used both the p38 inhibitor (SB203580) and GSN siRNA to confirm our conjecture. We found that both of these factors significantly suppressed gelsolin-induced cardiac hypertrophy through p38/GATA4 signaling pathway. Therefore, we predict that the gene silencing of GSN and/or the downstream blocking of GSN along the p38 pathway could be applied to ameliorate pathological cardiac hypertrophy in the future.
Circadian clocks generate rhythms in cellular functions, including metabolism, to align biological processes with the 24-hour environment. Disruption of this alignment by shift work alters glucose homeostasis. Glucose homeostasis depends on signaling and allosteric control; however, the molecular mechanisms linking the clock to glucose homeostasis remain largely unknown. We investigated the molecular links between the clock and glycogen metabolism, a conserved glucose homeostatic process, in Neurospora crassa We find that glycogen synthase (gsn) mRNA, glycogen phosphorylase (gpn) mRNA, and glycogen levels, accumulate with a daily rhythm controlled by the circadian clock. Because the synthase and phosphorylase are critical to homeostasis, their roles in generating glycogen rhythms were investigated. We demonstrate that while gsn was necessary for glycogen production, constitutive gsn expression resulted in high and arrhythmic glycogen levels, and deletion of gpn abolished gsn mRNA rhythms and rhythmic glycogen accumulation. Furthermore, we show that gsn promoter activity is rhythmic and is directly controlled by core clock component white collar complex (WCC). We also discovered that WCC-regulated transcription factors, VOS-1 and CSP-1, modulate the phase and amplitude of rhythmic gsn mRNA, and these changes are similarly reflected in glycogen oscillations. Together, these data indicate the importance of clock-regulated gsn transcription over signaling or allosteric control of glycogen rhythms, a mechanism that is potentially conserved in mammals and critical to metabolic homeostasis.
We have recently performed the characterization of alternative splicing events (ASEs) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, which allows dysregulation of protein expression common for cancer cells. Such analysis demonstrated a high ASE prevalence among tumor samples, including tumor-specific alternative splicing in the GSN gene.In vitro studies confirmed that overall expression of either ASE-GSN or wild-type GSN (WT-GSN) isoform inversely correlated with cell proliferation, whereas the high ratio of ASE-GSN to WT-GSN correlated with increased cellular invasion. Additionally, a change in expression of either isoform caused compensatory changes in expression of the other isoform. Our results suggest that the overall expression and the balance between GSN isoforms are mediating factors in proliferation, while increased overall expression of ASE-GSN is specific to cancer tissues. As a result, we propose ASE-GSN can serve not only as a biomarker of disease and disease progression, but also as a neoantigen for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma treatment, for which only a limited number of disease-specific targeted therapies currently exist.
Glycogen synthases catalyze the transfer of a glucosyl moiety from a nucleotide phosphosugar to a nascent glycogen chain via an alpha1-->4 linkage. Although many genes coding for glycogen synthases have been described, the enzymes from rabbit and yeast are the best characterized. The fungus Neurospora crassa accumulates glycogen during exponential growth, and mobilizes it at the onset of stationary phase, or when placed at high temperature or starved for carbon. Through a PCR methodology, the gsn cDNA coding for the N. crassa glycogen synthase was isolated, and the amino acid sequence of the protein was deduced. The product of the cDNA seems to be the only glycogen synthase present in N. crassa. Characterization of the gsn cDNA revealed that it codes for a 706-amino acids protein, which is very similar to mammalian and yeast glycogen synthases. Gene expression increased during exponential growth, reaching its maximal level at the end of the exponential growth phase, which is consistent with the pattern of glycogen synthase activity and glycogen level. Expression of the gsn is highly regulated at the transcriptional level. Under culture conditions that induce heat shock, conidiation, and carbon starvation, expression of the gsn gene was decreased, and glycogen synthase activity and glycogen content behaved similarly.
Gelsolin (GSN) variants have been implicated in amyloidosis of the Finnish type. This case series reports a novel GSN:c.1477T>C,p.(Trp493Arg) variant in a family with ocular and systemic features consistent with Finnish Amyloidosis. Exome sequencing performed on affected individuals from two families manifesting cutis laxa and polymorphic corneal stromal opacities demonstrated the classic GSN:c.654G>A,p.Asp214Asn variant in single affected individual from one family, and a previously undocumented GSN:c.1477T>C variant in three affected first-degree relatives from a separate family. Immunohistochemical studies on corneal tissue from a proband with the c.1477T>C variant identified gelsolin protein within histologically defined corneal amyloid deposits. This study reports a novel association between the predicted pathogenic GSN:c.1477T>C variant and amyloidosis of the Finnish type, and is the first to provide functional evidence of a pathological GSN variant at a locus distant to the critical G2 calcium-binding region, resulting in the phenotype of amyloidosis of the Finnish type.
Low bone mineral density (BMD) is a risk factor for osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is more prevalent in females than in males. So far, the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying osteoporosis are unclear. Peripheral blood monocytes (PBMs) are precursors of bone-resorbing osteoclasts. This study aims to identify PBM-expressed proteins (genes) influencing hip BMD in humans. We utilized three independent study cohorts (N=34, 29, 40), including premenopausal Caucasians with discordant hip BMD. We studied PBM proteome-wide protein expression profiles in cohort 1 and identified 57 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between low vs. high BMD subjects. One protein gelsolin (GSN), after validation by Western blotting, was subject to follow-up. We compared GSN mRNA level in PBM between low vs. high BMD subjects in cohorts 2 and 3. We genotyped SNPs across GSN in 2286 unrelated Caucasians (cohort 4) and 1627 Chinese (cohort 5) and tested their association with hip BMD in females and males, respectively. We discovered and validated that GSN protein expression level in PBM was down-regulated 3.0-fold in low vs. high BMD subjects (P<0.05). Down-regulation of GSN in PBM in low BMD subjects was also observed at mRNA level in both cohort 2 and cohort 3. We identified that SNP rs767770 was significantly associated with hip BMD in female Caucasians (P=0.0003) only. Integrating analyses of the datasets at DNA, RNA, and protein levels from female Caucasians substantiated that GSN is highly significant for hip BMD (P=0.0001). We conclude that GSN is a significant gene influencing hip BMD in female Caucasians.
Geosocial networking applications (GSN apps) are widely utilized by gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (GBMSM) to meet potential sexual/romantic partners, foster friendships, and build community. However, GSN apps usage has been linked to elevated levels of HIV sexual risk behavior among GBMSM. Little is known about how GSN apps can facilitate HIV sexual risk behaviors, especially among GBMSM in Africa. To fill this gap in research, the present study aimed to characterize the frequency of GSN apps usage and its association with sociodemographic characteristics, sexual health, healthcare access, psychosocial problems, and substance use in a large multicity sample of community-recruited GBMSM in Nigeria (N = 406). Bivariate and multivariable ordinal logistic regression procedures were used to examine factors associated with GSN apps usage. We found that 52.6% of participants reported recent (</= 3 months) GSN apps use to meet sexual partners. Factors associated with increased odds of GSN apps usage included: being single, having a university degree or higher, reporting higher recent receptive anal sexual acts, being aware of PrEP, having a primary care provider, and reporting higher levels of identity concealment. HIV-related intervention delivered through GSN apps may help curb the spread of HIV among Nigerian GBMSM.
BACKGROUND: Cancers have dysfunctional redox regulation resulting in production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), damaging DNA, RNA and free NTPs, and causing the accumulation of oxidative nucleic acids in cytoplasm. The major types are 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine(8-oxoGsn) in RNA and 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2' deoxyguanosine(8-oxodGsn) in Mt-DNA. The MTH1 protein sanitizes oxidized nucleotide pools from NTPs to monophosphates, preventing the occurrence of transversion mutations. This study concerned cytoplasmic 8-oxodGsn/Gsn and MTH1 expression in gastric cancer and para-cancer tissues and elucidated roles of nucleic-acid oxidation and anti-oxidation. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A polymer HRP detection system was used to detect 8-oxo-Gsn/dGsn and MTH1 expression in 51 gastric cancer and para-cancer tissue samples. Analyses of patient clinical and pathological data were also performed. RESULTS: The expression of MTH1 and the 8-oxo-dGsn/Gsn ratio were significantly higher in cancer tissues than para-cancer tissues (P<0.05). Cytoplasmic 8-oxo-Gsn and MTH1 were both found to positively correlate (P<0.05) with tumor differentiation, while no significant associations were found with gender, age, invasion depth, lymph node metastasis and clinical stage (P>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: We found 8-oxo-dGsn/Gsn and MTH1 are both highly expressed in gastric cancer tissues, especially in well differentiated lesions. In addition, oxidated mtDNA is prevalently expressed in gastric cancers, while 8-oxo-Gsn expression in cytoplasmic RNA is a bit lower, but more selectively.
Colorectal cancers are derived from intestinal polyps. Normally, alterations in cell adhesion genes expression cause deviation from the normal cell cycle, leading to cancer development, progression, and invasion. The present study aimed to investigate the elusive expression pattern of CDC42, TAGLN, and GSN genes in patients with high and low-risk polyp samples, and also colorectal cancer patients and their adjacent normal tissues. In upcoming study, 40 biopsy samples from Taleghani Hospital (Tehran, Iran) were collected, consisting of 20 colon polyps and 20 paired adjacent normal tissues. The expression of the nominated genes CDC42, TAGLN, and GSN was analyzed using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) and relative quantification was determined using the 2(-DeltaDeltaCt) method. ROC curve analysis was performed to compare high-risk and low-risk polyps for the investigated genes. The expression of adhesion molecule genes was also evaluated using TCGA data and the correlation between adhesion molecule gene expression and immunophenotype was analyzed. The role of mi-RNAs and lncRNAs in overexpression of adhesion molecule genes was studied. Lastly, GO and KEGG were performed to identify pathways related to adhesion molecule genes expression in healthy, normal adjacent, and COAD tissues. The results showed that the expression patterns of these genes were significantly elevated in high-risk adenomas compared to low-risk polyps and normal tissues and were associated with various clinicopathological characteristics. The estimated AUC for CDC42, TAGLN, and GSN were 0.87, 0.77, and 0.80, respectively. The study also analyzed COAD cancer patient data and found that the selected gene expression in cancer patients was significantly reduced compared to high-risk polyps and healthy tissues. Survival analysis showed that while the expression level of the GSN gene had no significant relationship with survival rate, the expression of CDC42 and TAGLN genes did have a meaningful relationship, but with opposite effects, suggesting the potential use of these genes as diagnostic or prognostic markers for colorectal cancer. The present study's findings suggest that the expression pattern of CDC42, TAGLN, and GSN genes was significantly increased during the transformation of normal tissue to polyp lesions, indicating their potential as prognostic biomarkers for colorectal polyp development. Further results provide valuable insights into the potential use of these genes as diagnostic or prognostic markers for colorectal cancer. However, further studies are necessary to validate these findings in larger cohorts and to explore the underlying mechanisms of these genes in the development and progression of colorectal cancer.
