Glutathione reductase, mitochondrial; Maintains high levels of reduced glutathione in the cytosol.
In the investigation of gunshot deaths, Bloodstains Pattern Analysis (BPA) and, in particular, backspatter patterns found on the body of the suspect/victim and on the surfaces close to the entrance wound of the bullet can provide investigators with important indications on the dynamics of the events. Backspatter patterns have, however, morphological characteristics common to other bloodstains of different origin, so, in order to positively identify them, a possible solution is represented by their sampling, using an aluminum stub for electron microscopy, for the detection of gunshot residues (GSR) present. The latter, however, if present below the small blood crusts, could be difficult to detect during analysis by Scanning Electron Microscopy/Energy Dispersive X-ray microanalysis (SEM/EDX). In this preliminary study we propose the treatment of the stub surface with a solution based on sodium hypochlorite and calcium chloride, in order to remove/reduce the blood crusts present on the stub surface.
Each of nine Ss was run for 11 daily sessions. Except for the first (operant level) and last two (extinction) sessions, 500-ohm drops in skin resistance were followed by reinforcement (light). These reinforcement periods lasted 20 min and were preceded by 10-min control periods during which no reinforcement was administered. Although the results showed no evidence for operant conditioning of the GSR, they did indicate that increased emission of GSR's occurred during the reinforcement period. This effect was shown to hold for Ss with low operant levels of GSR's but not for Ss with high operant levels.
When a firearm is discharged, gunshot residue (GSR) is produced and may be deposited on a shooter's body and his close vicinity. The tendency of GSR to drop off easily from the shooter may hinder forensic detection; this well-known phenomenon is accelerated by various common physical activities so that the number of particles detected on a suspect decreases over time. After shooting incidents, suspects will often try to cover their tracks by taking a shower. In these cases, it was assumed that no GSR will be detected upon examining the suspect's hand and hair. In the present study, we provide a way to overcome this loss of evidence by taking advantage of another occurrence, namely secondary transfer. Our participants were asked to take a shower after shooting a firearm. Samples were thereafter collected from the used bath towels and were found to contain up to a few dozen particles characteristic of GSR, including very large particles (>45 microm). The detection of GSR on a suspect's towel may provide significant forensic evidence aiding an investigation. When a shooter tries to remove evidence by taking a shower, sampling the towels that he may have used can preserve important evidence and connect a suspect to a shooting incident.
Cognitive determinants of GSR activity during extinction trials were examined following conditioning. Conditioned GSRs extinguished rapidly when subjects were informed the UCS would not again be administered, compared to subjects not given this information. Of greater interest was the finding that (false) high feedback concerning subjects' responsivity to the Cs+ during extinction served to maintain GSR activity at a higher level than subjects receiving (false) low feedback. The relationship was observed within both information conditions. Implications are drawn for both aversive conditioning therapy and systematic desensitization.
The present study was designed to investigate the possible effect of auditory subliminal stimulation on GSR. 38 undergraduate students were exposed subliminally to emotional words while GSR was monitored. The results confirmed the hypothesis that auditory subliminal stimulation would effect a significant increase in GSR.
The study reports the use of lambda, a measure of sequential dependency developed by Lathrop (1964) in connection with electrodermal activity. Thirteen female subjects, ranging in age from 19 to 53, participated in a simple repeat-stimulus habituation experiment: GSR data in percent-change and lambda were compared. A high, positive correlation was obtained. Consequently, the use of lambda is advocated because it shows both initial value and sequential dependency and meets the criteria for analysis based on the probability of statistics such as t and F.
Previous studies of visual and auditory signal detection (Flexman & Demaree, 1972; Flexman, 1974; Flexman, Demaree & Simpson, 1974) have found that signals occurring during exhalation are detected with greater sensitivity than are signals occuring during inhalation. The purpose of the present study was to make use of a use of a signal detection paradigm (Green & Swets, 1966) in extending these phase-of-respiration findings to internal event detection, specifically, to the detection of spontaneous galvanic skin responses (GSRs). A secondary purpose of the study was to re-examine Stern's (1972) finding that high magnitude GSRs were better detected than were low magnitude GSRs. It was found that the phase of respiration during which the GRS reached its peak significantly influenced GSR detection, but that unlike studies of external signal detection, detection was greater for GSRs peaking during the inhalation than for GSRs peaking during exhalation. Some possible artifactual sources of this finding are discussed. No significant effect of GSR magnitude on GSR detection was observed although differences were in the expected direction.
Hereditary glutathione reductase deficiency, caused by mutations of the GSR gene, is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by decreased glutathione disulfide (GSSG) reduction activity and increased thermal instability. This study implemented computational analysis to screen the most likely mutation that might be associated with hereditary glutathione reductase deficiency and other diseases. Using ten online computational tools, the study revealed four nsSNPs among the 17 nsSNPs identified as most deleterious and disease associated. Structural analyses and evolutionary confirmation study of native and mutant GSR proteins using the HOPE project and ConSruf. HOPE revealed more flexibility in the native GSR structure than in the mutant structure. The mutation in GSR might be responsible for changes in the structural conformation and function of the GSR protein and might also play a significant role in inducing hereditary glutathione reductase deficiency. LD and haplotype studies of the gene revealed that the identified variations rs2978663 and rs8190955 may be responsible for obstructive heart defects (OHDs) and hereditary anemia, respectively. These interethnic differences in the frequencies of SNPs and haplotypes might help explain the unpredictability that has been reported in association studies and can contribute to predicting the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs that make use of GSR.
Taiwan has a large number of poorly managed contaminated sites in need of remediation. This study proposes a framework, a set of standards, and a spreadsheet-based evaluation tool for implementing green and sustainable principles into remediation projects and evaluating the projects from this perspective. We performed a case study to understand how the framework would be applied. For the case study, we used a spreadsheet-based evaluation tool (SEFA) and performed field scale cultivation tests on a site contaminated with total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs). The site was divided into two lots: one treated by chemical oxidation and the other by bioremediation. We evaluated five core elements of green and sustainable remediation (GSR): energy, air, water resources, materials and wastes, and land and ecosystem. The proposed evaluation tool and field scale cultivation test were found to efficiently assess the effectiveness of the two remediation alternatives. The framework and related tools proposed herein can potentially be used to support decisions about the remediation of contaminated sites taking into account engineering management, cost effectiveness, and social reconciliation.
A total of 15 healthy individuals of both sexes, aged from 18 to 30 years, were studied. The subjects were presented a series of three audio signals in each of two conditions. Under condition A the subject made a first immediately after the third signal if all the three sounds were identical; under condition B, a fist was made if at least one sound was different from the other two. The GSR was particularly pronounced when the decision to make or not to make a fist was made under conditions where action was delayed.
Experiments were carried out to assess the danger of concealing GSR particles by skin debris using the tape-lift method for sampling GSR from hands. Thirty discrete spherical particles (from GSR and from the debris of oxygen cutting of steel) sized from 8 to 30 microns were mounted on a double-side adhesive coated stubs in known locations using a stereomicroscope. These stubs were then used for dabbing hands 50 times. Some of the particles or parts thereof were covered by skin flakes, however, all particles could be detected using the backscattered electron image (BEI) in the scanning electron microscope (SEM). Also, all could be identified by the energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX).
Hyperscanning is a brain imaging technique that measures brain synchrony caused by social interactions. Recent research on hyperscanning has revealed substantial inter-brain synchrony (IBS), but little is known about the link between IBS and mental workload. To study this link, we conducted an experiment consisting of button-pressing tasks of three different difficulty levels for the cooperation and competition modes with 56 participants aged 23.7+/- 3.8 years (mean+/-standard deviation). We attempted to observe IBS using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) and galvanic skin response (GSR) to assess the activities of the human autonomic nervous system. We found that the IBS levels increased in a frequency band of 0.075-0.15 Hz, which was unrelated to the task repetition frequency in the cooperation mode according to the task difficulty level. Significant relative inter-brain synchrony (RIBS) increases were observed in three and 10 channels out of 15 for the hard tasks compared to the normal and easy tasks, respectively. We observed that the average GSR values increased with increasing task difficulty levels for the competition mode only. Thus, our results suggest that the IBS revealed by fNIRS and GSR is not related to the hemodynamic changes induced by mental workload, simple behavioral synchrony such as button-pressing timing, or autonomic nervous system activity. IBS is thus explicitly caused by social interactions such as cooperation.
Physical fatigue is frequent for heavy manual laborers like construction workers, but it causes distraction and may lead to safety incidents. The purpose of this study is to develop predictive models for monitoring construction workers' inattention caused by physical fatigue utilizing electrocardiograph (ECG) and galvanic skin response (GSR) sensors. Thirty participants were invited to complete an attention-demanding task under non-fatigued and physically fatigued conditions. Supervised learning algorithms were utilized to develop models predicting their attentional states, with heart rate variability (HRV) features derived from ECG signals and skin electric activity features derived from GSR signals as data inputs. The results demonstrate that using HRV features alone could obtain a prediction accuracy of 88.33%, and using GSR features alone could achieve an accuracy of 76.67%, both through the KNN algorithm. The accuracy increased to 96.67% through the SVM algorithm when combining HRV and GSR features. The findings indicate that ECG sensors used alone or in combination with GSR sensors can be applied to monitor construction workers' inattention on job sites. The findings would provide an approach for detecting distracted workers at job sites. Additionally, it might reveal the relationships between workers' physiological features and attention.
Understanding the underlying neurobiology of bipolar disorder especially in the euthymic state is essential to furthering our understanding of pertinent psychiatric questions involving the observed symptomatology of the illness. In this study we investigated the mechanisms that underpin the modulation of affect in bipolar disorder to examine the contributions of cortico-limbic brain networks in the processing of affect. We employed a simultaneous functional magnetic resonance imaging and galvanic skin response methodology to investigate top-down networks in euthymic bipolar patients and healthy controls. Galvanic skin responsivity was used to partition neural epochs in which arousal pertaining to the appreciation of disgust stimuli was processed. The results of this study demonstrate that patients with bipolar disorder exhibited impairments in the recruitment of top-down brain networks and as such were unable to engage, to the same extent as matched controls, essential prefrontal processing needed to evaluate emotional salience. Partitioning top-down networks on the basis of arousal measures provided a context within which the modulation of brain networks specialised for the processing of emotion, as well as their interplay with other brain regions including the frontal lobes, could be studied.
DNA from epidermal cells attached to the adhesive tape of stubs employed to collect and identify gunshot residue (GSR) with scanning electron microscope (SEM) was extracted, amplified with PCR and typed. The method allowed identification of specimens when attribution to a definite person was uncertain. These results also suggest that adhesive tape could be used as a non invasive method for obtaining biological material suitable for DNA analysis from the skin surface.
BACKGROUND: The analysis of brain activity in different conditions is an important research area in neuroscience. OBJECTIVE: This paper analyzed the correlation between the brain and skin activities in rest and stimulations by information-based analysis of electroencephalogram (EEG) and galvanic skin resistance (GSR) signals. METHODS: We recorded EEG and GSR signals of eleven subjects during rest and auditory stimulations using three pieces of music that were differentiated based on their complexity. Then, we calculated the Shannon entropy of these signals to quantify their information contents. RESULTS: The results showed that music with greater complexity has a more significant effect on altering the information contents of EEG and GSR signals. We also found a strong correlation (r= 0.9682) among the variations of the information contents of EEG and GSR signals. Therefore, the activities of the skin and brain are correlated in different conditions. CONCLUSION: This analysis technique can be utilized to evaluate the correlation among the activities of various organs versus brain activity in different conditions.
