Glutathione S-transferase P; Conjugation of reduced glutathione to a wide number of exogenous and endogenous hydrophobic electrophiles. Regulates negatively CDK5 activity via p25/p35 translocation to prevent neurodegeneration.
Ferroptosis is a non-apoptotic form of regulated cell death. Glutathione (GSH) peroxidase 4 (GPX4) and GSH-independent ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1) have been identified as major defenses. Here, we uncover a protective mechanism mediated by GSH S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) by monitoring proteinomic dynamics during ferroptosis. Dramatic downregulation of GSTP1 is caused by SMURF2-mediated GSTP1 ubiquitination and degradation at early stages of ferroptosis. Intriguingly, GSTP1 acts in GPX4- and FSP1-independent manners by catalyzing GSH conjugation of 4-hydroxynonenal and detoxifying lipid hydroperoxides via selenium-independent GSH peroxidase activity. Genetic modulation of the SMURF2/GSTP1 axis or the pharmacological inhibition of GSTP1's catalytic activity sensitized tumor responses to Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved ferroptosis-inducing drugs both in vitro and in vivo. GSTP1 expression also confers resistance to immune checkpoint inhibitors by blunting ferroptosis. Collectively, these findings demonstrate a GPX4/FSP1-independent cellular defense mechanism against ferroptosis and suggest that targeting SMURF2/GSTP1 to sensitize cancer cells to ferroptosis has potential as an anticancer therapy.
Ovarian cancer is one of the leading causes of mortality in women worldwide. Currently, paclitaxel is one of the most effective chemotherapies. However, resistance to paclitaxel is a major cause of therapy failure and the precise mechanism of paclitaxel resistance remains unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) promotes paclitaxel resistance. We showed that G6PD expression was higher in paclitaxel-resistant cancer cells than in their paclitaxel-sensitive counterparts. Furthermore, we demonstrated that suppressing G6PD using shRNA, or an inhibitor, either as single agents or in combination, sensitized paclitaxel-resistant cancer cells to paclitaxel treatment and thereby improving the therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel. Interestingly, we found that the upregulation of G6PD in paclitaxel-resistant cells was due to the decreased expression of protein arginine methyltransferase 6 (PRMT6), which targets the promoter of G6PD. We further identified that G6PD promotes paclitaxel resistance by regulating the expression of glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), which confers resistance to chemotherapy by detoxifying several anticancer drugs. Taken together, our results suggest that G6PD is a novel potential target to overcome paclitaxel resistance.
Glutathione S-transferase Pi (GSTP1) mediates cellular defense against reactive electrophiles. Here, we report LAS17, a dichlorotriazine-containing compound that irreversibly inhibits GSTP1 and is selective for GSTP1 within cellular proteomes. Mass spectrometry and mutational studies identified Y108 as the site of modification, providing a unique mode of GSTP1 inhibition.
Glutathione S-transferase pi (GSTP1), a phase II detoxification enzyme, is known to be overexpressed and mediates chemotherapeutic resistance in lung cancer. However, whether GSTP1 supports cancer stem cells (CSCs) and the underlying mechanisms in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) remain largely unknown. This study unveiled that GSTP1 is upregulated in lung CSCs and supports tumor self-renewal, metastasis, and resistance to targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitors of LUAD both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, CaMK2A (calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 2 isoform A)/NRF2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2)/GSTP1 is uncovered as a regulatory axis under hypoxia. CaMK2A increased GSTP1 expression through phosphorylating the Sersine558 residue of NRF2 and promoting its nuclear translocation, a novel mechanism for NRF2 activation apart from conventional oxidization-dependent activation. Upregulation of GSTP1 in turn suppressed reactive oxygen species levels and supported CSC phenotypes. Clinically, GSTP1 analyzed by immunohistochemistry is upregulated in a proportion of LUAD and serves as a prognostic marker for survival. Using patient-derived organoids from an ALK-translocated LUAD, the therapeutic potential of a specific GSTP1 inhibitor ezatiostat in combination treatment with the ALK inhibitor crizotinib is demonstrated. This study demonstrates GSTP1 to be a promising therapeutic target for long-term control of LUAD through targeting CSCs.
The promoter region of the human GSTP1 gene contains a polymorphic short tandem repeat (STR) locus consisting of pentanucleotide repeat units (ATAAA). In this work we report the existence of a total of 26 alleles in a Caucasian population. While differences in size (ranging from one to five base pairs) were responsible for the major variation, in five size-defined classes, two alternative sequences were found. Automatic fragment sizing and sequencing analysis revealed that this polymorphism is of a highly complex nature in contrast with previous reports. A genetic population study was carried out on a random sample from Portugal showing no deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Somatic instability studies were also performed on gastric and thyroid tumours using this STR: no instability was detected in thyroid tumour tissues when compared with their normal counterpart but in gastric tumour tissues microsatellite instability (MSI) was detected in 9.6% of the cases and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) also in 9.6% of the cases studied. The results obtained with GSTP1 in gastric cancer were compared with previously reported data on MSI using BAT-26 and several dinucleotide repeat markers.
The coding region of GSTP1 gene is preceded by a large CpG-rich region that is frequently affected by methylation. In many cancer types, GSTP1 is affected by hypermethylation and, as a consequence, it has a low expression. The aim of this review is to give an overview on GSTP1 methylation studies with a special focus on liquid biopsy, thus to summarize methods, results, sample types, different diseases, to have a complete information regarding this promising epigenetic biomarker. We used all the most valuable scientific search engines (PubMed, Medline, Scopus and Web of Science) searching the following keywords: GSTP1, methylation, cancer, urine, serum, plasma and blood. GSTP1 is a largely investigated tissue biomarker in several malignancies such as prostate, breast, lung and hepatocellular carcinoma with good performances especially for diagnostic purposes. As a liquid biopsy biomarker, it has been mainly investigated in prostate cancer (PCa) where it showed a high specificity but a low sensitivity; thus, it is recommended in combination with other biomarkers. Despite the large number of published papers and the promising results, GSTP1 has not yet entered the clinical practice even for PCa diagnosis. For this reason, further large and prospective studies are needed to validate this assay.
Endogenous DNA damage levels were analyzed in relation to polymorphisms in genes encoding phase I detoxifying enzyme-CYP1A1, phase II detoxifying enzymes-GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 and enzyme involved in nucleotide excision repair-XPD. The study group consisted of 220 healthy non-smoking volunteers; 90 men and 130 woman, 25-60 years old (44 +/- 10 years). The level of DNA damage (% DNA in tail) was evaluated by alkaline comet assay. The genetic variants were determined by restriction fragment length polymorphism PCR. The highest level of DNA damage (6.7%) was found in carriers of both: AA variant of XPD gene and M1 null variant of GSTM1 gene. The lowest level of DNA breaks (3.7%) was associated with the genotype GSTP1-AA/GSTM1 (+).
PURPOSE: Oxidative stress is thought to play an important role in the pathophysiology of pre-eclampsia. Polymorphism of Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) protect cells against the cytotoxic effects of reactive compounds. Published data on the association between the GSTP1 polymorphism and pre-eclampsia risk are controversial. A meta-analysis was performed to assess whether the polymorphisms of GSTP1 are associated with pre-eclampsia risk. METHODS: Medline, Embase, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, and Chinese Biomedicine Databases were searched to identify eligible studies. Pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for GSTP1 polymorphism and pre-eclampsia were appropriately derived from fixed-effects or random effects models. RESULTS: A total of six studies were enrolled in this meta-analysis. The pooled analyses revealed that GSTP1 polymorphism was not associated with pre-eclampsia risk. Heterogeneity among studies was founded in allele contrast. Galbraith plot analyses were performed to assess the source of heterogeneity and one study was found to be contributor of heterogeneity. The heterogeneity decreased significantly after excluding that study. CONCLUSION: Present meta-analysis demonstrates that GSTP1 polymorphism may be not correlated with pre-eclampsia risk.
BACKGROUND: The incidence of endometrial cancer (EC) is still rising. Numerous risk factors including patient characteristics and molecular instability have been identified for EC. The presence of specific molecular markers allows specific diagnostic and prognostic approaches. Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified to influence endometrial cancer risk. Metalloestrogens are metal ions which can mimic estrogen activity; however, their role in uterine pathologies remains unknown. This study aimed to investigate total blood trace elements levels and evaluate the distribution of selected genotypes in GSTP1 and SLC11A2 genes. METHODS: This retrospective case-control analysis was carried out in peripheral blood samples of 110 women with endometrial cancer (EC; n = 21), uterine fibroma (n = 25), endometrial polyp (n = 48), and normal endometrium (n = 16). Analysis included measurement of metals and phosphor in serum, and of genetic polymorphisms in GST (rs1695) and SLC11A2 (rs224589) in DNA from white blood cells. Serum trace elements were measured using ICP-OES spectrometry. SNPs were identified using Taq Man real-time PCR genotyping assays. RESULTS: The study confirmed higher age (OR 2.19, 95% CI 1.69-2.24), post-menopausal status (OR 1.89, 95% CI 1.36-1.94), and diabetes type 2 (OR 1.54; 95% CI 0.97-1.72) as independent risk factors for EC. We also found a high level of Cd (OR 1.49; 95% CI 1.31-1.63) and a low level of Co (OR 0.76; 95% CI 0.53-0.59) to be independent risk factors of EC. None of the tested polymorphisms of GSTP1 and SLC11A2 were associated with EC risk. However, high Cd (OR 1.21, 95% CI 1.15-1.29) and Ni (OR 1.07, 95% CI 1.05-1.18) serum levels were significantly associated with a SLC1A2 TG genotype, and high Cd levels with GSTP1 (OR 1.05, 95% CI 1.01-1.13).
In first part of this study, a systematic review was designed to explore the involvement of CYP1A1 and GSTP1 genes in breast cancerogenesis. Based on systematic review, we designed a study to screen CYP1A1 and GSTP1 genes for mutation and their possible association with breast carcinogenesis. A total of 400 individuals were collected and analyzed by PCR-SSCP. After sequence analysis of coding region of CYP1A1 we identified eleven mutations in different exons of respective gene. Among these eleven mutations, ~3 folds increased breast cancer risk was found associated with Asp82Glu mutation (OR 2.99; 95% CI 1.26-7.09), with Ser83Thr mutation (OR 2.99; 95% CI 1.26-7.09) and with Glu86Ala mutation (OR 3.18; 95% CI 1.27-7.93) in cancer patients compared to controls. Furthermore, ~4 folds increase in breast cancer risk was found associated with Asp347Glu, Phe398Tyr and 5178delT mutations (OR 3.92; 95% CI 1.35-11.3) in patients compared to controls. The sequence analysis of GSTP1 resulted in identification of total five mutations. Among these five mutations, ~3 folds increase in breast cancer risk was observed associated with 1860G>A mutation, with 1861-1876delCAGCCCTCTGGAGTGG mutation (OR 2.70; 95% CI 1.10-6.62) and with 1861C>A mutation (OR 2.97; 95% CI 1.01-8.45) in cancer patients compared to controls. Furthermore, ~5 folds increase in breast cancer risk was associated with 1883G>T mutation (OR 4.75; 95% CI 1.46-15.3) and ~6 folds increase in breast cancer risk was found associated with Iso105Val mutation (OR 6.43; 95% CI 1.41-29.3) in cancer patients compared to controls. Our finding, based on systematic review and experimental data suggest that the polymorphic CYP1A1 and GSTP1 genes may contribute to risk of developing breast cancer.
The glutathione S-transferase P1(GSTP1) is an isoenzyme in the glutathione-S transferases (GSTs) enzyme system, which is the most abundant GSTs expressed in adult lungs. Recent research shows that GSTP1 is closely related to the regulation of cell oxidative stress, inhibition of cell apoptosis and promotion of cytotoxic metabolism. Interestingly, there is evidence that GSTP1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) 105Ile/Val related to the risk of radiation induced lung injury (RILI) development, which strongly suggests that GSTP1 is closely associated with the occurrence and development of RILI. In this review, we discuss our understanding of the role of GSTP1 in RILI and its possible mechanism.
OBJECTIVE: To quantitatively investigate the effect of GSTP1 hypermethylation on hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using a meta-analysis of available case-control studies. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Previous studies have primarily evaluated the incidence of GSTP1 hypermethylation in HCC and corresponding control groups, and compared the incidence of GSTP1 hypermethylation in tumor tissues, pericancer liver tissues, normal liver issues, and nontumor liver tissues with that in other diseases. Data regarding publication information, study characteristics, and incidence of GSTP1 hypermethylation in both groups were collected from these studies and summarized. Eleven studies, including 546 cases of HCC and 575 nontumor cases, were identified for meta-analysis. RESULTS: Statistically significant odds ratios (ORs) of GSTP1 hypermethylation were obtained from tumor tissues and nontumorous liver tissues of HCC patients (OR 2.63, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.77-3.89%, P < 0.0001), tumor tissues of HCC patients, healthy liver tissues of patients with other diseases (OR 7.29, 95% CI: 2.87-18.51%, P < 0.0001), tumor tissues of HCC patients, and liver tissues of patients with nontumorous liver diseases (OR 2.13, 95% CI: 1.10-4.13%, P < 0.05). The pooled analysis showed significantly increased ORs of GSTP1 hypermethylation (OR 2.21, 95% CI: 1.01-4.84%, P < 0.05) from HCC tissues and cirrhotic tissues. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this meta-analysis suggest that GSTP1 hypermethylation induces the inactivation of GSTP1 gene, plays an important role in hepatocarcinogenesis, and is associated with an increased risk of HCC.
PURPOSE: Genetic variations are related to individual differences of DNA repair ability and drug metabolism, which can greatly influence prognosis of antineoplastic agents, such as oxaliplatin. The aim was to explore the influences of X-ray repair cross-complementing 1(XRCC1) and Glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) genetic variants on prognosis of oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in colorectal cancer patients. METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis including 13 original studies with a total number of 1,234 patients in advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer. Tumor responses [complete response, partial response, stable disease (SD) and progressive disease (PD)] and progression-free survival were estimated. RESULTS: Our results showed that XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism was significantly associated with tumor chemotherapy when SD or PD was considered as non-response [risk ratio (RR) = 1.29; 95% confidence intervals (CI): 1.05-1.60; P = 0.02]. No significant association was found between GSTP1 Ile105 Val polymorphism and tumor response (RR = 0.63; 95% CI: 0.35-1.14; P = 0.13). In addition, our results also showed that there was no significant association between XRCC1 codon 399 Arg/Gln or Gln/Gln genotypes and hazard ratio for progression-free survival (Hazards ratio = 1.04 and 1.92; 95% CI: 0.75-1.43 and 0.62-1.37; P = 0.826 and 0.677, respectively). CONCLUSION: In our meta-analysis, XRCC1 Arg399Gln polymorphism may be a valuable genetic marker for oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy in colorectal cancer, and the results still need further confirmation.
