Guanylyl cyclase-activating protein 1; Stimulates retinal guanylyl cyclase when free calcium ions concentration is low and inhibits guanylyl cyclase when free calcium ions concentration is elevated. This Ca(2+)-sensitive regulation of retinal guanylyl cyclase is a key event in recovery of the dark state of rod photoreceptors following light exposure (By similarity). May be involved in cone photoreceptor light response and recovery of response in bright light (By similarity).
Here, we report two novel GUCA1A (the gene for guanylate cyclase activating protein 1) mutations identified in unrelated Spanish families affected by autosomal dominant retinal degeneration (adRD) with cone and rod involvement. All patients from a three-generation adRD pedigree underwent detailed ophthalmic evaluation. Total genome scan using single-nucleotide polymorphisms and then the linkage analysis were undertaken on the pedigree. Haplotype analysis revealed a 55.37 Mb genomic interval cosegregating with the disease phenotype on chromosome 6p21.31-q15. Mutation screening of positional candidate genes found a heterozygous transition c.250C>T in exon 4 of GUCA1A, corresponding to a novel mutation p.L84F. A second missense mutation, c.320T>C (p.I107T), was detected by screening of the gene in a Spanish patients cohort. Using bioinformatics approach, we predicted that either haploinsufficiency or dominant-negative effect accompanied by creation of a novel function for the mutant protein is a possible mechanism of the disease due to c.250C>T and c.320T>C. Although additional functional studies are required, our data in relation to the c.250C>T mutation open the possibility that transacting factors binding to de novo created recognition site resulting in formation of aberrant splicing variant is a disease model which may be more widespread than previously recognized as a mechanism causing inherited RD.
We report a mutation (Y99C) in guanylate cyclase activator 1A (GUCA1A), the gene for guanylate cyclase activating protein (GCAP1), in a family with autosomal dominant cone dystrophy. Linkage analysis excluded all the known cone and cone-rod dystrophy loci, except the chromosome 6p21.1 region. This is known to contain the RDS gene, which is associated with dominant cone-rod dystrophy. Screening of the RDS gene by heteroduplex analysis and direct sequencing failed to demonstrate sequence changes in the coding region of this gene. The gene for GCAP1, a calcium binding protein which is highly expressed in photoreceptor outer segments, is also located in 6p21.1. It was screened for mutations, and all affected individuals showed a single base pair missense mutation (A-->G) at codon 99 in exon 2 of this gene generating a tyrosine-to-cysteine change in the GCAP1 protein. This change was absent from 206 unrelated normal controls. We propose that this change would at least disrupt the EF3handof GCAP1 thereby preventing calcium binding and consequently interfere with activation. The resulting effect on cGMP production would predictably modify the number of open cGMP gated cation channels, and could explain the ultimate demise of cone photoreceptor cells.
PURPOSE: To compare the phenotype of patients with heterozygous mutation in GUCY2D or GUCA1A causing autosomal dominant cone or cone-rod dystrophies. METHODS: Five patients from one family with GUCA1A and nine patients from four families with GUCY2D mutations were included. Psychophysical and electrophysiological examinations were performed to study retinal function. Fundus autofluorescence imaging and spectral domain optical coherence tomography were performed for morphologic characterization. RESULTS: Genetic analysis revealed the mutation c.451C>T (p.L151F) in the GUCA1A family. In the GUCY2D group, c.2512C>T (p.R838C) was the most frequent (2 families), c.2512C>G (p.R838G) and c.2513G>A (p.R838H) were found in one family each. Visual acuity was reduced to 0.04 to 0.7 in GUCA1A and to 0.014 to 0.5 in patients with GUCY2D. Dark adaptation showed elevated thresholds in the GUCY2D group. Scotopic electroretinography revealed a tendency to a more affected rod function in the GUCY2D group. Photopic electroretinography showed residual or absent responses in both groups. Fundus alterations were confined to the macula in both groups. CONCLUSION: GUCA1A and GUCY2D mutations are both accompanied by similar pattern of generalized cone dysfunction with a tendency to less involvement of the rod photoreceptors and a less severe phenotype in patients with GUCA1A.
PURPOSE: Sixteen different mutations in the guanylate cyclase activator 1A gene (GUCA1A), have been previously identified to cause autosomal dominant cone dystrophy (adCOD), cone-rod dystrophy (adCORD), macular dystrophy (adMD), and in an isolated patient, retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The purpose of this study is to report on two novel mutations and the patients' clinical features. METHODS: Clinical investigations included visual acuity and visual field testing, fundus examination, high-resolution spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus autofluorescence imaging, and full-field and multifocal electroretinogram (ERG) recordings. GUCA1A was screened by Sanger sequencing in a cohort of 12 French families with adCOD, adCORD, and adMD. RESULTS: We found two novel GUCA1A mutations-one amino acid deletion, c.302_304delTAG (p.Val101del), and one missense mutation, c.444T>A (p.Asp148Glu)-each of which was found in one family. The p.Asp148Glu mutation affected one of the Ca(2+)-binding amino acids of the EF4 hand, while the p.Val101del mutation resulted in the in-frame deletion of Valine-101, localized between two Ca(2+)-binding aspartic acid residues at positions 100 and 102 of the EF3 hand. Both families complained of visual acuity loss worsening with age. However, the p.Asp148Glu mutation was present in one family with adCOD involving abnormal cone function and an absence of macular atrophy, whereas p.Val101del mutation was encountered in another family with adMD without a generalized cone defect. CONCLUSIONS: The two novel mutations described in this study are associated with distinct phenotypes, MD for p.Val101del and COD for p.Asp148Glu, with no intrafamilial phenotypic heterogeneity.
The GUCA1A gene encodes the guanylate cyclase activating protein 1 (GCAP1) of mammalian rod and cone photoreceptor cells, which is involved in the Ca2+-dependent negative feedback regulation of membrane bound guanylate cyclases in the retina. Mutations in the GUCA1A gene have been associated with different forms of cone dystrophies leading to impaired cone vision and retinal degeneration. Here we report the identification of three novel and one previously detected GUCA1A mutations: c.265G>A (p.Glu89Lys), c.300T>A (p.Asp100Glu), c.476G>T (p.Gly159Val) and c.451C>T (p.Leu151Phe). The clinical data of the patients carrying these mutations were compared with the functional consequences of the mutant GCAP1 forms. For this purpose we purified the heterologously expressed GCAP1 forms and investigated whether the mutations affected the Ca2+-triggered conformational changes and the apparent interaction affinity with the membrane bound guanylate cyclase. Furthermore, we analyzed Ca2+-dependent regulatory modes of wildtype and mutant GCAP1 forms. Although all novel mutants were able to act as a Ca2+-sensor protein, they differed in their Ca2+-dependent activation profiles leading to a persistent stimulation of guanylate cyclase activities at physiological intracellular Ca2+ concentration.
GUCA1A gene variants are associated with autosomal dominant (AD) cone dystrophy (COD) and cone-rod dystrophy (CORD). GUCA1A-associated AD-COD/CORD has never been reported in the Japanese population. The purpose of this study was to investigate clinical and genetic features of GUCA1A-associated AD-COD/CORD from a large Japanese cohort. We identified 8 variants [c.C50_80del (p.E17VfsX22), c.T124A (p.F42I), c.C204G (p.D68E), c.C238A (p.L80I), c.T295A (p.Y99N), c.A296C (p.Y99S), c.C451T (p.L151F), and c.A551G (p.Q184R)] in 14 families from our whole exome sequencing database composed of 1385 patients with inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) from 1192 families. Three variants (p.Y99N, p.Y99S, and p.L151F), which are located on/around EF-hand domains 3 and 4, were confirmed as "pathogenic", whereas the other five variants, which did not co-segregate with IRDs, were considered "non-pathogenic". Ophthalmic findings of 9 patients from 3 families with the pathogenic variants showed central visual impairment from early to middle-age onset and progressive macular atrophy. Electroretinography revealed severely decreased or non-recordable cone responses, whereas rod responses were highly variable, ranging from nearly normal to non-recordable. Our results indicate that the three pathogenic variants, two of which were novel, underlie AD-COD/CORD with progressive retinal atrophy, and the prevalence (0.25%, 3/1192 families) of GUCA1A-associated IRDs may be low among Japanese patients.
PURPOSE: To document longitudinal fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and electroretinogram (ERG) findings in a family with cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) caused by a novel missense mutation (D100G) in the GUCA1A gene. METHODS: Observational case series. RESULTS: Three family members 26-49 years old underwent complete clinical examinations. In all patients, funduscopic findings showed intraretinal pigment migration, loss of neurosensory retinal pigment epithelium, and macular atrophy. FAF imaging revealed the presence of a progressive hyperautofluorescent ring around a hypoautofluorescent center corresponding to macular atrophy. Full-field ERGs showed a more severe loss of cone than rod function in each patient. Thirty-hertz flicker responses fell far below normal limits. Longitudinal FAF and ERG findings in one patient suggested progressive CRD. Two more advanced patients exhibited reduced rod response consistent with disease stage. Direct sequencing of the GUCA1A gene revealed a new missense mutation, p.Asp100Gly (D100G), in each patient. CONCLUSION: Patients with autosomal dominant CRD caused by a D100G mutation in GUCA1A exhibit progressive vision loss early within the first decade of life identifiable by distinct ERG characteristics and subsequent genetic testing.
Guanylate cyclase-activating protein 1 (GCAP1), encoded by the GUCA1A gene, is a neuronal calcium sensor protein involved in shaping the photoresponse kinetics in cones and rods. GCAP1 accelerates or slows the cGMP synthesis operated by retinal guanylate cyclase (GC) based on the light-dependent levels of intracellular Ca(2+), thereby ensuring a timely regulation of the phototransduction cascade. We found a novel variant of GUCA1A in a patient affected by autosomal dominant cone dystrophy (adCOD), leading to the Asn104His (N104H) amino acid substitution at the protein level. While biochemical analysis of the recombinant protein showed impaired Ca(2+) sensitivity of the variant, structural properties investigated by circular dichroism and limited proteolysis excluded major structural rearrangements induced by the mutation. Analytical gel filtration profiles and dynamic light scattering were compatible with a dimeric protein both in the presence of Mg(2+) alone and Mg(2+) and Ca(2+). Enzymatic assays showed that N104H-GCAP1 strongly interacts with the GC, with an affinity that doubles that of the WT. The doubled IC(50) value of the novel variant (520 nM for N104H vs. 260 nM for the WT) is compatible with a constitutive activity of GC at physiological levels of Ca(2+). The structural region at the interface with the GC may acquire enhanced flexibility under high Ca(2+) conditions, as suggested by 2 mus molecular dynamics simulations. The altered interaction with GC would cause hyper-activity of the enzyme at both low and high Ca(2+) levels, which would ultimately lead to toxic accumulation of cGMP and Ca(2+) in the photoreceptor outer segment, thus triggering cell death.
Ten mutations in the guanylate cyclase activator 1A (GUCA1A) have been previously identified and reported in patients with retinal degeneration, including patients from 12 families with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD) and in an isolated patient with retinitis pigmentosa (RP). In this study, the coding exons and adjacent regions of GUCA1A were evaluated in 130 probands with CORD from 130 unrelated Chinese families using Sanger sequencing. A novel heterozygous c.464A>C (p.Glu155Ala) mutation was detected in a proband from a large family. The mutation presented in all nine patients examined in that family, but it was absent in six unaffected family members and 192 normal controls. All the nine patients in that family expressed typical CORD in eight cases and atypical CORD in one case. The results of this study suggested that the GUCA1A mutation only contributes to a small portion of CORD in people of Chinese descent.
Guanylate Cyclase-Activating Protein 1 (GCAP1) regulates the enzymatic activity of the photoreceptor guanylate cyclases (GC), leading to inhibition or activation of the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) synthesis depending on its Ca2+- or Mg2+-loaded state. By genetically screening a family of patients diagnosed with cone-rod dystrophy, we identified a novel missense mutation with autosomal dominant inheritance pattern (c.332A>T; p.(Glu111Val); E111V from now on) in the GUCA1A gene coding for GCAP1. We performed a thorough biochemical and biophysical investigation of wild type (WT) and E111V human GCAP1 by heterologous expression and purification of the recombinant proteins. The E111V substitution disrupts the coordination of the Ca2+ ion in the high-affinity site (EF-hand 3, EF3), thus significantly decreasing the ability of GCAP1 to sense Ca2+ ( approximately 80-fold higher Kdapp compared to WT). Both WT and E111V GCAP1 form dimers independently on the presence of cations, but the E111V Mg2+-bound form is prone to severe aggregation over time. Molecular dynamics simulations suggest a significantly increased flexibility of both the EF3 and EF4 cation binding loops for the Ca2+-bound form of E111V GCAP1, in line with the decreased affinity for Ca2+. In contrast, a more rigid backbone conformation is observed in the Mg2+-bound state compared to the WT, which results in higher thermal stability. Functional assays confirm that E111V GCAP1 interacts with the target GC with a similar apparent affinity (EC50); however, the mutant shifts the GC inhibition out of the physiological [Ca2+] (IC50E111V  approximately 10 muM), thereby leading to the aberrant constitutive synthesis of cGMP under conditions of dark-adapted photoreceptors.
Genetic heterogeneity leading to retinal disorders impairs biological processes by causing, for example, severe disorder of signal transduction in photoreceptor outer segments. A normal balance of the second messenger homeostasis in photoreceptor cells seems to be a crucial factor for healthy and normal photoreceptor function. Genes like GUCY2D coding for guanylate cyclase GC-E and GUCA1A coding for the Ca(2+)-sensor guanylate cyclase-activating protein GCAP1 are critical for a precisely controlled synthesis of the second messenger cGMP. Mutations in GUCA1A frequently correlate in patients with cone dystrophy and cone-rod dystrophy. Here, we report two mutations in the GUCA1A gene that were found in patients diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa, a phenotype that was rarely detected among previous cases of GUCA1A related retinopathies. One patient was heterozygous for the missense variant c.55C > T (p.H19Y), while the other patient was heterozygous for the missense variant c.479T > G (p.V160G). Using heterologous expression and cell culture systems, we examined the functional and molecular consequences of these point mutations. Both variants showed a dysregulation of guanylate cyclase activity, either a profound shift in Ca(2+)-sensitivity (H19Y) or a nearly complete loss of activating potency (V160G). Functional heterogeneity became also apparent in Ca(2+)/Mg(2+)-binding properties and protein conformational dynamics. A faster progression of retinal dystrophy in the patient carrying the V160G mutation seems to correlate with the more severe impairment of this variant.
PURPOSE: To determine the underlying molecular genetic basis of a retinal dystrophy identified in a 4-generation family and to examine the phenotype and the degree of intrafamilial variability. DESIGN: Prospective case series. PARTICIPANTS: Six affected individuals from a nonconsanguineous British family. METHODS: Detailed ophthalmologic examination, color fundus photography, autofluorescence imaging, and electrophysiologic assessment were performed. Blood samples were taken for DNA extraction, and mutation screening of GUCA1A, the gene encoding guanylate cyclase-activating protein 1 (GCAP1), was undertaken. RESULTS: All affected subjects complained of mild photophobia and reduced central and color vision. Onset was between the third and fifth decade, with subsequent gradual deterioration of visual acuity and color vision. Visual acuity ranged between 6/9 and counting fingers. Color vision was either absent or markedly reduced along all 3 color axes. A range of macular appearances was seen, varying from mild retinal pigment epithelial disturbance to extensive atrophy. Electrophysiologic testing revealed a range of electrophysiologic abnormalities: isolated cone electroretinography abnormalities, reduced cone and rod responses (with cone loss greater than rod), and isolated macular dysfunction. The 4 coding exons of GUCA1A were screened for mutations in affected and unaffected family members. A single transition, A319G, causing a nonconservative missense substitution, Tyr99Cys, segregated uniquely in all affected subjects. CONCLUSIONS: The Tyr99Cys GUCA1A mutation has been previously shown to cause autosomal dominant progressive cone dystrophy. This is the first report of this mutation also causing both cone-rod dystrophy and isolated macular dysfunction. The phenotypic variation described here exemplifies the intrafamilial heterogeneity of retinal dysfunction that can be observed in persons harboring the same mutation and chromosomal segment.
PURPOSE: To elucidate the clinical phenotypes and pathogenesis of a novel missense mutation in guanylate cyclase activator A1A (GUCA1A) associated with autosomal dominant cone dystrophy (adCOD). METHODS: The members of a family with adCOD were clinically evaluated. Relevant genes were captured before being sequenced with targeted next-generation sequencing and confirmed with Sanger sequencing. Sequence analysis was made of the conservativeness of mutant residues. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was implemented to detect the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) concentration. Then limited protein hydrolysis and an electrophoresis shift were used to assess possible changes in the structure. Coimmunoprecipitation was employed to analyze the interaction between GCAP1 and retGC1. Immunofluorescence staining was performed to observe the colocalization of GCAP1 and retGC1 in human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 cells. RESULTS: A pathogenic mutation in GUCA1A (c.431A>G, p.D144G, exon 5) was revealed in four generations of a family with adCOD. GUCA1A encodes guanylate cyclase activating protein 1 (GCAP1). D144, located in the EF4 loop involving calcium binding, was highly conserved in the species. GCAP1-D144G was more susceptible to hydrolysis, and the mobility of the D144G band became slower in the presence of Ca(2+). At high Ca(2+) concentrations, GCAP1-D144G stimulated retGC1 in the HEK-293 membrane to significantly increase intracellular cGMP protein concentrations. Compared with wild-type (WT) GCAP1, GCAP1-D144G had an increased interaction with retGC1, as detected in the coimmunoprecipitation assay. CONCLUSIONS: The newly discovered missense mutation in GUCA1A (p.D144G) might lead to an imbalance of Ca(2+) and cGMP homeostasis and eventually, cause a significant variation in adCOD.
PURPOSE: To describe the clinical features and genetic analysis of a family with an autosomal dominant cone dystrophy (adCD). METHODS: Selected members of a family with an autosomal dominant cone dystrophy underwent ophthalmic evaluation. Blood samples were obtained, genomic DNA was isolated, and genomic fragments were amplified by PCR. Linkage to locus D6S1017 was established. DHPLC mutational analysis and direct sequencing were used to identify a mutation in GUCA1A, the gene encoding the guanylate cyclase activating protein 1 (GCAP1). RESULTS: Of 24 individuals who are at risk of the disease in a five generation family, 11 members were affected. Clinical presentations included photophobia, color vision defects, central acuity loss, and legal blindness with advanced age. The disease phenotype was observed in the second and third decades of life and segregated in an autosomal dominant fashion. An electroretinogram performed on one proband revealed profoundly subnormal and prolonged photopic and flicker responses, but preserved scotopic ERGs, consistent with a cone dystrophy. Mutational analysis and direct sequencing revealed a C451T transition in GUCA1A, corresponding to a novel L151F mutation in GCAP1. Like the E155G mutation, this mutation occurs in the EF4 hand domain, a region of GCAP1 critical in conferring calcium sensitivity to the protein. The leucine at this position is highly conserved among vertebrate guanylate cyclase activating proteins. CONCLUSIONS: A novel L151F missense mutation in the EF4 high affinity Ca2+ binding site of GCAP1 is linked to adCD in a large pedigree. The cone dystrophy in this family shares clinical and electrophysiologic characteristics with other previously described adCD caused by mutations in GUCA1A.
PURPOSE: To report findings in GUCA1A-associated retinopathy, a rare autosomal-dominant retinopathy. METHODS: Clinical features and investigations from molecularly confirmed patients at a large referral center were analyzed (retrospective cohort study). RESULTS: Nineteen patients (14 families), with five different variants, were included: p.(Tyr99Cys) in 10 families and p.(Leu84Phe), p.(Ile107Thr), p.(Glu111Ala), and p.(leu176Phe) in 1 family each. Mean (SD) ages at first and last visits were 38 (17) and 48 (15) years, respectively. Mean (SD) logMAR visual acuities at the first and last visits were 0.67 (0.61) and 0.94 (0.58) for right eyes and 0.63 (0.63) and 0.95 (0.74) for left eyes. Acuities ranged from 0.00 logMAR to no light perception. Most described progressive problems with central and color vision. Across 144 patient visits, logMAR acuity correlated with age (Spearman coefficients of 0.43 and 0.54 for right and left eyes, P < 0.001), with a high interocular correlation (coefficient 0.90, P < 0.001). Optical coherence tomography showed irregularity and then loss of the central ellipsoid zone. Ultra-widefield imaging showed peripheral degeneration in some patients. Electrophysiology (n = 13) was consistent with cone dystrophy (n = 11) or macular dystrophy (n = 2). Compared with the common p.(Tyr99Cys) variant, patients with p.(Glu111Ala) (n = 2) had worse vision; those with p.(Leu84Phe) (n = 3) were younger with earlier-onset visual loss. Patients with p.(Ile107Thr) (n = 2) showed later presentation, with milder acuity reduction. CONCLUSIONS: We present genotypic and phenotypic findings from the largest cohort with GUCA1A retinopathy. Most had progressive visual loss and electrophysiologic evidence of cone dystrophy. Possible genotype-phenotype correlations emerged, but subgroups were small for four of five variants.
