Retinal guanylyl cyclase 1; Catalyzes the synthesis of cyclic GMP (cGMP) in rods and cones of photoreceptors. Plays an essential role in phototransduction, by mediating cGMP replenishment. May also participate in the trafficking of membrane-asociated proteins to the photoreceptor outer segment membrane (By similarity). Belongs to the adenylyl cyclase class-4/guanylyl cyclase family.
PURPOSE: To describe the genetic and clinical spectrum of GUCY2D-associated retinopathies and to accurately establish their prevalence in a large cohort of patients. DESIGN: Retrospective case series. METHODS: Institutional study of 47 patients from 27 unrelated families with retinal dystrophies carrying disease-causing GUCY2D variants from the Fundacion Jimenez Diaz hospital dataset of 8000 patients. Patients underwent ophthalmological examination and molecular testing by Sanger or exome sequencing approaches. Statistical and principal component analyses were performed to determine genotype-phenotype correlations. RESULTS: Four clinically different associated phenotypes were identified: 66.7% of families with cone/cone-rod dystrophy, 22.2% with Leber congenital amaurosis, 7.4% with early-onset retinitis pigmentosa, and 3.7% with congenital night blindness. Twenty-three disease-causing GUCY2D variants were identified, including 6 novel variants. Biallelic variants accounted for 28% of patients, whereas most carried dominant alleles associated with cone/cone-rod dystrophy. The disease onset had statistically significant differences according to the functional variant effect. Patients carrying GUCY2D variants were projected into 3 subgroups by allelic combination, disease onset, and presence of nystagmus or night blindness. In contrast to patients with the most severe phenotype of Leber congenital amaurosis, 7 patients with biallelic GUCY2D had a later and milder rod form with night blindness in infancy as the first symptom. CONCLUSIONS: This study represents the largest GUCY2D cohort in which 4 distinctly different phenotypes were identified, including rare intermediate presentations of rod-dominated retinopathies. We established that GUCY2D is linked to about 1% of approximately 3000 molecularly characterized families of our cohort. All of these findings are critical for defining cohorts for inclusion in future clinical trials.
The mosaic pattern of haplotypes observed around a single mutation results from one or several founder events. The difficulties involved in calculating the age of the variant are greatly reduced by assuming a single event, but this simplification may bias analysis of the genealogy of the mutation. However, if it is assumed that more than one founder event occurred, the number of genealogies is very large and the likelihood of every possible tree could not be realistically calculated. A multipoint approach is required, given the number of independent variables needed to describe a complex bifurcating genealogy. Starting from the observation that a limited number of parameters is needed for calculation of the simplest models of bifurcating genealogies, we show that the probability density of a two-ancestor model genealogy can be simply described as an algebraic function in a closed form, two coalescence times being calculated simultaneously without compromising accuracy. Implementation in a Bayesian framework is facilitated by the simplicity of the function, which describes the reciprocal relationship between the region of complete linkage disequilibrium and the branch length of the tree. We illustrate the use of haplotype information about allele-sharing decay around a mutation as a genetic clock, using data for two GUCY2D mutations in Mediterranean populations.
The GUCY2D gene encodes for the photoreceptor guanylate cyclase GC-E that synthesizes the intracellular messenger of photoreceptor excitation cGMP and is regulated by intracellular Ca(2+)-sensor proteins named guanylate cyclase-activating proteins (GCAPs). Over 140 disease-causing mutations have been described so far in GUCY2D, 88% of which cause autosomal recessive Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) while heterozygous missense mutations cause autosomal dominant cone-rod degeneration (adCRD). Mutations in GUCY2D are one of the major causes of all LCA cases and are the major cause of adCRD. A single amino acid, arginine at position 838, is likely to be the most sensitive one in GC-E as four single mutations and two complex mutations were reported to affect R838. The biochemical effect of 45 GC-E variants was studied showing a clear genotype-phenotype correlation: LCA-causing mutations either show reduced ability or complete inability to synthesize cGMP from GTP, while CRD-causing mutations are functional, but shift the Ca(2+)-sensitivity of the GC-E - GCAP complex. Eight animal models of retinal guanylate cyclase deficiency have been reported including knockout (KO) mouse and chicken models. These two models were used for gene augmentation therapy that yielded promising results. Here we integrate the available information on the genetics, biochemistry and phenotype that is related to GUCY2D mutations. These data clearly show that mutation type (missense versus null) and localization (dimerization domain versus other protein domains) are correlated with the pattern of inheritance, impact on enzymatic function and retinal phenotype. Such clear correlation is unique to GUCY2D while mutations in many other retinal disease genes show variable phenotypes and lack of available biochemical assays.
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the most severe form of retinopathy and cone/cone-rod dystrophy (CORD) is a common form of inherited retinopathy. Variants in GUCY2D constitute the most common cause of LCA and autosomal dominant CORD (ADCORD). The purpose of this study was to reveal novel variants and document associated phenotypes of patients with GUCY2D-associated retinopathy. Fifty-two potentially pathogenic variants (PPVs), including 12 novel ones (p.Gly144_Ala164del, p.Trp154Glyfs*12, p.Leu186Pro, p.Ala207Pro, p.Ala229Asp, p.Ala353Glu, p.Trp372*, p.Arg528*, p.Arg660Pro, p.Ile682Thr, p.Trp788Cys, and c.1026 + 171_*486del), were identified in 16 families with ADCORD and 34 families with autosomal recessive LCA (ARLCA). The novel variant c.1026 + 171_*486del is a large-scale (16.3 kb) deletion involving exons 4-20 of GUCY2D, and was identified in an ARLCA family in heterozygous status mimicking a homozygous p.Trp788Cys variant. Among the detected 52 PPVs, 32 (61.5%) were missense, seven (13.5%) were splicing, six (11.5%) were nonsense, four (7.7%) were inframe indel, and three (5.8%) were frameshift deletion. The median age of examination in 27 patients with ADCORD was 21.0 years (ranges 3-54) with a median visual acuity (VA) of 0.10 (ranges 0.02-0.90). There were 48.0% of patients with macular atrophy, 86.4% with severe reduced or extinguished cone responses, 77.3% with normal or mildly reduced rod responses, and 60.9% with high myopia. Visual impairment, macular dystrophy, and cone dysfunction deteriorated with age. The median age of examination in 34 patients with ARLCA was 1.1 years (ranges 0.3-25). There were 55.9% of patients with roving nystagmus, 68.2% with VA of worse than hand motion, 59.4% with almost normal fundus, 90.6% with extinguished rod and cone responses, and 50.0% with high hyperopia. In conclusions, twelve novel PPVs in GUCY2D (including a novel large-scale deletion) were identified. Most (32/52, 61.5%) of causative GUCY2D variants were missense. Progressive development of macular atrophy, cone dysfunction, visual impairment, and myopia are four major characteristics of GUCY2D-associated ADCORD. Normal fundus, roving nystagmus, and hypermetropia in early age are common findings specific to GUCY2D-associated ARLCA. The obtained data in this study will be of value in counselling patients and designing future therapeutic approaches.
We present the clinical and molecular genetic features of a large multi-generation Norwegian family with dominant cone-rod dystrophy. Ophthalmological evaluation including electroretinography showed cone dysfunction in younger patients, with rod dysfunction becoming apparent at more advanced stages of the disease. In one branch of the family, cone degeneration remained the only manifestation despite advancing age. Linkage analysis mapped the disease gene in this family to 17p12-p13, a chromosome region previously linked to cone-rod dystrophy in a Swedish family (CORD5). A maximum LOD score of 3.25 (straight theta = 0.00) for marker D17S1844 was obtained. Mutation analysis of the guanylate cyclase 2D gene (GUCY2D, MIM 600179, previously called RETGC1), located at 17p12-p13, showed a missense mutation (R838C) in exon 13, that co-segregated with the eye disease in the family. Our suspicion of the possibility of an interrelationship between the Swedish CORD5 family and the present family, both originating from Northern Scandinavia, initiated the linkage analysis in the Norwegian family. The R838C missense mutation was not, however, detected in the Swedish patients, strongly suggesting no relationship between these two families. The long-term ophthalmological evaluation in this large four-generation family, combined with the identification of the disease-causing mutation, provide critical information for refining the classification, prognosis, and genetic counselling of patients with cone-rod dystrophies.
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest and most severe form of all inherited retinal dystrophies. It is a genetically heterogeneous condition as six disease-causing genes have been hitherto identified. Among them, RETGC1 (GUCY2D), is more frequently implicated in our series of LCA patients. Interestingly, 70 % of the families with RETGC1 mutations are originating from Mediterranean countries, the remaining families (30%) being originating from various countries across the world. Here, we report, the identification of the same homozygous RETGC1 nonsense mutation in three unrelated and non-consanguineous LCA families of Finnish origin, suggesting a founder effect. Interestingly, no linkage desequilibrium was found using polymorphic markers flanking the RETGC1 gene, supporting the view that the mutation is very ancient. Haplotype studies and Bayesian calculation point the founder mutation to 150 generations (95% credible interval 80-240 generations), i.e., 3000 years ago.
PURPOSE: To compare the phenotype of patients with heterozygous mutation in GUCY2D or GUCA1A causing autosomal dominant cone or cone-rod dystrophies. METHODS: Five patients from one family with GUCA1A and nine patients from four families with GUCY2D mutations were included. Psychophysical and electrophysiological examinations were performed to study retinal function. Fundus autofluorescence imaging and spectral domain optical coherence tomography were performed for morphologic characterization. RESULTS: Genetic analysis revealed the mutation c.451C>T (p.L151F) in the GUCA1A family. In the GUCY2D group, c.2512C>T (p.R838C) was the most frequent (2 families), c.2512C>G (p.R838G) and c.2513G>A (p.R838H) were found in one family each. Visual acuity was reduced to 0.04 to 0.7 in GUCA1A and to 0.014 to 0.5 in patients with GUCY2D. Dark adaptation showed elevated thresholds in the GUCY2D group. Scotopic electroretinography revealed a tendency to a more affected rod function in the GUCY2D group. Photopic electroretinography showed residual or absent responses in both groups. Fundus alterations were confined to the macula in both groups. CONCLUSION: GUCA1A and GUCY2D mutations are both accompanied by similar pattern of generalized cone dysfunction with a tendency to less involvement of the rod photoreceptors and a less severe phenotype in patients with GUCA1A.
PURPOSE: To describe the natural history of autosomal dominant (AD) GUCY2D-associated cone-rod dystrophies (CRDs), and evaluate associated structural and functional biomarkers. METHODS: Retrospective analysis was conducted on 16 patients with AD GUCY2D-CRDs across two sites. Assessments included central macular thickness (CMT) and length of disruption to the ellipsoid zone (EZ) via optical coherence tomography (OCT), electroretinography (ERG) parameters, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), and fundus autofluorescence (FAF). RESULTS: At first visit, with a mean age of 30 years (range 5-70 years), 12 patients had a BCVA below Australian driving standard (LogMAR >/= 0.3 bilaterally), and 1 patient was legally blind (LogMAR >/= 1). Longitudinal analysis demonstrated a deterioration of LogMAR by - 0.019 per year (p < 0.001). This accompanied a reduction in CMT of - 1.4 microm per year (p < 0.0001), lengthened EZ disruption by 42 microm per year (p =  < 0.0001) and increased area of FAF by 0.05 mm(2) per year (p = 0.027). Similarly, cone function decreased with increasing age, as demonstrated by decreasing b-wave amplitude of the light-adapted 30 Hz flicker and fused flicker (p = 0.005 and p = 0.018, respectively). Reduction in CMT and increased EZ disruption on OCT were associated with functional changes including poorer BCVA and decreased cone function on ERG. CONCLUSION: We have described the natural long-term decline in vision and cone function associated with mutations in GUCY2D and identified a set of functional and structural biomarkers that may be useful as outcome parameters for future therapeutic clinical trials.
To report the clinical phenotype and associated genotype of a European patient cohort with GUCY2D-related autosomal-dominant (AD) cone-/cone-rod dystrophy (COD/CORD), we retrospectively analyzed 25 patients (17 female, range 12-68) with GUCY2D-related AD-COD/CORD from three major academic centers in Europe and reviewed the previously published data of 148 patients (visual acuity (VA), foveal thickness, age of first symptoms, and genetic variant). Considering all the patients, the onset of first symptoms was reported at a median age of 7 years (interquartile range 5-19 years, n = 78), and mainly consisted of reduced VA, photophobia and color vision abnormality. The disease showed a high degree of inter-eye symmetry in terms of VA (n = 165, Spearman's rho = 0.85, p < 0.0001) and foveal thickness (Spearman's rho = 0.96, n = 38, p < 0.0001). Disease progression was assessed by plotting VA as a function of age (n = 170). A linear best-fit analysis suggested a loss of 0.17 logMAR per decade (p < 0.0001). We analyzed the largest cohort described so far (n = 173), and found that the most common mutations were p.(Arg838Cys) and p.(Arg838His). Furthermore, the majority of patients suffered severe vision loss in adulthood, highlighting a window of opportunity for potential intervention. The emerging patterns revealed by this study may aid in designing prospective natural history studies to further define endpoints for future interventional trials.
PURPOSE: Heterozygous mutations in the GUCY2D gene, which encodes the membrane-bound retinal guanylyl cyclase-1 protein (RetGC-1), have been shown to cause autosomal dominant inherited cone degeneration and cone-rod degeneration (adCD, adCRD). The present study was a comprehensive screening of the GUCY2D gene in 27 adCD and adCRD unrelated families of these rare disorders. METHODS: Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing as well as PCR and subsequent restriction length polymorphism analysis (PCR/RFLP). Haplotype analysis was performed in selected patients by using microsatellite markers. RESULTS: GUCY2D gene mutations were identified in 11 (40%) of 27 patients, and all mutations clustered to codon 838, including two known and one novel missense mutation: p.R838C, p.R838H, and p.R838G. Haplotype analysis showed that among the studied patients only two of the six analyzed p.R838C mutation carriers shared a common haplotype and that none of the p.R838H mutation carriers did. CONCLUSIONS: GUCY2D is a major gene responsible for progressive autosomal dominant cone degeneration. All identified mutations localize to codon 838. Haplotype analysis indicates that in most cases these mutations arise independently. Thus, codon 838 is likely to be a mutation hotspot in the GUCY2D gene.
BACKGROUND: To report the results of the GUCY2D gene mutation analysis in a cohort of Chinese patients with cone or cone-rod dystrophies (COD or CORD) and to describe the clinical features observed in patients with molecularly confirmed COD or CORD. METHODS: A total of 74 probands clinically diagnosed with COD or CORD were recruited for genetic analysis; these included 15 unrelated patients with a positive family history consistent with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance and 59 unrelated sporadic cases. All probands underwent ophthalmic examinations including best-corrected visual acuity, fundus examination, optical coherence tomography, and electroretinography. Genomic DNA was extracted from venous blood of all participants, and all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the GUCY2D gene were screened for mutations by PCR-based DNA sequencing. Restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and allele-specific PCR analysis were used to validate the substitution in all available family members. RESULTS: Four different GUCY2D missense mutations--three affected codon 838 and one affected codon 849--were identified in nine unrelated probands. Mutation p.R838H was identified in four probands, while both mutations p.R838C and p.R838P were found in two unrelated patients, and mutation p.T849A was found in one proband. The GUCY2D mutations were found in 47% of the patients (7/15) with autosomal dominant cone dystrophy. Patients with mutation p.R838P presented a relatively severe clinical phenotype. CONCLUSION: The GUCY2D mutations were frequent in Chinese families with autosomal dominant cone or cone-rod dystrophies. All mutations were found in exon 13, which should be given priority during mutation screening analysis.
Cone-rod dystrophies are inherited retinal dystrophies that are characterized by progressive degeneration of cones and rods, causing an early decrease in central visual acuity and colour vision defects, followed by loss of peripheral vision in adolescence or early adult life. Both genetic and clinical heterogeneity are well known. In a family with autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy, genetic analyses comprising genome scan with microsatellite markers, fine mapping and candidate gene approach resulted in the identification of a homozygous missense GUCY2D mutation. This is the first GUCY2D mutation associated with autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy rather than Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA), a severe disease leading to childhood blindness. This study hence establishes GUCY2D, which is a common cause for both recessive LCA and dominant cone-rod dystrophy, as a good candidate for autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy.
PURPOSE: To report a novel mutation in the GUCY2D gene in a Japanese family with autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy (adCORD), and to examine the possible use of arrayed primer extension (APEX)-based genotyping chip in detecting mutations. METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of family members with adCORD. It was PCR-amplified, fragmented, and hybridized to APEX-based genotyping microarrays on which known disease-associated sequence variations were arrayed for patients with early-onset retinal dystrophy. All coding exons of the GUCY2D gene were directly sequenced. The PCR amplicon carrying a novel mutation was subcloned, and each clone was sequenced. RESULTS: Five single nucleotide polymorphisms in AIPL1, RPGRIP1, and GUCY2D were detected in the proband by microarray screening, and all were validated by direct sequencing. A novel heterozygous triple missense mutation of c.2540_2542delinsTCC (p.Gln847_Lys848delinsLeuGln amino acid substitutions) was found in both the proband and his father, and the three nucleotide changes were located on the same chromosome. Electroretinography (ERGs) demonstrated a significant reduction in rod function and a complete absence of cone function in both affected individuals. CONCLUSIONS: A novel heterozygous triple consecutive missense mutation in the GUCY2D gene has been linked to adCORD. Our study demonstrates that the APEX-based gene screening can be used to identify simultaneously disease-modifying sequence changes as well as disease-causing mutations, once proper and comprehensive sites of sequence variations of the disease are arrayed.
BACKGROUND: Leber congenital amaurosis 1 (LCA1), caused by mutations in GUCY2D, is a rare inherited retinal disease that typically causes blindness in early childhood. The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and preliminary efficacy of ascending doses of ATSN-101, a subretinal AAV5 gene therapy for LCA1. METHODS: 15 patients with genetically confirmed biallelic mutations in GUCY2D were included in this phase 1/2 study. All patients received unilateral subretinal injections of ATSN-101. In the dose-escalation phase, three adult cohorts (n=3 each) were treated with three ascending doses: 1.0 x 10(10) vg/eye (low dose), 3.0 x 10(10) vg/eye (middle dose), and 1.0 x 10(11) vg/eye (high dose). In the dose-expansion phase, one adult cohort (n=3) and one paediatric cohort (n=3) were treated at the high dose. The primary endpoint was the incidence of treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), and secondary endpoints included full-field stimulus test (FST) and best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA). A multi-luminance mobility test (MLMT) was also done. Data through the 12-month main study period are reported. FINDINGS: Patients were enrolled between Sept 12, 2019, and May 5, 2022. A total of 68 TEAEs were observed, 56 of which were related to the surgical procedure. No serious TEAE was related to the study drug. Ocular inflammation was mild and reversible with steroid treatment. For patients who received the high dose, mean change in dark-adapted FST was 20.3 decibels (dB; 95% CI 6.6 to 34.0) for treated eyes and 1.1 dB (-3.7 to 5.9) for untreated eyes at month 12 (white stimulus); improvements were first observed at day 28 and persisted over 12 months (p=0.012). Modest improvements in BCVA were also observed (p=0.10). Three of six patients who received the high dose and did the MLMT achieved the maximum score in the treated eye. INTERPRETATION: ATSN-101 is well tolerated 12 months after treatment, with no drug-related serious adverse events. Clinically significant improvements in retinal sensitivity were sustained in patients receiving the high dose. FUNDING: Atsena Therapeutics.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the spectrum of Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and cone-rod dystrophy (CORD) associated with the GUCY2D gene and to identify potential end points and optimal patient selection for future therapeutic trials. DESIGN: International, multicenter, retrospective cohort study. SUBJECTS: Eighty-two patients with GUCY2D-associated LCA or CORD from 54 families. METHODS: Medical records were reviewed for medical history, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), ophthalmoscopy, visual fields, full-field electroretinography, and retinal imaging (fundus photography, spectral-domain OCT [SD-OCT], fundus autofluorescence). MAIN OUTCOMES MEASURES: Age of onset, evolution of BCVA, genotype-phenotype correlations, anatomic characteristics on funduscopy, and multimodal imaging. RESULTS: Fourteen patients with autosomal recessive LCA and 68 with autosomal dominant CORD were included. The median follow-up times were 5.2 years (interquartile range [IQR] 2.6-8.8 years) for LCA and 7.2 years (IQR 2.2-14.2 years) for CORD. Generally, LCA presented in the first year of life. The BCVA in patients with LCA ranged from no light perception to 1.00 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR) and remained relatively stable during follow-up. Imaging for LCA was limited but showed little to no structural degeneration. In patients with CORD, progressive vision loss started around the second decade of life. The BCVA declined annually by 0.022 logMAR (P < 0.001) with no difference between patients with the c.2513G>A and the c.2512C>T GUCY2D variants (P = 0.798). At the age of 40 years, the probability of being blind or severely visually impaired was 32%. The integrity of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) and that of the external limiting membrane (ELM) on SD-OCT correlated significantly with BCVA (Spearman rho = 0.744, P = 0.001, and rho = 0.712, P < 0.001, respectively) in those with CORD. CONCLUSIONS: Leber congenital amaurosis associated with GUCY2D caused severe congenital visual impairment with relatively intact macular anatomy on funduscopy and available imaging, suggesting long preservation of photoreceptors. Despite large variability, GUCY2D-associated CORD generally presented during adolescence, with a progressive loss of vision, and culminated in severe visual impairment during mid-to-late adulthood. The integrity of the ELM and EZ may be suitable structural end points for therapeutic studies of GUCY2D-associated CORD.
