Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 3; Receptor for 3-OH-octanoid acid mediates a negative feedback regulation of adipocyte lipolysis to counteract prolipolytic influences under conditions of physiological or pathological increases in beta- oxidation rates. Acts as a low affinity receptor for nicotinic acid. This pharmacological effect requires nicotinic acid doses that are much higher than those provided by a normal diet.
BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers of the gastrointestinal tract and ranks third in cancer-related deaths worldwide. This study was conducted to identify novel biomarkers related to the pathogenesis of CRC based upon a bioinformatics analysis, and further verify the biomarkers in clinical tumor samples and CRC cell lines. METHODS: A series of bioinformatics analyses were performed using datasets from NCBI-GEO and constructed a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. This analysis enabled the identification of Hub genes, for which the mRNA expression and overall survival of CRC patients data distribution was explored in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) colon cancer and rectal cancer (COADREAD) database. Furthermore, the differential expression of HCAR3 and INLS5 was validated in clinical tumor samples by Real-time quantitative PCR analysis, western blotting analysis, and immunohistochemistry analysis. Finally, CRC cells over-expressing INSL5 were constructed and used for CCK8, cell cycle, and cell apoptosis validation assays in vitro. RESULTS: A total of 286 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened, including 64 genes with increased expression and 143 genes with decreased expression in 2 CRC database, from which 10 key genes were identified: CXCL1, HCAR3, CXCL6, CXCL8, CXCL2, CXCL5, PPY, SST, INSL5, and NPY1R. Among these genes, HCAR3 and INSL5 had not previously been explored and were further verified in vitro. CONCLUSIONS: HCAR3 expression was higher in CRC tissues and associated with better overall survival of CRC patients. INSL5 expression in normal tissue was higher than that in tumor tissue and its high expression was associated with a better prognosis for CRC. The overexpression of INSL5 significantly inhibited the proliferation and promoted the shearing of PARP of CRC cells. This integrated bioinformatics study presented 10 key hub genes associated with CRC. HCAR3 and INSL5 were expressed in tumor tissue and these were associated with poor survival and warrant further studies as potential therapeutic targets.
A meta-analysis of publicly available transcriptomic datasets was performed to identify metabolic pathways profoundly implicated in the progression and treatment of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The analysis revealed that genes involved in tryptophan (Trp) metabolism are upregulated in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) and return to baseline after successful treatment with infliximab. Microarray and mRNAseq profiles from multiple experiments confirmed that enzymes responsible for Trp degradation via the kynurenine pathway (IDO1, KYNU, IL4I1, KMO, and TDO2), receptor of Trp metabolites (HCAR3), and enzymes catalyzing NAD(+) turnover (NAMPT, NNMT, PARP9, CD38) were synchronously coregulated in IBD, but not in intestinal malignancies. The modeling of Trp metabolite fluxes in IBD indicated that changes in gene expression shifted intestinal Trp metabolism from the synthesis of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT, serotonin) towards the kynurenine pathway. Based on pathway modeling, this manifested in a decline in mucosal Trp and elevated kynurenine (Kyn) levels, and fueled the production of downstream metabolites, including quinolinate, a substrate for de novo NAD(+) synthesis. Interestingly, IBD-dependent alterations in Trp metabolites were normalized in infliximab responders, but not in non-responders. Transcriptomic reconstruction of the NAD(+) pathway revealed an increased salvage biosynthesis and utilization of NAD(+) in IBD, which normalized in patients successfully treated with infliximab. Treatment-related changes in NAD(+) levels correlated with shifts in nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT) expression. This enzyme helps to maintain a high level of NAD(+)-dependent proinflammatory signaling by removing excess inhibitory nicotinamide (Nam) from the system. Our analysis highlights the prevalent deregulation of kynurenine and NAD(+) biosynthetic pathways in IBD and gives new impetus for conducting an in-depth examination of uncovered phenomena in clinical studies.
Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 3 (HCAR3), a class A G-protein-coupled receptor, is an important cellular energy metabolism sensor with a key role in the regulation of lipolysis in humans. HCAR3 is deeply involved in many physiological processes and serves as a valuable target for the treatment of metabolic diseases, tumors, and immune diseases. Here, we report four cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) structures of human HCAR3-Gi1 complexes with or without agonists: the endogenous ligand 3-hydroxyoctanoic acid, the drug niacin, the highly subtype-specific agonist compound 5c (4-(n-propyl)amino-3-nitrobenzoic acid), and the apo form. Together with mutagenesis and functional analyses, we revealed the recognition mechanisms of HCAR3 for different agonists. In addition, the key residues that determine the ligand selectivity between HCAR2 and HCAR3 were also illuminated. Overall, these findings provide a structural basis for the ligand recognition, activation, and selectivity and G-protein coupling mechanisms of HCAR3, which contribute to the design of HCAR3-targeting drugs with high efficacy and selectivity.
Epithelial cells in the skin and other tissues rely on signals from their environment to maintain homeostasis and respond to injury, and GPCRs play a critical role in this communication. A better understanding of the GPCRs expressed in epithelial cells will contribute to understanding the relationship between cells and their niche and could lead to developing new therapies to modulate cell fate. This study used human primary keratinocytes as a model to investigate the specific GPCRs regulating epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation. We identified 3 key receptors-HCAR3, LTB4R, and GPR137-and found that knockdown of these receptors led to changes in numerous gene networks that are important for maintaining cell identity and promoting proliferation while inhibiting differentiation. Our study also revealed that the metabolite receptor HCAR3 regulates keratinocyte migration and cellular metabolism. Knockdown of HCAR3 led to reduced keratinocyte migration and respiration, which could be attributed to altered metabolite use and aberrant mitochondrial morphology caused by the absence of the receptor. This study contributes to understanding the complex interplay between GPCR signaling and epithelial cell fate decisions.
AIM: Blunted niacin response (BNR) was an endophenotype of schizophrenia, but the underlying mechanism remains unclarified. The objective of this study was to verify whether genes associated with BNR pathway constitute the genetic basis and the pathological mechanism of BNR phenotypic psychiatric patients. METHODS: Two independent sample sets consisting of 971 subjects were enrolled in this study. A total of 62 variants were genotyped in the discovery set, then the related variants were verified in the verification set. The published PGC GWAS data were used to validate the associations between the variants and psychiatry disorders. RT-PCR analysis, eQTL data, and Dual-Luciferase Reporter experiment were used to investigate the potential molecular mechanisms of the variants underlying BNR. RESULTS: The results showed that two SNPs, rs56959712 in HCAR2 and rs2454721 in HCAR3 were significantly associated with niacin response. The risk allele T of rs2454721 could affect the niacin responses of psychiatric patients through elevated HCAR3 gene expression. These two genes, especially HCAR3, were significantly associated with the risk of schizophrenia, as identified in this study and verified using the published GWAS data. CONCLUSION: HCAR3 is a novel schizophrenia susceptibility gene which is significantly associated with blunted niacin response in schizophrenia. In-depth investigation of HCAR3 is of great significance for uncovering the pathogenesis and propose new therapeutic targets for psychiatric disorders, especially for the BNR subgroup patients.
