Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 2; Acts as a high affinity receptor for both nicotinic acid (also known as niacin) and (D)-beta-hydroxybutyrate and mediates increased adiponectin secretion and decreased lipolysis through G(i)- protein-mediated inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. This pharmacological effect requires nicotinic acid doses that are much higher than those provided by a normal diet. Mediates nicotinic acid-induced apoptosis in mature neutrophils. Receptor activation by nicotinic acid results in reduced cAMP levels which may affect activity of cAMP-dependent protein kinase A and  [...] 
Niacin (nicotinic acid) is a potent lipid-lowering agent that has been used for prevention of coronary heart disease. Niacin activates the HCAR2 receptor found on adipocytes, macrophages and various immune cells throughout the body. Activation of the HCAR2 receptor by niacin results in beneficial anti-inflammatory effects that are independent of lipid lowering. This review summarizes the use of niacin in treatment of dyslipidemia, the pharmacogenetics of niacin response and the potential role of HCAR2 signaling in the treatment of a variety of inflammatory and metabolic diseases.
Hydroxycarboxylic acids are crucial metabolic intermediates involved in various physiological and pathological processes, some of which are recognized by specific hydroxycarboxylic acid receptors (HCARs). HCAR2 is one such receptor, activated by endogenous beta-hydroxybutyrate (3-HB) and butyrate, and is the target for Niacin. Interest in HCAR2 has been driven by its potential as a therapeutic target in cardiovascular and neuroinflammatory diseases. However, the limited understanding of how ligands bind to this receptor has hindered the development of alternative drugs able to avoid the common flushing side-effects associated with Niacin therapy. Here, we present three high-resolution structures of HCAR2-Gi1 complexes bound to four different ligands, one potent synthetic agonist (MK-6892) bound alone, and the two structures bound to the allosteric agonist compound 9n in conjunction with either the endogenous ligand 3-HB or niacin. These structures coupled with our functional and computational analyses further our understanding of ligand recognition, allosteric modulation, and activation of HCAR2 and pave the way for the development of high-efficiency drugs with reduced side-effects.
Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 2 (HCAR2), a member of Class A G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family, plays a pivotal role in anti-lipolytic and anti-inflammatory effects, establishing it as a significant therapeutic target for treating dyslipidemia and inflammatory diseases. However, the mechanism underlying the signaling of HCAR2 induced by various types of ligands remains elusive. In this study, we elucidate the cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of G(i)-coupled HCAR2 in complex with a selective agonist, MK-6892, resolved to a resolution of 2.60 A. Our structural analysis reveals that MK-6892 occupies not only the orthosteric binding pocket (OBP) but also an extended binding pocket (EBP) within HCAR2. Pharmacological assays conducted in this study demonstrate that the OBP is a critical determinant for ligand selectivity among the HCARs subfamily. Moreover, we investigate the pharmacological properties of the allosteric modulator compound 9n, revealing its probe-dependent behavior on HCAR2 in response to varying orthosteric agonists. Collectively, our findings provide invaluable structural insights that contribute to a deeper understanding of the regulatory mechanisms governing HCAR2 signaling transduction mediated by both orthosteric and allosteric ligands.
Ebola virus (EBOV) induces cell death not only in infected permissive cells but also in nonpermissive, bystander cells by employing different mechanisms. Hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 2 (HCAR2) has been reported to be involved in apoptotic cell death. We previously reported an increase in the expression of HCAR2-specific mRNA in EBOV-infected individuals with fatal outcomes. Here, we report that infection with an EBOV lacking the VP30 gene (EBOVDeltaVP30) results in the upregulation of HCAR2 mRNA expression in human hepatocyte Huh7.0 cells stably expressing VP30. Transient overexpression of HCAR2 reduced the viability of Huh7.0 cells and human embryonic kidney cells. Phosphatidylserine externalization and cell membrane permeabilization by HCAR2 overexpression was also observed. Interestingly, coexpression of HCAR2 with EBOV VP40 further reduced cell viability in transfected cells compared to HCAR2 coexpression with other viral proteins. Our data suggest that HCAR2 may contribute to EBOV-induced cell death.
A surprisingly clear picture of the allosteric mechanism connecting G protein-coupled receptor agonists with G protein binding-and back - is revealed by a puzzle of thirty novel 3D structures of the hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 2 (HCAR2) in complex with eight different orthosteric and a single allosteric agonist. HCAR2 is a sensor of beta-hydroxybutyrate, niacin and certain anti-inflammatory drugs. Surprisingly, agonists with and without on-target side effects bound very similarly and in a completely occluded orthosteric binding site. Thus, despite the many structures we are still left with a pertinent need to understand the molecular dynamics of this and similar systems.
