Histone deacetylase 2; Responsible for the deacetylation of lysine residues on the N-terminal part of the core histones (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4). Histone deacetylation gives a tag for epigenetic repression and plays an important role in transcriptional regulation, cell cycle progression and developmental events. Histone deacetylases act via the formation of large multiprotein complexes. Forms transcriptional repressor complexes by associating with MAD, SIN3, YY1 and N-COR. Interacts in the late S- phase of DNA-replication with DNMT1 in the other transcriptional repressor complex composed  [...] 
Histone deacetylase enzymes (HDACs) are responsible for the global silencing of tumour-suppressor genes. Treatment with a histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi) can reverse this process and restore normal cell function. Herein, we report a small series of boron-based (boronic acid, boronate ester and closo-1,2-carborane) HDAC2 inhibitors with IC(50) values in the nanomolar range. The boronate ester 4 b was the most potent compound assessed in this study (IC(50) =40.6+/-1.5 nM), followed closely by the 1,2-closo-carborane (IC(50) =42.9+/-1.5 nM). Compound 4 b exceeds the potency of the related gold-standard HDAC pan-inhibitor vorinostat (1) toward this particular HDAC isoform.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) arises from a complex sequence of biological and finely orchestrated events that are still poorly understood. Increasingly, epigenetic studies are providing exciting findings that may be exploited in promising and personalized cutting-edge therapies. A more appropriate and broader screening of possible players in cancer could identify a master molecular mechanism in AML. Here, we build on our previously published study by evaluating a histone deacetylase (HDAC)2-mediated miRNA regulatory network in U937 leukemic cells. Following a comparative miRNA profiling analysis in genetically and enzymatically HDAC2-downregulated AML cells, we identified miR-96-5p and miR-92a-3p as potential regulators in AML etiopathology by targeting defined genes. Our findings support the potentially beneficial role of alternative physiopathological interventions.
Loss of primary cilia is frequently observed in tumor cells, including pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells, suggesting that the absence of this organelle may promote tumorigenesis through aberrant signal transduction and the inability to exit the cell cycle. However, the molecular mechanisms that explain how PDAC cells lose primary cilia are still ambiguous. In this study, we found that inhibition or silencing of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) restores primary cilia formation in PDAC cells. Inactivation of HDAC2 results in decreased Aurora A expression, which promotes disassembly of primary cilia. We further showed that HDAC2 controls ciliogenesis independently of Kras, which facilitates Aurora A expression. These studies suggest that HDAC2 is a novel regulator of primary cilium formation in PDAC cells.
BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence suggests that epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and epigenetic mechanisms promote metastasis. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are important epigenetic regulators. Here, we elucidated a novel role of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in regulating EMT and CRC metastasis via ncRNA. METHODS: The expression of HDACs in CRC was analyzed using the public databases and matched primary and metastatic tissues, and CRC cells with different metastatic potentials (DLD1, HCT116, SW480 and SW620). Microarray analysis was used to identify differential genes in parental and HDAC2 knockout CRC cells. EMT and histone modifications were determined using western blot and immunofluorescence. Migration ability was assessed by transwell assay, and metastasis was assessed in vivo using a tail vain injection. Gene expression and regulation was assessed by RT-PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays. Protein interaction was assessed by immunoprecipitation. Specific siRNAs targeting H19, SP1 and MMP14 were used to validate their role in HDAC2 loss induced EMT and metastasis. RESULTS: Reduced HDAC2 expression was associated with poor prognosis in CRC patients and found in CRC metastasis. HDAC2 deletion or knockdown induced EMT and metastasis by upregulating the long noncoding RNA H19 (LncRNA H19). HDAC2 inhibited LncRNA H19 expression by histone H3K27 deacetylation in its promoter via binding with SP1. LncRNA H19 functioned as a miR-22-3P sponge to increase the expression of MMP14. HDAC2 loss strongly promoted CRC lung metastasis, which was suppressed LncRNA H19 knockdown. CONCLUSION: Our study supports HDAC2 as a CRC metastasis suppressor through the inhibition of EMT and the expression of H19 and MMP14.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Nowadays, owing to the complex mechanism of tumorigenesis, simultaneous inhibition of multiple targets is an important anticancer strategy. Recent studies have demonstrated receptor tyrosine kinase AXL (AXL) and histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) are closely associated with colorectal cancer. Herein, we identified five hit compounds concurrently targeting AXL and HDAC2 using virtual screening. Inhibitory experiments revealed these hit compounds potently inhibited AXL and HDAC2 in the nanomolar range. Among them, Hit-3 showed the strongest inhibitory effects which were better than that of the positive control groups. Additionally, MD assays showed that Hit-3 could bind stably to the AXL and HDAC2 active pockets. Further MTT assays demonstrated that Hit-3 showed potent anti-proliferative activity. Most importantly, Hit-3 exhibited significant in vivo antitumor efficacy in xenograft models. Collectively, this study is the first discovery of dual-targeting AXL/HDAC2 inhibitors for colorectal cancer treatment.
BACKGROUND: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) such as sunitinib are multitarget antiangiogenic agents in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). They are widely used in the treatment of advanced/metastatic renal cancer. However, resistance to TKIs is common in the clinic, particularly after long-term treatment. YTHDC1 is the main nuclear reader protein that binds with m(6)A to regulate the splicing, export and stability of mRNA. However, the specific role and corresponding mechanism of YTHDC1 in renal cancer cells are still unclear. METHODS: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset was used to study the expression of YTHDC1 in ccRCC. Cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8), wound healing, Transwell and xenograft assays were applied to explore the biological function of YTHDC1 in ccRCC. Western blot, quantitative real time PCR (RT‒qPCR), RNA immunoprecipitation PCR (RIP-qPCR), methylated RIP-qPCR (MeRIP-qPCR) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses were applied to study the YY1/HDAC2/YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis in renal cancer cells. The CCK-8 assay and xenograft assay were used to study the role of YTHDC1 in determining the sensitivity of ccRCC to sunitinib. RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that YTHDC1 is downregulated in ccRCC tissues compared with normal tissues. Low expression of YTHDC1 is associated with a poor prognosis in patients with ccRCC. Subsequently, we showed that YTHDC1 inhibits the progression of renal cancer cells via downregulation of the ANXA1/MAPK pathways. Moreover, we also showed that the YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis modulates the sensitivity of tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We then revealed that HDAC2 inhibitors resensitize ccRCC to tyrosine kinase inhibitors through the YY1/HDAC2 complex. We have identified a novel YY1/HDAC2/YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis modulating the progression and chemosensitivity of ccRCC. CONCLUSION: We identified a novel YY1/HDAC2/YTHDC1/ANXA1 axis modulating the progression and chemosensitivity of ccRCC.
