3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase; Transmembrane glycoprotein that is the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis as well as in the biosynthesis of nonsterol isoprenoids that are essential for normal cell function including ubiquinone and geranylgeranyl proteins.
Anti-HMGCR myopathy was first recognized and characterized in patients with a history of statin exposure and immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy. After the discovery of anti-HMGCR autoantibodies, several international groups identified and characterized more patients, expanding the phenotypic spectrum of this disease to include pediatric patients and young adults without statin exposure and those with a chronic myopathy resembling limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. We provide a summary of clinical findings, pathologic features, muscle imaging, and immunogenetic risk factors of the disease. We also discuss the current treatment strategies and approaches to monitoring the therapeutic response. Lastly, we briefly summarize the current understanding of the pathophysiology of the disease and postulate a model for autoimmunity initiation and propagation in this disease.
The discovery of autoantibodies directed against the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMGCR) enzyme has defined a sub-set of immune-mediated necrotising myopathy (IMNM) which is strongly associated with exposure to statin medications. Although understanding of anti-HMGCR IMNM has grown considerably with the reporting of multiple cohorts in North America, Europe, Asia and Oceania, there remain many unanswered questions. The true incidence of anti-HMGCR IMNM is not known and heterogeneity of phenotype and treatment response within this autoantibody sub-group is being increasingly recognised. Statin-naive adults and juvenile patients with anti-HMGCR potentially share characteristics distinct from statin-exposed patients, alluding to unique pathogenesis. Conflicting data exists on whether malignancies are associated with anti-HMGCR and further clarification is required to determine the degree of cancer screening required. Treatment approaches to anti-HMGCR IMNM are heterogeneous but generally highlight the efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin. Even with multimodal immunosuppression, patients with anti-HMGCR remain prone to relapse, with younger patients generally manifesting more refractory disease. In this Review, we aim to summarise the current literature on anti-HMGCR and discuss the remaining issues.
Various forms of programmed cell death (PCD) exhibit distinct characteristics depending on their specific molecular mechanisms, and there are interactions among these different forms. Ferroptosis, which is related to autophagy and apoptosis, has an unknown potential interaction with pyroptosis. This study revealed a mutually antagonistic relationship between ferroptosis and pyroptosis, with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) playing a key role in their interaction. It is found that HMGCR predominantly localized to mitochondria during ferroptosis but shifted to the endoplasmic reticulum following treatment with a pyroptosis inducer. Furthermore, this study demonstrated that BRCC36 (BRCA1/BRCA2-containing complex subunit 36) deubiquitinated HMGCR in a manner dependent on deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) activity, and inhibited ferroptosis and promoted pyroptosis. Moreover, as an oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), BRCC36 promoted cancer cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and tumor growth. Thiolutin, an inhibitor of BRCC36, effectively suppressed the interaction between BRCC36 and HMGCR, leading to the inhibition of HCC growth. Therefore, targeting BRCC36 can offer a novel and promising therapeutic strategy for HCC treatment. In conclusion, these findings provide new theoretical evidence for further characterizing tumor heterogeneity and offer new molecular targets for the diagnosis and treatment of HCC.
Statins are among the most commonly prescribed medications that significantly reduce cardiovascular risk in selected individuals. However, these drugs can also be associated with muscle symptoms ranging from mild myalgias to severe rhabdomyolysis. Although statin myotoxicity is usually self-limited, in some instances statin-exposed subjects can develop an autoimmune myopathy typically characterized by progressive weakness, muscle enzyme elevations, a necrotizing myopathy on muscle biopsy, and autoantibodies that recognize 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), the pharmacologic target of statins. These antibodies are also found in some autoimmune myopathy patients without statin exposure. Importantly, anti-HMGCR antibodies are not found in the vast majority of statin-exposed subjects without autoimmune myopathy, including those with self-limited statin intolerance. Thus, testing for these antibodies may help differentiate those with self-limited statin myopathy who recover after statin discontinuation from those with a progressive statin-associated autoimmune myopathy who typically require immunosuppressive therapy.
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a plausible cause of muscle fibre damage in a number of myopathies including immune-mediated necrotising myopathy. However, histopathological evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction is not often described in immune-mediated necrotising myopathy and, when present, it is often attributed to patient age. The purpose of this study was to describe features of mitochondrial dysfunction on muscle biopsy in anti-3‑hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase immune-mediated necrotising myopathy and explore whether these features are age-related. In this observational case control study, a statistically significant increase in the number of muscle fibres with increased lipid content (p = 0.004) and cytochrome c oxidase-negative/succinate dehydrogenase-positive fibres (p = 0.037) in anti-3‑hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme immune-mediated necrotising myopathy was found compared to age-matched controls. Therefore, histopathological features of mitochondrial dysfunction are more frequent in anti-3‑hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme immune-mediated necrotising myopathy than aged-matched controls and therefore, may be contributing to the pathogenesis.
Auranofin (AuRF) has been reported to display anticancer activity and has entered several clinical trials; however, its mechanism of action remains largely unknown. In this work, the anticancer mechanism of auranofin was investigated using a proteomics strategy entailing subcellular fractionation prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Bioinformatics analysis of the nuclear sub-proteomes revealed that tumor suppressor p14(ARF) is a key regulator of transcription. Through independent analysis, we validated that up-regulation of p14(ARF) is associated with E2F-dependent transcription and increased p53 expression. Our analyses further reveal that 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), which is the rate-determining enzyme of the mevalonate pathway, is a novel target of auranofin with half maximal inhibitory concentration at micromolar levels. The auranofin-induced cancer cell death could be partially reverted by the addition of downstream products of the mevalonate pathway (mevalonolactone or geranyleranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP)), implying that auranofin may target the mevalonate pathway to exert its anticancer effect.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to describe clinical and pathological features, prognosis and treatment in patients with anti-HMGCR antibody positive immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy (HMGCR-IMNM) based on recent findings. RECENT FINDINGS: Using advances in diagnostic modalities that can confirm the presence of anti-HMGCR antibody, the clinical and pathological manifestations of HMGCR-IMNM were found to be broader than previously reported. Although only a small percentage of HMGCR-IMNM patients present with atypical manifestations, some of these patients show slow disease progression and clinical symptoms, which are similar to those of limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. Other atypical HMGCR-IMNM patients have skin conditions similar to dermatomyositis-like skin rush or dermatological presentations of Jessner-Kanoff disease or cutaneous lymphoma, whose pathological changes including CD8-positive and bcl-2-positive lymphocytic accumulations, similar to Jessner-Kanoff lymphocytic infiltration of skin or low-grade cutaneous lymphoma, which are observed in muscle and skin. SUMMARY: Anti-HMGCR autoantibodies define unique populations of IMNM patients. Recent studies have revealed that clinicopathological manifestations of HMGCR-IMNM, especially extramuscular symptoms and pathological manifestations, are more common than previously recognized.
Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) is an X-linked neuromuscular disease characterized by progressive muscle weakness that currently has no cure. Immune-mediated necrotizing myopathy (IMNM) is a type of autoimmune inflammatory myopathy characterized by proximal muscle weakness that is treated with immunosuppressive therapy. We herein report a patient diagnosed with BMD complicated with IMNM by a pathological analysis. Notably, the patient had an elevated serum anti-3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase antibody level. Oral glucocorticoid and methotrexate treatment partially improved the muscle weakness with decreased levels of serum creatine kinase. An accurate diagnosis is important for therapeutic decisions in these complicated cases.
Cholesterol is vital for human life, but its levels must be tightly regulated. Too little cholesterol leads to developmental disorders, but too much is widely appreciated as contributing to heart disease. Levels are regulated through the coordinated control of cholesterol synthesis, uptake and efflux. Here, we focus on cholesterol synthesis. The cholesterol synthesis pathway involves more than twenty enzymes, but most research so far has focused on a very early enzyme, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), a well characterised control point. This is largely because HMGCR is the target of the successful cholesterol-lowering drugs, the statins. Our recent work has examined several other enzymes in the pathway and revealed complex regulatory mechanisms that also contribute to the control of cholesterol synthesis. In this review, we discuss the transcriptional regulation of the two terminal enzymes, 7- and 24-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7 and DHCR24), where we have found that a cooperative transcriptional program exists. We also discuss the post-translational regulation of another critical enzyme, squalene monooxygenase (SM), which has its protein levels controlled by cholesterol, and DHCR24, which has its activity affected by sterols and related compounds, as well as via phosphorylation/signalling. There is an unforeseen complexity in the regulation of cholesterol synthesis which requires further investigation.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacologic inhibitors of proprotein convertase subtilisin-kexin type 9 (PCSK9) are being evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. The effect of lowering low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels by inhibiting PCSK9 on the risk of cardiovascular events or diabetes is unknown. METHODS: We used genetic scores consisting of independently inherited variants in the genes encoding PCSK9 and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR; the target of statins) as instruments to randomly assign 112,772 participants from 14 studies, with 14,120 cardiovascular events and 10,635 cases of diabetes, to groups according to the number of LDL cholesterol-lowering alleles that they had inherited. We compared the effects of lower LDL cholesterol levels that were mediated by variants in PCSK9, HMGCR, or both on the risk of cardiovascular events and the risk of diabetes. RESULTS: Variants in PCSK9 and HMGCR were associated with nearly identical protective effects on the risk of cardiovascular events per decrease of 10 mg per deciliter (0.26 mmol per liter) in the LDL cholesterol level: odds ratio for cardiovascular events, 0.81 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.74 to 0.89) for PCSK9 and 0.81 (95% CI, 0.72 to 0.90) for HMGCR. Variants in these two genes were also associated with very similar effects on the risk of diabetes: odds ratio for each 10 mg per deciliter decrease in LDL cholesterol, 1.11 (95% CI, 1.04 to 1.19) for PCSK9 and 1.13 (95% CI, 1.06 to 1.20) for HMGCR. The increased risk of diabetes was limited to persons with impaired fasting glucose levels for both scores and was lower in magnitude than the protective effect against cardiovascular events. When present together, PCSK9 and HMGCR variants had additive effects on the risk of both cardiovascular events and diabetes. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, variants in PCSK9 had approximately the same effect as variants in HMGCR on the risk of cardiovascular events and diabetes per unit decrease in the LDL cholesterol level. The effects of these variants were independent and additive. (Funded by the Medical Research Council and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.).
Immune-related adverse events induced by immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy may affect diverse organ systems, including skeletal and cardiac muscle. ICI-associated myositis may result in substantial morbidity and occasional mortality. We present a case of a patient with advanced non-small cell lung cancer who developed grade 4 myositis with concurrent myocarditis early after initiation of anti-programmed death ligand 1 therapy (durvalumab). Autoantibody analysis revealed marked increases in anti-3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase antibody levels that preceded clinical toxicity, and further increased during toxicity. Notably, the patient had a history of intolerable statin myopathy, which had resolved clinically after statin discontinuation and prior to ICI initiation. This case demonstrates a potential association between statin exposure, autoantibodies, and ICI-associated myositis.
While statins, hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) inhibitors, are clinically proven to reduce plasma cholesterol levels, a wide variation in inter-individual response to statin therapy has been observed. Pharmacogenetic studies have identified multiple loci that potentially contribute towards the statin response, including the HMGCR gene. To examine, if a statin-resistant, catalytically-active isoform of the human HMGCR could be generated, we have rationally altered the protein to include additional residues in the flap domain, which has a role in statin binding. Comparative enzyme assays with purified wild-type and mutant isoforms reveal the alteration imposes a slight (38%) decrease in the K(app)(M) for the substrate, a near 2-fold increase in turnover number, and a 480% increase in the Ki for lovastatin. Thus, alterations in HMGCR could contribute towards the synergistic effects of multiple loci in the statin response.
Statins are a mainstay intervention for cardiovascular disease prevention, yet their use can cause rare severe myopathy. HMG-CoA reductase, an essential enzyme in the mevalonate pathway, is the target of statins. We identified nine individuals from five unrelated families with unexplained limb-girdle like muscular dystrophy and bi-allelic variants in HMGCR via clinical and research exome sequencing. The clinical features resembled other genetic causes of muscular dystrophy with incidental high CPK levels (>1,000 U/L), proximal muscle weakness, variable age of onset, and progression leading to impaired ambulation. Muscle biopsies in most affected individuals showed non-specific dystrophic changes with non-diagnostic immunohistochemistry. Molecular modeling analyses revealed variants to be destabilizing and affecting protein oligomerization. Protein activity studies using three variants (p.Asp623Asn, p.Tyr792Cys, and p.Arg443Gln) identified in affected individuals confirmed decreased enzymatic activity and reduced protein stability. In summary, we showed that individuals with bi-allelic amorphic (i.e., null and/or hypomorphic) variants in HMGCR display phenotypes that resemble non-genetic causes of myopathy involving this reductase. This study expands our knowledge regarding the mechanisms leading to muscular dystrophy through dysregulation of the mevalonate pathway, autoimmune myopathy, and statin-induced myopathy.
