15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase [NAD(+)]; Prostaglandin inactivation. Contributes to the regulation of events that are under the control of prostaglandin levels. Catalyzes the NAD-dependent dehydrogenation of lipoxin A4 to form 15-oxo-lipoxin A4. Inhibits in vivo proliferation of colon cancer cells.
Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a congenital multisystemic entity characterized by three major clinical symptoms: pachydermia, periostosis, and digital clubbing. Recently it has been reported that pathogenic mutations in two genes are known to be associated with PHO: HPGD and SLCO2A1. In the present study, a five-generation consanguineous Pakistani family harboring primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in autosomal-recessive pattern was ascertained. Whole genome single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyping and sequence analysis revealed a novel homozygous missense mutation (c.577T>C) of the human HPGD gene in all affected members of the family. The study presented here demonstrate the first case of primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy reported in Pashtun population.
Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, autosomal recessive type 1 (PHOAR1, MIM259100) is caused by mutations in the 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase gene (HPGD, MIM601688) on chromosome 4q34. An induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) line was generated in our lab from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of a 2-year-7-month-old girl with PHOAR1 carrying a homozygous mutation of c.310_311del in HPGD. The expression of pluripotency markers, absence of episomal vectors, preservation of normal karyotype, the potential of trilineage differentiation in vitro, were confirmed in the obtained iPSCs line.
Aspirin use reduces the risk of colorectal neoplasia, at least in part, through inhibition of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2, cyclooxygenase 2)-related pathways. Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase 15-(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) (15-PGDH, HPGD) is down-regulated in colorectal cancers and functions as a metabolic antagonist of PTGS2. We hypothesized that the effect of aspirin may be antagonized by low 15-PGDH expression in the normal colon. In the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study, we collected data on aspirin use every 2 years and followed up participants for diagnoses of colorectal cancer. Duplication-method Cox proportional, multivariable-adjusted, cause-specific hazards regression for competing risks data was used to compute hazard ratios (HRs) for incident colorectal cancer according to 15-PGDH mRNA expression level measured in normal mucosa from colorectal cancer resections. Among 127,865 participants, we documented 270 colorectal cancer cases from which we could assess 15-PGDH expression. Compared with nonuse, regular aspirin use was associated with lower risk of colorectal cancer that developed within a background of colonic mucosa with high 15-PGDH expression [multivariable HR, 0.49; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.34 to 0.71], but not with low 15-PGDH expression (multivariable HR, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.63 to 1.27) (P for heterogeneity = 0.018). Regular aspirin use was associated with lower incidence of colorectal cancers arising in association with high 15-PGDH expression, but not with low 15-PGDH expression in normal colon mucosa. This suggests that 15-PGDH expression level in normal colon mucosa may serve as a biomarker that may predict stronger benefit from aspirin chemoprevention.
BACKGROUND: Hypoxic pulmonary hypertension (HPH) is a syndrome of abnormally elevated pulmonary artery pressure, and it is mostly caused by vasoconstriction and remodeling of the pulmonary artery induced by long-term chronic hypoxia. There is a high incidence of HPH, a short survival time of the patients, but currently no effective treatments. METHODS: In this study, HPH-related single cell sequencing (scRNA-seq) and bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data were downloaded from the public database of Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) for bioinformatics analysis in order to find out genes with important regulatory roles in the development of HPH. 523 key genes were identified through cell subpopulation identification and trajectory analysis of the downloaded scRNA-seq data, and 41 key genes were identified through weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) of the bulk RNA-seq data. Three key genes: Hpgd, Npr3 and Fbln2 were identified by taking intersection of the key genes obtained above, and Hpgd was finally selected for subsequent verification. The human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (hPAECs) were treated with hypoxia for different periods of time, and it was found that the expression of Hpgd decreased in hypoxia-treated hPAECs in a time-dependent manner. In order to further confirm whether Hpgd affects the occurrence and development of HPH, Hpgd was overexpressed in hPAECs. RESULTS: Hpgd was confirmed to regulate the proliferation activity, apoptosis level, adhesiveness and angiogenesis ability of hypoxia-treated hPAECs through multiple experiments. CONCLUSIONS: Downregulation of Hpgd can improve the proliferation activity, reduce apoptosis, and enhance adhesion and angiogenesis in endothelial cells (ECs), thus promoting the occurrence and development of HPH.
Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a rare genetic disease mainly affecting the skeletal and skin. Two genes involved in prostaglandin degradation are known to be responsible for PHO: HPGD and SLCO2A1. HPGD gene mutation can cause PHO autosomal recessive 1 (PHOAR1). The purpose of the present study is to analyze the clinical and biochemical characteristics and HPGD gene mutations of 12 Chinese PHOAR1 patients. Twelve PHOAR1 patients from eleven families, including eleven males and one female, were enrolled in this study. Digital clubbing and periostosis came out to be the most common features, which always occur in the early childhood. We performed HPGD gene analysis and identified six novel (c.1A>G, c.34G>T, c.317T>A, c.475G>T, c.548C>T and c.421+1G>T) and one known (c.310_311delCT) HPGD mutations. The recurrent mutation c.310_311delCT were found in all eleven patients, suggesting it is a hotspot mutation. PHOAR1 patients are considered to have an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. Here, in addition to nine compound heterozygous patients and two homozygous patients, we found one heterozygous patient and reviewed two heterozygous patients reported in other studies. In terms of biochemical characteristics, our PHOAR1 patients have elevated urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) levels (P<0.001) and decreased urinary prostaglandin E metabolite (PGE-M) levels (P=0.04) compared with healthy controls. The patients' PGE2/PGE-M (E/M) ratio came out to be lower than normal subjects (P<0.001). This study provides a comprehensive description of the clinical phenotypes of Chinese PHOAR1 patients and expands the genotypic spectrum of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: Homozygous mutations in HPGD gene, encoding 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase, have recently been associated with primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO). So far, only 7 HPGD alterations are known. In order to expand this mutational spectrum and better delineate the HPGD-related phenotype, we report the clinical and molecular characterisation of a 13-year-old boy and compare his features to known mutated patients. METHODS: The HPGD gene exons 1-7 and exon-intron junctions were analysed by direct sequencing. Previously published HPGD-mutated patients were systematically reviewed based on the original clinical description. RESULTS: A novel homozygous c.217+1G>A mutation affecting the obligatory donor splice site of HPGD exon 2 was identified in our proband who showed a mild form of PHO. Review of HPGD-mutated patients outlined all patients manifested digital clubbing, periostosis and acro-osteolysis. Hyperhidrosis (92%), arthralgia (65%) and eczema (33%) were variably associated features. Pachydermia (54%) was mild and mostly limited to palms and sole; cutis vertigis gyrata, blepharoptosis and severe skin thickening were never observed. Besides digital clubbing, PHO infants often presented patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) (32%) and delayed cranial sutures closure (55%). CONCLUSIONS: The present findings broaden the allelic spectrum of HPGD gene to include a novel c.217+1G>A mutation. Mutated patients display a homogeneous phenotype mainly consisting in digital clubbing, periostosis, acro-osteolysis, hyperhidrosis and mild pachydermia. Earliest manifestations include delayed closure of the cranial sutures and PDA. In conclusion, the information reported herein would facilitate the diagnosis of PHO due to HPGD mutations.
OBJECTIVE: Homozygous recessive germline mutations of the 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD) gene, encoding 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase, result in persistent elevation of circulating PGE(2) levels, causing the syndrome of primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO). Homozygous HPGD mutations have so far been reported in 10 families, all but one displaying parental consanguinity. Only two of these families were of European origin. We wished to determine the role of HPGD in causing PHO in non-consanguineous European families. METHODS: Five previously unreported families of Caucasian European origin, with one or more individuals affected with typical PHO, were characterized clinically and by complete sequencing of the HPGD coding exons. RESULTS: Biallelic HPGD mutations were identified in affected individuals in all the five families, confirming a very specific association of this phenotype with HPGD mutations. The previously described c.175_176delCT frameshift mutation was observed in association with two different alleles of an adjacent single nucleotide polymorphism. CONCLUSIONS: Biallelic HPGD mutations are found in the majority of patients with typical PHO, and sequencing of the HPGD gene is a highly specific first-line investigation for patients presenting in this way, particularly during childhood. The c.175_176delCT frameshift mutation appears to be recurrent and to be the commonest HPGD mutation in Caucasian families.
Increasing evidences showed that ovulatory dysfunction, possibly caused by luteinized unruptured follicular follicle syndrome (LUFS), is one of the reasons for endometriosis-related infertility. The present study was conducted to explore the potential effect of elevated progesterone in follicular fluid (FF) on ovulation in endometriosis. A prospective study including 50 ovarian endometriosis patients and 50 control patients with matched pairs design was conducted with alterations in FF and peritoneal fluid (PF) components identified by metabolomics analyses and differentially expressed genes in granulosa cells (GCs) identified by transcriptome analysis. Patients with endometriosis exhibited a significantly higher progesterone level in serum, FF, and PF. Granulosa cells from endometriosis patients revealed decreased expression of HPGD, COX-2, and suppressed NF-kB signaling. Similarly, progesterone treatment in vitro downregulated HPGD and COX2 expression and suppressed NF-kB signaling in granulosa tumor-like cell line KGN (Bena Culture Collection, China) and primarily cultured GCs, as manifested by decreased expressions of IL1R1, IRAK3, reduced pIkBalpha/IkBalpha ratio, and nucleus translocation of p65. On the contrary, TNF-alpha treatment increased expression of IL1R1, IRAK3, pIkBalpha, p65, and HPGD in GCs. One potential p65 binding site was identified in the promoter region of HPGD by chromatin immunoprecipitation. In conclusion, we found that intrafollicular progesterone might downregulate HPGD and COX-2 in GCs via suppressing the NF-kB signaling pathway, shedding light on the mechanism underlying the endometriosis-related ovulatory dysfunction.
Background15-Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH, gene symbol HPGD) is considered a tumor suppressor, and its expression is often proportional to the anticancer response. However, the clinical significance of HPGD/15-PGDH in predicting immune response and its diagnosis and prognosis value in cervical cancer remains unclear.ObjectiveThis study aims to explore the clinical significance of HPGD/15-PGDH in predicting carcinogenesis, prognosis, and sensitivity to immuno- and chemotherapy in cervical cancer.MethodsA comprehensive evaluation of the diagnostic, treatment-sensitive, and prognostic value of HPGD/15-PGDH in cervical cancer was conducted by bioinformatics analysis of public databases and validation of real cohort data.ResultsBioinformatics analysis showed that HPGD expression was decreased in cervical cancer and did not independently predict patient prognosis. Low HPGD expression was linked to resistance to certain chemotherapies, potentially due to immunosuppression triggered by low HPGD levels. Validation in clinical samples from the local hospital confirmed the decreased 15-PGDH expression and increased COX-2 expression in HPV16-positive cervical cancer patients and increased immune suppression during cancer progression.ConclusionsHPGD/15-PGDH is a potential biomarker for predicting the progression, immune response, and chemotherapy sensitivity of cervical cancer, with implications that it is of great value for the diagnosis and individual-based treatment of cervical cancer.
Here, we highlight the case of a 31-yr-old man who had clinical features of primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHOAR) and harbored a homozygous variant (c.38C > A, p.Ala13Glu) in the HPGD gene, as indicated by whole-exome sequencing (WES). This variant has been previously classified by our laboratory as a variant of uncertain significance (VUS). However, another patient with the same phenotype and the same homozygous variant in HPGD was subsequently reported. In reassessing the variant, the absence of this variant in the gnomAD population database, supporting computational predictions, observation in homozygosity in two probands, and specificity of the phenotype for HPGD, all provide sufficient evidence to reclassify the HPGD c.38C > A, p.Ala13Glu variant as likely pathogenic.
BACKGROUND: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that reside in microRNA target sites may play an important role in breast cancer development and progression. To reveal the association between microRNA target site SNPs and breast cancer risk, we performed a large case-control study in China. METHODS: We performed a two-stage case-control study including 2744 breast cancer cases and 3125 controls. In Stage I, we genotyped 192 SNPs within microRNA binding sites identified from the "Patrocles" database using custom Illumina GoldenGate VeraCode assays on the Illumina BeadXpress platform. In Stage II, genotyping was performed on SNPs potentially associated with breast cancer risk using the TaqMan platform in an independent replication set. RESULTS: In stage I, 15 SNPs were identified to be significantly associated with breast cancer risk (P<0.05). In stage II, one SNP rs8752 was replicated at P<0.05. This SNP is located in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD) gene at 4q34-35, a miR-485-5p binding site. Compared with the GG genotype, the combined GA+AA genotypes has a significantly higher risk of breast cancer (OR = 1.18; 95% CI: 1.06-1.31, P = 0.002). Specifically, this SNP was associated with estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer (P = 0.0007), but not with ER negative breast cancer (P = 0.23), though p for heterogeneity not significant. CONCLUSION: Through a systematic case-control study of microRNA binding site SNPs, we identified a new breast cancer risk variant rs8752 in HPGD in Chinese women. Further studies are warranted to investigate the underling mechanism for this association.
BACKGROUND: Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a rare genetic disorder primarily characterized by digital clubbing, pachydermia, and periostitis. The rarity of this disease often leads to misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis. METHODS: We describe the clinical and genetic findings of two pediatric PHO cases caused by HPGD variants and perform a systematic literature review of HPGD-related PHO cases. RESULTS: Both patients exhibited congenital digital clubbing and patent ductus arteriosus from birth. Radiographs revealed cortical bone thickening and a periosteal reaction. Patient 1 displayed gait abnormalities and delayed cranial suture closure, while Patient 2 had bilateral leg swelling. Whole exome sequencing identified a compound heterozygous variant (NM_000860.6: c.189C > A, p.C63* and NM_000860.6: c.310_311delCT, p. L104Afs*3) in Patient 1 and a homozygous splice-site variant (NG_011689.1(NM_000860.6): c.324 + 5G > A) in Patient 2. All variants were classified as pathogenic based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics criteria. Among 89 reviewed cases, the c.310_311delCT variant accounted for 37.1% (33/89), predominantly in homozygous form (60.6%, 20/33). The median urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)-to-creatinine ratio in PHO patients was 627.1 ng/mmol (normal: 61.49 ng/mmol). Notably, the median age of symptom onset was 5.1 years, while diagnosis occurred at 22.1 years, with a male predominance (male-to-female ratio: 2.2:1). CONCLUSION: We report the first HPGD c.189C > A variant, expanding the genetic spectrum of PHO. The c.310_311delCT variant represents a recurrent hotspot, predominantly in homozygosity. Our findings highlight the importance of early genetic testing and multidisciplinary management to reduce diagnostic delays and improve outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Isolated congenital nail clubbing (ICNC) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterised by enlargement of the terminal segments of fingers and toes with thickened nails due to proliferation of the connective tissues and abnormal function of the nail matrix. In the present study, we investigated a large Pakistani family with 11 affected individuals having hereditary congenital nail clubbing as a single invariable clinical feature without any associated ectodermal, skeletal or systemic imperfection. OBJECTIVE: To identify a gene underlying the ICNC phenotype. METHODS: A genome wide homozygosity linkage mapping strategy was used to identify the gene causing ICNC. DNA sequencing was performed to screen 10 candidate genes located in the linkage interval. RESULTS: We assigned the disease locus for the ICNC to a 13.25 cM region on chromosome 4q32.3-q34.1. This region corresponds to 12.27 Mbp according to the sequence based physical map (Build 36.1) and flanked by markers D4S2952 and D4S415. A maximum two point LOD score of 2.98 ( theta= 0.00) was obtained at marker D4S2368 while a maximum multipoint LOD score of 3.62 was obtained with several markers along the disease interval. Sequence analysis of the candidate genes, in the ICNC linkage interval, revealed a homozygous missense mutation (c.577T>C; p.S193P) in exon 6 of the human HPGD gene encoding NAD(+) dependent 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (15-PGDH). CONCLUSIONS: The involvement of 15-PGDH in the pathogenesis of ICNC may open up interesting perspectives into the function of this enzyme in nail morphogenesis/development.
While the application of early screening and HPV vaccines has reduced the incidence and mortality rates of cervical cancer, it remains the third most common carcinoma and fourth leading cause of cancer-associated death among women worldwide. The precise mechanisms underlying progression of cervical cancer are not fully understood at present. Here, we detected significant down-regulation of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (HPGD) in cervical cancer tissues. Overexpression of HPGD inhibited cervical cancer cell proliferation, migration and anchorage-independent growth to a significant extent. To clarify the mechanisms underlying HPGD down-regulation in cervical cancer, miRNA microarray, bioinformatics and luciferase reporter analyses were performed. HPGD was identified as a direct target of miR-146b-3p displaying up-regulation in cervical cancer tissues. Similar to the effects of HPGD overexpression, down-regulation of miR-146b-3p strongly suppressed proliferation, migration and anchorage-independent growth of cervical cancer cells. Furthermore, HPGD negatively regulated activities of STAT3 and AKT that promote cervical cancer cell proliferation. Notably, HPV oncogenes E6 and E7 were determined as potential contributory factors to these alterations. Our results collectively suggest that the HPGD/miR-146b-3p axis plays a significant role in cervical cancer and may serve as a potentially effective therapeutic target.
