Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase; Converts guanine to guanosine monophosphate, and hypoxanthine to inosine monophosphate. Transfers the 5-phosphoribosyl group from 5- phosphoribosylpyrophosphate onto the purine. Plays a central role in the generation of purine nucleotides through the purine salvage pathway.
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS) is a rare X-linked inherited neurogenetic disorder of purine metabolism in which the enzyme, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGprt) is defective. The authors report a novel mutation which led to HGprt-related neurological dysfunction (HND) in two brothers from the same family with a missense mutation in exon 6 of the coding region of the HPRT1 gene: c.437T>C, p.L146S. Molecular diagnosis discloses the genetic heterogeneity of the HPRT1 gene responsible for HGprt deficiency. It allows fast, accurate carrier detection and genetic counseling.
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS) is a rare X-linked inherited neurogenetic disorder of purine metabolism in which the enzyme, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase(HGprt) is defective. The authors report a novel mutation which led to LNS in a family with a deletion followed by an insertion (INDELS) via the serial replication slippage mechanism: c.428_432delTGCAGinsAGCAAA, p.Met143Lysfs*12 in exon 6 of HPRT1 gene. Molecular diagnosis discloses the genetic heterogeneity of HPRT1 gene responsible for HGprt deficiency. It allows fast, accurate carrier detection and genetic counseling.
Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) is a rare X-linked inherited neurogenetic disorder of purine metabolism in which the enzyme, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGprt) is defective. The authors report a novel point mutation that led to HGprt-related neurological dysfunction (HND) in a family in which there was a missense mutation in exon 6 of the coding region of the HPRT1 gene: g.34938G>T, c.403G>T, p.D135Y. Molecular diagnosis is consistent with the genetic heterogeneity of the HPRT1 gene responsible for HGprt deficiency. It allows fast, accurate carrier detection and genetic counseling.
Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) is a rare X-linked inherited neurogenetic disorder of purine metabolism in which the enzyme, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGprt) is defective. The authors report three novel independent mutations in the coding region of the HPRT1 gene from genomic DNA of (a) a carrier sister of two male patients with LND: c.569G>C, p.G190A in exon 8; and (b) two LND affected male patients unrelated to her who had two mutations: c.648delC, p.Y216X, and c.653C>G, p.A218G in exon 9. Molecular analysis reveals the heterogeneity of genetic mutation of the HPRT1 gene responsible for the HGprt deficiency. It allows fast, accurate detection of carriers and genetic counseling.
Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) is a rare X-linked recessive disorder caused by deficiency of the purine salvage enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT), encoded by the HPRT1. To date, nearly all types of mutations have been reported in the whole gene; however, duplication mutations are rare. We here report the case of a 9-month-old boy with LND. He showed developmental delay, athetosis, and dystonic posture from early infancy, but no self-injurious behaviors. Hyperuricemia was detected, and his HPRT enzyme activity in erythrocytes was completely deficient. A novel duplication mutation (c.372dupT, c.372_374 TTT > c.372_375 TTTT) was identified in exon 4 of the HPRT1, which causes aberrant splicing. This is the third case of a duplication mutation in the HPRT1 that causes splicing error.
Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) is a rare X-linked inherited neurogenetic disorder of purine metabolism in which the enzyme, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGprt) is defective. The authors report two independent point mutations leading to splicing errors: IVS 2 +1G>A, c.134 +1G>A, and IVS 3 +1G>A, c.318 +1G>A in the hypoxanthine-phosphoribosyltransferase1 (HPRT1) gene which result in exclusion of exon 2 and exon 3 respectively, in the HGprt enzyme protein from different members of two Chiloe Island families. Molecular analysis has revealed the heterogeneity of genetic mutation of the HPRT1 gene responsible for the HGprt deficiency. It allows fast, accurate carrier detection and genetic counseling.
We explored the feasibility of applying gene diagnosis in prenatal diagnosis by analysis of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase-1 (HPRT1) gene mutation in a Chinese Lesch-Nyhan family. A homozygous mutation of p.R170X (c.508C＞T) in HPRT1 gene was detected in the proband, and a heterozygous mutation of p.R170X was detected in his mother. This mutation failed to be found in the 50 unrelated healthy individuals. Prenatal diagnosis indicated that the foetus was male and also carried p.R170X (c.508C＞T) mutation, same as the proband. Parents of the foetus decided termination of pregnancy, and the result of gene analysis for the aborted tissue was consistent with that of prenatal diagnosis. We can see that Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS) is caused by non-sense mutation p.R170X（c.508C＞T）in HPRT1 gene in this family. Prenatal gene diagnosis is a valid strategy to prevent LNS because it can avoid the birth of LNS foetuses.
Lesch-Nyhan disease (LND) is a X-linked genetic disease affecting boys characterized by complex neurological and neuropsychiatric symptoms. LND is caused by loss of function mutations in the HPRT1 gene leading to decrease activity of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase enzyme (HGPRT) and altered purine salvage pathway (Lesch and Nyhan, 1964). This study describes the generation of isogenic clones with deletions in HPRT1 produced from one male human embryonic stem cell line using CRISPR/Cas9 strategy. Differentiation of these cells into different neuronal subtypes will help elucidating the neurodevelopmental events leading to LND and develop therapeutic strategies for this devastating neurodevelopmental disorder.
Inherited mutation of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) gives rise to Lesch-Nyhan syndrome or HPRT-related gout. On the other hand, PRPS1 mutations cause PRPP synthetase superactivity associated with hyperuricemia and gout, sometimes including neurodevelopmental abnormalities. We have identified two mutations in two Lesch-Nyhan families after our last report. One of them, a new single nucleotide substitution (130G>T) resulting in a missense mutation D44Y was detected in exon 2 of HPRT1. RT-PCR amplification showed not only a cDNA fragment with normal size, but also a small amount of shorter fragment skipping exons 2 and 3. The other missense mutation F74L (222C > A) was detected in a Japanese patient but has been reported previously in European families. In four hyperuricemic patients with mild neurological abnormality, no mutations responsible for partial HPRT deficiency were identified in HPRT1. In these four patients, we also performed molecular analysis of PRPS1, but no mutations in PRPP synthetase were found.
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is caused by a deficiency of hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) encoded by HPRT1. About 20% of patients have a deletion of HPRT1 and large deletions of HPRT1 are not always fully characterized at the molecular level. Here, we report on a case of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome with a 33-kb deletion involving exon 1 of HPRT1. This novel mutation is caused by a nonhomologous recombination between different classes of interspersed repetitive DNA.
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS, MIM300322) is a rare inherited disorder caused by mutations in HPRT1 gene. Here we describe the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from an infected child carrying the HPRT1 mutation c.508C > T(p.R170X) by reprogramming peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with episomal vectors. The obtained hiPSCs exhibited normal karyotype, expressed pluripotency markers, and possessed trilineage differentiation capacity.
The authors report two brothers who presented with motor delay and stiffness. The elder boy had auto-mutilation of lips and fingers. Serum uric acid was elevated in both the children. Both the boys had undetectable hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase activity in hemolysate, confirming the diagnosis of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Molecular genetic testing revealed a new mutation in the HPRT1 gene.
Unlike complete deficiency of hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) (i.e., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome), partial HPRT deficiency causes HPRT-related hyperuricemia without neurological symptoms. Herein, we describe a 22-year-old man without neurological symptoms that presented gout, hyperuricemia (serum urate level, 12.2 mg/dL), multiple renal microcalculi, and a family history of juvenile gout that was exhibited by his brother and grandfather. Genetic testing revealed a novel missense mutation, c.103G>A (p.V35M), in the HPRT1 gene, and biochemical testing (conducted using the patient's erythrocytes) showed that the patient retained only 12.4% HPRT enzymatic activity compared to that exhibited by a healthy control subject. We thus diagnosed the patient with HPRT-related hyperuricemia caused by partial HPRT deficiency. After his serum urate level was controlled via treatment with febuxostat, his gout did not recur. Thus, this study emphasizes that HPRT deficiency should be considered as a potential cause of familial juvenile gout, even in the absence of neurological symptoms.
Inherited mutation of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase, (HPRT) gives rise to Lesch-Nyhan syndrome or HPRT-related gout. We have identified 34 mutations in 28 Japanese, 7 Korean, and 1 Indian families with the patients manifesting different clinical phenotypes, including two rare cases in female subjects, by the analysis of all nine exons of HPRT from the genomic DNA and reverse transcribed mRNA using PCR technique coupled with direct sequencing.
Mutation of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) gives rise to Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, which is characterized by hyperuricemia, severe motor disability, and self-injurious behavior, or HPRT-related gout with hyperuricemia. Four mutations were detected in two Lesch-Nyhan families and two families with partial deficiency since our last report. A new mutation of G to TT (c.456delGinsTT) resulting in a frameshift (p.Q152Hfs*3) in exon 3 has been identified in one Lesch-Nyhan family. In the other Lesch-Nyhan family, a new point mutation in intron 7 (c.532+5G>T) causing splicing error (exon 7 excluded, p.L163Cfs*4) was detected. In the two partial deficiency cases with hyperuricemia, two missense mutations of p.D20V (c.59A>T) and p.H60R (c.179A>G) were found. An increase of erythrocyte PRPP concentration was observed in the respective phenotypes and seems to be correlated with disease severity.
Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase 1 (HPRT1), once considered a housekeeping gene, has been identified as playing an important role in several tumors. Its role in pan-cancer, however, has not been systematically studied. This study evaluates the relationship between HPRT1 and clinical parameters, survival prognosis, and tumor immunity based on multi omics data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) databases. Drug sensitivity analysis screened 16 effective drugs against HPRT1, exploring the interactions with chemicals and genes. The significance of HPRT1 in tumor immunotherapy has also been investigated. Immunohistochemistry confirmed significant differences in the expression of HPRT1 between five tumor types (colon adenocarcinoma [COAD], head-neck squamous cell carcinoma [HNSC], lung adenocarcinoma [LUAD], thyroid carcinoma [THCA], and uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma [UCEC]) and adjacent normal tissues (P < 0.05). HPRT1 competitive endogenous RNA network was constructed in HNSC. Through cytological experiments, it was verified that HPRT1 plays a carcinogenic role in HNSC and is associated with tumor cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and apoptosis. In addition, there was a significant positive correlation between HPRT1 and programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) expression in HNSC (P < 0.05). These findings suggest that HPRT1 may be a potential biomarker for predicting and treating cancer.
Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT1), as a salvage pathway enzyme, plays a crucial role in modulating the cell cycle and has been reported to be overexpressed in multiple cancers. Nevertheless, the relationship between the HPRT1 gene and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) has not been investigated so far. In this study, we first evaluated the expression and clinical value of HPRT1 mRNA and protein in tumor and healthy control tissues. Then, we examined mutations of the HPRT1 gene and their association with survival outcomes of patients with HNSCC. We also performed functional analyses of HPRT1 coexpressed genes and examined the association between HPRT1 expression and drug sensitivity. Both HPRT1 mRNA and protein were significantly higher in HNSCC compared with normal tissues, and up-regulation of HPRT1 was also correlated with age, sex, pathological stage and histological grades of patients with HNSCC. Moreover, HPRT1 and its associated genes were observed to be enriched for several cancer-related pathways, including DNA replication and cell cycle. Finally, patients exhibiting overexpression of the HPRT1 gene may be resistant to abiraterone and sensitive to several drugs, including tozasertib and teniposide. This study demonstrated that the elevated expression of HPRT1 gene is correlated with the progression of HNSCC; thus, this gene may serve as a useful indicator for the early detection, risk stratification and targeted therapy of patients with HNSCC.
