Histamine H1 receptor; In peripheral tissues, the H1 subclass of histamine receptors mediates the contraction of smooth muscles, increase in capillary permeability due to contraction of terminal venules, and catecholamine release from adrenal medulla, as well as mediating neurotransmission in the central nervous system.
Numerous coreceptors have been shown to facilitate hACE2-dependent or hACE2-independent infection by SARS-CoV-2. A recent study published in mBio by Yu et al. showed that the histamine receptor H1 (HRH1) functions as an alternative receptor for SARS-CoV-2 via direct binding to viral spike proteins (F. Yu, X. Liu, H. Ou, X. Li, et al., mBio e01088-24, 2024, https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.01088-24). Furthermore, they present compelling evidence that antihistamine drugs targeting HRH1 potently inhibit SARS-CoV-2 entry. This study highlights the therapeutic potential of repurposable antihistamines against COVID-19.
H1 nonsedating antihistamines, such as desloratadine, are first-line treatment options for chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). However, desloratadine induces various degrees of sedation side effect in CSU patients, and no biomarkers currently exist for predicting the severity of such side effect. Herein, we evaluated the association between HRH1 gene rs901865 polymorphism and the severity of sedation side effect following desloratadine therapy in patients with CSU. We found that 20 of the 114 patients (17.50%) showed sedation side effect after desloratadine treatment, and 3 patients (2.63%) experienced serious sleepiness. The frequency of HRH1 rs901865 G allele was significantly higher in patients who experienced sedation than in patients with rs901865 A allele (p = 0.0009). Moreover, patients with the rs901865 G/G genotype suffered a more serious sedation side effect than patients with the rs901865 G/A genotype (p = 0.005). These results provide evidence that the HRH1 rs901865 G/G polymorphism is associated with severe sedation side effect after desloratadine treatment. Thus, the HRH1 rs901865 allele may potentially be used as a biomarker for predicting the severity of sedation side effect in patients suffering from CSU and treated with desloratadine.
The high-grade astrocytoma, glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), is the most common primary tumour of the brain, known for being aggressive and developing drug resistance. The non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), such as microRNAs (miRNAs) and Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), have critical functions in tumorigenesis and cancer drug resistance. Hence, we profiled miRNAs, piRNAs, and genes in U-87 MG GBM cells by next-generation sequencing and performed target prediction, pathway enrichment, protein-protein interaction, co-expression studies, and qRT-PCR validations to predict their possible roles in the malignancy. The study identified 335 miRNAs, 665 piRNAs, and 4286 genes differentially expressed (DE) in GBM. Among them 128 DE genes (DEGs) were targeted by both miRNAs and piRNAs, while 1817 and 192 were targeted solely by miRNAs or piRNAs, respectively. Interestingly, all the DEG targets enriched in cancer processes were overexpressed in GBM. Among these, BRAF was solely targeted by two piRNAs and this was found to be co-expressed with 19 sole targets of 5 miRNAs, including CCND1, and both were found to regulate cell proliferation in cancer. We conjectured that upregulated HRH1 and ATXN3 were targeted by both piRNAs and miRNAs, and along with BRAF and CCND1 might induce cell proliferation in GBM through G-protein-coupled receptor or Akt signalling pathways due to downregulation of the respective targeting small RNAs. These targets were also linked to the progression and overall survival of GBM patients, suggesting that they could be used as biomarkers. Overall, this study has identified a few novel ncRNA targets, which might aid in a better understanding of GBM pathogenesis.
AIM: Histamine plays an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. Genetic variations in histamine receptors (HRH) may influence the expression of allergic diseases. This study analyzes the association between HRH variants and NSAID hypersensitivity reactions. PATIENTS & METHODS: The authors analyzed copy number variations (CNVs) and common functional SNPs in genes HRH1, HRH2 and HRH4 in 442 unrelated patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs and in 414 healthy unrelated controls. RESULTS: The authors identified, both in patients and control subjects, individuals carrying CNVs in HRH genes. The most common genotype corresponded to two copies of each gene, but carriers of one or three copies of HRH1 (5% of individuals), HRH2 (1.1%) and HRH4 genes (0.9%) were also identified. CONCLUSION: For the first time, we describe CNVs in human HRH genes. Neither common functional SNPs in HRH genes nor CNVs influenced the risk of developing hypersensitivity to NSAIDs.
In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a number of PRP genes known to be involved in pre-mRNA processing have been genetically identified and cloned. Three PRP genes (PRP2, PRP16, and PRP22) were shown to encode putative RNA helicases of the family of proteins with DEAH boxes. However, any such splicing factor containing the helicase motifs in vertebrates has not been identified. To identify human homologs of this family, we designed PCR primers corresponding to the highly conserved region of the DEAH box protein family and successfully amplified five cDNA fragments, using HeLa poly(A)+ RNA as a substrate. One fragment, designated HRH1 (human RNA helicase 1), is highly homologous to Prp22, which was previously shown to be involved in the release of spliced mRNAs from the spliceosomes. Expression of HRH1 in a S. cerevisiae prp22 mutant can partially rescue its temperature-sensitive phenotype. These results strongly suggest that HRH1 is a functional human homolog of the yeast Prp22 protein. Interestingly, HRH1 but not Prp22 contains an arginine- and serine-rich domain (RS domain) which is characteristic of some splicing factors, such as members of the SR protein family. We could show that HRH1 can interact in vitro and in the yeast two-hybrid system with members of the SR protein family through its RS domain. We speculate that HRH1 might be targeted to the spliceosome through this interaction.
PURPOSE: Fexofenadine (FXF) is the active metabolite of terfenadine with selective peripheral H1 receptor antagonist activity. FXF is a third-generation antihistamine, non-sedating, rapid and very long acting used in symptoms associated with allergic diseases such as allergic rhinitis, asthma and dermatitis. The pleiotropic effects of histamine are mediated by four types of receptors that belong to the G-protein-coupled receptor family: histamine H1 receptor (HRH-1), histamine H2 receptor, histamine H3 receptor, and histamine H4 receptor. Our hypothesis is that HRH-4 opens new possibility in treatment in allergy diseases and FXF could be the antagonist of both HRH-1 and HRH-4. METHODS: We isolated a peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) from children with diagnosed allergies and healthy - control group and measured the HRH-1 and HRH-4 mRNA gene expression using Quantitive Real-Time PCR. We obtained the results from basal gene expression and after FXF and histamine stimulation. RESULTS: HRH-1 mRNA basal gene expression shows significantly higher, and HRH-4 shows significantly lower expression in allergy group compared to control. In both groups HRH-1 mRNA gene expression was observed as statistically significant increased after histamine stimulation compared to cells not treated, while in HRH-4 only in allergy group we observed statistical increase. FXF successively blocked histamine affinity in HRH-1 mRNA gene expression but not in HRH-4, where we not observed any reaction. CONCLUSIONS: Results clearly overturned our hypothesis about the possibility of using FXF to block over-expression HRH-4 and open new way of treatment in allergy diseases.
