Histamine H3 receptor; The H3 subclass of histamine receptors could mediate the histamine signals in CNS and peripheral nervous system. Signals through the inhibition of adenylate cyclase and displays high constitutive activity (spontaneous activity in the absence of agonist). Agonist stimulation of isoform 3 neither modified adenylate cyclase activity nor induced intracellular calcium mobilization.
Neurotransmitter release is modulated by presynaptic histamine H(3) receptors located on histaminergic, noradrenergic and other nonhistaminergic neurons of the central and peripheral nervous system. Here, we report the determination of the structure of the human histamine H(3) receptor gene (HRH3) and the identification of a missense mutation (Ala280Val) in a patient with Shy-Drager syndrome. The coding region of the gene consists of three exons interrupted by two introns of approximately 1 kb in size. Exon boundaries only partly correspond to transmembrane domain organization. The homozygous Ala280Val variation in the third intracellular loop of the histamine H(3) receptor of a patient with Shy-Drager syndrome may be related to the etiology of the illness due to altered norepinephrine release. Furthermore, knowledge of the gene structure allows the verification of alternative splicing of the receptor. The corresponding histamine H(3) receptor isoforms as reported for the guinea pig and rat histamine H(3) receptor in different brain regions are not found in the human brain.
The pathophysiological functions of cardiac histamine level and related histamine receptors during the development of chronic heart failure (CHF) were intensively investigated previously. However, the relevance of polymorphisms in histamine-related genes, such as HRH2, HRH3, DAO, and HNMT, with CHF remains largely neglected. This study herein aims to analyze the clinical associations of polymorphisms in those genes with CHF risk. A total of 333 unrelated Chinese Han CHF patients and 354 ethnicity-matched healthy controls were recruited and 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped. We found that the HRH3 rs3787429 polymorphism was associated with CHF risk (p < 0.001). The T allele of rs3787429 exhibited protective effect against CHF under the dominant (ORs = 0.455; 95% CIs = 0.322-0.642) and additive models (ORs = 0.662; 95% CIs = 0.523-0.838), while, for SNPs in HRH2, DAO, and HNMT, no significant associations were observed in the present study. These findings for the first time screen out one SNP (rs3787429) of HRH3 gene that was significantly associated with CHF in Chinese Han population, which may be a novel biomarker for personal prevention and treatment of CHF and provides novel highlights for investigating the contribution of this disease.
Evidence suggests that the human histamine H3 receptor (HRH3) may be involved in the pharmacodynamics of risperidone and influence clinical efficacy. More information on the pharmacogenetics of this receptor may therefore be useful in developing individualized therapy. However, to our knowledge, no study has been reported in this area. The aim of this investigation was to clarify whether H3 receptor polymorphism could affect risperidone efficacy. We genotyped tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the HRH3 gene (rs3787429 and rs3787430) and analyzed their association with the reduction of Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) score in Chinese Han schizophrenia patients (N = 129), following an eight-week period of risperidone monotherapy. The confounding effects of non-genetic factors were estimated, and then the significant one was included as the covariate for adjustment in statistical analysis. Baseline symptom score was the only significant confounding effect and thus the covariate. After adjustment, significant association of HRH3 with antipsychotic efficacy was detected (for rs3787429, p = 0.013, 0.087 after 4 weeks and 8 weeks of treatment, respectively; for rs3787430, p = 0.024, 0.010 after 4 weeks and 8 weeks of treatment, respectively) and stood up to conservative Bonferroni correction. Our results demonstrate that polymorphism of the HRH3 gene may be a potential genetic marker for predicting the therapeutic effect of risperidone, and suggest novel pharmacological links between HRH3 and risperidone. Further studies with larger samples and different ethnic populations are warranted to confirm our results.
