Histamine H4 receptor; The H4 subclass of histamine receptors could mediate the histamine signals in peripheral tissues. Displays a significant level of constitutive activity (spontaneous activity in the absence of agonist); Belongs to the G-protein coupled receptor 1 family.
TARGET: The purpose of the study was to investigate the association between the histamine H4 receptor (HRH4) polymorphisms and the susceptibility to ankylosing spondylitis (AS). METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method was used to analyze the HRH4 rs8088140 and rs657132 polymorphisms. Linkage disequilibrium and haplotype analyses were conducted with Haploview software. The genotypes distributions of HRH4 polymorphisms in the control group were tested by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE), allele, genotype and haplotype frequencies between the cases and control groups were compared by chi(2) test. The controls were matched with cases by age and gender. The relative risk of AS with HRH4 polymorphisms was represented by odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) calculated by chi(2) test. RESULTS: The genotypes distributions of HRH4 rs8088140, rs657132 polymorphisms in controls conformed to HWE. The frequency of rs657132 AA genotype in the case group was obviously higher than that in the control group (P=0.040), and so was the A allele (OR=2.572, 95% CI=1.475-4.486, P=0.022). The frequency differences of A-A haplotype between two groups had statistical significance (P=0.011, OR=2.071, 95% CI=1.172-3.660) through haplotype analysis, indicating A-A might be the susceptible haplotype to AS. CONCLUSION: The AA genotypes of HRH4 rs657132 polymorphism may be the susceptible factors for AS, and rs657132 plays a role in generation of AS. In addition, A-A haplotype in rs8088140-rs657132 is also increased the risk of AS.
BACKGROUND: Histamine as an inflammatory mediator plays an important role in chronic allergic and asthmatic conditions. However, the role of genetic polymorphisms of the histamine receptor HRH4 (histamine receptor H4) gene in asthma susceptibility and endophenotypes has not been studied yet. Our aim was to investigate the possible association between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the HRH4 gene and asthma or some endophenotypes of asthma. METHODS: Twenty-one SNPs of the HRH4 gene were genotyped in 313 asthmatic patients and 360 controls using Sequenom(R) iPLEX(R) Gold Genotyping Technology. RESULTS: Genotype distribution of three HRH4 SNPs, namely rs17187619 [p = 0.002; odds ratio, OR (95% confidence interval, CI) = 2.4 (4.1-1.4)], rs527790 [p = 0.0002; OR (95% CI) = 3.3 (6.1-1.8)] and rs487202 [p = 0.00007; OR (95% CI) = 3.5 (6.6-1.9)] differed significantly between patients with or without infection-induced asthma. Haplotypes, which included the rs4800573-rs527790 CC allele combination, were found to be associated with infection-induced asthma [p = 0.0009, OR (95% CI) = 0.5 (0.4-0.8)]. The rs487202-rs574913 CA haplotype was more frequent among patients with infection-induced asthma [p = 0.0006, OR (95% CI) = 1.9 (1.3-2.6)]. None of the SNPs contributed directly to the risk of asthma. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genetic variation in the HRH4 gene might influence the pathogenesis of infection-induced asthma.
BACKGROUND: Histamine is an established growth factor for gastrointestinal malignancies. The effect of histamine is largely determined locally by the histamine receptor expression pattern. Histamine receptor H4 (HRH4), the newest member of the histamine receptor family, is positively expressed on the epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract, and its function remains to be elucidated. Previously, we reported the decreased expression of HRH4 in colorectal cancers and revealed its correlation with tumor proliferation. In the current study, we aimed to investigate the abnormalities of HRH4 gene in gastric carcinomas (GCs). METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We analyzed H4R expression in collected GC samples by quantitative PCR, Western blot analysis, and immunostaining. Our results showed that the protein and mRNA levels of HRH4 were reduced in some GC samples, especially in advanced GC samples. Copy number decrease of HRH4 gene was observed (17.6%, 23 out of 131), which was closely correlated with the attenuated expression of H4R. In vitro studies, using gastric cancer cell lines, showed that the alteration of HRH4 expression on gastric cancer cells influences tumor growth upon exposure to histamine. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We show for the first time that deletion of HRH4 gene is present in GC cases and is closely correlated with attenuated gene expression. Down-regulation of HRH4 in gastric carcinomas plays a role in histamine-mediated growth control of GC cells.
BACKGROUND: Earlier studies have reported the production of histamine in colorectal cancers (CRCs). The effect of histamine is largely determined locally by the histamine receptor expression pattern. Recent evidence suggests that the expression level of histamine receptor H4 (HRH4) is abnormal in colorectal cancer tissues. However, the role of HRH4 in CRC progression and its clinical relevance is not well understood. The aim of this study is to evaluate the clinical and molecular phenotypes of colorectal tumors with abnormal HRH4 expression. METHODS: Immunoblotting, real-time PCR, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry assays were adopted to examine HRH4 expression in case-matched CRC samples (n = 107) and adjacent normal tissues (ANTs). To assess the functions of HRH4 in CRC cells, we established stable HRH4-transfected colorectal cells and examined cell proliferation, colony formation, cell cycle and apoptosis in these cells. RESULTS: The protein levels of HRH4 were reduced in most of the human CRC samples regardless of grade or Dukes classification. mRNA levels of HRH4 were also reduced in both early-stage and advanced CRC samples. In vitro studies showed that HRH4 over-expression caused growth arrest and induced expression of cell cycle proteins in CRC cells upon exposure to histamine through a cAMP -dependent pathway. Furthermore, HRH4 stimulation promoted the 5-Fu-induced cell apoptosis in HRH4-positive colorectal cells. CONCLUSION: The results from the current study supported previous findings of HRH4 abnormalities in CRCs. Expression levels of HRH4 could influence the histamine-mediated growth regulation in CRC cells. These findings suggested a potential role of abnormal HRH4 expression in the progression of CRCs and provided some new clues for the application of HRH4-specific agonist or antagonist in the molecular therapy of CRCs.
AIM: To investigate the effects of four probiotic bacteria and their combination on human mast cell gene expression using microarray analysis. METHODS: Human peripheral-blood-derived mast cells were stimulated with Lactobacillus rhamnosus (L. rhamnosus) GG (LGG((R))), L. rhamnosus Lc705 (Lc705), Propionibacterium freudenreichii ssp. shermanii JS (PJS) and Bifidobacterium animalis ssp. lactis Bb12 (Bb12) and their combination for 3 or 24 h, and were subjected to global microarray analysis using an Affymetrix GeneChip((R)) Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array. The gene expression differences between unstimulated and bacteria-stimulated samples were further analyzed with GOrilla Gene Enrichment Analysis and Visualization Tool and MeV Multiexperiment Viewer-tool. RESULTS: LGG and Lc705 were observed to suppress genes that encoded allergy-related high-affinity IgE receptor subunits alpha and gamma (FCER1A and FCER1G, respectively) and histamine H4 receptor. LGG, Lc705 and the combination of four probiotics had the strongest effect on the expression of genes involved in mast cell immune system regulation, and on several genes that encoded proteins with a pro-inflammatory impact, such as interleukin (IL)-8 and tumour necrosis factor alpha. Also genes that encoded proteins with anti-inflammatory functions, such as IL-10, were upregulated. CONCLUSION: Certain probiotic bacteria might diminish mast cell allergy-related activation by downregulation of the expression of high-affinity IgE and histamine receptor genes, and by inducing a pro-inflammatory response.
AIM: Histamine plays an important role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. Genetic variations in histamine receptors (HRH) may influence the expression of allergic diseases. This study analyzes the association between HRH variants and NSAID hypersensitivity reactions. PATIENTS & METHODS: The authors analyzed copy number variations (CNVs) and common functional SNPs in genes HRH1, HRH2 and HRH4 in 442 unrelated patients with hypersensitivity to NSAIDs and in 414 healthy unrelated controls. RESULTS: The authors identified, both in patients and control subjects, individuals carrying CNVs in HRH genes. The most common genotype corresponded to two copies of each gene, but carriers of one or three copies of HRH1 (5% of individuals), HRH2 (1.1%) and HRH4 genes (0.9%) were also identified. CONCLUSION: For the first time, we describe CNVs in human HRH genes. Neither common functional SNPs in HRH genes nor CNVs influenced the risk of developing hypersensitivity to NSAIDs.
PURPOSE: Fexofenadine (FXF) is the active metabolite of terfenadine with selective peripheral H1 receptor antagonist activity. FXF is a third-generation antihistamine, non-sedating, rapid and very long acting used in symptoms associated with allergic diseases such as allergic rhinitis, asthma and dermatitis. The pleiotropic effects of histamine are mediated by four types of receptors that belong to the G-protein-coupled receptor family: histamine H1 receptor (HRH-1), histamine H2 receptor, histamine H3 receptor, and histamine H4 receptor. Our hypothesis is that HRH-4 opens new possibility in treatment in allergy diseases and FXF could be the antagonist of both HRH-1 and HRH-4. METHODS: We isolated a peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) from children with diagnosed allergies and healthy - control group and measured the HRH-1 and HRH-4 mRNA gene expression using Quantitive Real-Time PCR. We obtained the results from basal gene expression and after FXF and histamine stimulation. RESULTS: HRH-1 mRNA basal gene expression shows significantly higher, and HRH-4 shows significantly lower expression in allergy group compared to control. In both groups HRH-1 mRNA gene expression was observed as statistically significant increased after histamine stimulation compared to cells not treated, while in HRH-4 only in allergy group we observed statistical increase. FXF successively blocked histamine affinity in HRH-1 mRNA gene expression but not in HRH-4, where we not observed any reaction. CONCLUSIONS: Results clearly overturned our hypothesis about the possibility of using FXF to block over-expression HRH-4 and open new way of treatment in allergy diseases.
