5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1B; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for ergot alkaloid derivatives, various anxiolytic and antidepressant drugs and other psychoactive substances, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity. Arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and medi [...] 
Schizophrenia is a serious, chronic psychiatric disorder requiring lifelong treatment. Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) are common adverse reactions to antipsychotic medications. In addition to the dopaminergic system, serotonergic mechanisms, including serotonin (5-HT) receptors, might be involved in EPS development. This study aimed to examine molecular associations of HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A, HTR2C and HTR6 gene polymorphisms with acute EPS in 229 male schizophrenia patients, following two weeks of haloperidol monotherapy. The Simpson-Angus Rating Scale for Extrapyramidal Side Effects (SAS), Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) and Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS) were used to evaluate EPS severity. Genotyping was performed using real-time PCR, following extraction of blood DNA. Significant acute EPS appeared in 48.03% of schizophrenia patients. For the rs13212041 HTR1B gene polymorphism, affecting microRNA regulation of HTR1B gene expression, a higher frequency of TT carriers was found among haloperidol-treated patients with akathisia when compared to the group without akathisia symptoms. In comparison to C-allele carriers, patients carrying the TT genotype had higher akathisia severity, as determined by the SAS, BARS and ESRS scales. These molecular findings suggest potential involvement of 5-HT(1B) receptors in akathisia development following haloperidol treatment, as well as possible epigenetic mechanisms of serotonergic modulation associated with antipsychotic-induced EPS.
Psychopathy is a condition characterized by atypical emotions and socially maladaptive behavioral patterns. Among incarcerated people, psychopathy has been associated with higher rates of crimes, recidivism, and resistance to treatment. Many studies have indicated significant heritability of psychopathic traits, but little is known about the specific contribution of genes and their interaction with adverse experiences in life. Considering the primary role that serotonin plays in cognition and emotion, we investigated TPH2-rs4570625, 5-HTTLPR, MAOA-uVNTR, HTR1B-rs13212041 and HTR2A-rs6314 as risk factors for psychopathy in the largest sample of institutionalized individuals studied so far, consisting of 793 US White male incarcerated adults, and in a replication sample of 168 US White male incarcerated adolescents. In a subgroup of the adult sample, the interaction between genetics and parenting style, assessed by the Measure of Parental Style (MOPS) questionnaire, was also evaluated. The HTR1B-rs13212041-T/T genotype, as compared to HTR1B-rs13212041-C allele, predicted higher psychopathy scores in both the adult and the adolescent samples. The interaction between HTR1B-rs13212041-T/T genotype and paternal MOPS scores, investigated in a subgroup of the adult sample, was an even stronger predictor of higher levels of psychopathy than either the genetics or the environment taken individually. Overall, these data, obtained in two independent samples, shed new light on neurobiological correlates of psychopathy with promising implications both at a clinical and forensic level.
AIMS: Antidepressants are effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), while many patients fail to respond to antidepressants. Both 5-HT1A (HTR1A) and 5-HT1B (HTR1B) receptors play an important role in antidepressant activity. Meanwhile, DNA methylation is associated with MDD and antidepressant efficacy. In this study we investigate the influence of HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype on antidepressant efficacy. METHODS: A total of 291 MDD patients and 100 healthy controls received the Life Events Scale (LES) and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) as stress assessment. Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of HTR1A and HTR1B involved in antidepressant mechanisms were tested. Methylation status in 181 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites of HTR1A and HTR1B were assessed. All MDD patients were divided into response (RES) and non-response (NRES) after 2 weeks of antidepressant treatment. Logistic regression was conducted for interactions between methylation, NLES/CTQ score and genotype. RESULTS: Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation is connected with better antidepressant efficacy in subgroup. Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation combined with low CTQ score is related to better antidepressant efficacy. The interaction between high HTR1B methylation with the rs6298 AA/AG genotype affects better antidepressant efficacy. CONCLUSIONS: HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype is associated with antidepressant efficacy.
The serotonin system is thought to play a role in the aetiology of callous-unemotional (CU) traits in children. Previous research identified a functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) from the promoter region of the serotonin 1B receptor gene as being associated with CU traits in boys with antisocial behaviour problems. This research tested the hypothesis that CU traits are associated with reduced methylation of the promoter region of the serotonin 1B receptor gene due to the influence of methylation on gene expression. Participants (N = 117) were boys with antisocial behaviour problems aged 3-16 years referred to University of New South Wales Child Behaviour Research Clinics. Participants volunteered a saliva sample from which the genotype of a SNP from the promoter region of the serotonin 1B receptor gene and the methylation levels of 30 CpG sites from 3 CpG regions surrounding the location of this polymorphism were assayed. Lower levels of serotonin 1B receptor gene methylation were associated with higher levels of CU traits. This relationship, however, was found to be moderated by genotype and carried exclusively by two CpG sites for which levels of methylation were negatively associated with overall methylation levels in this region of the gene. Results provide support to the emerging literature that argues for a genetically-driven system-wide alteration in serotonin function in the aetiology of CU traits. Furthermore, the results suggest that there may be two pathways to CU traits that involve methylation of the serotonin 1B receptor gene; one that is driven by a genotypic risk and another that is associated with risk for generally increased levels of methylation. Future research that aims to replicate and further investigate these results is required.
To investigate the association between three selected pain polymorphisms and clinical, functional, sensory-related, psychophysical, psychological or cognitive variables in a sample of women with fibromyalgia (FMS). One hundred twenty-three (n = 123) women with FMS completed demographic (age, height, weight), clinical (years with pain, intensity of pain at rest and during daily living activities), functional (quality of life, physical function), sensory-related (sensitization-associated and neuropathic-associated symptoms), psychophysical (pressure pain thresholds), psychological (sleep quality, depressive and anxiety level) and cognitive (pain catastrophizing, kinesiophobia) variables. Those three genotypes of the OPRM1 rs1799971, HTR1B rs6296 and COMT rs4680 single nucleotide polymorphisms were obtained by polymerase chain reactions from no-stimulated whole saliva collection. No significant differences in demographic, clinical, functional, sensory-related, psychophysical, psychological and cognitive variables according to OPRM1 rs1799971, HTR1B rs6296 or COMT rs4680 genotype were identified in our sample of women with FMS. A multilevel analysis did not either reveal any significant gene-to-gene interaction between OPRM1 rs1799971 x HTR1B rs6296, OPRM1 rs1799971 x COMT rs4680 and HTR1B rs6296 x COMT rs4680 for any of the investigated outcomes. This study revealed that three single nucleotide polymorphisms, OPRM1 rs1799971, HTR1B rs6296 or COMT rs4680, mostly associated with chronic pain were not involved in phenotyping features of FMS. Potential gene-to-gene interaction and their association with clinical phenotype in women with FMS should be further investigated in future studies including large sample sizes.
PURPOSE: Serotonin receptor 1B (HTR1B) is involved in the regulation of the serotonin system, playing different roles in specific areas of the brain. We review the characteristics of the gene coding for HTR1B, its product and the functional role of HTR1B in the neural networks involved in motivation and memory; the central role played by HTR1B in these functions is thoroughly depicted and show HTR1B to be a candidate modulator of the mnemonic and motivationally related symptoms in psychiatric illnesses. METHODS: In order to challenge this assessment, we analyze how and how much the genetic variations located in the gene that codes for HTR1B impacts on the psychiatric phenotypes by reviewing the literature on this topic. RESULTS: We gathered partial evidence arising from genetic association studies, which suggests that HTR1B plays a relevant role in substance-related and obsessive compulsive disorders. On the other hand, no solid evidence for other psychiatric disorders was found. This finding is quite striking because of the heavy impairment of motivation and of mnemonic-related functions (for example, recall bias) that characterize major psychiatric disorders. CONCLUSIONS: The possible reasons for the contrast between the prime relevance of HTR1B in regulating memory and motivation and the limited evidence brought by genetic association studies in humans are discussed, and some suggestions for possible future directions are provided.
Serotonin (5-HT) is implicated in the reward processes underlying substance use disorder. Epigenetic and transcriptional mechanisms contribute to the development of addictive states. To examine the potential mechanisms of 5-HT receptor genes in opioid use disorder, we first determined the associations between several single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) in three representative 5-HT receptor genes (HTR1B, HTR2A, and HTR3B) and susceptibility to heroin use disorder in 1731 participants. Gene-gene interactions among these genes were analyzed. After identifying the susceptibility genes and SNPs for heroin use disorder, DNA methylation in the promoter region of these susceptibility genes was compared between 111 healthy controls and 120 patients with heroin use disorder. In addition, associations between the susceptibility SNPs and methylation of the CpG sites and gene promoters with differential methylation between groups were examined. Finally, the function of the susceptibility SNPs in the expression of the corresponding genes was screened. Our results demonstrated that rs6296 in the HTR1B gene was correlated with susceptibility to heroin use disorder. Gene-gene interactions between the HTR1B and HTR2A genes were identified. The CpG sites HTR1B_07 and HTR1B_26 and the promoter region of the HTR1B gene were hypermethylated in patients with heroin use disorder compared with healthy controls. Notably, rs6296 correlated in an allele-specific manner with methylation in the HTR1B gene promoter in the blood and gene expression of the HTR1B gene in the frontal cortex and hypothalamus. SNP rs6296 was associated with opioid use disorder by involving mechanisms of DNA methylation and expression of the HTR1B gene.
The serotonin 1B receptor (5-HT(1B)) is important to both the pathogenesis of major depressive disorder and the antidepressant effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Although fluoxetine has been shown to be effective and safe in children and adolescents, not all patients experience a proper clinical response, which has led to further study into the main factors involved in this inter-individual variability. Our aim was to study the effect of epigenetic and genetic factors that could affect 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1B (HTR1B) gene expression, and thereby response to fluoxetine. A total of 83 children and adolescents were clinically assessed 12weeks after of initiating an antidepressant treatment with fluoxetine for the first time. We evaluated the influence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) specifically located in transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) on their clinical improvement. A combined genetic analysis considering the significant SNPs together with the functional variant rs130058 previously associated in our population was also performed. Moreover, we assessed, for the first time in the literature, whether methylation levels of the HTR1B promoter region could be associated with the pharmacological response. Two, rs9361233 and rs9361235, were significantly associated with clinical improvement after treatment with fluoxetine. The heterozygous genotype combination analysis showed a negative correlation with clinical improvement. The lowest improvement was experienced by patients who were heterozygous for all three SNPs. Moreover, a negative correlation was found between clinical improvement and the average methylation level of the HTR1B promoter. These results give new evidence for the role of epigenetic and genetic factors which could modulate HTR1B expression in the pharmacological response to antidepressants.
BACKGROUND: The HTR1B gene encodes the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT1B) receptor, which is involved in a variety of brain activities and mental disorders. The regulatory effects of non-coding regions on genomic DNA are one of many reasons for the cause of genetic-related diseases. Post-transcriptional regulation that depends on the function of 3' regulatory regions plays a particularly important role. This study investigated the effects, on reporter gene expression, of several haplotypes of the HTR1B gene (rs6297, rs3827804, rs140792648, rs9361234, rs76194807, rs58138557, and rs13212041) and truncated fragments in order to analyze the function of the 3' region of HTR1B. RESULTS: We found that the haplotype, A-G-Del-C-T-Ins-A, enhanced the expression level compared to the main haplotype; A-G-Del-C-G-Ins-A; G-G-Del-C-G-Ins-G decreased the expression level. Two alleles, rs76194807T and rs6297G, exhibited different relative luciferase intensities compared to their counterparts at each locus. We also found that + 2440 ~ + 2769 bp and + 1953 ~ + 2311 bp regions both had negative effects on gene expression. CONCLUSIONS: The 3' region of HTR1B has a regulatory effect on gene expression, which is likely closely associated with the interpretation of HTR1B-related disorders. In addition, the HTR1B 3' region includes several effector binding sites that induce an inhibitory effect on gene expression.
BACKGROUND: The 5-hydroxytryptamine 1B receptor (5-HT1B) plays an essential role in the serotonin (5-HT) system and is widely involved in a variety of brain activities. HTR1B is the gene encoding 5-HT1B. Genome-wide association studies have shown that HTR1B polymorphisms are closely related to multiple mental and behavioral disorders; however, the functional mechanisms underlying these associations are unknown. This study investigated the effect of several HTR1B haplotypes on regulation of gene expression in vitro and the functional sequences in the 5' regulatory region of HTR1B to determine their potential association with mental and behavioral disorders. METHODS: Six haplotypes consisting of rs4140535, rs1778258, rs17273700, rs1228814, rs11568817, and rs130058 and several truncated fragments of the 5' regulatory region of HTR1B were transfected into SK-N-SH and HEK-293 cells. The relative fluorescence intensities of the different haplotypes and truncated fragments were detected using a dual-luciferase reporter assay system. RESULTS: Compared to the major haplotype T-G-T-C-T-A, the relative fluorescence intensities of haplotypes C-A-T-C-T-A, C-G-T-C-T-A, C-G-C-A-G-T, and C-G-T-A-T-A were significantly lower, and that of haplotype C-G-C-A-G-A was significantly higher. Furthermore, the effects of the rs4140535T allele, the rs17273700C-rs11568817G linkage combination, and the rs1228814A allele made their relative fluorescence intensities significantly higher than their counterparts at each locus. Conversely, the rs1778258A and rs130058T alleles decreased the relative fluorescence intensities. In addition, we found that regions from - 1587 to - 1371 bp (TSS, + 1), - 1149 to - 894 bp, - 39 to + 130 bp, + 130 to + 341 bp, and + 341 to + 505 bp upregulated gene expression. In contrast, regions - 603 to - 316 bp and + 130 to + 341 bp downregulated gene expression. Region + 341 to + 505 bp played a decisive role in gene transcription. CONCLUSIONS: HTR1B 5' regulatory region polymorphisms have regulatory effects on gene expression and potential correlate with several pathology and physiology conditions. This study suggests that a crucial sequence for transcription is located in region + 341 ~ + 505 bp. Regions - 1587 to - 1371 bp, - 1149 to - 894 bp, - 603 to - 316 bp, - 39 to + 130 bp, and + 130 to + 341 bp contain functional sequences that can promote or suppress the HTR1B gene expression.
The purpose of this study was to test for association between Borderline personality disorder (BPD) and variants of the HTR1B and the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene. We genotyped four HTR1B and the functional BDNF G196A marker in 161 Caucasian BPD patients and 156 healthy controls. There were no significant differences between groups in genotype or haplotype distribution of HTR1B markers or in genotype distribution of the BDNF marker. Logistic regression analyses revealed an over-representation of the BDNF 196A allele in HTR1B A-161 allele carrying BPD patients.
BCR::ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal haematopoietic stem cell disorders characterized by specific driver mutations and an increased risk of both macrothrombosis and microthrombosis. Serotonin receptor type 1B (HTR1B) was found to be expressed by various solid tumours, and also primary bone marrow mononuclear cells from myelodysplastic neoplasm and acute myeloid leukaemia patients, representing a potential therapeutic target. In this study we assessed for the first time the expression levels of HTR1B mRNA in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of 85 newly diagnosed MPN patients, consisting of 28 polycythemia vera, 25 essential thrombocythemia and 32 primary myelofibrosis cases. Levels of HTR1B expression between MPN subtypes and control group were not significantly different. However, at clinical data examination, it was observed that MPN patients with a recent history of major thrombosis and/or signs of impaired microcirculation exhibited significantly higher HTR1B expression levels compared to non-thrombotic MPNs and control group. Moreover, thrombotic MPN patients had significantly higher HTR1B expression than patients with recent thrombosis and absence of MPN diagnostic criteria. These findings suggest that increased levels of HTR1B expression in PBMC might be associated with thrombosis in MPN patients, but larger studies are needed for confirmation, including testing of the receptor protein expression level.
OBJECTIVES: 5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)-1B receptors (HTR1B) may play an important role in psychiatric disorders and drug and alcohol dependence. In this study we report on genotype, molecular haplotype and statistically estimated haplotype analyses of previously identified polymorphisms in positions -261T>G, -161A>T, 129C>T, 861G>C and 1180A>G of the HTR1B gene in ethnically diverse populations (African-Americans, Caucasians, Hispanics and Asians) including 235 former heroin addicts and 161 control subjects from New York City. The objectives were to test for an association of molecular and statistically estimated haplotypes and genotypes in HTR1B gene with heroin addiction and to compare results provided by molecular and statistically estimated haplotyping methods. METHODS: Genotype analysis was performed using a standard TaqMan protocol. Molecular haplotype analysis of the subset of polymorphisms consisting of -261T>G, -161A>T and 129C>T was performed using a protocol specially designed by our group, using fluorescent PCR. This is based on use of allele-specific primers complementary to flanking polymorphisms and a fluorescently labeled sequence-specific TaqMan probe set complementary to an internal polymorphism of the haplotype region. Every individual's statistically inferred haplotype pair agreed with the individual's haplotype pair determined by molecular haplotyping. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: A point-wise significant association of haplotype pairs containing allele G at position 1180 with protective effect from heroin addiction in Caucasians was found. A point-wise nominally significant association of allele 1180G with a protective effect from heroin addiction was found in Caucasians. Statistically significant differences across four ethnic groups in control subjects for allelic frequencies of -261T>G and -161A>T were found.
The serotonergic system has been widely implicated in stress related psychiatric disorders such as depression and anxiety. We investigated the possible association between depression and anxiety scores and SNPs within the HTR1A and HTR1B genes in a population sample (n=1387). There was no direct SNP-phenotype association, but in interaction with recent stressful life events rs6295 G, rs878567 T alleles and rs6296 C alleles were associated with significantly higher symptom scores. A subset of control subjects (n=101) took part in a computerised face emotion processing task. Healthy rs6295 GG carriers did not show an affective bias to perceive more negative emotions but reacted more quickly to fearful faces. Thus we conclude that the serotonin-1A receptor conveys vulnerability to these psychiatric disorders by modulating threat-related information processing. Our results extend previous findings of an interaction between stressful life events and the serotonin transporter gene to two other genes in the serotonergic pathway and emphasise the possible role of increased threat-related information processing as an intermediate phenotype.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a very common psychiatric disorder across the life cycle and frequently presents comorbidities. Since ADHD is highly heritable, several studies have focused in the underlying genetic factors involved in its etiology. One of the major challenges in this search is the phenotypic heterogeneity, which could be partly attributable to the sexual dimorphism frequently seen in psychiatric disorders. Taking into account the well-known sexual dimorphic effect observed in serotonergic system characteristics, we differentially tested the influence of HTR1B SNPs (rs11568817, rs130058, rs6296 and rs13212041) on ADHD susceptibility and on its major comorbidities according to sex. The sample comprised 564 adults with ADHD diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria and 635 controls. There was no association of any HTR1B SNPs tested in relation to ADHD susceptibility. As for the comorbidities evaluated, after correction for multiple tests, significant associations were observed for both rs11568817 and rs130058 with substance use disorders (P(corr) = 0.009 and P(corr) = 0.018, respectively) and for rs11568817 with nicotine dependence (P(corr) = 0.025) in men with ADHD. In women with ADHD, the same rs11568817 was associated with generalized anxiety disorder (P(corr) = 0.031). The observed effects of rs11568817 G allele presence conferring risk to either substance use disorders or generalized anxiety disorder according to sex, suggest an overall scenario where a higher transcriptional activity of HTR1B, resulting from the presence of this allele, is related to externalizing behaviors in men and internalizing behaviors in women. These results are consistent with and expand previous evidence of sexual dimorphism of the serotoninergic system.
