5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1A; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathways. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity and activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second  [...] 
Previous studies have shown a close relationship between the serotonin system and working memory (WM), but the neural mechanism for the role of the serotonin system on the WM is unclear. The frontoparietal network is involved in WM and is associated with the serotonin system. Therefore, this study investigated the interaction effect of the serotonin transporter-linked polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) and the polymorphism in the serotonin 1A receptor gene (rs6295) on the frontoparietal network obtained from the independent component analysis in a large, young Chinese sample population. The current study found a significant interaction effect of 5-HTTLPR and rs6295 on the connectivity within the right frontoparietal network, specifically in the middle frontal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule. Moreover, the mean connectivity in the right inferior parietal lobule was positively correlated with WM performance. These brain network analysis findings could provide a new perspective on the neural mechanisms of gene-gene interactions and on individual differences in cognitive functions.
Several association studies have indicated that the HTR1A gene is associated with suicidal behavior (SB). Thus, a systematic assessment of the association of HTR1A was performed based on a literature review and pooled analysis. Four electronic databases were comprehensively searched to find and pinpoint all case-control articles related to this study. When analyzing the genetic association with SB, data were divided into: (A) SB cases vs. healthy controls and (B) SB cases vs. psychiatric controls. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were assessed as measures of association. Heterogeneity among included studies was analyzed using sensitivity test and Q statistics. Publication bias was also explored by Egger and rank correlation test. Thirteen case-control studies were selected in this meta-analysis, involving 2817 SB patients, 2563 healthy controls and 545 psychiatric controls. In the overall comparison between SB cases and healthy controls, result showed that the rs6295 polymorphisms of HTR1A gene was associated with SB, but only when using the recessive model (OR = 2.21, 95% CI = 1.80-2.71, P < 0.001). In the smaller sample size comparison between SB and psychiatric controls, no significant association was detected with rs6295 in any of the five genetics models tested. The present meta-analysis suggests that rs6295 polymorphism of HTR1A gene could increase the risk for SB. Well-designed studies with more patients will be required to validate these results.
The aim of this study was to explore the role of two SNPs (rs6295 & rs113195492) in the HTR1A gene promoter region that regulates the expression of the 5-HT1A receptor. A fragment spanning from -551 to +672 of HTR1A (Transcription start site +1) was cloned into the pGL-3 Basic Vector and three haplotype plasmids composed of two SNPs were constructed. HEK-293 cells and the SK-N-SH cells were transfected with the three plasmids, and the relative fluorescence intensity was measured. In HEK-293 cells, there was a significant difference when the relative fluorescence intensity of plasmid 1-1 was compared to that of plasmid 2-1. However, no significant difference was observed when the luciferase expression of plasmid 2-1 and plasmid 3-1 was analyzed. We also found that the expression trend of the SK-N-SH cells was similar to the HEK-293 cells, but the overall relative fluorescence intensity of the SK-N-SH cells was lower than that of the HEK-293 cells. Our finding showed that the rs6295 SNP, as a suspected variant that indicates susceptibility to schizophrenia, exhibited a higher transcriptional activity. The influence of the rs113195492 locus on schizophrenia needs to be explored further.
OBJECTIVE: Dysfunction of serotonin 1A receptors (HTR1A) may play a role in the genesis of suicidal behavior. We studied the association between a functional polymorphism in the HTR1A gene and suicidal behavior. METHOD: We performed a meta-analysis of published genetic association studies by searching through Medline, PubMed, and Web of Science databases to analyze a possible correlation between the rs6295 polymorphism and suicidal behavior in different populations. RESULTS: Four studies comprising a total of nine hundred and fifty seven patients with suicidal behavior and nine hundred and fifty seven controls were the eligible. The G allele of the rs6295 polymorphism may not be associated with suicidal behavior (Random-effects model: OR = 1.08; 95% CI: 0.80-1.45; p(Z) = 0.80) in presence of heterogeneity (Q = 17.84, df = 4, p = 0.0013). In a second analysis that presented no heterogeneity, a negative association was also observed (OR = 0.94; 95%CI: 0.79-1.13; p(Z) = 0.99). CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, the present study is the first meta-analysis searching for a correlation between rs6295 of HTR1A and suicidal behavior. Our results showed no association between HTR1A and suicidal behavior. However, more studies assessing different populations, as well as larger samples, are needed.
BACKGROUND: This meta-analysis was conducted to evaluate whether HTR1A gene polymorphisms impact the efficacy of antipsychotic drugs in patients with schizophrenia. METHODS: Candidate gene studies that were published in English up to August 6, 2015 were identified by a literature search of PubMed, Web of Science, and Google scholar. Data were pooled from individual clinical trials considering overall symptoms, positive symptoms and negative symptoms, and standard mean differences were calculated by applying a random-effects model. RESULTS: The present meta-analysis included a total of 1281 patients from 10 studies. Three polymorphisms of HTR1A (rs6295, rs878567, and rs1423691) were selected for the analysis. In the pooled data from all studies, none of these HTR1A polymorphisms correlated significantly with either overall symptoms or positive symptoms. However, C allele carriers of the rs6295 polymorphism showed a significantly greater negative symptoms improvement than G allele carriers (P=.04, standardized mean difference =-0.14, 95％CI = 0.01 to 0.28). CONCLUSIONS: The results of our present analysis indicate that the HTR1A rs6295 polymorphism may impact negative symptoms improvement but not on either overall symptoms or positive symptoms improvement. However, this meta-analysis was based on a small number of studies and patients, and the effect size on negative symptoms was small. Given this limitation, the results should be confirmed by further investigations.
BACKGROUND: Social adjustment is impaired in depressed patients. The difficulty to adjust to social circumstances has been hypothesized to be one of the causes of depression, as well as a consequence of the disorder. Genetic variation in the serotonin transporter gene has been previously associated with social adjustment levels in patients with mood disorders. METHODS: We investigated whether variations on the HTR1A (rs6295) and HTR2A (rs7997012) genes were associated with levels of social adjustment using the Social Adjustment Scale in two samples of depressed patients (total n=156). RESULTS: Patients carrying the GG genotype of the HTR2A-rs7997012 showed better social adjustment in areas of work and family unit bonding. LIMITATIONS: These findings did not survive correction for multiple testing and should be interpreted with caution. CONCLUSION: Our finding is in line with previous observations that have associated the G allele of the HTR2A-rs7997012 with higher rate of antidepressant response. The HTR2A-rs7997012 is worthy of further investigation in studies examining factors that are related to depression course and outcome.
The HTR1A -1019C>G genotype was associated with major depression in the Utah population. Linkage analysis on Utah pedigrees with strong family histories of major depression including only cases with the HTR1A -1019G allele revealed a linkage peak on chromosome 10 (maximum HLOD=4.4). Sequencing of all known genes in the linkage region revealed disease-segregating single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in LHPP. LHPP SNPs were also associated with major depression in both Utah and Ashkenazi populations. Consistent with the linkage evidence, LHPP associations depended on HTR1A genotype. Lhpp or a product of a collinear brain-specific transcript, therefore, may interact with Htr1a in the pathogenesis of major depression.
AIMS: Antidepressants are effective in the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), while many patients fail to respond to antidepressants. Both 5-HT1A (HTR1A) and 5-HT1B (HTR1B) receptors play an important role in antidepressant activity. Meanwhile, DNA methylation is associated with MDD and antidepressant efficacy. In this study we investigate the influence of HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype on antidepressant efficacy. METHODS: A total of 291 MDD patients and 100 healthy controls received the Life Events Scale (LES) and the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ) as stress assessment. Eight single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of HTR1A and HTR1B involved in antidepressant mechanisms were tested. Methylation status in 181 cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites of HTR1A and HTR1B were assessed. All MDD patients were divided into response (RES) and non-response (NRES) after 2 weeks of antidepressant treatment. Logistic regression was conducted for interactions between methylation, NLES/CTQ score and genotype. RESULTS: Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation is connected with better antidepressant efficacy in subgroup. Low HTR1A-2-143 methylation combined with low CTQ score is related to better antidepressant efficacy. The interaction between high HTR1B methylation with the rs6298 AA/AG genotype affects better antidepressant efficacy. CONCLUSIONS: HTR1A and HTR1B methylation combined with stress/genotype is associated with antidepressant efficacy.
Schizophrenia is a serious, chronic psychiatric disorder requiring lifelong treatment. Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) are common adverse reactions to antipsychotic medications. In addition to the dopaminergic system, serotonergic mechanisms, including serotonin (5-HT) receptors, might be involved in EPS development. This study aimed to examine molecular associations of HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A, HTR2C and HTR6 gene polymorphisms with acute EPS in 229 male schizophrenia patients, following two weeks of haloperidol monotherapy. The Simpson-Angus Rating Scale for Extrapyramidal Side Effects (SAS), Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) and Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS) were used to evaluate EPS severity. Genotyping was performed using real-time PCR, following extraction of blood DNA. Significant acute EPS appeared in 48.03% of schizophrenia patients. For the rs13212041 HTR1B gene polymorphism, affecting microRNA regulation of HTR1B gene expression, a higher frequency of TT carriers was found among haloperidol-treated patients with akathisia when compared to the group without akathisia symptoms. In comparison to C-allele carriers, patients carrying the TT genotype had higher akathisia severity, as determined by the SAS, BARS and ESRS scales. These molecular findings suggest potential involvement of 5-HT(1B) receptors in akathisia development following haloperidol treatment, as well as possible epigenetic mechanisms of serotonergic modulation associated with antipsychotic-induced EPS.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to use a machine-learning method to identify HTR1A/1B methylation and resting-state functional connectivity (rsFC) related to the diagnosis of MDD, then try to build classification models for MDD diagnosis based on the identified features. METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were collected from all recruited participants, and part of the participants underwent the resting-state fMRI scan. Features including HTR1A/1B methylation and rsFC were calculated. Then, the initial feature sets of epigenetics and neuroimaging were separately input into an all-relevant feature selection to generate significant discriminative power for MDD diagnosis. Random forest classifiers were constructed and evaluated based on identified features. In addition, the SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) method was adapted to interpret the diagnostic model. RESULTS: A combination of selected HTR1A/1B methylation and rsFC feature sets achieved better performance than using either one alone - a distinction between MDD and healthy control groups was achieved at 81.78% classification accuracy and 0.8948 AUC. CONCLUSION: A high classification accuracy can be achieved by combining multidimensional information from epigenetics and cerebral radiomic features in MDD. Our approach can be helpful for accurate clinical diagnosis of MDD and further exploring the pathogenesis of MDD.
Triple-negative breast cancer is the most aggressive subtype of breast cancer and the incidence of depression in breast cancer patients is high, which leading to worse survival and increased risk of recurrence. The effect of antidepressants on breast cancer patients remains contradictory, which might be due to variations in antidepression targets. Therefore, there is significant value to explore the antitumor potential of antidepressants and discover new therapeutic targets for breast patients. The authors screen antidepressant-related oncogenes or suppressors by using siRNAs. After combining functional experiments with online database analysis, 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1A (HTR1A is selected with antitumor potential in breast cancer cells in vivo and in vitro. RNA-seq analysis and coimmunoprecipitation assays indicate that HTR1A interacts with TRIM21 and PSMD7 to inhibit the degradation of TbetaRII through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, thereby inhibiting the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) canonical and noncanonical pathway. In addition, HTR1A is an independent predictive factor for breast cancer patients. The combined treatment of HTR1A agonists with demethylation drugs may significantly improve patient survival. It is of great significance to clarify the function and mechanism of the depression-related gene HTR1A in breast cancer, which might provide a new approach for triple-negative breast cancer patients.
BACKGROUND: Lifelong premature ejaculation (LPE) is one of the most common ejaculatory dysfunctions in men. The serotonin (5-HT) synthesis rate-limiting enzyme (TPH2) and receptor (HTR1A) in the 5-HT regulatory system may play a key role in the pathogenesis of LPE. However, there are few studies on the effects of TPH2 and HTR1A polymorphisms on LPE risk. We speculated that TPH2 and HTR1A polymorphisms may affect the occurrence and development of LPE in the Chinese Han population. METHODS: In this study, 91 patients with LPE and 362 normal controls aged 18 to 64 years were enrolled in the male urology department of Hainan General Hospital in China from January 2016 to December 2018. The SNPs in HTR1A and TPH2, which are related to 5-HT regulation, were selected as indexes to genotype the collected blood samples of participants. Logistic regression was used to analyze the correlation between SNPs of HTR1A and TPH2 with LPE susceptibility, as well as the relationship with leptin, 5-HT and folic acid levels. RESULTS: The results revealed that HTR1A-rs6295 increased LPE risk in recessive model. Rs11178996 in TPH2 significantly reduced susceptibility to LPE in allelic (odds ratio (OR) = 0.68, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) = 0.49-0.96, p = 0.027), codominant (OR = 0.58, 95% CI = 0.35-0.98, p = 0.040), dominant (OR = 0.58, 95% CI = 0.36-0.92, p = 0.020), and additive (OR = 0.71, 95% CI = 0.52-0.98, p = 0.039) models. G(rs11179041)T(rs10879352) could reduce the risk of LPE (OR = 0.44, 95% CI = 0.22-0.90, p = 0.024) by haplotype analysis. CONCLUSION: HTR1A-rs6295 and TPH2-rs11178996 are associated with LPE risk in the Chinese Han population based on the finding of this study.
Considerable variability in the activity of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis in response to stress has been found in quantitative genetic studies investigating healthy individuals suggesting that at least part of this variance is due to genetic factors. Since the HPA axis is regulated by a neuronal network including amygdala, hippocampus, prefrontal cortex as well as brainstem circuits, the investigation of candidate genes that impact neurotransmitter systems related to these brain regions might further elucidate the genetic underpinnings of the stress response. However, aside from genetic risk factors, past stressful life events might also result in long-term adjustments of HPA axis reactivity. Here, we investigated the effects of the -1019 G/C polymorphism in the HTR1A gene encoding the serotonin (5-HT) receptor 1A (5-HT(1A)) and stressful life events experienced during childhood and adolescence on changes in cortisol levels in response to the Trier Social Stress Test (TSST) in a sample of healthy older adults (N=97). Regression analyses revealed a significant effect of HTR1A genotype with the G allele being associated with a less pronounced stress response. In addition, an inverse relationship between past stressful life events and cortisol release but no gene x environment interaction was detected. The results further underscore the crucial role of functional serotonergic genetic variation as well as stressful events during critical stages of development on the acute stress response later in life.
Mental disorders are strongly connected with several psychiatric conditions including depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, eating disorder, and suicides. There are many biological conditions and pathways that define these complicated illnesses. For example, eating disorders are complex mental health conditions that require the intervention of geneticists, psychiatrists, and medical experts in order to alleviate their symptoms. A patient with suicidal ideation should first be identified and consequently monitored by a similar team of specialists. Both genetics and epigenetics can shed light on eating disorders and suicides as they are found in the main core of such investigations. In the present study, an analysis has been performed on two specific members of the GPCR family toward drawing conclusions regarding their functionality and implementation in mental disorders. Specifically, evolutionary and structural studies on the adrenoceptor alpha 2b (ADRA2B) and the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1A (HTR1A) have been carried out. Both receptors are classified in the biogenic amine receptors sub-cluster of the GPCRs and have been connected in many studies with mental diseases and malnutrition conditions. The major goal of this study is the investigation of conserved motifs among biogenic amine receptors that play an important role in this family signaling pathway, through an updated evolutionary analysis and the correlation of this information with the structural features of the HTR1A and ADRA2B. Furthermore, the structural comparison of ADRA2B, HTR1A, and other members of GPCRs related to mental disorders is performed.
The 5-HT1A receptor (HTR1A) and the 5-HT5A receptor (HTR5A) are key 5-HT receptors with distinct inhibitory functions. Studies have been conducted to investigate the association of a few HTR1A polymorphisms with schizophrenia, producing conflicting results, and the relationship between HTR5A and schizophrenia has not yet been well investigated. We aimed to examine the association of HTR1A and HTR5A with schizophrenia and executive function. The study included a discovery stage with 1,115 patients and 2,289 controls and a replication stage with 2,128 patients and 3,865 controls. A total of 30 common SNPs in HTR1A and HTR5A were genotyped in the discovery stage, and significantly associated SNPs were genotyped in the replication stage. We identified that two SNPs (rs878567 in HTR1A and rs1800883 in HTR5A) were significantly associated with schizophrenia in both datasets, and similar results were observed in imputation and haplotype association analyses. Moreover, we found that SNP rs1800883 significantly interacted with executive function when processing the perseverative error of Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in patients. Our results provide further supportive evidence of the effect of HTR1A and HTR5A on the etiology of schizophrenia and suggest that the selected genetic variations in HTR5A may be involved in impaired executive function.
Five kindreds selected through probands attending an Icelandic hospital were recruited for linkage studies of manic depression. The rates of affection were equal for males and females and the age of onset appeared to be predominantly in early adult life, since prevalence did not rise appreciably with age. A complex segregation analysis was performed using the computer program POINTER to obtain maximum likelihood estimates of the contributions to liability from multifactorial transmission and a single major locus. Likelihood ratios between models supported a role for a single major locus which was dominant and had moderately high penetrance with, in the case of unipolar illness, additional multifactorial transmission. The best-fitting parameters were used to devise a transmission model for linkage analysis. Three markers on chromosome 5 were studied, at D5S76, D5S6 and D5S39. Strongly negative lod scores were obtained which were less than -2 over a distance of 40 cM, which included the region to which the gene for the 5HT1a receptor has been mapped.
