5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 1E; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various alkaloids and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling inhibits adenylate cyclase activity.
5-Hydroxytryptamine receptor 1E (5-HTR1E) is reported to activate cyclic AMP (cAMP) and extracellular-signal related kinases (ERK) pathways via its ligands and binding partners, but the detailed mechanism underlying the serotonin-induced 5-HTR1E signaling is still not known. In the present study, we determined the cellular regulators of ERK and cAMP signaling pathways in response to serotonin-induced 5-HTR1E activation in 5-HTR1E overexpressing HEK293 cells. We found that Pertussis Toxin (PTX) treatment completely reversed the effect of serotonin-5-HTR1E mediated signaling on cAMP and ERK pathways, confirming the involvement of a Galphai-linked cascade. We also observed that Gbetagamma and Gq were not associated with 5-HTR1E activation, while blocking protein kinase A (PKA) inhibited ERK signaling only, and had no effect on cAMP. Additionally, serotonin-stimulated ERK1/2 phosphorylation was similar in 5-HTR1E overexpressing, beta-arrestin-deficient HEK293 cells and is solely dependent on G protein signaling. siRNA mediated gene knockdown studies in SH-SY5Y cells revealed that the inhibition of 5-HTR1E reduced the expression of cMyc, Cyclin D1, Cyclin E and BCL2 genes which are related to cell cycle regulation and survival. MTT assays showed that 5-HTR1E knockdown in SHSY-5Y and U118 cells inhibited cell survival significantly. In addition to the signaling mechanism, we also performed RNA-seq analysis in 5-HTR1E overexpressing HEK293 cells and found that 5-HTR1E can regulate the expression of Receptor activity modifying protein 1 (RAMP1), Nuclear receptor 1 (NR4A1) and other Cyclin genes. These findings indicate that serotonin interaction with 5-HTR1E receptor simultaneously activates cAMP and ERK pathway in HEK293 cells and its expression is important for cell survival.
