5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2B; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various ergot alkaloid derivatives and psychoactive substances. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathways. Signaling activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system that modulates the activity o [...] 
Nerves can support tumor development by secreting neurotransmitters that promote cancer cell proliferation and invasion. 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) is a critical neurotransmitter in the gastrointestinal nervous system, and 5-HT signaling has been shown to play a role in tumorigenesis. Here, we found that expression of the 5-HT receptor HTR2B was significantly elevated in human gastric adenocarcinoma tissues compared with nontumor tissues, and high HTR2B expression corresponded to shorter patient survival. Both 5-HT and a specific HTR2B agonist enhanced gastric adenocarcinoma cell viability under metabolic stress, reduced cellular and lipid reactive oxygen species, and suppressed ferroptosis; conversely, HTR2B loss or inhibition with a selective HTR2B antagonist yielded the inverse tumor suppressive effects. In a patient-derived xenograft tumor model, HTR2B-positive tumors displayed accelerated growth, which was inhibited by HTR2B antagonists. Single-cell analysis of human gastric adenocarcinoma tissues revealed enrichment of PI3K/Akt/mTOR and fatty acid metabolism-related gene clusters in cells expressing HTR2B compared with HTR2B-negative cells. Mechanistically, HTR2B cooperated with Fyn to directly regulate p85 activity and trigger the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway, which led to increased expression of HIF1alpha and ABCD1 along with decreased levels of lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis. Together, these findings demonstrate that HTR2B activity modulates PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling to stimulate gastric cancer cell survival and indicate that HTR2B expression could be a potential prognostic biomarker in patients with gastric cancer. SIGNIFICANCE: Nerve cancer cross-talk mediated by HTR2B inhibits lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis in gastric cancer cells and promotes viability under metabolic stress, resulting in increased tumor growth and decreased patient survival.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is often associated with lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), which has the same etiology (smoking, inflammation, oxidative stress, microenvironmental changes, and genetics). Smoking, inflammation, and airway remodeling are the most important and classical mechanisms of COPD comorbidity in LUSC patients. Cancer can occur during repeated airway damage and repair (airway remodeling). Changes in the inflammatory and immune microenvironments, which can cause malignant transformation of some cells, are currently being revealed in both LUSC and COPD patients. We obtained the GSE76925 dataset from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Screening for possible COPD biomarkers was performed using the LASSO regression model and a random forest classifier. The compositional patterns of the immune cell fraction in COPD patients were determined using CIBERSORT. HTR2B expression was analyzed using validation datasets (GSE47460, GSE106986, and GSE1650). HTR2B expression in COPD cell models was determined via real-time quantitative PCR. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker expression levels were determined after knocking down or overexpressing HTR2B. HTR2B function and mechanism in LUSC were analyzed with the Kaplan‒Meier plotter database. HTR2B expression was inhibited to detect changes in LUSC cell proliferation. A total of 1082 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the GSE76925 dataset (371 genes were significantly upregulated, and 711 genes were significantly downregulated). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs were mainly enriched in the p53 signaling and beta-alanine metabolism pathways. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs were largely related to transcription initiation from the RNA polymerase I promoter and to the regulation of mononuclear cell proliferation. The LASSO regression model and random forest classifier results revealed that HTR2B, DPYS, FRY, and CD19 were key COPD genes. Immune cell infiltration analysis indicated that these genes were closely associated with immune cells. Analysis of the validation sets suggested that HTR2B was upregulated in COPD patients. HTR2B was significantly upregulated in COPD cell models, and its upregulation was associated with increased EMT marker expression. Compared with that in bronchial epithelial cells, HTR2B expression was upregulated in LUSC cells, and inhibiting HTR2B expression led to the inhibition of LUSC cell proliferation. In conclusions, HTR2B might be a new biomarker and therapeutic target in COPD patients with LUSC.
Uveal melanoma (UM) remains the most common intraocular malignancy among diseases affecting the adult eye. The primary tumor disseminates to the liver in half of patients and leads to a 6 to 12-month survival rate, making UM a particularly aggressive type of cancer. Genomic analyses have led to the development of gene-expression profiles that can efficiently predict metastatic progression. Among these genes, that encoding the serotonin receptor 2B (HTR2B) represents the most discriminant from this molecular signature, its aberrant expression being the hallmark of UM metastatic progression. Recent evidence suggests that expression of HTR2B might be regulated through the Janus kinase/Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription proteins (JAK/STAT) intracellular signalization pathway. However, little is actually known about the molecular mechanisms involved in the abnormally elevated expression of the HTR2B gene in metastatic UM and whether activated STAT proteins participates to this mechanism. In this study, we determined the pattern of STAT family members expressed in both primary tumors and UM cell-lines, and evaluated their contribution to HTR2B gene expression. Examination of the HTR2B promoter sequence revealed the presence of a STAT putative target site (5'-TTC (N)3 GAA3') located 280 bp upstream of the mRNA start site that is completely identical to the high affinity binding site recognized by these TFs. Gene profiling on microarrays provided evidence that metastatic UM cell lines with high levels of HTR2B also express high levels of STAT proteins whereas low levels of these TFs are observed in non-metastatic UM cells with low levels of HTR2B, suggesting that STAT proteins contribute to HTR2B gene expression in UM cells. All UM cell lines tested were found to express their own pattern of STAT proteins in Western blot analyses. Furthermore, T142 and T143 UM cells responded to interleukins IL-4 and IL-6 by increasing the phosphorylation status of STAT1. Most of all, expression of HTR2B also considerably increased in response to both IL-4 and IL-6 therefore providing evidence that HTR2B gene expression is modulated by STAT proteins in UM cells. The binding of STAT proteins to the -280 HTR2B/STAT site was also demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) analyses and site-directed mutation of that STAT site also abolished both IL-4 and IL-6 responsiveness in in vitro transfection analyses. The results of this study therefore demonstrate that members from the STAT family of TFs positively contribute to the expression of HTR2B in uveal melanoma.
BACKGROUND: During pregnancy, the increase in maternal insulin resistance is compensated by hyperplasia and increased function of maternal pancreatic beta cells; the failure of this compensatory mechanism is associated with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Serotonin participates in beta cell adaptation, acting downstream of the prolactin pathway; the blocking of serotonin receptor B (HTR2B) signaling in pregnant mice impaired beta cell expansion and caused glucose intolerance. Thus, given the importance of the serotoninergic system for the adaptation of beta cells to the increased insulin demand during pregnancy, we hypothesized that genetic variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms [SNPs]) in the gene encoding HTR2B could influence the risk of developing GDM. METHODS: This was a case-control study. Five SNPs (rs4973377, rs765458, rs10187149, rs10194776, and s17619600) in HTR2B were genotyped by real-time polymerase chain reaction in 453 women with GDM and in 443 pregnant women without GDM. RESULTS: Only the minor allele C of SNP rs17619600 conferred an increased risk for GDM in the codominant model (odds ratio [OR] 2.15; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.53-3.09; P < 0.0001) and in the rare dominant model (OR 2.32; CI 1.61-3.37; P < 0.0001). No associations were found between the SNPs and insulin use, maternal weight gain, newborn weight, or the result of postpartum oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). In the overall population, carriers of the XC genotype (rare dominant model) presented a higher area under the curve (AUC) of plasma glucose during the OGTT, performed for diagnostic purposes, compared with carriers of the TT genotype of rs17619600. CONCLUSIONS: SNP rs17619600 in the HTR2B gene influences glucose homeostasis, probably affecting insulin release, and the presence of the minor allele C was associated with a higher risk of GDM.
Limited data are available about the role of the serotonin 2B (5-HT2B) receptor in the function of human islets. This study aimed to test whether the 5-HT2B receptor contributes to glucose, insulin, and glucagon homeostasis in humans, utilizing a hereditary loss-of-function gene mutation in the receptor, which causes a 50% reduction in the production of the receptor protein in heterozygotes. This clinical study enrolled participants recruited by newspaper advertisements and from mental status examinations. A cohort of participants from a young Finnish founder population composed of 68 non-diabetic males with a mean age of 30 was divided into groups for comparison based on being a 5-HT2B receptor loss-of-function gene mutation (HTR2B Q20*) heterozygote carrier (n=11) or not (n=57). Serum levels of glucose, insulin, and glucagon were measured in a 5 h oral glucose tolerance test using a 75 g glucose challenge. Insulin resistance, insulin sensitivity, and beta cell activity were calculated using the homeostasis model assessment (HOMA2) and whole body insulin sensitivity index (WBISI), as well as the ratio of glucagon to insulin was noted. The areas under the curves (AUCs) were also determined. Concentrations of the serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) were measured in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Covariate adjusted mean score comparisons were applied. Lower glucagon secretion and decreased glucose excursion were observed among HTR2B Q20* carriers as compared with individuals who were homozygotes for the wild-type Q20 allele (controls). No differences in insulin secretion, beta cell activity, insulin resistance, or insulin sensitivity were observed. The glucagon to insulin ratio differed between the HTR2B Q20* carriers and controls. CSF levels of 5-HIAA were similar between groups. Our findings indicate that the 5-HT2B receptor may contribute to the regulation of human glucagon and glucose homeostasis and the interplay between glucagon and insulin secretion.
Herein, we examined insulin resistance (IR), insulin sensitivity (IS), beta cell activity, and glucose metabolism in subjects with antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), and whether the serotonin 2B (5-HT2B) receptor and testosterone have a role in energy metabolism. A cohort of subjects belonging to a founder population that included 98 ASPD males, aged 25-30, was divided into groups based on the presence of a heterozygous 5-HT2B receptor loss-of-function gene mutation (HTR2B Q20*; n = 9) or not (n = 89). Serum glucose and insulin levels were measured in a 5 h oral glucose tolerance test (75 g) and indices describing IR, IS, and beta cell activity were calculated. Body mass index (BMI) was also determined. Concentrations of the serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid were measured in cerebrospinal fluid, and testosterone levels from serum. An IR-like state comprising high IR, low IS, and high beta cell activity indices was observed among ASPD subjects without the HTR2B Q20* allele. By contrast, being an ASPD HTR2B Q20* carrier appeared to be preventive of these pathophysiologies. The HTR2B Q20* allele and testosterone predicted lower BMI independently, but an interaction between HTR2B Q20* and testosterone lead to increased insulin sensitivity among HTR2B Q20* carriers with low testosterone levels. The HTR2B Q20* allele also predicted reduced beta cell activity and enhanced glucose metabolism. Reduced 5-HT2B receptor function at low or normal testosterone levels may be protective of obesity. Results were observed among Finnish males having an antisocial personality disorder, which limits the generality.
