5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 2C; G-protein coupled receptor for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Also functions as a receptor for various drugs and psychoactive substances, including ergot alkaloid derivatives, 1-2,5,- dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl-2-aminopropane (DOI) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors. Beta-arrestin family members inhibit signaling via G proteins and mediate activation of alternative signaling pathway [...] 
Major depressive disorder with suicide behavior (sMDD) is a server mood disorder, bringing tremendous burden to family and society. Although reduced gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) level has been observed in postmortem tissues of sMDD patients, the molecular mechanism by which GABA levels are altered remains elusive. In this study, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from five sMDD patients and differentiated the iPSCs to GABAergic interneurons (GINs) and ventral forebrain organoids. sMDD GINs exhibited altered neuronal morphology and increased neural firing, as well as weakened calcium signaling propagation, compared with controls. Transcriptomic sequencing revealed that a decreased expression of serotoninergic receptor 2C (5-HT2C) may cause the defected neuronal activity in sMDD. Furthermore, targeting 5-HT2C receptor, using a small molecule agonist or genetic approach, restored neuronal activity deficits in sMDD GINs. Our findings provide a human cellular model for studying the molecular mechanisms and drug discoveries for sMDD.
Previously we have shown that a functional nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs6318 on the HTR2C gene located on the X-chromosome, is associated with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis response to a laboratory stress recall task. The present paper reports a validation of the cortisol response to stress in a second, independent sample. The study population consisted of 60 adult participants (73.3% males). Consistent with our prior findings, compared to Cys23 G allele carriers, persons homozygous for the Ser23C allele had a significantly greater average cortisol response (p=0.007) and area under the curve (p=0.021) over the course of an emotional stress recall protocol. Also parallel to our prior report, the change in cortisol from baseline to the average during the stress protocol was roughly twice as large among Ser23C homozygotes than among persons with Cys23 G. These findings validate our initial observation of association between rs6318 and cortisol response to an acute stressor, and extend the results to include females.
OBJECTIVE: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in serotonin related genes influence mental disorders, responses to pharmacological and psychotherapeutic treatments. In planning association studies, researchers that want to investigate new SNPs have to select some among a large number of candidates. Our aim is to guide researchers in the selection of the most likely phenotype affecting polymorphisms. Here, we studied serotonin receptor 2C (HTR2C) SNPs because, till now, only relatively few of about 2000 are investigated. METHODS: We used the most updated and assessed bioinformatic tools to predict which variations can give rise to biological effects among 2450 HTR2C SNPs. RESULTS: We suggest 48 SNPs that are worth considering in future association studies in the field of psychiatry, psychology and pharmacogenomics. Moreover, our analyses point out the biological level probably affected, such as transcription, splicing, miRNA regulation and protein structure, thus allowing to suggest future molecular investigations. CONCLUSIONS: Although few association studies are available in literature, their results are in agreement with our predictions, showing that our selection methods can help to guide future association studies.
The 5-HT2C (serotonin-2C, HTR2C) receptor is implicated in the pathophysiology of eating disorders. There is a common polymorphism of the human 5-HT2C receptor at codon 23 (cys23ser) which has been reported to be a risk factor for certain psychiatric disorders and a predictor of their pharmacotherapeutic response. We examined whether this variant was associated with the eating disorder bulimia nervosa or binge eating disorder in a well-characterized community sample of 163 women, aged 16-35 years. Genotype and allele frequencies were entirely unaltered in both groups, compared to screened healthy controls from the same population. We conclude that allelic variation does not account for the involvement of the 5-HT2C receptor in these eating disorders.
Acute pancreatitis can be attributed to numerous potential causes, such as alcohol abuse, chololithiasis, infection, lesions, tumors, hypercalcemia, hyperlipidemia, and medications. Among psychotropic medications, the use of some atypical antipsychotics, such as clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone, has been implicated in the development of acute pancreatitis, although the underlying mechanism has not been clarified. We describe the case of a young man with no other major medical problems, alcohol abuse or predisposing factors, who developed acute necrotizing pancreatitis following olanzapine administration, possibly through severe elevation of serum triglycerides. A pharmacogenomic analysis revealed the presence of the 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) receptor 2C, G protein-coupled (HTR2C) -759C genotype which is related to increased risk for metabolic syndrome.
Schizophrenia is a serious, chronic psychiatric disorder requiring lifelong treatment. Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) are common adverse reactions to antipsychotic medications. In addition to the dopaminergic system, serotonergic mechanisms, including serotonin (5-HT) receptors, might be involved in EPS development. This study aimed to examine molecular associations of HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A, HTR2C and HTR6 gene polymorphisms with acute EPS in 229 male schizophrenia patients, following two weeks of haloperidol monotherapy. The Simpson-Angus Rating Scale for Extrapyramidal Side Effects (SAS), Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) and Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS) were used to evaluate EPS severity. Genotyping was performed using real-time PCR, following extraction of blood DNA. Significant acute EPS appeared in 48.03% of schizophrenia patients. For the rs13212041 HTR1B gene polymorphism, affecting microRNA regulation of HTR1B gene expression, a higher frequency of TT carriers was found among haloperidol-treated patients with akathisia when compared to the group without akathisia symptoms. In comparison to C-allele carriers, patients carrying the TT genotype had higher akathisia severity, as determined by the SAS, BARS and ESRS scales. These molecular findings suggest potential involvement of 5-HT(1B) receptors in akathisia development following haloperidol treatment, as well as possible epigenetic mechanisms of serotonergic modulation associated with antipsychotic-induced EPS.
Weight gain is a common side effect of antipsychotics, contributing to poor treatment adherence, and previously linked to the -759C/T polymorphism near the serotonin receptor 2C gene. The effect of this polymorphism was analyzed in schizophrenia patients treated with iloperidone for up to 7 months. No association was detected with the modest weight changes observed in these patients.
The serotonin 2C (HTR2C) and 1A (HTR1A) receptors have been involved in suicide-related behaviors. We studied gene variants of both receptors in suicide attempters and completers. The sample was composed of 167 German suicide attempters (affective spectrum n = 107, schizophrenia spectrum n = 35, borderline personality disorder n = 25), 92 Caucasian individuals who committed suicide, 312 German healthy subjects, 152 Italian suicide attempters (major depression n = 68 and bipolar disorder n = 84), and 131 Italian healthy volunteers. HTR2C (SNP: rs547536, rs2192372, rs6318, rs2428707, rs4272555, rs1801412) and HTR1A (SNP: rs1423691, rs878567, and rs6295) variants were analyzed in the German sample. HTR2C rs6318 and HTR1A rs6295 were analyzed in the Italian sample. Haplotype analysis in relation to suicidal behaviors did not reveal any significant association. Single markers and haplotypes were not or only marginally associated with other related features, such as violence of suicide attempt, family history for suicide attempt or State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI) and Questionnaire for Measuring Factors of Aggression (FAF) scores. In conclusion, our study does not support the notion that HTR2C and HTR1A gene variants are major contributors to suicide-, anger-, or aggression-related behaviors in our sample.
The 5-HT2C receptor is the primary serotonin receptor located in the corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH) neurons of the hypothalamus. These neurons initiate the signaling cascade that culminates in cortisol release. Therefore, genetic variation in the 5-HT2C receptor gene (HTR2C) is a prime candidate for affecting cortisol reactivity to stress. Accordingly, we examined the association of a nonsynonymous polymorphism (Cys23Ser; rs6318) in HTR2C with stress reactivity in two Trier Social Stress Tests conducted at separate sites. In both Study 1 (N=128) and Study 2 (N=185), Cys23 homozygous females and hemizygous males had greater cortisol reactivity. There was no relation between this polymorphism and self-reported affective response (Studies 1 and 2) or cardiovascular reactivity (Study 2). Additionally, the short/short genotype of a polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) in the serotonin transporter gene was associated with greater cortisol reactivity in Study 1 as well as in Study 2 (previously reported). The Cys23Ser polymorphism and the 5-HTTLPR were independently associated with cortisol reactivity in both studies. These findings emphasize the important role of genetic variation in the serotonin system on regulating cortisol reactivity to social evaluative stress. Comparison of the present associations with those of prior studies underscores the likely importance of situational and psychological factors in determining the direction and magnitude of the association between genotype and phenotype.
The polymorphisms of the serotonin receptor 2C (HTR2C) gene have been proposed to influence suicidal behavior. The aim of our study was to explore the role of the HTR2C gene variant Cys23Ser (rs6318) in the pathogenesis of suicidal behavior through a systematic review and meta-analysis. The search was performed using EBSCO and PubMed databases. To be included in the analysis, the studies had to evaluate suicidal behavior (attempted, ideation, or completed suicide). The results of the meta-analysis were expressed as odds ratios (ORs). Because HTR2C lies on chromosome X, pooled ORs were calculated, respectively, for each of the models used, namely: allelic, homozygous, dominant, and recessive for the female group and allelic for the male group. The meta-analysis comprised 3867 individuals, including 1668 cases and 2199 controls. The HTR2C Cys23Ser (rs6318) polymorphism did not show a significant association with suicidal behavior either in women (OR: 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.55-1.00) or in men (OR: 0.89; 95% confidence interval: 0.64-1.23). Similarly, nonsignificant associations were observed for all of the genetic models used in any of the populations/subgroups studied. Our findings suggest that the rs6318 (Cys23Ser) polymorphism is not associated with suicidal behavior. However, because of the study limitations, we suggest more researches should be performed, increasing the sample sizes and statistical power, to determine the association between the rs6318 variant and suicidal behavior.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenetics of tardive dyskinesia and dopamine D3 (DRD3), serotonin 2A (HTR2A), and 2C (HTR2C) receptors has been examined in various populations, but not in Russians. PURPOSE: To investigate the association between orofaciolingual (TDof) and limb-truncal dyskinesias (TDlt) and Ser9Gly (DRD3), -1438G>A (HTR2A), and Cys23Ser (HTR2C) polymorphisms in Russian psychiatric inpatients from Tomsk, Siberia. METHODS: In total, 146 subjects were included. Standard protocols were applied for genotyping. TDof and TDlt were assessed with AIMS items 1-4 and 5-7, respectively. Two-part model, logistic and log-normal regression analyses were applied to assess different variables (e.g., allele-carriership status, age, gender, and medication use). RESULTS: TDlt, but not TDof, exhibited an association with Ser9Gly and Cys23Ser (with 9Gly and 23Ser alleles exhibiting opposite effects). However, -1438G>A was not associated with TDof and Dlt. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first pharmacogenetic report on tardive dyskinesia in Russians. Subject to further replication, our findings extend and support the available data.
Serotonin 2C receptors (5HT2C) are involved in serotonin-driven dynamic equilibrium adjustments responsible for homeostatic stability in brain structures that modulate behavior and emotions. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the serotonin 2C receptor gene (HTR2C) have been associated with several neurological and mental disorders, including abnormalities in cognitive and emotional processes. The aim of this study was to evaluate the association between the rs6318 SNP of the HTR2C gene and behavioral characteristics exhibited by children and adolescents based on the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL/6-18) inventory. Eighty-five psychiatric outpatients between 8 and 18 years of age underwent genotyping of the rs6318 SNP. The CBCL/6-18 scale was administered to their caregivers. The chi-squared test was used to assess differences in the frequency of C and G alleles of the rs6318 SNP relative to the grouped CBCL/6-18 scores; significance level was 5%. The presence of the G allele of rs6318 was found to be associated with characteristics of aggressive behavior and social problems, and aggressive behavior was found to be associated with heterozygosis in females. These findings contribute to the identification of mental and behavioral phenotypes associated with gene expression.
