5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 3A; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. This receptor is a ligand- gated ion channel, which when activated causes fast, depolarizing responses in neurons. It is a cation-specific, but otherwise relatively nonselective, ion channel.
We nowadays record growing numbers of e-cigarette users. The development of nicotine dependence is a result of many factors, including genetics and personality. In this study we analyzed two polymorphisms-rs1985242 and rs1062613-in the serotonin receptor HTR3A gene in a group of e-cigarette users (n = 135) and controls (n = 106). Personality traits were measured using the NEO Five-Factor Inventory. The comparison of e-cigarette users with the control group indicates that the former showed significantly higher scores on the neuroticism scale and lower scores on the scales of extraversion and conscientiousness of the NEO-FFI. Homozygote variants of rs1985242 were more frequent in the study group. The results of the 2 x 3 factorial ANOVA for e-cigarette users and the control group as well as interaction between the HTR3A rs1985242 variants were found for the NEO-FFI conscientiousness scale. These results allow us to conclude that the combination of psychological factors and genetic data creates a possibility for making more complete models of substance use disorders.
BACKGROUND: 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) 3 receptor plays a crucial role in craving of alcohol dependence. Recent evidence shows that chronic alcohol exposure causes changes in gene expression and induces behavioral changes. However, the relationship between gene expression of 5-HT3 receptor and craving in alcohol-dependent patients is not fully understood. OBJECTIVES: The aim of this preliminary study was to investigate the relationship between gene expression of the 5-HT3 receptor and craving in alcohol-dependent patients and the epigenetic mechanism. METHODS: We recruited 50 male Han Chinese alcohol-dependent patients and 46 male Han Chinese healthy controls. We investigated the changes of HTR3A mRNA, which encodes the 5-HT3 receptor A subunit, and H3K9 acetylation in HTR3A promoter region. Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale (OCDS) was used to assess the craving of alcohol-dependent patients relative to controls. RESULTS: HTR3A mRNA expression levels and acetylation levels of H3K9 in the HTR3A promoter region were significantly higher in the alcohol-dependent patients. HTR3A mRNA expression levels were positively correlated with OCDS scores. Moreover, HTR3A mRNA expression levels were positively correlated with acetylation levels of H3K9 in HTR3A promoter region. CONCLUSION: The current findings suggest that HTR3A mRNA expression levels were positively correlated with craving in Han Chinese alcohol-dependent patients. The regulation of H3K9 histone acetylation in HTR3A promoter region may offer a target for the treatment of alcohol dependence.
Evidence shows that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) modulate mRNAs of multiple genes by post-transcriptional regulation. However, in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, lncRNAs involvement in post-transcriptional regulation of mRNAs have been rarely reported. In this study, we investigated a novel mechanism of linc01305 promoting metastasis and proliferation of ESCC. The results for real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ hybridization showed that linc01305 was highly expressed and predominantly located in cytoplasm of human esophageal cancer cells. Transwell and colony formation assays confirmed that linc01305 promoted migration and proliferation of esophageal cancer cells. RNA-seq, linc01305 pulldown, mass spectrometry, RNA immunoprecipitation and mRNA stability assays demonstrated that linc01305 stabilized mRNA of target gene HTR3A through interacting with IGF2BP2 and IGF2BP3. Taken together, our data unveils a novel mechanism in which cytoplasmic linc01305 stabilizes HTR3A mRNA through interacting with IGF2BP2 and IGF2BP3 and thereby promotes metastasis and proliferation of ESCC.
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death around the world. Adenocarcinoma is the most common histological type and has various histologic subtypes: lepidic, acinar, papillary, solid, and invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma. Histologic subtypes are related to invasiveness of tumors; eg, lepidic subtype is less invasive than acinar/papillary subtype. HTR3A is the main subunit of 5-hydroxytryptamine 3 (5-HT3) receptors, which are the only ligand-gated ion channels in seven families of 5-HT receptors. Although 5-HT3 receptor is expressed mainly throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems, some papers report the effect of 5-HT3 receptors on tumor cells, including lung cancer. However, whether HTR3A correlates with histopathological findings such as the histologic subtypes or the distribution in an individual sample remains unclear. Immunohistochemically, we revealed that the higher expression level of HTR3A was detected in acinar, papillary, and solid adenocarcinoma than in adenocarcinoma in situ and lepidic adenocarcinoma; the former was a more aggressive subtype than the latter. We also showed the relationship between HTR3A expression and Ki-67 positivity, widely used as a proliferation marker. Moreover, we generated HTR3A-knockdown lung adenocarcinoma cells and showed that the HTR3A knockdown attenuated proliferation by ERK phosphorylation. Our results indicated that HTR3A expression was related to proliferation in lung adenocarcinoma, by means of both in vitro and immunohistochemical assays on clinical samples. We showed the therapeutic potential of a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, tropisetron, for the treatment of lung adenocarcinoma.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HTR3A and HTR3B have been reported to be associated with bipolar disorder in European and Japanese populations. We explored the roles of 21 tag SNPs in HTR3A and HTR3B in susceptibility to bipolar disorder in a Chinese cohort. Twenty-one Tag SNPs were genotyped in a study consisting of 130 patients with bipolar disorder, who visited Shandong Mental Health Center between June 2013 and May 2014, and 109 healthy individuals as controls. All of the tag SNPs were genotyped using Sequenom MassArray matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight spectrometry. Plink 1.07, Haploview 4.2, and SPSS 20.0 were used for the analysis of the genotypes and the associations of the haplotypes with bipolar disorder. Association analyses of tag SNPs detected significant associations with the A allele in HTR3A rs1176719 (P = 0.030) and the C allele in HTR3A rs1176713 (P = 0.048). Haplotype-based association analyses indicated a statistically significant (P = 0.035) five-SNP haplotype (rs1062613:C, rs11604247:C, rs1176722:G, rs2276302:A, rs1176719:G) of linkage disequilibrium in block 3. Analysis of our small Chinese sample revealed a significant association of HTR3A with bipolar disorder, but yielded no evidence of an association between HTR3B and bipolar disorder. Furthermore, evidence for an association was found for a haplotype of HTR3A. Studies with larger Chinese samples are needed to verify our findings.
Converging evidence in neurophysiological and neuroimaging studies has suggested that the limbic and prefrontal systems play important roles in emotion and cognition. These structures are activated when we see a human face, assuming that we automatically evaluate the biological significance of the stimuli. The serotonin (5-HT) system within the brain has been tied to various behaviors such as mood and anxiety and to the biology of neuropsychiatric disorders. To investigate the link between the 5-HT system and limbic/prefrontal activity, normal subjects (n = 26) who underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging and faced recognition tasks were genotyped for the single nucleotide polymorphism C178T in the regulatory region of the serotonin receptor type 3 gene (HTR3A). We found that the subjects with C/C alleles had greater activity in the amygdala and dorsal and medial prefrontal cortices than those with C/T alleles. The C/C group also showed a faster reaction time during the task than the C/T group. The temperamental predisposition of the subjects had a significant correlation with brain activity in the C/C group. The genotype effect in the right amygdala and prefrontal cortex was largest during the first run of the experiment. These results indicate that the C178T variation in the HTR3A has a critical influence on the amygdaloid activity and on human face processing, probably through regulation of the receptor expression. The present study may contribute to elucidating a possible link among genes, the brain, and behavior in normal populations and may help reveal the biological basis of neuropsychiatric disorders.
BACKGROUND: The brain neurotransmitter serotonin is known to affect various aspects of human behavior, including personality traits. Serotonin receptor type 3 is a ligand-gated channel encoded by 2 different subunit genes, HTR3A and HTR3B. A polymorphism (C178T) in the 5' region of the HTR3A gene has recently been identified and suggested to be of functional importance. OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the possible association between the C178T polymorphism in the HTR3A gene and personality traits in women. DESIGN: Two independent samples of 35- to 45-year-old Swedish women were recruited using the population register. Sample 1 (n = 195) was assessed via the Karolinska Scales of Personality and the Temperament and Character Inventory; sample 2 (n = 175) was assessed using the latter only. Both samples were genotyped with respect to the C178T polymorphism in the HTR3A gene. The A1596G polymorphism in the same gene was also investigated. RESULTS: A significant association between C178T genotype and the Temperament and Character Inventory factor harm avoidance was observed in sample 1 (corrected for multiple comparisons P =.04); this finding was subsequently replicated in sample 2 (P =.004) (pooled populations: P<.001). In the pooled sample, all harm avoidance subscales were found to be significantly associated with the C178T polymorphism: anticipatory worry (P =.001), fear of uncertainty (P<.001), shyness (P<.001), and fatigability and asthenia (P =.008). In addition, a significant association was found in sample 1 between the C178T polymorphism and the Karolinska Scales of Personality nonconformity factor (corrected P =.002), including the subscales of social desirability (P<.001), indirect aggression (P =.002), verbal aggression (P =.05), and irritability (P<.001). Participants homozygous for the less common T allele (<4%) differed from the remaining women by displaying lower ratings on harm avoidance and nonconformity. CONCLUSION: The C178T polymorphism in the HTR3A gene may affect the personality trait of harm avoidance in women.
The neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) has been implicated in numerous human disorders. Dysfunction of serotonergic neurotransmission is thought to play a major role in the pathophysiology of the fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) which is characterised by non-restorative sleep and severe pain. In our study, both serotonin receptor subunit genes, HTR3A and HTR3B, have been investigated for sequence variations in FMS patients in order to reveal a possible involvement in the aetiology of FMS. We examined DNA samples from 48 patients with FMS representing sporadic cases by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (dHPLC) analysis, sequenced samples with conspicuous patterns and performed statistical calculations. HTR3A mutational analysis revealed one novel as well as five known sequence variations. Investigating HTR3B, we detected seven formerly described mutations and one novel sequence variant. Statistical computation rated all variants as probably non-disease-related polymorphisms. Nevertheless, one might speculate about an effect of the respective sequence variants on the severity of the disease. Sequence variants of the serotonin receptor subunit genes HTR3A and HTR3B indicate no obvious significance in the aetiology of fibromyalgia, yet they represent the basis for future studies on their pharmacogenetic relevance.
BACKGROUND: Genetic variations in the serotonin receptor 3A (HTR3A) and 3B (HTR3B) genes, positioned in tandem on chromosome 11q23.2, have been shown to be associated with psychiatric disorders in samples of European ancestry. But the polymorphisms highlighted in these reports map to different locations in the two genes, therefore it is unclear which gene exerts a stronger effect on susceptibility. METHODS: To determine the haplotype block structure in the genomic regions of HTR3A and HTR3B, and to examine whether genetic variations in the region show evidence of association with schizophrenia and affective disorder in the Japanese, we performed haplotype-based case-control analysis using 29 polymorphisms. RESULTS: Two haplotype blocks each were revealed for HTR3A and HTR3B in Japanese samples. In HTR3B, haplotype block 2 that included a nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), yielded evidence of association with major depression in females (global p = .0023). Analysis employing genome-wide SNPs using the STRUCTURE program did not detect population stratification in the samples. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest an important role for HTR3B in major depression in women and also raise the possibility that previously proposed disease-associated SNPs in the HTR3A/B region in Caucasians are in linkage disequilibrium with haplotype block 2 of HTR3B in the Japanese.
The proportion of treatment-resistant schizophrenia (TRS) has been estimated as 20-40% in the schizophrenic patients. Genetic factors are considered to be involved in the development of this condition. Serotonin subtypes are hypothesized to be the candidate genes. In the present study, single marker and haplotype analyses between several mutations of serotonin receptor subtypes (HTR2A, HTR3A and HTR4) and TRS (TRS=101, NON-TRS=239) were performed to determine a possible relationship with the development of TRS. Additionally, we also compared the daily neuroleptic dosage among each genotype. No significant association was observed between TRS and each allele, genotype, and haplotype. However, the daily neuroleptic dosage that patients had been receiving during their maintenance therapy was significantly higher in patients with the T/T genotype of HTR3A polymorphism (rs1062613, p=0.041). The present results support further research to examine the relationship between HTR3A polymorphism and the development of TRS in the Japanese population.
The aim of this study was to investigate experimentally if 5-HT3 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) contribute to pain perception and efficacy of the 5-HT3-antagonist granisetron and sex differences. Sixty healthy participants were genotyped regarding HTR3A (rs1062613) and HTR3B (rs1176744). First, pain was induced by bilateral hypertonic saline injections (HS, 5.5%, 0.2 mL) into the masseter muscles. Thirty min later the masseter muscle on one side was pretreated with 0.5 mL granisetron (1 mg/mL) and on the other side with 0.5 mL placebo (isotonic saline) followed by another HS injection (0.2 mL). Pain intensity, pain duration, pain area and pressure pain thresholds (PPTs) were assessed after each injection. HS evoked moderate pain, with higher intensity in the women (P = 0.023), but had no effect on PPTs. None of the SNPs influenced any pain variable in general, but compared to men, the pain area was larger in women carrying the C/C (HTR3A) (P = 0.015) and pain intensity higher in women with the A/C alleles (HTR3B) (P = 0.019). Pre-treatment with granisetron reduced pain intensity, duration and area to a lesser degree in women (P < 0.05), but the SNPs did not in general influence the efficacy of granisetron. Women carrying the C/T & T/T (HTR3A) genotype had less reduction of pain intensity (P = 0.041) and area (P = 0.005), and women with the C/C genotype (HTR3B) had less reduction of pain intensity (P = 0.030), duration (P = 0.030) and area compared to men (P = 0.017). In conclusion, SNPs did not influence experimental muscle pain or the effect of granisetron on pain variables in general, but there were some sex differences in pain variables that seem to be influenced by genotypes. However, due to the small sample size further research is needed before any firm conclusions can be drawn.
RATIONALE: Pharmacogenetics of schizophrenia has not yet delivered anticipated clinical dividends. Clinical heterogeneity of schizophrenia contributes to the poor replication of the findings of pharmacogenetic association studies. Functionally important HTR3A gene single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were reported to be associated with response to clozapine. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate how the association between HTR3A gene SNP and response to clozapine is influenced by various clinical predictors and by differing outcome definitions in patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia (TRS). METHODS: We recruited 101 consecutive patients with TRS, on stable doses of clozapine, and evaluated their HTR3A gene SNP (rs1062613 and rs2276302), psychopathology, and serum clozapine levels. We assessed their socio-demographic and clinical profiles, premorbid adjustment, traumatic events, cognition, and disability using standard assessment schedules. We evaluated their response to clozapine, by employing six differing outcome definitions. We employed appropriate multivariate statistics to calculate allelic and genotypic association, accounting for the effects of various clinical variables. RESULTS: T allele of rs1062613 and G allele of rs2276302 were significantly associated with good clinical response to clozapine (p = 0.02). However, varying outcome definitions make these associations inconsistent. rs1062613 and rs2276302 could explain only 13.8 % variability in the responses to clozapine, while combined clinical predictors and HTR3A pharmacogenetic association model could explain 38 % variability. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that the results of pharmacogenetic studies in schizophrenia depend heavily on their outcome definitions and that combined clinical and pharmacogenetic models have better predictive values. Future pharmacogenetic studies should employ multiple outcome definitions and should evaluate associated clinical variables.
Serotonin has been implicated in a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. Serotonergic dysfunction is thought to be involved in the pathophysiology of the Gilles de la Tourette Syndrome (GTS). GTS is characterized by multiple vocal and motoric tics. Among selective, competitive 5-HT(3) receptor antagonists, ondansetron represents a promising drug in GTS treatment. In our study both serotonin receptor subunit genes, HTR3A and HTR3B, were examined for sequence variations in GTS patients. We have analyzed DNA samples from 49 patients by SSCP and dHPLC. In HTR3A, we detected five mutations and in HTR3B the analysis revealed six sequence variants. Statistical analysis rated all variants as probably non-disease-related polymorphisms. Yet a certain effect of the detected variants on the severity of the disease cannot be excluded.
BACKGROUND: Extensive literature has investigated the role of serotonin (5-HT) in the control of the central dopamine (DA) systems, and their dysfunction in the pathological conditions. 5-HT stimulates the local DA release in striatal regions via activation of various receptors including serotonin receptor-3 (5-HT3). Several studies have related polymorphisms (SNPs) in the serotonin receptor-3 (HTR3) genes to be associated with the pain modulation and endogenous pain suppression. A few studies suggested a functional role of 5'UTR SNP in the serotonergic receptor HTR3A gene (rs1062613) in the development of the chronic pain and Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) in particular. Here, we investigated the effect of a 5'UTR SNP in the serotonergic receptor HTR3A gene (rs1062613) on striatal dopamine D2/D3 receptor (DRD2) availability and reward-associated DA release in response to unpredictable monetary rewards in 23 women with FMS and 17 age-matched healthy female controls. Furthermore, we aimed to examine if SNP rs1062613 is associated with thermal pain and pain tolerance thresholds. METHODS: We used PET and [(11) C]raclopride to assess the DRD2 availability. In the same participants we used the [(11) C]raclopride PET bolus-plus-infusion method to measure the [(11) C]raclopride receptor binding potential (DeltaBP) between an unpredictable reward condition and a sensorimotor control condition. DRD2 availability and DeltaBP were assessed in MRI-based striatal regions of interest. Thermal pain and pain tolerance thresholds were assessed outside the scanner. RESULTS: The frequency of SNP rs1062613 genotype differed significantly between groups, indicating that CC homozygotes were more frequent in FMS patients (82.6%) than in healthy controls (41.3%). Our results showed a significant main effect of SNP rs1062613 on [(11) C]raclopride binding potential in the right caudate nucleus indicating a higher DRD2 receptor availability for CC-genotype of this SNP. Furthermore, we found a significant group x SNP interaction on [(11) C]raclopride binding potential in the right putamen, indicating a higher DRD2 availability in T-carriers compared to CC genotype of SNP rs1062613 in FMS patients, whereas this effect was not present in healthy controls. However, we did not find an influence of SNP rs1062613 on reward-related DA release. In addition, there was no association between SNP rs1062613 and pain threshold or pain tolerance threshold in our data. CONCLUSION: These preliminary results indicate that SNP rs1062613 in the serotonergic receptor HTR3A gene possibly modulates the DRD2 receptor availability.
