5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 6; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase. It has a high affinity for tricyclic psychotropic drugs (By similarity). Controls pyramidal neurons migration during corticogenesis, through the regulation of CDK5 activity (By similarity). Is an activator of TOR signaling.
Hypertension is one of the major life-threatening complications of obesity. Recently adipose multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) were implicated to the pathogenesis of obesity-associated hypertension. These cells amplify noradrenaline-induced vascular cell contraction via cAMP-mediated signaling pathway. In this study we tested the ability of several cAMP-mediated hormones to affect the adrenergic sensitivity of MSCs and their associated contractility. Despite that adipose MSCs express a plethora of receptors capable of cAMP signaling activation, only 5-HT was able to elevate alpha1A-adrenoceptor-induced Ca(2+) signaling in MSCs. Furthermore, 5-HT markedly enhanced noradrenaline-induced MSCs contractility. Using HTR isoform-specific antagonists followed by CRISPRi-mediated knockdown, we identified that the observed 5-HT effect on MSCs was mediated by the HTR6 isoform. This receptor was previously associated exclusively with 5-HT central nervous system activity. Discovered effect of HTR6 on MSCs contractility points to it as a potential therapeutic target for the prevention and treatment of obesity-associated hypertension.
Schizophrenia is a serious, chronic psychiatric disorder requiring lifelong treatment. Extrapyramidal side effects (EPS) are common adverse reactions to antipsychotic medications. In addition to the dopaminergic system, serotonergic mechanisms, including serotonin (5-HT) receptors, might be involved in EPS development. This study aimed to examine molecular associations of HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR2A, HTR2C and HTR6 gene polymorphisms with acute EPS in 229 male schizophrenia patients, following two weeks of haloperidol monotherapy. The Simpson-Angus Rating Scale for Extrapyramidal Side Effects (SAS), Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale (BARS) and Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale (ESRS) were used to evaluate EPS severity. Genotyping was performed using real-time PCR, following extraction of blood DNA. Significant acute EPS appeared in 48.03% of schizophrenia patients. For the rs13212041 HTR1B gene polymorphism, affecting microRNA regulation of HTR1B gene expression, a higher frequency of TT carriers was found among haloperidol-treated patients with akathisia when compared to the group without akathisia symptoms. In comparison to C-allele carriers, patients carrying the TT genotype had higher akathisia severity, as determined by the SAS, BARS and ESRS scales. These molecular findings suggest potential involvement of 5-HT(1B) receptors in akathisia development following haloperidol treatment, as well as possible epigenetic mechanisms of serotonergic modulation associated with antipsychotic-induced EPS.
In order to identify gene variants related to the serotonergic neurotransmitter system that possibly represent a hereditary risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD), patients suffering from AD and non-demented psychiatric inpatients without symptoms of dementia were genotyped for polymorphisms of HTR6 (267C/T) and HTR2A (-1438G/A). Although there was a tendency toward an increased number of the genotype TT of the 5-HT6 receptor polymorphism in AD patients when compared to controls (2.8% vs. 1.3%), neither this nor the 5-HT2A promoter polymorphism showed significant differences in their genotypic or allelic distribution among patients and controls. These polymorphisms probably do not represent major genetic risk factors of AD. However, further studies including other genetic variants of the serotonergic neurotransmitter system are needed in order to elucidate their role in AD.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the correlation of 5-hydroxy tryptamine receptor 6 (5-HTR6) gene polymorphism with vestibular migraine (VM). METHODS: A total of 92 VM patients were enrolled as the observation group, and 100 healthy people receiving physical examinations as the control group. Their general clinical information was collected, and the level of 5-HT in plasma and the vestibular function test indexes were detected. Moreover, the polymorphism of 5-HTR6 rs770963777 was detected with the TaqMan-MGB probe. RESULTS: The observation group had a lower level of 5-HT than the control group (P < .05), and the abnormality rates of the vestibular function tests, including the caloric test, head-shaking test, and vestibular autorotation test, were obviously higher than those in the control group (P < .01). The comparisons showed that the distribution frequencies of the genotypes and alleles were different between the two groups (P < .05). According to the analysis of the genetic mode, there were differences in recessive and additive modes between the two groups (P < .05), but the dominant mode was not different between the two groups (P > .05). CONCLUSION: The level of 5-HT and the vestibular function test indexes can serve as the effective indicators for observing VM, and the polymorphism of 5-HTR6 rs770963777 site is correlated with VM onset.
Many epidemiological reports have indicated an increase in the incidence of breast cancer among psychotic patients, suggesting that the targets of antipsychotics, neurotransmitter receptors, may have a role in tumorigenesis. However, the functions of neurotransmitter receptors in cancer are barely known. Here, we analyzed 44 neurotransmitter receptors in breast cancer and revealed that the expression of 34 receptors was positively correlated with relapse-free survival rates (RFS) of patients using the public database (n = 3951). Among all these receptors, we revealed decreased expression of HTR6 in human advanced breast cancer versus tumors in situ using our original data (n = 44). After a pan-cancer analysis including 22 cancers (n = 11262), we disclosed that HTR6 was expressed in 12 tumors and uncovered its influence on survival in seven tumors. Using multi-omics datasets from Linkedomics, we revealed a potential regulatory role of HTR6 in MAPK, JUN, and leukocyte-differentiation pathways through enriching 294 co-expressed phosphorylated proteins of HTR6. Furthermore, we proclaimed a close association of HTR6 expression with the immune microenvironment. Finally, we uncovered two possible reasons for HTR6 down-regulation in breast cancer, including deep deletion in the genome and the up-regulation of FOXA1 in breast cancer, which was a potential negatively regulatory transcription factor of HTR6. Taken together, we revealed a new function of neurotransmitter receptors in breast cancer and identified HTR6 as a survival-related gene potentially regulating the immune microenvironment. The findings in our study would improve our understanding of the pathogenesis of breast cancer and provided a theoretical basis for personalized medication in psychotic patients.
Genes that regulate the serotonin signalling system are potential targets for research in the aetiology of mood disorders and also in the treatment response of serotonin reuptake inhibitors. In this study, we evaluated the association of seven serotonin signal transduction-linked single nucleotide polymorphisms [HTR1A (rs6295), HTR2A (rs6313, rs6311 and rs7997012), HTR6 (rs1805054), TPH1 (rs1800532) and TPH2 (rs1386494)] with major depressive disorder and/or treatment outcome with serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Patients who met the criteria for major depressive disorder were treated for 6 weeks with fluoxetine, paroxetine or citalopram. The treatment response was evaluated with the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale, and according to predefined response criteria, the patients were divided into responders, nonresponders, remitters and nonremitters. Altogether, 86 patients completed the entire study according to the study protocol. We had also a control population (N = 395) of healthy blood donors. None of the seven single nucleotide polymorphisms was associated with major depressive disorder or with treatment response in our study population of Finnish individuals.
Serotonergic neurotransmitter system has been implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)(6) receptor is mainly expressed in the brain areas involved in cognitive processes. And 5-HT(6) receptor gene (HTR6) variants may be a genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD). To assess whether HTR6 increases the risk for LOAD, we carried out an association study between the HTR6 polymorphism C267T and sporadic LOAD in Mainland Chinese. An association of C/T genotype with LOAD (OR = 2.10, P = 0.014) was observed. And no statistical difference was found between cases and controls after stratification for APOE epsilon4 status. These data suggest that the HTR6 polymorphism C267T possibly involved in the susceptibility to LOAD as an APOE epsilon4-allele independent risk factor of LOAD.
Serotonergic system dysfunction has been implicated in the etiology of suicide. A large number of genetic studies have focused on the potential involvement of genes coding for components of serotonergic system in suicidal behavior. However, other genes belonging to this system remain to be investigated or have been poorly studied, as is the case of the 5-HT6 receptor (5-HTR6) gene. In this study, we investigated the potential association between the 5-HTR6 gene 267C/T SNP and suicide in a Portuguese population. Blood samples were collected from 179 suicide victims and 189 controls. Genotypes for the 5-HTR6 gene 267C/T SNP were obtained with the restriction enzyme Rsa I. A tendency was found for genotype association between this polymorphism and suicide, but the differences were not statistically significant (chi(2)=5.374, df=2, p=0.068). However, a gender-specific association was detected when comparing the genotype distribution between male suicide victims and male controls (chi(2)=6.988, df=2, p=0.030), suggesting that this SNP might have a role in the etiology of suicide in male subjects in the Portuguese population.
The affinity of clozapine for 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT6, 5-HT7, and 5-HT1A receptors has been suggested to contribute to various aspects of its complex clinical actions. This study examined the hypothesis that genetic variation in 5-HT1A, 5-HT6, and 5-HT7 receptor genes is involved in the variability observed in response to clozapine. We employed a pharmacogenetic approach in a group (n=185) of schizophrenia patients that have been clinically well characterized for clozapine response. Polymorphisms in the 5-HT6 (HTR6), 5-HT1A (HTR1A) and 5-HT7 (HTR7) receptor genes were genotyped. No evidence for either an allelic or genotypic association of the T-->C 267 HTR6 polymorphism with response to clozapine was found in our sample (allele: chi(2)=0.06, 1 df, P=0.80; genotype: chi(2)=1.21, 2 df, P=0.55). The pro16leu HTR1A polymorphism was not observed in our sample; all individuals genotyped were pro/pro 16 homozygotes. With respect to the pro279leu HTR7 polymorphism, one Caucasian male responder to clozapine was observed to be heterozygous (pro/leu 279 genotype). This individual was clinically similar to the other clozapine responders. Overall, our findings do not support a role for the T-->C 267 polymorphism of the 5-HT6 receptor gene in response to clozapine, although replication is required to confirm this finding.
