5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 7; This is one of the several different receptors for 5- hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), a biogenic hormone that functions as a neurotransmitter, a hormone, and a mitogen. The activity of this receptor is mediated by G proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase.
BACKGROUND: A recent genome-wide association study has identified 5-hydroxytrytamine (serotonin) receptor 7, adenylate cyclase-coupled (HTR7) as a risk gene for alcohol dependence. In addition, the serotonergic system has been considered as a modulator that plays an important role in alcohol use disorders. Functional, pharmacological, and genetic studies of serotonin neurotransmission have revealed that serotonin receptors are potential targets for the treatment of alcohol use disorders. The aim of this study is to investigate whether associations between HTR7 genetic polymorphisms and alcohol dependence could be replicated. METHODS: This study genotyped a total of 22 common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 459 alcoholic patients and 444 nonalcoholic controls. RESULTS: Logistic regression analysis of the case-control study, controlling for age and sex as covariates, showed nominal associations of 7 SNPs (p = 0.02 to 0.04; odds ratio = 0.60 to 1.35). In further linear regression analysis based on the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test score for alcohol dependence, 8 SNPs and 3 haplotypes showed relatively significant associations with alcohol dependence (minimum p = 0.001; p(corr) = 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Although further replications and functional evaluations are needed, our findings suggest that genetic variations of HTR7 may contribute to the predisposition for alcohol dependence.
Several lines of evidence suggest that the human 5-HT(7) receptor may be involved in the pharmacodynamics of risperidone and may influence clinical response of the drug. A pharmocogenetics study of this receptor may therefore be useful in developing individualized therapy. But few studies about it have been done. In this study, we genotyped ten single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed throughout the HTR7 gene and analyzed six of them for association with the reduction of Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) scores in drug-naive Chinese schizophrenia patients, following an eight-week period of risperidone monotherapy. The confounding effects of nongenetic factors were estimated and the baseline symptom score as well as the duration of illness were included as covariates for adjustment. No significant correlation of HTR7 with antipsychotic efficacy was detected in either genotype or haplotype analysis. These results demonstrate that variations in the HTR7 gene may not be good genetic markers for predicting the therapeutic efficacy of risperidone.
A novel serotonin receptor designated 5HT7 (genetic locus HTR7) was cloned in 1993. This receptor has interesting properties related to ligand affinity and CNS distribution that render HTR7 a very interesting candidate gene for neuropsychiatric disorders. We mapped this gene, first by physical methods and then by genetic linkage. First, we made a tentative assignment to chromosome 10, based on hybridization of an HTR7 probe to a Southern blot of DNA from somatic cell hybrids. We then identified a genetic polymorphism at the HTR7 locus. We identified one extended pedigree where the polymorphism segregated. Using the LIPED computer program for pairwise linkage analysis, we confirmed the assignment of the gene to chromosome 10, specifically 10q21-q24, based on a lod score of 5.37 at 0% recombination between HTR7 and D10S20 (a chromosome 10 reference marker). Finally, we excluded genetic linkage between this locus and Tourette syndrome under a reasonable set of assumptions.
Event-related brain oscillations (EROs) represent highly heritable neuroelectrical correlates of human perception and cognitive performance that exhibit marked deficits in patients with various psychiatric disorders. We report the results of the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of an ERO endophenotype-frontal theta ERO evoked by visual oddball targets during P300 response in 1,064 unrelated individuals drawn from a study of alcohol dependence. Forty-two SNPs of the Illumina HumanHap 1 M microarray were selected from the theta ERO GWAS for replication in family-based samples (N = 1,095), with four markers revealing nominally significant association. The most significant marker from the two-stage study is rs4907240 located within ARID protein 5A gene (ARID5A) on chromosome 2q11 (unadjusted, Fisher's combined P = 3.68 x 10(-)(6)). However, the most intriguing association to emerge is with rs7916403 in serotonin receptor gene HTR7 on chromosome 10q23 (combined P = 1.53 x 10(-)(4)), implicating the serotonergic system in the neurophysiological underpinnings of theta EROs. Moreover, promising SNPs were tested for association with diagnoses of alcohol dependence (DSM-IV), revealing a significant relationship with the HTR7 polymorphism among GWAS case-controls (P = 0.008). Significant recessive genetic effects were also detected for alcohol dependence in both case-control and family-based samples (P = 0.031 and 0.042, respectively), with the HTR7 risk allele corresponding to theta ERO reductions among homozygotes. These results suggest a role of the serotonergic system in the biological basis of alcohol dependence and underscore the utility of analyzing brain oscillations as a powerful approach to understanding complex genetic psychiatric disorders.
The gene encoding the serotonin 5-HT(7) receptor (HTR7) has been considered as a candidate locus in several neuropsychiatric disorders, based on pharmacological evidence and ligand-binding studies. After determining over 3 kb of previously unpublished sequence from introns 1 and 2 of HTR7, a single base (C/T) polymorphism in the second intron of HTR7 was found. Allele-specific PCR was used to genotype the HTR7 marker in 53 trios consisting of subjects with autistic disorder and both parents. Using the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), no evidence of preferential transmission of either allele was found (TDT chi(2) = 0.252, p = 0.602). Sequence data obtained from both intron 1 and intron 2 of HTR7, and from the 5-HT(7) pseudogene (HTR7P), was used to confirm localization of HTR7 to 10q23 and HTR7P to 12p13 using radiation hybrid analyses.
Whole genome sequencing of a severely affected dizygotic twin with an autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability revealed a compound heterozygous mutation in the HTR7 gene as the only variation not detected in control databases. Each parent carries one allele of the mutation, which is not present in an unaffected stepsister. The HTR7 gene encodes the 5-HT(7) serotonin receptor that is involved in brain development, synaptic transmission, and plasticity. The paternally inherited p.W60C variant is situated at an evolutionary conserved nucleotide and predicted damaging by Polyphen2. A mutation akin to the maternally inherited pV286I mutation has been reported to significantly affect the binding characteristics of the receptor. Therefore, the observed sequence alterations provide a first suggestive link between a genetic abnormality in the HTR7 gene and a neurodevelopmental disorder. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
