Inositol-trisphosphate 3-kinase A; Belongs to the inositol phosphokinase (IPK) family.
The inositol polyphosphate kinase (IPK) family member ITPKA (inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinase) regulates the levels of many inositol polyphosphates which are important in cellular signaling. Several recent studies reported the aberrant expression of ITPKA in malignancy disease and usually made cancer more aggressive. However, the contribution of the inositol polyphosphate kinase ITPKA to lung cancer development remains unclear. Here we report that ITPKA is overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and positively correlated with advanced clinical parameters. ITPKA contributes to the malignant phenotypes in-vitro. Mechanistically, ITPKA executed its action through the inducting of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and interacting with Drebrin 1 (which is related to cancer metastasis). Moreover, the hyper-expression of ITPKA in LUAD is transcriptionally activated by the transcription factor TFAP2A. In survival analysis by using tissue microarray (TMA), we indicate that ITPKA is hyper-expressed in LUAD tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues, and increased expression of ITPKA is associated with poor prognosis. Collectively, this study indicates that TFAP2A induced ITPKA hyperexpression promotes LUAD via interacting with Drebrin 1 and activating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). ITPKA might represent a potent candidate for the treatment and prognostic prediction of LUAD.
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) represents a most common cancer among women worldwide. The outcomes of this disease remain dismal due to frequent recurrence and metastasis. Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate-3-kinase-A (ITPKA) plays an important role in regulating calcium signaling and actin dynamics. The dysregulation of ITPKA has been observed in several human cancers. The present study aimed to assess ITPKA expression and its prognostic value in BC. METHODS: ITPKA expression was examined via quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) methods. In addition, Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox regression analysis were performed to evaluate prognostic value of ITPKA in BC. RESULTS: Upregulated ITPKA expression was found in BC samples, according to both qRT-PCR and IHC analyses (all p < .05). ITPKA expression was positively correlated with lymph node metastasis (p = .021) and TNM stage (p = .009). Moreover, BC patients with high expression of ITPKA had poor overall survival compared with those with low expression (log-rank p < .05). Cox analysis verified that ITPKA expression was an independent prognostic factor for BC patients (HR = 4.239, 95%CI = 2.221-8.093 and p = .000). CONCLUSION: BC cases show increased expression of ITPKA. ITPKA may act as an independent prognostic biomarker in BC.
Expression of Ins(1,4,5)P3-kinase-A (ITPKA), the neuronal isoform of Ins(1,4,5)P3-kinases, is up-regulated in many tumor types. In particular, in lung cancer cells this up-regulation is associated with bad prognosis and it has been shown that a high level of ITPKA increases migration and invasion of lung cancer cell lines. However, since ITPKA exhibits actin bundling and Ins(1,4,5)P3-kinase activity, it was not clear which of these activities account for ITPKA-promoted migration and invasion of cancer cells. To address this issue, we inhibited endogenous actin bundling activity of ITPKA in lung cancer H1299 cells by overexpressing the dominant negative mutant ITPKAL34P. Analysis of actin dynamics in filopodia as well as wound-healing migration revealed that ITPKAL34P inhibited both processes. Moreover, the formation of invasive protrusions into collagen I was strongly blocked in cells overexpressing ITPKAL34P. Furthermore, we found that ATP stimulation slightly but significantly (by 13%) increased migration of cells overexpressing ITPKA while under basal conditions up-regulation of ITPKA had no effect. In accordance with these results, overexpression of a catalytic inactive ITPKA mutant did not affect migration, and the Ins(1,4,5)P3-kinase-inhibitor GNF362 reversed the stimulating effect of ITPKA overexpression on migration. In summary, we demonstrate that under basal conditions the actin bundling activity controls ITPKA-facilitated migration and invasion and in presence of ATP the Ins(1,4,5)P3-kinase activity slightly enhances this effect.
1,4,5-triphosphate 3-kinase A (ITPKA) was first described and characterized by Irvine et al. in 1986 and cloned by Takazawa et al. in 1990. It is one of the components of the Ca2+ and calmodulin signaling pathway and a substrate for cAMP-dependent kinase (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC), and is mainly involved in the regulation of intracellular inositol polyphosphate signaling molecules. Through a series of studies, Sabine's team has found that ITPKA expression was up-regulated in a variety of cancer cells, and silencing ITPKA inhibited while overexpressing ITPKA promoted cancer cell migration in vitro and metastasis in vivo. The latest research from Sabine's team has demonstrated that in H1299 lung cancer cells, the mechanism by which ITPKA promoted migration and invasion was predominantly depending on the ability of binding to F-actin, which will induce cancer cells to form a tight flexible actin networks. Small molecule compounds targeting the IP3 kinase activity of ITPKA protein may only inhibit the migration and invasion of cancer cells caused by the enhanced ITPKA kinase activity under ATP stimulation, but not the cytoskeletal remodeling caused by the binding of ITPKA protein to F-actin and the driven migration and invasion of cancer cells. Therefore, targeted therapeutic strategy focusing on blocking the binding of ITPKA to F-actin is indispensable when designing the inhibitors targeting ITPKA protein.
BACKGROUND: Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate-3-kinase-A (ITPKA) has recently been found to be implicated in the tumor progression of various cancers. However, the expression and the prognostic value of ITPKA in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains unexplored. The aim of this study is to investigate the clinical significance of ITPKA expression in HCC. METHODS: We determined the expression level of ITPKA in 135 cases of HCC tissues and the matched adjacent nontumorous tissues by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. The correlation between ITPKA expression and prognosis of HCC patients was further evaluated by univariate and multivariate analysis. Multivariate analysis of the prognostic factors was performed with Cox proportional hazards model. RESULTS: Up-regulation of ITPKA occurred in 48.9% of primary HCCs compared with their nontumor counterparts (P < 0.001). In addition, high expression of ITPKA was significantly associated with vascular invasion (P = 0.001) and TNM stage (P = 0.005). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that the 5-year overall survival (OS) and relapse-free survival (RFS) rate in the group with high expression of ITPKA is poorer than that in low expression group (32.2 and 26.8% versus 59.2 and 57.7%). Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that ITPKA was an independent prognostic factor for OS and RFS. Moreover, Stratified analysis revealed that its prognostic significance still existed within the subgroup of patients with early clinical stage (TNM stage I) or normal serum AFP level (</=25 mug/L). CONCLUSION: Our data indicated that ITPKA expression was significantly up-regulated in HCC and could serve as a potential novel prognostic biomarker for HCC patients after surgery.
INTRODUCTION: Despite recent advances in cancer therapy, the overall 5-year survival rate of patients with lung cancer remains low. The aim of our study was to search for novel markers for early diagnosis in patients with lung cancer. METHODS: Complementary DNA microarray analysis was performed in primary lung adenocarcinomas and cell lines to search for differentially expressed genes, followed by in vivo and in vitro tumorigenic assays to characterize the oncogenic potential of the candidate genes. Gene body methylation was analyzed by 450K methylation array, bisulfite sequencing, and quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction assays. In silico analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas data set was also performed. RESULTS: Inositol-trisphosphate 3-kinase A gene (ITPKA), a kinase with limited tissue distribution, was identified as a potential oncogene. We showed that ITPKA expression is up-regulated in many forms of cancers, including lung and breast cancers, and that overexpressed ITPKA contributes to tumorigenesis. We also demonstrated that ITPKA expression is regulated by epigenetic DNA methylation of ITPKA gene body through modulation of the binding of SP1 transcription factor to the ITPKA promoter. ITPKA gene body displayed low or absent levels of methylation in most normal tissue but was significantly methylated in malignant tumors. In lung cancer, ITPKA gene body methylation first appeared at the in situ carcinoma stage and progressively increased after invasion. CONCLUSIONS: ITPKA is a potential oncogene that it is overexpressed in most tumors, and its overexpression promotes tumorigenesis. ITPKA gene body methylation regulates its expression and thus serves as a novel and potential biomarker for early cancer detection.
Inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate-3-kinase-A (ITPKA) has been considered as an actin bundling protein because its N-terminal actin binding domain (ABD) induces formation of linear actin bundles. Since in many cancer cell lines ITPKA is essential for formation of lamellipodia, which consist of cross-linked actin filaments, here we analyzed if full length-ITPKA may induce formation of more complex actin structures. Indeed, we found that incubation of F-actin with ITPKA resulted in formation of dense, branched actin networks. Based on our result that ITPKA does not exhibit an additional C-terminal ABD, we exclude that ITPKA cross-links actin filaments by simultaneous F-actin binding with two different ABDs. Instead, stimulated-emission-depletion-microscopy and measurement of InsP3 Kinase activity give evidence that that N-terminal ABD-homodimers of ITPKA bind to F-actin while the monomeric C-termini insert between adjacent actin filaments. Thereby, they prevent formation of thick actin bundles but induce formation of thin branched actin structures. Interestingly, when embedded in this dense actin network, InsP3 Kinase activity is doubled and the product of InsP3 Kinase activity, Ins(1,3,4,5)P4 , inhibits spontaneous actin polymerization which may reflect a local negative feedback regulation of InsP3 Kinase activity. In conclusion, we demonstrate that not only the ABD of ITPKA modulates actin dynamics but reveal that the InsP3 Kinase domain substantially contributes to this process.
