Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily H member 2; Pore-forming (alpha) subunit of voltage-gated inwardly rectifying potassium channel. Channel properties are modulated by cAMP and subunit assembly. Mediates the rapidly activating component of the delayed rectifying potassium current in heart (IKr). [Isoform B-USO]: Has no channel activity by itself, but modulates channel characteristics by forming heterotetramers with other isoforms which are retained intracellularly and undergo ubiquitin- dependent degradation.
Short QT syndrome (SQTS) is a rare but dangerous genetic disease. In this research, we conducted a comprehensive in silico investigation into the arrhythmogenesis in KCNH2 T618I-associated SQTS using a multi-scale human ventricle model. A Markov chain model of I(Kr) was developed firstly to reproduce the experimental observations. It was then incorporated into cell, tissue, and organ models to explore how the mutation provided substrates for ventricular arrhythmias. Using this T618I Markov model, we explicitly revealed the subcellular level functional alterations by T618I mutation, particularly the changes of ion channel states that are difficult to demonstrate in wet experiments. The following tissue and organ models also successfully reproduced the changed dynamics of reentrant spiral waves and impaired rate adaptions in hearts of T618I mutation. In terms of pharmacotherapy, we replicated the different effects of a drug under various conditions using identical mathematical descriptions for drugs. This study not only simulated the actions of an effective drug (quinidine) at various physiological levels, but also elucidated why the I(Kr) inhibitor sotalol failed in SQT1 patients through profoundly analyzing its mutation-dependent actions.
Type 2 Long QT Syndrome (LQT2) is a rare genetic heart rhythm disorder causing life-threatening arrhythmias. We derived induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from two patients with LQT2, aged 18 and 6, both carrying a heterozygous missense mutation on the 3rd and 11th exons of KCNH2. The iPSC lines exhibited normal genomes, expressed pluripotent markers, and differentiated into trilineage embryonic layers. These patient-specific iPSC lines provide a valuable model to study the molecular and functional impact of the hERG channel gene mutation in LQT2 and to develop personalized therapeutic approaches for this syndrome.
Long-QT syndrome type 2 (LQT2) is a life-threatening Mendelian disease caused by genetic variants in KCNH2. Herein, we generated a human embryonic stem cell line (WAe009-A-88) carrying a LQT2 related mutation in KCNH2, c.1720 A>G. The WAe009-A-88 line maintained stem cell-like morphology, expressed high levels of pluripotent markers, had a normal karyotype, and could differentiate into all three germ layers in vivo. The cell line can serve as valuable tools for modeling LQT2 in vitro and investigating the pathological mechanisms related to KCNH2 mutations.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) empowered clinician scientists to measure the electrical activity of the heart noninvasively to identify arrhythmias and heart disease. Shortly after the standardization of the 12-lead ECG for the diagnosis of heart disease, several families with autosomal recessive (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndrome) and dominant (Romano-Ward Syndrome) forms of long QT syndrome (LQTS) were identified. An abnormally long heart rate-corrected QT-interval was established as a biomarker for the risk of sudden cardiac death. Since then, the International LQTS Registry was established; a phenotypic scoring system to identify LQTS patients was developed; the major genes that associate with typical forms of LQTS were identified; and guidelines for the successful management of patients advanced. In this review, we discuss the molecular and cellular mechanisms for LQTS associated with missense variants in KCNQ1 (LQT1) and KCNH2 (LQT2). We move beyond the "benign" to a "pathogenic" binary classification scheme for different KCNQ1 and KCNH2 missense variants and discuss gene- and mutation-specific differences in K(+) channel dysfunction, which can predispose people to distinct clinical phenotypes (e.g., concealed, pleiotropic, severe, etc.). We conclude by discussing the emerging computational structural modeling strategies that will distinguish between dysfunctional subtypes of KCNQ1 and KCNH2 variants, with the goal of realizing a layered precision medicine approach focused on individuals.
Long QT syndrome (LQT) is an inherited primary arrhythmic disorder characterized by prolonged QT interval on the surface electrocardiogram and life-threatening arrhythmia. In this study, a skin biopsy was obtained from an LQT type 2 (LQT2) patient, who carried a nonsense mutation (c.1956C > A; p.Y652X) in the potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily H member 2 (KCNH2) gene. The skin fibroblasts were reprogrammed by non-integrated Sendai viral method to generate a patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line. The generated iPSC line showed typical embryonic stem cell-like morphology, exhibited normal karyotype, expressed pluripotency markers, and was capable to differentiate into three germ layers.
OBJECTIVE: Long QT syndrome is a cardiovascular disease with a prolonged QT interval. CASE REPORT: We report a 22-year-old woman presenting with frequent syncopal episodes two months after childbirth. Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm, QT interval prolongation, and Torsade de Pointes. Her mother had experienced an episode of syncope, but her father had not. Genetic analyses revealed that a new mutation in the KCNH2 gene, the c.2108dupA mutation (p.H703Qfs*20, exon8, M_000238), was found in the patient and in her mother and sister. CONCLUSION: The c.2108dupA mutation (p.H703Qfs*20, exon8, M_000238) is the first reported case of a KCNH2 mutation at this site.
Mutations in KCNH2 can lead to long QT syndrome type 2. Variable disease manifestation observed with this channelopathy is associated with the location and type of mutation within the protein, complicating efforts to predict patient risk. Here, we demonstrated phenotypic differences in cardiomyocytes derived from isogenic human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC-CMs) genetically edited to harbor mutations either within the pore or tail region of the ion channel. Electrophysiological analysis confirmed that the mutations prolonged repolarization of the hiPSC-CMs, with differences between the mutations evident in monolayer cultures. Blocking the hERG channel revealed that the pore-loop mutation conferred greater susceptibility to arrhythmic events. These findings showed that subtle phenotypic differences related to KCNH2 mutations could be captured by hiPSC-CMs under genetically matched conditions. Moreover, the results support hiPSC-CMs as strong candidates for evaluating the underlying severity of individual KCNH2 mutations in humans, which could facilitate patient risk stratification.
KCNH2 (Potassium Voltage-Gated Channel Subfamily H Member) encodes a voltage-activated potassium channel role as rapidly activating-delayed rectifier potassium channel that plays an essential role in the final repolarization of the ventricular action potential. Mutations in this gene can cause long QT syndrome and short QT syndrome. Transcript variants encoding distinct isoforms were also identified. In this study, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) from a healthy individual by electroporation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and generated a KCNH2 heterozygous knockout human iPSC line via CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. The resulting iPSCs had a normal karyotype, were free of genomically integrated epitomal plasmids, expressed pluripotency markers, and maintained trilineage differentiation potential.
Induced pluripotent stem cell lines (iPSCs) were generated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from the peripheral blood of a ten years old boy with the type 2 Long QT syndrome carrying the heterozygous mutation c.1814C>T(p.P605L) in KCNH2. PBMCs were reprogrammed using non-integrative Sendai viral vectors containing reprogramming factors OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and C-MYC. The iPSCs were shown to express pluripotent markers, have trilineage differentiation potential, carry c.1814C>T(p.P605L) mutation in KCNH2 and have a normal karyotype. Thuse the iPSC line we established will be useful for studying the pathogenesis of the type 2 long QT syndrome and drug testing.
Andersen-Tawil syndrome (ATS) is a rare channelopathy, sometimes referred to as long QT syndrome type 7. ATS is an autosomal dominant disease predominantly caused by mutations in the KCNJ2 gene. Patients with ATS present with episodes of muscle weakness, arrythmias, including prolonged QT intervals, and various skeletal abnormalities. Unlike other channelopathies, ATS has a relatively mild clinical course and low risk of sudden cardiac death. In this study, we describe a female patient with typical symptoms of ATS with the addition of unusually severe arrhythmias. Extensive DNA testing was performed to find the possible cause of this unique presentation. In addition to a known mutation in KCNJ2, the patient carried a variant in KCNH2 The combination of genetic variants may lead to the severe clinical manifestation of ATS. Additional genetic information allowed accurate genetic counselling to be provided to the patient.
Long QT syndrome (LQTS), an inherited cardiac ion channelopathy, is associated with ventricular arrhythmias and risk of sudden death. LQTS sub-type 2 (LQT2) is caused by pathogenic variants in KCNH2 encoding the alpha-subunit of Kv11.1, thus affecting the rapid component of delayed rectifier K(+) current (I(Kr)) channel during the action potential. In this study, non-integrational Sendai reprogramming method was used to generate an induced-pluripotent-stem-cell (iPSC) line carrying the KCNH2 c.2464G>A (p.Val822Met) pathogenic variant from a LQT2 patient. This patient-specific iPSC line NUIGi003-A harbouring the c.2464G>A variant expressed pluripotency markers and demonstrated the differentiation potential to all three germ layers.
There has been increased interest in a possible association between epilepsy channelopathies and cardiac arrhythmias, such as long QT syndrome (LQTS). We report a kindred that features LQTS, idiopathic epilepsy, and increased risk of sudden death. Genetic study showed a previously unreported heterozygous point mutation (c.246T>C) in the KCNH2 gene. Functional studies showed that the mutation induces severe loss of function. This observation provides further evidence for a possible link between idiopathic epilepsy and LQTS.
Mutations in hERG (human ether-a-go-go-related gene) potassium channel are closely associated with long QT syndromes. By direct Sanger sequencing, we identified a novel KCNH2 mutation W410R in the patient with long QT syndrome 2 (LQT2). However, the electrophysiological functions of this mutation remain unknown. In comparison to hERG(WT) channels, hERG(W410R) channels have markedly decreased total and surface expressions. W410R mutation dramatically reduces hERG channel currents (I(Kr)) and shifts its steady-state activation curve to depolarization. Moreover, hERG(W410R) channels make dominant-negative effects on hERG(WT) channels. Significantly, we find hERG channel blocker E-4031 could partially rescue the function of hERG(W410R) channels by increasing the membrane expression. By using in silico model, we reveal that hERG(W410R) channels obviously elongate the repolarization of human ventricular myocyte action potentials. Collectively, W410R mutation decreases the currents of hERG channel, because of diminished membrane expression of mutant channels, that subsequently leads to elongated repolarization of cardiomyocyte, which might induce the pathogenesis of LQT2. Furthermore, E-4031 could partially rescue the decreased activity of hERG(W410R) channels. Thus, our work identifies a novel loss-of-function mutation in KCNH2 gene, which might provide a rational basis for the management of LQT2.
Long QT syndrome is one of the most common hereditary arrhythmias. Mutations in KCNH2 can cause long QT syndrome type 2 (LQT2). In this study, we generated a human induced pluripotent stem cell line ZZUNEUi027-A from a LQT2 female patient with c. 128A --> G in KCNH2 gene using non-integrative Sendai viral reprogramming technology. This cell line expresses pluripotency markers, exhibits a normal female karyotype (46, XX) and could differentiate into all three germ layers in vitro. ZZUNEUi027-A can serve as a cell disease model in the understanding of LQT2 pathogenesis.
BACKGROUND: KCNH2-mediated arrhythmia syndromes are caused by loss-of-function (type 2 long QT syndrome [LQT2]) or gain-of-function (type 1 short QT syndrome [SQT1]) pathogenic variants in the KCNH2-encoded K(v)11.1 potassium channel, which is essential for the cardiac action potential. METHODS: A dual-component "suppression-and-replacement" (SupRep) KCNH2 gene therapy was created by cloning into a single construct a custom-designed KCNH2 short hairpin RNA with ~80% knockdown (suppression) and a "short hairpin RNA-immune" KCNH2 cDNA (replacement). Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes and their CRISPR-Cas9 variant-corrected isogenic control (IC) induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes were made for 2 LQT2- (G604S, N633S) and 1 SQT1- (N588K) causative variants. All variant lines were treated with KCNH2-SupRep or non-targeting control short hairpin RNA (shCT). The action potential duration (APD) at 90% repolarization (APD(90)) was measured using FluoVolt voltage dye. RESULTS: KCNH2-SupRep achieved variant-independent rescue of both pathologic phenotypes. For LQT2-causative variants, treatment with KCNH2-SupRep resulted in shortening of the pathologically prolonged APD(90) to near curative (IC-like) APD(90) levels (G604S IC, 471+/-25 ms; N633S IC, 405+/-55 ms) compared with treatment with shCT (G604S: SupRep-treated, 452+/-76 ms versus shCT-treated, 550+/-41 ms; P<0.0001; N633S: SupRep-treated, 399+/-105 ms versus shCT-treated, 577+/-39 ms, P<0.0001). Conversely, for the SQT1-causative variant, N588K, treatment with KCNH2-SupRep resulted in therapeutic prolongation of the pathologically shortened APD(90) (IC: 429+/-16 ms; SupRep-treated: 396+/-61 ms; shCT-treated: 274+/-12 ms). CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first proof-of-principle gene therapy for correction of both LQT2 and SQT1. KCNH2-SupRep gene therapy successfully normalized the pathologic APD(90), thereby eliminating the pathognomonic feature of both LQT2 and SQT1.
A 26-year-old woman, 12 days in postpartum, developed recurrent syncope and cardiac arrest. Her ECG revealed QT-prolongation associated with LQT2-specific T-U wave patterns, T wave alternans, long QT-dependent torsade de pointes (TdP) and ventricular fibrillation (VF). She also had intermittent LBBB (80bpm) on alternate beats and RBBB at sinus tachycardia (113bpm). Family genotyping revealed a novel de novo missense mutation G604C of KCNH2. Propranolol slowed heart rate and further prolonged QT interval (610ms) that caused TdP recurrence. Mexiletine combined with magnesium and potassium supplements prevented TdP/VF recurrence. This patient has remained event-free after 9-month follow-up.
