Small conductance calcium-activated potassium channel protein 2; Forms a voltage-independent potassium channel activated by intracellular calcium. Activation is followed by membrane hyperpolarization. Thought to regulate neuronal excitability by contributing to the slow component of synaptic afterhyperpolarization. The channel is blocked by apamin; Belongs to the potassium channel KCNN family. KCa2.2/KCNN2 subfamily.
KCNN2 encodes the small conductance calcium-activated potassium channel 2 (SK2). Rodent models with spontaneous Kcnn2 mutations show abnormal gait and locomotor activity, tremor and memory deficits, but human disorders related to KCNN2 variants are largely unknown. Using exome sequencing, we identified a de novo KCNN2 frameshift deletion in a patient with learning disabilities, cerebellar ataxia and white matter abnormalities on brain MRI. This discovery prompted us to collect data from nine additional patients with de novo KCNN2 variants (one nonsense, one splice site, six missense variants and one in-frame deletion) and one family with a missense variant inherited from the affected mother. We investigated the functional impact of six selected variants on SK2 channel function using the patch-clamp technique. All variants tested but one, which was reclassified to uncertain significance, led to a loss-of-function of SK2 channels. Patients with KCNN2 variants had motor and language developmental delay, intellectual disability often associated with early-onset movement disorders comprising cerebellar ataxia and/or extrapyramidal symptoms. Altogether, our findings provide evidence that heterozygous variants, likely causing a haploinsufficiency of the KCNN2 gene, lead to novel autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental movement disorders mirroring phenotypes previously described in rodents.
Potassium calcium-activated channel subfamily N member 2 (KCNN2) encodes an integral membrane protein that forms small-conductance calcium-activated potassium (SK) channels. Recent studies in animal models show that SK channels are important in atrial and ventricular repolarization and arrhythmogenesis. However, the importance of SK channels in human arrhythmia remains unclear. The purpose of the present study was to test the association between genetic polymorphism of the SK2 channel and the occurrence of cardiac tachyarrhythmias in humans. We enrolled 327 Han Chinese, including 72 with clinically significant ventricular tachyarrhythmias (VTa) who had a history of aborted sudden cardiac death (SCD) or unexplained syncope, 98 with a history of atrial fibrillation (AF), and 144 normal controls. We genotyped 12 representative tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across a 141-kb genetic region containing the KCNN2 gene; these captured the full haplotype information. The rs13184658 and rs10076582 variants of KCNN2 were associated with VTa in both the additive and dominant models (odds ratio [OR] 2.89, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.505-5.545, P = 0.001; and OR 2.55, 95% CI = 1.428-4.566, P = 0.002, respectively). After adjustment for potential risk factors, the association remained significant. The population attributable risks of these 2 variants of VTa were 17.3% and 10.6%, respectively. One variant (rs13184658) showed weak but significant association with AF in a dominant model (OR 1.91, CI = 1.025-3.570], P = 0.042). There was a significant association between the KCNN2 variants and clinically significant VTa. These findings suggest an association between KCNN2 and VTa; it also appears that KCNN2 variants may be adjunctive markers for risk stratification in patients susceptible to SCD.
BACKGROUND: Essential tremor (ET) is one of the more common movement disorders. Current diagnosis is solely based on clinical findings. ET appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Several loci on specific chromosomes have been studied by linkage analysis, but the causes of essential tremor are still unknown in many patients. Genetic studies described the association of several genes with familial ET. However, they were found only in distinct families, suggesting that some can be private pathogenic variants. AIM OF THE STUDY: to characterize the phenotype of an Italian family with ET and identify the genetic variant associated. METHODS: Clinical and genetic examinations were performed. Genetic testing was done with whole-exome sequencing (WES) using the Illumina platform. Bidirectional capillary Sanger sequencing was used to investigate the presence of variant in all affected members of the family. In silico prediction of pathogenicity was used to study the effect of gene variants on protein structure. RESULTS: The proband was a 15-year-old boy. The patient was the first of two children of a non-consanguineous couple. Family history was remarkable for tremor in the mother line. His mother suffered from bilateral upper extremity kinetic tremors (since she was 20 years old), anxiety, and depression. Other relatives referred bilateral upper extremity tremors. In the index case, WES analysis performed supposing a dominant mode of inheritance, identified a novel heterozygous missense variant in potassium calcium-activated channel subfamily N member 2 (KCNN2) (NM_021614.3: c.1145G>A, p.Gly382Asp). In the pedigree investigation, all carriers of the gene variant had ET and showed variable expressivity, the elder symptomatic relative showing cognitive impairment and hallucinations in the last decade, in addition to tremor since a young age. The amino acid residue #382 is located in a transmembrane region and in silico analysis suggested a causative role for the variant. Modelling of the mutant protein structure showed that the variant causes a clash in the protein structure. Therefore, the variant could cause a conformational change that alters the ability of the protein in the modulation of ion channels Conclusions: The KCNN2 gene variant identified could be associated with ET. The variant could modify a voltage-independent potassium channel activated by intracellular calcium.
BACKGROUND: Here we combine clinical, electrophysiological, and genetic findings to phenotype an unusual childhood movement disorder in a patient with a rare form of KCNN2 mutation. CASE REPORT: A 10-year-old male presented with a clinical syndrome of tremor and myoclonus. Electrophysiology demonstrated muscle activity indicative of myoclonus dystonia, an observation that was not appreciated clinically. Genetic testing revealed an abnormality in the KCNN 2 gene, not present in the parents, known to cause dystonia, as the etiology. DISCUSSION: The value of utilizing noninvasive, electrophysiological recording in pediatric movement disorders expands the precision of diagnosis, potentially informing treatment when correlated with clinical and genetic findings.
Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) are at a higher risk of cardiovascular (CV) complications and mortality compared to the general population. This study aimed to investigate the genetic polymorphisms of KCNN2, a key gene encoding a subtype of small-conductance calcium-activated potassium (SK) channels, which regulate an important SK current pathway potentially involved in the development of CV complications, particularly arrhythmias, in ESRD patients. A total of 169 ESRD patients were enrolled in this study. The patients were divided into two groups based on the presence of CV complications: Group I, consisting of 84 patients without CV complications, and Group II, comprising 85 patients with CV complications. Twelve tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) in KCNN2 were examined. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed, and genotyping was correlated with CV complications in each group. The TC and CC genotypes of rs10076582, and the GT and TT genotypes of rs11738819 in the KCNN2 gene, were associated with an increased risk of CV complications in ESRD patients. After adjusting for potential risk factors, these associations remained significant. Additionally, KCNN2 haplotypes with the allele combinations GGCCCTCCGAG and AGTCCTCCGGT were significantly associated with a higher risk of CV complications in ESRD patients. In conclusion, our findings report that specific genetic polymorphisms in the KCNN2 gene, particularly the rs10076582 and rs11738819 variants, as well as GGCCCTCCGAG and AGTCCTCCGGT haplotypes, are significantly associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular complications in ESRD patients. These genetic markers may serve as potential biomarkers for identifying individuals at high risk of cardiovascular complications in this vulnerable population.
Kawasaki disease (KD) is often complicated by coronary artery lesions (CALs), including aneurysms. Because of the complications associated with KD, this disorder is the leading cause of acquired heart disease in children from developed countries. To identify genetic loci that confer a higher risk of developing CALs, we performed a case-control association study using previous genome-wide association study data for samples from KD cases only (n=186) by grouping KD patients without CALs (control: n=123) vs KD patients with extremely large aneurysms (diameter>5 mm) (case: n=17). Twelve loci with one or more sequence variants were found to be significantly associated with CALs (P<1 x 10(-5)). Of these, an SNP (rs17136627) in the potassium intermediate/small conductance calcium-activated channel, subfamily N, member 2 (KCNN2) at 5q22.3 was validated in 32 KD patients with large aneurysms (diameter>5 mm) and 191 KD patients without CALs (odds ratio (OR)=12.6, P(combined)=1.96 x 10(-8)). This result indicates that the KCNN2 gene can have an important role in the development of coronary artery aneurysms in KD.
