Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for VEGFA, VEGFC and VEGFD. Plays an essential role in the regulation of angiogenesis, vascular development, vascular permeability, and embryonic hematopoiesis. Promotes proliferation, survival, migration and differentiation of endothelial cells. Promotes reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. Isoforms lacking a transmembrane domain, such as isoform 2 and isoform 3, may function as decoy receptors for VEGFA, VEGFC and/or VEGFD. Isoform 2 plays an important role as negative reg [...] 
Pancreatic angiosarcoma is an exceedingly rare malignancy accounting for <1% of pancreatic neoplasms. A very limited number of pancreatic angiosarcomas have been reported in the literature without any cases described in children. We present the case of a 17-year-old female diagnosed with angiosarcoma of the pancreas following pancreaticoduodenectomy for a pancreatic mass, initially presumed to be a solid pseudopapillary neoplasm of the pancreas. The angiosarcoma was found to have a novel activating internal tandem duplication in the KDR gene (KDR-internal tandem duplication). We discuss the current literature on this disease process. This is the first reported case of pancreatic angiosarcoma in a pediatric patient and the first with an activating KDR-internal tandem duplication.
We conducted a genome-wide association scan (GWAS) of endometriosis using 25.5 million sequence variants detected through whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of 8,453 Icelanders and imputed into 1,840 cases and 129,016 control women, followed by testing of associated variants in Danish samples. Here we report the discovery of a new endometriosis susceptibility locus on 4q12 (rs17773813[G], OR=1.28; P=3.8 x 10(-11)), upstream of KDR encoding vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2). The variant correlates with disease severity (P=0.0046) when moderate/severe endometriosis cases are tested against minimal/mild cases. We further report association of rs519664[T] in TTC39B on 9p22 with endometriosis (P=4.8 x 10(-10); OR=1.29). The involvement of KDR in endometriosis risk highlights the importance of the VEGF pathway in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Cardiovascular diseases are a major cause of mortality in patients with psoriatic arthritis (PsA), but the precise mechanism of increased cardiovascular risk is unknown. Endothelial dysfunction plays a crucial role in the development of atherosclerosis. Circulating endothelial progenitor cells (CEPCs) contribute to endothelial regeneration and their level may be affected by chronic inflammation. The aim of this study was to evaluate the number of CEPCs in patients with PsA (n = 24) compared with controls (n = 26). CEPCs were identified as CD133+/ KDR+ cells in peripheral blood, using flow cytometry. A significantly decreased number of CEPCs was observed in patients with PsA (p < 0.0001). The number of these cells was significantly, inversely correlated with the severity of skin and joint involvement (Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI), DAS28) and the level of C-reactive protein. We hypothesize that the reduced number of CEPCs may indicate and contribute to the increased cardiovascular risk in patients with PsA.
Recent findings on vertebrate embryos have provided compelling evidence for the existence of hemangioblasts, i.e. common precursors for endothelial and hematopoietic cells, characterized by expression of the VEGFR2/Flk1 receptor. We describe here a population of KDR+ CD34- mesoderm cells that emerges in early-somitic human embryos, by the beginning of the 4th week of gestation. In the developing blood vessels, KDR-expressing CD34- cells gradually coexpress increasing levels of CD34 antigen. Remarkably, as development proceeds, a KDR+ CD34- contingent persists in the paraaortic splanchnopleura until just prior to the emergence of aorta-associated hematopoietic cell clusters. These observations suggest that KDR+ CD34- mesodermal cells might represent the putative hemangioblastic precursor of human hematopoietic and endothelial lineages.
Angiogenesis is important in tumor development. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is involved in this process. In this report, we constructed a recombinant protein (called FK) by fusing the second immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) domain of a human fms-like tyrosine kinase (Flt-1) with the third Ig-like domain of human kinase insert domain-containing receptor (KDR). FK bound to VEGF(165) in a dose-dependent manner with a disocciation constant (Kd) of 2.7 pM. In addition, FK specifically inhibited the proliferation of human microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC) and human umbilical vein endothelial Cell (HUVEC) stimulated by VEGF(165). Subsequent studies also demonstrate that FK efficaciously suppresses growth of a variety of tumors, which could make FK a potential drug candidate in anti-tumor therapy.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent tumor of the central nervous system, and its heterogeneity is a challenge in treatment. This study examined tumoral heterogeneity involving PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR gene amplification (GA) in 4q12 and its association with clinical parameters. Specimens from 22 GBM cases with GA for the 4q12 amplicon detected by FISH were investigated for homogeneous or heterogeneous coamplification patterns, diffuse or focal distribution of cells harboring GA throughout tumor sections, and pattern of clustering of fluorescence signals. Sixteen cases had homogenously amplification for all three genes (45.5%), for PDGFRA and KDR (22.7%), or only for PDGFRA (4.6%); six cases had heterogeneous GA patterns, with subpopulations including GA for all three genes and for two genes - PDGFRA and KDR (13.6%), or GA for all three and for only one gene - PDGFRA (9.1%) or KIT (4.6%). In 6 tumors (27.3%), GA was observed in focal tumor areas, while in the remaining 16 tumors (72.7%) it was diffusely distributed throughout the pathological specimen. Amplification was universally expressed as double minutes and homogenously stained regions. Coamplification of all three genes PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR, age >/= 60 years, and total tumor resection were statistically associated with poor prognosis. FISH proved effective for detailed interpretation of molecular heterogeneity. The study uncovered an even more diverse range of amplification patterns involving the 4q12 oncogenes in GBM than previously described, thus highlighting a complex tumoral heterogeneity to be considered when devising more effective therapies.
Inhibition of tumor-induced angiogenesis is a promising strategy in anticancer research. Neovascularization is a process required for both tumor growth and metastasis. Enhanced understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms has led to the discovery of a variety of pharmaceutically attractive targets. Decades of investigation suggest that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors, in particular VEGFR2 or kinase insert-domain-containing receptor (Kdr), play a critical role in the growth and survival of endothelial cells in newly forming vasculature. The clinical utility of inhibitors of this receptor tyrosine kinase is currently under intense investigation. Herein we report our efforts in this arena.
