Mast/stem cell growth factor receptor Kit; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for the cytokine KITLG/SCF and plays an essential role in the regulation of cell survival and proliferation, hematopoiesis, stem cell maintenance, gametogenesis, mast cell development, migration and function, and in melanogenesis. In response to KITLG/SCF binding, KIT can activate several signaling pathways. Phosphorylates PIK3R1, PLCG1, SH2B2/APS and CBL. Activates the AKT1 signaling pathway by phosphorylation of PIK3R1, the regulatory subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Activat [...] 
"The traveler's medical kit is an essential tool for both the novice and expert traveler. It is designed to treat travel-related illness and injury and to ensure preexisting medical conditions are managed appropriately. Travelers are at increased risk for common gastrointestinal issues during travel. Respiratory illnesses make up approximately 8% of the ailments present in returned international travelers. Approximately 12% of travelers experience a travel-related skin condition. First aid treatment for minor injuries is essential to all travel medical kits. The complexity ranges from a small, simple case for the urban traveler to a larger, extensive case for wilderness travel."
In this issue of Blood, Duployez et al present results from mutational profiling of >200 patients with core binding factor acute myeloid leukemia (CBF-AML). The identified mutational landscape is likely to have clinical relevance and hints at intriguing biological distinctions between these seemingly similar malignancies that will offer deep insights into the aberrant regulatory networks critical for leukemia development.
Blight-resistant rice lines are the most effective solution for bacterial blight, caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo). Key resistance mechanisms involve SWEET genes as susceptibility factors. Bacterial transcription activator-like (TAL) effectors bind to effector-binding elements (EBEs) in SWEET gene promoters and induce SWEET genes. EBE variants that cannot be recognized by TAL effectors abrogate induction, causing resistance. Here we describe a diagnostic kit to enable analysis of bacterial blight in the field and identification of suitable resistant lines. Specifically, we include a SWEET promoter database, RT-PCR primers for detecting SWEET induction, engineered reporter rice lines to visualize SWEET protein accumulation and knock-out rice lines to identify virulence mechanisms in bacterial isolates. We also developed CRISPR-Cas9 genome-edited Kitaake rice to evaluate the efficacy of EBE mutations in resistance, software to predict the optimal resistance gene set for a specific geographic region, and two resistant 'mega' rice lines that will empower farmers to plant lines that are most likely to resist rice blight.
Infant asphyxia is a condition due to insufficient oxygen intake suffered by newborn babies. A 4 to 9 million occurrences of infant asphyxia are reported each year by WHO. Early diagnosis of asphyxia is important to avoid complications such as damage to the brain, organ and tissue that could lead to fatality. This is possible with the automation of screening of infant asphyxia. Here, a non-invasive Asphyxia Screening Kit is developed. It is a Graphical User Interface that automatically detects asphyxia in infants from early birth to 6 months from their cries and displays the outcome of analysis. It is built with Matlab GUI underlied with signal processing algorithms, capable of achieving a classification accuracy of 96.03%. Successful implementation of ASK will assist to screen infant asphyxia for reference to clinicians for early diagnosis. In addition, ASK also provides an interface to enter patient information and images to be integrated with existing Hospital Information Management System.
A gain-of-function mutation of c-kit is the crucial step in tumorigenesis of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). Imatinib can block the activated receptor tyrosine kinase activity of c-kit. These findings made GIST an ideal candidate for evaluation of new targeted therapeutic approaches. Clinical studies demonstrated that, with imatinib, objective responses can be reached in more than 50% of patients with advanced GIST. Furthermore, even in those patients with stable disease, long-term tumor control could be achieved. Therefore imatinib at a dose of 400 mg/day is now the standard treatment of advanced GIST in which RO-resection cannot be reached. As imatinib resistance in GIST occurs at a median of 18 to 26 months, further targeted therapies have been explored. Sunitinib, another tyrosine kinase inhibitor, seems to be useful especially in patients with exon 9 mutations of c-kit, who usually have a worse response to imatinib. This might indicate that more exactly targeted therapies in GIST might improve clinical outcomes in the future.
The BioRad BioPlex 2200 Vasculitis kit demonstrates excellent relative sensitivity and relative specificity for the semi-quantitative detection of IgG autoantibodies to MPO, PR3 and GBM. The fully-automated platform simultaneously measures three analytes in a single tube, offering superior advantage in speed and ease of use over current assays. The availability of a fully-automated platform with 24-hour availability for these three antibodies may be of considerable value in the differential diagnosis of patients with rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
Biopsies, excisions, and other invasive cutaneous procedures are daily occurrences in dermatology clinics. Each procedure requires subsequent placement of a bandage; physicians can be left with an overwhelming choice of supplies for this purpose. We present a universal bandage kit as a resource for physicians in search of a concise guide for purchasing materials and educating nursing staff. These few supplies meet all bandaging needs that arise in a dermatology clinic.
Mastocytosis is a heterogeneous group of hematopoietic disorders characterized by abnormal growth and accumulation of mast cells (MC) in one or more organs. Clinical symptoms occur as a result of the release of chemical mediators and/or of pathologic infiltration of MC in various tissues. Although the initial events leading to mastocytosis have not yet been unraveled, acquired alterations in the c-kit gene coding for the receptor of stem cell factor (SCF), a major cytokine involved in MC growth, have been described in a significant number of patients. Of particular interest are point mutations resulting in a constitutively activated SCF receptor. Such mutations are probably involved in the abnormal (SCF-independent) proliferation of MC in these patients. New therapeutic strategies may be envisaged to inhibit the deregulated kinase activity of these mutant forms of c-kit.
Metastatic melanoma is a heterogenous disease that has served as a model for the development of both targeted therapy and immunotherapy. KIT-mutated melanoma represents a rare subset, most commonly arising from acral, mucosal, and chronically sun-damaged skin. Additionally, KIT alterations are enriched in the triple wild-type subtype of cutaneous melanoma. Activating alterations of KIT-a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase important for cell development, growth, and differentiation-have been shown to be critical to oncogenesis across many tumor subtypes. Following the successes of BRAF-targeted therapy in melanoma and KIT-targeted therapy in gastrointestinal stromal tumors, small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeting KIT have been examined in KIT-mutated melanoma. KIT inhibitors that have been investigated in relevant clinical trials in advanced melanoma include imatinib, sunitinib, dasatinib, and nilotinib. In these studies, selected patients with KIT-mutated melanoma were shown to be responsive to therapy with KIT inhibition, especially patients with L576P and K642E mutations. This has led to the incorporation of KIT-targeted therapy in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for systemic therapy for metastatic or unresectable melanoma. Current research and development efforts include novel KIT-targeted therapies and testing KIT inhibitors in combination with immunotherapy.
Melanoma, originating from epidermal melanocytes, is a heterogeneous disease that has the highest mortality rate among all types of skin cancers. Numerous studies have revealed the cause of this cancer as related to various somatic driver mutations, including alterations in KIT-a proto-oncogene encoding for a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase. Although accounting for only 3% of all melanomas, mutations in c-KIT are mostly derived from acral, mucosal, and chronically sun-damaged melanomas. As an important factor for cell differentiation, proliferation, and survival, inhibition of c-KIT has been exploited for clinical trials in advanced melanoma. Here, apart from the molecular background of c-KIT and its cellular functions, we will review the wide distribution of alterations in KIT with a catalogue of more than 40 mutations reported in various articles and case studies. Additionally, we will summarize the association of KIT mutations with clinicopathologic features (age, sex, melanoma subtypes, anatomic location, etc.), and the differences of mutation rate among subgroups. Finally, several therapeutic trials of c-KIT inhibitors, including imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, and sunitinib, will be analyzed for their success rates and limitations in advanced melanoma treatment. These not only emphasize c-KIT as an attractive target for personalized melanoma therapy but also propose the requirement for additional investigational studies to develop novel therapeutic trials co-targeting c-KIT and other cytokines such as members of signaling pathways and immune systems.
Although lentigines are usually benign, they can be associated with a number of genetic syndromes in which neoplasms and other multi-system pathological processes occur. Here, we report the case of a 6-year-old girl who presented with atypical lentiginosis and hyperpigmentation caused by a de novo genetic variant in the KIT gene.
Dedicated facilities of a high standard should be available for the examination of complainants and suspects where forensic samples are to be taken to ensure that the risk of contamination is kept to a minimum. The need for a decontamination kit came about because of the variable quality of examination facilities for complainants of sexual assault and suspects (persons of interest) within NSW. Overall the kit has been found to be useful and easy to use but there is still a need to increase awareness of its availability.
