Kallikrein-1; Glandular kallikreins cleave Met-Lys and Arg-Ser bonds in kininogen to release Lys-bradykinin; Belongs to the peptidase S1 family. Kallikrein subfamily.
The tissue kallikrein‑kinin system (KKS) is an endogenous multiprotein metabolic cascade which is implicated in the homeostasis of the cardiovascular, renal and central nervous system. Human tissue kallikrein (KLK1) is a serine protease, component of the KKS that has been demonstrated to exert pleiotropic beneficial effects in protection from tissue injury through its anti‑inflammatory, anti‑apoptotic, anti‑fibrotic and anti‑oxidative actions. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) or endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) constitute populations of well‑characterized, readily obtainable multipotent cells with special immunomodulatory, migratory and paracrine properties rendering them appealing potential therapeutics in experimental animal models of various diseases. Genetic modification enhances their inherent properties. MSCs or EPCs are competent cellular vehicles for drug and/or gene delivery in the targeted treatment of diseases. KLK1 gene delivery using adenoviral vectors or KLK1 protein infusion into injured tissues of animal models has provided particularly encouraging results in attenuating or reversing myocardial, renal and cerebrovascular ischemic phenotype and tissue damage, thus paving the way for the administration of genetically modified MSCs or EPCs with the human tissue KLK1 gene. Engraftment of KLK1‑modified MSCs and/or KLK1‑modified EPCs resulted in advanced beneficial outcome regarding heart and kidney protection and recovery from ischemic insults. Collectively, findings from pre‑clinical studies raise the possibility that tissue KLK1 may be a novel future therapeutic target in the treatment of a wide range of cardiovascular, cerebrovascular and renal disorders.
OBJECTIVE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a complex, multifactorial, polygenic disease. The rate of occurrence of COPD in the Kashi population (Uyghur) is significantly higher than that observed nationwide. The identification of COPD-related genes in the Chinese Uyghur population could provide useful insights that could help us understand this phenomenon. Our previous whole-exome sequencing study of three Uyghur families with COPD demonstrated that 72 mutations in 55 genes might be associated with COPD; these included rs15783G > A in the anoctamin 3 (ANO3) gene/mucin 15 (MUC15) gene, rs1800517G > A in the collagen type IV alpha 4 chain (COL4A4) gene, rs11960G > A in the ribosome binding protein 1 (RRBP1) gene, and rs5516C > G in the kallikrein 1 (KLK1) gene. This case-control study aimed to further validate the association of the four mutations with COPD in the Chinese Uyghur population. METHODS: Sanger sequencing was used for the genotyping of four polymorphisms (ANO3/MUC15 rs15783, COL4A4 rs1800517, RRBP1 rs11960, and KLK1 rs5516) in 541 unrelated Uyghur COPD patients and 534 Uyghur healthy controls. We then conducted stratified analyses based on the smoking status and airflow limitation severity, to explore the correlation between selected gene polymorphisms and COPD. RESULTS: ANO3/MUC15 rs15783 and KLK1 rs5516 polymorphisms could significantly reduce COPD risk (p < 0.05), but COL4A4 rs1800517 and RRBP1 rs11960 polymorphisms were not correlated with COPD in the entire population. In a stratified analysis of smoking status, non-smokers with the ANO3/MUC15 rs15783G/G genotype (OR = 0.63, p = 0.032) or COL4A4 rs1800517 allele G (OR = 0.80, p = 0.023) had a reduced risk of COPD. Smokers with the RRBP1 rs11960A/G genotype had a lower risk of COPD (OR = 0.41, p = 0.025). The KLK1 rs5516G > C polymorphism was associated with a decreased risk of COPD (OR < 1, p < 0.05), irrespective of the smoking status of individuals. No significant association with COPD severity was observed in individuals with these four polymorphisms (p > 0.05). CONCLUSION: We identified four previously unreported mutations (ANO3/MUC15 rs15783, COL4A4 rs1800517, RRBP1 rs11960, and KLK1 rs5516) that might decrease the COPD risk in individuals with different smoking statuses in the Chinese Uyghur population. Our findings provide new light for the genetic risk factors associated with the occurrence of COPD.
RNA activation, as a method of regulating gene expression at the transcriptional level, is far less widely used than RNA interference because of the insufficient understanding of the mechanism and the unstable success rate. It is necessary to analyze the failure cases of RNA activation to promote the application of RNA activation. When we validated the saRNAs designed to induce KLK1 expression, we found that saKLK1-374 can upregulate KLK1 expression in prostate tumor cell lines, but failed in normal prostate cell lines. To determine whether the RNA activation of normal cells is difficult only when the target gene is KLK1, we tested p21(WAF1/CIP1) as the target gene in RNA activation experiments of normal and cancer prostate cells. Next, to determine whether the above phenomenon exists in other tissues, we used normal and cancerous bladder cells to perform RNA activation experiments with KLK1 and p21(WAF1/CIP1) as targets. We have also extended the time from transfection to detection to evaluate whether a longer incubation time can make saRNA upregulate the target genes in normal cells. Fluorescently labeled dsRNA was transfected to evaluate the transfection efficiency, and the expression of Ago2 and IPO8 necessary for RNA activation was also detected. The p21(WAF1/CIP1) could be significantly upregulated by saRNA in prostate cancer cells, but not in normal prostate cells. The expression of KLK1 in bladder-derived cell lines was extremely low and could not be induced by saRNA. The p21(WAF1/CIP1) was upregulated by saRNA to a higher extent in bladder cancer cells but to a lower extent in normal bladder cells. Prolonging incubation time could not make saRNA induce the expression of target genes in normal cells. Compared with tumor cells used in this study, normal cells had lower transfection efficiency or lower expression of Ago2 and IPO8. Although it has been currently found that normal cell lines in the prostate and bladder might be more difficult to be successfully induced target gene expression by exogenous saRNA than tumor cells due to low transfection efficiency or Ago2 and IPO8 expression, it is not certain that this phenomenon occurs in other types of tissue. However, researchers still need to pay attention to the transfection efficiency and/or the expression levels of Ago2 and IPO8 when conducting RNA activation experiments in normal cells.
INTRODUCTION: The study aims to confirm the association of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with serum angiotensin II (AngII), kallikrein1 (KLK1), and ACE/KLK1 polymorphisms. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Serum AngII/KLK1 levels and ACE and KLK1 genotypes were determined in 208 patients with AMI and 216 normal controls. Binary logistic regression was used for data analysis. RESULTS: The differences in serum AngII levels were statistically significant between the groups. After adjusting for potential confounding factors, high serum levels of AngII and KLK1 significantly increased the risk of AMI. The individuals with ACE DD and KLK1 GG genotypes significantly increased the risk of AMI compared with those harboring the ACE II and KLK1 AA genotypes (OR = 8.77, 95% CI = 1.74-44.16). CONCLUSIONS: (1) Increasing the serum levels of AngII increased the risk of AMI. (2) The risk of AMI increased significantly when the serum levels of AngII and KLK1 simultaneously increased. (3) Individuals with the combined genotypes of ACE DD and KLK1 GG showed significantly increased risk of AMI compared with those with the combined genotypes of ACE II and KLK1 AA.
Previous reports have shown that polymorphism of the human tissue kallikrein 1 (KLK1) A1789G gene is associated with susceptibility to hypertension. The current study aimed to confirm the association between the polymorphism in KLK1 and coronary artery stenosis (CAS). A total of 458 patients with CAS and 482 controls were used in a case-control study carried out between January 2008 and January 2011 at the Qilu Hospital (Jinan, China). Analyses of the KLK1 A1789G genotype were performed, and the logistic regression model was used to assess the odds ratio related to CAS. The results showed that the frequencies of the AA, AG, and GG genotypes were 11.4, 50.2, and 38.4%, respectively, in patients with CAS, and 21.2, 47.7, and 31.1%, respectively, in controls. Compared with the AA genotype, the GG and AG/GG genotypes were associated with a significantly increased risk of CAS. Furthermore, the AG and GG genotypes combined with smoking showed a remarkable increase in the risk for CAS. In conclusion, polymorphism of the KLK1 A1789G gene is associated with CAS, and smoking combined with the KLK1 GG genotype was significantly associated with an increased risk of CAS. This information is extremely important to prevention strategies for CAS.
High altitude-associated polycythemia (HAPC) is a very common disease. However, it the disease is still unmanageable and the related molecular mechanisms remain largely unclear. In the present study, we aimed to explore the molecular mechanisms responsible for the development of HAPC using transcriptome analysis. Transcriptome analysis was conducted in 3 pairs of gastric mucosa tissues from patients with HAPC and healthy residents at a similar altitude. Endoscopy and histopathological analyses were used to examine the injury to gastric tissues. Molecular remodeling was performed for the interaction between different KLK members and cholesterol. HAPC was found to lead to morphological changes and pathological damage to the gastric mucosa of patients. A total of 10,304 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. Among these genes, 4,941 DEGs were upregulated, while 5,363 DEGs were downregulated in the patients with HAPC (fold change >/=2, P<0.01 and FDR <0.01). In particular, the kallikrein gene cluster (KLK1/3/7/8/12) was upregulated >17-fold. All the members had high-score binding cholesterol, particularly for the polymers of KLK7. The kallikrein gene cluster (KLK1/3/7/8/12) is on chromosome 19q13.3-13.4. The elevated levels of KLK1, KLK3, KLK7, KLK8 and KLK12 may be closely associated with the hypertension, inflammation, obesity and other gastric injuries associated with polycythemia. The interaction of KLKs and cholesterol maybe play an important role in the development of hypertension. The findings of the present study revealed that HAPC induces gastric injury by upregulating the kallikrein gene cluster (KLK1/3/7/8/12), which can bind cholesterol and result in kallikrein hypertension. These findings provide some basic information for understanding the molecular mechanisms responsible for HAPC and HAPC-related diseases.
OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerosis underlies aortic aneurysm (AA) and atherosclerotic stenosis (AS). Kallikrein-1 (KLK1) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) are 2 key molecules in kallikrein-kinin systems and renin-angiotensin systems, respectively, which are responsible for maintaining vascular balance and stability, playing important roles in atherosclerosis. We aimed to assess the involvement of single nucleotide polymorphism rs5516 in KLK1 as well as the insertion/deletion rs4646994 polymorphism in ACE in the development of AA and AS. METHODS: We enrolled Chinese Han patients with AA (N = 408) and AS (N = 432), as well as healthy controls (N = 408). Clinical and demographic characteristics were assessed. Genotypes were analyzed with recessive and dominant models. RESULTS: The rs5516 G allele of KLK1 was significantly associated with AA (P < 0.001), and the D allele of ACE was significantly associated with both AA (P < 0.001) and AS (P < 0.001). The GG and DD genotypes were significantly associated with both AA (P = 0.013) and AS (P < 0.001) in a recessive model, and were synergistic with hypertension in AA patients, but not in AS. Patients with CC/DD, CG/ID, or GG/II genotypes, which were synergistic with hypertension, had a greater risk of developing AA, while CC/DD, CG/DD, GG/ID, or GG/DD genotypes, which were not synergistic with hypertension, contributed to the development of AS. CONCLUSION: The KLK1 rs5516 G allele is closely associated with AA, and the ACE D allele is closely related to AA and AS.
Tissue kallikrein, kallikrein-related peptidases (KLKs), and plasma kallikrein form the largest group of serine proteases in the human genome, sharing many structural and functional properties. Several KLK transcripts have been found aberrantly expressed in numerous human malignancies, confirming their prognostic or/and diagnostic values. However, the process of alternative splicing can now be studied in-depth due to the development of Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). In the present study, we used NGS to discover novel transcripts of the KLK1 and KLK2 genes, after nested touchdown PCR. Bioinformatics analysis and PCR experiments revealed a total of eleven novel KLK transcripts (two KLK1 and nine KLK2 transcripts). In addition, the expression profiles of each novel transcript were investigated with nested PCR experiments using variant-specific primers. Since KLKs are implicated in human malignancies, qualifying as potential biomarkers, the quantification of the presented novel transcripts in human samples may have clinical applications in different types of cancer.
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common form of kidney cancer, for which there is no biochemical marker. We and others have previously shown that a prostate specific antigen (PSA)-like protein is elevated in the serum of women with RCC. PSA is a member of the tissue kallikrein (KLK) gene family of enzymes. We have constructed a RCC cDNA expression library and screened it for PSA and KLK expression to determine whether they may be responsible for this PSA-like activity. Since immunoscreening of the RCC library for expressed PSA-like proteins was unsuccessful, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of the RCC cDNA library was performed using universal KLK primers, directed to the common regions in exon 3 and exon 5 of KLK1, KLK2 and KLK3. Sequences identical to all three KLKs were present in the RCC cDNA library. In addition, a novel KLK1 transcript with a 104 base pair deletion in exon 4 that predicted a C terminal sequence minus the crucial Ser190, was detected. The role of these tissue kallikreins in RCC and the significance of the variant KLK1 transcript is yet to be established. It is still unclear which of these gene products, if any, was detected in the sera of the women with RCC.
Renal kallikrein is a component of the kallikrein-kinin-system (KKS). Kallikrein has been shown to cleave the precursor kininogen to release small kinins, which cause vasodilatation, increased diuresis and natriuresis. We have studied a normal restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) at the renal kallikrein locus (KLK1), detectable with the restriction enzyme TaqI. In one series of 167 unrelated individuals we found a trend towards an association between genotypes in this polymorphism and level of diastolic blood pressure (DBP), but in two other series comprising 123 and 213 unrelated individuals, respectively, we found no suggestion of an association. Since the three series did not exhibit a consistent pattern of association between DBP levels and genotypes in this RFLP, we conclude that the association that appeared in one of the series was probably a chance event. There was no difference between genotypes in any of the three series, with respect to systolic blood pressure (SBP). In two series of, respectively, 157 and 120 complete monozygotic (MZ) twin pairs, there was no difference between genotypes with respect to within-pair variation in SBP or DBP. This indicates that normal KLK1 genes, expressed as variants in this RFLP, do not participate in the determination of the limits within which life-style factors may cause blood pressure (BP) changes. We conclude that neither "level gene" effects nor "variability gene" effects at the KLK1 locus are detectable with the polymorphism analyzed, in the Norwegian population.
We describe a highly polymorphic microsatellite repeat sequence, KLK1 AC, which is located 3' to the human glandular kallikrein gene (KLK1) at 19q13.3-13.4. A multiplex PCR was developed to simultaneously genotype the KLK1 AC repeat length polymorphism and a similar repeat at the adjacent APOC2 locus at 19q13.2. Genotypes from these two loci in the 40 large kindred pedigrees from the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain were used in conjunction with the background genetic map to establish a multipoint linkage map. The KLK1 locus was also localized physically using somatic cell hybrid DNA templates for polymerase chain reaction analysis. Both genetic and physical mapping studies are consistent with the assignment cen-APOC2-KLK1-D19522-qter. The linkage map places KLK1 approximately 10 cM distal to APOC2. These markers therefore flank the myotonic dystrophy gene and may be useful for diagnosis.
