Tyrosine-protein kinase Lyn; Non-receptor tyrosine-protein kinase that transmits signals from cell surface receptors and plays an important role in the regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses, hematopoiesis, responses to growth factors and cytokines, integrin signaling, but also responses to DNA damage and genotoxic agents. Functions primarily as negative regulator, but can also function as activator, depending on the context. Required for the initiation of the B-cell response, but also for its down-regulation and termination. Plays an important role in the regulation of B-c [...] 
The role of Lyn, both a positive and a negative regulator of B and myeloid cells, in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) has not been well characterized. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Nguyen et al. demonstrated that Lyn in macrophages rather than in CLL cells is critical for the malignancy.
Microenvironmental bystander cells are essential for the progression of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). We have discovered previously that LYN kinase promotes the formation of a microenvironmental niche for CLL. Here we provide mechanistic evidence that LYN regulates the polarization of stromal fibroblasts to support leukemic progression. LYN is overexpressed in fibroblasts of lymph nodes of CLL patients. LYN-deficient stromal cells reduce CLL growth in vivo. LYN-deficient fibroblasts show markedly reduced leukemia feeding capacity in vitro. Multi-omics profiling reveals that LYN regulates the polarization of fibroblasts towards an inflammatory cancer-associated phenotype through modulation of cytokine secretion and extracellular matrix composition. Mechanistically, LYN deletion reduces inflammatory signaling including reduction of c-JUN expression, which in turn augments the expression of Thrombospondin-1, which binds to CD47 thereby impairing CLL viability. Together, our findings suggest that LYN is essential for rewiring fibroblasts towards a leukemia-supportive phenotype.
Neutrophilic inflammation is a hallmark of many monogenic autoinflammatory diseases; pathomechanisms that regulate extravasation of damaging immune cells into surrounding tissues are poorly understood. Here we identified three unrelated boys with perinatal-onset of neutrophilic cutaneous small vessel vasculitis and systemic inflammation. Two patients developed liver fibrosis in their first year of life. Next-generation sequencing identified two de novo truncating variants in the Src-family tyrosine kinase, LYN, p.Y508*, p.Q507* and a de novo missense variant, p.Y508F, that result in constitutive activation of Lyn kinase. Functional studies revealed increased expression of ICAM-1 on induced patient-derived endothelial cells (iECs) and of beta2-integrins on patient neutrophils that increase neutrophil adhesion and vascular transendothelial migration (TEM). Treatment with TNF inhibition improved systemic inflammation; and liver fibrosis resolved on treatment with the Src kinase inhibitor dasatinib. Our findings reveal a critical role for Lyn kinase in modulating inflammatory signals, regulating microvascular permeability and neutrophil recruitment, and in promoting hepatic fibrosis.
The human pathogen Helicobacter pylori colonizes the mucous layer of the stomach. During parasitic infection, freely swimming bacteria adhere to the gastric epithelial cells and trigger intracellular signalling pathways. This process requires the translocation of the effector protein CagA into the host cell through a specialized type IV secretion system encoded in the cag pathogenicity island. Following transfer, CagA is phosphorylated on tyrosine residues by a host cell kinase. Here, we describe how the tyrosine phosphorylation of CagA is restricted to a previously identified repeated sequence called D1. This sequence is located in the C-terminal half of the protein and contains the five-amino-acid motif EPIYA, which is amplified by duplications in a large fraction of clinical isolates. Tyrosine phosphorylation of CagA is essential for the activation process that leads to dramatic changes in the morphology of cells growing in culture. In addition, we observed that two members of the src kinases family, c-Src and Lyn, account for most of the CagA-specific kinase activity in host cell lysates. Thus, CagA translocation followed by tyrosine phosphorylation at the EPIYA motifs promotes a growth factor-like response with intense cytoskeletal rearrangements, cell elongation effects and increased cellular motility.
Activated B cells increase central carbon metabolism to fulfill their bioenergetic demands, yet the mechanistic basis for this, as well as metabolic regulation in B cells, remains largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that B-cell activation reprograms the tricarboxylic acid cycle and boosts the expression of fumarate hydratase (FH), leading to decreased cellular fumarate abundance. Fumarate accumulation by FH inhibition or dimethyl-fumarate treatment suppresses B-cell activation, proliferation and antibody production. Mechanistically, fumarate is a covalent inhibitor of tyrosine kinase LYN, a key component of the BCR signaling pathway. Fumarate can directly succinate LYN at C381 and abrogate LYN activity, resulting in a block to B-cell activation and function in vitro and in vivo. Therefore, our findings uncover a previously unappreciated metabolic regulation of B cells, and reveal LYN is a natural sensor of fumarate, connecting cellular metabolism to B-cell antigen receptor signaling.
