72 kDa type IV collagenase; Ubiquitinous metalloproteinase that is involved in diverse functions such as remodeling of the vasculature, angiogenesis, tissue repair, tumor invasion, inflammation, and atherosclerotic plaque rupture. As well as degrading extracellular matrix proteins, can also act on several nonmatrix proteins such as big endothelial 1 and beta- type CGRP promoting vasoconstriction. Also cleaves KISS at a Gly-|-Leu bond. Appears to have a role in myocardial cell death pathways. Contributes to myocardial oxidative stress by regulating the activity of GSK3beta. Cleaves GSK3 [...] 
Matrixmetalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of secreted or membrane-associated proteins capable of digesting extracellular matrix components. The importance of MMPs in tumor development and invasion is well known. Recent studies have strongly indicated the presence of a functional complex consisting of alpha(v)beta3 integrin, membrane type-1 metalloproteinase-2 (MT1-MMP), and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP-2) on tumor cell surface, which helps the activation of MMP-2. In this article, we report on the association of active MMP-2 with the membrane fraction of human cervical cancer cells. The association of MMP-2 with alpha(v)beta3 integrin and the expression of membrane type MT1-MMP strongly indicate the role of alpha(v)beta3/MT1-MMP/TIMP-2 complex in the activation of MMP-2 in cervical cancer tissue membrane fraction. The membrane-associated activated MMP-2 may have a role in the migration of tumor cells during invasion.
In recent years, the application of nanoimaging technology on standardize tumor diagnosis has become a new research hotspot, especially nanoprobes. Our research group has synthesized a kind of nanocarrier, mPEG2000-GPLGIAGQ-DSPE, which has the characteristic of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) sensitive ability in tumor microenvironment. Meanwhile, the encapsulation method is adopted to prepare MMP2-sensitive tumor-targeted prussian blue fluorescent nanoprobe with mPEG2000-GPLGIAGQ-DSPE as the carrier. On the one hand, this novel nanoprobe not only can effectively improve the solubility of prussian blue, but is non-toxic and safe for cells. On the other hand, octapeptide (GPLGIAGQ) in mPEG2000-GPLGIAGQ-DSPE nanocarrier can specifically respond to MMP2 in tumor cells to release prussian blue, and achieve targeted intelligent imaging of tumor cells.
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) play a pivotal role in the regulation of cell invasion. Placental trophoblast cell invasion is a precisely regulated event. Dysregulation of MMPs has been linked to various placental diseases. Growth differentiation factor-8 (GDF-8), also known as myostatin, is a member of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily. GDF-8 and its putative receptors are expressed in human extravillous cytotrophoblast cells (EVTs). Although the pro-invasive effect of GDF-8 in human EVT cells has been recently reported, the underlying molecular mechanism remains largely unknown. In this study, we investigate the effects of GDF-8 on the expression of the two most important MMPs, MMP2 and MMP9, in the HTR-8/SVneo human EVT cell line. Our results show that GDF-8 significantly upregulates the expression of MMP2. The expression of MMP9 is not affected by GDF-8. Using a siRNA-mediated knockdown approach, we reveal that the stimulatory effect of GDF-8 on MMP2 expression is mediated by the ALK5-SMAD2/3 signaling pathway. Additionally, the knockdown of MMP2 attenuates the GDF-8-induced cell invasiveness. These findings deepen our understanding of the biological roles of GDF-8 in the regulation of human trophoblast cell invasion.
PURPOSE: To investigate the possible association of the matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2)-1306C/T polymorphism with the risk of ischemic retinal vein occlusion (iRVO). METHODS: A total of 69 patients with RVO were enrolled in this study (43 with non-iRVO and 26 with iRVO). All subjects were screened for hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, history of stroke, anticoagulant medication, smoking status and glaucoma. The genotyping of MMP2-1306C/T polymorphism was performed using PCR-RFLP-based methods. RESULTS: MMP2-1306C/T T allele carriers (CT+TT) were statistically significant associated with a higher risk of iRVO compared to CC genotype in the overall RVO group (odds ratio = 3.91, p = 0.015, 95% confidence interval:1.30-11.79). Analysis, following stratification by age revealed that T allele carriers had a statistically significant increased risk of iRVO compared to C allele carriers only in RVO patients <75 years old. CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that MMP2-1306C/T polymorphism is a likely predisposing factor for iRVO in patients <75 years old. This is the first study attempting association of a gene polymorphism with the prevalence of iRVO.
Preeclampsia (PE) is a serious pregnancy-related syndrome, which is characterized by gestational hypertension and proteinuria. The microRNA-93 (miR-93) is upregulated in the maternal plasma of patients with PE. However, the functional role of miR-93 in PE remains unknown. Here, we identified that miR-93 inhibits trophoblastic invasion, which is correlated with PE development. In immortalized trophoblast cell lines, transwell assay showed that miR-93 mimics significantly inhibited the migration and invasion of immortalized trophoblast cells, whereas miR-93 inhibitors significantly promoted cell migration and invasion. Moreover, luciferase assays confirmed that miR-93 directly bound to the 3'untranslated region of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), and western blotting showed that miR-93 suppressed the expression of MMP-2 at the protein levels. This study indicated that miR-93 inhibits MMP-2 and reduces migration and invasion of immortalized trophoblast cells. Thus, miR-93 may represent a potential therapeutic target for PE intervention.
Hypertension is one of the leading risk factors for the development of heart failure. Despite being a multifactorial disease, in recent years, preclinical and clinical studies suggest strong evidence of the pivotal role of inflammatory cells and cytokines in the remodeling process and cardiac dysfunction. During the heart remodeling, activation of extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) occurs, with MMP-2 being one of the main proteases secreted by cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial and inflammatory cells in cardiac tissue. In this review, we will address the process of cardiac remodeling and injury induced by the increase in MMP-2 and the main signaling pathways involving cytokines and inflammatory cells in the process of transcriptional, secretion and activation of MMP-2. In addition, an interaction and coordinated action between MMP-2 and inflammation are explored and significant in maintaining the cardiac cycle. These observations suggest that new therapeutic opportunities targeting MMP-2 could be used to reduce inflammatory biomarkers and reduce cardiac damage in hypertension.
Raised endothelial shear stress is protective against atherosclerosis but such protection may be lost at sites of inflammation. We found that four splice variants of the peptidase inhibitor 16 (PI16) mRNA are among the most highly shear stress regulated transcripts in human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs), in vitro but that expression is reduced by inflammatory mediators TNFalpha and IL-1beta. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that PI16 is expressed in human coronary endothelium and in a subset of neointimal cells and medial smooth muscle cells. Adenovirus-mediated PI16 overexpression inhibits HCAEC migration and secreted matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. Moreover, PI16 inhibits MMP2 in part by binding an exposed peptide loop above the active site. Our results imply that, at high endothelial shear stress, PI16 contributes to inhibition of protease activity; protection that can be reversed during inflammation.
We performed immunohistochemical study combined with morphometrical analyses in order to examine the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9 using 55 human skin wounds of different ages: group I, 0-3 days (n = 16); II, 4-7 days (n = 11); III, 9-14 days (n = 16); and IV, 17-21 days (n = 12). Immunopositive reactions for MMP-2 were observed in all human skin specimens including uninjured skin as control. The number of MMP-2(+) macrophages was significantly increased in accordance with wound ages. In contrast to MMP-2, no MMP-9(+) signals were detected in uninjured and wound specimens aged less than 1 day. However, the number of MMP-9(+) macrophages profoundly appeared in groups II and III. Morphometrically, in all of wound samples aged 9-12 days, MMP-2(+) cell number was more than 20. On the contrary, most of the remaining samples had <20 positive cells. However, only one sample (a 7-day-old wound) showed 21 positive cells. Thus, with regard to practical applicability with forensic safety, MMP-2(+) macrophages of >20 would indicate a wound age of 7-12 days. Additionally, 10 out of 12 wound specimens aged 9-12 days showed the MMP-2(+) cell number of >25, implying that MMP-2(+) cell number of >25 would indicate the wound age of 9-12 days. On the contrary, all wound samples aged 3-14 days except for only one sample had MMP-9(+) cell number of >30, indicating that MMP-9(+) cell number of >30 would indicate the wound age of 3-14 days. Collectively, MMP-2 seemed to be more distinct marker, compared with MMP-9.
MMP2, a Zn(2+)-dependent metalloproteinase, is related to cancer and angiogenesis. Inhibition of this enzyme might result in a potential antimetastatic drug to leverage the anticancer drug armory. In silico or computer-aided ligand-based drug design is a method of rational drug design that takes multiple chemometrics (i.e., multi-quantitative structure-activity relationship methods) into account for virtually selecting or developing a series of probable selective MMP2 inhibitors. Though existing matrix metalloproteinase inhibitors have shown plausible pan-matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, they have resulted in various adverse effects leading to their being rescinded in later phases of clinical trials. Therefore a review of the ligand-based designing methods of MMP2 inhibitors would result in an explicit route map toward successfully designing and synthesizing novel and selective MMP2 inhibitors.
