Myeloperoxidase heavy chain; Part of the host defense system of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. It is responsible for microbicidal activity against a wide range of organisms. In the stimulated PMN, MPO catalyzes the production of hypohalous acids, primarily hypochlorous acid in physiologic situations, and other toxic intermediates that greatly enhance PMN microbicidal activity; Belongs to the peroxidase family. XPO subfamily.
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis is a necrotising systemic vasculitis predominantly affecting small and medium sized vessels. It is predominantly associated with antibodies directed against proteinase 3, but a small number of individuals with this disease have antibodies directed against myeloperoxidase. The premise of this paper is to explore the possibility that these two serotypes maybe two separate diseases. There is evidence that the same single nucleotide polymorphisms in the TLR 9 gene is associated with increased risk for PR3 ANCA positivity but protects against MPO ANCA positivity. There is some evidence that MPO ANCA positive GPA disease may be 'limited' in its expression and be associated with the more indolent phenotype. The genotype may affect the serotype, and the serotype might affect the phenotype. There has been limited success in identifying how the difference in phenotype might affect outcomes. We are at a very early stage in our understanding of how these serotypes might be treated differently. This paper attempts to critically appraise the evidence available so far.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis (AAV) is a systemic disease that causes vasculitis in various organs. Although the cause of the onset is unknown, infection has been reported to be a causative factor. The subsequent cytokine storm triggered by the immune response against SARS-CoV-2 infection has been reported to lead to symptoms being more severe. We herein report our experience with the onset of AAV following COVID-19 infection. We also report the course of anti-SARS-CoV-2 serum antibody titers following induction therapy, which suggests that vaccination and education concerning standard precautions are necessary in patients who require immunosuppressive therapy, even after COVID-19 infection.
An underestimated side effect of rituximab is late-onset neutropenia (R-LON), which often resolves spontaneously and rarely results in a severe infection. We herein report a case of febrile neutropenia due to R-LON in a 91-year-old woman with renal failure who was treated with rituximab to induce remission of myeloperoxidase antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies-associated vasculitis. Fifty-four days after the last rituximab administration, the patient was hospitalized for febrile neutropenia due to R-LON, which improved with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and antibiotics. Although R-LON may resolve spontaneously and remain unnoticed, it can cause severe infections in the elderly and patients with renal failure.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of occupational exposure to anaesthetic gases on myeloperoxidase activity, oxidative and antioxidative parameters in operating room personnel. METHODS: The cross-sectional study was conducted at Yuzuncu Yil University, Van, Turkey, in May 2011, and comprised equal number of operating room and non-operating room personnel. Serum myeloperoxidase activity, sulfhydryl group levels, lipid hydroperoxide levels and catalase activity were determined. SPSS 11 was used for data analysis. RESULTS: There were 64 subjects; 32(50%) each in the two groups. Myeloperoxidase activity and lipid hydroperoxide levels were significantly higher in operating room personnel than in the non-operating room personnel (p<0.001; p<0.001), while catalase activity and sulfhydryl group levels were significantly lower (p<0.009; p<0.003). Catalase activity negatively correlated with lipid hydroperoxide levels in operating room personnel (r=-0.293; p=0.018). Myeloperoxidase activity negatively correlated with sulfhydryl group levels in operating room personnel (r=-0.267; p=0.031). CONCLUSIONS: Operating room personnel exhibited higher oxidative stress, which may be due to the oxidative effect of anaesthetic gases.
Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a recurrent and sometimes life-threatening sterile pustular disease. Because interleukin (IL)-36 is the central cytokine in disease formation, spesolimab, which interferes with IL-36 receptor signaling, is highly effective. Here, we report a patient with GPP with a heterozygous hypomorphic MPO variant refractory to intravenous spesolimab. Although spesolimab showed excellent clinical efficacy in resolving pre-existing pustules and erythema, it did not suppress the emergence of new pustules and erythema, which did not decrease the peripheral blood neutrophil count, therefore bimekizumab, an anti-IL-17A/IL-17F antibody, was administered after the second spesolimab infusion, which resolved the pustules and erythema. We discuss the possible reasons for the resistance mechanism to spesolimab.
Despite that clinical trials have been examining the safety profile of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) vaccines, there are concerns about long-term side effects as the number of vaccinations increases. Herein, we report a case of new-onset renal-limited anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis after booster vaccination with the mRNA 1273 (Moderna) vaccine. A 72-year-old woman with no specific past history, and who had a normal renal function, developed ANCA-associated vasculitis following heterologous booster with mRNA1273 (Moderna) vaccine. After a kidney biopsy, she was diagnosed with ANCA-associated pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis. Her renal function and constitutional symptoms have been improved with treatment with plasmapheresis, intravenous cyclophosphamide and steroid pulse therapy (intravenous 500 mg of methylprednisolone sodium succinate for 3 days) followed by a reduced steroid regimen.
We present a patient with systemic symptoms including 4 months of dyspnoea worsened with exertion, fatigue, rhinorrhoea, intermittent facial swelling, generalised lymphadenopathy and weight loss. Laboratory studies demonstrated proteinuria and eosinophilia. His serology was consistent with Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) reactivation. A lymph node biopsy was consistent with EBV-associated reactive lymphoid hyperplasia. He was told to continue symptomatic treatment for EBV infection. After several admissions, vasculitis workup and myeloperoxidase-antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA) studies were positive. Evolution of clinical symptoms, laboratory parameters and our literature review suggested the diagnosis of EBV-associated ANCA vasculitis. Steroids were started after the patient continued to deteriorate; the viral load started increasing, so we added valganciclovir with favourable clinical response and no relapse during the follow-up for 6 months. This suggests that with evidence of viraemia (primary or reactivation), antiviral treatment likely has clinical benefit while immunosuppression is being considered.
BACKGROUND: Pulmonary-renal syndrome associated with anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies, also known as Goodpasture's syndrome, is a rare but acute and life-threatening condition. One third of patients presenting as anti-GBM antibody positive pulmonary-renal syndrome or rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis are also tested positive for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Whilst anti-GBM disease is considered a non-relapsing condition, the long-term course of double-positive patients is less predictable. CASE PRESENTATION: We report a patient with such dual positivity, who presented with pulmonary hemorrhage, crescentic glomerulonephritis and membranous nephropathy. Plasmapheresis in combination with immunosuppressive therapy led to a rapid remission but the disease relapsed after two years. The serum of the patient was tested positive for antibodies to human lysosomal membrane protein 2 (hLAMP2), a novel autoantigen in patients with active small-vessel vasculitis (SVV). The anti-hLAMP2 antibody levels correlated positively with clinical disease activity in this patient. CONCLUSION: We hypothesize that this antibody may indicate a clinical course similar to ANCA-associated vasculitis in double-positive patients. However, this needs to be confirmed on comprehensive patient cohorts.
A hospital-based case-control study was carried out to investigate the association between ANCA positive rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) and occupational exposure to silica dust. All ANCA positive male patients admitted to the Department of Nephrology of the University of Brescia between 1987 and 1992 were enrolled in the study as cases. The controls were pts of the same age, admitted at the Department immediately before or after the cases, affected by other renal diseases. Seven of the 16 cases and one of the 32 controls, had a positive history for jobs exposing to silica dust (relative risk 14; 95% C.I.: 1.7-113.8, p < 0.001). ANCA pattern was p-ANCA with anti-MPO antibodies in 6/7 of exposed pts. The review of renal histology showed a distinctive glomerular lesion consisting in peripheral nodular areas of glomerular sclerosis, in addition to the crescentic necrotizing glomerulonephritis, in 3/6 silica exposed pts, but in none of the unexposed pts.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of serum myeloperoxidase and lactate dehydrogenase levels as tumour markers in chronic myeloid leukaemia patients after one-year treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. METHODS: The case-control study was conducted at the College of Medicine, Mustansiriyah University, Baghdad, Iraq, in collaboration with the National Centre of Haematology, Baghdad, from December 2019 to April 2020. The cases comprised chronic myeloid leukaemia patients aged >/=18 years who had completed one-year treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitor. They were divided into two groups on the basis of major molecular response. Group 1 patients had major molecular response >0.1%, while group 2 patients had major molecular response <0.1%. Group 3 had healthy controls matched for age and gender. Serum myeloperoxidase and lactate dehydrogenase concentrations were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Data was analysed using SPSS 25. RESULTS: Of the 88 subjects, 32(36.4%) were in group A with mean age 44.9+/-12.6 years, 26(29.5%) were in group B with mean age 48.23+/-10.6 years, and 30(34%) were in group C with mean age 43.1+/-9.3 years. There was a significant increase in myeloperoxidase and lactate dehydrogenase levels in patient groups compared group 3 controls (p<0.05). Between the patient groups 1 and 2, the difference was significant for myeloperoxidase (p<0.05), but not for lactate dehydrogenase (p>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: There was higher oxidative stress in chronic myeloid leukaemia patients.
We describe a case of cardiac myxoma whose clinical presentation mimicked that of polyarteritis nodosa. The serum levels of MPO-ANCA and IL-6 were elevated on laboratory investigation and normalized after the removal of the tumor. We suggest that a 'true' vasculitic mechanism contributes to the pathogenesis of pseudovasculitis in cardiac myxoma.
To investigate the variety of histological features of vasculitic lesions in myeloperoxidase-specific antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA)-related vasculitis, retrospective pathological analysis was done on 13 autopsy cases, collected from 1990 to 1998 at five hospitals. These cases were classified into three groups: (i) pulmonary-renal syndrome characterized by capillaritis of lung and glomeruli with occasional small-vessel arteritis and/or phlebitis; (ii) glomerular capillaritis without pulmonary involvement associated with significant small-vessel arteritis; and (iii) extensive distribution of small-vessel arteritis with no capillary involvement. The results suggest that pANCA-related vasculitis encompasses a wide variety of vasculitic syndromes, including pulmonary-renal syndrome, microscopic polyarteritis nodosa, and classic polyarteritis nodosa. pANCA may contribute to pathogenesis in all of these cases.
Avacopan, an orally administered C5a receptor antagonist, is effective in microscopic polyangiitis via the inhibition of neutrophil priming induced by C5a. However, the exact effect of avacopan on the production of myeloperoxidase antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA) is yet to be clearly established. This report presents a microscopic polyangiitis patient without major organ damage where high levels of MPO-ANCA persisted with high-dose steroid therapy and azathioprine, but the addition of avacopan led to a reduction in MPO-ANCA titres. The present case implies that avacopan-mediated inhibition of C5a may lead to a reduction in MPO-ANCA levels, thereby potentially ameliorating the pathophysiology of ANCA-associated vasculitis. Nevertheless, the impact of avacopan on MPO-ANCA production cannot be asserted solely based on this report; therefore, further examination is necessary through subgroup analysis using data from larger-scale studies.
We present the case of a 67-year-old woman with myeloperoxidase (MPO)-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-positive pauci-immune crescentic necrotizing glomerulonephritis and tubulointerstitial nephritis with renal eosinophilic infiltration and peripheral blood eosinophilia. Staining for eosinophil cationic protein indicated that activated eosinophils were involved in the tubulitis, as well as in the glomerular injury. Marked peripheral blood eosinophilia is uncommon in ANCA-positive crescentic necrotizing glomerulonephritis associated with tubulointerstitial nephritis, except in Churg-Strauss syndrome. However, our patient had no clinical history or signs of asthma, no other signs suggestive of allergic diseases, and no histologic findings of granulomas in the kidney, thus failing to fulfill the criteria for Churg-Strauss syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Several lines of evidence implicate that there are distinct differences between patients with myeloperoxidase (MPO)-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibody double-seropositive patients (DPPs) and single-positive patients. Hence, we conducted a retrospective study from a single center in China to analyze the clinical and pathological features, and prognosis of DPPs. METHODS: 109 patients with MPO-ANCA-associated vasculitis (MPO-AAV), 20 DPPs and 23 patients diagnosed with anti-GBM disease from a large center in China were included in this study. The ratio of patients with renal biopsy in three groups were 100%, 50% and 100%, respectively. Their clinical and pathological characteristics, and outcomes were analyzed. The intensity of immune deposits in the kidney at diagnosis was detected by immunofluorescence (IF). Furthermore, multivariate Cox hazard model analysis was used to assess the clinical and histological predictors of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and death for DPPs. RESULTS: In our study, we found that patients in the DPPs group were older than the other two groups (p = 0.007, MPO-AAV vs. DPPs; p < 0.001, DPPs vs. anti-GBM). The DPPs group had a higher value of serum creatinine (p = 0.041) and lower estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (p = 0.032) compared with MPO-AAV patients. On the contrary, the DPPs group had a lower serum creatinine (p = 0.003) compared with patients with anti-GBM group. The proportion of patients with cardiac system involvement in the DPPs group was higher than anti-GBM patients (p = 0.014). Cellular crescents could be generally observed in renal biopsy of DPPs and patients with anti-GBM glomerulonephritis. In addition, Bowman's capsule rupture was more common in DPPs than MPO-AAV patients (p = 0.001). MPO-AAV had a better renal and overall survival outcome than DPPs (p < 0.001). There was no significant difference of renal and overall survival outcome between DPPs and patients with anti-GBM disease. The incidence of ESRD in DPPs was negatively associated with lymphocyte count (HR 0.153, 95% CI 0.027 to 0.872, p = 0.034) and eGFR (HR 0.847, 95% CI 0.726 to 0.989, p = 0.036). Elevated serum creatinine was confirmed as a risk factor of both renal (HR 1.003, 95% CI 1.000 to 1.005, p = 0.019) and patient survival in DPPs (HR1.461, 95% CI 1.050 to 2.033, p = 0.024). CONCLUSION: In summary, compared with anti-GBM disease, DPPs tended to involve multi-organ damage rather than limited to the kidney. It is highlighted that serologic DPPs have a worse renal and patient prognosis than MPO-AAV. Moreover, we found that the risk factors of renal survival of DPPs include low lymphocyte count, elevated serum creatinine and reduced eGFR, and serum creatinine can predict patient survival.
