N-acylneuraminate-9-phosphatase; N-acetylneuraminic acid phosphatase.
Sodium naphthenide (NaNp) deposited on aluminosilicate gels yields systems that exhibit signals in EPR spectra, the multiplicity, g values, and intensities of which depend on the gel composition. The symmetrical singlets (I) of a g(1) value of 2.00 were assigned to the complexed naphthalene anion radicals on the centers occurring on the surfaces of the alumina and silica phases of the gels studied. Those radicals complexed on surface Lewis acid sites are of hard acid/hard base type according to Pearson theory, and are bonded to the sites by ionic forces. The asymmetrical singlets (II) described by the value g(2)=1.95 were assigned to naphthalene anion radicals, which are complexed by the centers of the aluminosilicate phase of the gels studied. Those radicals, complexed on surface Lewis acid sites of this phase, are of soft acid/soft base type and are bonded to the sites by covalent bonds. The highest intensity of the singlet (I) was recorded for the system containing alumina gel. The highest intensity of the singlet (II) was recorded for the system containing Al(2)O(3) in 30 wt%. The structures of Lewis acid sites on aluminosilicate phases are postulated to be different from those on alumina or silica phases.
Exercise training improves functional parameters in patients with congestive heart failure (CHF). The aim of this study was to establish whether exercise training influence the elevated CgA levels in CHF patients. Plasma CgA was determined at baseline and at peak exercise before and after 12 weeks of training in 25 men (mean age 67+/-8 years) with CHF (NYHA functional class II and III). Plasma Chromogranin A (CgA) was significantly elevated in CHF, however without change after the 12 week exercise period. A positive correlation was obtained for CgA versus N-ANP and CgA versus TNFalpha for the patients with poor survival, indicating that in these patients the elevated plasma CgA was more closely connected to the myocardial release of natriuretic peptides and the inflammatory response than to activation of the sympathoadrenergic system.
An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was developed to detect antibody in human sera to a synthetic peptide, Asn-Ala-Asn-Pro (NANP)3, derived from the repeating amino acid sequence found in the surface circumsporozoite protein of Plasmodium falciparum sporozoites. One hundred four sera from U.S. residents were used to determine a cut-off value for reactivity. Test sera were considered reactive when the absorbance was greater than that at the 95th percentile of the control sera. Sera from 112 Kenyans living in an area of holoendemic malaria transmission were tested. Of the total number of sera, 65% had detectable antibody to (NANP)3. The percentage of reactive sera increased from 41% in sera from children under 4 years of age to 85% in sera from adults 20 to 39 years of age. The high exposure to malaria parasites of the Kenyans was reflected in indirect fluorescent antibody assay titers to blood stage P. falciparum parasites. All of the Kenyan sera had antibody present at titers greater than 1:256.
