Glucocorticoid receptor; Receptor for glucocorticoids (GC). Has a dual mode of action: as a transcription factor that binds to glucocorticoid response elements (GRE), both for nuclear and mitochondrial DNA, and as a modulator of other transcription factors. Affects inflammatory responses, cellular proliferation and differentiation in target tissues. Involved in chromatin remodeling. Plays a role in rapid mRNA degradation by binding to the 5' UTR of target mRNAs and interacting with PNRC2 in a ligand- dependent manner which recruits the RNA helicase UPF1 and the mRNA- decapping enzyme D [...] 
BACKGROUND: Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is closely associated with steroid hormones and their receptors affected by lipid metabolism. Recently, there has been growing interest in the carcinogenic role of NR3C1, the sole gene responsible for encoding glucocorticoid receptor. However, the specific role of NR3C1 in ccRCC remains unclear. The present study was thus developed to explore the underlying mechanism of NR3C1's carcinogenic effects in ccRCC. METHODS: Expression of NR3C1 was verified by various tumor databases and assessed using RT-qPCR and western blot. Stable transfected cell lines of ccRCC with NR3C1 knockdown were constructed, and a range of in vitro and in vivo experiments were performed to examine the effects of NR3C1 on ccRCC proliferation and migration. Transcriptomics and lipidomics sequencing were then conducted on ACHN cells, which were divided into control and sh-NR3C1 group. Finally, the sequencing results were validated using transmission electron microscopy, mitochondrial membrane potential assay, immunofluorescence co-localization, cell immunofluorescent staining, and Western blot. The rescue experiments were designed to investigate the relationship between endoplasmic reticulum stress (ER stress) and mitophagy in ccRCC cells after NR3C1 knockdown, as well as the regulation of their intrinsic signaling pathways. RESULTS: The expression of NR3C1 in ccRCC cells and tissues was significantly elevated. The sh-NR3C1 group, which had lower levels of NR3C1, exhibited a lower proliferation and migration capacity of ccRCC than that of the control group (P < 0.05). Then, lipidomic and transcriptomic sequencing showed that lipid metabolism disorders, ER stress, and mitophagy genes were enriched in the sh-NR3C1 group. Finally, compared to the control group, ER stress and mitophagy were observed in the sh-NR3C1 group, while the expression of ATF6, CHOP, PINK1, and BNIP3 was also up-regulated (P < 0.05). Furthermore, Ceapin-A7, an inhibitor of ATF6, significantly down-regulated the expression of PINK1 and BNIP3 (P < 0.05), and significantly increased the proliferation and migration of ccRCC cells (P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that knockdown of NR3C1 activates ER stress and induces mitophagy through the ATF6-PINK1/BNIP3 pathway, resulting in reduced proliferation and migration of ccRCC. These findings indicate potential novel targets for clinical treatment of ccRCC.
Glucocorticoids signal through their cognate, ubiquitously expressed glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which influences the transcription of a large number of target genes. Several genetic defects, including point mutations, deletions or insertions in the NR3C1 gene that encodes the GR, have been associated with familial or sporadic generalized glucocorticoid resistance or Chrousos syndrome. One of the clinical manifestations of this rare endocrine condition is bilateral adrenal hyperplasia due to compensatory elevations of plasma ACTH concentrations. In this commentary, we discuss the interesting findings of the recently published French MUTA-GR Study, and present our perspective on the evolving field of NR3C1 pathology.
Life threatening trauma and the development of PTSD during childhood, may each associate with transcriptional perturbation of immune cell glucocorticoid reactivity, yet their separable longer term contributions are less clear. The current study compared resting mononuclear cell gene expression levels of the nuclear receptor, subfamily 3, member 1 (NR3C1) coding the glucocorticoid receptor, its trans-activator spindle and kinetochore-associated protein 2 (SKA2), and its co-chaperon FKBP prolyl isomerase 5 (FKBP5), between a cohort of young adults first seen at the Hadassah Emergency Department (ED) after surviving a suicide bombing terror attack during childhood, and followed longitudinally over the years, and matched healthy controls not exposed to life threatening trauma. While significant reductions in mononuclear cell gene expression levels were observed among young adults for all three transcripts following early trauma exposure, the development of subsequent PTSD beyond trauma exposure, accounted for a small but significant portion of the variance in each of the three transcripts. Long-term perturbation in the expression of immune cell glucocorticoid response transcripts persists among young adults who develop PTSD following life threatening trauma exposure in childhood, denoting chronic dysregulation of immune stress reactivity.
Onset of alcohol use at an early age increases the risk for later alcohol dependence. We investigated the role of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) gene (NR3C1) in onset of alcohol use and abuse in 14-year-old adolescents (n=4534). Several NR3C1 polymorphisms were associated with onset of alcohol drinking or drunkenness at this age. Strongest associations were observed in females, with one marker (rs244465) remaining significant after correction for multiple testing (P(adj) =0.0067; odds ratio=1.7, for drunkenness). Our data provide the first evidence that GR modulates initiation of alcohol abuse and reveal a polymorphism that might contribute to susceptibility to addiction.
Adverse experiences in the perinatal period have been associated with the methylation of the human glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1) and long-term diseases. We conducted a systematic review on the association between adversities in the perinatal period and DNA methylation in the 1 (F) region of the NR3C1 gene in newborns. We explored the MEDLINE, Web of Science, Scopus, Scielo, and Lilacs databases without time or language limitations. Two independent reviewers performed the selection of articles and data extraction. A third participated in the methodological quality assessment and consensus meetings at all stages. Finally, ten studies were selected. Methodological quality was considered moderate in six and low in four. Methylation changes were reported in 41 of the 47 CpG sites of exon 1 (F). Six studies addressed maternal conditions during pregnancy: two reported methylation changes at the same sites (CpG 10, 13, 20, 21 and 47), and four at one or more sites from CpG 35 to 39. Four studies addressed neonatal parameters and morbidities: methylation changes at the same sites 4, 8, 10, 16, 25, and 35 were reported in two. Hypermethylation associated with stressful conditions prevailed. Hypomethylation was more often associated with protective conditions (maternal-foetal attachment during pregnancy, breast milk intake, higher birth weight or Apgar). In conclusion, methylation changes in several sites of the 1 (F) region of the NR3C1 gene in newborns and very young infants were associated with perinatal stress, but more robust and comparable results are needed to corroborate site-specific associations.
Aim: To identify the DNA methylation status of related genes in major depressive disorder following selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor treatment. Materials & methods: 45 patients with major depressive disorder and 45 healthy volunteers were considered experimental and control groups, respectively. High-resolution melting real-time PCR was implemented to evaluate DNA methylation. Results: After 100 days of selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor treatment, methylation of promoter CpG sites of BDNF, NR3C1, FKBP5 and SLC6A4 was significantly reduced. Compared with before treatment, patients' Hamilton Depression Rating Scale scores were significantly reduced after selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor treatment (p </= 0.0001). Conclusion: Based on the proven effect of antidepressants on DNA methylation and gene expression, these medications can improve the treatment process and reduce depression scores after treatment.
Hyperactivity of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis has been associated with the etiology of major depression. One of the factors underlying altered glucocorticoid signaling might be variability of the glucocorticoid receptor gene (GR, NR3C1). GR polymorphisms have been associated with variability in glucocorticoid sensitivity and endocrine responses to psychosocial stress. Furthermore, a common GR SNP (rs10482605), located in the promoter region, has been associated with major depression. We performed functional characterization of this SNP in vitro using a reporter gene assay under different stimulation conditions. Furthermore, we genotyped 219 subjects previously genotyped for four common GR SNPs to further characterize GR haplotype structure. The minor C allele of the rs10482605 SNP showed reduced transcriptional activity under unstimulated conditions and under different stimulation conditions in two brain derived cell lines. Linkage analyses revealed that the rs10482605 SNP is in high linkage disequilibrium with a A/G SNP in exon 9beta (rs6198), associated with relative glucocorticoid resistance and increased GRbeta mRNA stability. We provide evidence that two functional GR SNPs in linkage disequilibrium are responsible for both regulation of GR expression and mRNA stability. This newly characterized haplotype could increase the risk for the development of stress related disorders, including major depression.
We examined the prediction that the interaction between Glucocorticoid Receptor Gene (NR3C1) methylation, stress, and experienced maternal support predicts anxious and avoidant attachment development. This was tested in a general population sample of 487 children and adolescents (44% boys, Mage = 11.84, SDage = 2.4). These children were followed over a period of 18 months. In line with the prediction, we found that NR3C1 methylation moderates the effect of maternal support during stress on anxious attachment development 18 months later. More stressed children who experienced less maternal support reported increased anxious attachment when their NR3C1 gene was highly methylated. This effect could not be explained by children's level of psychopathology. No effects were found for attachment avoidance. These data provide the first prospective evidence that epigenetic processes are involved in attachment development. (PsycINFO Database Record
SARS-CoV-2 infection has recently been declared a pandemic. Some patients showing severe symptoms exhibit drastic inflammation and airway damage. In this study, we re-analyzed published scRNA-seq data of COVID-19 patient bronchoalveolar lavage fluid to further classify and compare immunological features according to the patient's disease severity. Patients with severe symptoms showed DNA damage and apoptotic features of epithelial cells. Our results suggested that epithelial damage was associated with neutrophil infiltration. Myeloid cells of severe patients showed higher expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as CXCL8. As a result, neutrophils were abundant in lungs of patients from the severe group. Furthermore, recruited neutrophils highly expressed genes related to neutrophil extracellular traps. Neutrophil-mediated inflammation was regulated by glucocorticoid receptor expression and activity. Based on these results, we suggest that severe COVID-19 symptoms may be determined by differential expression of glucocorticoid receptors and neutrophils.
AIM: To investigate childhood abuse victimization in relation to adult DNA methylation levels in a novel region of NR3C1, with emotional support as a possible modifier. MATERIALS & METHODS: 295 participants from the Black Women's Health Study. Multivariable linear regression models were used to compute differences in mean percent methylation levels. RESULTS: Women reporting childhood abuse victimization exhibited higher mean NR3C1 methylation levels than nonabused women, with a clear dose-response relationship. Childhood emotional support appeared to attenuate associations only among women with the highest levels of physical and sexual abuse. CONCLUSION: NR3C1 mean methylation was higher among women who reported childhood abuse. Further research is warranted to clarify whether or the extent to which childhood emotional support buffers the association.
The glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1) is a critical component of the stress response system. Cytosine methylation of NR3C1 has been repeatedly associated with trauma and mental disorders, including major depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, and personality disorders, suggesting that NR3C1 methylation may play a role in stress-related psychopathology. We systematically reviewed 55 studies examining NR3C1 DNA methylation in association with trauma exposure, psychopathology, gene expression, and/or common genetic variants. Overall, a number of NR3C1 CpG sites were significantly associated with trauma or psychopathology, but significant findings were often inconsistent across studies. This lack of consistency is likely influenced by significant methodological variability - experimentally and analytically - across studies. Selected common genetic variants show no significant effect on NR3C1 CpG methylation. In contrast, there was ample evidence linking increased methylation of NR3C1 to reduced expression of this gene. The inverse association between methylation and gene expression shown across eight out of ten studies supports the notion that methylation in the promoter region of NR3C1 is associated with transcriptional silencing.
Objective: Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) is a common and frequently occurring subtype of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL). The effective treatment and prognosis of DLBCL are still urgently needed to be explored. This article aims to shed light on the connection between DLBCL survival and NR3C1 expression levels. Methods: First, we divided the 952 DLBCL patients into an NR3C1 high-expression group and an NR3C1 low-expression group and compared the baseline characteristics of the two groups. Second, we used multivariate analysis to predict the dependent variable for age, pathology, ECOG score, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) ratio, and NR3C1 expression level. Finally, we analyzed the progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival rate (OS) of DLBCL patients with high or low NR3C1 expression. Results: DLBCL patients with high NR3C1 expression had a better prognosis than those with low NR3C1 expression (OS, P < 0.0001). In DLBCL patients of CHOP therapy, high NR3C1 expression was associated with a good survival prognosis in OS (OS, P = 0.028). Conclusion: In multivariate analysis, NR3C1 high expression was an independent prognostic factor that predicted a longer OS of DLBCL (OS, P = 0.0003). NR3C1 is considered an independent predictor of DLBCL patients and can be used as a biomarker for the prognosis of DLBCL.
This study investigated moderation of the association between recurrent maternal depression and offspring depression symptoms by a selection of biologically relevant gene variants. 271 children/adolescents (aged 9.00 to 16.00 years) whose mothers had experienced at least two episodes of DSM-IV major depression and 165 controls (aged 12.25 to 16.67 years) drawn from a population-based twin register were used. Seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from three genes were genotyped in children. The genes were the Corticotropin Receptor Type 1 gene (CRHR1), the gene coding for the FK506 binding protein 5 (FKBP5) and the Glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3c1) along with a haplotype formed by the SNPs in CRHR1. A significant association was found between recurrent maternal depression and depression symptoms in offspring. None of the SNPs were associated with offspring depression symptoms and associations did not differ according to the presence of recurrent maternal depression. However, caution is required due to a relatively small sample size.
OBJECTIVE: Glucocorticoid resistance is a rare endocrine disease caused by variants of the NR3C1 gene encoding the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). We identified a novel heterozygous variant (GRR569Q) in a patient with uncommon reversible glucocorticoid resistance syndrome. METHODS: We performed ex vivo functional characterization of the variant in patient fibroblasts and in vitro through transient transfection in undifferentiated HEK 293T cells to assess transcriptional activity, affinity, and nuclear translocation. We studied the impact of the variant on the tertiary structure of the ligand-binding domain through 3D modeling. RESULTS: The patient presented initially with an adrenal adenoma with mild autonomous cortisol secretion and undetectable adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) levels. Six months after surgery, biological investigations showed elevated cortisol and ACTH (urinary free cortisol 114 microg/24 h, ACTH 10.9 pmol/L) without clinical symptoms, evoking glucocorticoid resistance syndrome. Functional characterization of the GRR569Q showed decreased expression of target genes (in response to 100 nM cortisol: SGK1 control +97% vs patient +20%, P < .0001) and impaired nuclear translocation in patient fibroblasts compared to control. Similar observations were made in transiently transfected cells, but higher cortisol concentrations overcame glucocorticoid resistance. GRR569Q showed lower ligand affinity (Kd GRWT: 1.73 nM vs GRR569Q: 4.61 nM). Tertiary structure modeling suggested a loss of hydrogen bonds between H3 and the H1-H3 loop. CONCLUSION: This is the first description of a reversible glucocorticoid resistance syndrome with effective negative feedback on corticotroph cells regarding increased plasma cortisol concentrations due to the development of mild autonomous cortisol secretion.
