Delta-type opioid receptor; G-protein coupled receptor that functions as receptor for endogenous enkephalins and for a subset of other opioids. Ligand binding causes a conformation change that triggers signaling via guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (G proteins) and modulates the activity of down-stream effectors, such as adenylate cyclase. Signaling leads to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase activity. Inhibits neurotransmitter release by reducing calcium ion currents and increasing potassium ion conductance. Plays a role in the perception of pain and in opiate-mediated analgesia.  [...] 
Opioid use disorder (OUD) is a chronic and relapsing brain disease that results in significant mortality worldwide. Genetic factors are estimated to contribute to 40%-60% of the liability, with polymorphisms of opioid receptor genes implicated in this disorder. However, the mechanisms underlying these associations are not yet fully understood. In the present study, we first examined the methylation levels in the promoter region of the OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1 genes in 111 healthy controls (HCs) and 120 patients with OUD, and genotyped three tag SNPs in these genes. Correlations between these SNPs and the methylation levels of the CpG sites and expression levels of the genes were analyzed. After identifying the mQTLs and eQTLs, we determined the associations between the mQTLs/eQTLs and susceptibility to and characteristics of OUD in 930 HCs and 801 patients with OUD. Our results demonstrated that SNPs rs1799971 in the OPRM1 gene and rs4654327 in the OPRD1 gene were both mQTLs and eQTLs. We observed unique correlations between mQTLs and methylation levels of several CpG sites in the OUD group compared to the HC group. Interestingly, both the two mQTLs and eQTLs were associated with the susceptibility to OUD. In conclusion, we suppose that mQTLs and eQTLs in genes may underlie the associations between certain risk genetic polymorphisms and OUD. These mQTLs and eQTLs could potentially serve as promising biomarkers for better management of opioid misuse.
Aberrant DNA methylation has been observed in the patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), a common neurodegenerative disorder in the elderly. OPRD1 encodes the delta opioid receptor, a member of the opioid family of G-protein-coupled receptors. In the current study, we compare the DNA methylation levels of OPRD1 promoter CpG sites (CpG1, CpG2, and CpG3) between 51 AD cases and 63 controls using the bisulfite pyrosequencing technology. Our results show that significantly higher CpG3 methylation is found in AD cases than controls. Significant associations are found between several biochemical parameters (including HDL-C and ALP) and CpG3 methylation. Subsequent luciferase reporter gene assay shows that DNA fragment containing the three OPRD1 promoter CpGs is able to regulate gene expression. In summary, our results suggest that OPRD1 promoter hypermethylation is associated with the risk of AD.
This study aimed to determine the effects of nine OPRM1, OPRD1 and OPRK1 polymorphisms on plasma BUP and norbuprenorphine (norBUP) concentrations and various treatment responses in a sample of 122 patients receiving BUP/naloxone. Plasma concentrations of BUP and norBUP were detected by LC-MS/MS. PCR-RFLP method was used to genotype polymorphisms. OPRD1 rs569356 GG had significantly lower plasma norBUP concentration (p = 0.018), dose- (p = 0.049) and dose/kg-normalized norBUP values (p = 0.036) compared with AA. Craving and withdrawal symptoms were significantly higher in OPRD1 rs569356 AG+GG relative to AA. There was a statistically significant difference between the OPRD1 rs678849 genotypes in the intensity of anxiety (13.5 for CT+TT and 7.5 for TT). OPRM1 rs648893 TT (18.8 +/- 10.8) was significantly different to CC+CT (14.82 +/- 11.3; p = 0.049) in view of the intensity of depression. This current study provides the first data on a prominent effect of the OPRD1 rs569356 variation on BUP pharmacology due to its metabolite norBUP.
Eleven single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning OPRD1 were examined in 1063 European Americans (EAs) (620 cases with substance dependence (SD), including 557 with alcohol dependence (AD), 225 with cocaine dependence (CD) and 111 with opioid dependence (OD), and 443 controls). Nominally significant associations (P<0.05) of five SNPs with SD were observed; only the association of the non-synonymous variant G80T with OD remained significant after correction for multiple testing using SNPSpD. Haplotype analyses with six tag SNPs indicated that a specific haplotype GCAACT, which harbors G80T G-allele and C921T C-allele, was significantly associated with AD (chi(2)=14.82, degrees of freedom (d.f.)=1, P<0.001), CD (chi(2)=9.19, d.f.=1, P=0.002) and OD (chi(2)=20.68, d.f.=1, P<0.001). Logistic regression analyses, with sex and age being considered, demonstrated that this haplotype had a risk effect on AD (P=0.03, beta=1.86, odds ratio (OR)=6.43) and especially on OD (P<0.001, beta=3.92, OR=50.57). Moreover, seven SNPs covering OPRK1 were examined in the majority of the above subjects (390 cases, including 327 AD, 177 CD and 97 OD subjects, and 358 controls). Although no significant differences in allele, genotype or haplotype frequency distributions were seen between cases and controls, a specific OPRK1 haplotype, GGCTTCT, was significantly associated with AD (chi(2)=8.12, d.f.=1, P=0.004). Logistic regression analyses also revealed its risk effect on AD (P=0.009, beta=1.06, OR=2.90). Population stratification artifact was not observed in the sample. Taken together, our findings supported a positive association between OPRD1 variants and SD, and a positive haplotypic association between OPRK1 and AD in EAs.
Opioid addiction is a complex phenomenon with genetic, social, and other components. Due to such complexity, it is difficult to interpret the outcome of clinical studies, and thus, mutations found in individuals with these addictions are still not indisputably classified as opioid addiction-causing variants. Here, we computationally investigated two such mutations, A6V and N40D, found in the mu opioid receptor gene OPRM1. The mutations are located in the extracellular domain of the corresponding protein, which is important to the hetero-dimerization of OPRM1 with the delta opioid receptor protein (OPRD1). The hetero-dimerization of OPRD1-OPRM1 affects the signaling pathways activated by opioids and natural peptides and, thus, could be considered a factor contributing to addiction. In this study, we built four 3D structures of molecular pathways, including the G-protein signaling pathway and the beta-arrestin signaling pathway of the heterodimer of OPRD1-OPRM1. We also analyzed the effect of mutations of A6V and N40D on the stability of individual OPRM1/OPRD1 molecules and the OPRD1-OPRM1 heterodimer with the goal of inferring their plausible linkage with opioid addiction. It was found that both mutations slightly destabilize OPRM1/OPRD1 monomers and weaken their association. Since hetero-dimerization is a key step for signaling processes, it is anticipated that both mutations may be causing increased addiction risk.
Exposure to stress not only increases the vulnerability to heroin dependence (HD) but also provokes relapse. The etiology of HD and the role of life stress remain unclear, but prior studies suggested that both genetic and environmental factors are important. Opioid related genes, including OPRM1, OPRD1, OPRK1, and POMC, are obvious candidates for HD. Therefore, this study was conducted to explore whether the genetic polymorphisms of the candidates could affect vulnerability to HD and response to life stress in patients with HD. Ten polymorphisms of the opioid related genes were analyzed in 801 patients and 530 controls. The Life Event Questionnaire was used to assess the perspective and response to life stress in the past year. The genotype distribution and allelic frequency analyses showed that the minor C allele of rs2234918 in OPRD1 is over-represented in the HD group (P = .006 and P = .002, respectively). This finding was further confirmed by logistic regression analysis, showing that C allele carriers have a 1.42 times greater risk for HD compared to T/T homozygotes. A subgroup of 421 patients and 135 controls were eligible for life stress assessment. Patients with HD have a higher occurrence of negative events (No), negative events score (Ns), and average negative event score (Na) than those of controls (all P < .001), but there was no difference regarding positive recent events between the two groups. Gene-stress assessment in the HD group showed that T/T homozygotes of OPRD1 rs2236857 have more severe stress than C allele carriers (Ns, P = .004 and Na, P = .047). Our results indicate that the OPRD1 gene may not only play a role in the pathogenesis of HD but also affect the response to life stress among patients with HD in our Han Chinese population. Patients with the risk genotype may need additional psychosocial intervention for relapse prevention.
OBJECTIVE: Prior research demonstrated that the delta-opioid receptor (OPRD1) rs678849 variant influences opioid use in African Americans treated with methadone. We examined whether this variant moderated cocaine and opioid use in our clinical cohort of methadone and disulfiram treated recipients. METHODS: Cocaine and opioid codependent patients were stabilized for 2 weeks on methadone and subsequently randomized into groups treated with either methadone + placebo (n = 37) or methadone + disulfiram (250 mg/day; n = 33) for 12 weeks. RESULTS: A drop in cocaine-positive urine was found in the OPRD1 CC genotype group compared to T-allele carrier patients treated with methadone + disulfiram (P < 0.0001), but not in the methadone + placebo group. No difference in opioid-positive urines was found among each genotype group in either treatment group. CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that rs678849 genotype may predict treatment response of disulfiram for cocaine use in patients with co-occurring opioid and cocaine dependence.
Several OPRD1 intronic variants were associated with opioid addiction (OD) in a population-specific manner. This follow-up study aims to further characterize the OPRD1 haplotype pattern of the risk variants in different populations and apply in silico analysis to identify potential causal variants. A population-specific haplotype pattern was revealed based on six OPRD1 eQTL SNPs and five common haplotypes were identified in a sample of European ancestry (CEU). A European-specific haplotype ('Hap 3') that includes SNPs previously associated with OD and is tagged by SNP rs2236861 is more common in subjects with OD. It is quite common (10%) in CEU but is absent in the African sample (YRI) and extends upstream of OPRD1. SNP rs2236857 is most probably a non-causal variant in LD with the causal SNP/s in a population-specific manner. The study provides an explanation for the lack of association in African Americans, despite its high frequency in this population. OD samples homozygous for 'Hap 3' were reanalyzed using a denser coverage of the region and revealed at least 25 potentially regulatory SNPs in high LD. Notably, GTEx data indicate that some of the SNPs are eQTLs for the upstream phosphatase and actin regulator 4 (PHACTR4), in the cortex, and others are eQTLs for OPRD1 and the upstream lncRNA ENSG00000270605, in the cerebellum. The study highlights the limitation of single SNP analysis and the sensitivity of association studies of OPRD1 to a genetic background. It proposes a long-range functional connection between OPRD1 and PHACTR4. PHACTR4, a mediator of cytoskeletal dynamics, may contribute to drug addiction by modulating synaptic plasticity.
AIM: To evaluate the potential association of the genetic polymorphisms in ABCB1, ARRB2, DRD1 and OPRD1 genes with methadone dosage requirement among Han Chinese opioid-dependent patients. MATERIALS & METHODS: Eight SNPs in ABCB1, ARRB2, DRD1 and OPRD1 genes were selected and genotyped using Sequenom MassARRAY platform among 257 methadone maintenance treatment patients. The required information about stable methadone dose, urine analysis for opioid and socio-demographic characteristics was collected. Generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction method was performed to analyze the SNP-SNP interaction. RESULTS: We found that patients carrying the rs529520TG genotype of OPRD1 probably required higher methadone treatment dosage. A 3-locus SNP-SNP interaction pattern (rs1128503 in ABCB1, rs529520 in OPRD1 and rs1045280 in ARRB2) was significantly associated with the methadone dosage requirement (p = 0.029). CONCLUSION: Our results suggested that specific OPRD1 variants and interaction among polymorphisms in ABCB1, OPRD1 and ARRB2 genes contributes to methadone dosage requirement in Han Chinese opioid-dependent patients.
Genes encoding the opioid receptors (OPRM1, OPRD1 and OPRK1) are obvious candidates for involvement in risk for heroin dependence. Prior association studies commonly had samples of modest size, included limited single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) coverage of these genes and yielded inconsistent results. Participants for the current investigation included 1459 heroin-dependent cases ascertained from maintenance clinics in New South Wales, Australia, 1495 unrelated individuals selected from an Australian sample of twins and siblings as not meeting DSM-IV criteria for lifetime alcohol or illicit drug dependence (non-dependent controls) and 531 controls ascertained from economically disadvantaged neighborhoods in proximity to the maintenance clinics. A total of 136 OPRM1, OPRD1 and OPRK1 SNPs were genotyped in this sample. After controlling for admixture with principal components analysis, our comparison of cases to non-dependent controls found four OPRD1 SNPs in fairly high linkage disequilibrium for which adjusted P values remained significant (e.g. rs2236857; OR 1.25; P=2.95x10(-4) ) replicating a previously reported association. A post hoc analysis revealed that the two SNP (rs2236857 and rs581111) GA haplotype in OPRD1 is associated with greater risk (OR 1.68; P=1.41x10(-5) ). No OPRM1 or OPRK1 SNPs reached more than nominal significance. Comparisons of cases to neighborhood controls reached only nominal significance. Our results replicate a prior report providing strong evidence implicating OPRD1 SNPs and, in particular, the two SNP (rs2236857 and rs581111) GA haplotype in liability for heroin dependence. Support was not found for similar association involving either OPRM1 or OPRK1 SNPs.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacotherapy of alcohol dependence (AD) is at an early stage of development; currently available medications have limited efficacy. It would be clinically valuable to identify, before initiation of a course of treatment, those patients who, based on genetic markers, are most likely to respond to a specific pharmacotherapy. A previous report suggested that a functional variant at the genetic locus encoding the mu opioid receptor (Asn40Asp) is such a marker, in short-term (3-month) treatment with the opioid-blocking drug naltrexone (NTX). METHODS: We studied polymorphic variants at each of the 3 opioid receptor genes--OPRM1, OPRD1, and OPRK1, which encode the mu, delta, and kappa opioid receptors, respectively--including the OPRM1 Asn40Asp variant--as predictors of response to NTX or placebo in 215 alcohol-dependent male subjects who participated in Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study 425, "Naltrexone in the Treatment of Alcohol Dependence." RESULTS: At the 3-month time point, treatment condition, age, and the pretreatment number of drinks per drinking day were all significant (p<0.05) predictors of the rate of relapse and time to relapse. Although NTX had no significant effect on relapse to heavy drinking in the overall sample in CSP 425, it significantly reduced relapse in the subgroup that provided DNA for analysis (i.e., the present study sample). There were no significant interactions between any individual single nucleotide polymorphisms studied and NTX treatment response. CONCLUSIONS: These results do not support association of the OPRM1 Asn40Asp polymorphism with NTX treatment response for AD.
Two commonly prescribed treatments for opioid addiction are methadone and buprenorphine. Although these drugs show some efficacy in treating opioid dependence, treatment response varies among individuals. It is likely that genetic factors have a role in determining treatment outcome. This study analyses the pharmacogenetic association of six polymorphisms in OPRD1, the gene encoding the delta-opioid receptor, on treatment outcome in 582 opioid addicted European Americans randomized to either methadone or buprenorphine/naloxone (Suboxone) over the course of a 24-week open-label clinical trial. Treatment outcome was assessed as the number of missed or opioid-positive urine drug screens over the 24 weeks. In the total sample, no single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in OPRD1 were significantly associated with treatment outcome in either treatment arm. However, sex-specific analyses revealed two intronic SNPs (rs581111 and rs529520) that predicted treatment outcome in females treated with buprenorphine. Females with the AA or AG genotypes at rs581111 had significantly worse outcomes than those with the GG genotype when treated with buprenorphine (P=0.03, relative risk (RR)=1.67, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.06-2.1). For rs529520, females with the AA genotype had a significantly worse outcome than those with the CC genotype when (P=0.006, RR=2.15, 95% CI 1.3-2.29). No significant associations were detected in males. These findings suggest that rs581111 and rs52920 may be useful when considering treatment options for female opioid addicts, however, confirmation in an independent sample is warranted.
The delta-opioid receptor mediates rewarding effects of many substances of abuse. We reported an increased frequency of the minor G-allele of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs569356 (the only variant identified so far in the promoter region of the delta-opioid receptor gene (OPRD1)) in subjects with opioid dependence. In this study, we examined the functional significance of this variant. OPRD1 promoter region harboring SNP rs569356 was amplified by PCR and inserted into a firefly luciferase reporter vector. HEK293 cells were co-transfected with these constructs and a renilla luciferase vector to control for transfection efficiency. Expression of firefly luciferase (driven by the OPRD1 promoter) was measured by a dual luciferase reporter assay and normalized by renilla luciferase expression. Moreover, alleles altering expression were further assessed for binding of human brain nuclear proteins by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). The minor G-allele was associated with significantly greater expression levels of firefly luciferase than the major A-allele of SNP rs569356 (P=0.003). EMSA also showed specific gel shift bands, suggesting that SNP rs569356 is situated in the binding site of potential transcription factors. These results suggest that the minor G-allele of SNP rs569356 may enhance transcription factor binding and increase OPRD1 expression.
Delta opioid receptors are implicated in a variety of psychiatric and neurological disorders. These receptors play a key role in the reinforcing properties of drugs of abuse, and polymorphisms in OPRD1 (the gene encoding delta opioid receptors) are associated with drug addiction. Delta opioid receptors are also involved in protecting neurons against hypoxic and ischemic stress. Here, we first examined a large sample of 738 elderly participants with neuroimaging and genetic data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. We hypothesized that common variants in OPRD1 would be associated with differences in brain structure, particularly in regions relevant to addictive and neurodegenerative disorders. One very common variant (rs678849) predicted differences in regional brain volumes. We replicated the association of this single-nucleotide polymorphism with regional tissue volumes in a large sample of young participants in the Queensland Twin Imaging study. Although the same allele was associated with reduced volumes in both cohorts, the brain regions affected differed between the two samples. In healthy elderly, exploratory analyses suggested that the genotype associated with reduced brain volumes in both cohorts may also predict cerebrospinal fluid levels of neurodegenerative biomarkers, but this requires confirmation. If opiate receptor genetic variants are related to individual differences in brain structure, genotyping of these variants may be helpful when designing clinical trials targeting delta opioid receptors to treat neurological disorders.
Delta opioid receptor (DOR) is well known to be involved in heroin dependence. This study tested the hypothesis that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the opioid receptor delta 1 (OPRD1) gene coding region are associated with treatment responses in a methadone maintenance therapy (MMT) cohort in Taiwan. Three hundred forty-four MMT patients were recruited. Diastolic/systolic blood pressure, heart rate, methadone dosage, and plasma concentrations of methadone were recorded. Twenty-five SNPs located within the OPRD1 genetic region were selected and genotyped from the genomic DNA of all 344 participants. After pairwise tagger analyses, tagger SNP rs204047 showed a significant association with methadone dosage (P = 0.0019), and tagger SNPs rs204047 and rs797397 were significantly associated with plasma R, S-methadone concentrations (P < 0.0006) in patients tested negative in the urine morphine test, which indicated patients with a better response to MMT. The major genotype carriers showed a higher methadone dosage and higher plasma concentrations of R, S-methadone than the minor genotype carriers. The results indicated that OPRD1 genetic variants were associated with methadone dosage and methadone plasma concentration in MMT patients with a negative morphine test result.
Human studies on experimentally induced pain are of value to elucidate the genetic influence on morphine analgesia under controlled conditions. The aim of this study was to investigate whether genetic variants of mu-, kappa- and delta-opioid receptor genes (OPRM1, OPRK1 and OPRD1) and catechol-O-methyltransferase gene (COMT) are associated with the morphine analgesia. The study was a randomized, double-blind, two-way, crossover, single-dose study conducted in 40 healthy participants, where morphine was compared with placebo. Pain was induced by contact heat, muscle pressure, bone pressure, rectal stimulations (mechanical, electrical and thermal) and cold pressor test (immersion of the hand into ice water). Sixteen genetic polymorphisms of four candidate genes were explored. Variability in morphine analgesia to contact heat stimulation was associated with COMT rs4680 (p = 0.04), and rectal thermal stimulation was associated with OPRM1 rs9479757 (p = 0.03). Moreover, in males, variability in morphine analgesia to rectal thermal stimulation was associated with OPRD1 polymorphisms: rs2234918 (p = 0.01) and rs533123 (p = 0.046). The study was explorative and hypothesis-generating due to the relatively small study size. However, results suggest that genetic variants in the COMT and OPRM1 irrespective of gender, and OPRD1 in males may contribute to the variability in morphine analgesia in experimental pain models.
BACKGROUND: The functional mechanism is unknown for many genetic variants associated with substance use disorder phenotypes. Rs678849, an intronic variant in the delta-opioid receptor gene (OPRD1), has been found to predict regional brain volume, addiction risk, and the efficacy of buprenorphine/naloxone in treating opioid use disorder. The variant has also been implicated as an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) for several genes. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to identify functional differences between the two alleles of rs678849 in vitro. We hypothesized that the two alleles of rs678849 would have different effects on transcriptional activity due to differential interactions with transcription factors. METHODS: 15bp regions containing the C or T alleles of rs678849 were cloned into luciferase constructs and transfected into BE(2)C neuroblastoma cells to test the effect on transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using nuclear lysates from BE(2)C cell or human postmortem medial prefrontal cortex were used to identify proteins that differentially bound the two alleles. RESULTS: At 24 hours post-transfection, the C allele construct had significantly lower luciferase expression than the T allele construct and empty vector control (ANOVA p < .001). Proteomic analysis and supershift assays identified XRCC6 as a transcription factor specifically binding the C allele, whereas hnRNP D0 was found to specifically bind the T allele. CONCLUSION: These functional differences between the C and T alleles may help explain the psychiatric and neurological phenotype differences predicted by rs678849 genotype and the potential role of the variant as an eQTL.
Genetic association of rs678849 along with neuroimaging and biomarker phenotypes, parallel with the known involvements of the OPRD1 in drug abuse, provided additional support for targeting these receptors as potential therapeutic targets in both neurodegenerative diseases and neuropsychiactric disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. Samples were selected among 202 opium-addicted participants undergoing methadone treatment and 202 healthy controls. Genomic DNA of all subjects was extracted from whole blood samples through a Salting Out procedure. Four variants (rs678849, 2236857, 2236855, and 760589) were genotyped in the studied subjects using ARMS-PCR. The analysis was performed using SNPalyze and SPSS ver.20 software. According to single locus analysis, rs678849 under dominant model (p < 0.001), rs2236857 under recessive model (p = 0.006), and the two variants, rs2236855 and rs760589 under co-dominant model, showed significant contributions between groups (p = 0.001 and p = 0.009, respectively). rs2236855 was associated with the development of libido dysfunction in opium-addicted patients undergoing methadone treatment (p = 0.011). Through haplotype analyses, five haplotypes with frequency of more than 5% displayed significant association with opioid dependence in study participants. In conclusion, the four studied OPRD1 gene variants and their haplotypes can play important roles in susceptibility to opioid dependence.
