Mu-type opioid receptor; Receptor for endogenous opioids such as beta-endorphin and endomorphin. Receptor for natural and synthetic opioids including morphine, heroin, DAMGO, fentanyl, etorphine, buprenorphin and methadone. Agonist binding to the receptor induces coupling to an inactive GDP-bound heterotrimeric G-protein complex and subsequent exchange of GDP for GTP in the G-protein alpha subunit leading to dissociation of the G-protein complex with the free GTP-bound G-protein alpha and the G-protein beta-gamma dimer activating downstream cellular effectors. The agonist- and cell typ [...] 
The Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST) explains a variety of reward-motivated behaviors as the result of the activation of biologically-based systems. Inspired by the influences of parental bonding and opioid peptide on reward system, we investigated the contributions of parental bonding and mu-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1) towards motivation systems (i.e., the BAS, BIS-anxiety, and FFFS-fear). Results indicated that (1) parental care was negatively related to FFFS-fear, but parental overprotection was positively related to both FFFS-fear and BIS-anxiety; (2) parental care significantly interacted with OPRM1 rs1799971 in reward responsiveness with diathesis-stress model. Poor parental care reduced reward responsiveness among individuals with the G allele, but not those with the AA genotype. These findings from this study demonstrate a new gene-environment interactive mechanism of the RST.
Opioids are mainly used to treat both acute and chronic pain. Several opioids are metabolized to some extent by CYP2D6 (codeine, tramadol, hydrocodone, oxycodone, and methadone). Polymorphisms in CYP2D6 have been studied for an association with the clinical effect and safety of these drugs. Other genes that have been studied for their association with opioid clinical effect or adverse events include OPRM1 (mu receptor) and COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase). This guideline updates and expands the 2014 Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) guideline for CYP2D6 genotype and codeine therapy and includes a summation of the evidence describing the impact of CYP2D6, OPRM1, and COMT on opioid analgesia and adverse events. We provide therapeutic recommendations for the use of CYP2D6 genotype results for prescribing codeine and tramadol and describe the limited and/or weak data for CYP2D6 and hydrocodone, oxycodone, and methadone, and for OPRM1 and COMT for clinical use.
Pharmacogenetic research has the potential to explain the variation in treatment efficacy within patient populations. Understanding the interaction between genetic variation and medications may provide a method for matching patients to the most effective therapeutic options and improving overall patient outcomes. The OPRM1 gene has been a target of interest in a large number of pharmacogenetic studies due to its genetic and structural variation, as well as the role of opioid receptors in a variety of disorders. The mu-opioid receptor (MOR), encoded by OPRM1, naturally regulates the analgesic response to pain and also controls the rewarding effects of many drugs of abuse, including opioids, nicotine, and alcohol. Genetic variants in OPRM1, particularly the non-synonymous polymorphism A118G, have been repeatedly associated with the efficacy of treatments for pain and various types of dependence. This review focuses on the current understanding of the pharmacogenetic impact of OPRM1, primarily with regard to the treatment of pain and addiction.
Cancer pain is the most feared symptom at end of life. Methadone has advantages over other opioids but is associated with significant variability in clinical response, making dosing challenging in practice. OPRM1 is the most studied pharmacogene associated with the pharmacodynamics of opioids, however reports on the association of the A118G polymorphism on opioid dose requirements are conflicting, with no reports including methadone as the primary intervention. This association study on OPRM1 A118G and response to methadone for pain management, includes a review of this genetic factor's role in inter-patient variability. Fifty-four adult patients with advanced cancer were recruited in a prospective, multi-centre, open label dose individualization study. Patient characteristics were not shown to influence methadone response, and no significant associations were observed for methadone dose or pain score. The findings of our review of association studies for OPRM1 A118G in advanced cancer pain demonstrate the importance of taking ancestry into account. While our sample size was small, our results were consistent with European populations, but in contrast to studies in Chinese patients, where carriers of the A118G polymorphism were associated with higher opioid dose requirements. Pharmacogenetic studies in palliative care are challenging, continued contribution will support future genotype-based drug dosing guidelines.
Alcohol-use disorders are thought to be heterogeneous in etiology, pathophysiology and response to treatment. One hypothesized contributor to this variability is the common A118G polymorphism of the micro-opioid receptor gene, OPRM1. This article critically evaluates the evidence that the A118G substitution affects subjective, behavioral and neurobiological responses to alcohol and the opioid receptor antagonist, naltrexone. Although screening of patients in a clinical setting remains premature, results suggest the A118G substitution may influence one etiological pathway to alcoholism, for which naltrexone pharmacotherapy is more effective.
The human micro-opioid receptor variant 118 A>G (rs1799971) has become one of the most analyzed genetic variants in the pain field. At the molecular level, the variant reduces opioid receptor signaling efficiency and expression, the latter probably via a genetic-epigenetic interaction. In experimental settings, the variant was reproducibly associated with decreased effects of exogenous opioids. However, this translates into very small clinical effects (meta-analysis of 14 studies: Cohen's d = 0.096; p = 0.008), consisting of slightly higher opioid dosing requirements in peri- and post-operative settings. An effect can neither be maintained for chronic analgesic therapy nor for opioid side effects. It seems unlikely that further studies will reveal larger effect sizes and, therefore, further analyses appear unwarranted. Thus, due to its small effect size, the SNP is without major clinical relevance as a solitary variant, but should be regarded as a part of complex genotypes underlying pain and analgesia.
The largest proportion of methadone-associated deaths occurs during the drug induction phase. We analysed methadone-related fatalities for gene variations linked with methadone action. A significant association between high methadone concentrations and the CYP2B6*6 allele characteristic of the slow metabolizer phenotype was identified. We suggest that the risk of methadone fatality may be predetermined in part by the CYP2B6*6 allele. A significant correlation was also observed between post-mortem benzodiazepine concentrations and the OPRM1 A118G allele GA in methadone-related fatalities. Screening for these susceptibility variations prior to methadone prescription could assist in reducing the potential for serious adverse effects.
BACKGROUND: Recent research has implicated the endogenous opioid system in the development of alcohol use disorders. The A118G polymorphism of the OPRM1 gene has been shown to confer functional differences to mu-opioid receptors, such that the G variant binds beta-endorphin three times more strongly than the A variant. The goal of this study was to test whether the A118G polymorphism is associated with sensitivity to the effects of alcohol. METHODS: Participants who were either homozygous for the A allele (n = 23) or heterozygous (n = 15) received intravenous doses of alcohol designed to reach three target levels of breath alcohol concentration: 0.02, 0.04, and 0.06. The testing procedure consisted of measures of subjective intoxication, stimulation, sedation, and mood states at baseline and at each of the three target breath alcohol concentrations. RESULTS: The results suggested that individuals with the G allele reported higher subjective feelings of intoxication, stimulation, sedation, and happiness across trials as compared with participants with the A allele. Furthermore, participants with the G allele were almost three times more likely to report a positive family history of alcohol use disorders than participants with the A allele. CONCLUSIONS: These findings may help to explain previous research suggesting that naltrexone is more effective among individuals with the G allele. A medication that reduces feelings of euphoria after alcohol consumption may be more successful among individuals with a genetic predisposition to greater feelings of euphoria after consuming alcohol.
To determine whether the functional mu-opioid receptor (OPRM1) Asn40Asp variant predicts the comparative efficacy of different forms of NRT, we conducted a clinical trial of transdermal nicotine (TN) vs nicotine nasal spray (NS) in 320 smokers of European ancestry. Smokers carrying the OPRM1 Asp40 variant (n=82) were significantly more likely than those homozygous for the Asn40 variant (n=238) to be abstinent at the end of treatment, and reported less mood disturbance and weight gain. The genotype effect on treatment outcome was most pronounced among smokers receiving TN, particularly during the 21 mg dose phase. Smokers who carry the OPRM1 Asp40 variant are likely to have a favorable response to TN and may benefit from extended therapy with the 21 mg dose.
The mu-opioid receptor (MOR) is the primary target of methadone and buprenorphine. The primary neuronal transcript of the OPRM1 gene, MOR-1, contains a ~13 kb 3' untranslated region with five common haplotypes in European-Americans. We analyzed the effects of these haplotypes on the percentage of opioid positive urine tests in European-Americans (n=582) during a 24-week, randomized, open-label trial of methadone or buprenorphine/naloxone (Suboxone) for the treatment of opioid dependence. A single haplotype, tagged by rs10485058, was significantly associated with patient urinalysis data in the methadone treatment group. Methadone patients with the A/A genotype at rs10485058 were less likely to have opioid-positive urine drug screens than those in the combined A/G and G/G genotypes group (relative risk=0.76, 95% confidence intervals=0.73-0.80, P=0.0064). Genotype at rs10485058 also predicted self-reported relapse rates in an independent population of Australian patients of European descent (n=1215) who were receiving opioid substitution therapy (P=0.003). In silico analysis predicted that miR-95-3p would interact with the G, but not the A allele of rs10485058. Luciferase assays indicated miR-95-3p decreased reporter activity of constructs containing the G, but not the A allele of rs10485058, suggesting a potential mechanism for the observed pharmacogenetic effect. These findings suggest that selection of a medication for opioid dependence based on rs10485058 genotype might improve outcomes in this ethnic group.
Patients diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) exhibit differential responses to standard antidepressant pharmacotherapy. Mounting evidence demonstrates that genetic differences may be implicated in treatment response in disorders like GAD. In this study, we examined whether the OPRM1 gene, which has been implicated in antidepressant treatment response in major depressive disorder, also has an effect in GAD. In our study, 156 patients diagnosed with GAD received venlafaxine XR treatment as part of an 18-month relapse prevention study. Genotypes were obtained for the OPRM1 functional variant A118G for the entire sample (n = 151); however, only the European American population was considered (n = 108) for pharmacogenetic analysis. We found no significant association between A118G and antidepressant treatment response in our GAD population. Future studies that include different single nucleotide polymorphisms of the OPRM1 gene as well as larger populations will need to be conducted to further elucidate the pharmacogenetic role of the endogenous opioid system in anxiety disorders.
The regulation of MOR expression at the level of mRNA is relevant for its role in pain transmission and in other functions involving opioid receptors. Recently, the role of the 3'UTR in the posttranscriptional regulation of MOR expression has been highlighted. Here we describe a Renilla luciferase reporter assay for the study of the effect of any selective treatment on the 3'UTR-dependent regulation of OPRM1 in a model of glial cells.
BACKGROUND: The mu-opioid receptor (MOR) plays an important role in social bonding behaviors, while it is implicated in the pathophysiology of depression. It is shown that the A118G polymorphism (rs1799971) of the MOR gene (OPRM1) causes amino-acid exchange from Asn to Asp, and that this polymorphism is associated with altered mu-opioid receptor function. Meanwhile, sociotropy/autonomy and interpersonal sensitivity are personality vulnerabilities to depression characterized by distinctive interpersonal styles. The present study tested the hypothesis that the functional A118G OPRM1 polymorphism influences these personality traits. METHODS: The subjects were 402 physically and mentally healthy Japanese volunteers. Sociotropy and autonomy were measured by the Sociotropy-Autonomy Scale, and interpersonal sensitivity was evaluated by the Interpersonal Sensitivity Measure. The A118G polymorphism of the OPRM1 was determined by the PCR method. RESULTS: In one factor analysis of covariance, there were differences in scores of sociotropy (uncorrected p < .001, corrected p < .003) and interpersonal sensitivity (uncorrected p = .015, corrected p = .045), but not autonomy, among the A/A, A/G, and G/G genotypes. Post hoc LSD tests showed that sociotropy scores were higher in the A/A group than in the A/G (p = .029) and G/G (p < .001) groups, and higher in the A/G group than in the G/G group (p = .004). Interpersonal sensitivity scores were higher in the A/A group than in the A/G (p = .023) and G/G (p = .009) groups. CONCLUSION: This study suggests that the A118G OPRM1 polymorphism is associated with sociotropy and interpersonal sensitivity, interpersonal vulnerabilities to depression.
