Dual 3',5'-cyclic-AMP and -GMP phosphodiesterase 11A; Plays a role in signal transduction by regulating the intracellular concentration of cyclic nucleotides cAMP and cGMP. Catalyzes the hydrolysis of both cAMP and cGMP to 5'-AMP and 5'-GMP, respectively.
We present the pathologic findings in the adrenal glands of 4 patients, aged 10 to 38 years, with Cushing syndrome and germline inactivating mutations of the gene PDE11A4 that encodes phosphodiesterase11A4. The gene is expressed in the adrenal cortex and catalyses the hydrolysis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate and cyclic guanosine monophosphate. Two of the patients were mother and daughter; the third had no affected relative; the fourth patient inherited the mutation from her father. Three of the group, including the mother and daughter, had the same pathology, primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, a disorder known to be caused by inactivating mutations of the PRKAR1A gene. In these cases, the adrenal glands were small and the pathologic change was deep in the cortex in which numerous pigmented micronodules developed. In the remaining patient, the glands were slightly enlarged primarily owing to a diffuse hyperplasia of the superficial cortex that extended into the epi-adrenal fat.
cAMP and cGMP are important secondary messengers involved in cell regulation and metabolism driven by the G protein‑coupled receptor. cAMP is converted via adenylyl cyclase (AC) and activates protein kinase A to phosphorylate intracellular proteins that mediate specific responses. cAMP signaling serves a role at multiple steps in tumorigenesis. The level of cAMP is increased in association with cancer cell formation through activation of AC‑stimulatory G protein by mutation. Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) hydrolyze cAMP and cGMP to AMP and GMP. PDEs are composed of 11 families, and each can hydrolyze cAMP and cGMP or both cAMP and cGMP. PDEs perform various roles depending on their location and expression site, and are involved in several diseases, including male erectile dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia. PDE11A is the 11th member of the PDE family and is characterized by four splice variants with varying tissue expression and N‑terminal regulatory regions. Among tissues, the expression of PDE11A was highest in the prostate, and it was also expressed in hepatic skeletal muscle, pituitary, pancreas and kidney. PDE11A is the first PDE associated with an adrenocortical tumor associated genetic condition. In several studies, three PDE11A mutations have been reported in patients with Cushing syndrome with primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease or isolated micronodular adrenocortical disease without other genetic defects. It has been reported that an increase in PDE11A expression affects the proliferation of glioblastoma and worsens patient prognosis. The present mini‑review summarizes the location of PDE11A expression, the impact of structural differences and disease relevance.
PURPOSE: Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) is the most common malignancy among young adult males. The etiology is multifactorial and both environmental and genetic factors play an important role in the origin and development of TGCT. Genetic susceptibility may result from the interaction of multiple common and low-penetrance genetic variants and one of the main candidate genes is PDE11A. Many PDE11A polymorphisms were found responsible for a reduced PDE activity in TGCT patients, who often also display impaired hormone and sperm profile. The aim of this study was to investigate testicular function and PDE11A sequence in testicular cancer cases. METHODS: Semen analysis was performed in 116 patients with unilateral and bilateral sporadic TGCTs and in 120 cancer-free controls. We also investigated hormone profile and PDE11A polymorphisms using peripheral blood samples. RESULTS: Our data revealed that TGCT patients showed lower testosterone levels, higher gonadotropins levels and worse semen quality than controls, although the mean and the medians of sperm parameters are within the reference limits. PDE11A sequencing detected ten polymorphisms not yet associated with TGCTs before. Among these, G223A in homozygosity and A288G in heterozygosity were significantly associated with a lower risk of testicular tumour and they displayed a positive correlation with total sperm number. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the key role of PDE11A in testis and suggest the presence of an underlying complex and fine molecular mechanism which controls testis-specific gene expression and susceptibility to testicular cancer.
To identify novel risk genes and better understand the molecular pathway underlying Alzheimer's disease (AD), whole-exome sequencing was performed in 215 early-onset AD (EOAD) patients and 255 unrelated healthy controls of Han Chinese ethnicity. Subsequent validation, computational annotation and in vitro functional studies were performed to evaluate the role of candidate variants in EOAD. We identified two rare missense variants in the phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A) gene in individuals with EOAD. Both variants are located in evolutionarily highly conserved amino acids, are predicted to alter the protein conformation and are classified as pathogenic. Furthermore, we found significantly decreased protein levels of PDE11A in brain samples of AD patients. Expression of PDE11A variants and knockdown experiments with specific short hairpin RNA (shRNA) for PDE11A both resulted in an increase of AD-associated Tau hyperphosphorylation at multiple epitopes in vitro. PDE11A variants or PDE11A shRNA also caused increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels, protein kinase A (PKA) activation and cAMP response element-binding protein phosphorylation. In addition, pretreatment with a PKA inhibitor (H89) suppressed PDE11A variant-induced Tau phosphorylation formation. This study offers insight into the involvement of Tau phosphorylation via the cAMP/PKA pathway in EOAD pathogenesis and provides a potential new target for intervention.
Germline inactivating mutations of isoform 4 of phosphodiesterase (PDE) 11A (coded by the PDE11A gene) have been associated with familial adrenocortical tumors and familial testicular cancer. Testicular tissue is unique in expressing all four isoforms of PDE11A. In a prior candidate gene study of 94 familial testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT) subjects, we identified a significant association between the presence of functionally abnormal variants in PDE11A and familial TGCT risk. To validate this novel observation, we sequenced the PDE11A coding region in 259 additional TGCT patients (both familial and sporadic) and 363 controls. We identified 55 PDE11A variants: 20 missense, four splice-site, two nonsense, seven synonymous, and 22 intronic. Ten missense variants were novel; nine occurred in transcript variant 4 and one in transcript variant 3. Five rare mutations (p.F258Y, p.G291R, p.V820M, p.R545X, and p.K568R) were present only in cases and were significantly more common in cases vs controls (P=0.0037). The latter two novel variants were functionally characterized and shown to be functionally inactivating, resulting in reduced PDE activity and increased cAMP levels. In further analysis of this cohort, we focused on white participants only to minimize confounding due to population stratification. This study builds upon our prior reports implicating PDE11A variants in familial TGCT, provides the first independent validation of those findings, extends that work to sporadic testicular cancer, demonstrates that these variants are uncommonly but reproducibly associated with TGCT, and refines our understanding regarding which specific inactivating PDE11A variants are most likely to be associated with TGCT risk.
Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A) is the newest member in the PDE family. Although the tissue distribution of PDE11A mRNA has been shown, its protein expression pattern has not been well studied. The goal of this report is to investigate the distribution of PDE11A proteins in a wide range of normal and malignant human tissues. We utilized a polyclonal antibody that recognized all four PDE11A isoforms. Its specificity was demonstrated by Western blot analysis on a recombinant human PDE11A protein and native PDE11A proteins in various human tissues. Immunohistochemistry showed that PDE11A is widely expressed. Various degrees of immunoreactivity were observed in the epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and smooth muscle cells of all tissues examined. The highest expression was in the epithelial, endothelial, and smooth muscle cells of the prostate, Leydig, and spermatogenic cells of the testis, the tubule epithelial cells in the kidney, the epithelial and endothelial cells in the adrenal, the epithelial cells and macrophages in the colon, and the epidermis in the skin. Furthermore, PDE11A expression was also detected in several human carcinomas. Our results suggest that PDE11A might be involved in multiple physiological processes in various organs via its ability to modulate intracellular cAMP and cGMP levels.
CONTEXT: Among the genomic loci harboring potential candidate genes for prostatic cancer (PCa) is the 2q31-33 chromosomal region that harbors the gene encoding phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A). In addition, the combined cancer genome expression metaanalysis datasets included PDE11A among the top 1% down-regulated genes in PCa. OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we screened 50 unrelated PCa patients of Brazilian descent for PDE11A coding defects. DESIGN: The study consisted of PDE11A sequencing, in vitro functional assays, and immunostaining analysis. RESULTS: We identified eight different sequence alterations in 15 patients (30%): one stop-codon and seven missense mutations. Three of the variants (R202C, Y658C, and E840K) were novel, and the remaining five (Y727C, R804H, R867G, M878V, and R307X) have been associated with predisposition to adrenal or testicular tumors. The overall prevalence of PDE11A-inactivating sequence variants among PCa patients was significantly higher than in 287 healthy controls (0.16 vs. 0.051, respectively, P < 0.001, odds ratio 3.81, 95% confidence interval 1.86-7.81) and the R202C, Y658C, and E840K substitutions were not found in controls. All missense mutations led to decreased PDE11A activity in human embryonic kidney 293 and PC3M cells and immunostaining of PCa samples with sequence changes showed decreased PDE11A protein expression. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that, like in the adrenal cortex and the testicular germ cells, PDE11A-inactivating genetic alterations may play a role in susceptibility to PCa.
PURPOSE: We have reported previously nonsense inactivating mutations of the phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A) gene in patients with micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia and Cushing syndrome. The aim of this study is to investigate the presence of somatic or germ-line PDE11A mutations in various types of adrenocortical tumors: ACTH-independent macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (AIMAH), adrenocortical adenoma (ACA), and adrenocortical cancer (ACC). EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: PDE11A was sequenced in 117 adrenocortical tumors and 192 controls subjects; immunohistochemistry for PDE11A and tumor cyclic AMP levels were studied in a subgroup of adrenocortical tumors. RESULTS: One PDE11A inactivating mutation (R307X) was found in one ACA, 22 germ-line missense variants (18.8%) were found in adrenocortical tumors, and only 11 missense variants (5.7%) were found in controls. By comparing the common mutations, a higher frequency of mutations in adrenocortical tumors than in age/sex-matched controls were observed [16% versus 10% in ACC, 19% versus 10% in ACA, and 24% versus 9% in AIMAH; odds ratio (OR), 3.53; P = 0.05]. Somatic DNA from adrenocortical tumors with missense variants showed a wild-type allelic loss. A significant difference between ACC and controls was observed for a polymorphism in exon 6 (E421E; OR, 2.1; P = 0.03) and three associated polymorphisms located in intron 10-exon 11-intron 11 (OR, 0.5; P = 0.01). In AIMAH/ACA, cyclic AMP levels were higher than in normal adrenals and decreased PDE11A immunostaining was present in adrenocortical tumors with PDE11A variants. CONCLUSIONS: The present investigation of a large cohort of adrenocortical tumors suggests that PDE11A sequence defects predispose to a variety of lesions (beyond micronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia) and may contribute to the development of these tumors in the general population.
BACKGROUND: Carney complex (CNC) is an autosomal dominant multiple neoplasia, caused mostly by inactivating mutations of the regulatory subunit 1A of the protein kinase A (PRKAR1A). Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD) is the most frequent endocrine manifestation of CNC with a great inter-individual variability. Germline, protein-truncating mutations of phosphodiesterase type 11A (PDE11A) have been described to predispose to a variety of endocrine tumors, including adrenal and testicular tumors. OBJECTIVES: Our objective was to investigate the role of PDE11A as a possible gene modifier of the phenotype in a series of 150 patients with CNC. RESULTS: A higher frequency of PDE11A variants in patients with CNC compared with healthy controls was found (25.3 vs. 6.8%, P < 0.0001). Among CNC patients, those with PPNAD were significantly more frequently carriers of PDE11A variants compared with patients without PPNAD (30.8 vs. 13%, P = 0.025). Furthermore, men with PPNAD were significantly more frequently carriers of PDE11A sequence variants (40.7%) than women with PPNAD (27.3%) (P < 0.001). A higher frequency of PDE11A sequence variants was also found in patients with large-cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors (LCCSCT) compared with those without LCCSCT (50 vs. 10%, P = 0.0056). PDE11A variants were significantly associated with the copresence of PPNAD and LCCSCT in men: 81 vs. 20%, P < 0.004). The simultaneous inactivation of PRKAR1A and PDE11A by small inhibitory RNA led to an increase in cAMP-regulatory element-mediated transcriptional activity under basal conditions and after stimulation by forskolin. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate, in a large cohort of CNC patients, a high frequency of PDE11A variants, suggesting that PDE11A is a genetic modifying factor for the development of testicular and adrenal tumors in patients with germline PRKAR1A mutation.
We report here the cloning, expression, and characterization of human PDE11A1, a member of a distinct cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE) family. PDE11A exhibits </=50% amino acid identity with the catalytic domains of all other PDEs, being most similar to PDE5, and has distinct biochemical properties. The human PDE11A1 cDNA isolated contains a complete open reading frame encoding a 490-amino acid enzyme with a predicted molecular mass of 55,786 Da. At the N terminus PDE11A1 has a single GAF domain homologous to that found in other signaling molecules, including PDE2, PDE5, PDE6, and PDE10, which constitutes a potential allosteric binding site for cGMP or another small ligand. Tissue distribution studies indicate that PDE11A mRNA occurs at highest levels in skeletal muscle, prostate, kidney, liver, pituitary, and salivary glands and testis. PDE11A is expressed as at least three major transcripts of approximately 10.5, approximately 8.5, and approximately 6.0 kb, thus suggesting the existence of multiple subtypes. This possibility is further supported by the detection of three distinct proteins of approximately 78, approximately 65, and approximately 56 kDa by Western blotting of human tissues for PDE11A isoforms. Recombinant human PDE11A1 hydrolyzes both cGMP and cAMP with K(m) values of 0.52 microM and 1.04 microM, respectively, and similar V(max) values. Therefore, PDE11A represents a dual-substrate PDE that may regulate both cGMP and cAMP under physiological conditions. PDE11A is sensitive to the nonselective PDE inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) as well as zaprinast and dipyridamole, inhibitors that are generally considered relatively specific for the cGMP-selective PDEs, with IC(50) values of 49.8 microM, 12.0 microM, and 0.37 microM, respectively.
PDE11A is a dual-substrate, cAMP and cGMP, cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (PDE). Presently four unique variants carrying distinct GAF sequences in the N-terminal region have been identified. While human PDE11A3 and PDE11A4 are known to be specifically expressed in testis and prostate, respectively, PDE11A1 was mainly detected in skeletal muscle. The human PDE11A gene was investigated and revealed to span > 300 kb, contain 23 exons and be mapped on chromosome 2q31. The transcription start sites of PDE11A1, PDE11A3 and PDE11A4 were determined, and the promoter sequences were revealed. Although 5' flanking genomic regions of PDE11A1 and PDE11A3 had a consensus TATA motif, that of PDE11A4 was a TATA-less but contained CCAAT box and Sp1-binding sequence. Interestingly, we found that the exon 2 sequence for N-terminal region of PDE11A3 encoded an N-terminal sequence of the cytochrome c pseudogene in an alternate reading frame, and that C-terminal region of the cytochrome c pseudogene in intron 2 was disrupted by the insertion of Alu repetitive sequence. Furthermore, we examined the exon-intron organization of the PDE2A gene and compared the exon organization among GAF-PDE family. The exon organization of the PDE11A catalytic domain was very similar to those of PDE5A and PDE6B. However, other GAF-PDEs, PDE2A and PDE10A, displayed different exon organization from PDE11A although these three PDEs are similar in their amino-acid sequences to each other. The findings suggested that PDE11A has a common ancestral gene with PDE5A and PDE6s, whereas PDE2A and PDE10A are generated separately from these three GAF-PDEs.
CONTEXT: Phosphodiesterases (PDEs) are key regulatory enzymes of intracellular cAMP levels. PDE11A function has been linked to predisposition to adrenocortical tumors. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to study the PDE11A gene in a large cohort of patients with ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH) and in control subjects. DESIGN: The PDE11A entire coding region was sequenced in 46 patients with AIMAH and 192 controls. Two variants found in AIMAH patients were transiently expressed in HEK 293 and adrenocortical H295R cells for further functional studies. RESULTS: The frequency of all PDE11A variants was significantly higher among patients with AIMAH (28%) compared to controls (7.2%) (P = 5 x 10(-5)). Transfection of the two PDE11A variants found in AIMAH patients only (D609N or M878V) showed that cAMP levels were higher, after forskolin stimulation, in cells transfected with the PDE11A mutants, compared to cells transfected with the wild-type PDE11A in HEK 293 cells (P < 0.05). Moreover, transfection with mutants PDE11A increased transcriptional activity of a cAMP-response element reporter construct compared to wild-type PDE11A in HEK 293 cells (P < 0.0004 for D609N and P < 0.003 for M878V) and in the adrenocortical H295R cells (P < 0.05 for D609N and M878V). In addition, analysis of cAMP levels in intact living culture cells by fluorescence resonance energy transfer probes showed increased cAMP in forskolin-treated cells transfected with PDE11A variants compared with wild-type PDE11A (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: We conclude that PDE11A genetic variants may increase predisposition to AIMAH.
