Platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as a cell-surface receptor for PDGFA, PDGFB and PDGFC and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival and chemotaxis. Depending on the context, promotes or inhibits cell proliferation and cell migration. Plays an important role in the differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Required for normal skeleton development and cephalic closure during embryonic development. Required for normal development of the mucosa lining the gastrointes [...] 
The Cancer Genome Atlas Network recently cataloged recurrent genomic abnormalities in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). We describe a robust gene expression-based molecular classification of GBM into Proneural, Neural, Classical, and Mesenchymal subtypes and integrate multidimensional genomic data to establish patterns of somatic mutations and DNA copy number. Aberrations and gene expression of EGFR, NF1, and PDGFRA/IDH1 each define the Classical, Mesenchymal, and Proneural subtypes, respectively. Gene signatures of normal brain cell types show a strong relationship between subtypes and different neural lineages. Additionally, response to aggressive therapy differs by subtype, with the greatest benefit in the Classical subtype and no benefit in the Proneural subtype. We provide a framework that unifies transcriptomic and genomic dimensions for GBM molecular stratification with important implications for future studies.
Lartruvo (olaratumab) is a monoclonal antibody against the extracellular domain of PDGFRA. Olaratumab blocks ligand binding and thereby inhibits activation of PDGFRA kinase activity. Pre-clinically, this antibody inhibited PDGFRA-dependent tumor growth. In a randomized Phase II study, adding olaratumab to doxorubicin chemotherapy significantly improved overall survival, leading to FDA approval.
Platelet-derived growth subunit A (PDGFA) plays critical roles in development of glioblastoma (GBM) with substantial evidence from TCGA database analyses and in vivo mouse models. So far, only platelet-derived growth receptor alpha (PDGFRA) has been identified as receptor for PDGFA. However, PDGFA and PDGFRA are categorized into different molecular subtypes of GBM in TCGA_GBM database. Our data herein further showed that activity or expression deficiency of PDGFRA did not effectively block PDGFA activity. Therefore, PDGFRA might be not necessary for PDGFA function.To profile proteins involved in PDGFA function, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and Mass Spectrum (MS) and delineated the network of PDGFA-associated proteins for the first time. Unexpectedly, the data showed that EPHA2 could be temporally activated by PDGFA even without activation of PDGFRA and AKT. Furthermore, MS, Co-IP, in vitro binding thermodynamics, and proximity ligation assay consistently proved the interaction of EPHA2 and PDGFA. In addition, we observed that high expression of EPHA2 leaded to upregulation of PDGF signaling targets in TCGA_GBM database and clinical GBM samples. Co-upregulation of PDGFRA and EPHA2 leaded to worse patient prognosis and poorer therapeutic effects than other contexts, which might arise from expression elevation of genes related with malignant molecular subtypes and invasive growth. Due to PDGFA-induced EPHA2 activation, blocking PDGFRA by inhibitor could not effectively suppress proliferation of GBM cells, but simultaneous inhibition of both EPHA2 and PDGFRA showed synergetic inhibitory effects on GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, our study provided new insights on PDGFA function and revealed EPHA2 as a potential receptor of PDGFA. EPHA2 might contribute to PDGFA signaling transduction in combination with PDGFRA and mediate the resistance of GBM cells to PDGFRA inhibitor. Therefore, combination of inhibitors targeting PDGFRA and EHA2 represented a promising therapeutic strategy for GBM treatment.
BACKGROUND: PDGFRA D842V mutations occur in 5-10% of gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs), and previously approved tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) are inactive against this mutation. Consequently, patients have a poor prognosis. We present an updated analysis of avapritinib efficacy and long-term safety in this patient population. METHODS: NAVIGATOR (NCT02508532), a two-part, open-label, dose-escalation/dose-expansion phase I study, enrolled adult patients with unresectable GISTs. Patients with PDGFRA D842V-mutant GIST were a prespecified subgroup within the overall safety population, which included patients who received >/=1 avapritinib dose. Primary end-points were overall response rate (ORR) and avapritinib safety profile. Secondary end-points were clinical benefit rate (CBR), duration of response (DOR) and progression-free survival (PFS). Overall survival (OS) was an exploratory end-point. RESULTS: Between 7 October 2015 and 9 March 2020, 250 patients enrolled in the safety population; 56 patients were included in the PDGFRA D842V population, 11 were TKI-naive. At data cut-off, median follow-up was 27.5 months. Safety profile was comparable between the overall safety and PDGFRA D842V populations. In the PDGFRA D842V population, the most frequent adverse events were nausea (38 [68%] patients) and diarrhoea (37 [66%]), and cognitive effects occurred in 32 (57%) patients. The ORR was 91% (51/56 patients). The CBR was 98% (55/56 patients). The median DOR was 27.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI]: 17.6-not reached [NR]); median PFS was 34.0 months (95% CI: 22.9-NR). Median OS was not reached. CONCLUSION: Targeting PDGFRA D842V-mutant GIST with avapritinib resulted in an unprecedented, durable clinical benefit, with a manageable safety profile. Avapritinib should be considered as first-line therapy for these patients.
BACKGROUND: Targeting of KIT and PDGFRA with imatinib revolutionised treatment in gastrointestinal stromal tumour; however, PDGFRA Asp842Val (D842V)-mutated gastrointestinal stromal tumour is highly resistant to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. We aimed to assess the safety, tolerability, and antitumour activity of avapritinib, a novel KIT and PDGFRA inhibitor that potently inhibits PDGFRA D842V, in patients with advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumours, including patients with KIT and PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumours (NAVIGATOR). METHODS: NAVIGATOR is a two-part, open-label, dose-escalation and dose-expansion, phase 1 study done at 17 sites across nine countries (Belgium, France, Germany, Poland, Netherlands, South Korea, Spain, the UK, and the USA). Patients aged 18 years or older, with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 2 or less, and with adequate end-organ function were eligible to participate. The dose-escalation part of the study included patients with unresectable gastrointestinal stromal tumours. The dose-expansion part of the study included patients with an unresectable PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour regardless of previous therapy or gastrointestinal stromal tumour with other mutations that either progressed on imatinib and one or more tyrosine kinase inhibitor, or only received imatinib previously. On the basis of enrolment trends, ongoing review of study data, and evolving knowledge regarding the gastrointestinal stromal tumour treatment paradigm, it was decided by the sponsor's medical director together with the investigators that patients with PDGFRA D842V mutations would be analysed separately; the results from this group of patients is reported in this Article. Oral avapritinib was administered once daily in the dose-escalation part (starting dose of 30 mg, with increasing dose levels once daily in continuous 28-day cycles until the maximum tolerated dose or recommended phase 2 dose was determined; in the dose-expansion part, the starting dose was the maximum tolerated dose from the dose-escalation part). Primary endpoints were maximum tolerated dose, recommended phase 2 dose, and safety in the dose-escalation part, and overall response and safety in the dose-expansion part. Safety was assessed in all patients from the dose-escalation part and all patients with PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour in the dose-expansion part, and activity was assessed in all patients with PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour who received avapritinib and who had at least one target lesion and at least one post-baseline disease assessment by central radiology. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02508532. FINDINGS: Between Oct 26, 2015, and Nov 16, 2018 (data cutoff), 46 patients were enrolled in the dose-escalation part, including 20 patients with a PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour, and 36 patients with a PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour were enrolled in the dose-expansion part. At data cutoff (Nov 16, 2018), 38 (46%) of 82 patients in the safety population (median follow-up of 19.1 months [IQR 9.2-25.5]) and 37 (66%) of the 56 patients in the PDGFRA D842V population (median follow-up of 15.9 months [IQR 9.2-24.9]) remained on treatment. The maximum tolerated dose was 400 mg, and the recommended phase 2 dose was 300 mg. In the safety population (patients with PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumour from the dose-escalation and dose-expansion parts, all doses), treatment-related grade 3-4 events occurred in 47 (57%) of 82 patients, the most common being anaemia (14 [17%]); there were no treatment-related deaths. In the PDGFRA D842V-mutant population, 49 (88%; 95% CI 76-95) of 56 patients had an overall response, with five (9%) complete responses and 44 (79%) partial responses. No dose-limiting toxicities were observed at doses of 30-400 mg per day. At 600 mg, two patients had dose-limiting toxicities (grade 2 hypertension, dermatitis acneiform, and memory impairment in patient 1, and grade 2 hyperbilirubinaemia in patient 2). INTERPRETATION: Avapritinib has a manageable safety profile and has preliminary antitumour activity in patients with advanced PDGFRA D842V-mutant gastrointestinal stromal tumours. FUNDING: Blueprint Medicines.
Germline PDGFRA mutations cause multiple heterogeneous gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors. In its familial form this disease, which was formerly termed intestinal neurofibromatosis/neurofibromatosis 3b (INF/NF3b), has been included among familial gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) because of its genotype, described when GIST was the only known PDGFRA-mutant gastrointestinal tumor. Shortly afterwards, however, inflammatory fibroid polyps also revealed PDGFRA mutations. Subsequently, gastrointestinal CD34+ 'fibrous tumors' of uncertain classification were described in a germline PDGFRA-mutant context. Our aim was to characterize the syndrome produced by germline PDGFRA mutations and establish diagnostic criteria and management strategies for this hitherto puzzling disease. We studied a kindred displaying multiple gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors, comparing it with published families/individuals with possible analogous conditions. We identified a novel inherited PDGFRA mutation (P653L), constituting the third reported example of familial PDGFRA mutation. In adult mutants we detected inflammatory fibroid polyps, gastric GISTs and gastrointestinal fibrous tumors of uncertain nosology. We demonstrate that the syndrome formerly defined as INF/NF3b (exemplified by the family reported herein) is simplistically considered a form of familial GIST, because inflammatory fibroid polyps often prevail. Fibrous tumors appear variants of inflammatory fibroid polyps. 'INF/NF3b' and 'familial GIST' are misleading terms which we propose changing to 'PDGFRA-mutant syndrome'. In this condition, unlike KIT-dependent familial GIST syndromes, if present, GISTs are stomach-restricted and diffuse Cajal cell hyperplasia is not observed. This restriction of GISTs to the stomach in PDGFRA-mutant syndrome: (i) focuses oncological concern on gastric masses, as inflammatory fibroid polyps are benign; (ii) supports a selective role of gastric environment for PDGFRA mutations to elicit GISTs, justifying the known predilection for stomach of sporadic PDGFRA-mutant GISTs. An awareness that inflammatory fibroid polyps, relatively common among gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumors, may be the prevailing tumor in PDGFRA-mutant syndrome could eventually reveal an unsuspected prevalence of this condition.
We report a 4-year-old female who presented with severe hypereosinophilia (215.7 K/mul) and end-organ dysfunction. Extensive evaluation including whole exome sequencing was performed, revealing no causative mutation. Initial treatment with corticosteroids, leukapheresis, and hydroxyurea decreased her absolute eosinophil count (AEC), although it remained elevated. Despite the absence of a PDGFRA mutation, an imatinib trial resulted in normalization of her AEC. Imatinib was discontinued after sustained normal counts for 1 month. AECs have remained normal for more than 1 year off therapy. This provides support for consideration of imatinib in the treatment of hypereosinophilia even in the absence of a known tyrosine kinase mutation.
The BCR-PDGFRA fusion is a very rare event. To date, only eight cases of hematolymphoid neoplasms with the BCR-PDGFRA fusion gene have been reported. All cases except one had eosinophilia. We present the first case of T acute lymphoblastic leukemia with a t(4;22)(q12;q11.2) involving the BCR and PDGFRA genes, without associated eosinophilia. Radiology showed splenomegaly and extensive lymph node involvement. The patient rapidly achieved complete remission with treatment protocol for Philadelphia chromosome-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
This myxoid glioneuronal tumor, PDGFRA p.K385L-mutant, arose in the midbrain tectum rather than in the septum pellucidum, as in the previously-reported cases.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Most GIST harbor a mutation affecting either the KIT or PDGFRA genes, whereas a small subgroup of tumors is wild type for mutations.Mutation of tyrosine kinase receptors is a mechanism of drug resistance that can occur either at the beginning of treatment (primary resistance) or during the course of therapy (secondary resistance). In addition, mutational status can predict the response to treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors, but the role of mutational status as a prognostic factor remains controversial.Evidence of a potential role of mutational status as a prognostic factor has emerged over the past decade. The presence of KIT exon 11 insertion/deletion involving either one or both Trp557-Lys558 amino acids correlates with a poorer clinical outcome if compared to patients with tumors wild type for KIT exon 11 mutations. A malignant clinical behavior has also been documented for KIT exon 13 and KIT exon 9 mutant GIST. Patients with GIST harboring a PDGFRA mutation seem to have a better prognosis than the others.The aim of this paper is to review the clinical significance of tyrosine kinase mutational status.
INTRODUCTION: Approximately 90% of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are driven by activating mutations in receptor tyrosine-kinases KIT or PDGFRA. Despite the outstanding results of first-line imatinib in advanced GIST, resistance ultimately occurs mainly through secondary mutations in KIT/PDGFRA. Other tyrosine-kinase inhibitors (TKIs) with a broader spectrum of activity against these mutations are approved after imatinib failure. However, response rates and progression-free survival are drastically lower compared to imatinib. Notably, imatinib also triggers early tolerance adaptation mechanisms, which precede the occurrence of secondary mutations. AREAS COVERED: In this review, we outline the current landscape of KIT inhibitors, discuss the novel agents, and present additional biological pathways that may be therapeutically exploitable. EXPERT OPINION: The development of broad-spectrum and highly selective TKIs able to induce a sustained KIT/PDGFRA inhibition is the pillar of preclinical and clinical investigation in GIST. However, it is now recognized that the situation is more intricate, with various factors interacting with KIT and PDGFRA, playing a crucial role in the response and resistance to treatments. Future strategies in the management of advanced GIST should integrate driver inhibition with the blockade of other molecules to enhance cell death and establish enduring responses in patients.
Many variants of uncertain significance (VUS) have been detected in clinical cancer cases using next-generation sequencing-based cancer gene panel analysis. One strategy for the elucidation of VUS is the functional analysis of cultured cancer cell lines that harbor targeted gene variants using genome editing. Genome editing is a powerful tool for creating desired gene alterations in cultured cancer cell lines. However, the efficiency of genome editing varies substantially among cell lines of interest. We performed comparative studies to determine the optimal editing conditions for the introduction of platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) variants in human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines. After monitoring the copy numbers of PDGFRA and the expression level of the PDGFRalpha protein, four GBM cell lines (U-251 MG, KNS-42, SF126, and YKG-1 cells) were selected for the study. To compare the editing efficiency in these GBM cell lines, the modes of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-associated protein 9 (Cas9) delivery (plasmid vs. ribonucleoprotein (RNP)), methods of transfection (lipofection vs. electroporation), and usefulness of cell sorting were then evaluated. Herein, we demonstrated that electroporation-mediated transfer of Cas9 with single-guide RNA (Cas9 RNP complex) could sufficiently edit a target nucleotide substitution, irrespective of cell sorting. As the Cas9 RNP complex method showed a higher editing efficiency than the Cas9 plasmid lipofection method, it was the optimal method for single-nucleotide editing in human GBM cell lines under our experimental conditions.
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most frequent tumor of the central nervous system, and its heterogeneity is a challenge in treatment. This study examined tumoral heterogeneity involving PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR gene amplification (GA) in 4q12 and its association with clinical parameters. Specimens from 22 GBM cases with GA for the 4q12 amplicon detected by FISH were investigated for homogeneous or heterogeneous coamplification patterns, diffuse or focal distribution of cells harboring GA throughout tumor sections, and pattern of clustering of fluorescence signals. Sixteen cases had homogenously amplification for all three genes (45.5%), for PDGFRA and KDR (22.7%), or only for PDGFRA (4.6%); six cases had heterogeneous GA patterns, with subpopulations including GA for all three genes and for two genes - PDGFRA and KDR (13.6%), or GA for all three and for only one gene - PDGFRA (9.1%) or KIT (4.6%). In 6 tumors (27.3%), GA was observed in focal tumor areas, while in the remaining 16 tumors (72.7%) it was diffusely distributed throughout the pathological specimen. Amplification was universally expressed as double minutes and homogenously stained regions. Coamplification of all three genes PDGFRA, KIT, and KDR, age >/= 60 years, and total tumor resection were statistically associated with poor prognosis. FISH proved effective for detailed interpretation of molecular heterogeneity. The study uncovered an even more diverse range of amplification patterns involving the 4q12 oncogenes in GBM than previously described, thus highlighting a complex tumoral heterogeneity to be considered when devising more effective therapies.
