Platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta; Tyrosine-protein kinase that acts as cell-surface receptor for homodimeric PDGFB and PDGFD and for heterodimers formed by PDGFA and PDGFB, and plays an essential role in the regulation of embryonic development, cell proliferation, survival, differentiation, chemotaxis and migration. Plays an essential role in blood vessel development by promoting proliferation, migration and recruitment of pericytes and smooth muscle cells to endothelial cells. Plays a role in the migration of vascular smooth muscle cells and the formation of neointima at v [...] 
Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) comprises  approximately 10% to 15% of childhood ALL cases, many of which respond exquisitely to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), for example, imatinib in PDGFRB-rearranged ALL. However, some cases developed drug resistance to TKIs and the mechanisms are poorly understood. In this study, we identified a novel PDGFRB fusion gene, namely AGGF1-PDGFRB, and functionally characterized its oncogenic potential in vitro. Further genomic profiling of longitudinally collected samples during treatment revealed the emergence of a mutation, PDGFRB(C843G) , which directly conferred resistance to all generations of ABL TKIs, including imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, and ponatinib. PDGFRB-mutant leukemia cells are highly sensitive to multitarget kinase inhibitor CHZ868, suggesting potential therapeutic options for some patients resistant to ABL TKIs. In summary, we describe a complex clonal evolution pattern in Ph-like ALL and identified a novel PDGFRB point mutation that drives leukemia relapse after ABL TKI treatment.
A 9-year-old girl was diagnosed with B-cell precursor-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL). Although she entered remission after induction therapy, she relapsed 15 months after maintenance therapy cessation. Since further investigation revealed EBF1-PDGFRB fusion, her condition was treated as BCR-ABL1-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia. She was started on a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, imatinib, and chemotherapy and underwent umbilical cord blood transplantation following reduced intensity conditioning. She has remained in complete remission for 36 months after cord blood transplantation. This case demonstrates the successful use of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor to treat BCP-ALL with a fusion transcript and highlights the need for a standardized treatment protocol.
Myeloid and lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia and abnormalities of platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA), platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB), and fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1) are a group of hematologic neoplasms resulting from the formation of abnormal fusion genes that encode constitutively activated tyrosine kinases. These entities are now separated into their own major category in the 2008 World Health Organization classification of hematolymphoid tumors. Although eosinophilia is characteristic of these diseases, the clinical presentation of the three entities is variable. Conventional cytogenetics (karyotyping) will detect the majority of abnormalities involving PDGFRB and FGFR1, but florescence in situ hybridization (FISH)/molecular studies are required to detect factor interacting with PAP (FIP1L1)-PDGFRA as the characteristic 4q12 interstitial deletion is cryptic. Imatinib mesylate (imatinib) is the first-line therapy for patients with abnormalities of PDGFRA/B, whereas patients with FGFR1 fusions are resistant to this therapy and carry a poor prognosis. The discovery of novel gene rearrangements associated with eosinophilia will further guide our understanding of the molecular pathobiology of these diseases and aid in the development of small-molecule inhibitors that inhibit deregulated hematopoiesis.
Pericytic tumors are subclassified as myopericytomas, myofibromas, angioleiomyomas, and glomus tumors according to the current World Health Organization classification. These pericytic tumors form a continuous morphologic spectrum, including those with combined morphology. However, to our knowledge, no widely accepted criteria for classifying tumors with combined morphology are available. Recent studies have identified platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta (PDGFRB) gene mutations in a subset of myofibromas, myopericytomas, and myopericytomatoses but not in angioleiomyomas. NOTCH receptor 3 (NOTCH3) mutations have been reported in a subset of infantile myofibromatosis. To assess their potential role in classifying pericytic tumors, we investigated PDGFRB and NOTCH3 mutations in 41 pericytic tumors of variable morphology, including some combined forms. Our results show these mutations to be present in a variety of pericytic tumors, such as myopericytomas (PDGFRB, 3/11; NOTCH3, 4/11), myopericytomatoses (1/2; 1/2), myofibromas (3/6; 0/6), angioleiomyomas (2/13; 3/13), and glomus tumors (5/9; 1/9). Point mutations were identified in 3 tumors in PDGFRB exon 12 (Y562C, S574F, and G576S), 12 tumors in PDGFRB exon 14 (M655I, H657L, and N666K), and 9 tumors in NOTCH3 exon 25 (A1480S/T, D1481N, G1482S, T1490A, E1491K, G1494S, and V1512A). All PDGFRB mutations and NOTCH3 G1482S, T1490A, and G1494S mutations were classified as "deleterious/damaging" by >/=4 of 6 pathogenicity prediction tools in silico. Five-mutation-positive tumors, including 1 myopericytoma-angioleiomyoma, 2 myopericytomatoses-myofibroma, 1 myofibroma-myopericytoma and 1 angioleiomyoma-myopericytoma, were of combined morphology. Therefore, we found PDGFRB and NOTCH3 mutations to be detectable in a much wider variety of pericytic tumors than previously reported and confirmed myopericytomas, myofibromas, angioleiomyomas, and glomus tumors as members harboring PDGFRB or NOTCH3 mutations. Our results thus suggest that PDGFRB or NOTCH3 mutations are not useful for subclassifying members of the pericytic tumor family.
Gene fusions involving the catalytic domain of tyrosine kinases (TKs) are found in a variety of hematological and solid tumor malignancies. Clinically, TK fusions have emerged as prime targets for therapy with small molecule kinase inhibitors. Unfortunately, identification of TK fusions has been hampered by experimental limitations. Here, we developed version 2.0 of a genomically based systematic kinase fusion screen and used it to detect a novel imatinib-sensitive C6orf204-PDGFRB fusion in a patient with precursor T lymphoblastic lymphoma (T-ALL) and an associated myeloproliferative neoplasm with eosinophilia. These data validate the ability of this targeted capture-sequencing approach to detect TK fusion events in small amounts of DNA extracted directly from patient samples.
Cutaneous non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis (NLCH) is a rare and biologically benign entity that can be broadly classified into two categories: xanthogranuloma and non-xanthogranuloma. The xanthogranuloma family is characterized by a proliferation of histiocytes with both macrophage and dendritic cell differentiation, negative BRAF mutation, and rare Touton-type giant cells. Molecular studies have reported that mutations involved in the MAPK signaling pathways are implicated in the pathophysiology of histiocytoses. While LCH is associated with the somatic mutation of BRAF v600e, however, mutations and gene fusions in NLCH cases are undefined. We hereby present a 19-month-old female with recalcitrant nodular rashes diagnosed as NLCH with associated novel genetic mutation involving ANKRD26 and PDGFRB genes, as well as PDGFRB::CD74 fusion mRNA. Immunohistochemical staining showed strong and diffuse CD68 and CD163 positivity, and negative CD1a, CD207, ALK D5F3, S100 protein, and BRAF V600E (VE1). Albeit unknown significance, this case of an ANKRD26 and PDGFRB gene mutation in cutaneous NLCH has not been reported prior in the literature. Our case highlights the advantage of pathology and genetic studies in cutaneous NLCH to increase the understanding of this heterogeneous enigmatic disorder and identify further options in management.
OBJECTIVES: To summarize cases submitted to the 2019 Society for Hematopathology/European Association for Haematopathology Workshop under the category of myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia and PDGFRA, PDGFRB, or FGFR1 or with PCM1-JAK2 rearrangements, focusing on recent updates and relevant practice findings. METHODS: The cases were summarized according to their respective gene rearrangement to illustrate the spectrum of clinical, laboratory, and histopathology manifestations and to explore the appropriate molecular genetic tests. RESULTS: Disease presentations were heterogeneous, including myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs), MDS/MPN, acute myeloid leukemia, acute B- or T-lymphoblastic lymphoma/acute lymphoblastic lymphoma (ALL/LBL), or mixed-lineage neoplasms. Frequent extramedullary involvement occurred. Eosinophilia was common but not invariably present. With the advancement of RNA sequencing, cryptic rearrangements were recognized in genes other than PDGFRA. Additional somatic mutations were more frequent in the FGFR1-rearranged cases. Cases with B-ALL presentations differed from Philadelphia-like B-ALL by the presence of an underlying MPN. Cases with FLT3 and ABL1 rearrangements could be potential candidates for future inclusion in this category. CONCLUSIONS: Accurate diagnosis and classification of this category of myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms has important therapeutic implications. With the large number of submitted cases, we expand our understanding of these rare neoplasms and improve our ability to diagnose these genetically defined disorders.
Myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia (MLN-eos) are rare haematological neoplasms primarily affecting adults. The heterogeneous clinical picture and the rarity of the disease, especially in children, may delay an early diagnosis. MLN-eos are characterized by constitutive tyrosine kinase (TK) activity due to gene fusions. It is thus of importance to obtain a prompt genetic diagnosis to start a specific therapy. Here, we outline the clinical, genetic, and biochemical background of TK driven MLN-eos and report two extremely rare paediatric cases of MLN-eo, the used diagnostic methods, therapy and clinical outcomes. Our results demonstrate that, standard cytogenetic and molecular methods may not be sufficient to diagnose MLN-eo due to cytogenetically cryptic aberrations. We therefore recommend performing additional evaluation with fluorescence in-situ hybridization and molecular genetic methods (array-based comparative genomic hybridization and RNA sequencing) which will lead to the correct diagnosis. Following this diagnostic route we detected a TNIP1::PDGFRB and a PCM1::FGFR1 fusion in our patients. Thus, genetic diagnosis must be precise and quick in order to initiate adequate therapies with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or HSCT.
Four causative genes, including solute carrier family 20 member 2 (SLC20A2), platelet-derived growth factor receptor b (PDGFRB), platelet-derived growth factor b (PDGFB)and xenotropic and polytropic retrovirus receptor 1 (XPR1), have been identified to cause primary familial brain calcification (PFBC). However, PDGFRB mutations seem to be quite rare and no PDGFRB mutations have been reported in Chinese PFBC patients. A total of 146 PFBC patients including 12 families and 134 sporadic patients were recruited in this study. All of them were previously tested negative for the SLC20A2. Mutational analyses of the entire exons and exon-intron boundaries of PDGFRB were carried out by direct gene sequencing. In silico analyses of the identified variants were conducted using Mutation Taster, PolyPhen-2 and Sorts Intolerant From Tolerant. Two heterozygous variants, c.3G>A and c.2209G>A, of the PDGFRB gene were revealed in two PFBC families, respectively. These two variants were not observed in 200 healthy controls. The variant c.3G>A was located in exon 2 and affected the initiation codon of the PDGFRB gene. The variant c.2209G>A resulted in amino-acid substitutions of aspartic acid to asparagine at position 737. Both of these two variants co-segregated with the disease phenotype (variant carriers in Family 1: I1, II2 and II3; variant carriers in Family 2: I2 and II8), suggesting a pathogenic impact of these variants. The prevalence of PDGFRB mutations in Chinese PFBC patients seems to be quite low, indicating that PDGFRB is not a major causative gene of PFBC in Chinese population.
We evaluated clinical characteristics and outcome on imatinib of 22 patients with myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with eosinophilia and rearrangement of PDGFRB. Median age was 49 years (range 20-80), 91% were male. Fifteen different PDGFRB fusion genes were identified. Eosinophilia was absent in 4/19 (21%) cases and only 11/19 (58%) cases had eosinophils >/=1.5x10(9)/L. On imatinib, 17/17 (100%) patients in chronic phase achieved complete hematologic remission after median 2 months (range 0-13)​. Complete cytogenetic remission and/or complete molecular remission by RT-PCR were achieved in 12/13 (92%) and 12/14 patients (86%) after median 10 (range 3-34) and 19 months (range 7-110), respectively. In patients with blast phase (myeloid, n = 2; lymphoid, n = 3), treatment included combinations of imatinib (n = 5), intensive chemotherapy (n = 3), and/or allogeneic stem cell transplantation (n = 3). All 3 transplanted patients (complex karyotype, n = 2) experienced early relapse. Initially, patients were treated with imatinib 400 mg/day (n = 15) or 100 mg/day (n = 7), the dose was reduced from 400 mg/day to 100 mg/day during follow-up in 9 patients. After a median treatment of 71 months (range 1-135), the 5-year survival rate was 83%; 4/22 (18%) patients died (chronic phase; n = 2; blast phase, n = 2) due to progression (n = 3) or comorbidity while in remission (n = 1). Of note, 3/4 patients had a complex karyotype. In summary, the most important characteristics of myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with rearrangement of PDGFRB include (a) male predominance, (b) frequent lack of hypereosinophilia,
Introduction. Myofibromas are rare tumors of pericytic lineage, typically affecting children, and are sometimes aggressive. A subset of sporadic and familial myofibromas have activating variants in PDGFRB. The relationship of myofibroma and PDGFRB to the NOTCH pathway has not yet been described. Methods. Ten myofibroma cases were sequenced with a targeted panel of 447 genes, including copy number variation and selected fusions. Immunohistochemical analysis of total NOTCH3 and activated NOTCH3 was assessed for all 10 myofibroma cases, and a series of histologic mimics (n = 20). Results. Alterations identified by next-generation sequencing included PDGFRB sequence variants in 8/10 cases (80%), a NOTCH3 variant in 1/10 cases (10%), and a NOTCH2 variant in 1/10 cases (10%). All 10 cases also showed a pattern of low-amplitude (1.5- to 2-fold) copy number alterations including gains in PDGFRB and NOTCH3. Ten of 10 myofibromas (100%) showed cytoplasmic staining for total NOTCH3 and 9 of 10 cases (90%) showed nuclear staining for activated NOTCH3. Within the control cohort of histologic mimics, 3 of 3 nodular fasciitis cases (100%) were positive for activated and total NOTCH3, and the remaining 17 cases were negative for pan NOTCH3, while 3 of 3 desmoid-type fibromatosis cases (100%) showed patchy weak nuclear staining for activated NOTCH3. Discussion. Our findings suggest a common pathway of PDGFRB/NOTCH3 activation in myofibromas, even in cases that lack PDGFRB sequence variants. These results support the pericytic lineage of myofibroma. Identification of the characteristic genomic alterations or immunohistochemical staining pattern may facilitate a difficult pathologic diagnosis, and support the use of targeted treatments.
Eosinophilia-associated myeloid neoplasms with rearrangement of chromosome bands 5q31-33 are frequently associated with PDGFRB fusion genes, which are exquisitely sensitive to treatment with imatinib. In search for novel fusion partners of PDGFRB, we analyzed three cases with translocation t(5;20)(q33;p11), t(5;14)(q33;q32), and t(5;17;14)(q33;q11;q32) by 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends polymerase chain reaction (5'-RACE-PCR) and DNA-based long-distance inverse PCR (LDI-PCR) with primers derived from PDGFRB. LDI-PCR revealed a fusion between CCDC88C exon 25 and PDGFRB exon 11 in the case with t(5;17;14)(q33;q11;q32) while 5'-RACE-PCR identified fusions between CCDC88C exon 10 and PDGFRB exon 12 and between DTD1 exon 4 and PDGFRB exon 12 in the cases with t(5;14)(q33;q32) and t(5;20)(q33;p11), respectively. The PDGFRB tyrosine-kinase domain is predicted to be retained in all three fusion proteins. The partner proteins contained coiled-coil domains or other domains, which putatively lead to constitutive activation of the PDGFRB fusion protein. In vitro functional analyses confirmed transforming activity and imatinib-sensitivity of the fusion proteins. All three patients achieved rapid and durable complete hematologic remissions on imatinib.
Infantile myofibroma is a rare benign mesenchymal tumor that presents as solitary or multiple lesions (myofibromatosis) in the skin, soft tissue, bone, or internal organs. It most commonly affects the head and neck of infants and young children, but it can also affect adults. Intracranial involvement is reported to be extremely rare, and its clinical picture has been poorly characterized. Recently, it has been demonstrated that germline and somatic mutations in the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB) are associated with familial infantile myofibromatosis. We report a case of infantile myofibromatosis with predominant posterior fossa extradural involvement in a 14-year-old adolescent girl with a confirmed mutation in the PDGFRB gene.
BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is a life-threatening disease that poses a serious risk to human health. Although there are numerous molecular targets for gastric cancer in clinical practice, they often exhibit low specificity and sensitivity. Consequently, this can result in a low early diagnosis rate, delayed treatment, and poor prognosis for patients with gastric cancer. Hence, it remains crucial to identify more precise diagnostic markers for this disease. METHODS: This study utilized ceRNA chips and bioinformatics methods to investigate the key genes and mechanisms involved in matrine intervention in gastric cancer cells. RESULTS: ADAM12 and PDGFRB are the key genes that are down-regulated after matrine intervention in gastric cancer cells. By conducting bioinformatics analysis, two ceRNA regulatory axes were identified, which are associated with the prognosis of gastric cancer. These axes are lncRNA DGCR5/hsa-miR-206/ADAM12 and circRNA ITGA3/hsa-miR-24-3p/PDGFRB. CONCLUSION: The low expression of ADAM12 may weaken the digestion of extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules, which can result in the invasion and metastasis of tumor cells. This occurs without the catalysis of ECM proteases, thereby impacting the invasion and metastasis of gastric cancer cells. Additionally, the analysis of immune infiltration suggests that ADAM12 and PDGFRB may influence changes in the tumor immune microenvironment, thereby affecting the occurrence and development of gastric cancer. This study contributes to a deeper understanding of the role of the matrine-related ceRNA network in gastric cancer, providing a reference for clinical diagnosis and treatment. It holds significant importance in discovering new drug treatment targets.
Our previous studies have revealed that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), microRNAs (miRNAs), and genes were abnormally expressed in the pulmonary artery tissues of the chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) patients. We aim to establish the CTEPH-related miRNA-gene-lncRNA network for finding the core genes and associated miRNA and lncRNA in CTEPH patients.Firstly, the target genes of differential miRNAs were predicted by searching TargetScan databases, and the predicted target genes were intersected with the mRNAs from the gene chip. Secondly, the intersective genes were analyzed by the Gene Ontology function and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway software for obtaining differential intersective genes and then establish the miRNA-gene networks. Thirdly, the possible genes regulated by the differential lncRNAs from the gene chip were intersected with the above-screened mRNA to build the lncRNA-mRNA networks. Subsequently, the miRNA-gene-lncRNA networks were constructed according to the two networks above (miRNA-gene networks and lncRNA-mRNA networks). Finally, the core genes of the networks in the experimental group were screened according to Diffk > 0.6 and used to construct the miRNA-core gene-lncRNA networks of CTEPH.The pathway network, miRNA-mRNA network, lncRNA-mRNA networks, and miRNA-gene-lncRNA networks were successfully constructed. The core genes of the miRNA-gene-lncRNA networks (Diffk > 0.6) were the human Beta-type platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFRB) and hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1A), the miRNAs-PDGFRB-lncRNAs and miRNAs-HIF1A-lncRNAs networks were constructed. Finally, miRNA-149-5p-PDGFRB-TCONS_l2_00020587-XLOC_l2_010723 and miRNA-338-5p/miRNA-199b-5p-HIF1A- TCONS_l2_00020587-XLOC_l2_010723 were found in the analysis of the network.miRNA-149-5p-PDGFRB-lncRNA CTEPH-associated 1 (CTEPHA1) (TCONS_l2_00020587-XLOC_l2_010723) and miRNA-338-5p/miRNA-199b-5p-HIF1A-lncRNA CTEPHA1 are related to the development of CTEPH.
Esophageal cancer is a highly aggressive malignancy with very poor overall prognosis. Given the strong clinical relevance of SATB1 in esophagus cancer and other cancers suggested by previous studies, the exact function of SATB1 in esophagus cancer development is still unknown. Here we showed that the knockdown of SATB1 in esophageal cancer cell lines diminished the cell proliferation, survival and invasion. Whole genome transcriptome analysis of SATB1 knockdown cells revealed the different gene expression profiles between TE-1 cells and MDA-MB-231 cells. Network analysis and functional experiments further identified FN1 and PDGFRB to be key downstream genes regulated by SATB1 in esophageal cancer cells. Importantly, FN1 and PDGFRB were found to be highly expressed in human esophageal cancer. In summary, we provided the first molecular evidence that SATB1 played an oncogenic role in esophageal cancer by up-regulation of FN1 and PDGFRB.
Polymorphisms of PDGFRB, MMP-3, TIMP-2, RNF213, TGFB1, Raptor and eNOS genes have been associated with Moyamoya disease (MMD) separately in studies, but their interactions on MMD have never been evaluated in one study. This study enrolled 96 MMD patients and 96 controls to evaluate the contributions and interactions of these polymorphisms on MMD in Chinese Hans. After genotyping, five polymorphisms loci were deemed suitable for analysis, rs3828610 in PDGFRB, rs3025058 in MMP-3, rs8179090 in TIMP-2, rs112735431 and rs148731719 in RNF213. Interactions of different loci on MMD were evaluated by multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method. Significantly higher frequencies of A allele and G/A genotype of rs112735431 in RNF213 were observed in MMD patients compared with controls (P=0.011; P=0.018, respectively). In the dominant model, G/A genotype of rs112735431 was associated with increased risk of MMD (P=0.018). A higher frequency of G allele and G/G genotype of rs148731719 in RNF213 gene in patient than control group (P<0.001; P<0.01, respectively) was also detected. No significant association between MMD and other three loci (P>0.05) was detected. MDR analysis failed to detect any significant interaction among these five loci in the occurrence of MMD (P>0.05), but the combination of three loci (rs112735431 in RNF213, rs3828610 in PDGFRB, rs3025058 in MMP-3) could have the maximum testing accuracy (57.29%) and cross-validation consistency (10/10). The results indicated that RNF213 rs112735431 and rs148731719 may exert a significant influence on MMD occurrence. Compared with this overwhelming effect, the influences of PDGFRB, MMP-3, and TIMP-2 on MMD may be unremarkable in Chinese Hans. There may be no prominent interaction among these five gene polymorphisms on the occurrence of MMD.
