Serine/threonine-protein kinase pim-1; Proto-oncogene with serine/threonine kinase activity involved in cell survival and cell proliferation and thus providing a selective advantage in tumorigenesis. Exerts its oncogenic activity through: the regulation of MYC transcriptional activity, the regulation of cell cycle progression and by phosphorylation and inhibition of proapoptotic proteins (BAD, MAP3K5, FOXO3). Phosphorylation of MYC leads to an increase of MYC protein stability and thereby an increase of transcriptional activity. The stabilization of MYC exerted by PIM1 might explain pa [...] 
PIM kinases have important pro-tumorigenic roles and mediate several oncogenic traits, including cell proliferation, survival, and chemotherapeutic resistance. As a result, multiple PIM inhibitors have been pursued as investigational new drugs in cancer; however, response to PIM inhibitors in solid tumors has fallen short of expectations. We found that inhibition of PIM kinase activity stabilizes protein levels of all three PIM isoforms (PIM1/2/3), and this can promote resistance to PIM inhibitors and chemotherapy. To overcome this effect, we designed PIM proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) to target PIM for degradation. PIM PROTACs effectively downmodulated PIM levels through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Importantly, degradation of PIM kinases was more potent than inhibition of catalytic activity at inducing apoptosis in prostate cancer cell line models. In conclusion, we provide evidence of the advantages of degrading PIM kinases versus inhibiting their catalytic activity to target the oncogenic functions of PIM kinases.
Uveitis is a severe autoimmune disease, and a common cause of blindness; however, its individual cellular dynamics and pathogenic mechanism remain poorly understood. Herein, by performing single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) on experimental autoimmune uveitis (EAU), we identify disease-associated alterations in cell composition and transcriptional regulation as the disease progressed, as well as a disease-related molecule, PIM1. Inhibiting PIM1 reduces the Th17 cell proportion and increases the Treg cell proportion, likely due to regulation of PIM1 to the protein kinase B (AKT)/Forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) pathway. Moreover, inhibiting PIM1 reduces Th17 cell pathogenicity and reduces plasma cell differentiation. Importantly, the upregulation of PIM1 in CD4(+) T cells and plasma cells is conserved in a human uveitis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease (VKH), and inhibition of PIM1 reduces CD4(+) T and B cell expansion. Collectively, a dynamic immune cellular atlas during uveitis is developed and implicate that PIM1 may be a potential therapeutic target for VKH.
Disruption of cellular activities by pathogen virulence factors can trigger innate immune responses. Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma)-inducible antimicrobial factors, such as the guanylate binding proteins (GBPs), promote cell-intrinsic defense by attacking intracellular pathogens and by inducing programmed cell death. Working in human macrophages, we discovered that GBP1 expression in the absence of IFN-gamma killed the cells and induced Golgi fragmentation. IFN-gamma exposure improved macrophage survival through the activity of the kinase PIM1. PIM1 phosphorylated GBP1, leading to its sequestration by 14-3-3sigma, which thereby prevented GBP1 membrane association. During Toxoplasma gondii infection, the virulence protein TgIST interfered with IFN-gamma signaling and depleted PIM1, thereby increasing GBP1 activity. Although infected cells can restrain pathogens in a GBP1-dependent manner, this mechanism can protect uninfected bystander cells. Thus, PIM1 can provide a bait for pathogen virulence factors, guarding the integrity of IFN-gamma signaling.
Protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation plays a critical role in many biological processes. However, the identification of key regulatory kinases is still a great challenge. Here, we develop a trans-omics-based method, central kinase inference, to predict potentially key kinases by integrating quantitative transcriptomic and phosphoproteomic data. Using known kinases associated with anti-cancer drug resistance, the accuracy of our method denoted by the area under the curve is 5.2% to 29.5% higher than Kinase-Substrate Enrichment Analysis. We further use this method to analyze trans-omic data in hepatocyte maturation and hepatic reprogramming of human dermal fibroblasts, uncovering 5 kinases as regulators in the two processes. Further experiments reveal that a serine/threonine kinase, PIM1, promotes hepatic conversion and protects human dermal fibroblasts from reprogramming-induced ferroptosis and cell cycle arrest. This study not only reveals new regulatory kinases, but also provides a helpful method that might be extended to predict central kinases involved in other biological processes.
Levels of the mRNA for PIM-1, a protooncogene encoding a cytoplasmic serine threonine kinase show a wide variation among tissues and cell lines, although this gene is transcribed from a GC- rich housekeeping promoter. Previous studies have failed to identify tissue specific elements in the PIM-1 promoter raising the possibility that these elements might reside within the gene. Transient transfections of Luciferase reporter gene constructs into the chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line K562 (which expresses high levels of PIM-1 mRNA) demonstrate that the 1.7kbp PIM-1 promoter sequences alone were three times more efficient than constructs driven by the promoter+PIM-1 genomic sequences. Nuclear run on assays of nascent RNA from K562 cells revealed premature transcriptional termination within the PIM-1 gene. Thus, PIM-1 gene may be constitutively transcribed in all tissues and transcriptional attenuation could be one of the mechanisms regulating the observed differences in steady state levels of mRNA.
We have identified a conserved G-quadruplex forming sequence in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of the proto-oncogene PIM1. Circular dichroism and thermal denaturation studies revealed that the PIM1 mRNA guanine-rich sequence forms a highly stable intramolecular G-quadruplex structure. Reporter gene assay demonstrated that the PIM1 RNA G-quadruplex represses translation. It is the first experimental evidence of an RNA G-quadruplex structure located in the 3' UTR that may act as posttranscriptional regulator.
The constitutively active serine/threonine kinase Pim-1 is upregulated in different cancer types, mainly based on the action of several interleukines and growth factors at the transcriptional level. So far, a regulation of oncogenic Pim-1 by microRNAs (miRNAs) has not been reported. Here, we newly establish miR-33a as a miRNA with potential tumor suppressor activity, acting through inhibition of Pim-1. A screen for miRNA expression in K562 lymphoma, LS174T colon carcinoma and several other cell lines revealed generally low endogenous miR-33a levels relative to other miRNAs. Transfection of K562 and LS174T cells with a miR-33a mimic reduced Pim-1 levels substantially. In contrast, the cell-cycle regulator cyclin-dependent kinase 6 predicted to be a conserved miR-33a target, was not downregulated by the miR-33a mimic. Seed mutagenesis of the Pim-1 3'-untranslated region in a luciferase reporter construct and in a Pim-1 cDNA expressed in Pim-1-deficient Skov-3 cells demonstrated specific and direct downregulation of Pim-1 by the miR-33a mimic. The persistence of this effect was comparable to that of a small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Pim-1, resulting in decelerated cell proliferation. In conclusion, we demonstrate the potential of miR-33a to act as a tumor suppressor miRNA, which suggests miR-33a replacement therapy through delivery of miR mimics as a novel therapeutic strategy.
Cyclohexan-1,3-dione (1) reacted with either 2-aminoprop-1-ene-1,1,3-tricarbonitrile (2a) or diethyl 3-amino-2-cyanopent-2-enedioate (2b) to give the 5,6,7,8-tetrahydronaphthalene derivatives 3a and 3b, respectively. The latter compounds underwent further heterocyclization reactions to give the thieno[2',3':5,6]benzo[1,2-e][1,3]oxazine derivatives. On the other hand, the reaction of compound 1 with trichloroacetonitrile afforded the (2,2,2-trichloroethylidene)cyclohexane derivative 14. The latter underwent a series of reactions to produce 2,3,6,7-tetrahydroquinazoline, dihydrothieno[2,3-h]isoquinoline, octahydrobenzo[h]quinazoline and dihydrothieno[2,3-h]isoquinoline derivatives. The synthesized compounds were tested toward six cancer cell lines where most of them gave high inhibitions with c-Met enzymatic activity, with tyrosine kinases and Pim-1 inhibitions. The results obtained will encourage further work through such compounds to produce optimized anticancer agents.
Cellular senescence is a stable state of proliferative arrest that provides a barrier against malignant transformation and contributes to the antitumor activity of certain chemotherapies. Unexpectedly, we found that the expression of proto-oncogene PIM-1, which can promote tumorigenesis, is induced at transcriptional level during senescence. Inhibition of PIM-1 alleviated both replicative and oncogene-induced senescence. Conversely, ectopic expression of PIM-1 resulted in premature senescence. We also revealed that PIM-1 interacts with and phosphorylates heterochromatin protein 1gamma (HP1gamma) on Ser93. This PIM-1-mediated HP1gamma phosphorylation enhanced HP1gamma's capacity to bind to H3K9me3, resulting in heterochromatin formation and suppression of proliferative genes, such as CCNA2 and PCNA. Analysis of the mechanism underlying the up-regulation of PIM-1 expression during senescence demonstrated that IL-6, a critical regulator of cellular senescence, is responsible for PIM-1 induction. Our study demonstrated that PIM-1 is a key component of the senescence machinery that contributes to heterochromatin formation. More importantly, we demonstrated that PIM-1 is also a direct target of IL-6/STAT3 signaling and mediates cytokine-induced cellular senescence.
Pim-1 kinase has been widely regarded as an attractive target for anticancer drugs. Here, we reported our continued efforts in structure-based optimization of compound 10-DEBC, a previously identified micromolar Pim-1 inhibitor. Guided by the Site Identification by Ligand Competitive Saturation (SILCS) method, we quickly obtained a series of 10-DEBC derivatives with significantly improved activity and selectivity. In particular, compound 26 exhibited an IC(50) value of 0.9 nM, as well as 220- and 8-fold selectivity over Pim-2 and Pim-3 kinases, respectively.
