1-phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase beta-2; The production of the second messenger molecules diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) is mediated by activated phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C enzymes.
Phospholipase C (PLC)-beta2 (gene PLCB2) is a critical regulator of platelet responses upon activation. Mechanisms regulating of PLC-beta2 expression in platelets/MKs are unknown. Our studies in a patient with platelet PLC-beta2 deficiency revealed the PLCB2 coding sequence to be normal and decreased platelet PLC-beta2 mRNA, suggesting a defect in transcriptional regulation. PLCB2 5'- upstream region of the patient revealed a heterozygous 13 bp deletion (-1645/-1633 bp) encompassing a consensus sequence for nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). This was subsequently detected in three of 50 healthy subjects. To understand the mechanisms regulating PLC-beta2, we studied the effect of this variation in the PLCB2. Gel-shift studies using nuclear extracts from human erythroleukaemia (HEL) cells or recombinant p65 showed NF-kappaB binding to oligonucleotide with NF-kappaB site; in luciferase reporter studies its deletion reduced PLCB2 promoter activity. PLCB2 expression was decreased by siRNA knockdown of NF-kappaB p65 subunit and increased by p65 overexpression. By immunoblotting platelet PLC-beta2 in 17 healthy subjects correlated with p65 (r=0.76, p=0.0005). These studies provide the first evidence that NF-kappaB regulates MK/platelet PLC-beta2 expression. This interaction is important because of the major role of PLC-beta2 in platelet activation and of NF-kappaB in processes, including inflammation and atherosclerosis, where both are intimately involved.
Malignant melanoma has the highest malignancy rate among all skin cancer and is characterized by an insidious onset, high invasion and poor patient prognosis. Yet, the mechanisms involved remain unclear and warrant further investigation. Based on bioinformatic analysis, phospholipase C beta2 (PLCB2) has been found to be correlated with melanoma growth. The present study was the first to demonstrate that PLCB2 is a key factor affecting melanoma proliferation and apoptosis. Here, microarray datasets from the publicly available Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database were employed, and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was introduced to identify candidate transcription factors. PLCB2 was identified as a crucial gene in the protein‑protein interaction (PPI) network. The expression of PLCB2 mRNA in various cancer lines was analyzed by reverse transcription‑polymerase chain reaction (RT‑PCR). In addition, the proliferation ability and apoptosis rate in human melanoma cells overexpressing or not overexpressing PLCB2 were assessed using colony formation assay, flow cytometry and the Cell Counting Kit‑8 (CCK‑8) assay. Cell viability and apoptosis‑related factors, such as p53, Bcl‑2, Bax and caspase‑3 were significantly regulated. Knockdown of PLCB2 suppressed the activation of the Ras/Raf/MAPK signaling pathway. In conclusion, knockdown of PLCB2 suppressed cell viability and promoted cell apoptosis by activating the Ras/Raf/MAPK pathway. Thus, PLCB2 may utilized as a potential therapeutic target in patients with melanoma.
Endothelial cells (EC) are the first elements exposed to mediators circulating in the bloodstream, and react to stimulation with finely tuned responses mediated by different signal transduction pathways, leading the endothelium to adapt. Neuropeptide Y (NPY), the most abundant peptide in heart and brain, is mainly involved in the neuroendocrine regulation of the stress response. The regulatory roles of NPY depend on many factors, including its enzymatic processing, receptor subtypes and related signal transduction systems, including the phosphoinositide (PI) pathway and related phospholipase C (PI-PLC) family of enzymes. The panel of expression of PI-PLC enzymes differs comparing quiescent versus differently stimulated human EC. Growing evidences indicate that the regulation of the expression of PLC genes, which codify for PI-PLC enzymes, might act as an additional mechanism of control of the PI signal transduction pathway. NPY was described to potentiate the activation of PI-PLC enzymes in different cell types, including EC. In the present experiments, we stimulated human umbilical vein EC using different doses of NPY in order to investigate a possible role upon the expression PLC genes. NPY reduced the overall transcription of PLC genes, excepting for PLCE. The most significant effects were observed for PLCB2 and PLCD1, both isoforms recruited by means of G-proteins and G-protein-coupled receptors. NPY behavior was comparable with other PI-PLC interacting molecules that, beside the stimulation of phospholipase activity, also affect the upcoming enzymes' production acting upon gene expression. That might represent a mode to regulate the activity of PI-PLC enzymes after activation.
