1-phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase delta-1; The production of the second messenger molecules diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) is mediated by activated phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C enzymes. Essential for trophoblast and placental development.
Trichilemmal or "pilar" cysts are commonly found on the scalp and are derived from the outer root sheath of the hair follicle. Multiple trichilemmal cysts present in an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, yet the genetic mechanism has remained elusive. In this issue, Horer et al. (2019) highlight predisposing variants in PLCD1 in such families and propose a monoallelic mutational mechanism that drives cyst formation.
A 1-year-old girl presented with porcelain white fingernails, accidentally discovered when she was referred for an infantile hemangioma consultation. The family reported that the nails had been milky white since birth and her father had similar white finger and toenails. The father remembered that additional family members on his side of the family presented with white nails; however, he could not provide exact information about the number of other relatives affected by this nail abnormality. The girl and her father were the only available family members with white nails presented for this study (Figure 1). The girl presented with leukonychia totalis on all fingernails only, while the father had this abnormality on all finger and toenails (Figure 2). We were not aware of any association with other diseases or features in this family, except hemangioma in the girl. (SKINmed. 2023;21:44-46).
Trichilemmal cysts are common hair follicle-derived intradermal cysts. The trait shows an autosomal dominant mode of transmission with incomplete penetrance. Here, we describe the pathogenetic mechanism for the development of hereditary trichilemmal cysts. By whole-exome sequencing of DNA from the blood samples of 5 affected individuals and subsequent Sanger sequencing of a family cohort including 35 affected individuals, this study identified a combination of the Phospholipase C Delta 1 germline variants c.903A>G, p.(Pro301Pro) and c.1379C>T, p.(Ser460Leu) as a high-risk factor for trichilemmal cyst development. Allele-specific PCRs and cloning experiments showed that these two variants are present on the same allele. The analysis of tissue from several cysts revealed that an additional somatic Phospholipase C Delta 1 mutation on the same allele is required for cyst formation. In two different functional in vitro assays, this study showed that the protein function of the cyst-specific 1-phosphatidylinositol 4, 5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase delta-1 protein variant is modified. This pathologic mechanism defines a monoallelic model of the two-hit mechanism proposed for tumor development and other hereditary cyst diseases.
A large-scale sequencing analysis of genomic DNA in the vicinity of homozygous deletion on chromosome 3p found in a lung cancer cell line disclosed that the gene encoding phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1) is located just distal to the region removed by the deletion We report the genomic structure of this gene, which consists of 15 exons and spans about 22 kb, and its precise localization to chromosome 3p22-->p21.3.
As the most prevalent subtype of aortic aneurysm, abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) features the apoptosis, extracellular matrix (ECM) disruption, and inflammation response of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are crucial factors in AAA progression, while the investigations have not been fully explained. miR-191-5p upregulation is found in aortic aneurysm. However, its role in AAA has not been addressed. This research purposed to excavate the possible and associated molecular axis of miR-191-5p in AAA. In our study, miR-191-5p level was detected to be high in the tissues from AAA patients in comparison with the control group. After miR-191-5p expression was enhanced, cell viability was repressed, cell apoptosis was boosted, and ECM disruption and the inflammation response were fortified. Furthermore, the relationship among MIR503HG, miR-191-5p, and phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1) in VSMCs was disclosed via mechanism assays. Decreased MIR503HG lacked the inhibition on miR-191-5p targeting PLCD1, resulting in downregulation of PLCD1, which facilitated the progression of AAA. Thus, targeting MIR503HG/miR-191-5p/PLCD1 pathway will provide an additional method for the cure of AAA patients.
Chromosome 3p harbors multiple tumor-suppressor genes. PLCD1, located at 3p22, encodes an enzyme that mediates regulatory signaling of energy metabolism, calcium homeostasis and intracellular movement. We investigated the epigenetic alterations of PLCD1 and its tumor suppressor function in breast cancer. Frequent downregulation/silencing of PLCD1 was shown in most breast cancer cell lines by using semi-quantitative PCR. Promoter methylation of PLCD1 was detected in 78% (7/9) of cell lines and 52% (13/25) of primary tumors by Methylation-specific PCR (MSP), but not in any tumor adjacent breast tissues and normal breast tissues, which was further confirmed by bisulfite genomic sequencing (BGS). The silencing of PLCD1 could be reversed by pharmacological demethylation, indicating a methylation-mediated mechanism. Ectopic expression of PLCD1 in silenced breast cancer cells significantly inhibited their colony formation. In addition, PLCD1 inhibited tumor cell migration and induced cell cycle G(2)/M arrest. Thus, this study for the first time demonstrates the frequent inactivation of PLCD1 by promoter methylation and its tumor inhibitory function in breast cancer. Tumor-specific methylation of PLCD1 might serve as a biomarker for possible early detection and prognosis prediction of breast cancer.
Colon cancer (CC) is a common and lethal cancer to be further elucidated. Accumulating studies elaborated the crucial role of miRNAs differentially expressed in cancer cell growth. In the present study, differentially expressed miRNAs related to CC were screened by the bioinformatics methods on the strength of TCGA database. Highly expressed miR-17-3p was proved to notably influence CC cell proliferative, migratory, invasion, and apoptotic levels. By using TargetScan and miRTarBase databases, phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1) was predicted as a target downstream of miR-17-3p, and their binding site was predicted. Through TCGA database, low expression of PLCD1 and its significant negative correlation with miR-17-3p were identified in CC. Dual-luciferase reporter gene analysis ascertained the targeting relationship between miR-17-3p and PLCD1. Cell Counting Kit-8, colony formation, and transwell assays were introduced to detect CC cell malignant progression. Flow cytometry was applied to detect CC cell apoptosis. As result revealed, miR-17-3p was markedly highly expressed, and PLCD1, the target of miR-17-3p, was remarkably lowly expressed in CC cells. Forced expression of miR-17-3p facilitated CC cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and suppressed apoptosis. Biological roles of upregulating miR-17-3p in the colon cancer cells were markedly weakened by over-expressing PLCD1 simultaneously. MiR-17-3p regulated CC cell malignant progression, as well as apoptosis by targeting PLCD1. Moreover, KIF14 was extensively considered as an involved tumor-promoting gene that could be affected by miR-17-3p/PLCD1 axis based on BioGRID analysis and CO-IP assay. Concludingly, this study exhibited that miR-17-3p facilitated CC progression by PLCD1 downregulation.
Hereditary leukonychia (porcelain nails or white nails) is a rare nail disorder with an unknown genetic basis. To identify variants in a gene underlying this phenotype, we identified four families of Pakistani origin showing features of hereditary leukonychia. All 20 nails of each affected individual were chalky and white in appearance, consistent with total leukonychia, with no other cutaneous, appendageal, or systemic findings. By using Affymetrix 10K chip, we established linkage to chromosome 3p21.3-p22 with a LOD score (Z) of 5.1. We identified pathogenic mutations in PLCD1 in all four families, which encodes phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C delta 1 subunit, a key enzyme in phosphoinositide metabolism. We then identified localization of PLCD1 in the nail matrix. It was recently shown that PLCD1 is a component of the human nail plate by proteomic analysis and is localized in the matrix of human nails. Furthermore, mutations detected in PLCD1 resulted in reduced enzymatic activity in vitro. Our data show that mutations in PLCD1 underlie hereditary leukonychia, revealing a gene involved in molecular control of nail growth.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are emerging as crucial regulators in tumorigenesis and aggressive progression. However, their biological roles in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain largely unknown. Here, by performing circRNA high throughput sequencing in 4 paired NSCLC and normal tissues, we found a NSCLC-associated circRNA, circ-PLCD1, which was evidently downregulated in NSCLC tissues and cell lines. Circ-PLCD1 was transcriptionally activated by tumor-inhibiting protein p53, and exogenous expression of circ-PLCD1 inhibited NSCLC cell proliferation, invasion and induced apoptosis. Mechanistically, circ-PLCD1 acted as a competitive endogenous RNA (ceRNA) to sponge miR-375 and miR-1179 and elevate PTEN, a well-known inhibitor of oncogenic PI3K/AKT signaling, thereby repressing NSCLC tumorigenesis. Importantly, we also identified this ceRNA regulatory axis of circ-PLCD1/miR-375/miR-1179/PTEN in vivo by establishing a xenograft tumor model. Clinically, NSCLC patients with low circ-PLCD1 expression had larger tumor size, later clinical stage and shorter survival time than those with high circ-PLCD1 expression. Altogether, our findings reveal the important tumor suppressive role of circ-PLCD1 in NSCLC, reactivation of this circRNA may be considered as a novel therapeutic avenue for patient with NSCLC.
Hereditary leukonychia or porcelain nails is a nail dystrophy characterized by whitening of the nail plates in all nails of the hands and feet. It may exhibit an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Mutations in the gene PLCD1 have been reported to underlie hereditary leukonychia. In the present study, two Pakistani families with autosomal recessive hereditary leukonychia were investigated. Affected members of the families exhibited characteristic features of hereditary leukonychia with involvement of nails on both the hands and feet. Genotyping using microsatellite markers linked the families to the gene PLCD1 on chromosome 3p22.2. Sequence analysis of the gene detected one novel (p.Ser740ArgfsX19) and one previously reported mutation (p.Arg437X). This study expands spectrum of the mutations in the gene PLCD1 causing hereditary leukonychia.
Phospholipase C delta1 (PLCD1), is located at the important tumor suppressor locus 3p22. It encodes an enzyme that mediates regulatory signaling of energy metabolism, calcium homeostasis and intracellular movements. PLCD1 has been studied in some human solid tumors relating to the CpG island methylation of the gene promoter as a functional tumor suppressor. However, no such information is available in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In this study, we investigated PLCD1 expression in the CML K562 cell line (0/1) and 15% (2/13) of bone marrow mononuclear cells with CML by using semi-quantitative PCR. The CpG island (CGI) methylation status of the PLCD1 promoter was detected in K562 (0/1) and 56% (23/41) of CML patients by methylation-specific PCR (MSP), but not in the normal adult bone marrow mononuclear cells. Furthermore, the DNA demethylation agent 5'-aza-2'deoxycytidine restored the expression of PLCD1 in K562 cells. Functional studies showed that ectopic expression of PLCD1 in K562 cells was able to dramatically inhibit their colony formation and induce cell cycle G1 arrest, suggesting that PLCD1 acts as a functional tumor suppressor and may serve as a biomarker for possible early detection and prognosis of CML.
BACKGROUND: DLC1, a tumor suppressor gene that is downregulated in many cancer types by genetic and nongenetic mechanisms, encodes a protein whose RhoGAP and scaffolding activities contribute to its tumor suppressor functions. The role of the DLC1 START (StAR-related lipid transfer; DLC1-START) domain, other than its binding to Caveolin-1, is poorly understood. In other START domains, a key function is that they bind lipids, but the putative lipid ligand for DLC1-START is unknown. METHODS: Lipid overlay assays and Phosphatidylserine (PS)-pull down assays confirmed the binding of DLC1-START to PS. Co-immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated the interaction between DLC1-START and Phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1) or Caveolin-1, and the contribution of PS to those interactions. Rho-GTP, cell proliferation, cell migration, and/or anchorage-independent growth assays were used to investigate the contribution of PS and PLCD1, or the implications of TCGA cancer-associated DLC1-START mutants, to DLC1 functions. Co-immunoprecipitations and PS-pull down assays were used to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the impaired functions of DLC1-START mutants. A structural model of DLC1-START was also built to better understand the structural implications of the cancer-associated mutations in DLC1-START. RESULTS: We identified PS as the lipid ligand for DLC1-START and determined that DLC1-START also binds PLCD1 protein in addition to Caveolin-1. PS binding contributes to the interaction of DLC1 with Caveolin-1 and with PLCD1. The importance of these activities for tumorigenesis is supported by our analysis of 7 cancer-associated DLC1-START mutants, each of which has reduced tumor suppressor function but retains wildtype RhoGAP activity. Our structural model of DLC1-START indicates the mutants perturb different elements within the structure, which is correlated with our experimental findings that the mutants are heterogenous with regard to the deficiency of their binding properties. Some have reduced PS binding, others reduced PLCD1 and Caveolin-1 binding, and others are deficient for all of these properties. CONCLUSION: These observations highlight the importance of DLC1-START for the tumor suppressor function of DLC1 that is RhoGAP-independent. They also expand the versatility of START domains, as DLC1-START is the first found to bind PS, which promotes the binding to other proteins.
Hereditary leukonychia (HL) is a rare nail dystrophy disease, and several different clinical manifestations and mutations in the phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1) gene have been reported. The present study reports on one Chinese family and one sporadic case of with HL. The family members exhibited an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance with the involvement of all the fingers and toenails in all the patients. Of interest, most of the affected members had koilonychia during their childhood. Thus, the present study first used gene mapping with an aim to identify the pathogenic gene underlying koilonychia. Through genome‑wide linkage analysis, the pathogenic area of koilonychia was identified on chromosome 3 with multipoint Log of Odds scores >2. A novel pathogenic mutation c.1384G>A (p.E462K) was identified in the PLCD1 gene in all the patients in the family, which confirmed the diagnosis of hereditary leukonychia. A novel mutation c.770G>A (p.R257H) was also detected in one sporadic case of leukonychia. On the basis of these findings and of previous studies, it is suggested that hereditary leukonychia may initially present as koilonychia, whereas hereditary koilonychia does not progress to leukonychia. Moreover, the present study identified two pathogenic variants of the PLCD1 associated with hereditary leukonychia, and highlights the significance of genetic diagnosis.
The autosomal dominant presentation of trichilemmal cysts is one of the most common single gene familial diseases in humans. However, the genetic basis for the inheritance and genesis of these lesions has remained unknown. We first studied patients with multiple trichilemmal cysts using exome and Sanger sequencing. Remarkably, 21 of 21 trichilemmal cysts from 16 subjects all harbored a somatic p.S745L (c.2234 G > A) mutation in phospholipase C delta 1 (PLCD1), a proposed tumor suppressor gene. In addition to this specific somatic mutation in their tumors, 16 of the 17 subjects with multiple trichilemmal cysts were also heterozygous for a p.S460L (c.1379 G > A) germline variant in PLCD1 which is normally present in only about 6% of this population. The one patient of 17 that did not show the p.S460L germline variant had a germline p.E455K (c.1363 C > T) mutation in the same exon of PLCD1. Among 15 additional subjects, with a history suggesting a single sporadic trichilemmal cyst, six were likely familial due to the presence of the p.S460L germline variant. Of the remaining truly sporadic trichilemmal cysts that could be sequenced, only half showed the p.S745L somatic mutation in contrast to 100% of the familial cysts. Surprisingly, in contrast to Knudsen's two hit hypothesis, the p.S745L somatic mutation was always on the same chromosome as the p.S460L germline variant. Our results indicate that familial trichilemmal cysts is an autosomal dominant tumor syndrome resulting from two hits to the same allele of PLCD1 tumor suppressor gene. The c.1379 G > A base change and neighboring bases are consistent with a mutation caused by ultraviolet radiation. Our findings also indicate that approximately one-third of apparently sporadic trichilemmal cysts are actually familial with incomplete penetrance. Sequencing data suggests that the remaining, apparently sporadic, trichilemmal cysts are genetically distinct from familial cysts due to a lack of the germline mutations that underlie familial cysts and a decreased prevalence of the p.S745L somatic mutation relative to familial trichilemmal cysts.
Endothelial cells (EC) are the first elements exposed to mediators circulating in the bloodstream, and react to stimulation with finely tuned responses mediated by different signal transduction pathways, leading the endothelium to adapt. Neuropeptide Y (NPY), the most abundant peptide in heart and brain, is mainly involved in the neuroendocrine regulation of the stress response. The regulatory roles of NPY depend on many factors, including its enzymatic processing, receptor subtypes and related signal transduction systems, including the phosphoinositide (PI) pathway and related phospholipase C (PI-PLC) family of enzymes. The panel of expression of PI-PLC enzymes differs comparing quiescent versus differently stimulated human EC. Growing evidences indicate that the regulation of the expression of PLC genes, which codify for PI-PLC enzymes, might act as an additional mechanism of control of the PI signal transduction pathway. NPY was described to potentiate the activation of PI-PLC enzymes in different cell types, including EC. In the present experiments, we stimulated human umbilical vein EC using different doses of NPY in order to investigate a possible role upon the expression PLC genes. NPY reduced the overall transcription of PLC genes, excepting for PLCE. The most significant effects were observed for PLCB2 and PLCD1, both isoforms recruited by means of G-proteins and G-protein-coupled receptors. NPY behavior was comparable with other PI-PLC interacting molecules that, beside the stimulation of phospholipase activity, also affect the upcoming enzymes' production acting upon gene expression. That might represent a mode to regulate the activity of PI-PLC enzymes after activation.
BACKGROUND: Hereditary leukonychia is a rare nail dystrophy characterized by distinctive whitening of the nail plate. Mutations in the PLCD1 gene have been identified as a major causative factor in hereditary leukonychia (HL). However, few reports have analyzed the relationship between genotype and phenotype, especially in Chinese HL patients. Our study aims to explore the typical clinical features of hereditary leukonychia cases in Chinese Han pedigree and the correlations with PLCD1 gene mutation. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this study, two Chinese patients presented with leukonychia and koilonychia. Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was performed to screen for the mutations in PLCD1 gene and other candidate genes for hereditary leukonychia. Parents with PLCD1 mutation were selected for Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: A novel heterozygote missense mutation in exon 9 of PLCD1 gene was identified in the proband and his mother. Whole-exome sequencing revealed both, the proband (III.5) and his mother (II.4) carrying c.1451A>G mutation, while other family members had a normal sequence of the PLCD1 gene. CONCLUSION: For the first time, a hereditary leukonychia case with PLCD1 mutation has been described in Chinese Han pedigree. This finding suggests the PLCD1 mutation maybe involved in hereditary leukonychia.
