Plasmin heavy chain A, short form; Plasmin dissolves the fibrin of blood clots and acts as a proteolytic factor in a variety of other processes including embryonic development, tissue remodeling, tumor invasion, and inflammation. In ovulation, weakens the walls of the Graafian follicle. It activates the urokinase-type plasminogen activator, collagenases and several complement zymogens, such as C1 and C5. Cleavage of fibronectin and laminin leads to cell detachment and apoptosis. Also cleaves fibrin, thrombospondin and von Willebrand factor. Its role in tissue remodeling and tumor invas [...] 
Plg-R(KT) is a structurally unique transmembrane plasminogen receptor with both N- and C-terminal domains exposed on the extracellular face of the cell. Its C-terminal lysine functions to tether plasminogen to cell surfaces. Overexpression of Plg-R(KT) increases cell surface plasminogen binding capacity while genetic deletion of Plg-R(KT) decreases plasminogen binding. Plasminogen binding to Plg-R(KT) results in promotion of plasminogen activation to the broad spectrum serine protease plasmin. This function is promoted by the physical association of Plg-R(KT) with the urokinase receptor (uPAR). Plg-R(KT) is broadly expressed in cells and tissues throughout the organism and its sequence is remarkably conserved phylogenetically. Plg-R(KT) also is required for lactation and, thus, is necessary for survival of the species. This review provides an overview of established and emerging functions of Plg-R(KT) and highlights major roles for Plg-R(KT) in both the initiation and resolution of inflammation. While the roles for Plg-R(KT) in the inflammatory response are predominantly plasmin(ogen)-dependent, its role in lactation requires both plasminogen-dependent and plasminogen-independent mechanisms. Furthermore, the functions of Plg-R(KT) are dependent on sex. In view of the broad tissue distribution of Plg-R(KT) , its role in a broad array of physiological and pathological processes should provide a fruitful area for future investigation.
An efficient and straightforward orthogonal methodology was successfully developed to achieve constrained l-prolyl-l-leucylglycinamide (PLG) analogues starting from two proline mimetics based on a 2-azanorbornane scaffold. A preliminary dopamine D(2) receptor radiolabeled binding assay with [(3)H]-N-propylnorapomorphine shows that enantiopurity of PLG peptidomimetics based on 2-azanorbornane is a requirement to achieve statistically significant positive modulators of the D(2) receptor. This is the first documented active peptidomimetic of PLG whose bioactivity is not correlated with the C-terminal carboxamide pharmacophore and which cannot adopt the hypothesized type II beta-turn conformation.
Despite the importance of microsphere size for controlled drug delivery, little work has been done to quantitatively predict the distribution of microspheres from manufacturing techniques. This work presents a quantitative study that describes the size distribution of poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLG) microspheres. A fluid mechanics based correlation for the mean microsphere diameter is formulated based on the theory of emulsification in turbulent flow under non-coalescing conditions. The correlation was constructed and validated with experimentally obtained mean microsphere diameters prepared at different stirring speeds. In addition, a Rosin Rammler distribution function was found to give an accurate representation of the microsphere distribution. The spread of the microsphere size distribution was found to decrease with stirring speed. With the validation of the mathematical correlation, it is now possible to have a good estimate of the average microsphere size prior to microsphere preparation. This is directly relevant to the pharmaceutical industry where microspheres of specified mean diameter and size distribution are desirable.
The plasminogen activation system regulates the activity of the serine protease, plasmin. The role of plasminogen receptors in cancer progression is being increasingly appreciated as key players in modulation of the tumor microenvironment. The interaction of plasminogen with cells to promote plasminogen activation requires the presence of proteins exposing C-terminal lysines on the cell surface. Plg-R(KT) is a structurally unique plasminogen receptor because it is an integral membrane protein that is synthesized with and binds plasminogen via a C-terminal lysine exposed on the cell surface. Here, we have investigated the expression of Plg-R(KT) in human breast tumors and human breast cancer cell lines. Breast cancer progression tissue microarrays were probed with anti-Plg-R(KT) mAB and we found that Plg-R(KT) is widely expressed in human breast tumors, that its expression is increased in tumors that have spread to draining lymph nodes and distant organs, and that Plg-R(KT) expression is most pronounced in hormone receptor (HR)-positive tumors. Plg-R(KT) was detected by Western blotting in human breast cancer cell lines. By flow cytometry, Plg-R(KT) cell surface expression was highest on the most aggressive tumor cell line. Future studies are warranted to address the functions of Plg-R(KT) in breast cancer.
The enzyme urease was incorporated into poly(lactide-co-glycolide) microspheres using a double emulsion solvent removal technique. Ethyl acetate was used as organic solvent since it is less toxic than the more commonly used methylene chloride. The effect of the two solvents on urease was compared. Although this preparation technique is well established, it is often associated with reduced bioactivity and low entrapment efficiency of proteins. In order to retain a high degree of bioactivity, the well known protein stabilisers: sucrose, trehalose and poloxamer 407, were added to the urease in the preparation. The bioactivity of the entrapped urease was reduced more by methylene chloride than by ethyl acetate. The gelled form of poloxamer was shown to highly favour the retention of bioactivity, demonstrated by an increase of 41% compared to preparations without poloxamer. Moreover, the presence of poloxamer strongly increased the in vitro release rate of urease from the microspheres. The entrapment efficiency was increased by 44% using the sugars in the preparation. These results clearly show the great potential of small quantities of additive in the formulation to control the properties of the microspheres. The amount and type of additive could be adjusted according to the therapeutic application of the preparation.
PURPOSE: Early diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is critical to patient prognosis; however, there is lack of non-invasive biomarkers that are extremely sensitive and specific for early screening and diagnosis. Exosomes are a novel tool applied to the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Changes in plasma exosomal proteins have a certain relationship with the development of various diseases including tumors. Here, we aimed to find exosomal biomarkers for early diagnosis of CRC. METHODS: Exosomes obtained by ultracentrifugation from CRC patients and healthy donors were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), qNano and western blotting. Proteomic and functional enrichment analyses confirmed differences in the specific expression of exosomal proteins in plasma between CRC patients and healthy donors. Western blotting with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to verify the difference proteins. Statistical methods were used to analyze the relationship between protein levels and CRC. RESULTS: The expression levels of serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A member 1 (SERPINA1) and fibrinogen (PLG) in CRC patients were significantly higher than those in healthy groups. Receptor operating characteristic (ROC) curves analysis was superior to CEA and CA19-9 for the diagnosis of colorectal cancer and early-stage colorectal cancer. The two were related to TNM staging and coagulation, and the difference was statistically significant. CONCLUSION: The results of this study have potential value in advancing the clinical diagnosis of colorectal cancer.
A simplified model has been developed to describe the thermal response of pressure liquefied gas (PLG) tanks subjected to fire. The development of the stratification layer is considered in this model. Comparison of results with available experimental data shows that our proposed model can reasonably predict the thermal response. The effect of stratification on the liquid energy is also summarized. Results show that the pressure in the tank rises faster as a result of thermal stratification, and for the same tank pressure the energy in the liquid is less when the liquid is stratified. Stratification can reduce the severity of hazards of boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE).
Genetic polymorphism of human plasminogen in the Japanese population was studied using agarose gel isoelectric focusing followed by immunofixation. A new basic variant, PLG B, was found as a heterozygous state PLG 1-B, which was genetically determined. The allele frequencies calculated from 258 individuals were PLG1=0.958, PLG2=0.020 and PLGB=0.022.
PLG-007 is a developmental therapeutic compound that has been clinically shown to reduce the magnitude of postprandial glucose excursions and has the potential to be an adjunct treatment for diabetes and inflammatory-related diseases. The present investigation is aimed at understanding the molecular mechanism of action of PLG-007 and its galactomannan (GM) components GMalpha and GMbeta (in a 1:4 mass ratio, respectively) on enzyme (i.e., alpha-amylase, maltase, and lactase) hydrolysis of glucose polymers using colorimetric assays and (13)C HSQC NMR spectroscopy. The starch-iodine colorimetric assay indicated that GMalpha strongly inhibits alpha-amylase activity (~16-fold more potent than GMbeta) and thus is the primary active component in PLG-007. (13)C HSQC experiments, used to follow the alpha-amylase-mediated hydrolysis of starch and amylopectin, further demonstrate the alpha-amylase inhibitory effect of GMalpha via alpha-amylase-mediated hydrolysis of starch and amylopectin. Maltohexaose (MT6) was used to circumvent the relative kinetic complexity of starch/amylopectin degradation in Michaelis-Menten analyses. The V(max), K(M), and K(i) parameters were determined using peak volume integrals from (13)C HSQC NMR spectra. In the presence of PLG-007 with alpha-amylase and MT6, the increase in K(M) from 7.5 +/- 0.6 x 10(-3) M (control) to 21 +/- 1.4 x 10(-3) M, with no significant change in V(max), indicates that PLG-007 is a competitive inhibitor of alpha-amylase. Using K(M) values, K(i) was estimated to be 2.1 +/- 0.9 x 10(-6) M; however, the microscopic K(i) value of GMalpha is expected to be larger as the binding stoichiometry is likely to be greater than 1:1. Colorimetric assays also demonstrated that GMalpha is a competitive inhibitor of the enzymes maltase and lactase. Overall, this study provides insight as to how PLG-007 (GMalpha) is likely to function in vivo.
