Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma; Nuclear receptor that binds peroxisome proliferators such as hypolipidemic drugs and fatty acids. Once activated by a ligand, the nuclear receptor binds to DNA specific PPAR response elements (PPRE) and modulates the transcription of its target genes, such as acyl-CoA oxidase. It therefore controls the peroxisomal beta-oxidation pathway of fatty acids. Key regulator of adipocyte differentiation and glucose homeostasis. ARF6 acts as a key regulator of the tissue-specific adipocyte P2 (aP2) enhancer. Acts as a critical regulator of gut ho [...] 
The spindle cell/sclerosing subtype of rhabdomyosarcoma is classified based on genetic features into the three categories of MYOD1-mutated, gene fusion-driven, and a subset without a currently identified genetic driver event. The gene fusion-driven spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcomas are heterogenous and characterized by increasing numbers of gene fusions, the most common gene partners being VGLL2, NCOA2, and TFCP2. Here we report a spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcoma that arose in the orbit of a 4-year-old male. This tumor harbored a unique PAX8::PPARG fusion. PAX8::PPARG fusions have previously only been described in follicular thyroid carcinoma and follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Our report adds to the growing number of gene fusions in spindle cell/sclerosing rhabdomyosarcomas.
AIM: Investigate the correlation between paraoxonase 2 (PON2) Ser311Cys polymorphism as well as the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) His477His polymorphism and the susceptibility to development of coronary heart diseases (CHD) through a meta-analysis. METHODS: Odds ratio and the corresponding 95% CI were used to assess the results. We included 7476 CHD patients and 8504 healthy controls. All the statistical analyses were performed by Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software (CMA, version 2.0). RESULTS: The Ser311Cys polymorphism decreased susceptibility in the overall population and Asian population to CHD. The His477His polymorphism has a protective role in the overall population; however, the subgroup analysis by ethnicity suggested that in Asian population, His477His might increase the risk of CHD. CONCLUSION: These polymorphisms constitute important predictive indicators of CHD susceptibility.
Amplicon melting and genotyping with unlabeled probes has become wide spread technique for SNP genotyping. In both methods PCR is performed with new generation of double-strand DNA binding dyes. Nucleic acid melting generates distinct melting curves that can be used to identify the presence of sequence variation within the amplicon. Unlabeled probes are inexpensive and provide the sequence specificity. This chapter provides comprehensive instructions about design of primers and probes and evaluation of their quality. Chapter also contains useful advices on how to perform DNA purification, optimize PCR conditions, how to prepare working solutions, and how to interpret the data of melting analysis.
Clinical exome sequencing routinely identifies missense variants in disease-related genes, but functional characterization is rarely undertaken, leading to diagnostic uncertainty. For example, mutations in PPARG cause Mendelian lipodystrophy and increase risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Although approximately 1 in 500 people harbor missense variants in PPARG, most are of unknown consequence. To prospectively characterize PPARgamma variants, we used highly parallel oligonucleotide synthesis to construct a library encoding all 9,595 possible single-amino acid substitutions. We developed a pooled functional assay in human macrophages, experimentally evaluated all protein variants, and used the experimental data to train a variant classifier by supervised machine learning. When applied to 55 new missense variants identified in population-based and clinical sequencing, the classifier annotated 6 variants as pathogenic; these were subsequently validated by single-variant assays. Saturation mutagenesis and prospective experimental characterization can support immediate diagnostic interpretation of newly discovered missense variants in disease-related genes.
Acinic cell carcinoma (ACC) is a salivary gland malignancy most commonly arising in the parotid gland. It is the second most common salivary gland carcinoma in children. It is characterised by neoplastic cells with acinar morphology arranged in variably architectural features, including solid, cystic or follicular patterns. Conventional ACC typically has a low-grade clinical pattern, whereas high grade ACC exhibits a more aggressive clinical course with distant metastasis a high mortality rate. Most ACCs are characterised by gene rearrangements in the NR4A3 gene. Here, we present a case of high grade ACC lacking NR4A3 gene translocation but harbouring a hitherto undescribed SYN2::PPARG gene fusion of uncertain clinical significance. Clinical, radiological, histological and genomic features of the case are discussed alongside a brief review of the literature.
Genetic screens were performed across PPARG to study how disruptive mutations across the full coding sequence affect function. An alternative translational start site in PPARG generates a truncated isoform, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) M135, which lacks the N-terminal activation function 1 (AF-1) domain and shows increased agonist-induced transactivation of target genes. In human carriers of rare PPARG variants, AF-1 domain-disrupting genetic variants increase agonist-induced PPARgamma activity and decrease metabolic syndrome severity. Targeting the AF-1 domain is a potential therapeutic strategy for insulin sensitization.
BACKGROUND/AIM: One of the beneficial effects associated with vitamin E intake is the enhancement of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) activity and the consequent upregulation of adiponectin expression. The aim of this study was to analyze the adiponectin levels in subjects with the Pro12Ala polymorphism of PPARG according to vitamin E intake. METHODS: A total of 283 subjects were enrolled. Total vitamin E intake was estimated based on a validated 3-day food consumption record and analyzed using Nutritionist ProTM software. The Pro12Ala polymorphism (rs1801282) was determined by allelic discrimination. The adiponectin levels were measured by an ELISA assay. RESULTS: Vitamin E intake was deficient in all subjects (1.50 +/- 1.78 mg/day). Subjects with higher vitamin E intake levels and the Pro12Ala/Ala12Ala genotype had statistically significant higher levels of serum adiponectin than subjects with the Pro12Pro genotype (4.4 [3.2-5.7] vs. 2.7 [2.0-3.5] mug/mL; p = 0.024). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that increased consumption of vitamin E should be encouraged since it has been reported that vitamin E promotes adiponectin expression via PPARgamma activation. Subjects with Pro12Pro genotype had lower serum adiponectin levels than subjects with Pro12Ala/Ala12Ala genotype; therefore, they might be at higher risk of developing metabolic complications.
BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a common autoimmune disease in clinical practice, and previous observational studies have suggested that PPARG agonists such as Pioglitazone may be potential therapeutic agents. However, due to interference from various confounding factors, different observational studies have not reached a unified conclusion. We aim to evaluate the potential use of PPARG agonists for treating psoriasis from a new perspective through drug-targeted Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study includes data on 8,876 individuals for acute myocardial infarction from GWAS, and LDL cholesterol data from 343,621 Europeans. FinnGen contributed psoriasis vulgaris data for 403,972 individuals. The DrugBank10 databases function to identify genes encoding protein products targeted by active constituents of lipid-modifying targets. A two-sample MR analysis and summary-data-based MR (SMR) analysis estimated the associations between expressions of drug target genes and symptoms of psoriasis vulgaris. A multivariable MR study was further conducted to examine if the observed association was direct association. RESULTS: SMR analysis revealed that enhanced PPARG gene expression in the blood (equivalent to a one standard deviation increase) was a protective factor for psoriasis vulgaris (beta = -0.2017, se = 0.0723, p = 0.0053). Besides, there exists an MR association between LDL mediated by PPARG and psoriasis vulgaris outcomes (beta = -3.9169, se = 0.5676, p = 5.17E-12). These results indicate that PPARG is a therapeutic target for psoriasis, suggesting that psoriasis may be a potential indication for PPARG agonists. CONCLUSION: This study confirms that therapeutic activation of PPARG helps suppress the development of psoriasis. Psoriasis may be a new indication for PPARG agonists, such as Pioglitazone. In the future, new anti-psoriatic drugs could be developed targeting PPARG.
OBJECTIVE: The adipogenic PPARG-encoded PPARgamma nuclear receptor also displays essential placental functions. We evaluated the metabolic, reproductive, and perinatal features of patients with PPARG-related lipodystrophy. METHODS: Current and retrospective data were collected in patients referred to a National Rare Diseases Reference Centre. RESULTS: 26 patients from 15 unrelated families were studied (18 women, median age 43 years). They carried monoallelic PPARG variants except a homozygous patient with congenital generalized lipodystrophy. Among heterozygous patients aged 16 or more (n = 24), 92% had diabetes, 96% partial lipodystrophy (median age at diagnosis 24 and 37 years), 78% hypertriglyceridaemia, 71% liver steatosis, and 58% hypertension. The mean BMI was 26 +/- 5.0 kg/m2. Women (n = 16) were frequently affected by acute pancreatitis (n = 6) and/or polycystic ovary syndrome (n = 12). Eleven women obtained one or several pregnancies, all complicated by diabetes (n = 8), hypertension (n = 4), and/or hypertriglyceridaemia (n = 10). We analysed perinatal data of patients according to the presence (n = 8) or absence (n = 9) of a maternal dysmetabolic environment. The median gestational age at birth was low in both groups (37 and 36 weeks of amenorrhea, respectively). As expected, the birth weight was higher in patients exposed to a foetal dysmetabolic environment of maternal origin. In contrast, 85.7% of non-exposed patients, in whom the variant is, or is very likely to be, paternally-inherited, were small for gestational age. CONCLUSIONS: Lipodystrophy-related PPARG variants induce early metabolic complications. Our results suggest that placental expression of PPARG pathogenic variants carried by affected foetuses could impair prenatal growth and parturition. This justifies careful pregnancy monitoring in affected families.
The mechanism of regulation of PPARG expression during the osteogenesis of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) was investigated on an extracellular matrix (ECM) model that mimicked the stepwise osteogenesis ECM. Three matrices that mimicked the ECM of MSCs (stem cell matrices), the early stage ECM (early stage matrices), and the late stage ECM (late stage matrices) of osteogenesis were prepared and compared. The matrices showed different effects on the Wnt/beta-catenin signal. The beta-catenin signal was activated by endogenous Wnt through interaction with chondroitin sulfate chains to suppress PPARG expression on the stem cell matrices and early stage matrices but not on late stage matrices.
OBJECTIVES: PAX8/PPARG chromosomal rearrangement is frequently seen in thyroid cancer, and PPARG overexpression has been shown in the follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma, but not in papillary thyroid carcinoma other than the follicular variant. The main aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of PPARG overexpression among papillary thyroid carcinoma and if there were any variants of papillary thyroid carcinoma with PPARG overexpression other than the follicular variant. METHODS: Immunohistochemical analysis of PPARG overexpression was performed using a PPARG monoclonal antibody in a series of 111 paraffin-embedded blocks of thyroid tumours. Of the patients in our study, 100 were diagnosed with papillary thyroid carcinoma, 9 with follicular adenoma and 2 with follicular carcinoma. RESULTS: PPARG staining was detected in 19 of the 111 cases. Sixteen patients with PPARG overexpression had papillary thyroid carcinoma and 3 had follicular adenoma. CONCLUSION: PPARG overexpression was detected mainly in follicular-variant papillary thyroid carcinoma. Vascular invasion, lymphatic invasion, thyroid capsule invasion and lymph node positivity were lower in patients with PPARG overexpression.
