Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 2B catalytic subunit alpha isoform; Calcium-dependent, calmodulin-stimulated protein phosphatase which plays an essential role in the transduction of intracellular Ca(2+)-mediated signals. Many of the substrates contain a PxIxIT motif and/or a LxVP motif. In response to increased Ca(2+) levels, dephosphorylates and activates phosphatase SSH1 which results in cofilin dephosphorylation. In response to increased Ca(2+) levels following mitochondrial depolarization, dephosphorylates DNM1L inducing DNM1L translocation to the mitochondrion. Dephosphorylat [...] 
PPP3CA encodes the catalytic subunit of calcineurin, a calcium-calmodulin-regulated serine-threonine phosphatase. Loss-of-function (LoF) variants in the catalytic domain have been associated with epilepsy, while gain-of-function (GoF) variants in the auto-inhibitory domain cause multiple congenital abnormalities. We herein report five new patients with de novo PPP3CA variants. Interestingly, the two frameshift variants in this study and the six truncating variants reported previously are all located within a 26-amino acid region in the regulatory domain (RD). Patients with a truncating variant had more severe earlier onset seizures compared to patients with a LoF missense variant, while autism spectrum disorder was a more frequent feature in the latter. Expression studies of a truncating variant showed apparent RNA expression from the mutant allele, but no detectable mutant protein. Our data suggest that PPP3CA truncating variants clustered in the RD, causing more severe early-onset refractory epilepsy and representing a type of variants distinct from LoF or GoF missense variants.
Calcineurin (also called protein phosphatase-2B) is a calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase which plays an important role in signal transduction. The enzyme is a heterodimer of a 58-59 kDa calmodulin-binding catalytic subunit (calcineurin A) and a small (i.e. 19 kDa) Ca(2+)-binding regulatory subunit (calcineurin B). The highly conserved calcineurin B is encoded by a single gene in all tissues except testes, whereas there are three isoforms of calcineurin A (alpha, beta and gamma) encoded by genes on three different chromosomes. This enzyme can play a critical role in transcriptional regulation and growth control in T lymphocytes by a mechanism believed to involve dephosphorylation of the nuclear factor NF-AT which is essential for transcription of the interleukin-2 gene. To better evaluate the potential role of the calcineurin genes in human genetic disorders, we have studied their chromosome locations. Calcineurin B (PPP3R1) is located on human chromosome 2p16-->p15 and calcineurin A beta (PPP3CB, previous gene symbol CALNB) is present on 10q21-->q22. We confirm the localization of calcineurin A alpha (PPP3CA, previous gene symbol CALNA) to chromosome 4 without regional localization.
Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) are master regulators of the response to hypoxia. Although several kinases are known to modify their oxygen sensitive HIF-alpha subunits or affect indirectly their function, little is known about the role of phosphatases in HIF control. To address this issue, a library containing siRNAs for the 25 known catalytic subunits of human phosphatases was used to screen for their effect on HIF transcriptional activity in HeLa cells. Serine-threonine phosphatase PPP3CA (calcineurin A, isoform a) was identified as the strongest candidate for a negative regulator of HIF activity. Indeed, independent silencing of PPP3CA expression stimulated HIF transcriptional activity under hypoxia, without increasing the protein levels of HIF-1alpha or HIF-2alpha. Overexpression of a constitutively active PPP3CA form, but not its catalytically inactive counterpart, inhibited HIF activity and expression of HIF target genes but did not affect HIF-1alpha or HIF-2alpha expression. These results were phenocopied by treatment with the ionophore ionomycin, that activates endogenous PPP3CA. The effect of ionomycin was mediated by PPP3CA as it was largely abolished by PPP3CA silencing. Furthermore, ionomycin enhanced the down-regulation of HIF activity by wild-type PPP3CA overexpression. Overall, our results suggest the involvement of PPP3CA in fine-tuning the HIF-dependent transcriptional response to hypoxia.
Exome sequencing has readily enabled the discovery of the genetic mutations responsible for a wide range of diseases. This success has been particularly remarkable in the severe epilepsies and other neurodevelopmental diseases for which rare, often de novo, mutations play a significant role in disease risk. Despite significant progress, the high genetic heterogeneity of these disorders often requires large sample sizes to identify a critical mass of individuals with disease-causing mutations in a single gene. By pooling genetic findings across multiple studies, we have identified six individuals with severe developmental delay (6/6), refractory seizures (5/6), and similar dysmorphic features (3/6), each harboring a de novo mutation in PPP3CA. PPP3CA encodes the alpha isoform of a subunit of calcineurin. Calcineurin encodes a calcium- and calmodulin-dependent serine/threonine protein phosphatase that plays a role in a wide range of biological processes, including being a key regulator of synaptic vesicle recycling at nerve terminals. Five individuals with de novo PPP3CA mutations were identified among 4,760 trio probands with neurodevelopmental diseases; this is highly unlikely to occur by chance (p = 1.2 x 10(-8)) given the size and mutability of the gene. Additionally, a sixth individual with a de novo mutation in PPP3CA was connected to this study through GeneMatcher. Based on these findings, we securely implicate PPP3CA in early-onset refractory epilepsy and further support the emerging role for synaptic dysregulation in epilepsy.
PURPOSE: The objective of this study is to characterize the electro-clinical phenotype of individuals affected by the rare PPP3CA gene-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). METHODS: We provide a detailed electro-clinical description of four previously unreported subjects, with unremarkable structural brain MRI and a normal screening for inborn errors of metabolism, who carry pathogenic variants within the regulatory domain of the PPP3CA gene, which encodes for calcineurin. We also conducted a literature review via PubMed and SCOPUS (up to December 2023) to collect all the studies reporting clinical details of subjects with PPP3CA pathogenic variants within the regulatory domain. RESULTS: Our in-depth investigation reveals two distinct electro-clinical phenotypes with unique interictal and ictal patterns. Pathogenic variants within the calmodulin-binding domain result in childhood-onset epilepsy with focal and generalized seizures, developmental and intellectual impairments. Pathogenic variants within the regulatory domain lead to early onset drug-resistant severe epilepsy and potentially fatal outcomes. Comparative analysis with existing literature corroborates the notion that truncating mutations, prevalent in the regulatory domain but also possible in the calmodulin-binding domain, consistently associate with more profound disabilities and drug-resistant epilepsy. CONCLUSION: Our study emphasizes the critical role of pathogenic variants' type and location on the severity of PPP3CA-related DEE. We also speculate, based on peculiar EEG patterns, on potential pathophysiological mechanisms involving calcineurin dysfunction and calcium homeostasis. In order to improve our understanding of this rare DEE, we need both collaborative efforts to gather larger cohorts and further experimental studies.
BACKGROUND: the protein phosphatase 3 catalytic subunit alpha (PPP3CA) gene encodes for the alpha isoform of the calcineurin catalytic subunit, which controls the phosphorylation status of many targets. Currently, 23 pathogenic variants of PPP3CA are known, with clinical manifestations varying by mutation type and domain. RESULTS: through whole exome sequencing, we found two de novo variants in PPP3CA: a frameshift variant predicted leading to a truncated protein in Pt.1 and a splicing variant in Pt.2 associated with mild phenotype. PPP3CA is ubiquitously expressed with tissue-specificity of; namely, splicing isoform 1 prevailing over isoform 2 in the central nervous system. By analyzing isoform distribution in patient-derived cell lines, we highlight a skewed expression of both isoforms in Pt.1, whereas only isoform 2 shows a moderate reduction in Pt.2. In contrast, we did not observe significant abundance changes at the protein level. Cell lines derived from Pt.1 showed a reduced proliferation, associated with an increase in cell death and the upregulation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway. CONCLUSION: data suggest that an aberrant PPP3CA protein in Pt.1 could lead to UPR activation resulting in increased cell death. In Pt.2 an imbalance between the two main isoforms possibly explains the peculiar pathological manifestations, such as a moderate developmental delay.
A hypoxic tumor microenvironment (TME) promotes cancer progression, yet its value as a therapeutic target remains underexploited. Tripartite motif-containing 72 (TRIM72) may protect cells against various stresses including hypoxia. Recently, low TRIM72 expression has been implicated in cancer progression. However, the biological role and molecular mechanism of TRIM72 in breast cancer (BC) remain unclear. Herein, we analyzed the TRIM72 expression in BC tissue and cell lines by western blot (WB) and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. We established the overexpression of TRIM72 using plasmids and lentiviral-mediated upregulation, as well as downregulation of protein phosphatase 3 catalytic subunit alpha (PPP3CA) by siRNA. The tumor-suppressive roles of TRIM72 were assessed on BT549 and MDA-MB-231 cells by MTS, Transwell, and flow cytometry assays in vitro and in xenografted tumors in vivo. The molecular mechanism of TRIM72 was investigated by luciferase reporter and co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay. Lactate production was measured by ELISA under hypoxic environments induced by CoCl2. Moreover, the expression of PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway-associated proteins was detected by WB in BC cells. Results showed that TRIM72 was downregulated in BC. Overexpression of TRIM72 inhibited tumor proliferation and invasion in vitro and in a xenograft tumor model. Mechanistically, PPP3CA altered the inhibitory effects of TRIM72 on hypoxia-induced lactate production and monocarboxylate transporter 4-promoter activity, as well as the effect of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway. Our study suggests that TRIM72 modulates the TME and plays tumor-suppressive roles in BC progression. Therefore, TRIM72 may serve as a potential therapeutic target in BC.
Epileptic encephalopathies are severe seizure disorders accompanied by intellectual disability. Whole-exome sequencing technology has enabled the discovery of genetic mutations responsible for a wide range of diseases, and severe epilepsy and neurodevelopmental diseases are often associated with rare de novo mutations. We identified a novel de novo frameshift mutation in the PPP3CA gene encoding calcium-dependent protein phosphatase (calcineurin) catalytic subunit A (c.1255_1256del, p.Ser419Cysfs*31) in an 11.5-mo-old female with early-onset refractory epilepsy and developmental delay. This finding expands the list of PPP3CA mutations associated with early-onset severe neurodevelopmental disease with seizures and provides further details on clinical features.
PPP3CA encodes calmodulin-binding catalytic subunit of calcineurin, a ubiquitously expressed calcium/calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase. Recently de novo PPP3CA variants were reported as a cause of disease in 12 subjects presenting with epileptic encephalopathy and dysmorphic features. We describe a boy with similar phenotype and severe early onset epileptic encephalopathy in whom a novel de novo c.1324C>T (p.(Gln442Ter)) PPP3CA variant was found by whole exome sequencing. Western blot experiments in patient's cells (EBV transformed lymphocytes and neuronal cells derived through reprogramming) indicate that despite normal mRNA abundance the protein expression level is strongly reduced both for the mutated and wild-type protein. By in vitro studies with recombinant protein expressed in E. coli we show that c.1324C>T (p.(Gln442Ter)) results in constitutive activation of the enzyme. Our results confirm the role of PPP3CA defects in pathogenesis of a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder including severe epilepsy and dysmorphism and provide further functional clues regarding the pathogenic mechanism.
Calcineurin is a calcium (Ca2+)/calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase that mediates Ca2+-dependent signal transduction. Here, we report six heterozygous mutations in a gene encoding the alpha isoform of the calcineurin catalytic subunit (PPP3CA). Notably, mutations were observed in different functional domains: in addition to three catalytic domain mutations, two missense mutations were found in the auto-inhibitory (AI) domain. One additional frameshift insertion that caused premature termination was also identified. Detailed clinical evaluation of the six individuals revealed clinically unexpected consequences of the PPP3CA mutations. First, the catalytic domain mutations and frameshift mutation were consistently found in patients with nonsyndromic early onset epileptic encephalopathy. In contrast, the AI domain mutations were associated with multiple congenital abnormalities including craniofacial dysmorphism, arthrogryposis and short stature. In addition, one individual showed severe skeletal developmental defects, namely, severe craniosynostosis and gracile bones (severe bone slenderness and perinatal fractures). Using a yeast model system, we showed that the catalytic and AI domain mutations visibly result in decreased and increased calcineurin signaling, respectively. These findings indicate that different functional effects of PPP3CA mutations are associated with two distinct disorders and suggest that functional approaches using a simple cellular system provide a tool for resolving complex genotype-phenotype correlations.
Fine mapping of calcineurin (PPP3CA) gene identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and simple sequence repeat polymorphisms that are associated with addiction vulnerability. A trinucleotide repeat marker, located in the 5'untranslated region (5'UTR) of the PPP3CA mRNA, exhibited significantly different genotype and allele frequencies between abusers and controls in the NIDA African-American sample. The polymorphism showed allelic-specific expression in mRNA extracted from postmortem brain specimens. Novel alternatively spliced isoforms of PPP3CA were identified and their expressions were found altered in brain regions of postmortem Alzheimer's disease patients. These data underscore the importance of calcineurin gene in the molecular mechanism of addiction and Alzheimer's diseases.
BACKGROUND: PPP3CA gene encodes the catalytic subunit A of a calcium-dependent protein phosphatase called calcineurin. However, two distinct mechanisms in PPP3CA deficiency would cause two clinically different diseases. Gain-of-function mutations in the autoinhibitory domain at the C-terminus would cause ACCIID that stands for arthrogryposis, cleft palate, craniosynostosis and impaired intellectual development. While loss-of-function mutations in PPP3CA would cause infantile or early childhood onset epileptic encephalopathy1, named as IECEE1. IECEE1 is a severe epileptic neurodevelopmental disorder and mainly characterized by psychomotor delay. Here, we report a Chinese patient who was clinically and genetically diagnosed as IECEE1. We also extensively analyzed electroencephalogram (EEG) features of the patient in this study. CASE PRESENTATION: A 2-year-old Chinese patient who had recurrent polymorphic seizures was clinically and genetically diagnosed as IECEE1. A frameshift variant c.1283insC (p.T429NfsX22) was identified in this case. Multiple types of abnormal features were observed in the EEG, comparing with the previous reports. CONCLUSIONS: These findings could expand the spectrum of PPP3CA mutations and might also support the diagnosis and further study of IECEE1.
