Serine/threonine-protein phosphatase 2B catalytic subunit beta isoform; Calcium-dependent, calmodulin-stimulated protein phosphatase which plays an essential role in the transduction of intracellular Ca(2+)-mediated signals. Dephosphorylates and activates transcription factor NFATC1. Dephosphorylates and inactivates transcription factor ELK1. Dephosphorylates DARPP32 ; Belongs to the PPP phosphatase family. PP-2B subfamily.
Calcineurin (also called protein phosphatase-2B) is a calmodulin-regulated protein phosphatase which plays an important role in signal transduction. The enzyme is a heterodimer of a 58-59 kDa calmodulin-binding catalytic subunit (calcineurin A) and a small (i.e. 19 kDa) Ca(2+)-binding regulatory subunit (calcineurin B). The highly conserved calcineurin B is encoded by a single gene in all tissues except testes, whereas there are three isoforms of calcineurin A (alpha, beta and gamma) encoded by genes on three different chromosomes. This enzyme can play a critical role in transcriptional regulation and growth control in T lymphocytes by a mechanism believed to involve dephosphorylation of the nuclear factor NF-AT which is essential for transcription of the interleukin-2 gene. To better evaluate the potential role of the calcineurin genes in human genetic disorders, we have studied their chromosome locations. Calcineurin B (PPP3R1) is located on human chromosome 2p16-->p15 and calcineurin A beta (PPP3CB, previous gene symbol CALNB) is present on 10q21-->q22. We confirm the localization of calcineurin A alpha (PPP3CA, previous gene symbol CALNA) to chromosome 4 without regional localization.
We previously identified a gain-of-function mutation in PPP3CB in a neuroblastoma (NB) with MYCN amplification. Here we investigated the functional and clinical role of PPP3CB in NB. High PPP3CB expression was an independent indicator predicting poor prognosis of NB. Overexpression of wildtype or mutated PPP3CB (PPP3CBmut) promoted cell growth, but PPP3CB knockdown decreased cell growth in NB cells. Forced expressions of PPP3CB and PPP3CBmut activated NFAT2 and NFAT4 transcription factors and inhibited GSK3beta activity, resulting in the increase in the expressions of c-Myc, MYCN, and beta-catenin, which were downregulated in response to PPP3CB knockdown. Treatment with calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporin A (CsA) or FK506 suppressed cell proliferation and induced apoptotic cell death in both MYCN-amplified and MYCN-non-amplified NB cell lines. Expression of PPP3CB protein was decreased in response to two calcineurin inhibitors. c-Myc, MYCN, and beta-catenin were downregulated at the mRNA and protein levels in CsA or FK506-treated NB cells. Our data indicate that elevated expression of PPP3CB and the expression of its constitutively active mutant contribute to the aggressive behavior of NB tumors and therefore suggest that inhibition of calcineurin activity might have therapeutic potential for high-risk NB.
BACKGROUND: A genome scan of Taiwanese schizophrenia families suggested linkage to chromosome 10q22.3. We aimed to find the candidate genes in this region. METHODS: A total of 476 schizophrenia families were included. Hierarchical clustering method was used for clustering families to homogeneous subgroups according to their performances of sustained attention and executive function. Association analysis was performed using family-based association testing and TRANSMIT. Candidate associated regions were identified using the longest significance run method. The relative messenger RNA expression level was determined using real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: First, we genotyped 18 microsatellite markers between D10S1432 and D10S1239. The maximum nonparametric linkage score was 2.79 on D10S195. Through family clustering, we found the maximum nonparametric linkage score was 3.70 on D10S195 in the family cluster with deficits in attention and executive function. Second, we genotyped 79 single nucleotide polymorphisms between D10S1432 and D10S580 in 90 attention deficit and execution deficit families. Association analysis indicated significant transmission distortion for nine single nucleotide polymorphisms. Using the longest significance run method, we identified a 427-kilobase region as a significant candidate region, which encompasses nine genes. Third, we studied messenger RNA expression of these nine genes in Epstein-Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastic cells. In schizophrenic patients, there was significantly lower expression of ANXA7, PPP3CB, and DNAJC9 and significantly higher expression of ZMYND17. CONCLUSIONS: ANXA7, PPP3CB, DNAJC9, and ZMYND17 genes are potential candidate genes for schizophrenia, especially in patients with deficits in sustained attention and executive function. The responsible functional variants remained to be clarified.
