cAMP-dependent protein kinase type II-beta regulatory subunit; Regulatory subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinases involved in cAMP signaling in cells. Type II regulatory chains mediate membrane association by binding to anchoring proteins, including the MAP2 kinase.
The cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-activated protein kinase A (PKA) pathway is profoundly implicated in Prostate cancer (PCa) progression. Previously, we showed that PRKAR2B, the type II-beta regulatory subunit of PKA, is highly expressed in castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) and can induce epithelial-mesenchymal transition by activating Wnt/beta-catenin signaling in PCa cells. However, the molecular mechanism of dysregulated PRKAR2B expression pattern is still largely unknown. In this study, we found that the mutation, copy number alteration, and methylation status of PRKAR2B gene have no correlation with its expression level in PCa. Then, we identified two microRNAs (miR-200b-3p and miR-200c-3p) to be critical regulators of PRKAR2B expression in PCa. Notably, miR-200b-3p and miR-200c-3p expression were significantly downregulated in metastatic CRPC and negatively correlated with the expression level of PRKAR2B in PCa tissues. Moreover, we characterized X-Box Binding Protein 1 (XBP1) as a key transcription factor responsible for PRKAR2B expression in PCa. Importantly, miR-200b-3p/200c-3p or XBP1 knockdown inhibited PCa cell proliferation and promoted cell apoptosis and these inhibitory roles could be largely restored by PRKAR2B, suggesting that PRKAR2B is a functional mediator of miR-200b-3p, miR-200c-3p, and XBP1 in PCa. Collectively, our study firstly identified miR-200b-3p/200c-3p and XBP1 as the critical upstream regulators of PRKAR2B in PCa and provided novel insights to PRKAR2B-driven PCa progression.
The cyclic AMP/protein kinase A signaling cascade is one of the main pathways involved in the pathogenesis of adrenocortical tumors. The PKA R1A and R2B proteins are the most abundant regulatory subunits in endocrine tissues. Inactivating mutations of PRKAR1A are associated with Carney complex and a subset of sporadic tumors and the abundance of R2B protein is low in a subset of secreting adrenocortical adenomas. We previously showed that PRKAR1A and PRKAR2B inactivation have anti-apoptotic effects on the adrenocortical carcinoma cell line H295R. The aim of this study was to compare the effects of PRKAR1A and PRKAR2B depletion on cell proliferation, apoptosis, cell signaling pathways, and cell cycle regulation. We found that PRKAR2B depletion is compensated by an upregulation of R1A protein, whereas PRKAR1A depletion has no effect on the production of R2B. The depletion of either PRKAR1A or PRKAR2B promotes the expression of Bcl-xL and resistance to apoptosis; and is associated with a high percentage of cells in S and G2 phase, activates PKA and MEK/ERK pathways, and impairs the expression of IkB leading to activate the NF-kappaB pathway. However, we observed differences in the regulation of cyclins. The depletion of PRKAR1A leads to the accumulation of cyclin D1 and p27kip, whereas the depletion of PRKAR2B promotes the accumulation of cyclin A, B, cdk1, cdc2, and p21Cip. In conclusion, although the depletion of PRKAR1A and PRKAR2B in adrenocortical cells has similar effects on cell proliferation and apoptosis; loss of these PKA subunits differentially affects cyclin expression.
OBJECTIVE: Antipsychotics are effective in treating schizophrenia symptoms. However, the use of clozapine and olanzapine in particular are associated with significant weight gain. Mouse and human studies suggest that the protein kinase cAMP-dependent regulatory type II beta (PRKAR2B) gene may be involved in energy metabolism, and there is evidence that it is associated with clozapine's effects on triglyceride levels. We aimed at assessing PRKAR2B's role in antipsychotic-induced weight gain in schizophrenia patients. METHODS: DNA samples from adult schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder patients of mixed ancestry were genotyped, and weight gain was assessed. We analyzed 16 tag single-nucleotide polymorphisms across the PRKAR2B gene in a Caucasian subset treated either with clozapine or olanzapine (N = 99). Linear regression based on an additive model was performed with the inclusion of relevant covariates. RESULTS: Normalized per cent weight change was analyzed, revealing that patients with the minor allele at rs9656135 had a mean weight increase of 4.1%, whereas patients without this allele had an increase of 3.4%. This association is not significant after correcting for multiple testing. CONCLUSIONS: Because of limited power, PRKAR2B's role in antipsychotic-induced weight gain is unclear, but biological evidence suggests that PRKAR2B may be involved. Further research in larger sample sizes is warranted.
