cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit beta; Mediates cAMP-dependent signaling triggered by receptor binding to GPCRs. PKA activation regulates diverse cellular processes such as cell proliferation, the cell cycle, differentiation and regulation of microtubule dynamics, chromatin condensation and decondensation, nuclear envelope disassembly and reassembly, as well as regulation of intracellular transport mechanisms and ion flux. Regulates the abundance of compartmentalized pools of its regulatory subunits through phosphorylation of PJA2 which binds and ubiquitinates these subu [...] 
Intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs) are distinct from intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms based on characteristic morphologic and genetic features represented by fusion genes involving PRKACA or PRKACB (PRKACA/B). However, pancreatic and biliary tumors with partial oncocytic features are often encountered clinically, and their molecular features are yet to be clarified. This study included 80 intraductal papillary neoplasms: 32 tumors with mature IOPN morphology (typical), 28 with partial or subclonal oncocytic features (atypical), and 20 without oncocytic features (control). We analyzed PRKACA/B fusion genes, including ATP1B1::PRKACA, DNAJB1::PRKACA, and ATP1B1::PRKACB, by reverse-transcription PCR; mRNA expression of fusion genes and nonrearranged PRKACA/B genes by quantitative reverse-transcription PCR; mutations in KRAS, BRAF, and GNAS by targeted sequencing or droplet digital PCR; and the expression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunits alpha (PRKACA) and beta (PRKACB), phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein, and aberrations of p16, p53, SMAD4, STK11, and beta-catenin by immunohistochemistry. PRKACA/B fusion genes were detected in 100% (32/32) of typical, 46% (13/28) of atypical, and 0% (0/20) of control (P < .05). Expression of PRKACA, PRKACB, and phosphorylated cAMP response element-binding protein was upregulated in neoplasms with PRKACA/B fusion genes (P < .05). mRNA expression of the PRKACA/B fusion genes and protein expression of PRKACA or PRKACB tended to be higher in typical than in atypical cases (mRNA, P = .002; protein expression, P = .054). In some atypical neoplasms with mixed subtypes, PRKACA/B fusion genes were superimposed exclusively on oncocytic components. Typical IOPNs harbored fewer KRAS and GNAS mutations than control samples and fewer alterations in p53 and STK11 than atypical samples (P < .05). In conclusion, PRKACA/B fusion genes not only are the characteristic drivers of IOPNs but also play a crucial role in the development of subclonal oncocytic neoplasms. Moreover, oncocytic morphology is strongly associated with upregulation of PRKACA/B, which may provide clues for potential therapeutic options.
Mutations in the gene encoding the protein kinase A (PKA) catalytic subunit alpha have been found to be responsible for cortisol-producing adenomas (CPAs). In this study, we identified by whole-exome sequencing the somatic mutation p.S54L in the PRKACB gene, encoding the catalytic subunit beta (Cbeta) of PKA, in a CPA from a patient with severe Cushing syndrome. Bioluminescence resonance energy transfer and surface plasmon resonance assays revealed that the mutation hampers formation of type I holoenzymes and that these holoenzymes were highly sensitive to cAMP. PKA activity, measured both in cell lysates and with recombinant proteins, based on phosphorylation of a synthetic substrate, was higher under basal conditions for the mutant enzyme compared with the WT, while maximal activity was lower. These data suggest that at baseline the PRKACB p.S54L mutant drove the adenoma cells to higher cAMP signaling activity, probably contributing to their autonomous growth. Although the role of PRKACB in tumorigenesis has been suggested, we demonstrated for the first time to our knowledge that a PRKACB mutation can lead to an adrenal tumor. Moreover, this observation describes another mechanism of PKA pathway activation in CPAs and highlights the particular role of residue Ser54 for the function of PKA.
Intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs) of the pancreatobiliary tract are considered a separate entity from intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs), especially because of the distinct molecular alterations represented by PRKACA or PRKACB fusion. However, IOPNs display a spectrum of cytoarchitectural features. Typically, an IOPN is composed of arborizing papillae lined by layers of cells with oncocytic cytoplasm, prominent nucleoli, and intraepithelial lumina, while a significant subset shows atypical morphology: lack of the characteristic cytoarchitectural features such as arborizing papillae and prominent nucleoli, or mixture with nononcocytic IPMN-like components within a single lesion. To elucidate the tumorigenesis and morphologic spectrum of IOPNs, we analyzed 22 IOPNs, including those with atypical morphology for PRKACA/PRKACB fusions in each different component separately using fluorescence in situ hybridization. In total, 18 of 22 (82%) cases harbored PRKACA/PRKACB fusions, including 3 of 3 (100%) purely typical IOPNs and 15 of 19 (79%) IOPNs with atypical morphology. In the latter, PRKACA/PRKACB fusions were noted in atypical components as well as typical IOPN components. Notably, gastric-type IPMN-like components in the fusion-positive cases were usually low grade and had scattered neoplastic cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, a morphologic feature suggestive of an early lesion of IOPN. In summary, most IOPNs with atypical morphology either lack characteristic cytoarchitectural features or exhibit a mixture with nononcocytic IPMN-like components, harbored PRKACA/PRKACB fusion as did typical IOPN components. Our observations expanded the morphologic spectrum of IOPNs. They are expected to be useful for correct diagnosis of this neoplasm.
Intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs) of the pancreatobiliary system are tumors comprising oncocytic cells, in which three types of fusion genes involving -PRKACA/-PRKACB were recently identified. IOPNs infrequently combine with other histological subtypes of pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) and intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct (IPNBs). This study aimed to confirm the sensitivity/specificity of the fusion genes for IOPNs and to examine their significance in other oncocytic lesions. An RT-PCR, followed by DNA sequencing, was undertaken to examine the fusions in 18 histologically diagnosed IOPNs, including four combined IOPNs. Moreover, in two IOPN cases, invasive carcinomatous lesions were separately examined on their fusion status. Oncocytic thyroidal (n = 10), renal (n = 10), and salivary gland (n = 3) lesions and IPMNs (n = 9)/IPNBs (n = 4) with focal oncocytic changes were examined as controls. Fluorescence in situ hybridization using PRKACA break-apart probes was conducted for the combined IOPN cases. Target sequencing of KRAS exon2/3 and GNAS exon 8/9 was performed for IOPN cases. Fusions were detected in all IOPN cases including invasive lesions/none of the control cases. The fusion event was confirmed also in non-IOPN component in one of the four combined cases. Regarding mutation events, 5.6%/0% of IOPNs were KRAS-mt/GNAS-mt, respectively, and both components of combined IOPNs were all KRAS-wt/GNAS-wt. In conclusion, our study confirmed the sensitivity and specificity of these fusions for IOPNs. Here, we analyzed the roles of these fusion genes in combined IOPNs, proposing the possibility of IOPN development via IPMNs/IPNBs. Further studies with more combined cases are warranted.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intraductal oncocytic papillary neoplasms (IOPNs) of the pancreas and bile duct contain epithelial cells with numerous, large mitochondria and are cystic precursors to pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), respectively. However, IOPNs do not have the genomic alterations found in other pancreatobiliary neoplasms. In fact, no recurrent genomic alterations have been described in IOPNs. PDACs without activating mutations in KRAS contain gene rearrangements, so we investigated whether IOPNs have recurrent fusions in genes. METHODS: We analyzed 20 resected pancreatic IOPNs and 3 resected biliary IOPNs using a broad RNA-based targeted sequencing panel to detect cancer-related fusion genes. Four invasive PDACs and 2 intrahepatic CCAs from the same patients as the IOPNs, were also available for analysis. Samples of pancreatic cyst fluid (n = 5, collected before surgery) and bile duct brushings (n = 2) were analyzed for translocations. For comparison, we analyzed pancreatobiliary lesions from 126 patients without IOPN (controls). RESULTS: All IOPNs evaluated were found to have recurring fusions of ATP1B1-PRKACB (n = 13), DNAJB1-PRKACA (n = 6), or ATP1B1-PRKACA (n = 4). These fusions also were found in corresponding invasive PDACs and intrahepatic CCAs, as well as in matched pancreatic cyst fluid and bile duct brushings. These gene rearrangements were absent from all 126 control pancreatobiliary lesions. CONCLUSIONS: We identified fusions in PRKACA and PRKACB genes in pancreatic and biliary IOPNs, as well as in PDACs and pancreatic cyst fluid and bile duct cells from the same patients. We did not identify these gene fusions in 126 control pancreatobiliary lesions. These fusions might be used to identify patients at risk for IOPNs and their associated invasive carcinomas.
The use of synovial fluid-derived mesenchymal stem cells (SFMSCs) obtained from patients with degenerative arthropathy may serve as an alternative therapeutic strategy in osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). For treatment of OA and RA patients, autologous transplantation of differentiated MSCs has several beneficial effects for cartilage regeneration including immunomodulatory activity. In this study, we induced chondrogenic differentiation of SFMSCs by inhibiting protein kinase A (PKA) with a small molecule and microRNA (miRNA). Chondrogenic differentiation was confirmed by PCR and immunocytochemistry using probes specific for aggrecan, the major cartilaginous proteoglycan gene. Absorbance of alcian blue stain to detect chondrogenic differentiation was increased in H-89 and/or miRNA-23btransfected cells. Furthermore, expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and MMP-2 was decreased in treated cells. Therefore, differentiation of SFMSCs into chondrocytes through inhibition of PKA signaling may be a therapeutic option for OA or RA patients.
