cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit gamma; Phosphorylates a large number of substrates in the cytoplasm and the nucleus.
A cDNA for a new catalytic subunit (C gamma) of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) was recently isolated from a human testis cDNA library. This subunit was shown to be expressed only in testis, and has so far not been demonstrated in other species. In the present study, we have determined the chromosomal localization of this gene employing a cDNA for C gamma as a probe. Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA from human x mouse somatic cell hybrids allowed us to assign this gene (PRKACG) to human chromosome 9. In situ hybridization to metaphase chromosomes confirmed the somatic cell hybrid data and regionally mapped the C gamma gene of PKA to human chromosome 9q13.
Macrothrombocytopenias are the most important subgroup of inherited thrombocytopenias. This subgroup is particularly heterogeneous because the affected genes are involved in various functions such as cell signaling, cytoskeleton organization, and gene expression. Herein we describe the clinical and hematological features of a consanguineous family with a severe autosomal recessive macrothrombocytopenia associated with a thrombocytopathy inducing a bleeding tendency in the homozygous mutated patients. Platelet activation and cytoskeleton reorganization were impaired in these homozygous patients. Exome sequencing identified a c.222C>G mutation (missense p.74Ile>Met) in PRKACG, a gene encoding the gamma-catalytic subunit of the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase, the mutated allele cosegregating with the macrothrombocytopenia. We demonstrate that the p.74Ile>Met PRKACG mutation is associated with a marked defect in proplatelet formation and a low level in filamin A in megakaryocytes (MKs). The defect in proplatelet formation was rescued in vitro by lentiviral vector-mediated overexpression of wild-type PRKACG in patient MKs. We thus conclude that PRKACG is a new central actor in platelet biogenesis and a new gene involved in inherited thrombocytopenia with giant platelets associated with a thrombocytopathy.
