cAMP-dependent protein kinase type II-alpha regulatory subunit; Regulatory subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinases involved in cAMP signaling in cells. Type II regulatory chains mediate membrane association by binding to anchoring proteins, including the MAP2 kinase.
We have determined the chromosomal localization of the gene for the regulatory subunit RII alpha of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (locus PRKAR2A) to human chromosome 3 using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Southern blot analysis of two different somatic cell hybrid mapping panels. Furthermore, PCR analysis of a chromosome 3 mapping panel revealed the presence of a human RII alpha-specific amplification product only in cell lines containing the region 3p21.3-p21.2. The localization of PRKAR2A was confirmed by PCR mapping using the Stanford G3 Radiation Hybrid Panel as template. The results from this analysis demonstrated that PRKAR2A is most closely linked to D3S3334 (lod score 12.5) and flanked by D3S1322E and D3S1581.
Epithelioid fibrous histiocytoma (EFH) is a rare, benign, cutaneous neoplasm. This fibrohistiocytic tumor was once believed to be a variant of fibrous histiocytoma, but EFH is now known to be a distinct entity based on the presence of ALK gene rearrangements in most cases. The pattern of immunohistochemical expression of ALK in EFH in the literature thus far describes both granular cytoplasmic staining and nuclear staining. We present a case of EFH with dot-like Golgi pattern perinuclear ALK expression, a previously undescribed staining pattern. We surmised this unique staining pattern could be due to a novel fusion partner, and using FISH, we confirmed a rearrangement of the ALK (2p23) locus. Further investigation with whole transcriptome sequencing led to the discovery of PRKAR2A-ALK fusion, and the function of this fusion partner reflects a Golgi-predominant localization of the protein. Attention to the distinct immunohistochemical pattern of ALK expression may provide clues to the function of the fusion partner.
Recently we reported that the expression of the protein kinase A (PKA) regulatory subunit RIIalpha is dynamically regulated in human smooth muscle cells of the uterus. We showed that expression levels of mRNA/protein were substantially increased during pregnancy and decreased upon labour, changes that were mirrored by particulate type II PKA activity. This implied an important role for RIIalpha in maintaining uterine quiescence during pregnancy. Consequently the purpose of the present study was to identify potential mechanisms by which expression of the RIIalpha gene was regulated in this tissue. We indicate here that the three SpI-III (GC) binding domains within the proximal promoter region of the human RIIalpha gene may play important roles in modulating expression of the gene in human myometrial cells. We show that all three GC binding domains are involved in binding Sp1, Sp3, histone deacetylase (HDACs) 1/2 and RbAp48 transcriptional complexes. The functional significance of these binding domains was further analysed employing in vitro luciferase reporter assays with full-length/truncated RIIalpha promoter constructs. Importantly we show that treatment of primary human myometrial cell cultures with the general class I/II HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A results in an increase in mRNA/protein levels. Moreover the increase in mRNA levels appeared to be preceded by an increase in aH3, PolIIa, Sp3 and HDAC 2 binding to the three SpI-III (GC) binding sites within the RIIalpha promoter. These results enable us to provide a model whereby RIIalpha expression is epigenetically regulated in human myometrial smooth muscle cells by histone deacetylase(s) activity within the GC-rich proximal promoter region of the gene.
Fibrolamellar carcinoma (FLC) is a lethal primary liver cancer, affecting young patients in absence of chronic liver disease. Molecular understanding of FLC tumorigenesis is limited, partly due to the scarcity of experimental models. Here, we CRISPR-engineer human hepatocyte organoids to recreate different FLC backgrounds, including the predominant genetic alteration, the DNAJB1-PRKACA fusion, as well as a recently reported background of FLC-like tumors, encompassing inactivating mutations of BAP1 and PRKAR2A. Phenotypic characterizations and comparisons with primary FLC tumor samples revealed mutant organoid-tumor similarities. All FLC mutations caused hepatocyte dedifferentiation, yet only combined loss of BAP1 and PRKAR2A resulted in hepatocyte transdifferentiation into liver ductal/progenitor-like cells that could exclusively grow in a ductal cell environment. BAP1-mutant hepatocytes represent primed cells attempting to proliferate in this cAMP-stimulating environment, but require concomitant PRKAR2A loss to overcome cell cycle arrest. In all analyses, DNAJB1-PRKACA(fus) organoids presented with milder phenotypes, suggesting differences between FLC genetic backgrounds, or for example the need for additional mutations, interactions with niche cells, or a different cell-of-origin. These engineered human organoid models facilitate the study of FLC.
