Protein kinase C theta type; Calcium-independent, phospholipid- and diacylglycerol (DAG)- dependent serine/threonine-protein kinase that mediates non-redundant functions in T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling, including T-cells activation, proliferation, differentiation and survival, by mediating activation of multiple transcription factors such as NF-kappa-B, JUN, NFATC1 and NFATC2. In TCR-CD3/CD28-co-stimulated T-cells, is required for the activation of NF-kappa-B and JUN, which in turn are essential for IL2 production, and participates in the calcium-dependent NFATC1 and NFATC2 transact [...] 
Different therapeutic methods have been developed for the B-cell and T-cell subtypes of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The identification of molecular biomarkers that can accurately discriminate between B-cell and T-cell ALLs will facilitate the quick determination of therapeutic plans, as well as reveal the intrinsic mechanisms underlining the two different ALL subtypes. This study computationally screened the high-throughput transcriptome dataset for multiple candidate biomarkers and verified their discrimination abilities in an independent sample set using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology. Both technologies suggest that the two genes CD3D and PKRCQ together provided a good model for classification of B-cell and T-cell ALLs, whereas the individual genes did not show consistent discrimination between the two ALL subtypes. Supplementary material is available at http://healthinformaticslab.org/supp/.
INTRODUCTION: Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a group of clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders. DNA hypermethylation is considered to be the key mechanism of pathogenesis for MDS. Studies have demonstrated that DNA methylation can be regulated by the co-effect between long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs). The aim of this study was to identify DNMTs-associated differentially expressed (DE) lncRNAs, which may be a novel diagnostic and therapeutic target for MDS. METHODS: Two gene expression profile datasets (GSE4619 and GSE19429) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Systematic bioinformatics analysis was conducted. Then we verified the expression of PRKCQ-AS1 in MDS patients and features in SKM-1 cells. RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the DNMT-associated DE-lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 was functionally related to DNA methylation. The target genes of PRKCQ-AS1 associated with DNA methylation are mainly methionine synthetase (MTR) and ten-eleven-translocation 1 (TET1). Moreover, the high expression of PRKCQ-AS1 was verified in real MDS cases. Further cellular analysis in SKM-1 cells revealed that overexpressed PRKCQ-AS1 promoted methylation levels of long interspersed nuclear element 1 (LINE-1) and cell proliferation, and apparently elevated both mRNA and protein levels of MTR and TET1, while knockdown of PRKCQ-AS1 showed opposite trend in SKM-1 cells. CONCLUSION: DNMT-associated DE-lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 may affects DNA methylation levels by regulating MTR and TET1.
Recurring evidence suggests that fasting has extensive antitumor effects in various cancers, including papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC). However, the underlying mechanism of this relationship with PTC is unknown. In this study, we study the effect of fasting on glycolysis and mitochondrial function in PTC. We find that fasting impairs glycolysis and reduces mitochondrial dysfunction in vitro and in vivo and also fasting in vitro and fasting mimicking diets (FMD) in vivo significantly increase the expression of lncRNA-protein kinase C theta antisense RNA 1 (PRKCQ-AS1), during the inhibition of TPC cell glycolysis and mitochondrial function. Moreover, lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 was significantly lower in PTC tissues and cells. In addition, PRKCQ-AS1 overexpression increased PTC cell glycolysis and mitochondrial function; PRKCQ-AS1 knockdown has the opposite effect. On further mechanistic analysis, we identified that PRKCQ-AS1 physically interacts with IGF2BPs and enhances protein arginine methyltransferases 7 (PRMT7) mRNA, which is the key player in regulating glycolysis and mitochondrial function in PTC. Hence, PRKCQ-AS1 inhibits tumor growth while regulating glycolysis and mitochondrial functions via IGF2BPs/PRMT7 signaling. These results indicate that lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 is a key downstream target of fasting and is involved in PTC metabolic reprogramming. Further, the PRKCQ-AS1/IGF2BPs/PRMT7 axis is an ideal therapeutic target for PTC diagnosis and treatment.
Paclitaxel (PTX) resistance is a key cause of chemotherapy failure in patients with triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). The aim of this study is to investigate the effect and mechanism of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) on the PTX resistance of TNBC cells through autophagy. MDA-MB-231 cells are used to induce the PTX-resistant TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231.PR (MDR) by increasing dose intermittently. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used to validate the mRNA levels of phosphoinositide-3-kinase class 3 (PIK3C3), miR-361-5p and lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 in the cells, and Western blot analysis was used to detect the protein expressions of PIK3C3, autophagy-related, drug-resistant and apoptosis-related genes. MDC staining detected the formation of autophagic vacuoles. The interactions between miR-361-5p and PIK3C3 and between lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 and miR-361-5p were verified by dual-luciferase assay. Cell viability, apoptosis, migration and invasion were assessed by performing MTT, flow cytometry assay, and transwell assay. The mRNA level of miR-361-5p and the autophagy and drug resistance levels of TNBC PTX-resistant cells were significantly up-regulated. miR-361-5p could target autophagy-related gene PIK3C3, and overexpression of miR-361-5p could down-regulate PIK3C3 protein expression and autophagy level and PTX resistance of MDR cells. LncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 was selected through bioanalysis, and miR-361-5p could target lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1. In addition, lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 level was up-regulated in TNBC PTX-resistant cells, and knockdown of lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 could weaken autophagy and drug resistance level and could promote cell apoptosis. Overexpression of lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 reversed the pro-apoptotic effect and down-regulation of autophagy and resistance levels was induced by miR-361-5p. In vivo experiments were performed to verify the role of lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1. We demonstrate that down-regulation of lncRNA PRKCQ-AS1 weakened PTX resistance and promoted cell apoptosis by miR-361-5p/PIK3C3 mediated autophagy.
PURPOSE: The PRKCQ and REL genes are said to be associated with multiple autoimmune diseases. This study investigated the association between these genes and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome in Han Chinese. METHODS: A two-stage case-control study was performed on three single nucleotide polymorphisms ([SNPs] rs4750316, rs11258747, and rs947474) of the PRKCQ gene and three SNPs (rs842647, rs702873, and rs13031237) of the REL gene using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLPs) in a total of 859 patients with VKH syndrome and 1,542 healthy controls. Variables such as extraocular presentations were assessed. The data were analyzed using chi-square analysis, and corrected for multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni method. RESULTS: We found a decreased frequency of the GC genotype and the C allele of rs4750316 in patients with VKH syndrome when the GG genotype or G allele was used as a reference, respectively (GC genotype: P =2.45e-10, odds ratio [OR]=0.37, 95% confidence interval [CI]=0.28-0.51; C allele: P=8.79e-10, OR=0.41, 95% CI=0.31-0.55). The genotypic and allelic frequencies of rs11258747, rs947474, rs842647, rs702873, and rs13031237 were not statistically significantly different between patients with VKH syndrome and controls. Stratification analysis indicated that the PRKCQ rs4750316 polymorphism was associated with patients with VKH syndrome experiencing headache, alopecia, poliosis, tinnitus, and dysacusia, but no statistically significant association of the other five SNPs was found. CONCLUSIONS: The PRKCQ rs4750316 polymorphism may be a susceptibility factor for VKH syndrome pathogenesis and extraocular presentations, indicating that PRKCQ may be involved in the pathogenesis and extraocular presentations of VKH syndrome through the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway.
Breast cancer (BC) is the most commonly diagnosed cancer confronting women worldwide. Crocin, a glycosylated carotenoid extracted from Crocus sativus L., possesses anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory activities. This study tried to explore the influences of crocin on proliferation and inflammation of BC cells, and to investigate the possible mechanism. The protein levels of protein kinase C theta (PRKCQ) and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) p-p65 and p65 were examined using western blot analysis. The potential targets of crocin were predicted using the PharmMapper database. Cell viability and proliferation were determined utilizing CCK-8 and EdU incorporation assays, respectively. Inflammation was assessed by detecting the levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) using RT-qPCR and ELISA. Results showed that crocin inhibited NF-kappaB activation and suppressed cell viability and proliferation in BC cells. Crocin caused a significant reduction of levels of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta, suggesting that crocin suppressed inflammation in BC cells. NF-kappaB inhibition decreased proliferation and inflammation in BC cells. Additionally, PRKCQ was identified as a potential target of crocin according to PharmMapper database. Crocin treatment inhibited the activation of NF-kappaB in BC cells by reducing PRKCQ expression. Mechanistically, PRKCQ-dependent activation of NF-kappaB pathway reversed the effects of crocin on the proliferation and inflammation in BC cells. In conclusion, crocin inhibited NF-kappaB-mediated inflammation and proliferation in BC cells through reducing PRKCQ expression.
BACKGROUND: Protein kinase C theta, (PRKCQ/PKCtheta) is a serine/threonine kinase that is highly expressed in a subset of triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) and promotes their growth, anoikis resistance, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and invasion. Here, we show that PRKCQ regulates the sensitivity of TNBC cells to apoptosis triggered by standard-of-care chemotherapy by regulating levels of pro-apoptotic Bim. METHODS: To determine the effects of PRKCQ expression on chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, shRNA and cDNA vectors were used to modulate the PRKCQ expression in MCF-10A breast epithelial cells or triple-negative breast cancer cells (MDA-MB231Luc, HCC1806). A novel PRKCQ small-molecule inhibitor, 17k, was used to inhibit kinase activity. Viability and apoptosis of cells treated with PRKCQ cDNA/shRNA/inhibitor +/-chemotherapy were measured. Expression levels of Bcl2 family members were assessed. RESULTS: Enhanced expression of PRKCQ is sufficient to suppress apoptosis triggered by paclitaxel or doxorubicin treatment. Downregulation of PRKCQ also enhanced the apoptosis of chemotherapy-treated TNBC cells. Regulation of chemotherapy sensitivity by PRKCQ mechanistically occurs via regulation of levels of Bim, a pro-apoptotic Bcl2 family member; suppression of Bim prevents the enhanced apoptosis observed with combined PRKCQ downregulation and chemotherapy treatment. Regulation of Bim and chemotherapy sensitivity is significantly dependent on PRKCQ kinase activity; overexpression of a catalytically inactive PRKCQ does not suppress Bim or chemotherapy-associated apoptosis. Furthermore, PRKCQ kinase inhibitor treatment suppressed growth, increased anoikis and Bim expression, and enhanced apoptosis of chemotherapy-treated TNBC cells, phenocopying the effects of PRKCQ downregulation. CONCLUSIONS: These studies support PRKCQ inhibition as an attractive therapeutic strategy and complement to chemotherapy to inhibit the growth and survival of TNBC cells.
Previous studies have indicated that miR-128 was downregulated in a variety of cancers including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the role and the underlying molecular mechanisms of miR-128 in CRC still remain largely unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the level of miR-128-1-5p in CRC patients and to explore both the effects and regulatory mechanisms of miR-128-1-5p in the malignancy of CRC. Real-time PCR and western blot were used to analyze the expression levels of miR-128-1-5p and the direct downstream target protein tyrosine kinase C theta isoform (PRKCQ). Cell Counting Kit-8, clone formation, TUNEL apoptosis assays, and subcutaneous tumor model were performed to investigate the malignant ability of colon cancer cells. A luciferase assay was performed to explore whether miR-128-1-5p could directly bind to 3'-UTR region of PRKCQ. In the present study, we detected the decreased expression and clinical significances of miR-128-1-5p in colorectal cancer tissues and cell lines. Functional experiments revealed that miR-128-1-5p inhibited cell proliferation and induced cell apoptosis and that PRKCQ was identified as a target of miR-128-1-5p and involved in miR-128-1-5p-mediated proliferation and apoptosis. In conclusion, our results showed that miR-128-1-5p reduced CRC growth by modulating PRKCQ expression and is a possible new therapeutic target for patients with CRC.
OBJECTIVE: Recent genome-wide association studies have demonstrated that rs2236379 in PRKCQ is a novel significant locus for Crohn's disease (CD). However, the association has not been replicated in any populations. We therefore aimed to investigate the prevalence of the PRKCQ rs2236379 variant in the Chinese Han population and evaluate whether the genetic variant of PRKCQ confers susceptibility to CD and is associated with its clinical characteristics. METHODS: A total of 283 patients with CD and 381 healthy controls were enrolled. Genomic DNA was extracted from their whole blood samples and polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism was used for genotyping. The association between PRKCQ polymorphisms and susceptibility to CD, and between genotypes and clinical phenotypes was analyzed. RESULTS: A higher frequency of the T allele was discovered in CD patients than in healthy controls (P = 0.027). A significant difference in the distribution of the TT and CT/CC genotypes was observed between CD patients and controls (P = 0.024). The TT genotype showed a significant association with susceptibility to CD (odds ratio 1.647, 95% confidence interval: 1.088-2.574, P = 0.019). Patients with CD with the rs2236379 TT mutant risk genotype were most likely to exhibit perianal disease (P = 0.044). CONCLUSIONS: Our research revealed an association between the PRKCQ rs2236379 (C>T) and CD. The TT homozygous mutation increased the risk of developing CD and may contribute to perianal disease.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and candidate gene studies have identified the REL and PRKCQ genes as risk loci for various autoimmune diseases. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the association of the REL and PRKCQ genes with Behcet's disease (BD) in a Chinese Han population. A case-control study was conducted on three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs13031237, rs702873, and rs842647 of the REL gene and three SNPs (rs4750316, rs11258747, and rs947474) of the PRKCQ gene using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) in a total of 623 BD patients and 1,074 healthy controls. Multiple variables were assessed, including age, sex distribution, and extra-ocular findings. In the present study, the frequencies of rs842647 GG genotypes and rs842647 G alleles were significantly higher in patients than in controls and those of the rs842647 AG genotypes were lower in patients than in controls [GG genotype: Bonferroni corrected P-value for gender adjustment (Pc(a)) = 0.0074, odds ratio (OR) = 1.63; G allele: Pc(a) = 0.0072, OR = 1.57; AG genotype: Pc(a) = 0.024, OR = 0.63, respectively]. No statistically significant differences in the frequencies of rs702873, rs13031237, rs4750316, rs11258747, and rs947474 between BD patients and controls were observed. Stratification analysis indicated that the REL rs842647 polymorphism was associated with BD patients with skin lesions. No significant association of the other five SNPs between BD patients with other extra-ocular findings, including genital ulcer, arthritis, and positive pathergy test results was found. The REL rs842647 polymorphism may be a susceptibility factor for BD pathogenesis and skin lesions, which indicate that c-Rel may be involved in the pathogenesis and skin lesions of BD through the NF-kappaB pathway.
OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the hematopoietic transcription factor RUNX1 cause thrombocytopenia and impaired platelet function. In a patient with a heterozygous mutation in RUNX1, we have described decreased platelet pleckstrin phosphorylation and protein kinase C- (PKC-, gene PRKCQ) associated with thrombocytopenia, impaired platelet aggregation, and dense granule secretion. Little is known regarding regulation of PKC- in megakaryocytes and platelets. We have addressed the hypothesis that PRKCQ is a direct transcriptional target of RUNX1. METHODS AND RESULTS: In a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay using megakaryocytic cells, there was RUNX1 binding in vivo to PRKCQ promoter region -1225 to -1056 bp containing a RUNX1 consensus site ACCGCA at -1088 to -1069 bp; an electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed RUNX1 binding to the specific site. In RUNX1 overexpression studies, PKC- protein expression and promoter activity were enhanced; mutation of RUNX1 site showed decreased activity even with RUNX1 overexpression. Lastly, PRKCQ promoter activity and PKC- protein were decreased by short interfering RNA knockdown of RUNX1. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the first evidence that PRKCQ is regulated at the transcriptional level by RUNX1 in megakaryocytic cells and a mechanism for PKC- deficiency associated with RUNX1 haplodeficiency.
