Protein kinase C alpha type; Calcium-activated, phospholipid- and diacylglycerol (DAG)- dependent serine/threonine-protein kinase that is involved in positive and negative regulation of cell proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, migration and adhesion, tumorigenesis, cardiac hypertrophy, angiogenesis, platelet function and inflammation, by directly phosphorylating targets such as RAF1, BCL2, CSPG4, TNNT2/CTNT, or activating signaling cascade involving MAPK1/3 (ERK1/2) and RAP1GAP. Involved in cell proliferation and cell growth arrest by positive and negative regulation of the cell [...] 
Prostate cancer is among the most common cancers in males. Recent application of system biology methods has resulted in identification of key genes in the process of carcinogenesis. In the current study, we selected two datasets related to prostate cancer (PCa) and performed bulk RNA-seq analysis by selecting samples with Gleason scores greater than 7 and combining them. Subsequently, using several systems biology approaches, we constructed the ceRNA network and ultimately identified key axes related to PCa. Our analyses revealed importance of ADAMTS9-AS2/miR-150/PRKCA, ADAMTS9-AS2/miR-150/MMP14, MEG3/miR-150/PRKCA and MEG3/miR-150/MMP14 with miR-150 being a central component. Remarkably, miR-150 exhibited strong statistical significance in survival analyses. Further, analyzing expression levels from TCGA datasets, the expression of the identified genes associates significantly with prostate cancer compared to normal tissue confirming the bioinformatic analyses. Therefore, these genes can be regarded as prognostic markers in prostate cancer and the pathways are potential targets for therapeutic interventions.
In the present study, mitral valve tissues from three mitral stenosis patients with RHD by valve replacement and two healthy donors were harvested and conducted DNA methylation signature on PRKCA by MeDIP-qPCR. The presence of hypomethylated CpG islands at promoter and 5' terminal of PRKCA was observed in RHD accompanied with highly expressed PRKCA and down-regulated antisense long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) PRKCA-AS1 compared to health control. Furthermore, the enrichments of DNMT1/3A/3B on PRKCA were detected by ChIP-qPCR assay in vivo and in human cardiomyocyte AC16 and RL-14 cells exposed to TNF-alpha in vitro, and both demonstrated that DNMT1 substantially contributed to DNA methylation. Additionally, PRKCA-AS1 was further determined to bind with promoter of PRKCA via 5' terminal and interact with DNMT1 via 3' terminal. Taken together, our results illuminated a novel regulatory mechanism of DNA methylation on regulating PRKCA transcription through lncRNA PRKCA-AS1, and shed light on the molecular pathogenesis of RHD occurrence.
Chordoid glioma (ChG) is a characteristic, slow growing, and well-circumscribed diencephalic tumor, whose mutational landscape is unknown. Here we report the analysis of 16 ChG by whole-exome and RNA-sequencing. We found that 15 ChG harbor the same PRKCA (D463H) mutation. PRKCA encodes the Protein kinase C (PKC) isozyme alpha (PKCalpha) and is mutated in a wide range of human cancers. However the hot spot PRKCA (D463H) mutation was not described in other tumors. PRKCA (D463H) is strongly associated with the activation of protein translation initiation (EIF2) pathway. PKCalpha(D463H) mRNA levels are more abundant than wild-type PKCalpha transcripts, while PKCalpha(D463H) is less stable than the PCKalpha(WT) protein. Compared to PCKalpha(WT), the PKCalpha(D463H) protein is depleted from the cell membrane. The PKCalpha(D463H) mutant enhances proliferation of astrocytes and tanycytes, the cells of origin of ChG. In conclusion, our study identifies the hallmark mutation for chordoid gliomas and provides mechanistic insights on ChG oncogenesis.
We investigated the fused protein of solute carrier family 44 choline transporter member 1 (SLC44A1) and protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) in three patients with papillary glioneuronal tumors (PGNT). PGNT and rosette-forming glioneuronal tumors (RGNT) are recently identified, unusual glioneuronal tumor variants which were categorized as novel tumor entities in the 2007 World Health Organization classification system. The molecular background of these tumors remains poorly understood due to the paucity of studies. The SLC44A1-PRKCA fusion was recently detected in three cases of PGNT. We invesitgated for the SLC44A1-PRKCA fusion protein in the three PGNT patients and a further two with RGNT using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Two out of the three PGNT patients had a fused signal (paired red-green signal) representing a rearrangement on chromosomes 9 and 17. A normal signal pattern was observed in the third PGNT patient. Neither of the two RGNT patients demonstrated a fused signal. This suggests that the SLC44A1-PRKCA fusion is a characteristic alteration in PGNT but not RGNT. Therefore, it is a potential biomarker of PGNT. The paired red-green signal that was observed in the PGNT patients implies the presence of a different breakpoint than that previously reported in the 9q31 and 17q24 genes.
The protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) gene, encoding a Th17-cell-selective kinase, was repeatedly associated with multiple sclerosis (MS), but the underlying pathogenic mechanism remains unknown. We replicated the association in Italians (409 cases, 723 controls), identifying a protective signal in the PRKCA promoter (P = 0.033), and a risk haplotype in intron 3 (P = 7.7 x 10(-4); meta-analysis with previously published data: P = 4.01 x 10(-8)). Expression experiments demonstrated that the protective signal is associated with alleles conferring higher PRKCA expression levels, well fitting our observation that MS patients have significantly lower PRKCA mRNA levels in blood. The risk haplotype was shown to be driven by a GGTG ins/del polymorphism influencing the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein H-dependent inclusion/skipping of a PRKCA alternative exon 3*. Indeed, exon 3* can be present in two different versions in PRKCA mRNAs (out-of-frame 61 bp or in-frame 66 bp long), and is preferentially included in transcripts generated through a premature polyadenylation event. The GGTG insertion downregulates 3* inclusion and shifts splicing towards the 66 bp isoform. Both events reduce the nonsense-mediated mRNA-decay-induced degradation of exon 3*-containing mRNAs. Since we demonstrated that the protein isoform produced through premature polyadenylation aberrantly localizes to the plasma membrane and/or in cytoplasmic clusters, dysregulated PRKCA 3* inclusion may represent an additional mechanism relevant to MS susceptibility.
Protein kinase C (PKC) signalling is critically involved in the control of blood pressure. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) affect PKC expression and activity, which are partially associated with the responses to ACEi. We examined whether PRKCA (protein kinase C, alpha) polymorphisms (rs887797 C>T, rs1010544 T>C and rs16960228 G>A), or haplotypes, and gene-gene interactions within the ACEi pathway affect the antihypertensive responses in 104 hypertensive patients treated with enalapril as monotherapy. Patients were classified as poor responders (PR) or good responders (GR) to enalapril if their changes in mean arterial pressure were lower or higher than the median value, respectively. Multi-factor dimensionality reduction was used to characterize interactions among PRKCA, NOS3 (nitric oxide synthase 3) and BDKRB2 (bradykinin receptor B2) polymorphisms. The TC+CC genotypes for the rs1010544 polymorphism were more frequent in GR than in PR (p = 0.037). Conversely, the GA+AA genotypes for the rs16960228 polymorphism, and the CTA haplotype, were more frequent in PR than in GR (p = 0.040 and p = 0.008, respectively). Moreover, the GG genotype for the PRKCA rs16960228 polymorphism was associated with PR or GR depending on the genotypes for the rs2070744 (NOS3) and rs1799722 (BDKRB2) polymorphisms (p = 0.012). Our results suggest that PRKCA polymorphisms and gene-gene interactions within the ACEi pathway affect the antihypertensive responses to enalapril.
Diarrhea is a major cause of both morbidity and mortality worldwide, especially among young children. Cryptosporidiosis is a leading cause of diarrhea in children, particularly in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, where it is responsible for over 200,000 deaths per year. Beyond the initial clinical presentation of diarrhea, it is associated with long-term sequelae such as malnutrition and neurocognitive developmental deficits. Risk factors include poverty and overcrowding, and yet not all children with these risk factors and exposure are infected, nor do all infected children develop symptomatic disease. One potential risk factor to explain these differences is their human genome. To identify genetic variants associated with symptomatic cryptosporidiosis, we conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) examining 6.5 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 873 children from three independent cohorts in Dhaka, Bangladesh, namely, the Dhaka Birth Cohort (DBC), the Performance of Rotavirus and Oral Polio Vaccines in Developing Countries (PROVIDE) study, and the Cryptosporidiosis Birth Cohort (CBC). Associations were estimated separately for each cohort under an additive model, adjusting for length-for-age Z-score at 12 months of age, the first two principal components to account for population substructure, and genotyping batch. The strongest meta-analytic association was with rs58296998 (P = 3.73 x 10(-8)), an intronic SNP and expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) of protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA). Each additional risk allele conferred 2.4 times the odds of Cryptosporidium-associated diarrhea in the first year of life. This genetic association suggests a role for protein kinase C alpha in pediatric cryptosporidiosis and warrants further investigation.IMPORTANCE Globally, diarrhea remains one of the major causes of pediatric morbidity and mortality. The initial symptoms of diarrhea can often lead to long-term consequences for the health of young children, such as malnutrition and neurocognitive developmental deficits. Despite many children having similar exposures to infectious causes of diarrhea, not all develop symptomatic disease, indicating a possible role for human genetic variation. Here, we conducted a genetic study of susceptibility to symptomatic disease associated with Cryptosporidium infection (a leading cause of diarrhea) in three independent cohorts of infants from Dhaka, Bangladesh. We identified a genetic variant within protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) associated with higher risk of cryptosporidiosis in the first year of life. These results indicate a role for human genetics in susceptibility to cryptosporidiosis and warrant further research to elucidate the mechanism.
Twin, family and adoption studies suggest that susceptibility to multiple sclerosis is substantially mediated by genetic factors. Linkage to human chromosome 17q, homologous to a locus linked to experimental animal models of multiple sclerosis, has been widely replicated and the region likely to harbour a multiple sclerosis susceptibility gene has recently been refined to a 2.5 Mb region of 17q22-24. The candidate multiple sclerosis susceptibility gene, protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA), maps within this interval and association with 35 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers, spanning the gene with a median spacing of 7.8 kb, was tested using a case-control approach. Single-marker genotype and estimated haplotype frequencies were compared in UK unrelated cases with multiple sclerosis (n = 184) and healthy controls (n = 340) in order to investigate association with susceptibility to disease. A haplotype of two SNPs mapping to the proximal region of the gene showed evidence for association with susceptibility (Bonferroni-corrected P value = 1.1 x 10(-5)). These findings suggest that further investigation of the PRKCA gene is warranted, particularly in cohorts with evidence of linkage to 17q22. Most of the SNPs investigated in this study were intronic and screening to identify disease-associated functional mutations is now required. Our results suggest that the promoter and proximal gene region should be not only included but prioritized in any screening strategy.
Asthma incidence and prevalence are higher in obese individuals. A potential mechanistic basis for this relationship is pleiotropy. We hypothesized that significant linkage and candidate-gene association would be found for body mass index (BMI) in a population ascertained on asthma affection status. Linkage analysis for BMI was performed on 657 subjects in eight Costa Rican families enrolled in a study of asthma. Family-based association studies were conducted for BMI with SNPs within a positional candidate gene, PRKCA. SNPs within PRKCA were also tested for association with asthma. Association studies were conducted in 415 Costa Rican parent-child trios and 493 trios participating in the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP). Although only modest evidence of linkage for BMI was obtained for the whole cohort, significant linkage was noted for BMI in females on chromosome 17q (peak LOD = 3.39). Four SNPs in a candidate gene in this region (PRKCA) had unadjusted association p values < 0.05 for BMI in both cohorts, with the joint p value for two SNPs remaining significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons (rs228883 and rs1005651, joint p values = 9.5 x 10(-)(5) and 5.6 x 10(-)(5)). Similarly, eight SNPs had unadjusted association p values < 0.05 for asthma in both populations, with one SNP remaining significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons (rs11079657, joint p value = 2.6 x 10(-)(5)). PRKCA is a pleiotropic locus that is associated with both BMI and asthma and that has been identified via linkage analysis of BMI in a population ascertained on asthma.
IMPORTANCE: Melanocytic neoplasms with prominent pigment synthesis mimicking equine melanoma represent a rare variant of biologically indeterminate or low-grade malignant melanocytic tumors in which the molecular profile and exact histologic classification are not established. Tumors with these characteristics rarely occur as congenital lesions. We performed genomic analysis of a congenital pigment synthesizing melanocytic neoplasm with indeterminate biological potential. OBSERVATIONS: The patient was a 5-month-old girl presenting with a 6-cm protuberant scalp mass, which had doubled in size since birth. Histologic examination showed heavily pigmented intradermal proliferation of large, epithelioid melanocytes with mild cytologic atypia, low mitotic activity, focal necrosis, and ulceration. RNA sequencing identified a novel ATPase, Ca2+ transporting, plasma membrane 4(ATP2B4)-protein kinase C-alpha (PRKCA) fusion transcript. The fusion resulted in an in-frame linkage of the PRKCA catalytic domain with the N-terminal of ATP2B4 and high expression of the PRKCA kinase domain. Break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization showed PRKCA rearrangement, and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction confirmed the presence of the fusion transcript. The patient was alive and well, with no evidence of recurrence, at the 1-year follow-up. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first report of PRKCA fusions in melanocytic neoplasms. Future studies need to determine the frequency of PRKCA fusions in pigment-synthesizing melanocytic neoplasms.
BACKGROUND: The protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) gene, coding for a Th17-cell-selective kinase, shows a complex splicing pattern, with at least 2 stable alternative transcripts characterized by an alternative upstream polyadenylation site. Polymorphisms in this gene were associated with several conditions, including multiple sclerosis, asthma, schizophrenia, and cancer. The presence of a microRNA (miRNA), i.e. miR-634, within intron 15 of the PRKCA gene, suggests the intriguing possibility that this miRNA might play a role in the susceptibility to these pathologies. METHODS: Here, we characterized miR-634 expression profile and searched for its putative targets using a combination of RT-PCR and gene reporter assays. RESULTS: The quantitative analysis of PRKCA and miR-634 transcripts in a panel of human tissues and cell lines revealed discordant expression profiles, suggesting the presence of an independent miR-634 promoter and/or a possible direct role of miR-634 in modulating PRKCA expression. Functional studies demonstrated the existence of a miRNA-specific promoter, which was shown to be Pol-III-dependent. Furthermore, transfection experiments showed that miR-634 is able to target its host gene by specifically down-regulating the shorter alternative-polyadenylated isoforms. CONCLUSIONS: MiR-634 is a Pol III-dependent intronic miRNA, which could target its host gene through a "first-order" negative feedback. GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: MiR-634 is one of the few characterized examples of Pol-III-dependent intronic miRNAs. Its independent transcription from the host gene suggests caution in using expression profiles of host genes as proxies for the expression of the corresponding intronic miRNAs.
PURPOSE: Protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) is involved in multiple functions and has been implicated in heart failure risks and treatment outcomes. This study aims to identify regulatory variants affecting PRKCA expression in human heart, and evaluate attributable risk of heart disease. METHODS: mRNA expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) were extracted from the Genotype and Tissue Expression Project (GTEx). Allelic mRNA ratios were measured in 51 human heart tissues to identify cis-acting regulatory variants. Potential regulatory regions were tested with luciferase reporter gene assays and further evaluated in GTEx and genome-wide association studies. RESULTS: Located in a region with robust enhancer activity in luciferase reporter assays, rs9909004 (T > C, minor allele frequency =0.47) resides in a haplotype displaying strong eQTLs for PRKCA in heart (p = 1.2 x 10(-23)). The minor C allele is associated with both decreased PRKCA mRNA expression and decreased risk of phenotypes characteristic of heart failure in GWAS analyses (QT interval p = 3.0 x 10(-14)). While rs9909004 is the likely regulatory variant, other variants in high linkage disequilibrium cannot be excluded. Distinct regulatory variants appear to affect expression in other tissues. CONCLUSIONS: The haplotype carrying rs9909004 influences PRKCA expression in the heart and is associated with traits linked to heart failure, potentially affecting therapy of heart failure.
Everyday functioning relies on episodic memory, the conscious retrieval of past experiences, but this crucial cognitive ability declines severely with aging and disease. Vulnerability to memory decline varies across individuals however, producing differences in the time course and severity of memory problems that complicate attempts at diagnosis and treatment. Here we identify a key source of variability, by examining gene dependent changes in the neural basis of episodic remembering in healthy adults, targeting seven polymorphisms previously linked to memory. Scalp recorded Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) were measured while participants remembered words, using an item recognition task that requires discrimination between studied and unstudied stimuli. Significant differences were found as a consequence of a Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) in just one of the tested genes, PRKCA (rs8074995). Participants with the common G/G variant exhibited left parietal old/new effects, which are typically seen in word recognition studies, reflecting recollection-based remembering. During the same stage of memory retrieval participants carrying a rarer A variant exhibited an atypical pattern of brain activity, a topographically dissociable frontally-distributed old/new effect, even though behavioural performance did not differ between groups. Results replicated in a second independent sample of participants. These findings demonstrate that the PRKCA genotype is important in determining how episodic memories are retrieved, opening a new route towards understanding individual differences in memory.
