Protein kinase C delta type regulatory subunit; Calcium-independent, phospholipid- and diacylglycerol (DAG)- dependent serine/threonine-protein kinase that plays contrasting roles in cell death and cell survival by functioning as a pro-apoptotic protein during DNA damage-induced apoptosis, but acting as an anti- apoptotic protein during cytokine receptor-initiated cell death, is involved in tumor suppression as well as survival of several cancers, is required for oxygen radical production by NADPH oxidase and acts as positive or negative regulator in platelet functional responses. Nega [...] 
PURPOSE: Protein kinase C delta (PKCdelta) deficiency is a rare genetic disorder identified as a monogenic cause of systemic lupus erythematosus in 2013. Since the first cases were described, the phenotype has expanded to include children presenting with autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome-related syndromes and infection susceptibility similar to chronic granulomatous disease or combined immunodeficiency. We review the current published data regarding the pathophysiology, clinical presentation, investigation and management of PKCdelta deficiency. METHODS: Literature review was performed using MEDLINE. RESULTS: Twenty cases have been described in the literature with significant heterogeneity. CONCLUSION: The variation in clinical presentation delineates the broad and critical role of PKCdelta in immune tolerance and effector functions against pathogens.
BACKGROUND: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a common respiratory disease characterized by progressive airflow limitation and abnormal lung function due to noxious particles and gases. Although many measures are available, COPD remains one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Therefore, there is an urgent need to discover novel potential therapeutic targets for COPD. Protein kinase C delta (PRKCD) is a member of thePKCfamily and possesses various biological properties. Recently, PRKCD has been reported to play an important role in the pathogenesis of COPD. However, the mechanisms of PRKCD on COPD are not fully elucidated. AIM: In this review, we will discuss the roles and mechanisms of PRKCD involved in the development of COPD. METHODS: We systematically summarized the studies on the research progress of PRKCD in COPD based on MEDLINE/PubMed databases. CONCLUSIONS: PRKCD contributes to the development of COPD by promoting inflammatory response, apoptosis, mitochondrial dysfunction and MUC5AC hypersecretion. These data provide evidence that PRKCD might be a potential therapeutic target for COPD.
The removal of mitochondria in a programmed or stress-induced manner is essential for maintaining cellular homeostasis. To date, much research has focused upon stress-induced mitophagy that is largely regulated by the E3 ligase PRKN, with limited insight into the mechanisms regulating basal "housekeeping" mitophagy levels in different model organisms. Using iron chelation as an inducer of PRKN-independent mitophagy, we recently screened an siRNA library of lipid-binding proteins and determined that two kinases, GAK and PRKCD, act as positive regulators of PRKN-independent mitophagy. We demonstrate that PRKCD is localized to mitochondria and regulates recruitment of ULK1-ATG13 upon induction of mitophagy. GAK activity, by contrast, modifies the mitochondrial network and lysosomal morphology that compromise efficient transport of mitochondria for degradation. Impairment of either kinase in vivo blocks basal mitophagy, demonstrating the biological relevance of our findings.Abbreviations: CCCP: carbonyl cyanide-m-chlorophenyl hydrazone; DFP: deferiprone; GAK: cyclin G associated kinase; HIF1A: hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha; PRKC/PKC: protein kinase C; PRKCD: protein kinase C delta; PRKN: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase.
The tripartite motif (TRIM) protein family has been investigated in multiple human cancers, including gastric cancer (GC). However, the role of TRIM69 in the anoikis resistance and metastasis of GC cells remains to be elucidated. We identified the differentially expressed genes in anoikis-resistant GC cells using RNA-sequencing analysis. The interaction between TRIM69 and PRKCD was analyzed by coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. Our results have shown that TRIM69 was significantly downregulated in anoikis-resistant GC cells. TRIM69 overexpression markedly suppressed the anoikis resistance and metastasis of GC cells in vitro and in vivo. TRIM69 knockdown had the opposite effects. Mechanistically, TRIM69 interacted with PRKCD through its B-box domain and catalyzed the K48-linked polyubiquitination of PRKCD. Moreover, TRIM69 inhibited BDNF production in a PRKCD-dependent manner. Importantly, overexpression of PRKCD or BDNF blocked the effects of TRIM69 on the anoikis resistance and metastasis of GC cells. Interestingly, a TRIM69(-)PRKCD(+)BDNF(+) cell subset was positively associated with metastasis in GC patients. TRIM69-mediated suppression of the anoikis resistance and metastasis of GC cells via modulation of the PRKCD/BDNF axis, with potential implications for novel therapeutic approaches for metastatic GC.
Dermatofibroma (DF) is a benign tumor that forms pedunculated lesions ranging in size from a few millimeters to 2 cm, usually affecting the extremities and trunks of young adults. Histopathologically, DF is characterized by the storiform proliferation of monomorphic fibroblast-like spindle cells. In addition to neoplastic cells, secondary elements such as foamy histiocytes, Touton-type giant cells, lymphoplasmacytes, and epidermal hyperplasia are characteristic histological features. Several histological variants, including atypical, cellular, aneurysmal, and lipidized variants, have been reported; cases with variant histologies are sometimes misdiagnosed as sarcomas. We present a case of metastasizing aneurysmal DF that was initially diagnosed as an angiosarcoma on biopsy. A 26-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a gradually enlarging subcutaneous mass in her lower left leg. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography revealed high fluorodeoxyglucose uptake not only in the tumor but also in the left inguinal region. On biopsy, ERG and CD31-positive atypical spindle cells proliferated in slit-like spaces with extravasation, leading to the diagnosis of angiosarcoma. Histology of the wide-resection specimen was consistent with DF, and lymph node metastasis was also observed. Nanopore DNA sequencing detected CD63::PRKCD fusion and copy number gain, although CD63 was not included in the target region of adaptive sampling. This report highlights the importance of recognizing the unusual clinical, radiological, and pathological features of DF to avoid misdiagnosis, and the potential diagnostic utility of nanopore sequencer.
BACKGROUND: Protein kinase C delta (PRKCD) and caspase recruitment domain family member 9 (CARD9) are genes involved in B and T cell activation, and cytokine production, which are vital mechanisms underlying autoimmune disease development. This study aimed to explore the association of the PRKCD and CARD9 genes with Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease (VKH) disease. The case-control study was performed to in 912 patients with VKH and 878 normal controls. MassARRAY system, SHEsis online platform, real-time PCR, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were used to detect genotyping, haplotyping, mRNA expression, and cytokine levels, respectively. RESULTS: We found that rs74437127 C allele of PRKCD, rs3812555 CC genotype, and C allele of CARD9 were associated with increased susceptibility of VKH (Pc = 0.020, OR = 1.624; Pc = 2.04 x 10(-5), OR = 1.810; Pc = 2.76 x 10(-5), OR = 1.698, respectively). However, the rs74437127 T allele, and rs3812555 TC genotype and T allele were linked with decreased susceptibility to VKH (Pc = 0.020, OR = 0.616; Pc = 7.85 x 10(-5), OR = 0.559; Pc = 2.76 x 10(-5), OR = 0.589, respectively). PRKCD ATG and CARD9 GCTTA haplotypes decreased susceptibility to VKH (Pc = 3.11 x 10(-3), OR = 0.594; Pc = 5.00 x 10(-3), OR = 0.639, respectively). Functional studies on rs3812555 genotyped individuals revealed that CC carriers had significantly higher CARD9 mRNA expression and tumour necrosis factor-alpha production than TC/TT carriers (P = 1.00 x 10(-4); P = 2.00 x 10(-3), respectively). CONCLUSIONS: We found an association between PRKCD rs74437127 and CARD9 rs3812555 polymorphisms and VKH susceptibility and revealed that the increased susceptibility of rs3812555 for VKH may be mediated by regulating CARD9 gene expression and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-alpha.
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) usually presents in childhood with fever, nonmalignant splenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy along with cytopenia, which is caused by mutations in the FAS apoptotic pathway. The TCRalphabeta + CD4/CD8 double-negative T cells (DNT), one of required criteria of ALPS, will rise markedly in ALPS. Human Protein kinase C delta (PRKCD) deficiency (OMIM # 615559) was recently identified to be causative for an ALPS-type III with significant B-cell proliferation particularly of immature B cells. We report a pedigree homozygous variation of PRKCD gene (c.36T>G, p. Y12X) which presented with refractory cytopenia, splenomegaly, and polarization of DNT/regulatory T cells (Treg) axis. After repeated recurrence, the patient was treated with mTOR inhibitor sirolimus, which had a safety mechanism and specifically rebalance the DNT/Treg axis. The patient's hemoglobin and clinical condition improved gradually by the application of sirolimus (1.5 mg/m(2), actual blood concentration 4.27-10.3 ng/l). Homozygous variation in PRKCD may lead to typical ALPS clinical manifestations. Targeting DNT/Treg axis, use of sirolimus in such patients may help to achieve good clinical control.
