Protein kinase C gamma type; Calcium-activated, phospholipid- and diacylglycerol (DAG)- dependent serine/threonine-protein kinase that plays diverse roles in neuronal cells and eye tissues, such as regulation of the neuronal receptors GRIA4/GLUR4 and GRIN1/NMDAR1, modulation of receptors and neuronal functions related to sensitivity to opiates, pain and alcohol, mediation of synaptic function and cell survival after ischemia, and inhibition of gap junction activity after oxidative stress. Binds and phosphorylates GRIA4/GLUR4 glutamate receptor and regulates its function by increasing p [...] 
We report on a family with an autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia in which we identified a novel mutation in exon 5 of the PRKCG/SCA14 gene that results in a Val138Glu substitution in the encoded protein PKCgamma. While most affected subjects displayed a late-onset uncomplicated form of spinocerebellar ataxia with occasional mild extrapyramidal features (such as postural tremor), one patient presented with a very mild nonprogressive ataxia since the age of 3 years and predominant multifocal myoclonus.
Pathogenic mutations in the serine/threonine kinase STK11 (alias LKB1) cause Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) in most affected individuals. However, in a considerable number of PJS-patients mutations cannot be detected in STK11 suggesting genetic heterogeneity. One PJS family without STK11 mutations (PJS07) has previously been described with significant evidence for linkage to a second potential PJS locus on 19q13.3-->q13.4. In this study we investigated candidate genes within markers D19S180 and D19S254, since multipoint linkage analysis yielded significant LOD scores for this region in this family. Four genes in the region (cytohesin 2: PSCD2, kallikrein 10: KLK10, protein kinase C gamma: PRKCG, and serine/threonine kinase 13: STK13) potentially involved in growth inhibitory pathways or in the pathophysiology of can- cer, were considered as candidates. We first determined the genomic structure of the PSCD2 and PRKCG genes, and performed mutation analysis of all exons and exon-intron junctions of the four genes, in the PJS07 family. No pathogenic mutation was identified in these four genes in affected individuals. A very rare polymorphism resulting in a conserved amino acid change Lys to Arg was found in PSCD2. These data provide considerable evidence for exclusion of these four genes as candidates for the second locus on 19q13.3-->q13.4 in PJS. Finally, we also excluded the recently identified STK11-interacting protein gene (STK11IP, alias LIP1) mapped in 2q36 as candidate for PJS in the PJS07 family, although this could be a good candidate in other non-STK11/LKB1 families.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a mental disorder that results from complex interplay between multiple and partially overlapping sets of susceptibility genes and environmental factors. The brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and Protein kinase C gamma type (PRKCG) are logical candidate genes in MDD. Among diverse environmental factors, negative life events have been suggested to exert a crucial impact on brain development. In the present study, we hypothesized that interactions between genetic variants in BDNF and PRKCG and negative life events may play an important role in the development of MDD. We recruited a total of 406 patients with MDD and 391 age- and gender-matched control subjects. Gene-environment interactions were analyzed using generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction (GMDR). Under a dominant model, we observed a significant three-way interaction among BDNF rs6265, PRKCG rs3745406, and negative life events. The gene-environment combination of PRKCG rs3745406 C allele, BDNF rs6265 G allele and high level of negative life events (C-G-HN) was significantly associated with MDD (OR, 5.97; 95% CI, 2.71-13.15). To our knowledge, this is the first report of evidence that the BDNF-PRKCG interaction may modify the relationship between negative life events and MDD in the Chinese population.
We report our observations in an Australian family with spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA 14). We describe a novel mutation in exon 5 of the PRKCG gene, altering a highly conserved cysteine to a phenylalanine at codon 150, and record the detailed clinical observations in six affected family members.
Two cases of spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) with a G128D mutation in the protein kinase C gamma gene (PRKCG) without a definite family history have been reported previously. Here, we describe the first familial cases of SCA14 with a G128D mutation in PRKCG. Among three family members, the chief complaints varied and included ataxic gait, cervical dystonia, and positional vertigo. Moreover, retinal degeneration and facial muscle weakness were observed, although these are not expected to be present in SCA14. Cerebral blood flow evaluation using single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) also differed among family members. It is possible that patients with the G128D mutation suffering from SCA14 may sometimes be classified as unaffected due to the varying clinical signs among family members.
We describe a novel mutation in the gene coding for protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG) in patients of a German family affected with slowly progressive gait ataxia, dysarthria, and nystagmus. The G/T missense mutation occurred in exon 2 of PRKCG and results in a substitution of glycine by valine (G63V) in the evolutionarily highly conserved cysteine-rich region 1/C1 domain of PRKCG. Among the 20 mutations described to date, this is the first mutation located in exon 2 of PRKCG.
Cerebellar ataxia and parkinsonism are two common overlapping clinical syndromes in patients with spinocerebellar ataxia. We report a case mimicking the phenotype of early-onset Parkinson's disease with a candidate novel de novo mutation (c.1151A>G, p.K384R) in PRKCG, a gene known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 14.
BACKGROUND: Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS) is one of the diseases that predispose to sudden ascent to high altitudes above 2500 m. Among the many studies on the occurrence and development of AMS, there are few studies on the severity of AMS. Some unidentified phenotypes or genes that determine the severity of AMS may be vital to elucidating the mechanisms of AMS. This study aims to explore the underlying genes or phenotypes associated with AMS severity and to provide evidence for a better understanding of the mechanisms of AMS. METHODS: GSE103927 dataset was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database, and a total of 19 subjects were enrolled in the study. Subjects were divided into a moderate to severe AMS (MS-AMS, 9 subjects) group and a no or mild AMS (NM-AMS, 10 subjects) group based on the Lake Louise score (LLS). Various bioinformatics analyses were used to compare the differences between the two groups. Another dataset, Real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), and another grouping method were used to validate the analysis results. RESULT: No statistically significant differences in phenotypic and clinical data existed between the MS-AMS and NM-AMS groups. Eight differential expression genes are associated with LLS, and their biological functions are related regulating of the apoptotic process and programmed cell death. The ROC curves showed that AZU1 and PRKCG had a better predictive performance for MS-AMS. AZU1 and PRKCG were significantly associated with the severity of AMS. The expression of AZU1 and PRKCG were significantly higher in the MS-AMS group compared to the NM-AMS group. The hypoxic environment promotes the expression of AZU1 and PRKCG. The results of these analyses were validated by an alternative grouping method and RT-qPCR results. AZU1 and PRKCG were enriched in the Neutrophil extracellular trap formation pathway, suggesting the importance of this pathway in influencing the severity of AMS. CONCLUSION: AZU1 and PRKCG may be key genes influencing the severity of acute mountain sickness, and can be used as good diagnostic or predictive indicators of the severity of AMS. Our study provides a new perspective to explore the molecular mechanism of AMS.
Sepsis represents a syndrome of systemic inflammatory response, which is mostly a result of infection with various pathogenic microorganisms, characterized by an uncontrolled infection response of the organism leading to life-threatening organ dysfunction. Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), as competing endogenous RNA, can affect the binding of microRNA (miRNA) to mRNA, thus influencing the development of sepsis. In this study, based on transcriptome data from GEO database, we screened differentially expressed lncRNAs and constructed lncRNA-miRNA-mRNA network. And pathway IL-17RA-1/miR-7847-3p/protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG) coexpression network was successfully sorted out. The effect of this network on LPS-induced sepsis model in THP-1 cells was also verified by CCK-8, scratch, ELISA, Western blot, and qRT-PCR assays. Corresponding binding sites of miR-7847-3p to IL-17RA-1 and miR-7847-3p to PRKCG were verified using dual luciferase gene reporter assays, respectively. Compared with control, si-IL-17RA-1 significantly inhibited the cell viability and migration ability of THP-1, and levels of proinflammatory factors IL-6, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha secreted were markedly decreased, and the expression of IL-17RA-1, PRKCG, p-MEKK1, and p-JNK were markedly reduced. In addition, IL-17RA-1 could target binding to miR-7847-3p and inhibit its expression, and miR-7847-3p could also bind to PRKCG. Our experiments demonstrate that IL17-RA-1 attenuates the sepsis response through the miR-7847-3p/MAPK pathway, and this competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) network may be a potential approach to predict and combat sepsis.
The objective of this study was to explore the relationship between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG) gene and osteosarcoma susceptibility in Chinese Han population. A total of 610 cases of osteosarcoma patients and 610 healthy individuals were enrolled in this study. TaqMan method was used to compare genotypes and the allelic distribution frequency of three SNPs (rs454006, rs2242245, and rs8103851) in the PRKGG gene between osteosarcoma patients and healthy individuals. Osteosarcoma patients were grouped according to different clinical parameters (age, gender, pathological types, tumor location, Enneking staging, tumor metastasis and treatment) to compare genotype and allele frequency among different groups as well as to explore the relationship between gene polymorphisms and different clinical parameters. The rs454006 polymorphisms of the PRKCG gene include the CC, CT, and TT genotypes. The differences in genotype frequency and allele frequency between osteosarcoma patients and healthy individuals were significant (both P < 0.001). There was no significant different between osteosarcoma patients and healthy individuals in rs8103851 and rs2242245 polymorphisms of the PRKCG gene (both P > 0.05). The differences of the rs8103851 genotype frequency and allele frequency in patients with metastatic osteosarcoma and patients without metastasis were significant (both P < 0.001). The distribution frequencies of the CG and GG genotypes as well as the G allele in patients with metastatic osteosarcoma were higher than in patients without metastasis. The genotype frequency and allele frequency of rs454006 and rs2242245 did not correlate with clinical parameters. The rs454006 polymorphism of the PRKCG gene correlated to osteosarcoma susceptibility and might increase the risk of osteosarcoma. The rs8103851 correlated to metastatic osteosarcoma and could be risk factors for metastatic osteosarcoma.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) is an autosomal dominant SCA caused by variants of the PRKCG encoding protein kinase C gamma (PKCgamma). Although the toxic gain-of-function mechanism is the main cause of SCA14, its molecular pathophysiology remains unclear. To elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of SCA14, we analyzed two families with the variants in PRKCG. Clinical symptoms and neurological findings of two Japanese families were evaluated by neurologists. Exome sequencing was performed using the BGI platform. GFP-tagged PRKCGs harboring the identified variants were transfected into the HeLa cells, and aggregation of PKCgamma was analyzed using confocal laser microscopy. Solubility of PKCgamma was evaluated by assessing the proportion of insoluble fraction present in1% Triton-X. Patients in family 1 presented with only cerebellar atrophy without ataxia; however, patients in family 2 exhibited cerebellar ataxia, dystonia, and more severe cerebellar atrophy than those in family 1. Exome sequencing identified two novel missense variants of PRKCG:c.171 G > C,p.W57C (family 1), and c.400 T > C,p.C134R (family 2). Both the mutant PKCgamma aggregated in the cytoplasm. Although the solubility of PKCgamma of the C134R variant was lower than that of the wild-type, PKCgamma of W57C retained its solubility. In conclusion, we identified two novel variants of PRKCG. The difference in severity between the two families may be due to the difference in solubility changes observed between the two variants. Decreased solubility of the PKCgamma may play an important role in the pathogenesis of SCA14.
This study explores the association between a highly heritable behavioral disinhibition phenotype and the protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG) gene in an ethnically diverse youth sample from Colorado, USA. The rationale for this study was based on the impulsive behavior and increased ethanol consumption observed in the protein kinase C gamma (PKC-gamma)-deficient mouse model. Two composite behavioral disinhibition phenotypes and their component behavioral scores [conduct disorder, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), substance experimentation (SUB) and novelty-seeking] were examined for association with five independent PRKCG single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Association analysis for the five individual SNPs revealed modest genetic association of Exon 14 (rs2242244) and Upstream (rs307941) markers with the behavioral disinhibition composite variables in the combined, Hispanic and African-American samples. Additionally, haplotype-based association analysis for two SNPs located in Intron 3 (rs402691) and Exon 6 (rs3745406) indicated a significant overall association of the PRKCG locus with the ADHD-hyperactive subscale scores in the combined and Caucasian samples, supporting the relation between impulsive behaviors and the PRKCG gene. A significant haplotype association was also observed with SUB scores but only in the Hispanic ethnic group, highlighting the marker variability for each ethnic group. In conclusion, our results support the role of the PKC-gamma enzyme in behavioral impulsivity previously observed in mice. This study provides the first exploration of the PRKCG gene and its association with behavioral disinhibition and warrants further study in other larger population samples.
Progressive myoclonic ataxia, also referred to as Ramsay Hunt syndrome, is characterized by a combination of myoclonus and cerebellar ataxia, infrequently accompanied by tonic-clonic seizures. Its differential diagnosis overlaps with progressive myoclonic epilepsy, a syndrome with myoclonus, tonic-clonic seizures, progressive ataxia and dementia. In patients with progressive myoclonic epilepsy, specific diseases can frequently be recognized, but the diagnostic yield in progressive myoclonic ataxia is much lower. We describe a patient who presented with multifocal myoclonus in his thirties and who later developed cerebellar ataxia and focal dystonia. His father was similarly affected. Genetic studies revealed a mutation in the protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG) gene, known to cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA-14). This case illustrates that both myoclonus and dystonia are part of the clinical spectrum in SCA-14 and that myoclonus can even be the presenting symptom. We suggest that SCA-14 should be considered in the differential diagnosis of progressive myoclonic ataxia.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 (SCA14) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder characterized by cerebellar ataxia and intermittent axial myoclonus. Various mutations have been found in the PRKCG gene encoding protein kinase C gamma in SCA14 families. Most of those mutations have been found in exon 4 of the PRKCG gene. We performed polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based screening to clarify the approximate morbidity rate of the disease in the Japanese SCA population. We screened exon 4 of the PRKCG gene in 882 SCA patients with undefined etiologies using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and subsequent direct sequencing. We found a novel C/T missense mutation with a Ser119-to-Phe substitution (S119F) in 2 patients and subsequently found that they belonged to the same family. This S119F mutation was not found in 259 control individuals. Further PCR-based analysis revealed an additional 5 members with the same mutation in this family. Cerebellar ataxia was manifested in 5 of those 7 members. The main symptom in 4 of the 5 affected members was pure cerebellar ataxia with late onset. They had no myoclonus, extrapyramidal signs, ophthalmoplegia, or intellectual disturbance, some of which were found in previously reported SCA families. One patient showed intractable epilepsy, severe walking disturbance, and trunk ataxia with early onset. The results of this study suggest that the frequency of SCA14 in the Japanese SCA population is very low.
Osteosarcoma is a common malignant tumor, which exists widely in the bone of children and adolescents. Protein kinase C gamma (PRKCG) gene, which encodes gammaPKC, plays important roles in tumor promotion, cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration. The objective of the present study was to investigate the relationship between PRKCG polymorphisms and the risk of osteosarcoma. Five tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PRKCG were retrieved from the HapMap database and genotyped by the method of SNapShot in a hospital-based study containing 388 patients and 388 healthy individuals. Odds ratios (ORs) and their 95 % confidence intervals (CIs) were used to evaluate the association SPSS 20.0 statistical software package was used to analyze statistical data. Our results suggested that the T/C variant of rs454006 located in the intron 3 region of PRKCG gene was significantly associated with an increased risk of osteosarcoma (CC vs. TT, OR = 1.91; 95 % CI 1.29-2.85; P = 0.001; CC vs. TT+TC, OR = 2.14, 95 % CI = 1.48-3.09, P = 0.001; C vs. T, OR = 1.32, 95 % CI = 1.08-1.62, P = 0.008). Similarly, the rs3745406 T/C variant can also elevate the risk of osteosarcoma in the dominant model (OR = 1.45, 95 % CI = 1.08-1.96, P = 0.014), homozygous model (OR = 1.68, 95 % CI = 1.10-2.59, P = 0.002), and allelic model (OR = 1.31, 95 % CI = 1.07-1.61, P = 0.009). However, there were no significant differences in genotypes and allele frequencies of rs2547362 (T>C), rs8103851 (C>G), and rs2242245 (T>C) SNPs between osteosarcoma patients and healthy controls. The results showed that carrier of rs454006*C allele and rs3745406*C might elevate the risk of osteosarcoma. Further studies are needed to validate the coalition between PRKCG gene polymorphisms and risk of osteosarcoma relying on a larger population that included the participants in different ethnicity and hospital.
OBJECTIVES: Despite a similar prevalence of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (ADCA) in Norway compared to other European countries, less than 10% of the families are explained by the CAG trinucleotide expansions. We wanted to find the occurence of SCA14 in the dominant ataxia population and describe the phenotype. METHODS: We screened a large dominant cerebellar ataxia cohort for mutations in the PRKCG gene. Patients were evaluated according to a standard clinical protocol for ataxia patients. RESULTS: A novel mutation was found in two families, a C to A transversion altering Histidine to a Glutamine at codon 139, located in a highly concerved region in the gene. It completely co-segregated with the affected family members and was not seen in 576 control chromosomes. Genetic analysis revealed common alleles at three microsatellite markers between these two families suggesting a shared ancestral chromosome. Affected subjects displayed a mild, slowly progressive cerebellar syndrome that included gait and limb ataxia and saccadic pursuit and head tremor in one. Age at onset ranged from 10 to 45 years. CONCLUSIONS: These are the first families with SCA14 reported from Scandinavia and a new mutation in the PRKCG gene. The occurrence in the Norwegian dominant ataxia cohort is 3.5%.
