Protein kinase C epsilon type; Calcium-independent, phospholipid- and diacylglycerol (DAG)- dependent serine/threonine-protein kinase that plays essential roles in the regulation of multiple cellular processes linked to cytoskeletal proteins, such as cell adhesion, motility, migration and cell cycle, functions in neuron growth and ion channel regulation, and is involved in immune response, cancer cell invasion and regulation of apoptosis. Mediates cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix via integrin- dependent signaling, by mediating angiotensin-2-induced activation of integrin beta- [...] 
Protein kinase C-epsilon (PKCepsilon) is an isoform of a large PKC family of enzymes that has a variety of functions in different cell types. Here we discuss two major roles of PKCepsilon in cardiac muscle cells; specifically, its role in regulating cardiac muscle contraction via targeting the sarcomeric proteins, as well as modulating cardiac cell energy production and metabolism by targeting cardiac mitochondria. The importance of PKCepsilon action is described within the context of intracellular localization, as substrate selectivity and specificity is achieved through spatiotemporal targeting of PKCepsilon. Accordingly, the role of PKCepsilon in regulating myocardial function in physiological and pathological states has been documented in both cardioprotection and cardiac hypertrophy.
Untranslated regions of the gene play a crucial role in gene expression regulation at mRNA and protein levels. Mutations at UTRs impact expression by altering transcription factor binding, transcriptional/translational efficacy, miRNA-mediated gene regulation, mRNA secondary structure, ribosomal translocation, and stability. PKCepsilon, a serine/threonine kinase, is aberrantly expressed in numerous diseases such as cardiovascular disorders, neurological disorders, and cancers; its probable cause is unknown. Therefore, in the current study, the influence of PRKCE 5'-and 3'UTR variants was explored for their potential impact on its transcription and translation through several bioinformatics approaches. UTR variants data was obtained through different databases and initially evaluated for their regulatory function. Variants with regulatory function were then studied for their effect on PRKCE binding with transcription factors (TF) and miRNAs, as well as their impact on mRNA secondary structure. Study outcomes indicated the regulatory function of 73 5'UTR and 17 3'UTR variants out of 376. 5'UTR variants introduced AP1 binding sites and promoted the PRKCE transcription. Four 3'UTR variants introduced a circular secondary structure, increasing PRKCE translational efficacy. A region in 5'UTR position 45,651,564 to 45,651,644 was found where variants readily influenced the miRNA-PRKCE mRNA binding. The study further highlighted a PKCepsilon-regulated feedback loop mechanism that induces the activity of TFs, promoting its gene transcription. The study provides foundations for experimentation to understand these variants' role in diseases. These variants can also serve as the genetic markers for different diseases' diagnoses after validation at the cell and population levels.
Novel protein kinase C (nPKC) family member, protein kinase C epsilon (PKCepsilon) is an AGC kinase superfamily member. It is associated with neurological and metabolic diseases as well as human cancers. No study so far has been conducted to identify genetic variations and their effect on PKCepsilon folding and functioning. The present study aimed to identify mutational hotspots in PKCepsilon and disease-causing non-synonymous variants (nsSNPs) along with the investigation of nsSNP impact on protein dynamics. Twenty-nine in silico tools were applied to determine nsSNP deleteriousness, their impact on protein dynamics and disease association, along with the prediction of PKCepsilon post-translational modification (PTM) sites. The present study's outcomes indicated that most nsSNPs were concentrated in the PKCepsilon hinge region and C-terminal tail. Most pathogenic variants mapped to the kinase domain. Regulatory domain variants influenced PKCepsilon interaction with molecular players whereas kinase domain variants were predicted to impact its phosphorylation pattern and protein-protein interactions. Most PTM sites were mapped to the hinge region. PKCepsilon nsSNPs have an association with oncogenicity and its expression dysregulation is responsible for poor overall survival. Understanding nsSNP structural impact is a primary step necessary for delineating the relationship of genetic level differences with protein phenotype. The obtained knowledge can eventually help in disease diagnosis and therapy design.
RIG-I-like receptors are the key cytosolic sensors for RNA viruses and induce the production of type I interferons (IFN) and pro-inflammatory cytokines through a sole adaptor IFN-beta promoter stimulator-1 (IPS-1) (also known as Cardif, MAVS and VISA) in antiviral innate immunity. These sensors also have a pivotal role in anticancer activity through induction of apoptosis. However, the mechanism for their anticancer activity is poorly understood. Here, we show that anticancer vaccine adjuvant, PolyIC (primarily sensed by MDA5) and the oncolytic virus, Newcastle disease virus (NDV) (sensed by RIG-I), induce anticancer activity. The ectopic expression of IPS-1 into type I IFN-responsive and non-responsive cancer cells induces anticancer activity. PolyIC transfection and NDV infection upregulate pro-apoptotic gene TRAIL and downregulate the anti-apoptotic genes BCL2, BIRC3 and PRKCE. Furthermore, stable knockdown of IPS-1, IRF3 or IRF7 in IFN-non-responsive cancer cells show reduced anticancer activity by suppressing apoptosis via TRAIL and anti-apoptotic genes. Collectively, our study shows that IPS-1 induces anticancer activity through upregulation of pro-apoptotic gene TRAIL and downregulation of the anti-apoptotic genes BCL2, BIRC3 and PRKCE via IRF3 and IRF7 in type I IFN-dependent and -independent manners.
BACKGROUND: Optimal non-invasive biomarkers for diagnosis and treatment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) remain to be identified. AIMS: To identify potential DNA methylation biomarkers for NAFLD. METHODS: Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling was performed to identify differentially methylated CpG sites in peripheral blood leukocytes. Differentially methylated regions were validated using the MassCLEAVE assay. The expression levels of candidate genes were explored by Gene Expression Omnibus database. RESULTS: The hypomethylation of PRKCE CpG 4.5 and CpG 18.19 was associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL), the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were 0.129 (0.026-0.639) and 0.231 (0.069-0.768). The methylation level of CpG 1.2 and average methylation level of SEC14L3 were correlated with NAFL, with OR (95% CI) being 0.283 (0.093-0.865) and 0.264 (0.087-0.799). PRKCE CpG 4.5 and cg17802464 of SEC14L3 were correlated with body mass index, waist circumference, total triglyceride, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase. All selected datasets showed high expression levels of PRKCE and SEC14L3 in patients with NAFLD. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the hypomethylation of PRKCE and SEC14L3 promoters represent attractive biomarkers for NAFLD. Further studies are warranted to validate these biomarkers as molecular tools for diagnosis of NAFLD and therapeutic targets.
Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is one of the most common malignancy of the biliary tract characterized by its high chemoresistant tendency. Although great progresses have been made in recent decades for treating many cancers with anticancer drugs, effective therapeutics methods for anti-GBC are still lacking. Therefore, investigations into identifying the mechanisms underlying the drug resistance of GBC are greatly needed. In this study, we show that miR-218-5p plays a critical role in gemcitabine resistance of GBC. miR-218-5p levels were significantly lower in GBC than adjacent non-cancer tissues, and which were also associated with patient prognosis. While miR-218-5p overexpression abrogated gemcitabine resistance of GBC cells, silencing of which exhibited the opposite effects. Via six microRNA targets prediction algorithms, we found that PRKCE is a potential target of miR-218-5p. Moreover, miR-218-5p overexpression repressed the luciferase activity of reporter constructs containing 3'-UTR of PRKCE and also reduced PRKCE expression. Further studies revealed that miR-218-5p promotes sensitivity of gemcitabine by abolishing PRKCE-induced upregulation of MDR1/P-gp. Taken together, our results imply that an intimate correlation between miR-218-5p and PRKCE/MDR1 axis abnormal expression is a key determinant of gemcitabine tolerance, and suggest a novel miR-218-5p-based clinical intervention target for GBC patients.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Deletions in the q arm of chromosome 3 have been reported in uterine leiomyomas, also as sole anomalies. Because some neoplasia-associated deletions may give rise to tumorigenic fusion genes, we chose to investigate thoroughly one such tumor. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A uterine leiomyoma obtained from a 45-year-old woman had the karyotype 46,XX,del(3)(q?)[11]. The tumor was further studied using array comparative genomic hybridization, RNA sequencing, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, Sanger sequencing, and fluorescence in situ hybridization methodologies. RESULTS: The deletion was shown to be from 3q22.2 to 3q26.32. Unexpectedly, a cryptic balanced t(2;3)(p21;q25) translocation was also found affecting two otherwise normal chromosomes 2 and 3, i.e., the der(3)t(2;3) was not the deleted chromosome 3. The translocation generated two chimeras between the genes WW domain containing transcription regulator 1 (WWTR1) from 3q25.1 and protein kinase C epsilon (PRKCE) from 2p21. The WWTR1::PRKCE fusion would code for a chimeric serine/threonine kinase, whereas the reciprocal PRKCE::WWTR1 fusion would code for a chimeric transcriptional coactivator protein. CONCLUSION: Leiomyomas carrying a deletion on 3q may also have a balanced t(2;3)(p21;q25) leading to fusion of WWTR1 with PRKCE.
SHORT syndrome is a rare, recognizable syndrome resulting from heterozygous mutations in PIK3R1 encoding a regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K). The condition is characterized by short stature, intrauterine growth restriction, lipoatrophy and a facial gestalt involving a triangular face, deep set eyes, low hanging columella and small chin. PIK3R1 mutations in SHORT syndrome result in reduced signaling through the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway. We performed whole exome sequencing for an individual with clinical features of SHORT syndrome but negative for PIK3R1 mutation and her parents. A rare de novo variant in PRKCE was identified. The gene encodes PKCepsilon and, as such, the AKT-mTOR pathway function was assessed using phospho-specific antibodies with patient lymphoblasts and following ectopic expression of the mutant in HEK293 cells. Kinase analysis showed that the variant resulted in a partial loss-of-function. Whilst interaction with PDK1 and the mTORC2 complex component SIN1 was preserved in the mutant PKCepsilon, it bound to SIN1 with a higher affinity than wild-type PKCepsilon and the dynamics of mTORC2-dependent priming of mutant PKCepsilon was altered. Further, mutant PKCepsilon caused impaired mTORC2-dependent pAKT-S473 following rapamycin treatment. Reduced pFOXO1-S256 and pS6-S240/244 levels were also observed in the patient LCLs. To date, mutations in PIK3R1 causing impaired PI3K-dependent AKT activation are the only known cause of SHORT syndrome. We identify a SHORT syndrome child with a novel partial loss-of-function defect in PKCepsilon. This variant causes impaired AKT activation via compromised mTORC2 complex function.
