Prostaglandin E2 receptor EP2 subtype; Receptor for prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). The activity of this receptor is mediated by G(s) proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase. The subsequent raise in intracellular cAMP is responsible for the relaxing effect of this receptor on smooth muscle.
Precise molecular characterization of circulating polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSCs) is hampered by their mixed composition of mature and immature cells and lack of specific markers. Here, we focus on mature CD66b(+)CD10(+)CD16(+)CD11b(+) PMN-MDSCs (mPMN-MDSCs) from either cancer patients or healthy donors receiving G-CSF for stem cell mobilization (GDs). By RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) experiments, we report the identification of a distinct gene signature shared by the different mPMN-MDSC populations under investigation, also validated in mPMN-MDSCs from GDs and tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) by single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) experiments. Analysis of such a gene signature uncovers a specific transcriptional program associated with mPMN-MDSC differentiation and allows us to identify that, in patients with either solid or hematologic tumors and in GDs, CD52, CD84, and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) represent potential mPMN-MDSC-associated markers. Altogether, our findings indicate that mature PMN-MDSCs distinctively undergo specific reprogramming during differentiation and lay the groundwork for selective immunomonitoring, and eventually targeting, of mature PMN-MDSCs.
BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer is the second leading cause of gynecologic cancer-associated deaths. Cancer stemness and chemoresistance are responsible for ovarian cancer metastasis and the poor prognosis of patients. In this study, we determined the function of N6-methyladenine (m6A) RNA methylation and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) in ovarian cancer progression. METHODS: The m6A RNA methylation-associated PTGER2 in ovarian cancer was identified using bioinformatics analysis. The role of PTGER2 in ovarian cancer was elucidated in cell lines and clinical samples with cellular and molecular experiments. RESULTS: In this investigation, bioinformatics analysis based on a public cancer database was used to elucidate the impact of m6A modification on the prognosis of patients with ovarian cancer. Moreover, PTGER2 was identified as a potential oncogene associated with the distant metastasis of ovarian cancer and poor patient prognosis. Interestingly, PTGER2 expression was experimentally shown to be enhanced by N6-adenosine-methyltransferase 70 kDa subunit (METTL3)-mediated m6A modification. In addition, PTGER2 enhanced cancer stem cell self-renewal properties, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and DNA damage repair, thus potentiating cell stemness, therapy resistance to carboplatin, proliferation, and metastasis of ovarian cancer. Importantly, PTGER2 expression in clinical samples was associated with distant metastasis, predicted poor patient prognosis, and independently served as a prognostic predictor in ovarian cancer. CONCLUSIONS: Our work defines PTGER2 as an oncogene and reveals that PTGER2 is a prognostic predictor and novel therapeutic target for the management of ovarian cancer.
We hypothesized that polymorphisms of genes involved in the prostaglandin pathway could be associated with COPD. In this study we explored the involvement of genetic polymorphisms in PTGS2, PTGER2 and PTGER4 genes in the development and severity of COPD and their effects on plasma concentrations of inflammatory/oxidative stress markers. We identified genotypes of PTGS2, PTGER2 and PTGER4 SNPs in a Tunisian cohort including COPD patients (n = 138) and control subjects (n = 216) using PCR-RFLP and PCR TaqMan. Pulmonary function (FEV1 and FVC) were assessed by plethsmography. PGE(2), PGD(2) and cytokine plasma (IL-6, IL-18, TNF-alpha, TGF-beta) concentrations were measured using ELISA and colorimetric standard methods were used to determine oxidative stress concentrations. Genotype frequencies of rs2745557 in PTGS2 and rs2075797 in PTGER2 were different between COPD cases and controls. There was no correlation between these polymorphisms and lung function parameters. For rs2745557, the A allele frequency was higher in COPD cases than in controls. For rs2075797, carriers of the GG genotype were more frequent in the COPD group than in controls. Only rs2745557 in PTGS2 had an effect on PGD(2) and cytokine plasma concentrations. PGD(2) was significantly decreased in COPD patients with the GA or AA genotypes. In contrast, IL-18 and NO plasma concentrations were increased in COPD rs2745557 A allele carriers as compared to homozygous GG subjects. Our findings suggest that rs2745557 in PTGS2 and rs2075797 in PTGER2 are associated with COPD development but not with its severity.
BACKGROUND: The expression of prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) affects the biologic behavior of various types of malignant tumors. Recently, transactivation of both PTGER2 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been reported in some tumors. METHODS: PTGER2 gene expression and possible aberrant methylation of the PTGER2 gene were investigated in 10 nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, 233 primary tumors, and 168 adjacent nonmalignant lung tissues. They were analyzed with reference to an association with EGFR mutation in 133 clinical lung adenocarcinomas and were correlated with patient survival. RESULTS: Down-regulation of PTGER2 expression was observed in 8 of 10 NSCLC cell lines. Demethylation of 5 expression-negative cell lines restored the expression of PTGER2. Aberrant methylation of the PTGER2 gene was reversely concordant with its messenger RNA expression. PTGER2 methylation was detected in 137 of 233 NSCLC specimens (58%) but was detected in only 2 of 168 nonmalignant lung tissues (1%). Both NSCLCs and adenocarcinomas that had PTGER2 methylation predicted a significantly better prognosis than those without PTGER2 methylation (P = .0051 and P = .0171, respectively). PTGER2 methylation was present with greater frequency in tumors with EGFR mutation than in non-EGFR mutated tumors (P = .0095), and the significance of the correlation was independent after adjusting for sex and smoking status (P = .0144). CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant methylation of the PTGER2 gene was observed frequently in NSCLC tissues and was associated with the presence of EGFR mutation and a better prognosis.
We previously identified a cluster of prostanoid receptor genes, prostaglandin D2 receptor (PTGDR) and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2), as possible targets for DNA methylation in advanced types of neuroblastoma (NB) using bacterial artificial chromosome array-based methylated CpG island amplification method. Among them, in this study, we found that PTGER2 was frequently silenced in NB cell lines, especially in those with MYCN amplification, through epigenetic mechanisms. In NB cell lines, DNA methylation pattern within a part of CpG island was inversely correlated with PTGER2 expression, and histone H3 and H4 deacetylation and histone H3 lysine 9 methylation within the putative promoter region were more directly correlated with silencing of this gene. Methylation of PTGER2 was observed more frequently in advanced-type of primary NBs compared with early-stage tumors. Growth of NB cells lacking endogenous PTGER2 expression was inhibited by restoration of the gene product by transient and stable transfection. A PTGER2-selective agonist, butaprost, increased intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) level, inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis of NB cells stably expressing exogenous PTGER2. 8-Bromo-cAMP also inhibited growth of NB cells lacking PTGER2 expression, but not cells expressing this gene. Taken together, it is suggested that NB cells may lose responsiveness to PTGER2-mediated growth inhibition/apoptosis through epigenetic silencing of PTGER2 and/or disruption of downstream cAMP-dependent pathway during the neuroblastomagenesis.
In luteinizing granulosa cells, prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) can exert luteotrophic actions, apparently via the cAMP signalling pathway. In addition to stimulating progesterone synthesis, PGE(2) can also stimulate oxidation of the physiological glucocorticoid, cortisol, to its inactive metabolite, cortisone, by the type 1 11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11betaHSD1) enzyme in human granulosa-lutein cells. Having previously shown these human ovarian cells to express functional G-protein coupled, E-series prostaglandin (PTGER)1, PTGER2 and PTGER4 receptors, the aim of this study was to delineate the roles of PTGER1 and PTGER2 receptors in mediating the effects of PGE(2) on steroidogenesis and cortisol metabolism in human granulosa-lutein cells. PGE(2)-stimulated concentration-dependent increases in both progesterone production and cAMP accumulation (by 1.9 +/- 0.1- and 18.7 +/- 6.8-fold respectively at 3000 nM PGE(2)). While a selective PTGER1 antagonist, SC19220, could partially inhibit the steroidogenic response to PGE(2) (by 55.9 +/- 4.1% at 1000 nM PGE(2)), co-treatment with AH6809, a mixed PTGER1/PTGER2 receptor antagonist, completely abolished the stimulation of progesterone synthesis at all tested concentrations of PGE(2) and suppressed the stimulation of cAMP accumulation. Both PGE(2) and butaprost (a preferential PTGER2 receptor agonist) stimulated concentration-dependent increases in cortisol oxidation by 11betaHSD1 (by 42.5 +/- 3.1 and 40.0 +/- 3.0% respectively, at PGE(2) and butaprost concentrations of 1000 nM). Co-treatment with SC19220 enhanced the ability of both PGE(2) and butaprost to stimulate 11betaHSD1 activity (by 30.2 +/- 0.2 and 30.5 +/- 0.6% respectively), whereas co-treatment with AH6809 completely abolished the 11betaHSD1 responses to PGE(2) and butaprost. These findings implicate the PTGER2 receptor-cAMP signalling pathway in the stimulation of progesterone production and 11betaHSD1 activity by PGE(2) in human granulosa-lutein cells.
BACKGROUND: Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2, the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee-approved official symbol for cycloxygenase-2, COX-2) and its enzymatic product prostaglandin E2 have critical roles in inflammation and carcinogenesis through the G protein-coupled receptor PTGER2 (EP2). The PTGS2 (COX-2) pathway is a promising target for cancer therapy and chemoprevention. PTGS2 (COX-2) expression in colon cancer has been inversely associated with survival as well as tumoral microsatellite instability (MSI) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). However, the prognostic significance of PTGER2 expression or its relationship with MSI, CIMP, LINE-1 hypomethylation, or PTGS2 (COX-2) remains uncertain. METHODS: Using the database of 516 colorectal cancers in two prospective cohort studies with clinical outcome data, we detected PTGER2 overexpression in 169 (33%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We analyzed MSI using 10 microsatellite markers; CIMP by MethyLight (real-time methylation-specific PCR) on an eight-marker panel [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1]; BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA, and methylation in LINE-1 by Pyrosequencing; and CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) and TP53 (p53) by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: PTGER2 overexpression was positively associated with the mucinous component (P = 0.0016), signet ring cells (P = 0.0024), CIMP-high (P = 0.0023), and MSI-high (P < 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, the significant relationship between PTGER2 and MSI-high persisted (adjusted odds ratio, 2.82; 95% confidence interval, 1.69-4.72; P < 0.0001). PTGER2 was not significantly associated with PTGS2 (COX-2), TP53, or CTNNB1 expression, patient survival, or prognosis. CONCLUSION: PTGER2 overexpression is associated with MSI-high in colorectal cancer. IMPACT: Our data imply potential roles of inflammatory reaction by PTGER2 upregulation in carcinogenic process to MSI-high colorectal cancer.
Worldwide, more than 1 in 10 infants is born prior to 37 weeks gestation. Preterm birth can lead to increased mortality risk and poor life-long health and neurodevelopmental outcomes. Whether environmental risk factors affect preterm birth through epigenetic phenomena is largely unstudied. We sought to determine whether preterm risk factors, such as smoke exposure and education, were associated with cervical DNA methylation in the prostaglandin E receptor 2 gene (PTGER2) and a repetitive element, long interspersed nuclear element-1 Homo sapiens-specific (LINE 1-HS). Second, we aimed to determine whether mid-pregnancy DNA methylation of these regions in cervical samples could predict the length of gestation. We obtained a cervical swab between 16-19 weeks gestation from 80 women participating in a Mexico City birth cohort, used pyrosequencing to analyze DNA methylation of PTGER2 and LINE 1-HS, and examined associations with maternal covariates. We used accelerated failure time models to analyze associations of DNA methylation with the length of gestation. DNA methylation of both sequences was associated with Pap smear inflammation. LINE 1-HS methylation was associated with smoke exposure, BMI and parity. In adjusted models, gestations were 3.3 days longer (95%CI 0.6, 6.0) for each interquartile range of PTGER2 DNA methylation. Higher LINE 1-HS methylation was associated with shorter gestations (-3.3 days, 95%CI -6.5, -0.2). In conclusion, cervical DNA methylation was associated with risk factors for preterm birth and the length of gestation.
BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common monogenic kidney disorder. Half of the patients would slowly progress to end-stage renal disease. However, the potential target for ADPKD treatment is still lacking. METHODS: Four ADPKD patients and two healthy family members were included in this study. The peripheral blood samples were obtained and tested by the whole exome sequencing (WES). The autosomal mutations in ADPKD patients were retained as candidate sites. The Gene Ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment, and protein-protein interaction network (PPI) analyses were performed by clusterProfiler R package. A dataset containing 18 ADPKD patients and three normal samples were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and analyzed using the limma R package. RESULTS: A total of six mutant genes were identified based on the dominant genetic pattern and most of them had not been reported to be associated with ADPKD. Furthermore, 19 harmful genes were selected according to the harmfulness of mutation. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses showed that the processes of single-organism cellular process, response to stimulus, plasma membrane, cell periphery, and anion binding as well as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) signaling pathway and pathways in cancer were significantly enriched. Through integrating PPI and gene expression analyses, acyl-CoA thioesterase 13 (ACOT13), which has not been reported to be related to ADPKD, and prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) were identified as potential genes associated with ADPKD. CONCLUSIONS: Through combination of WES, gene expression, and PPI network analyses, we identified ACOT13 and PTGER2 as potential ADPKD-related genes.
