Prostaglandin G/H synthase 2; Converts arachidonate to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), a committed step in prostanoid synthesis. Constitutively expressed in some tissues in physiological conditions, such as the endothelium, kidney and brain, and in pathological conditions, such as in cancer. PTGS2 is responsible for production of inflammatory prostaglandins. Up-regulation of PTGS2 is also associated with increased cell adhesion, phenotypic changes, resistance to apoptosis and tumor angiogenesis. In cancer cells, PTGS2 is a key step in the production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which plays imp [...] 
Prostaglandin endoperoxidase synthase 2 is a key regulator of inflammation and may play a role in prostate carcinogenesis. The polymorphism, -899G>C (rs20417), alters a transcription factor-binding site and is associated with a reduced risk of colorectal adenoma. We tested the hypothesis that rs20417 may influence prostate cancer risk, using a large case-control study (n(cases)=1608, n(controls)=3058). We found no evidence that rs20417 alters prostate cancer risk (odds ratio (OR(CC & GC v GG)=1.05, 95% confidence interval (CI)=0.91-1.20). A meta-analysis of three studies also found little evidence that rs20417 alters risk (pooled OR(CC & GC v GG)=1.04, 95% CI=0.93-1.17), making it unlikely that rs20417 contributes in any major way to prostate cancer aetiology.
Ferroptosis and pyroptosis have not been fully studied in atherosclerosis. We aimed to investigate the expression of ferroptosis-related and pyroptosis-related proteins in human coronary arteries and analyse correlation with severity of atherosclerosis and clarify the interactions between proteins and possible mechanisms of atherosclerosis. 40 human coronary artery specimens were employed. The atherosclerotic lesions were characterized by Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining. The expression of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2), anti-acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4), glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), caspase-1, and NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3) were analysed by immunohistochemical assay. Correlations between expression of proteins and severity of atherosclerosis were assessed using Spearman correlation analysis. Bioinformatic and coexpression analyses were performed to study the possible pathways and interactions. In the present study, PTGS2, ACSL4, caspase-1, and NLRP3, were upregulated, while GPX4 was downregulated in the advanced stages of atherosclerosis. The severity of atherosclerosis was positively associated with the expression of PTGS2, ACSL4, caspase-1, and NLRP3 and negatively associated with the expression of GPX4. Biological processes of lipid metabolism and inflammation and C-type lectin receptor signaling pathway were enriched. The five proteins interacted with each other directly or indirectly and PTGS2 might be the hub gene of atherosclerosis. Ferroptosis and pyroptosis may regulate the occurrence and development of atherosclerosis. These findings may shed light on new ideas and potential targets for the prevention and treatment of coronary artery atherosclerosis and the proteins may be used as biomarkers for the severity of atherosclerosis.
Accumulative evidences have indicated the interaction between cellular senescence and ferroptosis. This study intends to investigate the ferroptosis-related molecular markers in TNF-alpha-induced endothelial senescence. The microarray expression dataset (GSE195517) was used to identify the differently expressed ferroptosis-related genes (DEFRGs) through weighted gene co-expressed network analysis (WGCNA). GO and KEGG were performed to explore the biological function. Furthermore, hub genes were identified after protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis and validated through real-time qPCR (RT-qPCR). Then, a drug-gene network was established to predict potential drugs for the hub genes. Seven DEFRGs were recognized in the TNF-alpha-induced HUVEC senescence. Moreover, four hub genes (PTGS2, TNFAIP3, CXCL2, and IL6 are upregulated) were identified by PPI analysis and validated by RT-qPCR. Further analysis exhibited that PTGS2 was subcellularly located in the plasma membrane. Furthermore, after aminosalicylic acid (ASA) was identified as ferroptosis inhibitor for targeting PTGS2 in senescent HUVECs, 5-ASA and 4-ASA were verified to alleviate TNF-alpha-induced HUVEC senescence through ferroptosis. PTGS2 might play a role in TNF-alpha-induced HUVEC senescence and ASA may be the potential drug for alleviating TNF-alpha-induced HUVEC senescence through ferroptosis.
The leading indicator for successful outcomes in in-vitro fertilization (IVF) is the quality of gametes in oocytes and sperm. Thus, advanced research aims to highlight the parameter in assessing these qualities - DNA fragmentation in sperm and oocyte development capacity (ODC) via evaluation of microenvironments involving its maturation process. Regarding oocytes, most evidence reveals the role of cumulus cells as non-invasive methods in assessing their development competency, mainly via gene expression evaluation. Our review aims to consolidate the evidence of GDF-9 derivatives, the HAS2, GREM1, and PTGS2 gene expression in cumulus cells used as ODC markers in relevant publications and tailored to current IVF outcomes. In addition to that, we also added the bioinformatic analysis in our review to strengthen the evidence aiming for a better understanding of the pathways and cluster of the genes of interest - HAS2, GREM1, and PTGS2 in cumulus cell level. Otherwise, the current non-invasive method can be used in exploring various causes of infertility that may affect these gene expressions at the cumulus cell level. Nevertheless, this method can also be used in assessing the ODC in various cohorts of women or as an improvement of markers following targeted tools or procedures by evaluating the advancement of these gene expressions following the targeted intervention.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Inflammation is a major risk factor for development of colorectal cancer (CRC). Prostaglandin synthase cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) encoded by the PTGS2 gene is the rate limiting enzyme in prostaglandin synthesis and therefore plays a distinct role as regulator of inflammation. METHODS: PTGS2 mRNA levels were determined in intestinal tissues from 85 intestinal adenoma cases, 115 CRC cases, and 17 healthy controls. The functional PTGS2 polymorphisms A-1195G (rs689466), G-765C (rs20417), T8473C (rs5275) were assessed in 200 CRC cases, 991 adenoma cases and 399 controls from the Norwegian KAM cohort. RESULTS: PTGS2 mRNA levels were higher in mild/moderate adenoma tissue compared to morphologically normal tissue from the same individual (P<0.0001) and (P<0.035) and compared to mucosa from healthy individuals (P<0.0039) and (P<0.0027), respectively. In CRC patients, PTGS2 mRNA levels were 8-9 times higher both in morphologically normal tissue and in cancer tissue, compared to healthy individuals (P<0.0001). PTGS2 A-1195G variant allele carriers were at reduced risk of CRC (odds ratio (OR) = 0.52, 95% confidence interval (95% CI): 0.28-0.99, P = 0.047). Homozygous carriers of the haplotype encompassing the A-1195G and G-765C wild type alleles and the T8473C variant allele (PTGS2 AGC) were at increased risk of CRC as compared to homozygous carriers of the PTGS2 AGT (A-1195G, G-765C, T8473C) haplotype (OR = 5.37, 95% CI: 1.40-20.5, P = 0.014). No association between the investigated polymorphisms and PTGS2 mRNA levels could be detected. CONCLUSION: High intestinal PTGS2 mRNA level is an early event in colorectal cancer development as it occurs already in mild/moderate dysplasia. PTGS2 polymorphisms that have been associated with altered PTGS2 mRNA levels/COX-2 activity in some studies, although not the present study, were associated with colorectal cancer risk. Thus, both PTGS2 polymorphisms and PTGS2 mRNA levels may provide information regarding CRC risk.
PURPOSE: Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2, cyclooxygenase-2; a target of aspirin) produces inflammatory mediator prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and contributes to colorectal neoplasia development. PTGS2-driven inflammatory responses can induce tumor expression of microRNA MIR21 (miR-21) that can increase local PGE2 level by downregulating PGE2-metabolizing enzymes. We hypothesized that the prognostic association of tumor MIR21 expression level in colorectal carcinoma might depend on inflammatory tumor microenvironment and be stronger in tumors expressing high-level PTGS2. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Utilizing 765 rectal and colon cancer specimens in the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, we measured MIR21 expression by quantitative reverse transcription PCR, and PTGS2 expression by immunohistochemistry. Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to assess statistical interaction between MIR21 and PTGS2 in colorectal cancer-specific survival analysis, controlling for potential confounders including microsatellite instability, CpG island methylator phenotype, LINE-1 methylation level, and KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA mutations. RESULTS: Tumor MIR21 expression level was associated with higher colorectal cancer-specific mortality (Ptrend = 0.029), and there was a statistically significant interaction between MIR21 and PTGS2 (Pinteraction = 0.0004). The association between MIR21 expression and colorectal cancer-specific mortality was statistically significant in PTGS2-high cancers (multivariable hazard ratio of the highest vs. lowest quartile of MIR21, 2.28; 95% confidence interval, 1.42-3.67; Ptrend = 0.0004) but not in PTGS2-absent/low cancers (Ptrend = 0.22). CONCLUSIONS: MIR21 expression level in colorectal carcinoma is associated with worse clinical outcome, and this association is stronger in carcinomas expressing high-level PTGS2, suggesting complex roles of immunity and inflammation in tumor progression. Clin Cancer Res; 22(15); 3841-8. (c)2016 AACR.
Hereby, we aimed to investigate the expression of prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) and Vascular Endothelial Factor-C (VEGF-C) besides the methylation of PTGS2 in AML patients. VEGF-C and PTGS2 expression analysis were evaluated in newly diagnosed AML patients and healthy controls by quantitative Reverse Transcriptase PCR method. Also, PTGS2 methylation status was evaluated by Methylation-Sensitive High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis (MS-HRM). While 34% of patients were female, the mean age of the patients was 43.41 +/- 17.60 years suffering mostly from M4 (48.21%) type of AML. Although methylation level between patients and controls was not significantly different, none of the normal controls showed methylation in the PTGS2 promoter. PTGS2 and VEGF-C levels were elevated in AML cases and correlated with WBC, Platelet, and Hemoglobin levels. The survival of patients with overexpressed VEGF-C and PTGS2 was poorer than others. It can be concluded that PTGS2 and especially VEGF-C expression but not PTGS2 methylation can be considered as diagnostic biomarkers for AML.
Acute lung injury (ALI) is a clinical respiratory disease caused by various factors, which lacks effective pharmacotherapy to reduce the mortality rate. Elsholtzia bodinieri Vaniot is an annual herbaceous plant used as a traditional herbal tea and folk medicine. Here we used bioinformatic databases and software to explore and analyze the potential key genes in ALI regulated by E. bodinieri Vaniot, including B cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 (Bcl2), prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (Ptgs2) and NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, quinone 1 (Nqo1). In an inflammatory cells model, we verified bioinformatics results, and further mechanistic analysis showed that methanol extract of E. bodinieri Vaniot (EBE) could alleviate oxidative stress by upregulating the expression of NQO1, suppress pyroptosis by upregulating the expression of BCL2, and attenuate inflammation by downregulating the expression of PTGS2. In sum, our results demonstrated that EBE treatment could alleviate oxidative stress, suppress pyroptosis and attenuate inflammation by regulating NQO1, BCL2 and PTGS2 in a cells model, and E. bodinieri Vaniot might be a promising source for functional food or as a therapeutic agent.
Prostaglandins are lipid mediators involved in physiological processes, such as constriction or dilation of blood vessels, but also pathophysiological processes, which include inflammation, pain and fever. They are produced by almost all cell types in the organism by activation of Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthases/Cyclooxygenases. The inducible Prostaglandin Endoperoxide Synthase 2/Cyclooxygenase 2 (PTGS2/COX2) plays an important role in pathologies associated with inflammatory signaling. The main product derived from PTGS2/COX2 expression and activation is Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)), which promotes a wide variety of tissue-specific effects, pending environmental inputs. One of the major sources of PGE(2) are infiltrating inflammatory cells - the production of this molecule increases drastically in damaged tissues. Immune infiltration is a hallmark of type 1 diabetes mellitus, a multifactorial disease that leads to autoimmune-mediated pancreatic beta cell destruction. Controversial effects for the PTGS2/COX2-PGE(2) signaling cascade in pancreatic islet cells subjected to diabetogenic conditions have been reported, allocating PGE(2) as both, cause and consequence of inflammation. Herein, we review the main effects of this molecular pathway in a tissue-specific manner, with a special emphasis on beta cell mass protection/destruction and its potential role in the prevention or development of T1DM. We also discuss strategies to target this pathway for future therapies.
PURPOSE: Lung cancer survivors report the lowest quality of life relative to other cancer survivors. Pain is one of the most devastating, persistent, and incapacitating symptoms for lung cancer survivors. Prevalence rates vary with 80-100% of survivors experiencing cancer pain and healthcare costs are five times higher in cancer survivors with uncontrolled pain. Cancer pain often has a considerable impact on quality of life among cancer patients and cancer survivors. Therefore, early identification, and treatment is important. Although recent studies have suggested a relationship between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in several cytokine and inflammation genes with cancer prognosis, associations with cancer pain are not clear. Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to identify SNPs related to pain in lung cancer survivors. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Participants were enrolled in the Mayo Clinic Lung Cancer Cohort upon diagnosis of their lung cancer. 1149 Caucasian lung cancer survivors (440 surviving <3 years; 354 surviving 3-5 years; and 355 surviving >5 years) completed study questionnaires and had blood DNA samples available. Ten SNPS from PTGS2 and LTA genes were selected based on the serum-based studies in the literature. Outcomes included pain, and quality of life as measured by the SF-8. RESULTS: Of the 10 SNPs evaluated in LTA and PTGS2 genes, 3 were associated with pain severity (rs5277; rs1799964), social function (rs5277) and mental health (rs5275). These results suggested both specificity and consistency of these inflammatory gene SNPs in predicting pain severity in lung cancer survivors. CONCLUSION: These results provide support for genetic predisposition to pain severity and may aid in identification of lung cancer survivors at high risk for morbidity and poor QOL.
