Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1; Plasma membrane-associated small GTPase which cycles between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states. In its active state, binds to a variety of effector proteins to regulate cellular responses such as secretory processes, phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, epithelial cell polarization, neurons adhesion, migration and differentiation, and growth-factor induced formation of membrane ruffles. Rac1 p21/rho GDI heterodimer is the active component of the cytosolic factor sigma 1, which is involved in stimulation of the NADPH oxidase activity  [...] 
The small GTPases of the Rho family regulate many aspects of actin dynamics, but are functionally connected to many other cellular processes. Rac1, a member of this family, besides its known function in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton, plays a key role in the production of reactive oxygen species, in gene transcription, in DNA repair, and also has been proven to have specific roles in neurons. This review focuses on the cooperation between Rac1 and Rab proteins, analyzing how the coordination between these GTPases impact on cells and how alterations of their functions lead to disease.
RAC1 encodes the protein RAS-related C3 Botulinum Toxin Substrate 1 (RAC1), which plays a pivotal role in various cellular functions. Pathogenic variants in RAC1 are linked to the rare intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal-dominant 48 (MRD48). We present one case with typical phenotype and two cases with a mild phenotype. This report expands the phenotypic spectrum of MRD48.
Acetylation, a critical regulator of diverse cellular processes, holds significant implications in various cancer contexts. Further understanding of the acetylation patterns of key cancer-driven proteins is crucial for advancing therapeutic strategies in cancer treatment. This study aimed to unravel the acetylation patterns of Engulfment and Cell Motility Protein 1 (ELMO1) and its relevance to the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (CRC). Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry precisely identified lysine residue 505 (K505) as a central acetylation site in ELMO1. P300 emerged as the acetyltransferase for ELMO1 K505 acetylation, while SIRT2 was recognized as the deacetylase. Although K505 acetylation minimally affected ELMO1's localization and stability, it played a crucial role in mediating ELMO1-Dock180 interaction, thereby influencing Rac1 activation. Functionally, ELMO1 K505 acetylation proved to be a pivotal factor in CRC progression, exerting its influence on key cellular processes. Clinical analysis of CRC samples unveiled elevated ELMO1 acetylation in primary tumors, indicating a potential association with CRC pathologies. This work provides insights into ELMO1 acetylation and its significance in advancing potentially therapeutic interventions in CRC treatment.
RAC1 is a GTPase member of the RAS superfamily, and RAC1(P29S) was recently identified as the third most common recurrent mutation in melanomas, affecting 4-7% of the patients. This is an oncogenic mutation, because the mutant protein remains mostly in its active GTP-bound form, and its ectopic expression increases the rate of normal melanocytes proliferation and migration. There is limited information regarding the functional role of RAC1(P29S) as a "driver" in human melanogenesis and as a cause for drug resistance. This commentary describes the latest data and provides evidence that supports the notion that RAC1 is activated even in melanoma cells that do not carry the mutation rendering it a good target for therapy. On the other hand, its role in conferring resistance to BRAF or MEK inhibitors is still in question.
RAC1 signalling has been implicated in a variety of dynamic cell biological processes that are orchestrated through regulated localisation and activation of RAC1. As a small GTPase, RAC1 switches between active and inactive states at various subcellular locations that include the plasma membrane, nucleus and mitochondria. Once activated, RAC1 interacts with a range of effectors that then mediate various biological functions. RAC1 is regulated by a large number of proteins that can promote its recruitment, activation, deactivation, or stability. RAC1 and its regulators are subject to various post-translational modifications that further fine tune RAC1 localisation, levels and activity. Developments in technologies have enabled the accurate detection of activated RAC1 during processes such as cell migration, invasion and DNA damage. Here, we highlight recent advances in our understanding of RAC1 regulation and function at specific subcellular sites.
Influenza A virus (IAV) is a major human pathogen with the potential to become pandemic. IAV contains only eight RNA segments; thus, the virus must fully exploit the host cellular machinery to facilitate its own replication. In an effort to comprehensively characterize the host machinery taken over by IAV in mammalian cells, we generated stable A549 cell lines with over-expression of the viral non-structural protein (NS1) to investigate the potential host factors that might be modulated by the NS1 protein. We found that the viral NS1 protein directly interacted with cellular Rac1 and facilitated viral replication. Further research revealed that NS1 down-regulated Rac1 activity via post-translational modifications. Therefore, our results demonstrated that IAV blocked Rac1-mediated host cell signal transduction through the NS1 protein to facilitate its own replication. Our findings provide a novel insight into the mechanism of IAV replication and indicate new avenues for the development of potential therapeutic targets.
EMBO J 31 3, 534-551 (2012); published online December 09 2011 Since its description more than two decades ago as a substrate for botulinum C3 exoenzyme (Didsbury et al, 1989), Rac1 has been one of the most studied small GTPases of the Ras superfamily. Interest in Rac1 exploded in 1992 when Ridley and Hall published their seminal work showing that Rac1 regulates the actin cytoskeleton to promote lamellipodia formation (Ridley et al, 1992). Since that report, >4350 studies have been published on Rac1 and seemingly every detail of its regulation and biological function has been dissected, including its post-translational modifications. It therefore comes as somewhat of a surprise when del Pozo and colleagues (Navarro-Lerida et al, 2012) report for the first time in this issue of The EMBO Journal that Rac1 can be palmitoylated and that acylation directs its location in plasma membrane microdomains and modulates its signalling output.
Navarro-Lerida et al. (2015) report in this issue of Developmental Cell that RAC1 nuclear accumulation causes actin-dependent deformation of the nuclear envelope and increases nuclear plasticity. It further leads to depletion of cytoplasmic, active RAC1 with a concomitant increase in RHOA signaling driving actomyosin-mediated cell shape changes. These two properties combine to enhance tumor cells invasiveness.
Sarcoidosis is an enigmatic multisystem disease characterized by the development and accumulation of granulomas: a compact collection of macrophages that have differentiated into epithelioid cells and which are associated with T helper (Th)1 and Th17 cells. Although no single causative factor has been shown to underlie sarcoidosis in humans, its etiology has been related to microbial, environmental, and genetic factors. We examine how these factors play a role in sarcoidosis pathogenesis. Specifically, we propose that dysfunction of mTOR, Rac1, and autophagy-related pathways not only hampers pathogen or nonorganic particle clearance but also participates in T cell and macrophage dysfunction, driving granuloma formation. This concept opens new avenues for potentially treating sarcoidosis and may serve as a blueprint for other granulomatous disorders.
Rac1 is a small GTPase that plays key roles in actin reorganization, cell motility, and cell survival/growth as well as in various cancer types and neurodegenerative diseases. Similar to other Ras superfamily GTPases, Rac1 switches between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states. Switch I and II regions open and close during GDP/GTP exchange. P29S and A159V (paralogous to K-Ras(A146)) mutations are the two most common somatic mutations of Rac1. Rac1(P29S) is a known hotspot for melanoma, whereas Rac1(A159V) most commonly occurs in head and neck cancer. To investigate how these substitutions induce the Rac1 dynamics, we used atomistic molecular dynamics simulations on the wild-type Rac1 and two mutant systems (P29S and A159V) in the GTP bound state, and on the wild-type Rac1 and P29S mutated system in the GDP bound state. Here, we show that P29S and A159V mutations activate Rac1 with different mechanisms. In Rac1(P29S)-GTP, the substitution increases the flexibility of Switch I based on RMSF and dihedral angle calculations and leads to an open conformation. We propose that the open Switch I conformation is one of the underlying reasons for rapid GDP/GTP exchange of Rac1(P29S). On the other hand, in Rac1(A159V)-GTP, some of the contacts of the guanosine ring of GTP with Rac1 are temporarily lost, enabling the guanosine ring to move toward Switch I and subsequently close the switch. Rac1(A159V)-GTP adopts a Ras state 2 like conformation, where both switch regions are in closed conformation and Thr35 forms a hydrogen bond with the nucleotide.
In this issue, Le et al. (2021. J. Cell Biol.https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.202012114) describe a new role for the recently discovered protein CYRI in controlling the protrusions that allow cells to engulf extracellular fluid by macropinocytosis. This study helps explain how these structures are disassembled, but also uncovers a new mechanism linking the ability of cells to drink and their capacity for invasive migration.
The ability of lipid-anchored small GTPases to form nanometer-scale lipid domains on the cell plasma membrane (PM) is precipitating exciting new insights into membrane-anchored protein regulation. A recent article by Remorino et al. demonstrates that Rac1, similar to Ras, forms nanoclusters on the PM. The implications of these findings are discussed herein.
