Retinoic acid receptor alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9- cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence of ligand, the RXR-RAR heterodimers associate with a multiprotein complex containing transcription corepressors that induce histone deacetylation, chromatin condensation and transcr [...] 
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a unique disease entity in acute myeloid leukemia, characterized by PML-RARA fusion gene, which is generated by chromosomal translocation t(15;17)(q24;q21). We identified TNRC18-RARA as novel RARA fusion in resembling APL. Our study highlights the importance of combining multiple molecular techniques to characterize and optimally manage APL lacking classic t(15;17)(q24;q12)/PML-RARA fusion.
PML nuclear bodies (NB) are disrupted in PML-RARA-driven acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Arsenic trioxide (ATO) cures 70% of patients with APL, driving PML-RARA degradation and NB reformation. In non-APL cells, arsenic binding onto PML also amplifies NB formation. Yet, the actual molecular mechanism(s) involved remain(s) elusive. Here, we establish that PML NBs display some features of liquid-liquid phase separation and that ATO induces a gel-like transition. PML B-box-2 structure reveals an alpha helix driving B2 trimerization and positioning a cysteine trio to form an ideal arsenic-binding pocket. Altering either of the latter impedes ATO-driven NB assembly, PML sumoylation, and PML-RARA degradation, mechanistically explaining clinical ATO resistance. This B2 trimer and the C213 trio create an oxidation-sensitive rheostat that controls PML NB assembly dynamics and downstream signaling in both basal state and during stress response. These findings identify the structural basis for arsenic targeting of PML that could pave the way to novel cancer drugs. SIGNIFICANCE: Arsenic curative effects in APL rely on PML targeting. We report a PML B-box-2 structure that drives trimer assembly, positioning a cysteine trio to form an arsenic-binding pocket, which is disrupted in resistant patients. Identification of this ROS-sensitive triad controlling PML dynamics and functions could yield novel drugs. See related commentary by Salomoni, p. 2505. This article is featured in Selected Articles from This Issue, p. 2489.
Deletion of the entire gene encoding the RarA protein of Escherichia coli results in a growth defect and additional deficiencies that were initially ascribed to a lack of RarA function. Further work revealed that most of the effects reflected the presence of sequences in the rarA gene that affect expression of the downstream gene, serS. The serS gene encodes the seryl aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. Decreases in the expression of serS can trigger the stringent response. The sequences that affect serS expression are located in the last 15 nucleotides of the rarA gene.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a specific subtype of acute myeloid leukemia that is distinguished by the chromosomal translocation t(15;17)(q24;q21), which leads to the fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene with the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). Recently, we identified a novel fusion gene in APL, RARA::ankyrin repeat domain 34C (ANKRD34C), identified its functions by morphological, cytogenetic, molecular biological and multiplex fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses, and demonstrated the potential therapeutic effect clinically and experimentally of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA); the findings have important implications for the diagnosis and treatment of atypical APL.
Although a normal karyotype according to conventional cytogenetic analysis in association with cryptic t(15;17) has been infrequently reported in cases of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)-negative cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement is even more rare, with only 12 such APL cases of FISH-negative cryptic PML-RARA rearrangements in the literature. Reported here is an additional clinical APL case with a FISH-negative cryptic PML-RARA rearrangement, confirmed by long-distance DNA polymerase chain reaction method. Discussion includes a relevant literature review of similar cases. DNA-PCR can be a useful tool for the analysis of complex and cryptic rearrangements.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with tetraploidy chromosome harboring t(15;17)(q23;a21) is extremely rare. To date, there are 14 such cases reports that describe this entity, mostly found in Eastern hemisphere. Herein we described a 51-year-old man with a diagnosis of tetraploid acute promyelocytic leukemia with double (15;17) translocations and compare the prototypically clinicopathologic, genetic and molecular findings with those reported in the literature.
Fibroepithelial tumours are biphasic neoplasms of the breast comprising the common benign fibroadenomas and the less common phyllodes tumours (PTs), which have recurrent potential. PTs are classified into benign, borderline or malignant, based on five histopathological criteria, with malignant PTs having the highest metastatic capability. Accurate diagnosis can be challenging due to the subjective assessment of histopathological parameters. Fibroadenomas bear morphological similarities to benign PTs, while borderline and malignant PTs can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from other spindle cell tumours of the breast. From clonality studies to whole-genome sequencing, much research has been conducted to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of fibroepithelial tumours, which, in turn, have allowed leveraging the findings for diagnostic applications, including grading of PTs. The most noteworthy discovery was of recurrent MED12 mutations in both fibroadenomas and PTs. Subsequent studies also uncovered relatively frequent genetic mutations in TERT promoter and RARA A customised panel of 16 most frequently mutated genes in fibroepithelial tissues has been compiled previously and has contributed to resolving a few diagnostic dilemmas. This review will introduce the 16 genes and focus on the top three that are most frequently mutated in fibroepithelial tumours: MED12, TERT, and RARA.
A primary melanoma of the uterine cervix is presented. Diagnostic approaches and therapeutic procedures are discussed following a review of the literature.
Atypical acute promyelocytic leukemia (aAPL) presents a complex landscape of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) fusion genes beyond the well-known PML::RARA fusion. Among these, 31 individually rare RARA and RARG fusion genes have been documented, often reported in the canonical X::RAR bipartite fusion form. Intriguingly, some artificially mimicked bipartite X::RAR fusions respond well to all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) in vitro, contrasting with the ATRA resistance observed in patients. To unravel the underlying mechanisms, we conducted a comprehensive molecular investigation into the fusion transcripts in 27 RARA fusion gene-positive aAPL (RARA-aAPL) and 21 RARG-aAPL cases. Our analysis revealed an unexpected novel form of X::RAR::X- or X::RAR::Y-type tripartite fusions in certain RARA-aAPL and all RARG-aAPL cases, with shared features and notable differences between these 2 disease subgroups. In RARA-aAPL cases, the occurrence of RARA 3' splices was associated with their 5' fusion partner genes, mapping across the coding region of helix 11_12 (H11_12) within the ligand-binding domain (LBD), resulting in LBD-H12 or H11_12 truncation. In RARG-aAPL cases, RARG 3' splices were consistently localized to the terminus of exon 9, leading to LBD-H11_12 truncation. Significant differences were also observed between RARA and RARG 5' splice patterns. Our analysis also revealed extensive involvement of transposable elements in constructing RARA and RARG 3' fusions, suggesting transposition mechanisms for fusion gene ontogeny. Both protein structural analysis and experimental results highlighted the pivotal role of LBD-H11_12/H12 truncation in driving ATRA unresponsiveness and leukemogenesis in tripartite fusion-positive aAPL, through a protein allosteric dysfunction mechanism.
An acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patient not demonstrating the retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) translocation is rare. A 76-year-old man was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). After a year, abnormal promyelocytes were detected with pancytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Morphologically, the patient was diagnosed with APL; however, a genetic examination failed to detect RARA translocation. Thereafter, whole-genome sequencing revealed an NRAS missense mutation [c.38G>A (p.G13D)]. This mutation was not detected in posttreatment bone marrow aspirate, despite residual MDS. Few reports are available on similar cases. Furthermore, the NRAS c.38G>A mutation may be a novel pathogenic variant exacerbating RARA translocation-negative acute promyelocytic-like leukemia.
In this issue, Maimaitiyiming and colleagues demonstrate thermic stress-induced PML/RARA oncogenic fusion protein destabilization driven by corepressor aggregation. Hyperthermia synergizes with PML/RARA degradation by ATO and may circumvent ATO-resistance in historical APL patients. This novel approach could be extended to other corepressor-associated oncogenic fusion proteins.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APML) with variant RARa translocations comprises 1-2% of APML cases. However, the diagnosis of these cases is challenging as the routine practice includes fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction targeting the PML and RARA genes to detect PML/RARA fusions. Here, we report a case highlighting the importance of atypical FISH signal patterns in standard dual-color dual-fusion PML/RARa FISH analysis complimented by karyotyping to detect these variant RARA translocations.
