Retinoic acid receptor beta; Receptor for retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors bind as heterodimers to their target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9-cis retinoic acid, and regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RXR/RAR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5. In the absence or presence of hormone ligand, acts mainly as an activator of gene expression due to weak binding to corepressors. The RXRA/RARB heterodimer can act as a repressor on the DR1 element  [...] 
DNA methylation and polycomb proteins are well-known mediators of epigenetic silencing in mammalian cells. Usually described as mutually exclusive, this statement is today controversial and recent in vitro studies suggest the co-existence of both repressor systems. We addressed this issue in the study of Retinoic Acid Receptor beta (RARbeta), a tumor suppressor gene frequently silenced in prostate cancer. We found that the RARbeta promoter is hypermethylated in all studied prostate tumors and methylation levels are positively correlated with H3K27me3 enrichments. Thus, by using bisulfite conversion and pyrosequencing of immunoprecipitated H3K27me3 chromatin, we demonstrated that DNA methylation and polycomb repression co-exist in vivo at this locus. We found this repressive association in 6/6 patient tumor samples of different Gleason score, suggesting a strong interplay of DNA methylation and EZH2 to silence RARbeta during prostate tumorigenesis.
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are able to survive after cancer therapies, leading to cancer progression and recurrence in colorectal carcinoma (CRC). Therapies targeting CSCs are believed to be promising strategies for efficiently eradicating cancers. This study was to investigate that how retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB) affected the biological characteristics of CSCs and radio-resistance in CRC and the epigenetic mechanism. The sensitivity of CSCs isolated from HCT116 cells to radiotherapy was reduced compared with the parental cells. Using database querying, we found that RARB was one of the most significantly downregulated gene in radio-resistant cells in CRC. Also, RARB was poorly expressed in our isolated CSCs, and overexpression of RARB inhibited the properties of CSCs and enhanced radiotherapy sensitivity. Mechanistically, the methylation of RARB was higher in CSCs compared with HCT116 cells, which was significantly reduced after the application of DNA methylation inhibitor 5-azacytidine (5-azaC). DNA methyltransferases (DNMT1) was found to be recruited into the RARB promoter. 5-AzaC treatment inhibited DNMT1 activity and improved radiotherapy sensitivity by promoting RARB expression. Our results imply that inhibition of DNMT1 can display a new mechanism for the epigenetic mediation of RARB in radio-resistant CRC.
Microsatellite instability (MSI) has been widely acknowledged as an important factor regulating tumor intrinsic biological behavior and affecting the survival of gastric cancer patients. Here, we firstly identified the RARB as a gene associated with MSI gastric cancer. RARB was downregulated in human gastric cancer tissues compared to paired paracancerous tissues, Knockdown of RARB accelerated the proliferation, invasion and migration of cancer cells in vitro. Mechanismly, RARB knockdown promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process of gastric cancer. However, RARB(Low) patients exhibited better survival compared to RARB(High) patients. Further study revealed that RARB expression was inversely correlated with MSI status and immune infiltrates in vivo. Thus, RARB may be a potential target for the treatment of gastric cancer.
Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is one of the most common AIDS-related malignant neoplasms, which can leave lesions on the skin among HIV patients. These lesions can be treated with 9-cis-retinoic acid (9-cis-RA), an endogenous ligand of retinoic acid receptors that has been FDA-approved for treatment of KS. However, topical application of 9-cis-RA can induce several unpleasant side effects, like headache, hyperlipidemia, and nausea. Hence, alternative therapeutics with less side effects are desirable. There are case reports associating over-the-counter antihistamine usage with regression of KS. Antihistamines competitively bind to H1 receptor and block the action of histamine, best known for being released in response to allergens. Furthermore, there are already dozens of antihistamines that are FDA-approved with less side effects than 9-cis-RA. This led our team to conduct a series of in-silico assays to determine whether antihistamines can activate retinoic acid receptors. First, we utilized high-throughput virtual screening and molecular dynamics simulations to model high-affinity interactions between antihistamines and retinoic acid receptor beta (RARbeta). We then performed systems genetics analysis to identify a genetic association between H1 receptor itself and molecular pathways involved in KS. Together, these findings advocate for exploration of antihistamines against KS, starting with our two promising hit compounds, bepotastine and hydroxyzine, for experimental validation study in the future.
BACKGROUND: Promoter hypermethylation is one of the enabling mechanisms of hallmarks of cancer. Tumor suppressor genes like RARB and GSTP1 have been reported as hypermethylated in breast cancer tumors compared with normal tissues in several populations. This case-control study aimed to determine the association between the promoter methylation ratio (PMR) of RARB and GSTP1 genes (separately and as a group) with breast cancer and its clinical-pathological variables in Peruvian patients, using a liquid biopsy approach. METHODS: A total of 58 breast cancer patients and 58 healthy controls, matched by age, participated in the study. We exacted cell-free DNA (cfDNA) from blood plasma and converted it by bisulfite salts. Methylight PCR was performed to obtain the PMR value of the studied genes. We determined the association between PMR and breast cancer, in addition to other clinicopathological variables. The sensitivity and specificity of the PMR of these genes were obtained. RESULTS: A significant association was not found between breast cancer and the RARB PMR (OR = 1.90; 95% CI [0.62-6.18]; p = 0.210) or the GSTP1 PMR (OR = 6.57; 95% CI [0.75-307.66]; p = 0.114). The combination of the RARB + GSTP1 PMR was associated with breast cancer (OR = 2.81; 95% CI [1.02-8.22]; p = 0.026), controls under 50 years old (p = 0.048), patients older than 50 (p = 0.007), and postmenopausal (p = 0.034). The PMR of both genes showed a specificity of 86.21% and a sensitivity of 31.03%. CONCLUSION: Promoter hypermethylation of RARB + GSTP1 genes is associated with breast cancer, older age, and postmenopausal Peruvian patients. The methylated promoter of the RARB + GSTP1 genes needs further validation to be used as a biomarker for liquid biopsy and as a recommendation criterion for additional tests in asymptomatic women younger than 50 years.
Gene promoter methylation may be used a potential biomarker for detecting solid tumor including cervical cancer. Here, we used methylation sensitive-high resolution melting (MS-HRM) analysis to detecting promoter methylation ratios of DAPK1, MGMT and RARB gene in patients with different cervical disease grade. The detection of gene promoter methylation was conducted in two hundred fifty patients' samples including normal cytology (n=48), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 1 (CIN1, n=54), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 2 (CIN2, n=47), cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 (CIN3, n=56) and cervical squamous cell carcinomas (SCS, n=45). We found there were a significant positive correlation between the promoter methylation status of DAPK1 and cervical disease grade (P=0.022). In addition, the methylated promoters of DAPK1 combined with MGMT, MGMT combined with RARB, DAPK1 combined with RARB were positive correlated with cervical disease grade (P < 0.05). All three genes promoters methylated were positive correlated with cervical disease grade (P < 0.001). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves was conducted to evaluate whether the three genes methylation could be used to be a potential marker for diagnosing high grade cervical disease (HSIL and SCC). The cutoff values for the methylation rates of all these genes were 0-5%. Regrettably, only the methylation of MGMT combined with DAPK1 gave 43.4% sensitivity and 68.6% specificity. The current results indicated that MS-HRM-based testing for DNA methylations of MGMT plus DAPK1 genes holds some promise for high grade cervical disease screening.
Retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB) is a transcriptional regulator crucial for coordinating retinoic acid- (RA-) mediated morphogenic movements, cell growth, and differentiation during eye development. Loss- or gain-of-function RARB coding variants have been associated with microphthalmia, coloboma, and anterior segment defects. We identified a de novo variant c.157+1895G>A located within a conserved region (CR1) in the first intron of RARB in an individual with complex microphthalmia and significant global developmental delay. Based on the phenotypic overlap, we further investigated the possible effects of the variant on mRNA splicing and/or transcriptional regulation through in silico and functional studies. In silico analysis identified the possibility of alternative splicing, suggested by one out of three (HSF, SpliceAI, and MaxEntScan) splicing prediction programs, and a strong indication of regulatory function based on publicly available DNase hypersensitivity, histone modification, chromatin folding, and ChIP-seq data sets. Consistent with the predictions of SpliceAI and MaxEntScan, in vitro minigene assays showed no effect on RARB mRNA splicing. Evaluation of CR1 for a regulatory role using luciferase reporter assays in human lens epithelial cells demonstrated a significant increase in the activity of the RARB promoter in the presence of wild-type CR1. This activity was further significantly increased in the presence of CR1 carrying the c.157+1895G>A variant, suggesting that the variant may promote RARB overexpression in human cells. Induction of RARB overexpression in human lens epithelial cells resulted in increased cell proliferation and elevated expression of FOXC1, a known downstream target of RA signaling and a transcription factor whose down- and upregulation is associated with ocular phenotypes overlapping the RARB spectrum. These results support a regulatory role for the CR1 element and suggest that the de novo c.157+1895G>A variant affecting this region may alter the proper regulation of RARB and, as a result, its downstream genes, possibly leading to abnormal development.
Dietary methyl group donors could influence the hypermethylation status of certain putative genes. The present study explored the possible associations of dietary intake of one-carbon metabolism-related nutrients with promoter hypermethylation status and expression of retinoic acid receptor-beta (RARB), breast cancer-1 (BRCA1), and Ras association domain family-1, isoform A (RASSF1A) genes in Iranian women with breast cancer (BC). The hypermethylation status was investigated in 146 dissected BC tissue samples using methylation-specific PCR. The expression level was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR. Dietary nutrients were estimated using a validated 136-item food frequency questionnaire. Expression levels of the genes were associated with the unmethylated status of related promoters (p < 0.05). The crude dietary folate and adjusted cobalamin intakes were inversely associated with methylated RARB and BRCA1. Low intake of residual folate and cobalamin was correlated with the methylated status of RARB for subjects at <48 years of age, and folate alone was linked to BRCA1 at >48 years of age. High dietary intake of riboflavin and pyridoxine was the only determinant of the methylated promoter of RARB at odds ratios (ORs) of 4.15 (95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.28-13.50) and 2.53 (95 % CI 1.14-3.83) in multivariate models, respectively. One-carbon nutrients most often correlated inversely with the methylation-influenced expression of RARB. Although high folate intake increased the chance of unmethylation-dependent overexpression of BRCA1 3-fold, cobalamin and methionine were inversely linked to methylation-mediated expression. Nutritional epigenomics less actively influenced RASSF1A. These findings provide new insights into and a basic understanding of the selective contributions of individual B vitamins on hypermethylation and methylation-related expression of RARB and BRCA1 in BC. KEY MESSAGE: Hypermethylation at promoters of RARB, BRCA1, and RASSF1A is associated with reduced transcript levels of the respective gene in primary breast cancer tissue samples. Dietary folate and cobalamin intake is inversely associated with methylated RARB and BRCA1. High dietary intake of riboflavin and pyridoxine is associated with increased methylation in the RARB promoter. There is evidence for the age-dependent effects of nutrient intake on promoter methylation status. Bioavailability to the pool of nutrients might determine selectivity.
The promyelocytic leukemia-retinoic acid receptor-alpha (PML::RARA) fusion is the hallmark of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and is observed in over 95% of APL cases. RARA and homologous receptors RARB and RARG are occasionally fused to other gene partners, which differentially affect sensitivity to targeted therapies. Most APLs without RARA fusions have rearrangements involving RARG or RARB, both of which frequently show resistance to all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and/or multiagent chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We present a 13-year-old male diagnosed with variant APL with a novel FNDC3B::RARB in-frame fusion that showed no response to ATRA but responded well to conventional AML therapy. While FNDC3B has been identified as a rare RARA translocation partner in ATRA-sensitive variant APL, it has never been reported as a fusion partner with RARB and it is only the second known fusion partner with RARB in variant APL. We also show that this novel fusion confers an RNA expression signature that is similar to APL, despite clinical resistance to ATRA monotherapy.
Retinoic acid (RA) signaling plays a key role in the development and function of several systems in mammals. We previously discovered that the de novo mutations c.1159C>T (p.Arg387Cys) and c.1159C>A (p.Arg387Ser) in the RA Receptor Beta (RARB) gene cause microphthalmia and diaphragmatic hernia. However, the natural history of affected subjects beyond the prenatal or neonatal period was unknown. Here, we describe nine additional subjects with microphthalmia who have de novo mutations in RARB, including the previously described p.Arg387Cys as well as the novel c.887G>C (p.Gly296Ala) and c.638T>C (p.Leu213Pro). Moreover, we review the information on four previously reported cases. All subjects who survived the neonatal period (n = 10) displayed severe global developmental delay with progressive motor impairment due to spasticity and/or dystonia (with or without chorea). The majority of subjects also showed Chiari type I malformation and severe feeding difficulties. We previously found that p.Arg387Cys and p.Arg387Ser induce a gain-of-function. We show here that the p.Gly296Ala and p.Leu213Pro RARB mutations further promote the RA ligand-induced transcriptional activity by twofold to threefold over the wild-type receptor, also indicating a gain-of-function mechanism. These observations suggest that precise regulation of RA signaling is required for brain development and/or function in humans.
Polymorphisms in the prion protein gene (PRNP) can affect the susceptibility of humans to prion diseases. Recently, aside from PRNP, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of two candidate genes for susceptibility to human prion diseases have been identified by human genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in the British population. One SNP of retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB), which is correlated with prion disease incubation time in mice, was associated with human prion diseases such as variant and iatrogenic CJD in the British population. The other SNP of the gene that encodes SCG10 (STMN2), which is related to clinical onset of sporadic CJD, was also associated with variant CJD and kuru. In order to investigate whether two polymorphisms located in upstream of RARB and STMN2 are associated with sporadic CJD in the Korean population, we compared genotype and allele frequencies of these polymorphisms in 217 sporadic CJD patients and 216 healthy Koreans. The genotype distribution and allele frequencies in upstream of the RARB and STMN2 polymorphisms were not significantly different between healthy controls and Korean sporadic CJD patients. This finding indicates that the two SNPs are not correlated with genetic susceptibility to sporadic CJD in the Korean population. This is the first genetic association study of RARB and STMN2 with sporadic CJD in an Asian population.
We report a higher frequency of loss of heterozygosity at loci on the short arm of chromosome 3 in human epidermoid lung tumors than in other non-small cell lung tumors. This observation together with the already known involvement of the retinoids in the development of epidermoid metaplasia and neoplasia, especially in lung tissue, prompted us to investigate by RNAase protection assays the status of expression of a gene that maps on chromosome band 3p24 and codes for the B receptor for retinoic acid (RARB). We show that expression of RARB is detectable in normal lung tissue and in most of the cell lines derived from lung tumors, including the five non-small cell lines that clearly had a non-epidermoid phenotype. Strikingly, however, only one of the five epidermoid-tumor-derived cell lines studied showed detectable expression of RARB. Of two lines derived from adenosquamous tumors, one had a clear epidermoid differentiation, and this line also did not express RARB. Taken together, our results strongly implicate RARB in the evolution of epidermoid lung tumors.
Genetic and epigenetic alterations in choroid plexus tumors, a rare neuroepithelial neoplasm most frequently detected in children, are poorly characterized. Epigenetic silencing associated with aberrant CpG island methylation is one mechanism leading to the loss of tumor suppressor functions in cancer cells. Using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction, the methylation patterns of the genes CDH1 (E-cadherin), RARB (retinoic acid receptor, beta), and SFN (stratifin; 14-3-3sigma) were retrospectively investigated in eight choroid plexus tumors (five papillomas, two atypical papillomas, and one carcinoma), as well as in two normal cortexes obtained after autopsy from male individuals aged 6 months and 64 years. Among the six pediatric tumors, the mean age at diagnosis was 1.8 years old (range, 0.2-6) and the two adult tumors were detected in a 66-year-old man and a 45-year-old woman. A high frequency of hypermethylation was detected in CDH1 and SFN genes in tumoral and normal cortex tissues. Tumor-specific RARB hypermethylation was observed in four papillomas. Further studies are required to evaluate the role of aberrant methylation in choroid plexus tumor progression.
Among T helper (Th) lineages differentiated from naive CD4(+) T cells, interleukin (IL)-17-producing Th17 cells are highly correlated with the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders. This study aimed to clarify the involvement of miR-141-3p and miR-200a-3p in Th17 cell differentiation as well as explore their potential target genes involved. For this purpose, human naive CD4(+) T cells were cultured under Th17 cell polarizing condition. The differentiation process was confirmed through measurement of IL-17 secretion using the ELISA method and assessment of Th17 cell-defining genes expression during the differentiation period. MiR-141-3p and miR-200a-3p downstream genes were identified via consensus and integration in silico approach and their expression pattern and alterations were evaluated by quantitative real-time PCR. Finally, direct interaction between both microRNAs (miRNAs) and their common predicted target sequences was approved by dual-luciferase reporter assay. Highly increased IL-17 secretion and Th17 lineage-specific genes expression confirmed Th17 cell differentiation. Our results have demonstrated that miR-141-3p and miR-200a-3p are Th17 cell-associated miRNAs and their expression level is upregulated significantly during Th17 cell induction. We have also found that retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB) gene, whose product has been reported as a negative regulator of Th17 cell generation, is a direct target of both miRNAs and its downregulation can affect the transcriptional level of JAK/STAT pathway genes. Overall, our results have identified two novel Th17 lineage-associated miRNAs and have provided evidence for the RARB-dependent mechanism of miR-141-3p and miR-200a-3p-induced Th17 cell differentiation and hence Th17-mediated autoimmunity.
BACKGROUND: Serum miRNAs profiles between papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) patients with non-(131)I and (131)I-avid lung metastases are differentially expressed. These miRNAs have to be further validated and the role of these miRNAs in the molecular function level of thyroid cancer cell lines has not been investigated. METHODS: Expression levels of six identified miRNAs were assessed via quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) in the serum of eligible patients. Dual-luciferase reporter assay was used to determine the potential target of miR-106a. Cell viability and apoptosis were evaluated by MTT assay and flow cytometry analysis, respectively. The change of gene expression was detected by qRT-PCR and western blotting analysis. In vitro iodine uptake assay was conducted by a gamma-counter. RESULTS: Compared to PTC patients with (131)I-avid lung metastases, miR-106a was up-regulated in the serum of patients with non-(131)I-avid lung metastases. The results of dual-luciferase reporter assay demonstrated that miR-106a directly targeted retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB) 3'-UTR. miR-106a-RARB promoted viability of thyroid cancer cells by regulating MEKK2-ERK1/2 and MEKK2-ERK5 pathway. miR-106a-RARB inhibited apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells by regulating ASK1-p38 pathway. Moreover, miR-106a-RARB could regulate the expression of sodium iodide symporter, TSH receptor and alter the iodine uptake function of thyroid cancer cells. CONCLUSIONS: miRNA-106a, directly targeting RARB, associates with the viability, apoptosis, differentiation and the iodine uptake function of thyroid cancer cell lines by regulating MAPK signaling pathway in vitro. These findings in the present study may provide new strategies for the diagnosis and treatment in radioiodine-refractory differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
The THRA gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor alpha shares an unusual partial overlap with the NR1D1 gene encoding the orphan receptor Rev-ErbAalpha. Though THRA and NR1D1 have close relatives in THRB and NR1D2, which encode TRbeta and Rev-ErbAbeta, these beta isoforms do not share an analogous overlap. Here we report that the human THRB and NR1D2 genes are separated by approximately 1 Mb on chromosome 3 and that these two genes are also linked to the RARB gene, which encodes retinoic acid receptor beta. Since previous results indicate that the THRA/NR1D1 locus is also linked to the RARA gene, these results suggest that the two receptor gene clusters were generated by a single large-scale duplication.
BACKGROUND: Definition of the individual genotypes that cause a Mendelian phenotype is of great importance both to clinical diagnostics and disease characterization. Heterozygous de novo gain-of-function missense variants in RARB are associated with syndromic microphthalmia 12 (MCOPS12), a developmental disorder characterized by eye malformations and variable involvement of other organs. A subset of patients were described with poorly delineated movement disorders. Additionally, RARB bi-allelic loss-of-function variants, inherited from asymptomatic heterozygous carrier parents, have been found in a recessive family with four MCOPS12-affected members. PATIENT/METHODS: We used trio whole-exome sequencing to explore the molecular basis of disease in an individual with congenital eye abnormality and movement disorder. All patients with reported RARB variants were reviewed. RESULTS: We report on identification of a heterozygous de novo RARB nonsense variant in a girl with microphthalmia and progressive generalized dystonia. Public database entries indicate that the de novo variant is recurrently present in clinically affected subjects but a literature report has not yet been available. CONCLUSIONS: We provide the first detailed evidence for a role of dominant RARB truncating alterations in congenital eye-brain disease, expanding the spectrum of MCOPS12-associated mutations. Considered together with the published family with bi-allelic variants, the data suggest manifestation and non-manifestation of disease in relation to almost identical RARB loss-of-function variations, an apparent paradox that is seen in a growing number of human genetic conditions associated with both recessive and dominant inheritance patterns.
An association between functional polymorphisms of genes resulting in decreased detoxification of carcinogens or DNA repair and aberrant promoter methylation is an attractive hypothesis in lung carcinogenesis. The genotypes at polymorphic sites of the glutathione S-transferase (GST) M1 (null/wildtype) and P1 (nucleotide 2627 A/G), myeloperoxidase (MPO) (nucleotide -463 G/A), X-ray repair cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1) (nucleotides 26304 C/T; 28152 G/A), and NADPH quinine oxidoreductase (NQO1) (nucleotide 609 C/T) genes in 75 Chinese patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) were characterized with polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. Results were correlated with aberrant methylation of the CDKN2A (alias p16(INK4A)), retinoic acid receptor beta (RARB), methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), and death-associated-protein (DAP) kinase genes in the tumors. In comparison with an age-matched control, none of the polymorphisms were associated with increased lung cancer risks. In male patients, however, the MPO -463 GG homozygous state was associated with CDKN2A (alias p16(INK4A)) methylation (odds ratio OR=3.63, 95% confidence interval CI=1.26-10.51), and the XRCC1 26304 T allele in the heterozygous/homozygous state was associated with methylation of CDKN2A (OR=6.13, 95% CI=1.55-24.16) and RARB (OR=7.67, 95% CI=1.62-36.18). In female patients, the GSTP1 G allele in the heterozygous/homozygous state was associated with RARB methylation (OR=18.0, 95% CI=0.76-427.29). These results showed that functional deficiencies in metabolic pathways that protect cells from carcinogen induced DNA damage might be linked to aberrant promoter methylation of the CDKN2A and RARB genes during lung carcinogenesis.
