Renin; Renin is a highly specific endopeptidase, whose only known function is to generate angiotensin I from angiotensinogen in the plasma, initiating a cascade of reactions that produce an elevation of blood pressure and increased sodium retention by the kidney.
This article is intended to be a review of current studies on the effectiveness of antibiotics in limiting postoperative complications after third molar exractions; in search of conclusions above and beyond Ren and Malmstroms' excellent meta-analysis.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The primary goal of this review article was to determine whether the three RAAS-associated SNPs, Renin-rs16853055, AGT-rs3789678 and ACE-rs4305 are genetically linked to the development of hypertension in preeclampsia. The secondary goal was to establish if there was a link between these SNPs and HIV infection. RECENT FINDINGS: There is a paucity of findings related to the aforementioned SNPs and preeclampsia. There are no recent findings on the rs16853055 renin polymorphism. The rs3789678 angiotensinogen polymorphism correlated significantly with gestational hypertension. The rs4305 ACE polymorphism showed no significant association with the development of pregnancy-induced hypertension. There are conflicting findings when determining the relationship between ethnicity and the predisposition of preeclampsia and hypertension in relation to the discussed RAAS-associated SNPs. To date, the association between RAAS-associated SNPs and preeclamptic women co-morbid with HIV in South Africa has revealed that certain alleles of the AGT gene are more prominent in HIV-infected PE compared to normotensive pregnant HIV-infected women.
Lactobacillus salivarius Ren (LsR) (CGMCC No. 3606) is a probiotic strain that was isolated from the feces of a healthy centenarian living in Bama, Guangxi, China. Previous studies have shown that this strain decreases 4-nitroquinoline 1-oxide (4-NQO)-induced genotoxicity in vitro. It also suppresses 4-NQO-induced oral carcinogenesis and 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH)-induced colorectal carcinogenesis, and therefore may be used as an adjuvant therapeutic agent for cancer. Here, we report the complete genome sequence of LsR that consists of a circular chromosome of 1751,565 bp and two plasmids (pR1, 176,951 bp; pR2, 49,848 bp).

There is a significant unmet need for novel, effective, and well-tolerated acute migraine treatments. Remote electrical neuromodulation (REN) is a non-pharmacological, non-invasive, acute migraine treatment that stimulates upper arm peripheral nerves to induce conditioned pain modulation - an endogenous analgesic mechanism in which a conditioning stimulation inhibits pain in remote body regions. This review presents the method of action and the clinical data of REN and discusses its potential patient benefits. The clinically meaningful efficacy, together with a very favorable safety profile, suggests that REN may offer a promising alternative for the acute treatment of migraine and could be considered first-line treatment in some patients.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the effectiveness and safety of Zao Ren An Shen (ZRAS), a Chinese herbal medicine formula, for the treatment of insomnia. METHODS: Seven databases (ie, EMBASE, PubMed, the Cochrane library, and PsycINFO, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure, Wanfang and Chongqing VIP) were searched from their inception to 6 November 2018. Controlled trials comparing the effectiveness or safety of ZRAS to conventional treatments, a placebo or no-treatment in an insomnia population were selected. Primary outcomes were: sleep quality (assessed with the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, PSQI), and the number of adverse events at post-treatment. The risk of bias was assessed with the Cochrane Collaboration's tool and meta-analyses were performed using RevMan 5.3. RESULTS: A total of 19 studies (1780 participants) were included. The effect of ZRAS on sleep quality (mean difference) was found to be superior compared to placebo in the sole placebo-controlled study located [-0.90 (-1.56, -0.24; 95% CI), p = 0.007] and similar to Benzodiazepine Receptor Agonists (BzRAs) [0.17 (-0.29, 0.64); 95% CI, p = 0.46]. The number of adverse events (relative risk) was lower for ZRAS than BzRAs [0.16 (0.12, 0.23; 95% CI), p < 0.001]. An overall high risk of bias was found in the selected studies. CONCLUSIONS: The results favor ZRAS against BzRAs and placebo for the treatment of insomnia. However, the poor methodology of the studies prevents strong recommendations for ZRAS. Clinical trials with higher quality designs are required.
We found a polyphenoloxidase (PPO) in the cell extract of Streptomyces lavendulae REN-7. About 0.8 mg of purified PPO was obtained from 200 g of the mycelia with a yield of 9.0%. REN-7-PPO showed broad substrate specificity toward various aromatic compounds. Moreover, this enzyme was capable of oxidation of syringaldazine, which is a specific substrate for laccase. Interestingly, REN-7-PPO retained its original activity after 20 min of incubation at even 70 degrees C. The gene encoding the PPO was cloned. Four copper-binding sites characteristics of laccases were contained in the deduced amino acid sequence. We constructed a high-level expression system of this gene in Escherichia coli. The properties of the recombinant enzyme were identical that of wild-type. In conclusion, this PPO is a thermostable laccase.
Ren-shen-yang-rong-tang (Japanese name: Ninjin-yoei-to, NYT) is a traditional Chinese herbal medicine. Leukocytosis and elevated levels of colony-stimulating factor (CSF) in peripheral blood were found previously after the administration of this compound to mice. In this study, human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were cultured in the presence of NYT in vitro, and the levels of granulocyte-macrophage CSF (GM-CSF) and granulocyte CSF (G-CSF) in the supernatant of cultured PBMC were measured using a sensitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. NYT significantly (P less than 0.01) augmented GM-CSF production but not G-CSF production by PBMC in vitro.
In this paper, we propose an emotion separated method(SeTF.IDF) to assign the emotion labels of sentences with different values, which has a better visual effect compared with the values represented by TF.IDF in the visualization of a multi-label Chinese emotional corpus Ren_CECps. Inspired by the enormous improvement of the visualization map propelled by the changed distances among the sentences, we being the first group utilizes the Word Mover's Distance(WMD) algorithm as a way of feature representation in Chinese text emotion classification. Our experiments show that both in 80% for training, 20% for testing and 50% for training, 50% for testing experiments of Ren_CECps, WMD features get the best f1 scores and have a greater increase compared with the same dimension feature vectors obtained by dimension reduction TF.IDF method. Compared experiments in English corpus also show the efficiency of WMD features in the cross-language field.
