Extracellular cell-membrane anchored RET cadherin 120 kDa fragment; Receptor tyrosine-protein kinase involved in numerous cellular mechanisms including cell proliferation, neuronal navigation, cell migration, and cell differentiation upon binding with glial cell derived neurotrophic factor family ligands. Phosphorylates PTK2/FAK1. Regulates both cell death/survival balance and positional information. Required for the molecular mechanisms orchestration during intestine organogenesis; involved in the development of enteric nervous system and renal organogenesis during embryonic life, and [...] 
The RET proto-oncogene has been well-studied. RET is involved in many different physiological and developmental functions. When altered, RET mutations influence disease in a variety of organ systems from Hirschsprung's disease and multiple endocrine neoplasia 2 (MEN2) to papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Changes in RET expression have been discovered in 30-70% of invasive breast cancers and 50-60% of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas in addition to colorectal adenocarcinoma, melanoma, small cell lung cancer, neuroblastoma, and small intestine neuroendocrine tumors. RET mutations have been associated with tumor proliferation, invasion, and migration. RET fusions or rearrangements are somatic juxtapositions of 5' sequences from other genes with 3' RET sequences encoding tyrosine kinase. RET rearrangements occur in approximately 2.5-73% of sporadic PTC and 1-3% of NSCLC patients. The most common RET fusions are CDCC6-RET and NCOA4-RET in PTC and KIF5B-RET in NSCLC. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are drugs that target kinases such as RET in RET-driven (RET-mutation or RET-fusion-positive) disease. Multikinase inhibitors (MKI) target various kinases and other receptors. Several MKIs are FDA-approved for cancer therapy (sunitinib, sorafenib, vandetanib, cabozantinib, regorafenib, ponatinib, lenvatinib, alectinib) and non-oncologic disease (nintedanib). Selective RET inhibitor drugs LOXO-292 (selpercatinib) and BLU-667 (pralsetinib) are also undergoing phase I/II and I clinical trials, respectively, with preliminary results demonstrating partial response and low incidence of serious adverse events. RET fusions provide a viable therapeutic target for oncologic treatment, and further study is warranted into the prevalence and pathogenesis of RET fusions as well as development of current and new tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: RET mutations occur in 70% of medullary thyroid cancers, and RET fusions occur rarely in other thyroid cancers. In patients with RET-altered thyroid cancers, the efficacy and safety of selective RET inhibition are unknown. METHODS: We enrolled patients with RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer with or without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment, as well as those with previously treated RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer, in a phase 1-2 trial of selpercatinib. The primary end point was an objective response (a complete or partial response), as determined by an independent review committee. Secondary end points included the duration of response, progression-free survival, and safety. RESULTS: In the first 55 consecutively enrolled patients with RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had previously received vandetanib, cabozantinib, or both, the percentage who had a response was 69% (95% confidence interval [CI], 55 to 81), and 1-year progression-free survival was 82% (95% CI, 69 to 90). In 88 patients with RET-mutant medullary thyroid cancer who had not previously received vandetanib or cabozantinib, the percentage who had a response was 73% (95% CI, 62 to 82), and 1-year progression-free survival was 92% (95% CI, 82 to 97). In 19 patients with previously treated RET fusion-positive thyroid cancer, the percentage who had a response was 79% (95% CI, 54 to 94), and 1-year progression-free survival was 64% (95% CI, 37 to 82). The most common adverse events of grade 3 or higher were hypertension (in 21% of the patients), increased alanine aminotransferase level (in 11%), increased aspartate aminotransferase level (in 9%), hyponatremia (in 8%), and diarrhea (in 6%). Of all 531 patients treated, 12 (2%) discontinued selpercatinib owing to drug-related adverse events. CONCLUSIONS: In this phase 1-2 trial, selpercatinib showed durable efficacy with mainly low-grade toxic effects in patients with medullary thyroid cancer with and without previous vandetanib or cabozantinib treatment. (Funded by Loxo Oncology and others; LIBRETTO-001 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03157128.).
Since the discovery of the RET receptor tyrosine kinase in 1985, alterations of this protein have been found in diverse thyroid cancer subtypes. RET gene rearrangements are observed in papillary thyroid carcinoma, which result in RET fusion products. By contrast, single amino acid substitutions and small insertions and/or deletions are typical of hereditary and sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma. RET rearrangements and mutations of extracellular cysteines facilitate dimerization and kinase activation, whereas mutations in the RET kinase coding domain drive dimerization-independent kinase activation. Thus, RET kinase inhibition is an attractive therapeutic target in patients with RET alterations. This approach was initially achieved using multikinase inhibitors, which affect multiple deregulated pathways that include RET kinase. In clinical practice, use of multikinase inhibitors in patients with advanced thyroid cancer resulted in therapeutic efficacy, which was associated with frequent and sometimes severe adverse effects. However, remarkable progress has been achieved with the identification of novel potent and selective RET kinase inhibitors for the treatment of advanced thyroid cancer. Although expanded clinical validation in future trials is needed, the sustained antitumoural activity and the improved safety profile of these novel compounds is opening a new exciting era in precision oncology for RET-driven cancers.
The gene encoding the receptor-tyrosine kinase RET was first discovered more than three decades ago, and activating RET rearrangements and mutations have since been identified as actionable drivers of oncogenesis. Several multikinase inhibitors with activity against RET have been explored in the clinic, and confirmed responses to targeted therapy with these agents have been observed in patients with RET-rearranged lung cancers or RET-mutant thyroid cancers. Nevertheless, response rates to RET-directed therapy are modest compared with those achieved using targeted therapies matched to other oncogenic drivers of solid tumours, such as sensitizing EGFR or BRAF(V600E) mutations, or ALK or ROS1 rearrangements. To date, no RET-directed targeted therapeutic has received regulatory approval for the treatment of molecularly defined populations of patients with RET-mutant or RET-rearranged solid tumours. In this Review, we discuss how emerging data have informed the debate over whether the limited success of multikinase inhibitors with activity against RET can be attributed to the tractability of RET as a drug target or to the lack, until 2017, of highly specific inhibitors of this oncoprotein in the clinic. We emphasize that novel approaches to targeting RET-dependent tumours are necessary to improve the clinical efficacy of single-agent multikinase inhibition and, thus, hasten approvals of RET-directed targeted therapies.
BACKGROUND: Alterations involving the RET kinase are implicated in the pathogenesis of lung, thyroid and other cancers. However, the clinical activity of multikinase inhibitors (MKIs) with anti-RET activity in RET-altered patients appears limited, calling into question the therapeutic potential of targeting RET. LOXO-292 is a selective RET inhibitor designed to inhibit diverse RET fusions, activating mutations and acquired resistance mutations. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Potent anti-RET activity, high selectivity, and central nervous system coverage were confirmed preclinically using a variety of in vitro and in vivo RET-dependent tumor models. Due to clinical urgency, two patients with RET-altered, MKI-resistant cancers were treated with LOXO-292, utilizing rapid dose-titration guided by real-time pharmacokinetic assessments to achieve meaningful clinical exposures safely and rapidly. RESULTS: LOXO-292 demonstrated potent and selective anti-RET activity preclinically against human cancer cell lines harboring endogenous RET gene alterations; cells engineered to express a KIF5B-RET fusion protein -/+ the RET V804M gatekeeper resistance mutation or the common RET activating mutation M918T; and RET-altered human cancer cell line and patient-derived xenografts, including a patient-derived RET fusion-positive xenograft injected orthotopically into the brain. A patient with RET M918T-mutant medullary thyroid cancer metastatic to the liver and an acquired RET V804M gatekeeper resistance mutation, previously treated with six MKI regimens, experienced rapid reductions in tumor calcitonin, CEA and cell-free DNA, resolution of painful hepatomegaly and tumor-related diarrhea and a confirmed tumor response. A second patient with KIF5B-RET fusion-positive lung cancer, acquired resistance to alectinib and symptomatic brain metastases experienced a dramatic response in the brain, and her symptoms resolved. CONCLUSIONS: These results provide proof-of-concept of the clinical actionability of RET alterations, and identify selective RET inhibition by LOXO-292 as a promising treatment in heavily pretreated, multikinase inhibitor-experienced patients with diverse RET-altered tumors.
RET (rearranged during transfection) is a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in the development of neural crest derived cell lineages, kidney, and male germ cells. Different human cancers, including papillary and medullary thyroid carcinomas, lung adenocarcinomas, and myeloproliferative disorders display gain-of-function mutations in RET. Accordingly, RET protein has become a promising molecular target for cancer treatment.
Numerous biologic processes and such diseases as cancer depend on activation of tyrosine kinase receptors. The RET tyrosine kinase receptor was discovered two decades ago as a transforming gene and was subsequently implicated in the formation of papillary and medullary thyroid carcinoma. This article examines the data about the mechanism of activation of downstream signal transduction pathways by RET oncoproteins. Collectively, these findings have advanced the understanding of the processes underlying thyroid carcinoma formation.
RET is the receptor for glial-derived neurotrophic factor growth factors. It is a paradigm of a single gene that causes different types of human cancer when targeted by different genetic alterations. Like other receptor tyrosine kinases, once activated, RET recruits a variety of signaling molecules that mediate biological responses. Here we review data on the signaling pathways that lead to RET-mediated cell transformation and recent evidence that manipulation of RET holds promise for thyroid cancer treatment.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) still remains a rare endocrine tumor. 20-25% of MTC cases are genetically determined. The detection of the RET proto-oncogene mutation in 1993 allowed to understand the unique genotype-phenotype relationships in hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma (HMTC) and formed the basis for therapeutic decisions based on the molecular results. Currently, prophylactic thyroidectomy is a commonly adopted and accepted therapeutic method. The decision on the time and extent of surgery should be made based on the results of molecular examination, the assessment of calcitonin (Ct) concentration and family history. Treatment of patients with HMTC requires the cooperation of a multidisciplinary team of experts and should be done in specialized centers only. The study is a review of the current guidelines for surgical management in the MEN2 syndrome.
The increasing incidence of thyroid cancer is associated with a higher number of advanced disease characterized by the loss of cancer differentiation and metastatic spread. The knowledge of the molecular pathways involved in the pathogenesis of thyroid cancer has made possible the development of new therapeutic drugs able to blockade the oncogenic kinases (RET/PTC) or signaling kinases (vascular endothelial growth factor receptor [VEGFR]) involved in cellular growth and proliferation. Some clinical trials have been conducted showing the ability of targeted therapies able to inhibit RET(sorafenib, imatinib, vandetanib) in stabilizing the course of the disease. The aim of the introduction of these targeted therapies is to extend life duration assuring a good quality of life; however, further studies are needed to reach these goals.
Precision oncology informed by genomic information has evolved in leaps and bounds over the last decade. Although non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has moved to center-stage as the poster child of precision oncology, multiple targetable genomic alterations have been identified in various cancer types. RET alterations occur in roughly 2% of all human cancers. The role of RET as oncogenic driver was initially identified in 1985 after the discovery that transfection with human lymphoma DNA transforms NIH-3T3 fibroblasts. Germline RET mutations are causative of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 syndrome, and RET fusions are found in 10-20% of papillary thyroid cases and are detected in most patients with advanced sporadic medullary thyroid cancer. RET fusions are oncogenic drivers in 2% of Non-small cell lung cancer. Rapid translation and regulatory approval of selective RET inhibitors, selpercatinib and pralsetinib, have opened up the field of RET precision oncology. This review provides an update on RET precision oncology from bench to bedside and back. We explore the impact of selective RET inhibitor in patients with advanced NSCLC, thyroid cancer, and other cancers in a tissue-agnostic fashion, resistance mechanisms, and future directions.
