Ribosomal protein S6 kinase alpha-3; Serine/threonine-protein kinase that acts downstream of ERK (MAPK1/ERK2 and MAPK3/ERK1) signaling and mediates mitogenic and stress-induced activation of the transcription factors CREB1, ETV1/ER81 and NR4A1/NUR77, regulates translation through RPS6 and EIF4B phosphorylation, and mediates cellular proliferation, survival, and differentiation by modulating mTOR signaling and repressing pro- apoptotic function of BAD and DAPK1. In fibroblast, is required for EGF-stimulated phosphorylation of CREB1 and histone H3 at 'Ser-10', which results in the subseq [...] 
Here, we report on a patient with a 625 kb duplication in Xp22.12, detected by array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). The duplicated region contains only one gene, RPS6KA3, that results in partial duplication. The same duplication was present in his mother and his maternal uncle. This partial duplication inhibits the RPS6KA3 expression, mimicking the effect of loss-of-function mutations associated with Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS). The phenotype of the patient here presented is not fully evocative of this syndrome because he does not present some of the facial, digital and skeletal abnormalities that are considered the main diagnostic features of CLS. This case is one of the few examples where RPS6KA3 mutations are associated with a non-specific X-linked mental retardation.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome is an X-linked disorder characterized by mental retardation, characteristic facial features, skeletal abnormalities, and tapering fingers. Herein we report a novel missense mutation in exon 7 at codon 180 in the RPS6KA3 gene in a boy with Coffin-Lowry syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Coffin-Lowry syndrome is a rare X-linked disease, caused by loss-of-function mutations in the RPS6KA3 gene. Patients exhibit severe intellectual disability with characteristic dysmorphism. As there are no specific laboratory findings to support the diagnosis of Coffin-Lowry syndrome, it may be difficult to diagnose-especially in young children, where the characteristic craniofacial features are less discernible. CASE: Here we report on a 2-year-old boy with Coffin-Lowry syndrome with a novel missense mutation in the RPS6KA3 gene. On magnetic resonance imaging, his brain exhibited periventricular signal abnormalities with multiple small cystic lesions. These findings may aid in diagnosis of Coffin-Lowry syndrome.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked disorder characterized by growth and psychomotor retardation, hypotonia and progressive skeletal changes. RPS6KA3 is the only gene known to be associated with CLS, and over 150 distinct inactivating mutations in this gene have so far been reported in CLS patients. However, no defect is found in about half of the CLS compatible patients by exon sequencing. We report here the first deep intronic mutation in RPS6KA3, which is associated with the retention of intronic sequences in the mRNAs. Indeed, this finding suggests that all the patients with a highly suggestive CLS clinical diagnosis, but in whom exon screening has failed to detect a mutation, should be reanalyzed at the RNA level.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is a rare X-linked disorder that, usually affects males, presenting with intellectual disability, short stature, growth retardation, short hands, hyperextensible fingers and progressive kyphoscoliosis. Due to skewed X chromosome inactivation, the clinical presentations of the affected females vary greatly and clinical manifestations could range from mild intellectual disability to typical features of CLS in males. Here, we reported two different novel RPS6KA3 gene mutations in two unrelated CLS patients and also described concomitant compulsive eyebrow-pulling behavior in one of these cases for the first time in the literature.
Two novel mutations of the ribosomal S6 kinase 2 gene (also known as RSK2) have been identified in two unrelated patients with Coffin-Lowry syndrome. The first mutation consists of a de novo insertion of a 5'-truncated LINE-1 element at position -8 of intron 3, which leads to a skipping of exon 4, leading to a shift of the reading frame and a premature stop codon. The L1 fragment (2800 bp) showed a rearrangement with a small deletion, a partial inversion of the ORF 2, flanked by short direct repeats which duplicate the acceptor splice site. However, cDNA analysis of the patient shows that both sites are apparently not functional. The second family showed the nucleotide change 803T>C in exon 10, resulting in the F268S mutation. This mutation was detected in two monozygotic twin patients and in their mother, who was mildly affected. The patients fulfill the clinical criteria of the syndrome, and therefore the mutation provides further support for the importance of phenylalanine at position 268, which is highly conserved in the protein kinase domain of many serine-threonine protein kinases.
Background and objectives: Coffin-Lowry Syndrome (CLS), a rare neurodegenerative disorder, is mainly diagnosed based on clinical manifestations and molecular analyses. In total, about 20 cases of CLS have been reported in China. Here, we report two cases of CLS in identical twin brothers and examine their potential causative mutations. Methods: The Trio mode was used in this analysis, i.e., DNA from the proband and his parents was sequenced. Furthermore, DNA from the proband's twin brother was used for confirmation. Results: A hemizygous variation was detected in the 11th exon of the RPS6KA3 gene, c.898C>T (p.R300*) of the proband, and the same site variation was detected in his identical twin brother; however, the mutation was not detected in his parents. Conclusions: The RPS6KA3 gene mutation c.898C>T (p.R300*) is the causative factor of familial CLS. The variant detected was reported for the first time in the Chinese population. Additionally, by analyzing the previous literature, we were able to summarize the phenotypic and genetic characteristics of GLS in China.
Microduplications of the X chromosome are a rare cause of X-linked intellectual disability (XLID), a clinically and genetically heterogeneous spectrum of disorders. In the present study, a 950-kb Xp22.12 microduplication including the RPS6KA3 gene was detected in affected members of a family, including the proband (male), his mother and one maternal uncle. Four female carriers had major depression and one of them also had mild intellectual disability. The present and previous cases with overlapping microduplications suggest that Xp22.12 microduplications can be included in the neuropsychiatric copy number variations.
We describe three families with X-linked mental retardation, two with a deletion of a single amino acid and one with a missense mutation in the proximal domain of the RSK2(RPS6KA3) (ribosomal protein S6 kinase, 90 kDa, polypeptide 3) protein similar to mutations found in Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS). In two families, the clinical diagnosis had been nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation. In the third family, although CLS had been suspected, the clinical features were atypical and the degree of intellectual disability much less than expected. These families show that strict reliance on classical clinical criteria for mutation testing may result in a missed diagnosis. A less targeted screening approach to mutation testing is advocated.
The Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is a rare X-linked semidominant syndrome characterized by severe psychomotor retardation, facial dysmorphism, digit abnormalities and progressive skeletal deformations. CLS is caused by mutations in a gene located in Xp22.2, RPS6KA3. This gene encodes for a growth factor-regulated serine/threonine protein kinase, RSK2 (ribosomal S6 kinase 2), acting in the Ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. Mutations in the RPS6KA3 gene are extremely heterogeneous and lead to premature termination of translation and/or to loss of phosphotransferase activity of the RSK2 protein. Screening for RSK2 mutations is essential in most cases to confirm the diagnosis as well as for genetic counseling. Here we present 44 novel mutations in RSK2 causing CLS. The overall number of CLS mutations reported now is 128. Thirty-three percent of mutations are missense mutations, 15% nonsense mutations, 20% splicing errors and 29% short deletion or insertion events. Only four large deletions have so far been found. They are distributed throughout the RPS6KA3 gene, and the majority has been found in a single family. This study further confirms the high rate of new mutations at the RSK2 locus. It is important to consider the possibility of mosaicism when providing genetic counseling in CLS families.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, craniofacial features, tapering digits, short stature, and skeletal deformities. Using whole exome sequencing and high-resolution targeted comparative genomic hybridization array analysis, we identified a novel microduplication encompassing exons five through nine of RPS6KA3 in three full brothers. Each brother presented with intellectual disability and clinical and radiographic features consistent with CLS. qRT-PCR analyses performed on mRNA from the peripheral blood of the three siblings revealed a marked reduction of RPS6KA3 levels suggesting a loss-of-function mechanism. PCR analysis of the patients' cDNA detected a band greater than expected for an exon 4-10 amplicon, suggesting this was likely a direct duplication that lies between exons 4 through 10, which was later confirmed by Sanger sequencing. This microduplication is only the third intragenic duplication of RPS6KA3, and the second and smallest reported to date thought to cause CLS. Our study further supports the clinical utility of methods such as next-generation sequencing and high-resolution genomic arrays to detect small intragenic duplications. These methods, coupled with expression studies and cDNA structural analysis have the capacity to confirm the diagnosis of CLS in these rare cases.
RSK2 is a growth factor-regulated serine-threonine protein kinase, acting in the Ras-Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. Mutations in the RSK2 gene (RPS6KA3) on chromosome Xp22.2, have been found to cause Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS), an X-linked disorder characterized by psychomotor retardation, characteristic facial and digital abnormalities, and progressive skeletal deformations. By screening of 250 patients with clinical features suggestive of Coffin-Lowry syndrome, 71 distinct disease-associated RSK2 mutations have been identified in 86 unrelated families. Thirty-eight percent of mutations are missense mutations, 20% are nonsense mutations, 18% are splicing errors, and 21% are short deletion or insertion events. About 57% of mutations result in premature translation termination, and the vast majority are predicted to cause loss of function of the mutant allele. These changes are distributed throughout the RSK2 gene and show no obvious clustering or phenotypic association. However, some missense mutations are associated with milder phenotypes. In one family, one such mutation was associated solely with mild mental retardation. It is noteworthy that nine mutations were found in female probands, with no affected male relatives, ascertained through learning disability and mild but suggestive facial and digital dysmorphisms.
The ribosomal protein S6 kinase, 90 kb, polypeptide 3 gene (RPS6KA3) is responsible for Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS), which is characterized by intellectual disability (ID) and facial and bony abnormalities. This gene also affects nonsyndromic X-linked ID and nonsyndromic X-linked ID without bony abnormalities. Two families have been previously reported to have genetic microduplication including RPS6KA3. In the present study, we used array-comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) analysis with Agilent Human genome CGH 180K and detected a 584-kb microduplication spanning 19.92-20.50 Mb of Xp22.12 (including RPS6KA3) in the members of one family, including three brothers, two sisters, and their mother. The 15-year-old male proband and one of his brothers had mild ID and localization-related epilepsy, whereas his other brother presented borderline intelligence quotient (IQ) and attention-deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). One sister presented pervasive development disorder (PDD). Analysis of this family suggests that RPS6KA3 duplication is responsible for mild ID, ADHD, and localization-related epilepsy, and possibly for PDD.
Pediatric hepatoblastoma (HBL) and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are primary liver malignant neoplasms with 5-year event-free survival of >80% and <30%, respectively. In these patients, alpha-fetoprotein levels can guide surgical intervention and monitor disease progression. Although histology and immunohistochemical stains support diagnosis, genetic testing can elucidate mechanisms that drive pathogenesis. Pediatric HBL and HCC harbor well-characterized molecular signatures such as alterations in CTNNB1, TERT, and AXIN1 that alter the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. Approximately 8% of individuals with HCC harbor RPS6KA3 variants that appear with other gene mutations. Herein, we report a novel solitary pathogenic RPS6KA3 variant finding in a 6-year-old boy whose final diagnosis was hepatocellular malignant neoplasm, not otherwise specified.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked mental retardation syndrome caused by defects in the RSK2 gene. We have identified a CLS family with four patients in two generations. The patients in this family, a mother and her three children (a male and two females), all have severe mental retardation with the typical CLS phenotype. In addition, brain MRI studies on the three siblings revealed abnormalities in deep subcortical white matter, thinning of the corpus callosum, hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, and asymmetry of the lateral ventricles. The degree of severity of the MRI findings correlated with the severity of mental retardation in the patients. Extensive mutation screening was performed on the entire RSK2 gene in this family. Twenty-two exons including the intron/exon junctions were amplified by PCR and subsequently sequenced on both strands. A novel mutation, a two-nucleotide insertion (298 ins TG), was identified. The insertion creates a stop codon at codon 100, resulting in a 99 amino acid truncated RSK2 protein. All patients tested have the same mutation, and no other mutation could be found in the RSK2 gene from the proband. The mutation was confirmed by PCR/RFLP. X-chromosome inactivation assay on the female patients revealed significant skewing toward inactivation of the normal RSK2 allele. Thus, this novel mutation is likely to be responsible for the unusual clinical presentation in this family, which includes full phenotypic expression in females and unique brain MRI abnormalities. The pathological function of the mutation and genotype/phenotype correlation between the mutation and this unusual clinical presentation await further clarification.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked semi-dominant disorder characterized by diverse phenotypes including intellectual disability, facial and digital anomalies. Loss-of-function mutations in the Ribosomal Protein S6 Kinase Polypeptide 3 (RPS6KA3) gene have been shown to be responsible for CLS. Among the large number of mutations, however, no exonic mutation causing exon skipping has been described. Here, we report a male patient with CLS having a novel mutation at the 3' end of an exon at a splice donor junction. Interestingly, this nucleotide change causes both a novel missense mutation and partial exon skipping leading to a truncated transcript. These two transcripts were identified by cDNA sequencing of RT-PCR products. In the carrier mother, we found only wildtype transcripts suggesting skewed X-inactivation. Methylation studies confirmed X-inactivation was skewed moderately, but not completely, which is consistent with her mild phenotype. Western blot showed that the mutant RSK2 protein in the patient is expressed at similar levels relative to his mother. Protein modeling demonstrated that the missense mutation is damaging and may alter binding to ATP molecules. This is the first report of exon skipping from an exonic mutation of RPS6KA3, demonstrating that a missense mutation and concomitant disruption of normal splicing contribute to the manifestation of CLS.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is a rare X-linked dominant disorder characterized by intellectual disability, craniofacial abnormalities, short stature, tapering fingers, hypotonia, and skeletal malformations. CLS is caused by mutations in the Ribosomal Protein S6 Kinase, 90 kDa, Polypeptide 3 (RPS6KA3) gene located at Xp22.12, which encodes Ribosomal S6 Kinase 2 (RSK2). Here we analyzed RPS6KA3 in three unrelated CLS patients including one from the historical Coffin-Lowry syndrome family and found two novel mutations. To date, over 140 mutations in RPS6KA3 have been reported. However, the etiology of the very first familial case, which was described in 1971 by Lowry with detailed phenotype and coined the term CLS, has remained unknown. More than 40 years after the report, we succeeded in identifying deposited fibroblast cells from one patient of this historic family and found a novel heterozygous 216 bp in-frame deletion, encompassing exons 15 and 16 of RPS6KA3. Drop episodes in CLS patients were reported to be associated with truncating mutations deleting the C-terminal kinase domain (KD), and only one missense mutation and one single basepair duplication involving the C-terminal KD of RSK2 in the patients with drop episode have been reported thus far. Here we report the first in-frame deletion in C-terminal KD of RPS6KA3 in a CLS patient with drop episodes.
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and array- comparative genomic hybridization analysis have been proven to be useful in the identification of submicroscopic copy-number imbalances in families with nonsyndromic X-linked intellectual disability (NS-XLID). Here we report the first description of a child with mild intellectual disability and a submicroscopic duplication at Xp22.12 identified by MLPA with a P106 MRX kit (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands) and further confirmed and characterized with a custom 244-k oligo-array, fluorescence in situ hybridization, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and immunoblotting. This 1.05-megabase duplication encompasses 7 genes, RPS6KA3 being the only of these genes known to be related to ID. The proband was an 8-year-old boy referred to the genetics unit for psychomotor retardation and learning disabilities. Both maternal brothers also showed learning difficulties and delayed language during childhood in a similar way to the proband. These boys also carried the duplication, as did the healthy mother and grandmother of the proband. The same duplication was also observed in the 5-year-old younger brother who presented with features of developmental delay and learning disabilities during the previous year. Increased RPS6KA3/RSK2 levels were demonstrated in the proband by qPCR and immunoblotting. To our knowledge, this is the first family identified with a submicroscopic duplication including the entire RPS6KA3/RSK2 gene, and our findings suggest that an increased dose of this gene is responsible for a mild form of NS-XLID.
