Retinoic acid receptor RXR-alpha; Receptor for retinoic acid that acts as a transcription factor. Forms homo- or heterodimers with retinoic acid receptors (RARs) and binds to target response elements in response to their ligands, all-trans or 9-cis retinoic acid, to regulate gene expression in various biological processes. The RAR/RXR heterodimers bind to the retinoic acid response elements (RARE) composed of tandem 5'-AGGTCA-3' sites known as DR1-DR5 to regulate transcription. The high affinity ligand for retinoid X receptors (RXRs) is 9-cis retinoic acid. In the absence of ligand, th [...] 
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vitamin D pathway genes have been implicated in cutaneous melanoma (CM) risk, but their role in CM disease-specific survival (DSS) remains obscure. We comprehensively analyzed the prognostic roles of 2669 common SNPs in the vitamin D pathway genes using data from a published genome-wide association study (GWAS) at The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) and then validated the SNPs of interest in another GWAS from the Nurses' Health Study and Health Professionals Follow-up Study. Among the 2669 SNPs, 203 were significantly associated with DSS in MDACC dataset (P < 0.05 and false-positive report probability < 0.2), of which 18 were the tag SNPs. In the replication, two of these 18 SNPs showed nominal significance: the VDBP rs12512631 T > C was associated with a better DSS [combined hazards ratio (HR) = 0.66]; and the same for RXRA rs7850212 C > A (combined HR = 0.38), which were further confirmed by the Fine and Gray competing-risks regression model. Further bioinformatics analyses indicated that these loci may modulate corresponding gene methylation status.
BACKGROUND: The energy homeostasis-associated gene (ENHO), retinoid X receptor alpha gene (RXRA), and liver X receptor alpha gene (LXRA) are involved in adipogenic/lipogenic regulation. We investigated whether single-nucleotide polymorphisms in these genes (ENHO rs2281997, rs72735260; RXRA rs749759, rs10776909, rs10881578; LXRA rs2279238, rs7120118, rs11039155) are associated with dyslipidaemia, related comorbidities and survival of haemodialysis (HD) patients also tested for T-helper (Th) cell interleukin genes (IL). METHODS: The study was carried out in 873 HD patients. Dyslipidaemia was diagnosed by the recommendations of the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (K/DOQI) guidelines (2003); atherogenic dyslipidaemia was referred to if the TG/HDL cholesterol ratio was equal to or higher than 3.8. Genotyping of ENHO SNPs, LXRA SNPs, and IL12A rs568408 was carried out using HRM analysis. RXRA SNPs, IL12B rs3212227, and IL18 rs360719 were genotyped using PCR-RFLP analysis. The circulating adropin concentration was determined in 126 patients by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Survival probability was analysed using the Kaplan-Meier method in 440 patients followed through 7.5 years. RESULTS: Dyslipidaemia by K/DOQI was diagnosed in 459 patients (91% revealed hyper-LDL- cholesterolaemia), atherogenic dyslipidaemia was diagnosed in 454 patients, and 231 patients were free of dyslipidaemia by both criteria. The variant allele (T) of ENHO rs2281997 was associated with the hyper-LDL cholesterolaemic pattern of dyslipidaemia by K/DOQI. The frequency of atherogenic dyslipidaemia was lower in T-allele bearers than in CC-genotype patients. The rs2281997 T allele was associated with lower cardiovascular mortality in HD patients showing atherogenic dyslipidaemia. ENHO, RXRA, and LXRA showed epistatic interactions in dyslipidaemia. Circulating adropin was lower in atherogenic dyslipidaemia than in non-atherogenic conditions. RXRA rs10776909 was associated with myocardial infarction. Bearers of LXRA rs2279238, rs7120118 or rs11039155 minor alleles showed higher mortality. ENHO SNP positions fell within the same DNase 1 hypersensitivity site expressed in the Th1 cell line. Epistatic interactions occurred between rs2281997 and Th1 IL SNPs (rs360719, rs568408). CONCLUSIONS: Atherogenic dyslipidaemia occurs in HD patients in whom ENHO encodes less adropin. ENHO, RXRA, and LXRA SNPs, separately or jointly, are associated with dyslipidaemia, myocardial infarction, and survival in HD patients. Differences in the availability of transcription binding sites may contribute to these associations.
Retinoic X receptor alpha (RXRA), encoded by RXRA, plays a key role in development and metabolism, specifically in adipocyte biology, glucose homeostasis, and intestinal cholesterol balance. RXRA is also a positional candidate gene for Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy. We report the systematic screening of RXRA coding regions by genomic DNA sequencing, which has resulted in the identification of three novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
Cellular senescence is broadly known as a stable cell cycle arrest accompanied by a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). In the past decades, calcium signaling has emerged as a key mediator of cellular senescence. However, the transcriptional regulation of calcium signaling during cellular senescence remains partially understood. We have previously identified the nuclear receptor RXRA as a key senescence repressor through inhibiting the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) calcium release channel inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, type 2 (ITPR2) mediated intracellular calcium signaling. Nevertheless, as a transcriptional recruiter, the mechanism by which RXRA inhibits ITPR2 during cellular senescence remains unclear. Here we identified the zinc finger protein ZBTB17 can interact with RXRA. Interestingly, knockdown of ZBTB17 induces a cascade of RXRA-dependent intracellular calcium signaling, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation, DNA damages, and ultimately cellular senescence. Moreover, the signaling and senescence phenotype induced by knocking down of ZBTB17 can also be abolished after silencing ITPR2. Altogether, our work provides a new mechanism controlling intracellular calcium signaling and cellular senescence and unveils novel insight toward the role of zinc finger proteins.
Cardiovascular disease is the main cause of death worldwide, and dyslipidemia is an important multifactorial risk factor. Considering the involvement of nuclear receptors in metabolic pathways, and that some of the receptors act in lipid metabolism and homeostasis, the aim of the present study was to investigate the influence of genetic variations in RXRA, PPARA, NR1I2, and NR1I3 on lipid and lipoprotein levels. Five polymorphisms in the aforementioned genes were genotyped in 622 Brazilians of European descent by PCR-RFLP or TaqMan genotyping assays. In general, carriers of the A insertion of RXRA rs11381416 polymorphism showed higher levels of triglyceride (TG; 1.80 +/- 1.20 vs. 1.52 +/- 1.20 mmol/L; P = 0.020). Moreover, sexual dimorphic association was found (gender*NR1I3 rs2501873 genotype interaction P < 0.001), males with NR1I3 rs2501873 G/G genotype had lower TG levels (ANCOVA, P = 0.009). Our results suggest that polymorphisms in the RXRA and NR1I3 genes influence lipid profile in a Southern Brazilian population. However, these general and gender association require confirmation in subsequent studies.
Human skin is the natural source, place of metabolism, and target for vitamin D(3). The classical active form of vitamin D(3), 1,25(OH)(2)D(3), expresses pluripotent properties and is intensively studied in cancer prevention and therapy. To define the specific role of vitamin D(3) receptor (VDR) and its co-receptor retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRA) in genomic regulation, VDR or RXRA genes were silenced in the squamous cell carcinoma cell line A431 and treated with 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) at long incubation time points 24 h/72 h. Extending the incubation time of A431 WT (wild-type) cells with 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) resulted in a two-fold increase in DEGs (differentially expressed genes) and a change in the amount of downregulated from 37% to 53%. VDR knockout led to a complete loss of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced genome-wide gene regulation at 24 h time point, but after 72 h, 20 DEGs were found, of which 75% were downregulated, and most of them belonged to the gene ontology group "immune response". This may indicate the existence of an alternative, secondary response to 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). In contrast, treatment of A431 DeltaRXRA cells with 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) for 24 h only partially affected DEGs, suggesting RXRA-independent regulation. Interestingly, overexpression of classic 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) targets, like CYP24A1 (family 24 of subfamily A of cytochrome P450 member 1) or CAMP (cathelicidin antimicrobial peptide) was found to be RXRA-independent. Also, immunofluorescence staining of A431 WT cells revealed partial VDR/RXRA colocalization after 24 h and 72 h 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) treatment. Comparison of transcriptome changes induced by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in normal keratinocytes vs. cancer cells showed high cell type specific expression pattern with only a few genes commonly regulated by 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). Activation of the genomic pathway at least partially reversed the expression of cancer-related genes, forming a basis for anti-cancer activates of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3). In summary, VDR or RXRA independent genomic activities of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) suggest the involvement of alternative factors, opening new challenges in this field.
Calcium signaling is emerging as a key pathway controlling cellular senescence, a stable cell proliferation arrest playing a fundamental role in pathophysiological conditions, such as embryonic development, wound healing, cancer, and aging. However, how calcium signaling is regulated is still only partially understood. The inositol 1, 4, 5-trisphosphate receptor type 2 (ITPR2), an endoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel, was recently shown to critically contribute to the implementation of senescence, but how ITPR2 expression is controlled is unclear. To gain insights into the regulation of ITPR2 expression, we performed an siRNA screen targeting 160 transcription factors and epigenetic regulators. Interestingly, we discovered that the retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRA), which belongs to the nuclear receptor family, represses ITPR2 expression and regulates calcium signaling though ITPR2 and the mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU). Knockdown of RXRA induces the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA damage via the ITPR2-MCU calcium signaling axis and consequently triggers cellular senescence by activating p53, whereas RXRA overexpression decreases DNA damage accumulation and then delays replicative senescence. Altogether, our work sheds light on a novel mechanism controlling calcium signaling and cellular senescence and provides new insights into the role of nuclear receptors.
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) is the main cytokine responsible for the induction of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells, which is a hallmark of tumor transformation to the metastatic phenotype. Recently, research demonstrated that the chemokine CCL2 gene expression level directly correlates with the TGF-beta activity in breast cancer patients. CCL2 attracts tumor-associated macrophages and is, therefore, considered as an important inductor of breast cancer progression; however, the precise mechanisms underlying its regulation by TGF-beta are unknown. Here, we studied the behavior of the CCL2 gene in MDA-MB-231 and HCC1937 breast cancer cells representing mesenchymal-like phenotype activated by TGF-beta. Using bioinformatics, deletion screening and point mutagenesis, we identified binding sites in the CCL2 promoter and candidate transcription factors responsible for its regulation by TGF-beta. Among these factors, only the knock-down of EGR1 and RXRA made CCL2 promoter activity independent of TGF-beta. These factors also demonstrated binding to the CCL2 promoter in a TGF-beta-dependent manner in a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, and point mutations in the EGR1 and RXRA binding sites totally abolished the effect of TGF-beta. Our results highlight the key role of EGR1 and RXRA transcription factors in the regulation of CCL2 gene in response to TGF-beta pathway.
A subset of environmental chemicals acts as "obesogens" as they increase adipose mass and lipid content in livers of treated rodents. One of the most studied class of obesogens are the tin-containing chemicals that have as a central moiety tributyltin (TBT), which bind and activate two nuclear hormone receptors, Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor Gamma (PPARG) and Retinoid X Receptor Alpha (RXRA), at nanomolar concentrations. Here, we have tested whether TBT chloride at such concentrations may affect the neutral lipid level in two cell line models of human liver. Indeed, using high content image analysis (HCA), TBT significantly increased neutral lipid content in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Consistent with the observed increased lipid accumulation, RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (RNA FISH) and RT-qPCR experiments revealed that TBT enhanced the steady-state mRNA levels of two key genes for de novo lipogenesis, the transcription factor SREBF1 and its downstream enzymatic target, FASN. Importantly, pre-treatment of cells with 2-deoxy-D-glucose reduced TBT-mediated lipid accumulation, thereby suggesting a role for active glycolysis during the process of lipid accumulation. As other RXRA binding ligands can promote RXRA protein turnover via the 26S proteasome, TBT was tested for such an effect in the two liver cell lines. We found that TBT, in a time- and dose-dependent manner, significantly reduced steady-state RXRA levels in a proteasome-dependent manner. While TBT promotes both RXRA protein turnover and lipid accumulation, we found no correlation between these two events at the single cell level, thereby suggesting an additional mechanism may be involved in TBT promotion of lipid accumulation, such as glycolysis.
