Sodium channel protein type 5 subunit alpha; This protein mediates the voltage-dependent sodium ion permeability of excitable membranes. Assuming opened or closed conformations in response to the voltage difference across the membrane, the protein forms a sodium-selective channel through which Na(+) ions may pass in accordance with their electrochemical gradient. It is a tetrodotoxin-resistant Na(+) channel isoform. This channel is responsible for the initial upstroke of the action potential. Channel inactivation is regulated by intracellular calcium levels. Belongs to the sodium chann [...] 
Influx of sodium ions through voltage-gated sodium channels in cardiomyocytes is essential for proper electrical conduction within the heart. Both acquired conditions associated with sodium channel dysfunction (myocardial ischaemia, heart failure) as well as inherited disorders secondary to mutations in the gene SCN5A encoding for the cardiac sodium channel Nav1.5 are associated with life-threatening arrhythmias. Research in the last decade has uncovered the complex nature of Nav1.5 distribution, function, in particular within distinct subcellular subdomains of cardiomyocytes. Nav1.5-based channels furthermore display previously unrecognized non-electrogenic actions and may impact on cardiac structural integrity, leading to cardiomyopathy. Moreover, SCN5A and Nav1.5 are expressed in cell types other than cardiomyocytes as well as various extracardiac tissues, where their functional role in, e.g. epilepsy, gastrointestinal motility, cancer and the innate immune response is increasingly investigated and recognized. This review provides an overview of these novel insights and how they deepen our mechanistic knowledge on SCN5A channelopathies and Nav1.5 (dys)function. This article is part of the theme issue 'The heartbeat: its molecular basis and physiological mechanisms'.
BACKGROUND: A large number of SCN5A variants have been reported to underlie Brugada syndrome (BrS). However, the evidence supporting individual variants is highly heterogeneous. OBJECTIVE: We systematically re-evaluated all SCN5A variants reported in BrS using the 2015 American college of medical genetics and genomics and the association for molecular pathology (ACMG-AMP) guidelines. METHODS: A PubMed/Embase search was performed to identify all reported SCN5A variants in BrS. Standardized bioinformatic re-analysis (SIFT, PolyPhen, Mutation Taster, Mutation assessor, FATHMM, GERP, PhyloP, and SiPhy) and re-evaluation of frequency in the gnomAD database were performed. Fourteen ACMG-AMP rules were deemed applicable for SCN5A variant analysis. RESULTS: Four hundred and eighty unique SCN5A variants were identified, the majority of which 425 (88%) were coding variants. One hundred and fifty-six of 425 (37%) variants were classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic. Two hundred and fifty-eight (60%) were classified as variants of uncertain significance, while a further 11 (3%) were classified as benign/likely benign. When considering the subset of variants that were considered "null" variants separately, 95% fulfilled criteria for pathogenicity/likely pathogenicity. In contrast, only 17% of missense variants fulfilled criteria for pathogenicity/likely pathogenicity. Importantly, however, only 25% of missense variants had available functional data, which was a major score driver for pathogenic classification. CONCLUSION: Based on contemporary ACMG-AMP guidelines, only a minority of SCN5A variants implicated in BrS fulfill the criteria for pathogenicity or likely pathogenicity.
SCN5A gene encodes the pore-forming ion-conducting alpha-subunit of the cardiac sodium channel (Na(v)1.5), which is responsible for the initiation and propagation of action potentials and thereby determines cardiac excitability and conduction of electrical stimuli through the heart. The importance of Na(v)1.5 for normal cardiac electricity is reflected by various disease entities that can be caused by mutations in SCN5A. Gain-of-function mutations in SCN5A lead to more sodium influx into cardiomyocytes through aberrant channel gating and cause long QT syndrome, a primary electrical disease of the heart. Loss-of-function mutations in SCN5A lead to lower expression levels of SCN5A or production of defective Na(v)1.5 proteins and cause Brugada syndrome, an electrical disease with minor structural changes in the heart. In addition, both loss- and gain-of-function mutations may cause dilated cardiomyopathy, which is an arrhythmogenic disease with gross structural defects of the left ventricle (and sometimes both ventricles). Other SCN5A-related diseases are multifocal ectopic premature Purkinje-related complexes (gain-of-function mutations), isolated cardiac conduction defect (loss-of-function mutations), sick sinus syndrome (loss-of-function mutations), atrial fibrillation (loss-of-function or gain-of-function mutations), and overlap syndromes (mutations with both loss-of-function and gain-of-function effects). Growing insights into the role of SCN5A in health and disease has enabled clinicians to lay out gene-specific risk stratification schemes and mutation-specific diagnostic and therapeutic strategies in the management of patients with a SCN5A mutation. This review summarizes currently available knowledge about the pathophysiological mechanisms of SCN5A mutations and describes how this knowledge can be used to manage patients suffering from potentially lethal cardiac diseases.
Partial or complete loss-of-function variants in SCN5A are the most common genetic cause of the arrhythmia disorder Brugada syndrome (BrS1). However, the pathogenicity of SCN5A variants is often unknown or disputed; 80% of the 1,390 SCN5A missense variants observed in at least one individual to date are variants of uncertain significance (VUSs). The designation of VUS is a barrier to the use of sequence data in clinical care. We selected 83 variants: 10 previously studied control variants, 10 suspected benign variants, and 63 suspected Brugada syndrome-associated variants, selected on the basis of their frequency in the general population and in individuals with Brugada syndrome. We used high-throughput automated patch clamping to study the function of the 83 variants, with the goal of reclassifying variants with functional data. The ten previously studied controls had functional properties concordant with published manual patch clamp data. All 10 suspected benign variants had wild-type-like function. 22 suspected BrS variants had loss of channel function (<10% normalized peak current) and 22 variants had partial loss of function (10%-50% normalized peak current). The previously unstudied variants were initially classified as likely benign (n = 2), likely pathogenic (n = 10), or VUSs (n = 61). After the patch clamp studies, 16 variants were benign/likely benign, 45 were pathogenic/likely pathogenic, and only 12 were still VUSs. Structural modeling identified likely mechanisms for loss of function including altered thermostability and disruptions to alpha helices, disulfide bonds, or the permeation pore. High-throughput patch clamping enabled reclassification of the majority of tested VUSs in SCN5A.
Voltage-gated Na+ channels mediate the rapid upstroke of the action potential in excitable tissues. Na(v)1.5, encoded by the SCN5A gene, is the predominant isoform in the heart. Mutations in SCN5A are associated with distinct cardiac excitation disorders often resulting in life-threatening arrhythmias. This review outlines the currently known SCN5A mutations linked to three distinct cardiac rhythm disorders: long QT syndrome subtype 3 (LQT3), Brugada syndrome (BS), and cardiac conduction disease (CCD). Electrophysiological properties of the mutant channels are summarized and discussed in terms of Na+ channel structure-function relationships and regarding molecular mechanisms underlying the respective cardiac dysfunction. Possible reasons for less convincing genotype-phenotype correlations are suggested.
BACKGROUND: Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a common heritable channelopathy. Mutations in the SCN5A-encoded sodium channel (BrS1) culminate in the most common genotype. OBJECTIVE: This study sought to perform a retrospective analysis of BrS databases from 9 centers that have each genotyped >100 unrelated cases of suspected BrS. METHODS: Mutational analysis of all 27 translated exons in SCN5A was performed. Mutation frequency, type, and localization were compared among cases and 1,300 ostensibly healthy volunteers including 649 white subjects and 651 nonwhite subjects (blacks, Asians, Hispanics, and others) that were genotyped previously. RESULTS: A total of 2,111 unrelated patients (78% male, mean age 39 +/- 15 years) were referred for BrS genetic testing. Rare mutations/variants were more common among BrS cases than control subjects (438/2,111, 21% vs. 11/649, 1.7% white subjects and 31/651, 4.8% nonwhite subjects, respectively, P <10(-53)). The yield of BrS1 genetic testing ranged from 11% to 28% (P = .0017). Overall, 293 distinct mutations were identified in SCN5A: 193 missense, 32 nonsense, 38 frameshift, 21 splice-site, and 9 in-frame deletions/insertions. The 4 most frequent BrS1-associated mutations were E1784K (14x), F861WfsX90 (11x), D356N (8x), and G1408R (7x). Most mutations localized to the transmembrane-spanning regions. CONCLUSION: This international consortium of BrS genetic testing centers has added 200 new BrS1-associated mutations to the public domain. Overall, 21% of BrS probands have mutations in SCN5A compared to the 2% to 5% background rate of rare variants reported in healthy control subjects. Additional studies drawing on the data presented here may help further distinguish pathogenic mutations from similarly rare but otherwise innocuous ones found in cases.
Mutations in sodium channel alpha-subunit gene (SCN5A) result in multiple arrhythmic syndromes, including long QT3 (LQT3), Brugada syndrome (BS), an inherited cardiac conduction defect, sudden unexpected nocturnal death syndrome (SUNDS) and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), constituting a spectrum of disease entities termed Na+ channelopathies. These diseases are allelic disorders, if not the same disease with variable penetrance and variable modifiers worldwide. Interestingly, death occurs during sleep in all of these disorders, suggesting a common mechanism. To date, mutational analyses have revealed about 103 distinct mutations in SCN5A, of which at least more than 30 mutations are associated with LQT3, whereas the rest of the mutations are affiliated with the remaining sodium channel disorders. The majority of these mutations are missense. However, other types such as deletions, insertions, frameshifts, nonsense and splice-donor errors have also been reported.
BACKGROUND: Long-QT Syndrome (LQTS) is a cardiovascular disorder characterized by prolongation of the QT interval on ECG and presence of syncope, seizures, and sudden death. Five genes have been implicated in Romano-Ward syndrome, the autosomal dominant form of LQTS: KVLQT1, HERG, SCN5A, KCNE1, and KCNE2. Mutations in KVLQT1 and KCNE1 also cause the Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, a form of LQTS associated with deafness, a phenotypic abnormality inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. METHODS AND RESULTS: We used mutational analyses to screen a pool of 262 unrelated individuals with LQTS for mutations in the 5 defined genes. We identified 134 mutations in addition to the 43 that we previously reported. Eighty of the mutations were novel. The total number of mutations in this population is now 177 (68% of individuals). CONCLUSIONS: KVLQT1 (42%) and HERG (45%) accounted for 87% of identified mutations, and SCN5A (8%), KCNE1 (3%), and KCNE2 (2%) accounted for the other 13%. Missense mutations were most common (72%), followed by frameshift mutations (10%), in-frame deletions, and nonsense and splice-site mutations (5% to 7% each). Most mutations resided in intracellular (52%) and transmembrane (30%) domains; 12% were found in pore and 6% in extracellular segments. In most cases (78%), a mutation was found in a single family or an individual.
SCN5A overlap syndromes are clinical entities that express a phenotype combining aspects of different canonical SCN5A-related arrhythmia syndromes or a variable arrhythmic phenotype among individuals carrying the same SCN5A mutation. Here we review the literature addressing SCN5A overlap syndromes as well as the principal mechanisms currently proposed. Among others, a multifactorial determination encompassing an interaction between SCN5A variant(s), other genetic polymorphisms, and possibly environmental factors seems the most plausible hypothesis.
Variants in the sodium voltage-gated channel alpha subunit 5 gene (SCN5A) produce variable cardiac phenotypes including Brugada syndrome, conduction disease and cardiomyopathy. These phenotypes can lead to life-threatening arrhythmias, heart failure, and sudden cardiac death. Novel variants in splice-site regions of SCN5A require functional studies to characterise their pathogenicity as they are poorly understood. The generation of an induced pluripotent stem cell line provides a valuable resource to investigate the functional effects of potential splice-disrupting variants in SCN5A.
Mutations leading to haploinsufficiency in SCN5A, the gene encoding the cardiac sodium channel Na(v)1.5 alpha-subunit, are involved in life-threatening cardiac disorders. Using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome edition, we generated here a human induced-pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) line carrying a heterozygous mutation in exon 2 of SCN5A, which leads to apparition of a premature stop codon. SCN5A-clone 5 line maintained normal karyotype, morphology and pluripotency and differentiated into three germ layers. Cardiomyocytes derived from these hiPSCs would be a useful model for investigating channelopathies related to SCN5A heterozygous deficiency.
Patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) are a valuable approach to model cardiovascular diseases. We nucleofected non-integrating episomal vectors in skin fibroblasts of three family members carrying a single nucleotide variant (SNV) in SCN5A, which encodes the cardiac-type sodium channel, and of a related healthy control. The SNV SCN5A_c.4573G > A had been previously identified in a Brugada Syndrome patient. The resulting iPS cell lines differentiate into cells of the 3 germ layers, display normal karyotypes and express pluripotency surface markers and genes. Thus, they are a reliable source to study the effect of the identified mutation in a physiologically relevant environment.
BACKGROUND: A rare gene variant in SCN5A can be found in approximately 20%-25% of patients with Brugada syndrome (BrS). OBJECTIVE: The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to evaluate the differences in clinical characteristics of BrS patients with and without SCN5A rare variants and the prognostic role of SCN5A for ventricular arrhythmias in BrS. METHODS: PubMed and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) were systematically searched from inception to January 2024 to identify all relevant studies. Studies were analyzed if they included patients diagnosed with BrS in whom genetic testing for SCN5A variants was performed and arrhythmic outcomes were reported. RESULTS: A total of 17 studies with 3568 BrS patients, of whom 3030 underwent genetic testing for SCN5A variants, fulfilled the eligibility criteria and were included. Compared with SCN5A- patients, SCN5A+ BrS patients more frequently had spontaneous type 1 electrocardiogram, history of syncope, and documented arrhythmias. Furthermore, higher PQ and QRS intervals in SCN5A+ BrS patients compared with SCN5A- have been found. The pooled analysis demonstrated a significant association between the presence of SCN5A rare variants in BrS patients and the risk of major arrhythmic events, with a pooled odds ratio of 2.14 (95% confidence interval, 1.53-2.99; I(2) = 29%). CONCLUSION: SCN5A+ BrS patients showed a worse clinical phenotype compared with SCN5A-. The pooled analysis demonstrated a significant association between SCN5A+ mutation status and the risk of major arrhythmic events in BrS patients.
The voltage-gated sodium channel 1.5 (Nav1.5), encoded by the SCN5A gene, is responsible for the rising phase of the action potential of cardiomyocytes. The sodium current mediated by Nav1.5 consists of peak and late components (I(Na-P) and I(Na-L)). Mutant Nav1.5 causes alterations in the peak and late sodium current and is associated with an increasingly wide range of congenital arrhythmias. More than 400 mutations have been identified in the SCN5A gene. Although the mechanisms of SCN5A mutations leading to a variety of arrhythmias can be classified according to the alteration of I(Na-P) and I(Na-L) as gain-of-function, loss-of-function and both, few researchers have summarized the mechanisms in this way before. In this review article, we aim to review the mechanisms underlying dysfunctional Nav1.5 due to SCN5A mutations and to provide some new insights into further approaches in the treatment of arrhythmias. Impact statement The field of ion channelopathy caused by dysfunctional Nav1.5 due to SCN5A mutations is rapidly evolving as novel technologies of electrophysiology are introduced and our understanding of the mechanisms of various arrhythmias develops. In this review, we focus on the dysfunctional Nav1.5 related to arrhythmias and the underlying mechanisms. We update SCN5A mutations in a precise way since 2013 and presents novel classifications of SCN5A mutations responsible for the dysfunction of the peak (I(Na-P)) and late (I(Na-L)) sodium channels based on their phenotypes, including loss-, gain-, and coexistence of gain- and loss-of function mutations in I(Na-P), I(Na-L), respectively. We hope this review will provide a new comprehensive way to better understand the electrophysiological mechanisms underlying arrhythmias from cell to bedside, promoting the management of various arrhythmias in practice.
Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a hereditary arrhythmia syndrome characterized by right bundle branch block on an electrocardiogram and persistent ST-segment elevation in the right precordial leads. In this study, we describe the establishment of an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line derived from a BrS patient carrying the novel heterogeneous missense mutation (c.3118G>C; p.G1040R) in the sodium channel protein type 5 subunit alpha (SCN5A) gene. Skin fibroblasts underwent reprogramming using a non-integrated Sendai viral method. Generated iPSC line exhibited embryonic stem cell-like morphology, maintained a normal karyotype, expressed pluripotency markers, and demonstrated the capacity to differentiate into three germ layers.
To better understand sodium channel (SCN5A)-related cardiomyopathies, we generated ventricular cardiomyocytes from induced pluripotent stem cells obtained from a dilated cardiomyopathy patient harbouring the R222Q mutation, which is only expressed in adult SCN5A isoforms. Because the adult SCN5A isoform was poorly expressed, without functional differences between R222Q and control in both embryoid bodies and cell sheet preparations (cultured for 29-35 days), we created heart-on-a-chip biowires which promote myocardial maturation. Indeed, biowires expressed primarily adult SCN5A with R222Q preparations displaying (arrhythmogenic) short action potentials, altered Na(+) channel biophysical properties and lower contractility compared to corrected controls. Comprehensive RNA sequencing revealed differential gene regulation between R222Q and control biowires in cellular pathways related to sarcoplasmic reticulum and dystroglycan complex as well as biological processes related to calcium ion regulation and action potential. Additionally, R222Q biowires had marked reductions in actin expression accompanied by profound sarcoplasmic disarray, without differences in cell composition (fibroblast, endothelial cells, and cardiomyocytes) compared to corrected biowires. In conclusion, we demonstrate that in addition to altering cardiac electrophysiology and Na(+) current, the R222Q mutation also causes profound sarcomere disruptions and mechanical destabilization. Possible mechanisms for these observations are discussed.
BACKGROUND: Inherited loss of function mutations in SCN5A have been linked to overlapping syndromes including cardiac conduction disease and Brugada syndrome (BrS). The mechanisms responsible for the development of one without the other are poorly understood. METHODS: Direct sequencing was performed in a family with cardiac conduction disease. Wild-type (WT) and mutant channels were expressed in TSA201 cells for electrophysiological study. Green fluorescent protein (GFP)-fused WT or mutant genes were used to assess channel trafficking. RESULTS: A novel SCN5A mutation, P1008S, was identified in all family members displaying first-degree atrioventricular block, but not in unaffected family members nor in 430 reference alleles. Peak P1008S current was 11.77% of WT (P < 0.001). Confocal microscopy showed that WT channels tagged with GFP were localized on the cell surface, whereas GFP-tagged P1008S channels remained trapped in intracellular organelles. Trafficking could be rescued by incubation at room temperature, but not by incubation with mexiletine (300 muM) at 37 degrees C. We also identified a novel polymorphism (D601E) in CACNB2b that slowed inactivation of L-type calcium current (I(Ca,L)), significantly increased total charge. Using the Luo-Rudy action potential (AP) model, we show that the reduction in sodium current (I(Na)) can cause loss of the right ventricular epicardial AP dome in the absence but not in the presence of the slowed inactivation of I(Ca,L). Slowed conduction was present in both cases. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest genetic variations leading to a loss-of-function in I(Na) coupled with a gain of function in I(Ca,L) may underlie the development of cardiac conduction disease without BrS.
AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the predictive value of the rs1805124 polymorphism of the SCN5A gene with regard to idiopathic cardiac conduction disorders. RESULTS: The AG genotype frequency was significantly higher in patients with an atrioventricular block (61,2%+/-6,0%) compared with healthy control subjects (34,8%+/-2,3%), p<0.0001. The AG genotype frequencies among patients with only idiopathic complete right bundle-branch block (CRBBB) (54,2%+/-5,5%) and those with both CLBBB and LAH (50%+/-5,1) were significantly higher than in the control group (34,8%+/-2,3%), p<0.005. CONCLUSIONS: The AG genotype of the H558R (rs1805124) polymorphism of the SCN5A gene is a genetic predictor of idiopathic disorders of atrioventricular and intraventricular conduction.
