Sodium channel protein type 8 subunit alpha; Mediates the voltage-dependent sodium ion permeability of excitable membranes. Assuming opened or closed conformations in response to the voltage difference across the membrane, the protein forms a sodium-selective channel through which Na(+) ions may pass in accordance with their electrochemical gradient. Belongs to the sodium channel (TC 1.A.1.10) family. Nav1.6/SCN8A subfamily.
We report detailed functional analyses and genotype-phenotype correlations in 392 individuals carrying disease-causing variants in SCN8A, encoding the voltage-gated Na+ channel Nav1.6, with the aim of describing clinical phenotypes related to functional effects. Six different clinical subgroups were identified: Group 1, benign familial infantile epilepsy (n = 15, normal cognition, treatable seizures); Group 2, intermediate epilepsy (n = 33, mild intellectual disability, partially pharmaco-responsive); Group 3, developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (n = 177, severe intellectual disability, majority pharmaco-resistant); Group 4, generalized epilepsy (n = 20, mild to moderate intellectual disability, frequently with absence seizures); Group 5, unclassifiable epilepsy (n = 127); and Group 6, neurodevelopmental disorder without epilepsy (n = 20, mild to moderate intellectual disability). Those in Groups 1-3 presented with focal or multifocal seizures (median age of onset: 4 months) and focal epileptiform discharges, whereas the onset of seizures in patients with generalized epilepsy was later (median: 42 months) with generalized epileptiform discharges. We performed functional studies expressing missense variants in ND7/23 neuroblastoma cells and primary neuronal cultures using recombinant tetrodotoxin-insensitive human Nav1.6 channels and whole-cell patch-clamping. Two variants causing developmental and epileptic encephalopathy showed a strong gain-of-function (hyperpolarizing shift of steady-state activation, strongly increased neuronal firing rate) and one variant causing benign familial infantile epilepsy or intermediate epilepsy showed a mild gain-of-function (defective fast inactivation, less increased firing). In contrast, all three variants causing generalized epilepsy induced a loss-of-function (reduced current amplitudes, depolarizing shift of steady-state activation, reduced neuronal firing). Functional effects were known for 170 individuals. All 136 individuals carrying a functionally tested gain-of-function variant had either focal (n = 97, Groups 1-3) or unclassifiable (n = 39) epilepsy, whereas 34 individuals with a loss-of-function variant had either generalized (n = 14), no (n = 11) or unclassifiable (n = 6) epilepsy; only three had developmental and epileptic encephalopathy. Computational modelling in the gain-of-function group revealed a significant correlation between the severity of the electrophysiological and clinical phenotypes. Gain-of-function variant carriers responded significantly better to sodium channel blockers than to other anti-seizure medications, and the same applied for all individuals in Groups 1-3. In conclusion, our data reveal clear genotype-phenotype correlations between age at seizure onset, type of epilepsy and gain- or loss-of-function effects of SCN8A variants. Generalized epilepsy with absence seizures is the main epilepsy phenotype of loss-of-function variant carriers and the extent of the electrophysiological dysfunction of the gain-of-function variants is a main determinant of the severity of the clinical phenotype in focal epilepsies. Our pharmacological data indicate that sodium channel blockers present a treatment option in SCN8A-related focal epilepsy with onset in the first year of life.
Mutations in SCN8A gene lead to changes in sodium channels in the brain, which are correlated with severe epileptic syndrome. Due to the rarity, there are few studies that support anesthesia in that population. The present study aims to report alternatives to inhalation anesthesia at epileptic encephalopathy. CASE REPORT: Male, 4 years old, with SCN8A encephalopathy with surgical indication of orchidopexy. Neuroaxis block was performed and dexmedetomidine was used as a pre-anesthetic and sedation. The anestheticsurgical act was uneventful. CONCLUSION: The association of neuraxial block and dexmedetomidine proved to be a viable alternative for surgery in patients with SCN8A encephalopathy.
Voltage-gated sodium channels are the main targets of antiepileptic drugs, such as sodium valproate (VPA). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the Nav1.6 isoform (SCN8A) have been reported to be closely associated with motor dysfunction in pediatric akathisia epileptica. In this study, we conducted a genetic screening of pediatric patients with seizures treated solely with VPA and identified two novel missense mutations of SCN8A (A1534V and Q1853H). Electrophysiological results revealed that the peak currents of the A1534V variant were smaller compared to that of the wild-type (WT) channel. The A1534V variant also caused a positive shift in the I-V curve, indicating a change in the voltage dependence of activation compared to the WT channels. In contrast, VPA induced a significant negative shift in the inactivation of both WT and A1534V mutant. However, the inhibition of currents by VPA was weaker in the A1534V variant than in WT. Furthermore, the recovery time constant of the A1534V variant was shorter than that of WT when treated with VPA. Regrettably, although the Q1853H variant can be expressed in HEK293T cells, the detected current is too small (approximately 50 pA). In conclusion, our results suggest that the A1534V mutation is a novel loss-of-function variant that exhibits moderate insensitivity to VPA. These results underscore the importance of Nav1.6 as a key target in epilepsy and highlight the necessity of analyzing its role in the pathological process.
The SCN8A gene encodes the sodium voltage-gated channel alpha subunit 8. Mutations in this gene have been associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 13. With the use of whole-exome sequencing, a de novo missense mutation in SCN8A was identified in a 4-yr-old female who initially exhibited symptoms of epilepsy at the age of 5 mo that progressed to a severe condition with very little movement, including being unable to sit or walk on her own.
BACKGROUND: SCN8A-related disorders are a group of variable conditions caused by pathogenic variations in SCN8A. Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) terms them as developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 13, benign familial infantile seizures 5 or cognitive impairment with or without cerebellar ataxia. METHODS: In this study, we describe clinical and genetic results on eight individuals from six families with SCN8A pathogenic variants identified via exome sequencing. RESULTS: Clinical findings ranged from normal development with well-controlled epilepsy to significant developmental delay with treatment-resistant epilepsy. Three novel and three reported variants were observed in SCN8A. Electrophysiological analysis in transfected cells revealed a loss-of-function variant in Patient 4. CONCLUSIONS: This work expands the clinical and genotypic spectrum of SCN8A-related disorders and provides electrophysiological results on a novel loss-of-function SCN8A variant.
BACKGROUND: The Met136Val mutation in SCN8A was described in a case of trigeminal neuralgia but no frequency among affected individuals was provided. METHODS: Direct sequencing of 123 individuals diagnosed with classic trigeminal neuralgia was performed aimed to detect the Met136Val change. RESULTS: No cases of classical trigeminal neuralgia studied had the Met136Val mutation in SCN8A. CONCLUSION: Met136Val mutation in SCN8A is not a frequent cause of classical trigeminal neuralgia.
BACKGROUND: SCN8A mutations are rare and cause a phenotypically heterogeneous early onset epilepsy known as early infantile epileptic encephalopathy type 13 (EIEE13, OMIM #614558). There are currently no clear genotype-phenotype correlations to help guide patient counseling and management. PATIENT DESCRIPTION: We describe a patient with EIEE13 (de novo heterozygous pathogenic mutation in SCN8A - p.Ile240Val (ATT>GTT)) who presented prenatally with maternally reported intermittent, rhythmic movements that, when observed on ultrasound, were concerning for fetal seizures. Ultrasound also revealed abnormal developmental states. With maternal administration of levetiracetam, the rhythmic fetal movements stopped. After birth, the patient developed treatment-refractory multi-focal epilepsy confirmed by electroencephalogram. Neuroimaging revealed restricted diffusion in the superior cerebellar peduncles, a finding not reported previously in EIEE13. CONCLUSION: This is the first report of EIEE13 associated with clinical prenatal-onset seizures. Ultrasonography can be useful for identifying fetal seizures, which may be treatable in utero. Ideally, the clinical approach to fetal seizures should involve a multidisciplinary team spanning the pre- and postnatal course to expedite early diagnosis and optimize management, as illustrated by this patient.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop consensus for diagnosis/management of SCN8A-related disorders. Utilizing a modified Delphi process, a global cohort of experienced clinicians and caregivers provided input on diagnosis, phenotypes, treatment, and management of SCN8A-related disorders. METHODS: A Core Panel (13 clinicians, one researcher, six caregivers), divided into three subgroups (diagnosis/phenotypes, treatment, comorbidities/prognosis), performed a literature review and developed questions for the modified Delphi process. Twenty-eight expert clinicians, one researcher, and 13 caregivers from 16 countries participated in the subsequent three survey rounds. We defined consensus as follows: strong consensus, >/=80% fully agree; moderate consensus, >/=80% fully/partially agree, <10% disagree; and modest consensus, 67%-79% fully/partially agree, <10% disagree. RESULTS: Early diagnosis is important for long-term clinical outcomes in SCN8A-related disorders. There are five phenotypes: three with early seizure onset (severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy [DEE], mild/moderate DEE, self-limited (familial) infantile epilepsy [SeL(F)IE]) and two with later/no seizure onset (neurodevelopmental delay with generalized epilepsy [NDDwGE], NDD without epilepsy [NDDwoE]). Caregivers represented six patients with severe DEE, five mild/moderate DEE, one NDDwGE, and one NDDwoE. Phenotypes vary by age at seizures/developmental delay onset, seizure type, electroencephalographic/magnetic resonance imaging findings, and first-line treatment. Gain of function (GOF) versus loss of function (LOF) is valuable for informing treatment. Sodium channel blockers are optimal first-line treatment for GOF, severe DEE, mild/moderate DEE, and SeL(F)IE; levetiracetam is relatively contraindicated in GOF patients. First-line treatment for NDDwGE is valproate, ethosuximide, or lamotrigine; sodium channel blockers are relatively contraindicated in LOF patients. SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first-ever global consensus for the diagnosis and treatment of SCN8A-related disorders. This consensus will reduce knowledge gaps in disease recognition and inform preferred treatment across this heterogeneous disorder. Consensus of this type allows more clinicians to provide evidence-based care and empowers SCN8A families to advocate for their children.
BACKGROUND: Epilepsy is a complex disorder caused by various factors, including genetic aberrance. Recent studies have identified an essential role of the sodium channel Nav1.6, encoded by the gene SCN8A, in epileptic encephalopathy. CASE PRESENTATION: Using parent-offspring trio targeted-exome sequencing, we identified a de novo heterozygous missense mutation c.3953A > G (p.N1318S) in SCN8A in a 3-year-and-9-month Chinese female patient with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy and a normal magnetic resonance imaging of the brain. CONCLUSIONS: This de novo mutation was only detected in the patient but not in her parents. Bioinformatic analysis indicates the pathogenicity of this mutation. Administration of the sodium channel blocker well controlled seizures in the patient. Therefore, we recommend trio targeted-exome sequencing as a routine method for pathogenic variant screening in patients with intractable epilepsy and a normal MRI.
Understanding the precise genetic -basis of disease is one of the critical developments in medicine in the twenty-first century. Genetic testing has revolutionized the diagnosis and treatment of neurological diseases in children. Whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing have particularly been useful in understanding the genetic basis of childhood epileptic encephalopathies characterized by early-onset seizures with significant developmental impairment and regression. In this review we describe the identification of a new epileptic encephalopathy caused by a de novo mutation in the SCN8A gene, which encodes for Na(V)1.6, a vital sodium channel in the central nervous system. SCN8A variants in patients with epilepsy result primarily in gain-of-function in Na(v)1.6 and hyperexcitability of neurons in the central nervous system. Following the original discovery in 2012 of a de novo mutation in a child with developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), more than 400 individuals with SCN8A-related disorders have been identified. Clinical manifestations range from movement disorders or intellectual disability only to severe DEE, which includes epileptic encephalopathy with intractable multivariate seizure types, developmental impairment and regression, intellectual disability, and other neurological manifestations. Gain-of-function of the Na(v)1.6 channel predicts effectiveness of sodium channel-blocking agents in the treatment of seizures, which has been corroborated by clinical experience. Nevertheless, treatment options remain limited and adverse effects are common. However, with the availability of a growing database of genetic and clinical data along with transfected cell lines and mouse models, more efficacious, targeted, and selective treatments may soon be feasible.
