Sonic hedgehog protein N-product; [Sonic hedgehog protein]: The C-terminal part of the sonic hedgehog protein precursor displays an autoproteolysis and a cholesterol transferase activity (By similarity). Both activities result in the cleavage of the full-length protein into two parts (ShhN and ShhC) followed by the covalent attachment of a cholesterol moiety to the C-terminal of the newly generated ShhN (By similarity). Both activities occur in the reticulum endoplasmic (By similarity). Once cleaved, ShhC is degraded in the endoplasmic reticulum (By similarity).
Many genes that drive normal cellular development also contribute to oncogenesis. Medulloblastoma (MB) tumors likely arise from neuronal progenitors in the cerebellum, and we hypothesized that the heterogeneity observed in MBs with sonic hedgehog (SHH) activation could be due to differences in developmental pathways. To investigate this question, here we perform single-nucleus RNA sequencing on highly differentiated SHH MBs with extensively nodular histology and observed malignant cells resembling each stage of canonical granule neuron development. Through innovative computational approaches, we connect these results to published datasets and find that some established molecular subtypes of SHH MB appear arrested at different developmental stages. Additionally, using multiplexed proteomic imaging and MALDI imaging mass spectrometry, we identify distinct histological and metabolic profiles for highly differentiated tumors. Our approaches are applicable to understanding the interplay between heterogeneity and differentiation in other cancers and can provide important insights for the design of targeted therapies.
Medulloblastoma is the most common CNS embryonal tumor and the most common malignant tumor of childhood. Its overall incidence is 1.8 cases per 1 million people, with a childhood incidence of 6 cases per 1 million. 77 percent of patients are less than 19 years old. Medulloblastoma occurs in the 4th ventricle and usually presents with symptoms of increased intracranial pressure (headaches, nausea, vomiting) and signs of obstructive hydrocephalus. Medulloblastoma is both histologically and genetically defined with prognosis that depends on classification.
Shh contributes to neural circuit formation with different mechanisms. In this issue, Peng and colleagues (2018) identify a novel trans-axonal mechanism by which Shh derived from contralateral projecting retinal ganglion cells prevents midline crossing of Boc-expressing ipsilateral axons at the optic chiasm.
Correct notochord and neural tube (NT) formation is crucial to the development of the central nervous system and midline structures. Integrated biochemical and biophysical signaling controls embryonic growth and patterning; however, the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we took the opportunities of marked morphological changes during notochord and NT formation and identified both necessary and sufficient roles of Yap, a key mechanosensor and mechanotransducer, in biochemical signaling activation during formation of notochord and floor plate, the ventral signaling centers that pattern the dorsal-ventral axis of NT and the surrounding tissues. We showed that Yap activation by a gradient of mechanical stress and tissue stiffness in the notochord and ventral NT induces FoxA2 and Shh expression. Hedgehog signaling activation rescued NT patterning defects caused by Yap deficiency, but not notochord formation. Therefore, mechanotransduction via Yap activation acts in feedforward mechanisms to induce FoxA2 expression for notochord formation and activate Shh expression for floor plate induction by synergistically interacting with FoxA2.
