Solute carrier family 22 member 7; Mediates sodium-independent multispecific organic anion transport. Transport of prostaglandin E2, prostaglandin F2, tetracycline, bumetanide, estrone sulfate, glutarate, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, allopurinol, 5-fluorouracil, paclitaxel, L-ascorbic acid, salicylate, ethotrexate, and alpha- ketoglutarate.
Observed variations in drug responses among patients may result from differences in heritable genetic traits or from alterations in the epigenetic regulation of drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters (DMETs). MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a group of small non-coding RNAs, provide an epigenetic mechanism for fine-tuning the expression of targeted DMET genes by regulating the efficiency of protein translation and by decreasing mRNA stability via enhanced degradation. In the current study we systematically screened 374 important genes encoding DMETs for potential response elements to hsa-miR-29a-3p, a highly abundant miRNA in human liver. RNA electrophoresis mobility shift assays displayed direct interactions between hsa-miR-29a-3p and its cognate targets within the mRNA transcripts for the ABCC6, SLC22A7 and ALDH5A1 genes. The expression of luciferase reporter genes containing the 3'-UTRs of SLC22A7 or ALDH5A1 and the expression of endogenous SLC22A7 and ALDH5A1 were each suppressed by transfection with hsa-miR-29a-3p mimics. Importantly, chemically-induced up-regulation of hsa-miR-29a-3p correlated inversely with the expression of SLC22A7 and ALDH5A1. However, our studies failed to detect suppressive effects of hsa-miR-29a-3p on ABCC6 expression, which might be explained by the notion that the interaction of hsa-miR-29a-3p and ABCC6 mRNA was unable to recruit ribonucleoproteins to form a RNA-induced silencing complex.
AIM: To identify novel variants associated with anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and to assess these in a genotype-guided risk prediction model. PATIENTS & METHODS: Two cohorts treated for childhood cancer (n = 344 and 218, respectively) were genotyped for 4578 SNPs in drug ADME and toxicity genes. RESULTS: Significant associations were identified in SLC22A17 (rs4982753; p = 0.0078) and SLC22A7 (rs4149178; p = 0.0034), with replication in the second cohort (p = 0.0071 and 0.047, respectively). Additional evidence was found for SULT2B1 and several genes related to oxidative stress. Adding the SLC22 variants to the prediction model improved its discriminative ability (AUC 0.78 vs 0.75 [p = 0.029]). CONCLUSION: Two novel variants in SLC22A17 and SLC22A7 were significantly associated with anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity and improved a genotype-guided risk prediction model, which could improve patient risk stratification.
The second messenger, cGMP, mediates a host of cellular responses to various stimuli, resulting in the regulation of many critical physiologic functions. The existence of specific cGMP transporters on the plasma membrane that participate in the regulation of cGMP levels has been suggested in a large number of studies. In this study, we identified a novel plasma membrane transporter for cGMP. In particular, we showed that hOAT2 (SLC22A7), a member of the solute carrier (SLC) superfamily, was a facilitative transporter for cGMP and other guanine nucleotides. hOAT2, which is ubiquitously expressed at high levels in many cell types, was previously thought to primarily transport organic anions. Among purine and pyrimidine nucleobases, nucleosides, and nucleotides, hOAT2 showed the greatest preference for cGMP, which transported cGMP with a K(m) value of 88 +/- 11 muM and exhibited between 50- and 100-fold enhanced uptake over control cells. Our data revealed that hOAT2 is a bidirectional facilitative transporter that can control both intracellular and extracellular levels of cGMP. In addition, we observed that a common alternatively spliced variant of hOAT2 demonstrated a complete loss of transport function as a result of a low expression level on the plasma membrane. We conclude that hOAT2 is a highly efficient, facilitative transporter of cGMP and may be involved in cGMP signaling in many tissues. Our study suggests that hOAT2 represents a potential new drug target for regulating cGMP levels.
The physiological function of organic anion transporter OAT2 (SLC22A7) remains unclear, but since OAT2 transports purine derivatives, it may be involved in renal handling of uric acid, the final metabolite of purine derivatives. In the present study, we studied uric acid transport in stably OAT2-expressing HEK293 cells (HEK293/OAT2). OAT2 mediated uptake, but not efflux, of [(14)C]uric acid. Uric acid transport was saturable with K(m) of 1168+/-335 muM (mean and S.E.M.) and V(max) of 2.57+/-0.350 nmol/min/mg protein. The [(14)C]uric acid uptake was sensitive to Cl(-) and was enhanced at acidic pH. In cis-inhibition assay, [(14)C]uric acid uptake was inhibited by several mono- or dicarboxylic acids, but it was not trans-stimulated by any of the compounds tested. The pattern of inhibition of OAT2-mediated uric acid transport by various drugs was different from that of OAT1- or OAT3-mediated transport. Furthermore, OAT2-mediated transport of uric acid was inhibited by an antiuricosuric drug, pyrazinecarboxylic acid. These results revealed distinct characteristics of uric acid transport via OAT2 compared with other uric acid transporters, suggesting that OAT2 plays a role in renal uric acid uptake from blood as a first step of tubular secretion. OAT2 may therefore be a potential target for regulating serum uric acid level.
The present study was conducted to characterise the transporter(s) responsible for the uptake of cyclic nucleotides to human erythrocytes. Western blotting showed that hRBC expressed OAT2 (SLC22A7), but detection of OAT1 (SLC22A6), or OAT3 (SLC22A8) was not possible. Intact hRBC were employed to clarify the simultaneous cyclic nucleotide egression and uptake. Both these opposing processes were studied. The K(m) -values for high affinity efflux was 3.5 +/- 0.1 and 39.4 +/- 5.7 muM for cGMP and cAMP, respectively. The respective values for low affinity efflux were 212 +/- 11 and 339 +/- 42 muM. The uptake was characterised with apparently low affinity and similar K(m) -values for cGMP (2.2 mM) and cAMP (0.89 mM). Using an iterative approach in order to balance uptake with efflux, the predicted real K(m) -values for uptake were 100-200 muM for cGMP and 50-150 muM for cAMP. The established OAT2-substrate indomethacin showed a competitive interaction with cyclic nucleotide uptake. Creatinine, also an OAT2 substrate, showed saturable uptake with a K(m) of 854 +/- 98 muM. Unexpectedly, co-incubation with cyclic nucleotides showed an uncompetitive inhibition. The observed K(m) -values were 399 +/- 44 and 259 +/- 30 muM for creatinine, in the presence of cGMP and cAMP, respectively. Finally, the OAT1-substrate para-aminohippurate (PAH) showed some uptake (K(m) -value of 2.0 +/- 0.4 mM) but did not interact with cyclic nucleotide or indomethacin transport.
Nicotinic acid (NA) and nicotinamide (NAM) are biosynthetic precursors of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) - a physiologically important coenzyme that maintains the redox state of cells. Mechanisms driving their entry into cells are not well understood. Here we evaluated the hepatic uptake mechanism(s) of NA and NAM using transporter-transfected cell systems and primary human hepatocytes. NA showed robust organic anion transporter (OAT)2-mediated transport with an uptake ratio (i.e., ratio of accumulation in transfect cells to wild-type cells) of 9.7 +/- 0.3, and a Michaelis-Menten constant (K(m)) of 13.5 +/- 3.3 microM. However, no transport was apparent via other major hepatic uptake and renal secretory transporters, including OAT1/3/4, organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B1/1B3/2B1, sodium-taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide, organ cation transporter 1/2/3. OAT2-specific transport of NA was inhibited by ketoprofen and indomethacin (known OAT2 inhibitors) in a concentration-dependent manner. Similarly, NA uptake into primary human hepatocytes showed pH- and concentration-dependence and was subject to inhibition by specific OAT2 inhibitors. Unlike NA, NAM was not transported by the hepatic and renal solute carriers upon assessment in transfected cells, although its uptake into human hepatocytes was significantly inhibited by excess unlabelled NAM and a pan-SLC inhibitor (rifamycin SV 1 mM). In conclusion, these studies demonstrate, for the first time, a specific transport mechanism for NA uptake in the human liver and suggest that OAT2 (SLC22A7) has a critical role in its physiological and pharmacological functions.
