Solute carrier family 22 member 8; Plays an important role in the excretion/detoxification of endogenous and exogenous organic anions, especially from the brain and kidney. Involved in the transport basolateral of steviol, fexofenadine. Transports benzylpenicillin (PCG), estrone-3-sulfate (E1S), cimetidine (CMD), 2,4-dichloro-phenoxyacetate (2,4-D), p-amino-hippurate (PAH), acyclovir (ACV) and ochratoxin (OTA). Belongs to the major facilitator (TC 2.A.1) superfamily. Organic cation transporter (TC 2.A.1.19) family.
Organic anion transporter 3 (OAT3, SLC22A8), a transporter expressed on the basolateral membrane of the proximal tubule, plays a critical role in the renal excretion of organic anions including many therapeutic drugs. The goal of this study was to evaluate the in vivo effects of the OAT3-Ile305Phe variant (rs11568482), present at 3.5% allele frequency in Asians, on drug disposition with a focus on cefotaxime, a cephalosporin antibiotic. In HEK293-Flp-In cells, the OAT3-Ile305Phe variant had a lower maximum cefotaxime transport activity, Vmax , [159 +/- 3 nmol*(mg protein)(-1) /min (mean +/- SD)] compared with the reference OAT3 [305 +/- 28 nmol*(mg protein)(-1) /min, (mean +/- SD), p < 0.01], whereas the Michaelis-Menten constant values (Km ) did not differ. In healthy volunteers, we found volunteers that were heterozygous for the Ile305Phe variant and had a significantly lower cefotaxime renal clearance (CLR ; mean +/- SD: 84.8 +/- 32.1 mL/min, n = 5) compared with volunteers that were homozygous for the reference allele (158 +/- 44.1 mL/min, n = 10; p = 0.006). Furthermore, the net secretory component of cefotaxime renal clearance (CLsec ) was reduced in volunteers heterozygous for the variant allele [33.3 +/- 31.8 mL/min (mean +/- SD)] compared with volunteers homozygous for the OAT3 reference allele [97.0 +/- 42.2 mL/min (mean +/- SD), p = 0.01]. In summary, our study suggests that a low-frequency reduced-function polymorphism of OAT3 associates with reduced cefotaxime CLR and CL(sec) .
PURPOSE: Our previous studies showed that the mRNA level of human organic anion transporter (hOAT) 3 in the kidney was correlated with the rate of elimination of an anionic antibiotic cefazolin. However, the correlation coefficient was not so high. In the present study, therefore, we enrolled more patients to examine whether additional factors were responsible for the correlation. METHODS: hOAT mRNA levels in renal biopsy specimens were quantified using the real-time polymerase chain reaction method. The elimination rates for the free fraction of cefazolin were determined in patients with various renal diseases. RESULTS: In the present study, the coefficient of correlation between the hOAT3 mRNA level and the elimination rates for the free fraction of cefazolin was not so high in the patients overall as in our previous study (r = 0.536). However, following the classification of renal diseases, a better correlation was obtained in patients with mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (r = 0.723). In contrast, multiple regression analyses including gender, age, and liver function did not result in any improvements in the correlation coefficients. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the hOAT3 mRNA level is a significant marker of pharmacokinetics with which to predict the rate of elimination of cefazolin in patients with mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is one of the most common renal malignancies worldwide. SLC22A8 plays a key role in renal excretion of organic anions. However, its role in ccRCC remains unclear; therefore, this study aimed to elucidate the relationship between SLC22A8 and ccRCC. The The Cancer Genome Atlas-kidney renal clear cell carcinoma cohort was included in this study. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test and logistic regression were used to analyze the relationship between SLC22A8 expression and clinicopathological characteristics. Multifactorial analysis and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were adopted for correlation between SLC22A8 expression and clinicopathological parameters and overall survival. Utilizing the UALCAN database, the correlation of the expression levels of SLC22A8 DNA methylation in ccRCC was explored. Immunological characterization of SLC22A8 regarding the ccRCC tumor microenvironment was carried out by the single sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis algorithm and the CIBERSORT algorithm. With the CellMiner database, the analysis of the association between SLC22A8 gene expression and drug sensitivity was further performed. Eventually, gene ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genome enrichment analyses were applied to identify the functional and signaling pathways involved in SLC22A8. SLC22A8 expression is associated with age, grade, stage, and tumor status. SLC22A8 protein expression levels, phosphorylated protein levels, and DNA methylation expression levels were lower in ccRCC tissues than in normal tissues, and low methylation levels predicted poor overall survival. Comprehensive analysis of tumor immune infiltration and the tumor microenvironment indicated a higher level of overall immunity in the SLC22A8 low expression group. Gene Enrichment Analysis results showed that low expression of SLC22A8 was associated with immune pathways, such as phagocytosis recognition and humoral immune response. SLC22A8 expression was significantly correlated with survival and immune infiltration in ccRCC and can be used as a prognostic biomarker for ccRCC.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to quantitate the contribution of the genetic polymorphisms of the genes for 2 human organic anion transporters-organic anion transporting polypeptide C (OATP-C) and organic anion transporter 3 (OAT3)-to the pharmacokinetics of pravastatin. METHODS: Genetic polymorphisms were screened by polymerase chain reaction-single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, after sequencing with deoxyribonucleic acid obtained from 120 healthy volunteers. To examine whether polymorphisms in these 2 genes of interest alter transport activity, we conducted a clinical study (n = 23) with pravastatin as a selective probe drug. RESULTS: Among 120 healthy individuals, 5 nonsynonymous variants and 1 nonsynonymous variant were observed in the OATP-C and OAT3 genes, respectively. The polymorphisms in the OAT3 gene did not appear to be associated with changes in renal and tubular secretory clearance. In contrast, the OATP-C variants were associated with differences in the disposition kinetics of pravastatin. Subjects with the OATP-C*15 allele (Asp130Ala174) had a reduced total and nonrenal clearance, as compared with those with the OATP-C*1b allele (Asp130Val174); nonrenal clearance values in *1b/*1b (n = 4), *1b/*15 (n = 9), and *15/*15 (n = 1) subjects were 2.01 +/- 0.42 L. kg(-1). h(-1), 1.11 +/- 0.34 L. kg(-1). h(-1), and 0.29 L. kg(-1). h(-1), respectively, and the difference between *1b/*1b and *1b/*15 subjects was significant (P <.05). CONCLUSION: Certain commonly occurring single-nucleotide polymorphisms in OATP-C, such as T521C (Val174Ala), are likely to be associated with altered pharmacokinetics of pravastatin. Large clinical studies are needed to confirm these observations.
The OAT1 (SLC22A6) and OAT3 (SLC22A8) urate transporters are located on the basolateral membrane of the proximal renal tubules, where they ensure the uptake of uric acid from the urine back into the body. In a cohort of 150 Czech patients with primary hyperuricemia and gout, we examined the coding regions of both genes using PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing. Variants p.P104L (rs11568627) and p.A190T (rs146282438) were identified in the gene for solute carrier family 22 member 6 (SLC22A6) and variants p.R149C (rs45566039), p.V448I (rs11568486) and p.R513Q (rs145474422) in the gene solute carrier family 22 member 8 (SLC22A8). We performed a functional study of these rare non-synonymous variants using the HEK293T cell line. We found that only p.R149C significantly reduced uric acid transport in vitro. Our results could deepen the understanding of uric acid handling in the kidneys and the molecular mechanism of uric acid transport by the OAT family of organic ion transporters.
The human organic anion transporter, OAT3 (SLC22A8), plays a critical role in renal drug elimination, by mediating the entry of a wide variety of organic anions, including a number of commonly used pharmaceuticals, into the renal proximal tubular cells. To understand the nature and extent of genetic variation in OAT3, and to determine whether such variation affects its function, we identified OAT3 variants in a large, ethnically diverse sample population and studied their transport activities in cellular assays. We identified a total of 10 distinct coding-region variants, which altered the encoded amino acid sequence, in DNA samples from 270 individuals (80 African-Americans, 80 European-Americans, 60 Asian-Americans, and 50 Mexican-Americans). The overall prevalence of these OAT3 variants was relatively low among the screened population, with only three variants having allele frequencies of >1% in a particular ethnic group. Clones of each variant were created by site-directed mutagenesis, expressed in HEK-293 cells, and tested for function using the model substrates, estrone sulfate (ES) and cimetidine (CIM). The results revealed a high degree of functional heterogeneity among OAT3 variants, with three variants (p. Arg149Ser, p. Gln239Stop, and p. Ile260Arg) that resulted in complete loss of function, and several others with significantly reduced function. One of the more common variants (p. Ile305Phe), found in 3.5% of Asian-Americans, appeared to have altered substrate specificity. This variant exhibited a reduced ability to transport ES, but a preserved ability to transport CIM. These data suggest that genetic variation in OAT3 may contribute to variation in the disposition of drugs.
3-Methyl-1-phenyl-2-pyrazolin-5-one (MCI-186; edaravone), a novel free radical scavenger, is used for the treatment of acute cerebral infarction. After marketing, a few cases of acute renal failure were reported in patients following treatment with this drug. Because edaravone is mainly excreted into the urine following conjugation to glucuronide or sulfate, the renal excretion mechanisms of edaravone should help provide important information when considering the clinical cases. We examined the transport of edaravone and its sulfate and glucuronide conjugates via human organic anion transporter 1 (hOAT1) and 3 (hOAT3), expressed on the basolateral membranes of proximal tubules. The hOAT1- and hOAT3-transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293 cells exhibited a markedly higher uptake of edaravone sulfate and a slightly higher uptake of edaravone than vector-transfected cells. The K(m) values of edaravone sulfate uptake by hOAT1 and hOAT3 were 11 and 15 microM, respectively. Estimation of the relative contribution of hOAT1 and hOAT3 using reference compounds suggested that hOAT1 and hOAT3 might contribute to the renal uptake of edaravone sulfate to the same extent. However, edaravone and its sulfate showed no cytotoxicity toward both hOAT1-HEK and control cells, suggesting that higher uptake in hOAT1-HEK did not associate with cytotoxicity of these compounds. In conclusion, our results suggest that both hOAT1 and hOAT3 are responsible for the basolateral uptake of edaravone sulfate in the kidney.
Phenolic acids exert beneficial health effects such as anti-oxidant, anti-carcinogenic, and anti-inflammatory activities and show systemic exposure after consumption of common fruits, vegetables, and beverages. However, knowledge regarding which components convey therapeutic benefits and the mechanism(s) by which they cross cell membranes is extremely limited. Therefore, we determined the inhibitory effects of nine food-derived phenolic acids, p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, gallic acid, gentisic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, protocatechuic acid, sinapinic acid, syringic acid, and vanillic acid, on human organic anion transporter 1 (hOAT1), hOAT3, and hOAT4. In the present study, inhibition of OAT-mediated transport of prototypical substrates (1 muM) by phenolic acids (100 muM) was examined in stably expressing cell lines. All compounds significantly inhibited hOAT3 transport, while just ferulic, gallic, protocatechuic, sinapinic, and vanillic acid significantly blocked hOAT1 activity. Only sinapinic acid inhibited hOAT4 (~35%). For compounds exhibiting inhibition > ~60%, known clinical plasma concentration levels and plasma protein binding in humans were examined to select compounds to evaluate further with dose-response curves (IC(50) values) and drug-drug interaction (DDI) index determinations. IC(50) values ranged from 1.24 to 18.08 muM for hOAT1 and from 7.35 to 87.36 muM for hOAT3. Maximum DDI indices for gallic and gentisic acid (>>0.1) indicated a very strong potential for DDIs on hOAT1 and/or hOAT3. This study indicates that gallic acid from foods or supplements, or gentisic acid from salicylate-based drug metabolism, may significantly alter the pharmacokinetics (efficacy and toxicity) of concomitant therapeutics that are hOAT1 and/or hOAT3 substrates.
