Sodium-dependent serotonin transporter; Serotonin transporter whose primary function in the central nervous system involves the regulation of serotonergic signaling via transport of serotonin molecules from the synaptic cleft back into the pre-synaptic terminal for re-utilization. Plays a key role in mediating regulation of the availability of serotonin to other receptors of serotonergic systems. Terminates the action of serotonin and recycles it in a sodium-dependent manner.
Serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants, including selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; i.e., citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, and sertraline), serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (i.e., desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levomilnacipran, milnacipran, and venlafaxine), and serotonin modulators with SSRI-like properties (i.e., vilazodone and vortioxetine) are primary pharmacologic treatments for major depressive and anxiety disorders. Genetic variation in CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2B6 influences the metabolism of many of these antidepressants, which may potentially affect dosing, efficacy, and tolerability. In addition, the pharmacodynamic genes SLC6A4 (serotonin transporter) and HTR2A (serotonin-2A receptor) have been examined in relation to efficacy and side effect profiles of these drugs. This guideline updates and expands the 2015 Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) guideline for CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 genotypes and SSRI dosing and summarizes the impact of CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP2B6, SLC6A4, and HTR2A genotypes on antidepressant dosing, efficacy, and tolerability. We provide recommendations for using CYP2D6, CYP2C19, and CYP2B6 genotype results to help inform prescribing these antidepressants and describe the existing data for SLC6A4 and HTR2A, which do not support their clinical use in antidepressant prescribing.
5HTTLPR, which is the trivial name for a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism mapped to the 5' region of the SLC6A4 (serotonin transporter protein) gene, is one of the most studied variants with respect to psychiatric traits. It is also widely studied in the context of intermediate phenotypes such as neuroimaging measures, and gene-by-environment interaction, the latter generally in the context of affective and anxiety phenotypes. In this article, the author discusses the importance of the variant in the context of a population genetics article published in Human Genetics sixteen years ago.
AIM: We carried out a pharmacogenomic study in order to identify susceptible genes for antipsychotics induced weight gain within the Chinese Han population. MATERIALS & METHODS: We enrolled 216 patients with schizophrenia in our study. All of them underwent risperidone monotherapy, and fulfilled 4-week follow-up. Weight gain was measured before treatment and 4 weeks later. Seven hundred and sixty-eight SNPs from 85 genes were calculated for association with weight gain percentage. RESULTS: Fifty-seven SNPs located at 16 genes with a p-value less than 0.05.4 SNPs located on serotonin transporter gene (solute carrier family 6, member 4, SLC6A4) remained significant after multitest correction (rs3813034, p = 0.000357, q = 0.08, rs1042173, rs4325622, rs9303628, p = 0.000451, q = 0.08). CONCLUSION: SLC6A4 might be susceptible gene for risperidone-induced weight gain within the Chinese Han population.
Aim: To identify the DNA methylation status of related genes in major depressive disorder following selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor treatment. Materials & methods: 45 patients with major depressive disorder and 45 healthy volunteers were considered experimental and control groups, respectively. High-resolution melting real-time PCR was implemented to evaluate DNA methylation. Results: After 100 days of selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor treatment, methylation of promoter CpG sites of BDNF, NR3C1, FKBP5 and SLC6A4 was significantly reduced. Compared with before treatment, patients' Hamilton Depression Rating Scale scores were significantly reduced after selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor treatment (p </= 0.0001). Conclusion: Based on the proven effect of antidepressants on DNA methylation and gene expression, these medications can improve the treatment process and reduce depression scores after treatment.
In the current study, we investigated how individual variants in the serotonin promoter gene, previously associated with smoking cessation and linked to anxiety-related personality traits, were associated with individual differences in responsiveness to bupropion and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in a clinical population. We hypothesize that subjects with the long allele may be less responsive to treatment. Altogether 61 schizophrenic patients (46 M, 15 F) on stable neuroleptic medication were initially enrolled in a smoking reduction program (prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled) including cognitive behavioral therapy plus placebo or CBT plus bupropion. Additionally, subjects were genotyped for a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4). Thirty-two subjects (23 M, 9 F) completed a 14-week course of treatment. While both groups of subjects demonstrated significant reductions in smoking behavior due to CBT, subjects receiving bupropion did not show significant differences in smoking behavior when compared to placebo. In addition, analysis by SPSS repeated measures multivariate showed a significant sex by SLC6A4 genotype interaction on the number of cigarettes smoked. Only male subjects with at least one short promoter region allele (short/short and short/long combined) showed a reduction in cigarette consumption as a result of treatment. This study provides preliminary evidence of how polymorphisms in the serotonin transporter can be informative in predicting individual responses to smoking reduction therapy.
We tested four genes [phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4), monoamine oxidase B (MAOB), and the gamma-aminobutyric acid A receptor beta-3 subunit (GABRB3)] for their impact on five schizophrenia symptom factors: delusions, hallucinations, mania, depression, and negative symptoms. In a 90 family subset of the Irish Study of High Density Schizophrenia Families, the PAH 232 bp microsatellite allele demonstrated significant association with the delusions factor using both QTDT (F=8.0, p=.031) and QPDTPHASE (chi-square=12.54, p=.028). Also, a significant association between the GABRB3 191 bp allele and the hallucinations factor was detected using QPDTPHASE (chi-square=15.51, p=.030), but not QTDT (chi-square=2.07, p=.560).
The Strong African American Family (SAAF) program has been shown to have a variety of short and long-term benefits for participating youth and families. However, biological mechanisms potentially influencing long-term effects on resilience in young adulthood have not been examined. In the current investigation, we examine the effects of SAAF on methylation of the OXTR gene in young adulthood, focusing on a regulatory region previously identified to be both responsive to stress and implicated in resilience. Using the subsample of participants from the original study for whom methylation data was available (N = 388), we replicated the previously reported G x E effect on prevention of early substance use and then examined whether there would also be a moderated effect on OXTR methylation in early adulthood, with "s" allele carriers, but not "LL" participants, showing a significant indirect effect of SAAF on OXTR methylation. Results suggest that for susceptible youth (i.e., "s" allele carriers), preventive intervention may "get under the skin," in a manner potentially beneficial for long-term outcomes. Implications for examination of OXTR methylation in future prevention research are discussed.
The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) is a suitable candidate gene to test for involvement in the pathogenesis of major psychiatric disorders. We used the method of family-based controls to test for association between disease and a variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) in intron 2 of the gene, which has received support for involvement in the pathogenesis of several psychiatric disorders. We analysed 413 proband-parent trios of Bulgarian origin: 266 had a schizophrenic proband, 103 had a bipolar proband and 44 had a schizoaffective proband. The results were analysed using the extended transmission disequilibrium test. Possible effects of different alleles on certain clinical variables were examined by correlation analysis. Three alleles were detected: STin2.9, STin2.10 and STin2.12. None of the three diagnostic samples showed preferential transmission of alleles that reached conventional levels of statistical significance. We could not confirm previous results that STin2.12 allele increases susceptibility to bipolar disorder type I. The rare STin2.9 showed a non-significant trend for preferential transmission in the sample as a whole: 18 transmitted versus 11 non-transmitted (P = 0.2). The VNTR polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene does not appear to be a major risk factor for increasing susceptibility to major psychiatric disorders.
To replicate a reported association between migraine with aura (MA) and a promoter polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4), we performed a case-control study in a large German sample comprising 472 patients with MA and 506 controls. Neither this polymorphism nor a systematic analysis with single nucleotide polymorphisms capturing the main haplotype diversity of the SLC6A4 locus provided evidence for a contribution of SLC6A4 to the predisposition of complex inherited MA.
OBJECTIVE: Age at onset of first major depressive episode (MDE) does not necessarily translate into different treatment outcomes to antidepressants in late-life depression. The influence of genetic variants may affect this relationship. DESIGN: Post hoc data set analysis of the association between variants in the promoter region (indel, rs25531) and within intron 2 (Stin2 VNTR) of the SCL6A4 gene and treatment outcomes among older participants in the first treatment arm of the Sequenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve Depression trial (STAR*D). SETTING: Participants were enrolled from 23 psychiatric and 18 primary care settings. PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred twenty-one, white non-Hispanic subjects, aged 60 to 75 years, with 16-item Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology-Clinician Rating (QIDS-CR16) initial score >/=10, and who remained in the study for at least 6 weeks, were genotyped. INTERVENTION: Citalopram treatment for up to 14 weeks. MEASUREMENTS: Main outcome was remission rate defined as a score of </=5 on the QIDS-CR16. Response was a secondary outcome defined as a reduction of >/=50% of baseline QIDS-CR16. RESULTS: Polymorphism in the indel promoter region was associated with remission among subjects whose first lifetime episode of major depression occurred later than age 55. In this group, subjects with L/L genotype had significantly higher remission (80% versus 43%) compared to those subjects with any other indel promoter genotype. Multivariate analysis demonstrated that the genetic effect of the indel promoter region on remission increases along with age at onset of MDE. CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the indel promoter region of the SLC6A4 gene have a more robust effect to antidepressant outcome among older subjects who experienced their first MDE at a later age. The mechanism of action of these variants remains to be determined.
We analyzed the putative functional promoter polymorphism of the serotonin transporter (5-HTTLPR) in two large autism spectrum disorder samples and a control sample. A Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium was detected for 5-HTTLPR in the unaffected founders of both autism spectrum disorder samples and control samples. When we lowered the total magnesium concentration in the polymerase chain reaction below levels reported in previously published studies, we observed a shift in relative allele frequencies and restoration of the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Our data suggest that higher magnesium concentrations caused allele-dependent, non-random genotyping errors. Genotyping data obtained from the 2 mM magnesium protocol increased the significance of linkage and gave suggestive (P=0.06) association with autism spectrum disorder, whereas the corrected genotypes of 5-HTTLPR provide no linkage information beyond the results we have previously published and no evidence of association with autism spectrum disorder. We present details regarding appropriate polymerase chain reaction conditions for the accurate genotyping of this polymorphism.
BACKGROUND: The relationship between early adverse life events and later internalizing problems could be mediated by DNA methylation. Adversity has been associated with higher methylation levels in the glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1) and the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4) in adolescents. We investigated cross-sectional and prospective associations of NR3C1 and SLC6A4 methylation with adolescents׳ clinical diagnoses of internalizing disorders and internalizing symptom scores. METHODS: In a population sample (mean age=16.2) we measured DNA methylation in three regions of NR3C1 (NR3C1_1, N=454; NR3C1_2, N=904; NR3C1_3, N=412) and one region of SLC6A4 (N=939) at baseline. Internalizing problems were operationalized as clinical DSM-IV diagnoses, assessed at 3 year follow-up with a diagnostic interview, and internalizing symptom scores, assessed with Self-Report questionnaires at baseline and follow-up. RESULTS: Only NR3C1_1 methylation was positively associated with risk of lifetime internalizing disorders, and with symptom scores at follow-up. However, after accounting for baseline symptom scores there was only a tendency for association with internalizing symptom scores at follow-up. There was no association between SLC6A4 methylation and risk of lifetime internalizing disorders. SLC6A4 methylation and internalizing symptom scores showed a tendency for association, also after accounting for baseline symptom scores. LIMITATIONS: There was no repeated measure of DNA methylation to study causality between methylation and internalizing problems. Gene expression data were not available. CONCLUSIONS: Although the role of gene methylation in the development of internalizing problems remains unclear, our findings suggest that gene methylation, particularly of NR3C1, may be involved in the development of internalizing problems in adolescence.
Abnormalities in monoamine metabolism, including serotonin metabolism, have been implicated in the pathophysiology of affective disorders, schizophrenia, suicide, and other psychiatric disorders. Serotonin transporter protein (SERT) allows neurons to retrieve serotonin that has been released into a synapse. SERT is a site of action for several drugs with CNS effects, including both therapeutic agents (e.g., antidepressants) and drugs of abuse (e.g., cocaine). This gene had previously been physically mapped to chromosome 17. We used a PCR product corresponding to the 3' untranslated region of the gene as a probe to identify restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP), which we then used to establish that the SLC6A4, genetic locus for SERT, is near 17q12 and probably flanked by D17S58 and D17S73 (a location consistent with observed crossovers). These data should be useful for linkage studies of neuropsychiatric disorders.
Meditation-based interventions are novel and effective non-pharmacologic treatments for veterans with PTSD. We examined relationships between treatment response, early life trauma exposure, DNA polymorphisms, and methylation in the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4) and FK506-binding protein 5 (FKBP5) genes. DNA samples and clinical outcomes were examined in 72 veterans with PTSD who received meditation-based therapy in two separate studies of mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) and Transcendental Meditation (TM). The PTSD Checklist was administered to assess symptoms at baseline and after 9 weeks of meditation intervention. We examined the SLC6A4 promoter (5HTTLPR_L/S insertion/deletion + rs25531_A/G) polymorphisms according to previously defined gene expression groups, and the FKBP5 variant rs1360780 previously associated with PTSD disease risk. Methylation for CpG sites of SLC6A4 (28 sites) and FKBP5 (45 sites) genes was quantified in DNA samples collected before and after treatment. The 5HTTLPR L(A)L(A) high expression genotype was associated with greater symptom improvement in participants exposed to early life trauma (p = 0.015). Separately, pre to post-treatment change of DNA methylation in a group of nine FKBP5 CpG sites was associated with greater symptom improvement (OR = 2.8, 95% CI 1.1-7.1, p = 0.027). These findings build on a wealth of existing knowledge regarding epigenetic and genetic relationships with PTSD disease risk to highlight the potential importance of SLC6A4 and FKBP5 for treatment mechanisms and as biomarkers of symptom improvement.
The global prevalence of suicide has increased substantially over the last four decades. Suicidal behavior manifests owing to a combination of biological, behavioral and social factors; however, the etiology of suicidality remains elusive. Even though twin studies have reported a significant heritability of 30-50%, meta-analyses have not highlighted a common genetic variant associated with the spectrum of suicidal behavior. Here, we performed a systematic review of the literature (n = 112) to assess the association between serotonergic and non-serotonergic genetic polymorphisms and suicidal behavior. Using an inverse variance random-effects model, we developed pooled odds ratios for the 10 most commonly studied genetic variants related to suicidal behavior, each with at least five independent studies that met our stringent inclusion criteria. Our pooled results indicate no significant correlation between genetic polymorphisms and overall suicidal behavior. However, subgroups of suicide attempts demonstrated actual significance with the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4) 5HTTLPR (OR = 1.13 (95% confidence interval = 1.05-1.21), P = 0.001) and reached nominal significance with the tryptophan hydroxylase rs1800532 (1.22 (1.05-1.41), P = 0.007) variant. Subgroups of suicidal behavior (completions and attempts) displayed reduced heterogeneity compared with the overall suicidal behavior spectrum. Our findings suggest that the 5HTTLPR and rs1800532 polymorphisms are significantly associated with suicide attempts, but not associated with completed suicides. The high degree of heterogeneity in past studies may be attributed to the lack of a phenotypic distinction between suicidal attempts and completions. Consequently, we have identified an important source of phenotypic heterogeneity that provides a rationale for the current lack of a common genetic variant associated with suicidal behavior.
Stress exposure during pregnancy is critically linked with maternal mental health and child development. The effects might involve altered patterns of DNA methylation in specific stress-related genes (i.e., glucocorticoid receptor gene, NR3C1, and serotonin transporter gene, SLC6A4) and might be moderated by the gestational timing of stress exposure. In this study, we report on NR3C1 and SLC6A4 methylation status in Italian mothers and infants who were exposed to the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown during different trimesters of pregnancy. From May 2020 to February 2021, 283 mother-infant dyads were enrolled at delivery. Within 24 h from delivery, buccal cells were collected to assess NR3C1 (44 CpG sites) and SLC6A4 (13 CpG sites) methylation status. Principal component (PC) analyses were used to reduce methylation data dimension to one PC per maternal and infant gene methylation. Mother-infant dyads were split into three groups based on the pregnancy trimester (first, second, third), during which they were exposed to the COVID-19 lockdown. Mothers and infants who were exposed to the lockdown during the first trimester of pregnancy had lower NR3C1 and SLC6A4 methylation when compared to counterparts exposed during the second or third trimesters. The effect remained significant after controlling for confounders. Women who were pregnant during the pandemic and their infants might present altered epigenetic biomarkers of stress-related genes. As these epigenetic marks have been previously linked with a heightened risk of maternal psychiatric problems and less-than-optimal child development, mothers and infants should be adequately monitored for psychological health during and after the pandemic.
Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a mental health condition with a complex pathogenic mechanism. One important hypothesis of SCZ pathology is serotonin (5-HT) impairment, and the 5-HT transporter, encoded by the SLC6A4 gene, plays a key role in regulating 5-HT levels. Some studies have confirmed that the CpG island upstream of exon 1 and the island shore region of SLC6A4 are hypermethylated in SCZ; however, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no study on the methylation level of CpG islands downstream of SLC6A4 exon 1. Methylation of CpG islands downstream of SLC6A4 exon 1 was measured in the peripheral blood of SCZ patients with positive symptoms using the MethylTarget method. Overall, the methylation level of SLC6A4 was significantly higher in women than in men. In intergroup comparisons, the level of SLC6A4 methylation was higher in the SCZ group than in the control group, especially within the male subgroup. Moreover, methylation levels of several CpG sites correlated significantly with SCZ. These results suggest that epigenetic alterations of SLC6A4 are related to SCZ pathophysiology. These findings improve the current understanding of the role of the 5-HT system in the pathological development of SCZ.
