Sodium-dependent dopamine transporter; Amine transporter. Terminates the action of dopamine by its high affinity sodium-dependent reuptake into presynaptic terminals.
The gene coding for the dopamine transporter (DAT), SLC6A3, contains a 40-base pair variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) polymorphism (rs28363170) in its 3' untranslated region. This VNTR has been associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and has been investigated in relation to cognition and brain function. Here, we report the results of a comprehensive meta-analysis with meta-regression examining the association of the VNTR with different domains of cognition in healthy adults. We extracted data from 28 independent studies and carried out meta-analyses for associations with working memory (k=10 samples, N=1193 subjects), inhibition (k=8 samples, N=829 subjects), executive functions including inhibition (k=10 samples, N=984 subjects), attention (k=6 samples, N=742 subjects) and declarative long-term memory (k=5 samples, N=251 subjects). None of the investigated dimensions showed significant associations with the VNTR (all p>0.26). Meta-regression including year of publication, gender, age, ethnicity and percentage of 10R-homozygotes similarly did not attain significance. We conclude that there is no evidence that rs28363170 may be a significant predictor of cognitive function in healthy adults.
Methylphenidate (MPH) is the most commonly used treatment for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children. However, the response to MPH is not similar in all patients. This meta-analysis investigated the potential role of SLC6A3 polymorphisms in response to MPH in children with ADHD. Clinical trials or naturalistic studies were selected from electronic databases. A meta-analysis was conducted using a random-effects model. Cohen's d effect size and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were determined. Sensitivity analysis and meta-regression were performed. Q-statistic and Egger's tests were conducted to evaluate heterogeneity and publication bias, respectively. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system was used to assess the quality of evidence. Sixteen studies with follow-up periods of 1-28 weeks were eligible. The mean treatment acceptability of MPH was 97.2%. In contrast to clinical trials, the meta-analysis of naturalistic studies indicated that children without 10/10 repeat carriers had better response to MPH (Cohen's d: -0.09 and 0.44, respectively). The 9/9 repeat polymorphism had no effect on the response rate (Cohen's d: -0.43). In the meta-regression, a significant association was observed between baseline severity of ADHD, MPH dosage, and combined type of ADHD in some genetic models. Sensitivity analysis indicated the robustness of our findings. No publication bias was observed in our meta-analysis. The GRADE evaluations revealed very low levels of confidence for each outcome of response to MPH. The results of clinical trials and naturalistic studies regarding the effect size between different polymorphisms of SLC6A3 were contradictory. Therefore, further research is recommended.
1. Individuals display significant differences in their levels of expression of the dopamine transporter (DAT; SLC6A3). These differences in DAT are strong candidates to contribute to individual differences in motor, mnemonic and reward functions. To identify "cis"-acting genetic mechanisms for these individual differences, we have sought variants in 5' aspects of the human DAT gene and identified the haplotypes that these variants define. 2. We report (i) significant relationships between 5' DAT haplotypes and human individual differences in ventral striatal DAT expression assessed in vivo using [(11)C] cocaine PET and (ii) apparent confirmation of these results in studies of DAT expression in postmortem striatum using [(3)H] carboxyflurotropane binding. 3. These observations support the idea that cis-acting variation in 5' aspects of the human DAT/SLC6A3 locus contributes to individual differences in levels of DAT expression in vivo. 5' DAT variation is thus a good candidate to contribute to individual differences in a number of human phenotypes.
Being small for gestational age (SGA) has been established as a risk factor for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Likewise, several molecular genetic studies have found a link between DAT1 and ADHD. This study investigated whether SGA moderates the effect of dopamine transporter gene variants on the risk of ADHD. A total of 546 children of European descent were genotyped at age 11 for seven DAT1 SNPs (rs6347, rs11564774, rs40184, rs1042098, rs2702, rs8179029 and rs3863145). The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire was used to measure symptoms of ADHD at ages 3.5, 7 and 11. We found significant gene-environment interactions between birth weight and DAT1 SNPs (rs6347, rs40184, rs1042098, rs3863145) on ADHD symptoms at 3.5 years only. Results suggest that genotypic variation of DAT1 may confer a relative protective effect against ADHD in SGA individuals. This study supports the idea that being born SGA moderates the effect of the DAT1 gene on ADHD symptoms in the preschool years and may help to explain some of the heterogeneity in ADHD outcomes.
The human dopamine transporter gene SLC6A3 has been consistently implicated in several neuropsychiatric diseases but the disease mechanism remains elusive. In this risk synthesis, we have concluded that SLC6A3 represents an increasingly recognized risk with a growing number of familial mutants associated with neuropsychiatric and neurological disorders. At least five loci were related to common and severe diseases including alcohol use disorder (high activity variant), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (low activity variant), autism (familial proteins with mutated networking) and movement disorders (both regulatory variants and familial mutations). Association signals depended on genetic markers used as well as ethnicity examined. Strong haplotype selection and gene-wide epistases support multimarker assessment of functional variations and phenotype associations. Inclusion of its promoter region's functional markers such as DNPi (rs67175440) and 5'VNTR (rs70957367) may help delineate condensate-based risk action, testing a locus-pathway-phenotype hypothesis for one gene-multidisease etiology.
Dopamine neurotransmission has been a key player in attempts to identify genetic factors involved in alcohol dependence. The dopamine transporter terminates dopaminergic neurotransmission, making the gene encoding the transporter (SLC6A3/DAT1) an attractive candidate in clinical studies on alcohol dependence. We conducted a systematic review of 18 studies examining associations between polymorphisms in DAT1 and alcohol dependence. The DAT1 variable number tandem repeat, the most frequent studied polymorphism in DAT1, did not show a direct association with alcohol dependence in general. Several, but not all, studies found that the DAT1 variable number tandem repeat (9-repeat allele) was associated with alcohol-withdrawal symptoms, such as seizures and delirium tremens. We discuss shortcomings, such as lack of power and disregarding moderating variables, as well as future challenges of gene association studies.
BACKGROUND: Excessive exposure to manganese is harmful for neurodevelopment, causing intellectual disability, decreased cognitive ability and diminished language quotients. However, little is known about the link between manganese, genetic susceptibility and the risk of dyslexia. We aim to examine the association between manganese exposure and dyslexia and to test whether the SLC6A3 gene would modify this relationship. METHODS: A case-control study was conducted among 239 dyslexic children and 230 controls in China. Urinary manganese concentrations were assessed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs2975226 and rs27072) in the SLC6A3 gene were selected. RESULTS: The rs2975226 polymorphism was associated with dyslexia within the recessive model (OR = 1.74, 95 % CI = 1.06-2.86) and the additive model (OR = 1.69, 95 % CI = 1.10-2.61) after multivariate adjustment. Modification effects on the relationship of manganese levels in urine with the risk of dyslexia were suggested in rs27072 (P-value for interaction = 0.003). Furthermore, the highest quartile of urinary manganese was found to have a 3.87-fold (95 % CI = 1.39-10.74) elevated dyslexia risk compared with the lowest quartile among the rs27072 mutation carriers. CONCLUSIONS: The rs2975226 polymorphism was associated with dyslexia and manganese exposure could interact with the rs27072 mutation to increase the risk of dyslexia.
Several recent lines of evidence are proving an important role for dopamine in the aging process and in the determination of life span. Components of the dopaminergic system may represent good candidates for longevity studies. Herein, we tested the possible association of the functional SLC6A3/DAT1 40-bp VNTR with life-expectancy in a healthy population of Central Italy (N = 993) by applying a genetic-demographic approach that takes into account the demographic information and different survival rates between sexes for modeling the survival of specific allele carriers in the population. Male carriers of S*/S* genotype showed a lower survival chance across most of the lifespan respect to the survival of DAT1*L-carriers (P = 0.021). The same analyses gave non-significant results in females. Several studies already reported significant sex differences in dopamine metabolism and its related biological pathways. Thus, we can hypothesize that the SLC6A3/DAT1 40 bp-VNTR may affect life expectancy in a sex-specific way. Moreover, it is conceivable that DAT1 S*/S* carriers, who are prone to assume "risk" type behaviors, may be dropped out of the "healthy" population by a sort of "demographic selection".
Predisposition to antisocial behavior can be related to the presence of certain polymorphic variants of genes encoding dopaminergic system proteins. We studied the frequencies of allele variants and genotypes of variable number tandem repeat polymorphism in 3' untranslated region (3' VTNR) of the dopaminergic transporter SLC6A3 gene in Caucasian men committed socially dangerous violent and non-violent crimes. Alleles with 9 and 10 repeats were most frequent in both the control group and group of men predisposed to antisocial behavior. At the same time, the 10/10 genotype was more frequently observed in the group of men prone to antisocial non-violent behavior. Hence, the presence of certain variants of 3' VTNR polymorphism of SLC6A3 gene in men is associated with predisposition to certain forms of antisocial behavior.
The human dopamine transporter gene SLC6A3 is involved in substance use disorders (SUDs) among many other common neuropsychiatric illnesses but allelic association results including those with its classic genetic markers 3'VNTR or Int8VNTR remain mixed and unexplainable. To better understand the genetics for reproducible association signals, we report the presence of recombination hotspots based on sequencing of the entire 5' promoter regions in two small SUDs cohorts, 30 African Americans (AAs) and 30 European Americans (EAs). Recombination rate was the highest near the transcription start site (TSS) in both cohorts. In addition, each cohort carried 57 different promoter haplotypes out of 60 and no haplotypes were shared between the two ethnicities. A quarter of the haplotypes evolved in an ethnicity-specific manner. Finally, analysis of five hundred subjects of European ancestry, from the 1000 Genome Project, confirmed the promoter recombination hotspots and also revealed several additional ones in non-coding regions only. These findings provide an explanation for the mixed results as well as guidance for selection of effective markers to be used in next generation association validation (NGAV), facilitating the delineation of pathogenic variation in this critical neuropsychiatric gene.
Cell proliferation and invasion are characteristic of many tumors, including ameloblastoma, and are important features to target in possible future therapeutic applications. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was the identification of key genes and inhibitory drugs related to the cell proliferation and invasion of ameloblastoma using bioinformatic analysis. METHODS: The H10KA_07_38 gene profile database was analyzed by Rstudio and ShinyGO Gene Ontology enrichment. String, Cytoscape-MCODE, and Kaplan-Meier plots were generated, which were subsequently validated by RT-qPCR relative expression and immunoexpression analyses. To propose specific inhibitory drugs, a bioinformatic search using Drug Gene Budger and DrugBank was performed. RESULTS: A total of 204 significantly upregulated genes were identified. Gene ontology enrichment analysis identified four pathways related to cell proliferation and cell invasion. A total of 37 genes were involved in these pathways, and 11 genes showed an MCODE score of >/=0.4; however, only SLC6A3, SOX10, and LRP5 were negatively associated with overall survival (HR = 1.49 (p = 0.0072), HR = 1.55 (p = 0.0018), and HR = 1.38 (p = 0.025), respectively). The RT-qPCR results confirmed the significant differences in expression, with overexpression of >2 for SLC6A3 and SOX10. The immunoexpression analysis indicated positive LRP5 and SLC6A3 expression. The inhibitory drugs bioinformatically obtained for the above three genes were parthenolide and vorinostat. CONCLUSIONS: We identify LRP5, SLC6A3, and SOX10 as potentially important genes related to cell proliferation and invasion in the pathogenesis of ameloblastomas, along with both parthenolide and vorinostat as inhibitory drugs that could be further investigated for the development of novel therapeutic approaches against ameloblastoma.
It has been previously shown that the serotonin and dopamine neurotransmitter systems might influence the predisposition to suicidal behavior. This study aims to estimate the contribution of 11 polymorphisms in the genes SLC6A4 (5HTT), HTR1A, HTR2A, HTR1B, SLC6A3 (DAT1), DRD4, DRD2, COMT, and BDNF to suicidal behavior and severity of symptoms of depression and anxiety in the Russian population. The study was performed on 100 patients with repeated suicide attempts and 154 controls. We first found an association between SLC6A3 (DAT1) 40 bp VNTR locus and suicidal behavior. This association was significant; when using the codominant (p = 0.006), dominant (p = 0.001), overdominant (p = 0.004), and log-additive (p = 0.004) models, LL genotype played a protective role (OR = 0.48, 0.29-0.82, p = 0.005). Difference in the distribution of COMT rs4680 genotypes was significant in the codominant (p = 0.04), dominant (p = 0.013), and log-additive (p = 0.02) models, and AA genotype might protect against suicide (OR = 0.49, 0.26-0.91, p = 0.025). SLC6A4 5-HTTLPR + rs25531 locus was significant in the recessive model (p = 0.024), and also affected the severity of symptoms of depression (p = 0.044) and personal anxiety (p = 0.029). Our results suggest that allelic variants of SLC6A3, COMT, and SLC6A4 genes might be considered as risk factors for suicidal attempts.
BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer is a malignant tumor originating from the gastric mucosal epithelium, with no obvious symptoms at the early stage. The dopamine transporter gene (SLC6A3) is involved in the metabolism of dopamine and catecholamine and is a potential gene for Parkinson's disease and alcoholism. But the role of SLC6A3 in gastric cancer is still unknown. The aim of our study is to investigate the potential diagnostic value of SLC6A3 on gastric cancer. METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR) was used to detect the expression of SLC6A3 in clinical samples and cells. A total of 246 samples were enrolled in this study (26 pairs of tissue samples; Serum of 113 patients with gastric cancer, 51 polyps patients and 56 healthy controls). The diagnostic value of SLC6A3 was evaluated by the ROC curve and analyzed the changes of SLC6A3 expression before and after surgery. The prognostic value, interacting proteins and related pathways of SLC6A3 were evaluated by TCGA analysis in UALCAN database (http://ualcan.path.uab.edu/). RESULTS: The expression level of SLC6A3 in gastric cancer was significantly higher than that in controls. Further, the proportion under the ROC curve (AUC) for SLC6A3, CEA and CA19-9 was 0.818 (95 % confidence interval [CI]: 0.754 to 0.883, P < 0.001), and the expression level of SLC6A3 in the serum of patients with gastric cancer decreased significantly after surgery (P < 0.001). Bioinformatic enrichment analysis of SLC6A3 displayed the relevant metabolic pathways involved in its interacting proteins. CONCLUSION: SLC6A3 is involved in the occurrence and development of gastric cancer and can be used as a potential diagnostic indicator for gastric cancer.
The dopamine transporter gene, SLC6A3, has received substantial attention in genetic association studies of various phenotypes. Although some variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs) present in SLC6A3 have been tested in genetic association studies, results have not been consistent. VNTRs in SLC6A3 that have not been examined genetically were characterized. The Tandem Repeat Annotation Library was used to characterize the VNTRs of 64 unrelated long-read haplotype-phased SLC6A3 sequences. Sequence similarity of each repeat unit of the five VNTRs is reported, along with the correlations of SNP-SNP, SNP-VNTR, and VNTR-VNTR alleles across the gene. One of these VNTRs is a novel hyper-VNTR (hyVNTR) in intron 8 of SLC6A3, which contains a range of 3.4-133.4 repeat copies and has a consensus sequence length of 38 bp, with 82% G+C content. The 38-base repeat was predicted to form G-quadruplexes in silico and was confirmed by circular dichroism spectroscopy. In addition, this hyVNTR contains multiple putative binding sites for PRDM9, which, in combination with low levels of linkage disequilibrium around the hyVNTR, suggests it might be a recombination hotspot.
Cue-induced craving for addictive substances has long been known to contribute to the problem of persistent addiction in humans. Research in animals over the past decade has solidly established the central role of dopamine in cue-induced craving for addictive substances, including nicotine. Analogous studies in humans, however, are lacking, especially among African-American smokers, who have lower quit rates than Caucasian smokers. Based on the animal literature, the study's objective was to test the hypothesis that smokers carrying specific variants in dopamine-related genes previously associated with risk for addictive behaviors would exhibit heightened levels of cigarette craving following laboratory exposure to cues. To this end, cigarette craving was induced in healthy African-American smokers (n=88) through laboratory exposure to smoking cues. Smokers carrying either the DRD2 (D2 dopamine receptor gene) TaqI A1 RFLP or the SLC6A3 (dopamine transporter gene) 9-repeat VNTR polymorphisms had stronger cue-induced cravings than noncarriers (Ps <0.05 and 0.01, respectively). Consistent with the separate biological pathways involved (receptor, transporter), carriers of both polymorphisms had markedly higher craving responses compared to those with neither (P<0.0006), reflecting additive effects. Findings provide support for the role of dopamine in cue-induced craving in humans, and suggest a possible genetic risk factor for persistent smoking behavior in African-American smokers.
Evidence of the genetic correlates of inhibitory control is scant. Two previously studied dopamine-related polymorphisms, COMT rs4680 and the SLC6A3 3' UTR 40-base-pair VNTR (rs28363170), have been associated with response inhibition, however with inconsistent findings. Here, we investigated the influence of these two polymorphisms in a large healthy adult sample (N = 515) on a response inhibition battery including the antisaccade, stop-signal, go/no-go and Stroop tasks as well as a psychometric measure of impulsivity (Barratt Impulsiveness Scale) (Experiment 1). Additionally, a subsample (N = 144) was studied while performing the go/no-go, stop-signal and antisaccade tasks in 3T fMRI (Experiment 2). In Experiment 1, we did not find any significant associations of COMT or SLC6A3 with inhibitory performance or impulsivity. In Experiment 2, no association of COMT with BOLD was found. However, there were consistent main effects of SLC6A3 genotype in all inhibitory contrasts: Homozygosity of the 10R allele was associated with greater fronto-striatal BOLD response than genotypes with at least one 9R allele. These findings are consistent with meta-analyses showing that the 10R allele is associated with reduced striatal dopamine transporter expression, which in animal studies has been found to lead to increased extracellular dopamine levels. Our study thus supports the involvement of striatal dopamine in the neural mechanisms of cognitive control, in particular response inhibition.
We investigated the association between SLC6A3 gene polymorphisms and changes in dopamine transporter (DAT) availability after glucose loading in humans. An intravenous injection of (18) F-FP-CIT was administered after infusion of glucose or placebo, and the emission data were acquired over 90 min in 38 healthy male participants. DAT availability expressed in terms of binding potential (BP(ND) ) was recorded. The 40-bp variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) in the 3' untranslated region and two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs2652511 and rs2937639, in the SLC6A3 gene were genotyped. Among the 38 participants, those with a VNTR other than 10R/10R (n = 7) were excluded. The alleles of the two SNPs (rs2652511 and rs2937639) appeared to be inherited together in two fixed combinations (C-G or T-A) in 29 of 31 individuals. The BP(ND) in the ventral striatum (VST), caudate nucleus, and putamen was not significantly different after glucose or placebo loading according to genotype. However, BP(ND) s from the caudate nucleus and putamen of all participants with rs2652511 CT/rs2937639 AG (n = 6) were higher after glucose loading. In conclusion, the SLC6A3 gene polymorphism is associated with the changes in DAT availability after glucose loading. DAT availability after glucose or placebo loading in the VST, caudate nucleus, and putamen did not differ according to the SLC6A3 genotype.
