Somatostatin receptor type 2; Receptor for somatostatin-14 and -28. This receptor is coupled via pertussis toxin sensitive G proteins to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. In addition it stimulates phosphotyrosine phosphatase and PLC via pertussis toxin insensitive as well as sensitive G proteins. Inhibits calcium entry by suppressing voltage-dependent calcium channels. Acts as the functionally dominant somatostatin receptor in pancreatic alpha- and beta-cells where it mediates the inhibitory effect of somatostatin-14 on hormone secretion. Inhibits cell growth through enhancement of MAPK1 [...] 
PURPOSE: There are no effective medical therapies for patients with meningioma who progress beyond surgical and radiotherapeutic interventions. Somatostatin receptor type 2 (SSTR2) represents a promising treatment target in meningiomas. In this multicenter, single-arm phase II clinical study (NCT03971461), the SSTR2-targeting radiopharmaceutical 177Lu-DOTATATE is evaluated for its feasibility, safety, and therapeutic efficacy in these patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Adult patients with progressive intracranial meningiomas received 177Lu-DOTATATE at a dose of 7.4 GBq (200 mCi) every eight weeks for four cycles. 68Ga-DOTATATE PET-MRI was performed before and six months after the start of the treatment. The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS) at 6 months (PFS-6). Secondary endpoints were safety and tolerability, overall survival (OS) at 12 months (OS-12), median PFS, and median OS. RESULTS: Fourteen patients (female = 11, male = 3) with progressive meningiomas (WHO 1 = 3, 2 = 10, 3 = 1) were enrolled. Median age was 63.1 (range 49.7-78) years. All patients previously underwent tumor resection and at least one course of radiation. Treatment with 177Lu-DOTATATE was well tolerated. Seven patients (50%) achieved PFS-6. Best radiographic response by modified Macdonald criteria was stable disease (SD) in all seven patients. A >25% reduction in 68Ga-DOTATATE uptake (PET) was observed in five meningiomas and two patients. In one lesion, this corresponded to >50% reduction in bidirectional tumor measurements (MRI). CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with 177Lu-DOTATATE was well tolerated. The predefined PFS-6 threshold was met in this interim analysis, thereby allowing this multicenter clinical trial to continue enrollment. 68Ga-DOTATATE PET may be a useful imaging biomarker to assess therapeutic outcome in patients with meningioma.
64Cu radiopharmaceuticals have shown tumor growth inhibition in tumor-bearing animal models with a relatively low radiation dose that may be related to nuclear localization of the 64Cu in tumor cells. Here we address whether the nuclear localization of 64Cu from a 64Cu-labeled chelator-somatostatin conjugate is related to the dissociation of the radio-copper from its chelator. The 64Cu complex of 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane-1,4,8,11-tetraacetic acid (TETA) has demonstrated instability in vivo, whereas 64Cu-CB-TE2A (CB-TE2A is 4,11-bis(carboxymethyl)-1,4,8,11-tetraazabicyclo[6.6.2]hexadecane) was highly stable. METHODS: Receptor binding, nuclear uptake, internalization, and efflux assays were performed to characterize the interaction with the somatostatin receptor and the intracellular fate of 64Cu-labeled chelator-peptide conjugates in A427-7 cells. From these data, the absorbed dose to cells was calculated. RESULTS: 64Cu-TETA-Y3-TATE (64Cu-[1]) and 64Cu-CB-TE2A-Y3-TATE (64Cu-[2]) had high affinity for somatostatin receptor subtype 2 (SSTr2) in A427-7 cells. After 3 h, 64Cu-[2] showed greater internalization (>30%) compared with 64Cu-[1] (approximately 15%). There was uptake of 64Cu-[1] in nuclei of 427-7 cells (9.4% +/- 1.7% at 24 h), whereas 64Cu-[2] showed minimal nuclear accumulation out to 24 h (1.3% +/- 0.1%). A427-7 cells were exposed to 0.40 Gy from 64Cu-[1] and exposed to 1.06 Gy from 64Cu-[2]. External beam irradiation of A427-7 cells showed <20% cell killing at 1 Gy. CONCLUSION: These results are consistent with our hypothesis that dissociation of 64Cu from TETA leads to nuclear localization. Dosimetry calculations indicated that the nuclear localization of 64Cu-[1] was not significant enough to increase the absorbed dose to the nuclei of A427-7 cells. These studies show that 64Cu localization to cell nuclei from internalizing, receptor-targeted radiopharmaceuticals is related to chelate stability.
The cyclic peptide hormone somatostatin regulates physiological processes involved in growth and metabolism, through its binding to G-protein coupled somatostatin receptors. The isoform 2 (SSTR2) is of particular relevance for the therapy of neuroendocrine tumours for which different analogues to somatostatin are currently in clinical use. We present an extensive and systematic computational study on the dynamics of SSTR2 in three different states: active agonist-bound, inactive antagonist-bound and apo inactive. We exploited the recent burst of SSTR2 experimental structures to perform mus-long multi-copy molecular dynamics simulations to sample conformational changes of the receptor and rationalize its binding to different ligands (the agonists somatostatin and octreotide, and the antagonist CYN154806). Our findings suggest that the apo form is more flexible compared to the holo ones, and confirm that the extracellular loop 2 closes upon the agonist octreotide but not upon the antagonist CYN154806. Based on interaction fingerprint analyses and free energy calculations, we found that all peptides similarly interact with residues buried into the binding pocket. Conversely, specific patterns of interactions are found with residues located in the external portion of the pocket, at the basis of the extracellular loops, particularly distinguishing the agonists from the antagonist. This study will help in the design of new somatostatin-based compounds for theranostics of neuroendocrine tumours.
Somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) expression has previously been documented in olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB). Here, we fully characterize SSTR2 expression in ONB and correlate staining results with clinicopathologic parameters including Hyams grade. We also assess SSTR2 immunohistochemistry expression in various histologic mimics of ONB to assess its diagnostic functionality. 78 ONBs (51 primary biopsies/excisions and 27 recurrences/metastases) from 58 patients were stained for SSTR2. H-scores based on intensity (0-3 +) and percentage of tumor cells staining were assigned to all cases. 51 histologic mimics were stained and scored in an identical fashion. 77/78 (99%) ONB cases demonstrated SSTR2 staining (mean H-score: 189, range: 0-290). There were no significant differences in staining between primary tumors and recurrences/metastases (mean H-score: 185 vs 198). Primary low-grade ONB had somewhat stronger staining than high-grade tumors (mean H-score: 200 vs 174). SSTR2 expression had no prognostic value when considering disease-free or disease-specific survival. SSTR2 staining is significantly higher in ONB than its histologic mimics (mean H-score: 189 vs 12.9, p < 0.001) suggesting a potential use of the marker in diagnosis of ONB. In conclusion, SSTR2 is consistently expressed in ONB suggesting a role for somatostatin-analog based imaging and therapy in this disease. More generally, SSTR2 may be another marker of neuroendocrine differentiation in ONB.
Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) constitute a heterogeneous cluster of tumors celebrated for their predisposition to metastasize and exhibit local recurrence. Recent explorations have illuminated the intricate involvement of Somatostatin Receptor 2 (SSTR2), a growth-regulatory receptor traditionally classified as a tumor suppressor, yet concurrently implicated in bolstering specific tumor phenotypes. Advances in the realm of SSTR2 investigation within HNSCC, with a specific spotlight on laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas (LSCC), tongue squamous cell carcinomas (TSCC), and nasopharyngeal carcinomas (NPC), have been established. This study aims to provide a comprehensive overview of SSTR2 expression patterns, prognostic implications, distinctive signaling pathways, epigenetic modifications, and potential therapeutic strategies associated with SSTR2 in HNSCC.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is increasingly common worldwide, including in China. Therefore, there is an increasing need to detect CRC at an early stage and to discover and evaluate diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers. DNA methylation of genes in CRC is a potential epigenetic biomarker for the early detection of CRC. This study was performed to analyze the methylation frequency of six candidate genes, CMTM3, SSTR2, MDFI, NDRG4, TGFB2, and BCL2L11, in fresh-frozen CRC tissues and adjacent normal colorectal tissues, from 42 patients with CRC. DNA isolation, bisulphite modification, and pyrosequencing were performed. The sensitivity, specificity, and the area under the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) were evaluated to determine whether these genes showed any associations with tumor grade, stage, or diagnostic features. Among the tested genes, three genes, CMTM3, SSTR2, and MDFI were significantly methylated in CRC tissues when compared with adjacent normal colorectal tissues. The ROC analysis showed that a multigene model, including CMTM3, SSTR2, and MDFI, had a sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of 91% with an AUC value of 0.92. The findings of this study have shown that DNA methylation of the genes, CMTM3, SSTR2, and MDFI should be studied further with a view to determining their potential role as biomarkers for CRC.
AIMS: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) belongs to the receptor tyrosine kinases family and overexpression of EGFR has been linked to poor prognosis and cancer progression. Somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) with diverse biological functions in humans, and it is upregulated through the NF-KB signalling pathway in nasopharyngeal carcinomas (NPC). However, no studies have examined the EGFR and SSTR2 in NPC. This study aimed to investigate whether SSTR2 is associated with EGFR and clinicopathological features in NPC. METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis was performed to assess the correlation between EGFR and SSTR2 based on the GEO database. The expression of SSTR2 and EGFR was evaluated by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in 491 cases of NPC and 50 cases of non-cancerous nasopharyngeal epithelium. RESULTS: The bioinformatics analysis and IHC showed a positive correlation between SSTR2 and EGFR in NPC. High expression of SSTR2 and EGFR was significantly increased in NPC patients compared with non-cancerous nasopharyngeal epithelium. High expression of SSTR2 and/or EGFR was associated with a worse outcome and a higher risk of progression. The study found that patients receiving chemoradiotherapy (CR) with high expression of SSTR2, high expression of EGFR, and high coexpression of SSTR2 and EGFR had a poorer prognosis in both progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Interestingly, NPC patients with high expression of SSTR2, high expression of EGFR, high coexpression of EGFR and SSTR2, and EGFR/SSTR2 anyone high expression had a better prognosis with CR combined with targeted therapy. Cox multivariate analysis identified SSTR2 and EGFR as independent poor predictors of PFS. CONCLUSION: Our study is the first to shed light on the intricate relationship between SSTR2 and EGFR in NPC and provides new insights into the potential benefits of EGFR targeted therapy for patients with high SSTR2 expression. Additionally, SSTR2 has potential as a new biomarker for poor prognosis in NPC patients.
Alternative radiolabeled, targeted agents are being investigated for children with relapsed neuroblastoma (NB) who do not respond to I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) therapy. (DOTA-Tyr)-octreotate targets somatostatin receptors (SSTRs), particularly SSTR2, which are expressed on NB cells. We investigated SSTR2 expression in NB tumors (36 high-risk [HR]; 33 non-HR patients) and correlated SSTR2 levels with clinical features, norepinephrine transporter (NET) expression, and MIBG avidity. SSTR2 and NET immunohistochemistry scores (0 to 3) were calculated on biopsies using digital image analysis based on staining intensity and distribution. Clinical data were correlated with SSTR2 expression. Median SSTR2 score for 69 patients was 1.31 (0.26 to 2.55). Non-HR NB was associated with a higher SSTR2 score (P=0.032). The SSTR2 expression did not correlate with age, International Neuroblastoma Staging System (INSS) stage, MYCN amplification and histology. Higher SSTR2 scores were observed in MIBG-avid versus MIBG-nonavid NB. SSTR2 score was not significantly associated with NET score (r=-0.062, P=0.62). Twenty-six patients who relapsed or progressed had a median SSTR2 score of 1.33 (0.26 to 2.55). Patients with NB including relapsed or progressive disease showed SSTR2 expression at diagnosis, suggesting they could be candidates for radiolabeled-DOTA-conjugated peptide imaging or therapy.
PURPOSE: Dynamic PET studies with(68)Ga-DOTATOC were performed in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) to assess the somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2) expression. Furthermore, dynamic(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) studies were performed in the same patients to compare the SSTR2 expression with the tumour viability. METHODS: The study population comprised nine patients, examined with both tracers on two different days within 1 week. Standardised uptake values (SUVs) were calculated and a two-tissue compartment model was applied to the data. Furthermore, a non-compartment model based on the fractal dimension (FD) was applied to the data. RESULTS: The DOTATOC uptake was generally lower than the FDG uptake. Moderately enhanced DOTATOC uptake was noted in seven of the nine tumours. All kinetic parameters except k (4) were lower for DOTATOC than for FDG. The mean SUV was 2.018 for DOTATOC, in comparison to 5.683 for FDG. In particular, k (3) was highly variable for DOTATOC and showed an overlap with the normal lung tissue. The fractional blood volume V (B) was relatively low for both tracers, not exceeding 0.3. The highest significant logarithmic correlation was found for the FD of the two tracers (r=0.764, p=0.017). The logarithmic correlation for SUVs was also significant (r=0.646, p=0.060), as was that forV (B) (r=0.629, p=0.069). In contrast, none of the eight metastases which were positive on FDG PET showed any DOTATOC uptake. CONCLUSION: The results demonstrated moderate (68)Ga-DOTATOC uptake in primary NSCLC but did not provide any evidence for SSTR2 expression in metastases. This may be caused by loss of the gene expression in metastases as compared with the primary tumours.
