Tyrosine-protein kinase SYK; Non-receptor tyrosine kinase which mediates signal transduction downstream of a variety of transmembrane receptors including classical immunoreceptors like the B-cell receptor (BCR). Regulates several biological processes including innate and adaptive immunity, cell adhesion, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and vascular development. Assembles into signaling complexes with activated receptors at the plasma membrane via interaction between its SH2 domains and the receptor tyrosine-phosphorylated ITAM domains. The association with the receptor can a [...] 
Hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae (hvKP) is a highly lethal opportunistic pathogen that elicits more severe inflammatory responses compared to classical Klebsiella pneumoniae (cKP). In this study, we investigated the interaction between hvKP infection and the anti-inflammatory immune response gene 1 (IRG1)-itaconate axis. Firstly, we demonstrated the activation of the IRG1-itaconate axis induced by hvKP, with a dependency on SYK signaling rather than STING. Importantly, we discovered that exogenous supplementation of itaconate effectively inhibited excessive inflammation by directly inhibiting SYK kinase at the 593 site through alkylation. Furthermore, our study revealed that itaconate effectively suppressed the classical activation phenotype (M1 phenotype) and macrophage cell death induced by hvKP. In vivo experiments demonstrated that itaconate administration mitigated hvKP-induced disturbances in intestinal immunopathology and homeostasis, including the restoration of intestinal barrier integrity and alleviation of dysbiosis in the gut microbiota, ultimately preventing fatal injury. Overall, our study expands the current understanding of the IRG1-itaconate axis in hvKP infection, providing a promising foundation for the development of innovative therapeutic strategies utilizing itaconate for the treatment of hvKP infections.
During neurodegenerative disease, resident CNS macrophages termed "microglia" assume a neuroprotective role and engulf toxic protein aggregates and cell debris. In this issue of Cell, two groups independently show how spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) acts downstream of microglial surface receptors to propagate this neuroprotective program in vivo.
Non-receptor type of protein-tyrosine kinase Syk (spleen tyrosine kinase) was isolated in University of Fukui in 1991. Syk is most highly expressed by haemopoietic cells and known to play crucial roles in the signal transduction through various immunoreceptors of the adaptive immune response. However, recent reports demonstrate that Syk also mediates other biological functions, such as innate immune response, osteoclast maturation, platelet activation and cellular adhesion. Moreover, ectopic expression of Syk by epigenetic changes is reported to cause retinoblastoma. Because of its critical roles on the cellular functions, the development of Syk inhibitors for clinical use has been desired. Although many candidate compounds were produced, none of them had progressed to clinical trials. However, novel Syk inhibitors were finally developed and its usefulness has been evaluated in the treatment of allergic rhinitis, rheumatoid arthritis and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. In this review, we will summarize the history, structure and function of Syk, and then the novel Syk inhibitors and their current status. In addition, we will introduce our research focused on the functions of Syk on Dectin-1-mediated mast cell activation.
Spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) is an important regulatory molecule of signal transduction pathways involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as immune thrombocytopenia (ITP), and the SYK-signaling pathway has emerged as a potential target for the treatment of numerous diseases. The aim of this narrative review is to summarize the biological properties of SYK and its involvement in disease pathways, provide an update on SYK inhibitors in the treatment of ITP, and consider other potential applications. Fostamatinib, the only licensed SYK inhibitor to date, produces clinical response in ITP patients, including those who are refractory to other treatments. It appears to reduce the risk of thrombotic events and may therefore be a drug to consider for patients with an increased thrombotic risk. Encouraging results have also been obtained in the treatment of warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Several other SYK inhibitors have entered clinical trials for a range of indications, reflecting the ability of these drugs to affect multiple signaling pathways. SYK inhibitors have the potential to target several aspects of COVID-19 pathogenesis including thrombosis, without affecting normal hemostasis, and data from the first study of fostamatinib in COVID-19 are encouraging. It is hoped that ongoing trials in autoimmune indications other than ITP, as well as in hematological malignancies and other disorders, confirm the promise of SYK inhibitors.
A series of aminopyrazines as inhibitors of Syk kinase activity and showing inhibition of LAD2 cells degranulation is described. Optimization of the carboxamide motif with aminomethylpiperidines provided high potency inhibiting Syk but low cellular activity. Amides of cis and trans adamantanol showed good inhibitory activity against Syk as well as remarkable activity in LAD2 cells degranulation assay.
Periodontitis is the sixth most prevalent diseases around the globe, which is closely related to many systemic diseases and affects general health. As the leading cause of tooth loss, periodontitis is characterized by irreversible alveolar bone loss and activated osteoclastogenic process, which might be closely related to the activated intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) in osteoclasts. Here, we demonstrated triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (Trem2) as a key regulator of osteoclastogenesis with the regulation of intracellular ROS signals in periodontitis. In the present study, the expression of Trem2 was significantly upregulated in human alveolar bones diagnosed with chronic periodontitis, as assessed by RNA-seq. In the mice model of periodontitis, the alveolar bone resorption was impeded in the presence of the conditional knockout of Trem2 in osteoclasts. Furthermore, we identified Trem2/DAP12/Syk-dependent cascade as a vital intracellular signaling for the amplification of reactive oxygen species (ROS) signals in osteoclastogenesis, while the accumulation of soluble Abeta(42) oligomers (Abetao) in periodontitis microenvironment further strengthened the signals and enhanced osteoclastogenesis through direct interactions with Trem2. Collectively, Trem2 mediated ROS signal amplification cascade was crucial in the process of osteoclastogenesis in periodontitis, suggesting the potential of Trem2 as a target for the prevention and treatment of bone destruction in periodontitis.
SYK and ZAP70 nonreceptor tyrosine kinases serve essential roles in initiating B-cell receptor (BCR) and T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling in B- and T-lymphocytes, respectively. Despite their structural and functional similarity, expression of SYK and ZAP70 is strictly separated during B- and T-lymphocyte development, the reason for which was not known. Aberrant co-expression of ZAP70 with SYK was first identified in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and is considered a biomarker of aggressive disease and poor clinical outcomes. We recently found that aberrant ZAP70 co-expression not only functions as an oncogenic driver in CLL but also in various other B-cell malignancies, including acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) and mantle cell lymphoma. Thereby, aberrantly expressed ZAP70 redirects SYK and BCR-downstream signaling from NFAT towards activation of the PI3K-pathway. In the sole presence of SYK, pathological BCR-signaling in autoreactive or premalignant cells induces NFAT-activation and NFAT-dependent anergy and negative selection. In contrast, negative selection of pathological B-cells is subverted when ZAP70 diverts SYK from activation of NFAT towards tonic PI3K-signaling, which promotes survival instead of cell death. We discuss here how both B-cell malignancies and autoimmune diseases frequently evolve to harness this mechanism, highlighting the importance of developmental separation of the two kinases as an essential safeguard.
Spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK) is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase. The dysregulation of SYK is closely related to the occurrence and development of allergic diseases, autoimmune diseases and cancer. SYK has become an attractive target for drug discovery due to its important biological functions. This article reviews the biological function of SYK, the relationship between SYK and disease, and therapies targeting SYK. In addition, inspired by new technologies such as proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs) and phosphatase recruiting chimeras (PHORCs), we propose the development of new therapeutic approaches for targeting SYK, such as SYK PROTACs and SYK PHORCs, which may overcome deficiencies of existing methods.
