Thromboxane A synthase 1; Belongs to the cytochrome P450 family.
Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia (GHDD) is a rare, autosomal recessive condition characterised by diaphyseal dysplasia of long bones with defective haematopoiesis. We describe 2 such cases with clinical and radiological evidence of GHDD. Molecular analysis revealed novel variants in TBXAS1 gene in both of them. Suspicion and confirmation of this entity is crucial in cases of refractory anemia with bony deformities, as the clinical manifestations in this entity are usually well responsive to corticosteroids.
Thromboxane synthase (TS) catalyzes the conversion of the prostaglandin endoperoxide into thromboxane A2 (TxA2), a potent vasoconstrictor and inducer of platelet aggregation. In concert with prostacyclin TxA2 plays a pivotal role in the maintenance of hemostasis. Deficiency of platelet TS activity has been shown to result in bleeding disorders. The potent effect of TxA2 on platelet function and vascular activity suggests a possible involvement of TS in normal and pathophysiological conditions such as cardiovascular disease. To aid in establishing the correlation of TS to disease states, we localized the human TS gene (TBXAS1) to chromosome 7q34-q35 using dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between thromboxane A synthase 1 (TBXAS1) gene polymorphism and metabolic syndrome (MS) and explore whether gene polymorphism could act as biomarkers in MS and its components or whether it could play a role in MS-related damage. METHODS: A total of 3072 eligible subjects were obtained, of which 1079 cases were controls and 1993 cases were MS patients. Subjects were followed up for 5 years, and the endpoint were recorded. The gene polymorphism of TBXAS1 was detected by using the Sequenom MassArray method. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in ischemic stroke and NC_000007.14: g.139985896C>T (P < 0.05). The incidence of ischemic stroke was significantly higher in T allele carriers than in C (P < 0.05). C allele was the protective factor of the onset of ischemic stroke. There were negative interactions between C allele and waist circumference (WC), systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and fasting plasma glucose (FPG). CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that NC_000007.14: g.139985896C>T was related to the incidence of ischemic stroke in the whole and MS population, and individuals who carry the C allele have a reduced risk of ischemic stroke, which may be used as a promising biomarker of disease risk in patients with MS.
BACKGROUND: Homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the thromboxane A synthase 1 (TBXAS1) gene are associated with Ghosal hematodiaphyseal dysplasia (GHDD) which is characterized by defective hematopoiesis and increased bone density of long bones. METHODS: Patients 1 and 2 are identical twins, who presented with red blood cell transfusion-dependent normocytic anemia and thrombocytopenia with bone marrow fibrosis and cortical bone thickening of long bones on plain radiograph. To clarify the etiology of their anemia and thrombocytopenia, whole blood was used for the DNA extraction and analyzed using next-generation sequencing (NGS) on an in-house bone marrow failure syndrome panel. RESULTS: The NGS results indicated that these two patients carried two heterozygous variants in TBXAS1, exon7, c.583_584del, p.Ala195Leufs*12, and exon12, c.1420G>T, p.Gly474Trp, which were inherited from their mother and father, respectively. Patients 1 and 2 have been on chronic oral steroids with normalization of hemoglobin and platelet count after steroid initiation. Patient 3 is their sister who has normal blood counts but also has the same variants in TBXAS1 as her brothers. Radiographs showed cortical bone thickening and she has not required any treatment or transfusion. CONCLUSION: We report three Caucasian siblings from non-consanguineous parents with novel compound heterozygous variants of TBXAS1 presenting with the phenotypes of GHDD. These three cases illustrate the variable clinical expressivity of the GHDD from two-compound heterozygous pathogenic variants of TBXAS1.
Although depression is an emerging disorder affecting many people worldwide, most genetic studies have been performed in European descent populations. Herein, a genome-wide association study (GWAS) was conducted in Korean population to elucidate the genomic loci associated with depressive symptoms. Two independent cohorts were used as discovery datasets, which consisted of 6474 (1484 cases and 4990 controls) and 1654 (557 cases and 1097 controls) Korean participants, respectively. The participants were divided into case and control groups based on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Meta-analysis using the two cohorts revealed that rs6945590 was significantly associated with the risk of depressive symptoms [P = 2.83 x 10(-8); odds ratio (OR) = 1.23; 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.15-1.33]. This association was validated in other independent cohorts which were another Korean cohort (258 cases and 1757 controls) and the East Asian study of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC) (12,455 cases and 85,548 controls). The predicted expression levels of thromboxane A synthase 1 gene (TBXAS1), which encodes the enzyme thromboxane A synthase 1 and participates in the arachidonic acid (AA) cascade, was significantly decreased in the whole blood tissues of the participants with depressive symptoms. Furthermore, Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis showed a causal association between TBXAS1 expression and the risk of depressive symptoms. In conclusion, as the number of risk alleles (A) of rs6945590 increased, TBXAS1 expression decreased, which subsequently caused an increase in the risk of depressive symptoms.
Thromboxane synthase (TBXAS1), a cytochrome P450 enzyme, converts prostaglandin H2 into thromboxane A2, a potent vasoconstrictor and inducer of platelet aggregation. Thromboxane A2 has been implicated in modulating cell cytotoxicity and in tumor growth and metastasis. Twelve coding-region variants were identified in the human TBXAS1 gene in 48 African-American and 46 Caucasian individuals, of which eight were amino-acid substitutions. The latter were confirmed in an independent Caucasian population (n=94 unrelated individuals). We performed an evolutionary analysis of patterns of nucleotide diversity and identified patterns of amino acid replacement in human-mouse comparisons consistent with purifying selection on an inter-species time scale using the McDonald-Kreitman test. We also observed patterns of nucleotide diversity within humans consistent with purifying selection acting on existing polymorphism using Tajima's D within coding regions. These evolutionary tests suggest that some of the rare coding variations observed in the human population are deleterious. We used two sequence-homology-based software programs and molecular modeling to predict the potential impact of these polymorphisms on TBXAS1 function. The c.772C>T (p.Lys258Glu), c.1249C>G (p.Gln417Glu), and c.1348G>A (p.Glu450Lys) substitutions are predicted as most likely to alter protein function; another, c.1352C>A (p.Thr451Asn), may also affect function. Given the evolutionary evidence, these variants may be functional and therefore of relevance for disease endpoints related to inflammation and angiogenesis, as well as for the pharmacogenetics of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
BACKGROUND: Eicosanoids may play a role in ischemic stroke (IS). However, the association of variants in eicosanoid genes with symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis and neurologic deterioration (ND) is not fully understood. The aim of the present study was to investigate the association of 11 variants in eicosanoid genes with symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis and ND. METHODS: Eleven variants in eicosanoid genes were examined using mass spectrometry method in 297 IS patients. The symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis was assessed by computed tomographic angiography. Platelet aggregation and platelet-leukocyte aggregates were measured. The primary outcome was ND within 10 days of admission. ND was defined as an increase of 2 or more points in National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score. RESULTS: Among 297 IS patients, 182 (61.3%) cases had symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis, and 88 (29.6%) patients experienced ND within 10 days after admission. Symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis was significantly associated with higher ND (P < .001). Rs20417CC, rs41708TT, and rs5629CC were independent risk factors for symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis and ND, and associated with higher platelet aggregation and platelet-leukocyte aggregates. CONCLUSIONS: Symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis was associated with higher ND. Rs20417CC, rs41708TT, and rs5629CC were not only independent risk factors for symptomatic carotid artery or intracranial arterial stenosis, but also independent risk predictors for ND.
