Toll-like receptor 7; Key component of innate and adaptive immunity. TLRs (Toll- like receptors) control host immune response against pathogens through recognition of molecular patterns specific to microorganisms. TLR7 is a nucleotide-sensing TLR which is activated by single-stranded RNA. Acts via MYD88 and TRAF6, leading to NF-kappa-B activation, cytokine secretion and the inflammatory response (By similarity).
Red blood cells (RBCs) express the nucleic acid-binding toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) and bind CpG-containing DNA. However, whether human RBCs express other nucleic acid-binding TLRs is unknown. Here we show that human RBCs express the RNA sensor TLR7. TLR7 is present on the red cell membrane and is associated with the RBC membrane protein Band 3. In patients with SARS-CoV2-associated sepsis, TLR7-Band 3 interactions in the RBC membrane are increased when compared with healthy controls. In vitro, RBCs bind synthetic ssRNA and RNA from ssRNA viruses. Thus, RBCs may serve as a previously unrecognized sink for exogenous RNA, expanding the repertoire of non-gas exchanging functions performed by RBCs.
Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) is critical to the induction of antiviral immunity, but TLR7 dosage is also a key pathogenic factor in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disease with strong female bias. SLE prevalence is also elevated in individuals with Klinefelter syndrome, who carry one or more supernumerary X chromosomes, suggesting that the X chromosome complement contributes to SLE susceptibility. TLR7 is encoded by an X chromosome locus, and we examined here whether the TLR7 gene evades silencing by X chromosome inactivation in immune cells from women and Klinefelter syndrome males. Single-cell analyses of TLR7 allelic expression demonstrated that substantial fractions of primary B lymphocytes, monocytes, and plasmacytoid dendritic cells not only in women but also in Klinefelter syndrome males express TLR7 on both X chromosomes. Biallelic B lymphocytes from women displayed greater TLR7 transcriptional expression than the monoallelic cells, correlated with higher TLR7 protein expression in female than in male leukocyte populations. Biallelic B cells were preferentially enriched during the TLR7-driven proliferation of CD27(+) plasma cells. In addition, biallelic cells showed a greater than twofold increase over monoallelic cells in the propensity to immunoglobulin G class switch during the TLR7-driven, T cell-dependent differentiation of naive B lymphocytes into immunoglobulin-secreting cells. TLR7 escape from X inactivation endows the B cell compartment with added responsiveness to TLR7 ligands. This finding supports the hypothesis that enhanced TLR7 expression owing to biallelism contributes to the higher risk of developing SLE and other autoimmune disorders in women and in men with Klinefelter syndrome.
TLR7 recognizes pathogen-derived single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), a function integral to the innate immune response to viral infection. Notably, TLR7 can also recognize self-derived ssRNA, with gain-of-function mutations in human TLR7 recently identified to cause both early-onset systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and neuromyelitis optica. Here, we describe two novel mutations in TLR7, F507S and L528I. While the L528I substitution arose de novo, the F507S mutation was present in three individuals from the same family, including a severely affected male, notably given that the TLR7 gene is situated on the X chromosome and that all other cases so far described have been female. The observation of mutations at residues 507 and 528 of TLR7 indicates the importance of the TLR7 dimerization interface in maintaining immune homeostasis, where we predict that altered homo-dimerization enhances TLR7 signaling. Finally, while mutations in TLR7 can result in SLE-like disease, our data suggest a broader phenotypic spectrum associated with TLR7 gain-of-function, including significant neurological involvement.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease with a dramatic sex bias, affecting 9 times more women than men. Activation of Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) by self-RNA is a central pathogenic process leading to aberrant production of type I interferon (IFN) in SLE, but the specific RNA molecules that serve as TLR7 ligands have not been defined. By leveraging gene expression data and the known sequence specificity of TLR7, we identified the female-specific X-inactive specific transcript (XIST) long noncoding RNA as a uniquely rich source of TLR7 ligands in SLE. XIST RNA stimulated IFN-alpha production by plasmacytoid DCs in a TLR7-dependent manner, and deletion of XIST diminished the ability of whole cellular RNA to activate TLR7. XIST levels were elevated in blood leukocytes from women with SLE compared with controls, correlated positively with disease activity and the IFN signature, and were enriched in extracellular vesicles released from dying cells in vitro. Importantly, XIST was not IFN inducible, suggesting that XIST is a driver, rather than a consequence, of IFN in SLE. Overall, our work elucidated a role for XIST RNA as a female sex-specific danger signal underlying the sex bias in SLE.
The Toll-like receptor (TLR)7- and TLR9-dependent signalling cascade is responsible for production of a large amount of alpha interferon by plasmacytoid dendritic cells upon viral infection. Here, we show that Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) accessory protein ORF4b has the most potential among the MERS-CoV accessory proteins to inhibit the TLR7/9-signaling-dependent alpha interferon production. ORF4b protein, which has a bipartite nuclear localization signal, was found to bind to IKKalpha, a kinase responsible for phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)7. This interaction caused relocation of a large proportion of IKKalpha from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Studies using ORF4b and IKKalpha mutants demonstrated that ORF4b protein inhibited IKKalpha-mediated IRF7 phosphorylation by sequestering IKKalpha in the nucleus and by impeding the phosphorylation process of cytoplasmic IKKalpha.
Aberrant sensing of self-nucleic acids by Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7, 8, or 9 is associated with several autoimmune disorders, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, or systemic sclerosis. In recent years, several classes of synthetic oligonucleotides have been shown to antagonize sensing of immunostimulatory nucleic acids by TLR7/8/9, indicating that these molecules could have therapeutic applications in such autoimmune diseases. Conversely, synthetic oligonucleotides used in therapeutic technologies such as antisense and microRNA inhibitors also have the potential to inhibit TLR7/8/9 sensing, rendering patients more susceptible to viral/bacterial infections. This chapter describes a protocol to define the inhibitory activity of synthetic oligonucleotides on TLR7.
