Activated CDC42 kinase 1; Non-receptor tyrosine-protein and serine/threonine-protein kinase that is implicated in cell spreading and migration, cell survival, cell growth and proliferation. Transduces extracellular signals to cytosolic and nuclear effectors. Phosphorylates AKT1, AR, MCF2, WASL and WWOX. Implicated in trafficking and clathrin-mediated endocytosis through binding to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and clathrin. Binds to both poly- and mono-ubiquitin and regulates ligand-induced degradation of EGFR, thereby contributing to the accumulation of EGFR at the limiting  [...] 
We identified a small family with autosomal recessive, infantile onset epilepsy and intellectual disability. Exome sequencing identified a homozygous missense variant in the gene TNK2, encoding a brain-expressed tyrosine kinase. Sequencing of the coding region of TNK2 in 110 patients with a similar phenotype failed to detect further homozygote or compound heterozygote mutations. Pathogenicity of the variant is supported by the results of our functional studies, which demonstrated that the variant abolishes NEDD4 binding to TNK2, preventing its degradation after epidermal growth factor stimulation. Definitive proof of pathogenicity will require confirmation in unrelated patients.
Activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 (ACK1), a kind of tyrosine kinase, is considered to be an oncogene in many cancers, and it is likely to become a potential target for cancer treatment. We found that the expression of the ACK1 gene in colon cancer was higher than that in normal tissues adjacent to cancer, and high expression of the ACK1 gene was associated with poor prognosis of patients. We assessed the prognosis of colon cancer based on ACK1-related genes and constructed a model that can predict the prognosis of colon cancer patients in colon cancer data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. We then explored the relationship between ACK1 and the immune microenvironment of colon cancer. The overexpression of ACK1 might hinder the function of antigen-presenting cells. The colon cancer prognosis prediction model we constructed has certain significance for clinicians to judge the prognosis of patients with colon cancer. The expression of the ACK1 gene might affect the infiltration level of a variety of immune cells and immunomodulators in the immune microenvironment.
Activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 (ACK1/TNK2) is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase with a unique structure. It not only can act as an activated transmembrane effector of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) to transmit various RTK signals but also can play a corresponding role in epigenetic regulation. A number of studies have shown that ACK1 is a carcinogenic factor. Blockage of ACK1 has been proven to be able to inhibit cancer cell survival, proliferation, migration, and radiation resistance. Thus, ACK1 is a promising potential antitumor target. To date, despite many efforts to develop ACK1 inhibitors, no specific small molecule inhibitors have entered clinical trials. This Perspective provides an overview of the structural features, biological functions, and association with diseases of ACK1 and in vitro and in vivo activities, selectivity, and therapeutic potential of small molecule ACK1 inhibitors with different chemotypes.
Deregulated tyrosine kinase signaling alters cellular homeostasis to drive cancer progression. The emergence of a non-receptor tyrosine kinase (non-RTK), ACK1 (also known as activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 or TNK2) as an oncogenic kinase, has uncovered novel mechanisms by which tyrosine kinase signaling promotes cancer progression. Although early studies focused on ACK1 as a cytosolic effector of activated transmembrane RTKs, wherein it shuttles between the cytosol and the nucleus to rapidly transduce extracellular signals from the RTKs to the intracellular effectors, recent data unfold a new aspect of its functionality as an epigenetic regulator. ACK1 interacts with the estrogen receptor (ER)/histone demethylase KDM3A (JHDM2a) complex, which modifies KDM3A by tyrosine phosphorylation to regulate the transcriptional outcome at HOXA1 locus to promote the growth of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. It is also well established that ACK1 regulates the activity of androgen receptor (AR) by tyrosine phosphorylation to fuel the growth of hormone-refractory prostate cancers. Further, recent explosion in genomic sequencing has revealed recurrent ACK1 gene amplification and somatic mutations in a variety of human malignancies, providing a molecular basis for its role in neoplastic transformation. In this review, we will discuss the various facets of ACK1 signaling, including its newly uncovered epigenetic regulator function, which enables cells to bypass the blockade to major survival pathways to promote resistance to standard cancer treatments. Not surprisingly, cancer cells appear to acquire an 'addiction' to ACK1-mediated survival, particularly under stress conditions, such as growth factor deprivation or genotoxic insults or hormone deprivation. With the accelerated development of potent and selective ACK1 inhibitors, targeted treatment for cancers harboring aberrant ACK1 activity may soon become a clinical reality.
BACKGROUND: Host factors are required for Influenza virus infection and have great potential to become antiviral target. OBJECTIVE: Here we demonstrate the role of TNK2 in influenza virus infection. CRISPR/Cas9 induced TNK2 deletion in A549 cells. METHODS: CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deletion of TNK2. Western blotting and qPCR was used to measure the expression of TNK2 and other proteins. RESULTS: CRISPR/Cas9-mediated deletion of TNK2 decreased the replication of influenza virus and significantly inhibited the ex-pression of viral proteins and TNK2 inhibitors (XMD8-87 and AIM-100) reduced the expression of influenza M2, while over-expression of TNK2 weakened the resistance of TNK2-knockout cells to influenza virus infection. Furthermore, a decrease of nuclear import of IAV in the infected TNK2 mutant cells was observed in 3 h post-infection. Interestingly, TNK2 deletion enhanced the colocalization of LC3 with autophagic receptor p62 and led to the attenuation of influenza virus-caused accumulation of autophagosomes in TNK2 mutant cells. Further, confocal microscopy visualization result showed that influenza viral matrix 2 (M2) was colocalized with Lamp1 in the infected TNK2 mutant cells in early infection, while almost no colocalization between M2 and Lamp1 was observed in IAV-infected wild-type cells. Moreover, TNK2 depletion also affected the trafficking of early endosome and the movement of influenza viral NP and M2. CONCLUSION: Our results identified TNK2 as a critical host factor for influenza viral M2 protein trafficking, suggesting that TNK2 will be an attractive target for the development of antivirals therapeutics.
BACKGROUND: This study investigated the clinical implication of TNK2 expression in esophageal cancer patients' cancer tissue samples. METHODS: The expression of TNK2 in esophageal cancer tissues and para-carcinoma tissue was assessed with immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis; besides, the proteins of CDC42, EGFR, and Akt were also analyzed. Then, Kaplan-Meier survival curves of TNK2 protein expression level were assayed with 184 esophageal cancer patients from TCGA database. Moreover, with multiple linear regression analysis, we detected the correlations of TNK2 expression associated with tumor differentiation degree and metastasis status. RESULTS: It revealed that TNK2 was highly expressed in the cytoplasm of esophageal cancer tissues compared with para-carcinoma tissue; besides, the proteins of CDC42, EGFR, and Akt were also up-regulated in different levels of esophageal cancer tissues. However, there was no significant difference of the overall survival time of TNK2 protein expression in 184 esophageal cancer patients from TCGA database (p = 0.37). But, in the included study samples of our study, there was positive coefficience between TNK2 protein expression and differentiation degree in esophageal cancer with multiple linear regression analysis [R = 0.928, 95% confidence interval (0.085-0.12)]. CONCLUSION: Our results indicated that TNK2 was a potential diagnostic marker and promoted esophageal cancer progression through activating EGFR-AKT signaling.
The tyrosine kinase ACK1, a critical signal transducer regulating survival of hormone-refractory cancers, is an important therapeutic target, for which there are no selective inhibitors in clinical trials to date. This work reports the discovery of novel and potent inhibitors for ACK1 tyrosine kinase (also known as TNK2) using an innovative fragment-based approach. Focused libraries were designed and synthesized by selecting fragments from reported ACK inhibitors to create hybrid structures in a mix and match process. The hybrid library was screened by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay-based kinase inhibition and (33)P HotSpot assays. Systematic structure-activity relationship studies led to the identification of compound (R)-9b, which shows potent in vitro (IC50 = 56 nM, n = 3, (33)P HotSpot assay) and in vivo (IC50 < 2 muM, human cancer cell lines) ACK1 inhibition. Both (R)-9b and (S)-9b were stable in human plasma and displayed a long half-life (t(1/2) > 6 h).
Nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs) represent an important class of signaling molecules driving diverse cellular pathways. Aberrant expression and hyperphosphorylation of TNK2, an NRTK, have been implicated in multiple cancers. However, the exact proteins and cellular events that mediate phenotypic changes downstream of TNK2 are unclear. Biological systems that employ proximity-dependent biotinylation methods, such as BioID, are being increasingly used to map protein-protein interactions, as they provide increased sensitivity in discovering interaction partners. In this study, we employed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture and BioID coupled to the biotinylation site identification technology (BioSITe) method that we recently developed to quantitatively explore the interactome of TNK2. By performing a controlled comparative analysis between full-length TNK2 and its truncated counterpart, we were able to not only identify site-level biotinylation of previously well-established TNK2 binders and substrates including NCK1, NCK2, CTTN, and STAT3, but also discover several novel TNK2 interacting partners. We also performed co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analysis to validate the interaction between TNK2 and CLINT1, a novel TNK2 interacting protein. Overall, this work reveals the power of the BioSITe method coupled to BioID and highlights several molecules that warrant further exploration to assess their functional significance in TNK2-mediated signaling.
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the second most common hematological malignancy after lymphoma in the world. Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) have been suggested as key regulators of cancer development and progression in AML. As a member of lncRNA family, the biological role and mechanisms of tyrosine kinase non receptor 2 antisense RNA 1 (TNK2-AS1) in AML is still unclear. The expression of TNK2-AS1 was measured with RT-qPCR in AML cell lines. The changes of the proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation in TNK2-AS1 shRNA-transfected HL-60 and THP-1 cells were detected with CCK-8, EdU, flow cytometry, Western blot, and NBT assays. Molecular control of TNK2-AS1 on CUGBP Elav-like family member 2 (CELF2) and ETS domain-containing protein-1 (ELK1) on TNK2-AS1 was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), RT-qPCR, Western blot, and RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays. TNK2-AS1 expression was upregulated in AML cell lines and negatively correlated with survival patients. Knockdown of TNK2-AS1 markedly reduced AML cell proliferation and promoted apoptosis and differentiation. Likewise, TNK2-AS1 knockdown significantly suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Mechanistically, the upregulation of TNK2-AS1 was activated by transcription factor ELK1. We also uncovered that TNK2-AS1 exerted tumor-promoting effect through silencing CELF2 via binding with EZH2, thus activating PI3K/Akt pathway in AML cells. Elevated expression of TNK2-AS1 was induced by ELK1 and facilitated AML progression by suppressing CELF2 expression via EZH2-mediated epigenetic silencing, suggesting TNK2-AS1 may be a promising therapeutic target and prognostic marker for AML patients.
TNK2 is a ubiquitously expressed nonreceptor-type tyrosine kinase. TNK2 participates in tumorigenesis, and TNK2 activation has been found in various cancers; therefore, TNK2 is a promising target for cancer chemotherapy. While the TNK2 inhibitor XMD16-5 is highly selective, it inhibits cytokinesis at higher concentrations by targeting Aurora B kinase, a key enzyme for cell division. Cytokinesis failure frequently generates polyploid cells, and the surviving polyploid cells risk leading to cancer development and malignant progression via chromosome instability. In this study, to investigate the possibility that (R)-9bMS, a TNK2 inhibitor structurally related to XMD16-5, drives malignant progression by inducing abnormal cell division, we examined its effects on cell division, Aurora B autophosphorylation, and colony formation. Cell count results showed a reduction in the number of A431, HeLa S3, HCT116, and MCF7 cells upon TNK2 inhibitor treatment. Microscopic observation indicated the formation of multinucleated and nucleus-enlarged cells. An increase in DNA content was confirmed with flow cytometry, which was underpinned by an increased number of centrosomes. Time-lapse imaging revealed mitotic failure, such as mitotic slippage and cytokinesis failure, as a cause of polyploidization. Of note, TNK2 knockdown significantly increased multinucleated cells, but the effect was quite weak, suggesting that TNK2 inhibition may only partially contribute to mitotic failure and polyploidization. Expectedly, Aurora B phosphorylation was reduced by (R)-9bMS like XMD16-5, but not by TNK2 knockdown. Collectively, TNK2 inhibitors (R)-9bMS and XMD16-5 induce polyploidization via mitotic failure caused by the inhibition of Aurora B kinase rather than TNK2. Notably, (R)-9bMS treatment promoted anchorage-independent colony formation, a hallmark of cancer. Our findings suggest that (R)-9bMS at a high concentration risks promoting cancer development or malignant progression. Therefore, caution should be used when using TNK2 inhibitors for cancers where TNK2 activation is not the transforming mutation and higher concentrations of TNK2 inhibitors are required to slow proliferation.
Evidence has shown the importance of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) during angiogenesis and lung cancer progression. However, the potential functions of TNK2-AS1 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remain elusive. By lncRNA profiling, we identified TNK2-AS1 as a novel oncogenic lncRNA in NSCLC. TNK2-AS1 was significantly upregulated in NSCLC and correlated with poor prognosis. We found that TNK2-AS1 could increase viability and migration of NSCLC cells in vitro. TNK2-AS1 also promoted NSCLC xenograft tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. TNK2-AS1 could interact with STAT3 to increase its protein stability by protecting it from proteasome-mediated degradation. STAT3 could also bind TNK2-AS1 promoter to trigger its transcription. The positive feedback loop between STAT3 and TNK2-AS1 therefore augmented STAT3 signaling by elevating VEGFA expression to facilitate angiogenesis. Collectively, our work has elucidated a novel mechanism of TNK2-AS1-mediated angiogenesis by enforcing STAT3/VEGFA signaling and may provide a potential target for therapeutic intervention.
