Troponin C, skeletal muscle; Troponin is the central regulatory protein of striated muscle contraction. Tn consists of three components: Tn-I which is the inhibitor of actomyosin ATPase, Tn-T which contains the binding site for tropomyosin and Tn-C. The binding of calcium to Tn-C abolishes the inhibitory action of Tn on actin filaments.
Troponin C (TnC) is a critical regulator of skeletal muscle contraction; it binds Ca2+ to activate muscle contraction. Surprisingly, the gene encoding fast skeletal TnC (TNNC2) has not yet been implicated in muscle disease. Here, we report 2 families with pathogenic variants in TNNC2. Patients present with a distinct, dominantly inherited congenital muscle disease. Molecular dynamics simulations suggested that the pathomechanisms by which the variants cause muscle disease include disruption of the binding sites for Ca2+ and for troponin I. In line with these findings, physiological studies in myofibers isolated from patients' biopsies revealed a markedly reduced force response of the sarcomeres to [Ca2+]. This pathomechanism was further confirmed in experiments in which contractile dysfunction was evoked by replacing TnC in myofibers from healthy control subjects with recombinant, mutant TnC. Conversely, the contractile dysfunction of myofibers from patients was repaired by replacing endogenous, mutant TnC with recombinant, wild-type TnC. Finally, we tested the therapeutic potential of the fast skeletal muscle troponin activator tirasemtiv in patients' myofibers and showed that the contractile dysfunction was repaired. Thus, our data reveal that pathogenic variants in TNNC2 cause congenital muscle disease, and they provide therapeutic angles to repair muscle contractility.
The chromosomal location of the human fast skeletal muscle troponin C (TNNC2) gene was determined using somatic cell hybrids. PCR-based analysis of a 'monochromosomal' hybrid panel identified the presence of the TNNC2 gene on human chromosome 20 and subsequent analysis of the Genebridge4 radiation hybrid panel located the gene between D20S721 and GCT10F11 with a lod score of > 3.
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive malignancy with high morbidity and mortality rates and ranks as the sixth most common cancer all over the world. Despite numerous advancements in therapeutic methods, the prognosis of HNSCC patients still remains poor. Therefore, there is an urgent need to have a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying HNSCC progression and to identify essential genes that could serve as effective biomarkers and potential treatment targets. In the present study, original data of three independent datasets were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database (GEO) and R language was applied to screen out the differentially expressed genes (DEGs). PYGM and TNNC2 were finally selected from the overlapping DEGs of three datasets for further analyses. Transcriptional and survival data related to PYGM and TNNC2 was detected through multiple online databases such as Oncomine, Gene Expression Profiling Interactive Analysis (GEPIA), cBioportal, and UALCAN. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis was adopted for the validation of PYGM and TNNC2 mRNA level in HNSCC tissues and cell lines. Survival curves were plotted to evaluate the association of these two genes with HNSCC prognosis. It was demonstrated that PYGM and TNNC2 were significantly down-regulated in HNSCC and the aberrant expression of PYGM and TNNC2 were correlated with HNSCC prognosis, implying the potential of exploiting them as therapeutic targets for HNSCC treatment or potential biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis.
BACKGROUND Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a disease that causes pathological changes in the spine and sacroiliac joints. Numerous studies have shown that the characteristics of AS differ between males and females. The purpose of this study was to discover the key molecules that contribute to sex-associated differences in AS, which may provide a new molecular target for personalized treatment. MATERIAL AND METHODS The gene expression profile of GSE39340 was downloaded from the Gene Expression Comprehensive database, and 2 groups (AS vs. No-AS groups and male AS vs. female AS groups) of differentially expressed genes (EDGs) were obtained by GEO2R. The DAVID database was used for DEGs function and enrichment analysis. Based on data in the STRING online database, a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed in Cytoscape. Hub genes were selected from CytoHubba. With the intersection of the top 30 hub genes of 2 sets of EDGs, genes coexisting with the KEGG-related pathway were found. RESULTS We screened 560 genes between the AS and No-AS groups, and screened 710 genes that were differentially expressed between the male and female AS groups. GO analysis showed that DEGs were mainly co-enriched in molecular functions, including structural constituent of muscle. The KEGG pathway mainly included the structural constituent of muscle. Seven hub genes were obtained. Troponin C2 and fast skeletal type (TNNC2) were the key genes participating in the calcium signaling pathway. CONCLUSIONS This study contributes to understanding the molecular biological mechanism underlying sex-associated differences in AS. TNNC2 and calcium signaling pathway may be new targets for the individualized treatment of AS.
