Troponin C, slow skeletal and cardiac muscles; Troponin is the central regulatory protein of striated muscle contraction. Tn consists of three components: Tn-I which is the inhibitor of actomyosin ATPase, Tn-T which contains the binding site for tropomyosin and Tn-C. The binding of calcium to Tn-C abolishes the inhibitory action of Tn on actin filaments.
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynaecologic malignancy in the United States, and advanced serous ovarian adenocarcinoma is responsible for most ovarian cancer deaths. However, the stroma-derived molecular determinants that modulate patient survival are yet to be characterized. Here we identify a stromal gene signature for advanced high-grade serous ovarian cancer using microdissected stromal ovarian tumour samples and find that stromal microfibrillar-associated protein 5 (MFAP5) is a prognostic marker for poor survival. Further functional studies reveal that FAK/CREB/TNNC1 signalling pathways mediate the effect of MFAP5 on ovarian cancer cell motility and invasion potential. Targeting stromal MFAP5 using MFAP5-specific siRNA encapsulated in chitosan nanoparticles significantly decreases ovarian tumour growth and metastasis in vivo, suggesting that it may be a new modality of ovarian cancer treatment.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) have significant phenotypic overlap and a similar genetic background, both caused mainly by variants in sarcomeric genes. HCM is the most common cardiomyopathy, while RCM is a rare and often underdiagnosed heart condition, with a poor prognosis. This study focuses on a large family with four infants diagnosed with fatal RCM associated with biventricular hypertrophy. Affected infants were found to be homozygous for NM_003280.3(TNNC1):c.23C>T(p.Ala8Val) variant. Interestingly, this variant resulted in a low penetrance and mild form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in relatives carrying a single copy of the variant. Overall, this study underscores the complex nature of genetic inheritance in cardiomyopathies and the wide range of clinical presentations they can exhibit. This emphasizes the vital role of genetic testing in providing essential insights crucial for diagnosis, prognosis, early intervention, and the development of potential treatment strategies.
BACKGROUND As we know, chemotherapy resistance is a critical factor leading to recurrence and metastasis of nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). To clarify the key target and potential mechanism of resistance to gemcitabine (GEM) in NSCLC, we selected Gene Expression Omnibus Data Set and statistically analyzed a parent cell group and a GEM-resistant cell group. Results showed that the expression of troponin C1, slow skeletal and cardiac type (TNNC1) in GEM-resistant cells was higher than in parent cells, which implies that TNNC1 was associated with GEM resistance in lung cancer cells. MATERIAL AND METHODS TNNC1 expression level was detected by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction or western blot in GEM-resistant patient serum and cell lines. It could reduce or increase autophagy response and GEM resistance accordingly by inhibition of the short interfering ribonucleic acid or by forced overexpression of TNNC1 viruses in A549 cell line and GEM-resistant cell line (A549/GemR) respectively. Blocking autophagy with 3-methyladenine increased the sensitivity of chemotherapy confirmed by flow cytometry and microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B - light chain 3 punctate assay. What's more, in a loss-of-function model, silencing of forkhead box 03 (FOXO3) in A549/GemR cells could rescue the autophagy weakened by TNNC1. RESULTS TNNC1 promoted GEM chemoresistance of NSCLC by activating cytoprotective autophagy, regulated negatively by FOXO3. This research may provide a completely new strategy for NSCLC treatment. CONCLUSIONS Targeting the TNNC1/FOXO3 signaling pathway in NSCLC may be a novel strategy to combat GEM resistance.
Troponin C type 1 (TNNC1) is commonly overexpressed in ovarian cancer. However, the biological implications of TNNC1 overexpression on ovarian cancer malignization and its related mechanism remain unknown. To elucidate these implications, we knocked out the TNNC1 gene in TNNC1-overexpressing SKOV-3-13 ovarian cancer cells using CRISPR/Cas-9 technology and observed the changes in metastatic phenotypes and related molecular pathways. TNNC1-knockout (KO) cells showed significantly reduced proliferation and colony formation when compared with TNNC1 wild-type cells (P < 0.01). In TNNC1-KO cells, wound healing, migration, and invasive phenotypes decreased. Upon observation of upstream regulators of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), levels of phosphorylated AKT (Ser-473 and Thr-308) and GSK-3beta (inactive form) were found to be decreased in TNNC1-KO cells. Accordingly, SNAIL and SLUG expression decreased and were almost completely localized in the cytoplasm following TNNC1 silencing. Regarding downstream EMT markers, N-cadherin and vimentin expression decreased, but E-cadherin expression increased. Related matrix metalloproteinase and chemokine expression generally decreased. TNNC1 deficiency also suppressed F-actin polymerization. In conclusion, TNNC1 overexpression contributes to the metastatic behavior of ovarian cancer by perturbation of EMT and actin microfilaments. Our results provide a better understanding of the detailed molecular mechanism of ovarian cancer metastasis associated with TNNC1 overexpression.
We have determined the chromosomal location of the human cardiac/slow skeletal muscle troponin C gene (TNNC1) to the short arm of chromosome 3 using somatic cell hybrids. PCR-based analysis of a 'monochromosomal' hybrid panel identified the presence of the TNNC1 gene on human chromosome 3 and subsequent analysis of the Genebridge4 radiation hybrid panel located the gene between D3S3118 (7.3cR) and GCT4B10 (4.2cR) with a lod score of > 3.0.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare form of pediatric cardiac disease, for which the known genes include MYH7, TNNT2, TNNI3, ACTC1, and DES. We describe a pediatric proband with fatal restrictive cardiomyopathy associated with septal hypertrophy and compound heterozygosity for TNNC1 mutations (NM_003280: p.A8V [c.C23T] and p.D145E [c.C435A]). This association between restrictive cardiomyopathy and TNNC1 mutations was strengthened by prospective observations on the second pregnancy in the family which revealed, in the presence of the same TNNC1 genotype, prenatally diagnosed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy which evolved into restrictive cardiomyopathy, heart failure and death at the age of 9 months. Contrary to previous reports, family and population analyses showed that each of the TNNC1 variants was not pathogenic when present alone. Our results (i) confirm that genetic backgrounds of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and restrictive cardiomyopathy overlap and (ii) indicate that TNNC1 is a likely novel gene for autosomal recessive restrictive cardiomyopathy. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
The purpose of this study is to identify candidate genes that could predict prognosis of early-stage tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) and its occult cervical lymphatic metastasis by large-scale gene expression profiling. Tumor tissue and matched normal mucosa samples were collected from patients with TSCC and analyzed with Affymetrix HTA2.0 high-density oligonucleotide array. Differentially expressed genes in TSCC with cervical lymph node metastasis (CLNM) were further analyzed with Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes for their functions and related pathways. A total of 107 differentially expressed genes (p < 0.05) were identified by microarray in TSCC samples with CLNM (n = 6) compared to those without CLNM (n = 6). Genes involved in the cell-matrix adherens junction and migration function including MFAP5, TNNC1, MGP, FBFBP1 and FBXO32 were selected and validated by RT-PCR in TSCC samples (n = 32). Of the five genes, MFAP5 and TNCC1 expressions were further validated by immohistochemistry (n = 61). The significant positive correlation between MFAP5 and TNNC1 expression (p<0.001) was observed. Notably, over-expression of MFAP5 and TNNC1 were correlated with CLNM, metastasis relapse-free survival and overall survival. Our findings indicated that MFAP5 and TNNC1 may be potential markers for predicting occult cervical lymphatic metastasis and prognosis of oral tongue carcinoma.
Defined as clinically unexplained hypertrophy of the left ventricle, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is traditionally understood as a disease of the cardiac sarcomere. Mutations in TNNC1-encoded cardiac troponin C (cTnC) are a relatively rare cause of HCM. Here, we report clinical and functional characterization of a novel TNNC1 mutation, A31S, identified in a pediatric HCM proband with multiple episodes of ventricular fibrillation and aborted sudden cardiac death. Diagnosed at age 5, the proband is family history-negative for HCM or sudden cardiac death, suggesting a de novo mutation. TnC-extracted cardiac skinned fibers were reconstituted with the cTnC-A31S mutant, which increased Ca(2+) sensitivity with no effect on the maximal contractile force generation. Reconstituted actomyosin ATPase assays with 50% cTnC-A31S:50% cTnC-WT demonstrated Ca(2+) sensitivity that was intermediate between 100% cTnC-A31S and 100% cTnC-WT, whereas the mutant increased the activation of the actomyosin ATPase without affecting the inhibitory qualities of the ATPase. The secondary structure of the cTnC mutant was evaluated by circular dichroism, which did not indicate global changes in structure. Fluorescence studies demonstrated increased Ca(2+) affinity in isolated cTnC, the troponin complex, thin filament, and to a lesser degree, thin filament with myosin subfragment 1. These results suggest that this mutation has a direct effect on the Ca(2+) sensitivity of the myofilament, which may alter Ca(2+) handling and contribute to the arrhythmogenesis observed in the proband. In summary, we report a novel mutation in the TNNC1 gene that is associated with HCM pathogenesis and may predispose to the pathogenesis of a fatal arrhythmogenic subtype of HCM.
Paeonol, a naturally bioactive phenolic ingredient predominantly isolated from Paeonia suffruticosa, has recently garnered significant interest as an anti-tumor agent against diverse carcinomas including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). However, the anti-tumor mechanism of paeonol in NSCLC remains unclear. Cell viability, caspase-3 activity, and apoptosis were evaluated using CCK-8 assay, Caspase-3 Colorimetric Assay Kit, and flow cytometry analysis, respectively. GSE186218 was downloaded from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The common genes were screened using GEO2R and Draw Venn Diagram software. Expression of troponin C type 1 (TNNC1), scavenger receptor class A member 5 (SCARA5), phosphorylated protein kinase B (AKT) (p-AKT) and AKT was examined using GEPIA database, qRT-PCR and western blot analysis. Paeonol treatment concentration-dependently inhibited cell viability and increased caspase-3 activity and apoptotic rate in NSCLC cells. Only 5 overlapping genes including TNNC1 and SCARA5 were obtained among 232 upregulated genes in GSE186218, 200 underexpressed genes in TCGA-LUAD, and 200 underexpressed genes in TCGA-LUSC according to the Venn diagram software. TNNC1 and SCARA5, two known tumor suppressors, were significantly downregulated in LUAD and LUSC tissues and NSCLC cells. Paeonol dose-dependently upregulated TNNC1 and SCARA5 expression in NSCLC cells. Paeonol suppressed the AKT pathway by upregulating TNNC1 and SCARA5 expression. AKT inhibitor attenuated the effects of TNNC1 or SCARA5 knockdown on the anti-tumor activity of paeonol. In conclusion, paeonol exhibited anti-cancer activity in NSCLC cells through inactivating the AKT pathway by upregulating TNNC1 or SCARA5.
BACKGROUND: Rare variants in >30 genes have been shown to cause idiopathic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), but the frequency of genetic causation remains poorly understood. We have previously resequenced 9 genes in a cohort of idiopathic or familial DCM probands for rare variants, and now we report resequencing results for 5 more genes with established relationships to DCM. METHODS AND RESULTS: Blood samples were collected, and DNA specimens were prepared from 312 patients, 181 with familial DCM and 131 with idiopathic DCM. Genomic DNA underwent bidirectional sequencing, and DNA of additional family members underwent analysis when a rare variant was identified. We identified rare variants in 34 probands (10.9% overall), including 29 unique protein-altering rare variants and 2 splicing variants that were absent in 246 control subjects (492 chromosomes). These variants were 12 MYBPC3 (myosin-binding protein C) in 13 (4.2%) probands, 8 MYH6 (alpha-myosin heavy chain) in 10 (3.2%), 6 TPM1 (tropomyosin) in 6 (1.9%), 4 TNNC1 (cardiac troponin C) in 4 (1.3%), and 1 TNNI3 (cardiac troponin I) in 2 (0.6%). Variants were classified as likely or possibly disease causing in 13 and 20 probands, respectively (n=33; 10.6% overall). One MYH6 variant was classified as unlikely to be disease causing. CONCLUSIONS: Rare variants in these 5 genes likely or possibly caused 10.6% of DCM in this cohort. When combined with our prior resequencing reports, approximately 27% of DCM probands had possible or likely disease-causing variants identified.
Pediatric cardiomyopathies (CM) are rare and challenging to diagnose due to the complex and mixed phenotypes. With the advent of next-generation sequencing (NGS), variants in several genes associated with CM have been identified, such as Troponin C (TnC), encoded by the TNNC1 gene. De novo variants in TNNC1 have been associated with different types of CM, including dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics recently added TNNC1 to their recommended list of genes for reporting secondary findings. In this study, we report a de novo variant, c.100G>C (p.Gly34Arg) in the TNNC1 gene identified in three siblings with a diagnosis of severe DCM causing infant death for one of the siblings and stillbirth in the other two pregnancies. The identification of the same de novo variant in all affected siblings is suggestive of germline mosaicism in this family.
Rare pediatric non-compaction and restrictive cardiomyopathy are usually associated with a rapid and severe disease progression. While the non-compaction phenotype is characterized by structural defects and is correlated with systolic dysfunction, the restrictive phenotype exhibits diastolic dysfunction. The molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. Target genes encode among others, the cardiac troponin subunits forming the main regulatory protein complex of the thin filament for muscle contraction. Here, we compare the molecular effects of two infantile de novo point mutations in TNNC1 (p.cTnC-G34S) and TNNI3 (p.cTnI-D127Y) leading to severe non-compaction and restrictive phenotypes, respectively. We used skinned cardiomyocytes, skinned fibers, and reconstituted thin filaments to measure the impact of the mutations on contractile function. We investigated the interaction of these troponin variants with actin and their inter-subunit interactions, as well as the structural integrity of reconstituted thin filaments. Both mutations exhibited similar functional and structural impairments, though the patients developed different phenotypes. Furthermore, the protein quality control system was affected, as shown for TnC-G34S using patient's myocardial tissue samples. The two troponin targeting agents levosimendan and green tea extract (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCg) stabilized the structural integrity of reconstituted thin filaments and ameliorated contractile function in vitro in some, but not all, aspects to a similar degree for both mutations.
PurposeHypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common cause of sudden death in young people, including trained athletes, and is caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins of the cardiac sarcomere. Mutations in the Troponin C gene (TNNC1) are a rare genetic cause of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We describe a novel type of mutation (c.363dupG) in Troponin C, a rare form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. METHODS: A family in which a 19-year-old asymptomatic male died of sudden cardiac death due to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was genetically studied by sequencing 17 genes associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or its phenocopies. RESULTS: A c.363dupG mutation in Troponin C was identified, and tested across the family. CONCLUSIONS: We report the first frameshift mutation (c.363dupG or p.Gln122AlafsX30) in Troponin C causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (and sudden cardiac death) in a 19-year-old male, and have demonstrated that the mutation segregates with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy within the family.
Cardiac troponin C (cTnC) is the critical Ca(2+) -sensing component of the troponin complex. Binding of Ca(2+) to cTnC triggers a cascade of conformational changes within the myofilament that culminate in force production. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)-associated TNNC1 variants generally induce a greater degree and duration of Ca(2+) binding, which may underly the hypertrophic phenotype. Regulation of contraction has long been thought to occur exclusively through Ca(2+) binding to site II of cTnC. However, work by several groups including ours suggest that Mg(2+) , which is several orders of magnitude more abundant in the cell than Ca(2+) , may compete for binding to the same cTnC regulatory site. We previously used isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) to demonstrate that physiological concentrations of Mg(2+) may decrease site II Ca(2+) -binding in both N-terminal and full-length cTnC. Here, we explore the binding of Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) to cTnC harbouring a series of TNNC1 variants thought to be causal in HCM. ITC and thermodynamic integration (TI) simulations show that A8V, L29Q and A31S elevate the affinity for both Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) . Further, L48Q, Q50R and C84Y that are adjacent to the EF hand binding motif of site II have a more significant effect on affinity and the thermodynamics of the binding interaction. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to explore the role of Mg(2+) in modifying the Ca(2+) affinity of cTnC mutations linked to HCM. Our results indicate a physiologically significant role for cellular Mg(2+) both at baseline and when elevated on modifying the Ca(2+) binding properties of cTnC and the subsequent conformational changes which precede cardiac contraction.
