Tubulin alpha-4A chain; Tubulin is the major constituent of microtubules. It binds two moles of GTP, one at an exchangeable site on the beta chain and one at a non-exchangeable site on the alpha chain.
The tubulin alpha 4a (TUBA4A) gene has been recently associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Interestingly, some of the mutation carriers were also diagnosed with frontotemporal degeneration (FTD) or mild cognitive impairment. With the aim to investigate the role of TUBA4A in FTD, we screened TUBA4A in a series of 814 FTD patients from Spain. Our data did not disclose any nonsense or missense variant in the cohort, thus suggesting that TUBA4A mutations are not associated with FTD.
Tubulinopathies encompass neurodevelopmental disorders caused by mutations in genes encoding for different isotypes of alpha- and beta-tubulins, the structural components of microtubules. Less frequently, mutations in tubulins may underlie neurodegenerative disorders. In the present study, we report two families, one with 11 affected individuals and the other with a single patient, carrying a novel, likely pathogenic, variant (p. Glu415Lys) in the TUBA4A gene (NM_006000). The phenotype, not previously described, is that of spastic ataxia. Our findings widen the phenotypic and genetic manifestations of TUBA4A variants and add a new type of spastic ataxia to be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis.
Alpha-tubulin 4A encoding gene (TUBA4A) has been associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia, based on identification of likely pathogenic variants in patients from distinct amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia cohorts. By screening a multicentric French cohort of 448 unrelated probands presenting with cerebellar ataxia, we identified ultra-rare TUBA4A missense variants, all being absent from public databases and predicted pathogenic by multiple in silico tools. In addition, gene burden analyses in the 100 000 Genomes project (100KGP) showed enrichment of TUBA4A rare variants in the inherited ataxia group compared to controls [odds ratio: 57.0847 (10.2-576.7); P = 4.02 x10-7]. Taken together, we report 12 patients presenting with spasticity and/or cerebellar ataxia and harbouring a predicted pathogenic TUBA4A missense mutation, including five confirmed de novo cases and a mutation previously reported in a large family presenting with spastic ataxia. Cultured fibroblasts from three patients harbouring distinct TUBA4A missense showed significant alterations in microtubule organization and dynamics, providing insight of TUBA4A variants pathogenicity. Our data confirm the identification of a hereditary spastic ataxia disease gene with variable age of onset, expanding the clinical spectrum of TUBA4A associated phenotypes.
Identifying disease genes implicated in late-onset neurodegenerative disorders can be challenging due to the lack of DNA samples from multiple affected family members. To overcome this limitation, Smith et al. (2014) report in this issue of Neuron the first exome-wide rare variant analysis in unrelated familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients associating TUBA4A with ALS.
We showed the results of pathological and genetic investigation for an autopsy case who was evaluated as longstanding Parkinson's disease (PD) in alive. Neuropathological investigation showed "pure nigropathy" without Lewy and tau pathology, and genetic analyses using next-generation sequencing detected novel TUBA4A nonsence mutation. Subsequent physiological study added to strength the hypothesis that the variant is pathogenic one. Present case showed TUBA4A is not only responsible gene for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia but also PD associated pure nigropathy. Also we found minimal but significant tau pathology high possibly associated with long-term deep brain stimulation in subthalamic nucleus.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an inexorably progressive and degenerative disorder of motor neurons with no currently-known cure. Studies to determine the mechanism of neurotoxicity and the impact of ALS-linked mutations (SOD1, FUS, TARDP, C9ORF72, PFN1, TUBA4A and others) have greatly expanded our knowledge of ALS disease mechanisms and have helped to identify potential targets for ALS therapy. Cellular pathologies (e.g., aggregation of mutant forms of SOD1, TDP43, FUS, Ubiqulin2, PFN1, and C9ORF72), mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroinflammation, and oxidative damage are major pathways implicated in ALS. Nevertheless, the selective vulnerability of motor neurons remains unexplained. The importance of tubulins for long-axon infrastructure, and the special morphology and function of motor neurons, underscore the central role of the cytoskeleton. The recent linkage of mutations to the tubulin alpha chain, TUBA4A, to familial and sporadic cases of ALS provides a new investigative opportunity to shed light on both mechanisms of ALS and the vulnerability of motor neurons. In the current study we investigate TUBA4A, a structural microtubule protein with mutations causal to familial ALS, using molecular-dynamic (MD) modeling of protein structure to predict the effects of each mutation and its overall impact on GTP binding, chain stability, tubulin assembly, and aggregation propensity. These studies predict that each of the reported mutations will cause notable structural changes to the TUBA4A (alpha chain) tertiary protein structure, adversely affecting its physical properties and functions. Molecular docking and MD simulations indicate certain alpha chain mutations (e.g. K430N, R215C, and W407X) may cause structural deviations that impair GTP binding, and plausibly prevent or destabilize tubulin polymerization. Furthermore, several mutations (including R320C and K430N) confer a significant increase in predicted aggregation propensity of TUBA4A mutants relative to wild-type. Taken together, these in silico modeling studies predict structural perturbations and disruption of GTP binding, culminating in failure to form a stable tubulin heterocomplex, which may furnish an important pathogenic mechanism to trigger motor neuron degeneration in ALS.
BACKGROUND: Congenital myopathies are a clinical, histopathological and genetic heterogeneous group of inherited muscle disorders that are defined on peculiar architectural abnormalities in the muscle fibres. Although there have been at least 33 different genetic causes of the disease, a significant percentage of congenital myopathies remain genetically unresolved. The present study aimed to report a novel TUBA4A variant in two unrelated Chinese patients with sporadic congenital myopathy. METHODS: A comprehensive strategy combining laser capture microdissection, proteomics and whole-exome sequencing was performed to identify the candidate genes. In addition, the available clinical data, myopathological changes, the findings of electrophysiological examinations and thigh muscle MRIs were also reviewed. A cellular model was established to assess the pathogenicity of the TUBA4A variant. RESULTS: We identified a recurrent novel heterozygous de novo c.679C>T (p.L227F) variant in the TUBA4A (NM_006000), encoding tubulin alpha-4A, in two unrelated patients with clinicopathologically diagnosed sporadic congenital myopathy. The prominent myopathological changes in both patients were muscle fibres with focal myofibrillar disorganisation and rimmed vacuoles. Immunofluorescence showed ubiquitin-positive TUBA4A protein aggregates in the muscle fibres with rimmed vacuoles. Overexpression of the L227F mutant TUBA4A resulted in cytoplasmic aggregates which colocalised with ubiquitin in cellular model. CONCLUSION: Our findings expanded the phenotypic and genetic manifestations of TUBA4A as well as tubulinopathies, and added a new type of congenital myopathy to be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis.
TUBA4A gene has recently been identified as a potential candidate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis(ALS)-associated gene using exome-wide rare variant burden analysis. The identification of novel TUBA4A variants in Italian ALS patients further support the role of TUBA4A in ALS. We sequenced the coding region of exon 4 in the TUBA4A gene in a cohort consisting of 80 familial ALS probands, 500 sporadic ALS patients and 500 healthy control individuals. No TUBA4A causative variants were identified in the ALS patients. In conclusion, our current results did not find an association between TUBA4A and ALS in Chinese patients, and further studies will be required.
Recently, disease-associated variants of the TUBA4A gene were identified in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Here, we present the neuropathological report of a patient with the semantic variant of primary progressive aphasia with a family history of Parkinsonism, harboring a novel frameshift mutation c.187del (p.Arg64Glyfs*90) in TUBA4A. Immunohistochemistry showed abundant TAR DNA-binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43) dystrophic neurite pathology in the frontal and temporal cortex and the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus, consistent with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). The observed pathology pattern fitted best with that of FTLD-TDP Type C. qPCR showed the presence of mutant TUBA4A mRNA. However, no truncated TUBA4A was detected at the protein level. A decrease in total TUBA4A mRNA and protein levels suggests loss-of-function as a potential pathogenic mechanism. This report strengthens the idea that N-terminal TUBA4A mutations are associated with FTLD-TDP. These N-terminal mutations possibly exert their pathogenic effects through haploinsufficiency, contrary to C-terminal TUBA4A mutations which are thought to disturb the microtubule network via a dominant-negative mechanism.
Exome sequencing is an effective strategy for identifying human disease genes. However, this methodology is difficult in late-onset diseases where limited availability of DNA from informative family members prohibits comprehensive segregation analysis. To overcome this limitation, we performed an exome-wide rare variant burden analysis of 363 index cases with familial ALS (FALS). The results revealed an excess of patient variants within TUBA4A, the gene encoding the Tubulin, Alpha 4A protein. Analysis of a further 272 FALS cases and 5,510 internal controls confirmed the overrepresentation as statistically significant and replicable. Functional analyses revealed that TUBA4A mutants destabilize the microtubule network, diminishing its repolymerization capability. These results further emphasize the role of cytoskeletal defects in ALS and demonstrate the power of gene-based rare variant analyses in situations where causal genes cannot be identified through traditional segregation analysis.
Mutation screening and phenotypic profiling of 2 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-(ALS) and frontotemporal dementia-(FTD) associated genes, CHCHD10 and TUBA4A, were performed in a Belgian cohort of 459 FTD, 28 FTD-ALS, and 429 ALS patients. In CHCHD10, we identified a novel nonsense mutation (p.Gln108*) in a patient with atypical clinical FTD and pathology-confirmed Parkinson's disease (1/459, 0.22%) leading to loss of transcript. We further observed 3 previously described missense variants (p.Pro34Ser, p.Pro80Leu, and p.Pro96Thr) that were also present in the matched control series. In TUBA4A, we detected a novel frameshift mutation (p.Arg64Glyfs*90) leading to a truncated protein in 1 FTD patient (1/459 of 0.22%) with family history of Parkinson's disease and cognitive impairment, and a novel missense mutation (p.Thr381Met) in 2 sibs with familial ALS and memory problems (1 index patient/429, 0.23%) in whom we previously identified a pathogenic Chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 repeat expansion mutation. The present study confirms the role of CHCHD10 and TUBA4A in the FTD-ALS spectrum, although genetic variations in these 2 genes are extremely rare in the Belgian population and often associated with symptomatology of related neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
