Tubulin beta-4B chain; Tubulin is the major constituent of microtubules. It binds two moles of GTP, one at an exchangeable site on the beta chain and one at a non-exchangeable site on the alpha chain; Belongs to the tubulin family.
Twin studies suggest that additive genetic effects account for about a quarter of the variance in handedness. Recently, Schijven et al. used exome-wide sequencing to provide evidence for a role of rare protein-coding variants in handedness. These included the gene encoding beta-tubulin, TUBB4B, suggesting that microtubules are relevant for handedness ontogenesis.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease-associated hepatocellular carcinoma (NAFLD-HCC) is an emerging malignancy due to the rising prevalence of NAFLD. However, no drug is available to target NAFLD-HCC. In this study, we aim to unravel novel therapeutic targets of NAFLD-HCC utilizing a high-throughput CRISPR/Cas9 screening strategy. We utilized the Epi-drug CRISPR/Cas9 library consisting of single-guide RNAs (sgRNAs) targeting over 1,000 genes representing the FDA-approved drug targets and epigenetic regulators to perform loss-of-function screening in two NAFLD-HCC cell lines (HKCI2 and HKCI10). CRISPR/Cas9 library screening unraveled TUBB4B as an essential gene for NAFLD-HCC cell growth. TUBB4B was overexpressed in NAFLD-HCC tumors compared with adjacent normal tissues (N = 17) and was associated with poor survival (p < 0.01). RNA-sequencing and functional assays revealed that TUBB4B knockout in NAFLD-HCC promoted cell apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and cellular senescence, leading to suppressed NAFLD-HCC growth in vitro and in vivo. We identified that TUBB4B inhibitor mebendazole (MBZ), an FDA-approved drug, inhibited NAFLD-HCC growth by inducing apoptosis and cellular senescence. Since protein expression of pro-survival Bcl-xL was induced in TUBB4B knockout NAFLD-HCC cells, we examined combination of TUBB4B inhibition with navitoclax, a Bcl-xL inhibitor that selectively targets senescent cells. Consistent with our hypothesis, either TUBB4B knockout or MBZ synergized with navitoclax to inhibit NAFLD-HCC cell growth via the induction of intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis pathways. In summary, TUBB4B is a novel therapeutic target in NAFLD-HCC. Inhibition of TUBB4B with MBZ in combination with navitoclax synergistically inhibited NAFLD-HCC cell growth, representing a promising strategy for the treatment of NAFLD-HCC. (c) 2023 The Authors. The Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Beta-tubulin 4B isotype is one of the subunits of microtubules encoded by TUBB4B gene on chromosome 9, which is responsible for the maintenance of microtubule stability. In humans, mutations in microtubule-encoding genes have been associated with several tubulinopathies with very heterogeneous symptoms. So far, only two missense mutations in TUBB4B gene have been found to have pathological implications in this disorder. Here we report a Hungarian family with three affected members, mother and her 12- and 14-year-old children, who suffer from ophthalmologic and hearing impairments probably due to c.1171C > T missense variant in the TUBB4B gene. The presented case is the second report, and unique in the literature because of three affected family members carrying the same mutation and the family provides evidence for a quite similar but not identical phenotype of LCAEOD in subjects carrying this mutation.
Tumor metastasis, the major problem for clinical oncology in colon cancer treatment, is linked with an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The observed cellular transformation in this process is manifested by cell elongation, enhanced cell migration and invasion ability, coordinated by cytoskeleton reorganization. In the present study, we examined the role of tubulin-beta4 (TUBB4B) downregulation that occurs during EMT in colon cancer cells, in the modulation of the function of microtubules. Based on biochemical and behavioral analysis (transmigration) we posit that the decrease of the TUBB4B level is critical for microtubule-vimentin interaction and contributes to the maintenance of polarity in migrating cells. The microscopic studies revealed that TUBB4B decrease is accompanied by cell elongation and increased number of matured focal adhesion sites, which is a characteristic of the cell metastatic stage. We also demonstrated faster polymerization of microtubules in cells with a lower level of TUBB4B. Simultaneous TUBB3 upregulation, reported during EMT, acts additively in this process. Our studies suggest that the protein level of TUBB4B could be used as a marker for detection of the preinvasive stages of the colon cancer cells. We also concluded that chemotherapy enriched to increase TUBB4B level and/or to stabilize microtubule polymerization might more effectively prevent metastasis in colon cancer development.
Our purpose was to elucidate the genotype and ophthalmological and audiological phenotype in TUBB4B-associated inherited retinal dystrophy (IRD) and sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL), and to model the effects of all possible amino acid substitutions at the hotspot codons Arg390 and Arg391. Six patients from five families with heterozygous missense variants in TUBB4B were included in this observational study. Ophthalmological testing included best-corrected visual acuity, fundus examination, optical coherence tomography, fundus autofluorescence imaging, and full-field electroretinography (ERG). Audiological examination included pure-tone and speech audiometry in adult patients and auditory brainstem response testing in a child. Genetic testing was performed by disease gene panel analysis based on genome sequencing. The molecular consequences of the substitutions of residues 390 and 391 on TUBB4B and its interaction with alpha-tubulin were predicted in silico on its three-dimensional structure obtained by homology modelling. Two independent patients had amino acid exchanges at position 391 (p.(Arg391His) or p.(Arg391Cys)) of the TUBB4B protein. Both had a distinct IRD phenotype with peripheral round yellowish lesions with pigmented spots and mild or moderate SNHL, respectively. Yet the phenotype was milder with a sectorial pattern of bone spicules in one patient, likely due to a genetically confirmed mosaicism for p.(Arg391His). Three patients were heterozygous for an amino acid exchange at position 390 (p.(Arg390Gln) or p.(Arg390Trp)) and presented with another distinct retinal phenotype with well demarcated pericentral retinitis pigmentosa. All showed SNHL ranging from mild to severe. One additional patient showed a variant distinct from codon 390 or 391 (p.(Tyr310His)), and presented with congenital profound hearing loss and reduced responses in ERG. Variants at codon positions 390 and 391 were predicted to decrease the structural stability of TUBB4B and its complex with alpha-tubulin, as well as the complex affinity. In conclusion, the twofold larger reduction in heterodimer affinity exhibited by Arg391 substitutions suggested an association with the more severe retinal phenotype, compared to the substitution at Arg390.
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a neurodegenerative disease of photoreceptor cells that causes blindness within the first year of life. It occasionally occurs in syndromic metabolic diseases and plurisystemic ciliopathies. Using exome sequencing in a multiplex family and three simplex case subjects with an atypical association of LCA with early-onset hearing loss, we identified two heterozygous mutations affecting Arg391 in beta-tubulin 4B isotype-encoding (TUBB4B). Inspection of the atomic structure of the microtubule (MT) protofilament reveals that the beta-tubulin Arg391 residue contributes to a binding pocket that interacts with alpha-tubulin contained in the longitudinally adjacent alphabeta-heterodimer, consistent with a role in maintaining MT stability. Functional analysis in cultured cells overexpressing FLAG-tagged wild-type or mutant TUBB4B as well as in primary skin-derived fibroblasts showed that the mutant TUBB4B is able to fold, form alphabeta-heterodimers, and co-assemble into the endogenous MT lattice. However, the dynamics of growing MTs were consistently altered, showing that the mutations have a significant dampening impact on normal MT growth. Our findings provide a link between sensorineural disease and anomalies in MT behavior and describe a syndromic LCA unrelated to ciliary dysfunction.
BACKGROUND: Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is a frequent manifestation of syndromic inherited retinal diseases (IRDs), exemplified by the very rare form of autosomal-dominant Leber congenital amaurosis with early onset deafness (LCAEOD; OMIM #617879). LCAEOD was first described in 2017 in four families segregating heterozygous missense mutations in TUBB4B, a gene encoding a beta-tubulin isotype. To date, only eight more families with similar TUBB4B-associated sensorineural disease (SND) have been reported. Most cases harbored missense variants affecting the same amino acid (Arg391) and only three families segregated variants involving different residues (Tyr310, Arg390). METHODS: We performed whole-exome sequencing and a full ophthalmological and audiological examination of the affected members in an Italian family segregating syndromic IRD with early onset deafness. RESULTS: We identified a novel, ultra-rare, disease-causing variant in TUBB4B (NM_006088.6:c.1049A>C) that replaces a highly conserved lysine with threonine at amino acid position 350. The functional impact of the Lys350Thr substitution was supported by protein structure modeling studies. The variant segregates in the family members presenting retinal disease with early onset SNHL. Detailed ophthalmological assessment of the affected subjects diagnosed a progressive cone-rod dystrophy. CONCLUSION: These findings expand the limited number of disease-causing TUBB4B variants, corroborating their association with SND forms, and suggest Lys350 is an important residue for beta-tubulin function. Interestingly, our results demonstrate that TUBB4B mutations can cause cone-dominated retinal phenotypes.
