UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1-1; UDPGT is of major importance in the conjugation and subsequent elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds. This isoform glucuronidates bilirubin IX-alpha to form both the IX-alpha-C8 and IX-alpha-C12 monoconjugates and diconjugate. Is also able to catalyze the glucuronidation of 17beta-estradiol, 17alpha- ethinylestradiol, 1-hydroxypyrene, 4-methylumbelliferone, 1-naphthol, paranitrophenol, scopoletin, and umbelliferone. Isoform 2 lacks transferase activity but acts as a negative regulator of isoform 1. Belongs to the UDP-glyc [...] 
The Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group (DPWG) aims to facilitate PGx implementation by developing evidence-based pharmacogenetics guidelines to optimize pharmacotherapy. This guideline describes the starting dose optimization of the anti-cancer drug irinotecan to decrease the risk of severe toxicity, such as (febrile) neutropenia or diarrhoea. Uridine diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1 encoded by the UGT1A1 gene) enzyme deficiency increases risk of irinotecan-induced toxicity. Gene variants leading to UGT1A1 enzyme deficiency (e.g. UGT1A1*6, *28 and *37) can be used to optimize an individual's starting dose thereby preventing carriers from toxicity. Homozygous or compound heterozygous carriers of these allele variants are defined as UGT1A1 poor metabolisers (PM). DPWG recommends a 70% starting dose in PM patients and no dose reduction in IM patients who start treatment with irinotecan. Based on the DPWG clinical implication score, UGT1A1 genotyping is considered "essential", indicating that UGT1A1 testing must be performed prior to initiating irinotecan treatment.
Gilbert syndrome (GS) is a hereditary condition that affects ~10% of the population. It is characterized by intermittent, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia in the absence of hepatocellular damage and hemolysis. Although GS is often described as a benign laboratory finding, it may alter drug metabolism by decreasing the ability to conjugate drugs. Genetic polymorphisms, specifically the UGT1A1*28 allele, may reduce glucuronidation by 30% that severely impacts the ability to metabolize certain medications. Antineoplastic agents used in oncologic settings have toxic side effects, and alterations in metabolism may result in severe or even life-threatening toxicities. Many of the drug monographs provided by manufacturers contain dose adjustment parameters for hepatic function, using serum bilirubin as a surrogate marker. However, in patients with GS, hepatic function remains normal in the setting of hyperbilirubinemia, and scant literature is available to provide guidance on empirical dosage adjustment. In this review, we conducted a literature search of routinely used oncology medications and assessed the need for empirical dose adjustments in the setting of GS.
During development of a novel detection method for the UDP-glucuronosyl transferase 1A1 (UGT1A1)*28, the fluorescence intensity of a dye conjugated to cytosine (C) at the end of a DNA strand decreased upon hybridization with guanine (G). This phenomenon is referred to as photoinduced electron transfer (PeT). Using this phenomenon, we devised a method for the naked-eye detection of UGT1A1*28 (thymine-adenine (TA)-repeat polymorphism). Fluorescently labeled single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) oligonucleotides (probes) were designed and hybridized with complementary strand DNAs (target DNAs). Base pair formation at the blunt end between fluorescently labeled C (probe side) and G (target side), induced dramatic fluorescence quenching. Additionally, when the labeled-CG pair formed near the TA-repeat sequence, different TA-repeat numbers were discriminated. However, obtaining enough target DNA for this probe by typical polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was difficult. To enable the practical use of the probe, producing sufficient target DNA remains problematic.
Tweetable abstract Pretreatment UGT1A1 genotyping and a 70% irinotecan dose intensity in poor metabolizers is safe, feasible, cost-effective and essential for safe irinotecan treatment in cancer patients. It is time to update guidelines to swiftly enable the implementation of UGT1A1 genotype-guided irinotecan dosing in routine oncology care.
UGT1A1 is the main enzyme that catalyzes the metabolic elimination and detoxification of SN-38, the active form of the drug irinotecan. Milk thistle products have been used widely to protect the liver from injury associated with the use of chemotherapeutic agents. To evaluate whether SN-38 metabolism can be affected by milk thistle products, the inhibitory effects of silybins on UGT1A1*1 and UGT1A1*6 were evaluated in the present investigation. Both silybin A and silybin B potently inhibited SN-38 glucuronidation catalyzed by UGT1A1*1 or UGT1A1*6. It was noteworthy that silybin A and silybin B showed synergistic effect in UGT1A1*1 microsomes at concentration around IC(50), while additive effect in UGT1A1*6. According to the predicted AUC(i)/AUC ratios (the ratio of the area under the plasma concentration-time curve of SN-38 in the presence and absence of silybins), the coadministration of irinotecan and several milk thistle products, including silybin-phosphatidylcholine complex, two Legalon capsules, four Silymarin tablets or four Liverman capsules, may lead to clinically significant herb-drug interactions (HDI) via UGT1A1 inhibition. Meanwhile, R(gut) values were much higher than 11 in all the groups, indicating potential HDI due to intestinal UGT1A1 inhibition.
OBJECTIVES: The direct-acting protease inhibitor paritaprevir is a new pharmaco-logic option available for treatment of chronic hepatitis C (HCV). Paritaprevir is reported to inhibit human UGT 1A1, but the mechanism of inhibition and its possible clinical consequences are not established. Our objective was to evaluate the in-vitro metabolic interaction between paritaprevir and the oral contraceptive steroid ethinyl estradiol (EE), a UGT 1A1 substrate. METHODS: Enzyme kinetic parameters were determined using human liver microsomes for the biotransformation of EE to its glucuronide metabolites, and the potency and mechanism of inhibition by paritaprevir. Probenecid was used as a reference inhibitor for purposes of assay validation. KEY FINDINGS: The underlying pattern of EE kinetics was complex, with evidence of substrate inhibition. The in-vitro inhibition constant (K(i) ) value for paritaprevir vs EE on average was 20 mum and was consistent with a competitive inhibition mechanism. The ratio of in-vivo maximum plasma concentration of paritaprevir to in-vitro K(i) was <0.1. CONCLUSIONS: Paritaprevir is an in-vitro inhibitor of UGT 1A1. However, the in-vitro K(i) value relative to maximum clinical plasma concentrations is below the threshold to trigger a recommendation for pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies.
The adoption of a preemptive UGT1A1*28 genotyping to increase irinotecan safety in clinical practice is still limited. This is the first actual study of costs associated with the management of irinotecan-related toxicities, and their association with UGT1A1*28 genotype. A retrospective analysis of the cost of toxicity management was conducted on 243 metastatic colorectal cancer patients enrolled in a clinical trial and treated with standard of care FOLFIRI (5-fluorouracil combined with irinotecan). The mean predicted cost per patient was higher for *28/*28 (euro4,886), vs. *1/*1 (euro812), (regression coefficient 1.79, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.31-2.28; P < 0.001) and for *1/*28 (euro1,119) vs. *1/*1 (regression coefficient 0.32, 95% CI = 0.04-0.60; P = 0.024). This is consistent with a different grade 4 toxicity profile among the three genotypes, and a higher frequency of costly interventions like hospitalization among patients with the *28 allele. A differential toxicity management cost by *28 genotype is herein demonstrated, representing a first step towards the demonstration of the test clinical utility.
Hyperbilirubinemia is the main mechanism that causes neonatal jaundice, and genetics is one of the risk factors of hyperbilirubinemia. Therefore, this study aims to explore the correlation between two genes, UGT1A1 and SLCO1B1, and hyperbilirubinemia in Thai neonates. One hundred thirty seven neonates were recruited from Division of Clinical Chemistry, Ramathibodi Hospital. UGT1A1*28 and *6 were determined by pyrosequencing whereas, SLCO1B1 388A > G and 521 T > C genetic variants were determined by TaqMan(R) real-time polymerase chain reaction. Neonates carrying with homozygous (AA) and heterozygous (GA) variants in UGT1A1*6 were significantly related to hyperbilirubinemia development compared with wild type (GG; P < 0.001). To the combined of UGT1A1, total bilirubin levels in homozygous variant were higher significantly than heterozygous variant and wild type (P = 0.002, P = 0.003, respectively). Moreover, SLCO1B1 combination was significant differences between the hyperbilirubinemia and the control group (P = 0.041). SLCO1B1 521 T > C variant provide protection for Thai neonatal hyperbilirubinemia (P = 0.041). There are no significant differences in UGT1A1*28 and SLCO1B1 388A > G for the different severity of hyperbilirubinemia. The combined UGT1A1*28 and *6 polymorphism is a strong risk factor for the development of severe hyperbilirubinemia in Thai neonates. Therefore, we suggest neonates with this gene should be closely observed to avoid higher severities of bilirubin.
We present the case of a young woman diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukemia who began de-novo treatment with nilotinib, which led to increased plasma levels of total bilirubin and QT interval. An evaluation of the genetic profile of uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase was made, as nilotinib inhibits the activity of this enzyme causing hyperbilirubinemia, with higher risk in slow metabolizers, such as those ones with *6/*6 genotype. This type of patient can be identified by genetic profiling, and adjustment in the dose of nilotinib could be made to avoid tyrosine kinase inhibitor switching.
BACKGROUND: Previous articles explored the role of UGT1A1 polymorphism on predicting irinotecan-induced toxicity, but the conclusions were still inconsistent and not comprehensive. We performed this meta-analysis to investigate the association between UGT1A1 polymorphism and irinotecan-induced toxicity. METHODS: PubMed and Web of Science were searched for articles before July 2017. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were set to select eligible articles, and corresponding data were extracted from those articles. Subgroup analyses based on different cancer categories, doses and races were carried out to achieve comprehensive results. Statistical analyses were conducted using STATA 11.0. RESULTS: A total of 38 studies with 6742 cases were included after reading full text. Both UGT1A1*6 and UGT1A1*28 polymorphism are significantly associated with severe irinotecan-induced toxicity. Both Asian and Caucasian cancer patients with UGT1A1*28 variant had an increased risk. Compared with heterozygous variant, patients with homozygous variant suffered from a higher risk of toxicity. The effect of UGT1A1*28 polymorphism on diarrhea was less than on neutropenia. Subgroup analysis exhibited that for UGT1A1*6 polymorphism, patients treated with low-dose irinotecan were at a notable risk of toxicity. Moreover, the association between UGT1A1*6 polymorphism and irinotecan-induced toxicity was found in patients suffering from respiratory system cancers. CONCLUSIONS: Both UGT1A1*6 and UGT1A1*28 polymorphisms can be considered as predictors of irinotecan-induced toxicity, with effect varying by race, cancer type and irinotecan dose.
The antiretroviral protease inhibitor atazanavir inhibits hepatic uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1, thereby preventing the glucuronidation and elimination of bilirubin. Resultant indirect hyperbilirubinemia with jaundice can cause premature discontinuation of atazanavir. Risk for bilirubin-related discontinuation is highest among individuals who carry two UGT1A1 decreased function alleles (UGT1A1*28 or *37). We summarize published literature that supports this association and provide recommendations for atazanavir prescribing when UGT1A1 genotype is known (updates at www.pharmgkb.org).
Severe irinotecan-induced toxicity is associated with UGT1A1 polymorphisms. However, some patients develop side-effects despite harbouring a normal UGT1A1 genotype. As CYP3A4 is also an irinotecan-metabolizing enzyme, our study aimed to elucidate the influence of the CYP3A4*20 loss-of-function allele in the toxicity profile of these patients. Three-hundred and eight metastatic colorectal cancer patients treated with an irinotecan-containing chemotherapy were studied. The presence of CYP3A4*20, UGT1A1*37 and UGT1A1*28 alleles was tested. Associations between these genetic variants and toxicity were evaluated. UGT1A1*28 was significantly associated with severe diarrhoea, neutropenia and asthenia (P = 0.002, P = 0.037 and P = 0.041, respectively). One patient with the UGT1A1*28/*37 genotype presented with grade IV neutropenia and lethal septic shock. One heterozygous UGT1A1 (*1/*28) patient also carried the CYP3A4*20 allele but did not develop toxicity. We confirm that UGT1A1*37 and UGT1A1*28 are associated with severe toxicity and suggest that the CYP3A4*20 allele does not play a role in irinotecan-induced toxicity.
OBJECTIVES: Hydroxyurea is known to reduce ineffective erythropoiesis and thereby hemolysis leading to a reduction in bilirubin levels in patients with hemoglobinopathies. However, the effect of hydroxyurea on hyperbilirubinemia in relation to the UGT1A1 gene promoter polymorphism is not known in Indian patients with different hemoglobinopathies. DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 112 patients (77 sickle cell anemia, 22 beta-thalassemia intermedia and 13 HbE-beta-thalassemia) who were on hydroxyurea therapy for 2 years for their response towards hyperbilirubinemia associated with UGT1A1 promoter polymorphism. RESULTS: The patients with (TA)(7)/(TA)(7) repeats had significantly higher serum bilirubin levels than those with (TA)(6)/(TA)(6) repeats in all the groups and the reduction in serum bilirubin after hydroxyurea therapy was still higher among patients with (TA)(7)/(TA)(7) repeats when compared with (TA)(6)/(TA)(6) repeats. CONCLUSIONS: Higher bilirubin levels were associated with the (TA)(7)/(TA)(7) sequence however they did not come down to normal levels after hydroxyurea therapy.
UDP-glucuronyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) is a member of the Phase II metabolic enzyme family and the only enzyme that can metabolize detoxified bilirubin. Inactivation and very low activity of UGT1A1 in the liver can be fatal or lead to lifelong Gilbert's syndrome (GS) and Crigler-Najjar syndrome (CN). To date, more than one hundred UGT1A1 polymorphisms have been discovered. Although most UGT1A1 polymorphisms are not fatal, which diseases might be associated with low activity UGT1A1 or UGT1A1 polymorphisms? This scientific topic has been studied for more than a hundred years, there are still many uncertainties. Herein, this article will summarize all the possibilities of UGT1A1 gene-related diseases, including GS and CN, neurological disease, hepatobiliary disease, metabolic difficulties, gallstone, cardiovascular disease, Crohn's disease (CD) obesity, diabetes, myelosuppression, leukemia, tumorigenesis, etc., and provide guidance for researchers to conduct in-depth study on UGT1A1 gene-related diseases. In addition, this article not only summarizes the prevention strategies of UGT1A1 gene-related diseases, but also puts forward some insights for sharing.
To explore the correlation between UGT1A1 variant and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia in Chinese Uighur and Han populations. We conducted this study in Urumqi, China. Umbilical cord blood specimens and clinical information of term infants born in the studied center were collected. Variation status of UGT1A1 was determined by direct sequencing or capillary electrophoresis analysis. 102 Uighur and 99 Han normal term neonates, together with 19 hospitalized term newborns (10 Uighur and 9 Han) due to significant hyperbilirubinemia were enrolled into the final analysis. The incidence of neonates with high-risk transcutaneous bilirubin level (TCB) were much higher in Han newborns than in Uighur newborns(P = 0.01). Also, there was statistically significant difference in (TA) 7 promoter mutation of UGT1A1 between Han and Uighur group(chi2 = 4.675, P = 0.03). Furthermore, exon mutation (c.211 and /or c.1091) in UGT1A1 gene was significantly associated with increased TCB level (ORadj = 1.41, 95%CI: 0.25-2.51, P = 0.002) and higher risk of hyperbilirubinemia in both Han and Uighur infants after adjusted for covariates (ORadj = 2.21, 95%CI: 1.09-4.49, P = 0.03). In conclusion, UGT1A1 promoter polymorphism seem to be an important genetic modulator of plasma bilirubin level and neonatal hyperbilirubinemia risk within ethnic groups. Genetic assessment of UGT1A1 coding variants may be useful for clinical diagnosis of neonatal jaundice.
Tranilast (N-(3'4'-demethoxycinnamoyl)-anthranilic acid (N-5)) is an investigational drug for the prevention of restenosis following percutaneous transluminal coronary revascularization. An increase in bilirubin levels was observed in 12% of patients upon administration of tranilast in a phase III clinical trial. To identify the potential genetic factors that may account for the drug-induced hyperbilirubinemia, we examined polymorphisms in the uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) gene in over a thousand patients. Our results suggested that the TA repeat polymorphism in UGT1A1, which predisposes some individuals to Gilbert's syndrome, predicted the susceptibility to tranilast-induced hyperbilirubinemia. The (TA)(7)/(TA)(7) genotype was present in 39% of the 127 hyperbilirubinemic patients vs 7% of the 909 controls (P=2 x 10(-22)). Rapid identification of genetic factors accounting for the observed adverse effect during the course of a double-blind clinical trial demonstrated the potential application of pharmacogenetics in the clinical development of safe and effective medicines.
