BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Pharmacologically controlled drinking in the treatment of alcohol dependence or alcohol use disorders (AUDs) is an emerging concept. Our objective was to explore the comparative effectiveness of drugs used in this indication. DESIGN: Systematic review with direct and network meta-analysis of double-blind randomized controlled trials (RCTs) assessing the efficacy of nalmefene, naltrexone, acamprosate, baclofen or topiramate in non-abstinent adults diagnosed with alcohol dependence or AUDs. Two independent reviewers selected published and unpublished studies on Medline, the Cochrane Library, Embase, ClinicalTrials.gov, contacted pharmaceutical companies, the European Medicines Agency and the Food and Drug Administration, and extracted data. SETTING: Thirty-two RCTs. PARTICIPANTS: A total of 6036 patients. MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was total alcohol consumption (TAC). Other consumption outcomes and health outcomes were considered as secondary outcomes. FINDINGS: No study provided direct comparisons between drugs. A risk of incomplete outcome data was identified in 26 studies (81%) and risk of selective outcome reporting in 17 (53%). Nalmefene [standardized mean difference (SMD) = -0.19, 95% confidence interval (CI) = -0.29, -0.10; I(2)  = 0%], baclofen (SMD = -1.00, 95% CI = -1.80, -0.19; one study) and topiramate (SMD = -0.77, 95% CI = -1.12, -0.42; I(2)  = 0%) showed superiority over placebo on TAC. No efficacy was observed for naltrexone or acamprosate. Similar results were observed for other consumption outcomes, except for baclofen (the favourable outcome on TAC was not reproduced). The number of withdrawals for safety reasons increased under nalmefene and naltrexone. No treatment demonstrated any harm reduction (no study was powered to explore health outcomes). Indirect comparisons suggested that topiramate was superior to nalmefene, naltrexone and acamprosate on consumption outcomes, but its safety profile is known to be poor. CONCLUSIONS: There is currently no high-grade evidence for pharmacological treatment to control drinking using nalmefene, naltrexone, acamprosate, baclofen or topiramate in patients with alcohol dependence or alcohol use disorder. Some treatments show low to medium efficacy in reducing drinking across a range of studies with a high risk of bias. None demonstrates any benefit on health outcomes.
AIM: The current research aims to systematically review the rates of adherence reported in randomised controlled clinical trials of acamprosate. It also sought to determine the reliability of the adherence monitoring and measurement methods used in these trials. METHODS: The protocol for this review was pre-registered (PROSPERO: CRD42021230011). A search of the literature was conducted using OVID MEDLINE, Embase and PsycINFO from database inception to January 2021. Randomised controlled trials with a minimum sample size of 10 per treatment arm that compared the efficacy of acamprosate with placebo or other active medication in adults with a diagnosis of alcohol dependence were included. Data on rates of adherence, methods of measurement and monitoring of adherence was extracted from eligible studies independently in duplicate by two reviewers. A weighted mean adherence rate was calculated. The reliability of adherence monitoring methods was determined by calculating an adherence-assurance score based on the adherence monitoring method used. Risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool. RESULTS: Fifteen studies met the eligibility criteria involving 4,450 participants (2,480 participants in the placebo arms). A mean adherence rate of 88% (54.2-95.0%) was reported across studies that reported the percentage of medication taken. A mean adherence rate of 84.9% (56.4-91.3%) was reported for trials that reported the percentage of participants taking more than 80% of medication prescribed. There is low confidence in the methods used to monitor adherence with all clinical trials having a low adherence-assurance rating. Risk of bias was judged to be high for all included studies. CONCLUSIONS: Adherence to acamprosate in clinical trials can be poor with low confidence in the methods used to measure it. Adherence rates therefore might not be accurate, which has implications for determining the efficacy of acamprosate.
BACKGROUND: Acamprosate and naltrexone, evidence-based pharmacotherapies for alcohol use disorder (AUD), are publicly covered by the Ontario Drug Benefit (ODB) programs; however, their availability has changed over time, with expanded formulary access in July 2018, followed by an acamprosate shortage in February 2019 and ending in July 2020. We evaluated the impact of these events on the use of these medications in Ontario, Canada. METHODS: We conducted a time-series analysis among individuals with AUD dispensed acamprosate or naltrexone through the ODB from July 2016 to December 2020. Outcomes included monthly rates of those with AUD on therapy (primary), and rate of initiation (secondary) overall and by treatment type. We used autoregressive moving average models to evaluate the impact of expanded coverage and the acamprosate shortage on rates of use, and reported characteristics at first dispensation. RESULTS: Over the study period, 10,637 individuals (61.0% male) initiated acamprosate or naltrexone. Expanded coverage increased monthly utilization rates of acamprosate (p = 0.0004), naltrexone (p < 0.0001), and either AUD pharmacotherapy (p < 0.0001). The acamprosate shortage led to a 98.1% reduction in acamprosate use (p = 0.0003) but did not impact naltrexone (p = 0.51). Our secondary analysis yielded consistent results with respect to the shortage; however, the expanded formulary listing did not impact the rate of new acamprosate patients (p = 0.3). By December 2020, 5.3% of ODB recipients with AUD were accessing pharmacotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: Although coverage expansion increased access to medications that treat AUD, the shortage of acamprosate led to large reductions in its use, with no responsive increase in naltrexone prescribing.
BACKGROUND: Acamprosate is an effective and cost-effective medication for alcohol relapse prevention but poor adherence can limit its full benefit. Effective interventions to support adherence to acamprosate are therefore needed. OBJECTIVES: To determine the effectiveness of Medication Management, with and without Contingency Management, compared to Standard Support alone in enhancing adherence to acamprosate and the impact of adherence to acamprosate on abstinence and reduced alcohol consumption. DESIGN: Multicentre, three-arm, parallel-group, randomised controlled clinical trial. SETTING: Specialist alcohol treatment services in five regions of England (South East London, Central and North West London, Wessex, Yorkshire and Humber and West Midlands). PARTICIPANTS: Adults (aged 18 years or more), an International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision, diagnosis of alcohol dependence, abstinent from alcohol at baseline assessment, in receipt of a prescription for acamprosate. INTERVENTIONS: (1) Standard Support, (2) Standard Support with adjunctive Medication Management provided by pharmacists via a clinical contact centre (12 sessions over 6 months), (3) Standard Support with adjunctive Medication Management plus Contingency Management that consisted of vouchers (up to  pound120) to reinforce participation in Medication Management. Consenting participants were randomised in a 2 : 1 : 1 ratio to one of the three groups using a stratified random permuted block method using a remote system. Participants and researchers were not blind to treatment allocation. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcome: self-reported percentage of medication taken in the previous 28 days at 6 months post randomisation. Economic outcome: EuroQol-5 Dimensions, a five-level version, used to calculate quality-adjusted life-years, with costs estimated using the Adult Service Use Schedule. RESULTS: Of the 1459 potential participants approached, 1019 (70%) were assessed and 739 (73 consented to participate in the study, 372 (50%) were allocated to Standard Support, 182 (25%) to Standard Support with Medication Management and 185 (25%) to Standard Support and Medication Management with Contingency Management. Data were available for 518 (70%) of participants at 6-month follow-up, 255 (68.5%) allocated to Standard Support, 122 (67.0%) to Standard Support and Medication Management and 141 (76.2%) to Standard Support and Medication Management with Contingency Management. The mean difference of per cent adherence to acamprosate was higher for those who received Standard Support and Medication Management with Contingency Management (10.6%, 95% confidence interval 19.6% to 1.6%) compared to Standard Support alone, at the primary end point (6-month follow-up). There was no significant difference in per cent days adherent when comparing Standard Support and Medication Management with Standard Support alone 3.1% (95% confidence interval 12.8% to -6.5%) or comparing Standard Support and Medication Management with Standard Support and Medication Management with Contingency Management 7.9% (95% confidence interval 18.7% to -2.8%). The primary economic analysis at 6 months found that Standard Support and Medication Management with Contingency Management was cost-effective compared to Standard Support alone, achieving small gains in quality-adjusted life-years at a lower cost per participant. Cost-effectiveness was not observed for adjunctive Medication Management compared to Standard Support alone. There were no serious adverse events related to the trial interventions reported. LIMITATIONS: The trial's primary outcome measure changed substantially due to data collection difficulties and therefore relied on a measure of self-reported adherence. A lower than anticipated follow-up rate at 12 months may have lowered the statistical power to detect differences in the secondary analyses, although the primary analysis was not impacted. CONCLUSIONS: Medication Management enhanced with Contingency Management is beneficial to patients for supporting them to take acamprosate. FUTURE WORK: Given our findings in relation to Contingency Management enhancing Medication Management adherence, future trials should be developed to explore its effectiveness and cost-effectiveness with other alcohol interventions where there is evidence of poor adherence. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial is registered as ISRCTN17083622 https://doi.org/10.1186/ISRCTN17083622. FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 27, No. 22. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further project information.
AIMS: To ascertain the efficacy and safety of naltrexone and acamprosate in the treatment of alcohol dependence. METHODS: Systematic review of the literature (1990-2002) and meta-analysis of full published randomized and controlled clinical trials assessing acamprosate or naltrexone therapy in alcohol dependence. Estimates of effect were calculated according to the fixed-effects model. MEASUREMENTS: Relapse and abstinence rates, cumulative abstinence duration and treatment compliance were considered as primary outcomes. Findings Thirty-three studies met the inclusion criteria. Acamprosate was associated with a significant improvement in abstinence rate [odds ratio (OR): 1.88 (1.57, 2.25), P < 0.001] and days of cumulative abstinence [WMD: 26.55 (17.56, 36.54]. Short-term administration of naltrexone reduced the relapse rate significantly [OR: 0.62 (0.52, 0.75), P < 0.001], but was not associated with a significant modification in the abstinence rate [OR: 1.26 (0.97,1.64), P = 0.08]. There were insufficient data to ascertain naltrexone's efficacy over more prolonged periods. Acamprosate had a good safety pattern and was associated with a significant improvement in treatment compliance [OR: 1.29 (1.13,1.47), P < 0.001]. Naltrexone's side effects were more numerous, yet the drug was nevertheless tolerated acceptably without being associated with a lower adherence to treatment (OR: 0.94 (0.80, 1.1), P = 0.5). However, overall compliance was relatively low with both medications. CONCLUSIONS: Both acamprosate and naltrexone are effective as adjuvant therapies for alcohol dependence in adults. Acamprosate appears to be especially useful in a therapeutic approach targeted at achieving abstinence, whereas naltrexone seems more indicated in programmes geared to controlled consumption. Both drugs are safe and acceptably tolerated but issues of compliance need to be addressed adequately to assure their usefulness in clinical practice.
Acamprosate, a drug used to treat alcohol dependence, was first reported as a potential treatment for tinnitus in 2005. The drug may improve tinnitus by a dual mechanism of action, acting both as a glutamate antagonist and as a GABA agonist. It is suggested that its action may be both on the ear and the nervous system.
We previously reported that SNPs near TSPAN5 were associated with plasma serotonin (5-HT) concentrations which were themselves associated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor treatment outcomes in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). TSPAN5 SNPs were also associated with alcohol consumption and alcohol use disorder (AUD) risk. The present study was designed to explore the biological function of TSPAN5 with a focus on 5-HT and kynurenine concentrations in the tryptophan pathway. Ethanol treatment resulted in decreased 5-HT concentrations in human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neuron culture media, and the downregulation of gene expression of TSPAN5, DDC, MAOA, MAOB, TPH1, and TPH2 in those cells. Strikingly, similar observations were made when the cells were treated with acamprosate-an FDA approved drug for AUD therapy. These results were replicated in iPSC-derived astrocytes. Furthermore, TSPAN5 interacted physically with proteins related to clathrin and other vesicle-related proteins, raising the possibility that TSPAN5 might play a role in vesicular function in addition to regulating expression of genes associated with 5-HT biosynthesis and metabolism. Downregulation of TSPAN5 expression by ethanol or acamprosate treatment was also associated with decreased concentrations of kynurenine, a major metabolite of tryptophan that plays a role in neuroinflammation. Knockdown of TSPAN5 also influenced the expression of genes associated with interferon signaling pathways. Finally, we determined that TSPAN5 SNPs were associated with acamprosate treatment outcomes in AUD patients. In conclusion, TSPAN5 can modulate the concentrations of 5-HT and kynurenine. Our data also highlight a potentially novel pharmacogenomic mechanism related to response to acamprosate.
BACKGROUND: Alcoholism represents a major public health issue and treating alcohol dependent patients remains an imminent challenge. Evidence based psychotherapies and pharmacotherapies are available. However, when administered to heterogeneous populations of patients effect sizes are only modest. We present the rationale and design of a double-blind randomized trial comparing acamprosate, naltrexone, and placebo. Additionally we subtype patients on the basis of biological and psychometric measures and explore their treatment response to both acamprosate and naltrexone. According to our initial hypothesis, the "relief drinker/craver" is an endophenotype associated with glutamatergic dysfunction who responds to acamprosate. The "reward drinker/craver" is mainly associated with alterations in the dopaminergic and opioidergic system and responds to naltrexone. METHODS: The study is planned for 430 patients (2:2:1 for both drugs and placebo) over 12 weeks of medication. All receive manualized counselling to improve compliance (Medical Management) which is extended to 6 months. Subtyping is primarily done using the acoustic startle reflex, functional magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography (in a subset of patients), and the Inventory of Drinking Situations. Relapsers will be re-randomized into a second study where additional psychotherapy (Cognitive Behavioral Intervention) is used in a stepped care approach. Genotyping and additional analyses such as health economy are being done as well. The study follows the assessment methods, treatments, and medications used in the U.S. based COMBINE study, which will allow for a direct comparison between this U.S. study trial and a study performed in Europe.
Acamprosate and naltrexone have each demonstrated safety and efficacy for alcohol dependence in placebo-controlled clinical trials. There is scientific and clinical interest in evaluating these drugs in combination, given their high tolerability, moderate effect sizes, different pharmacological profiles and potentially different effects on drinking outcomes. Thus, this is the first human pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug interaction study of acamprosate and naltrexone. Twenty-four normal, healthy adult volunteers participated in a double-blind, multiple dose, within subjects, randomized, 3-way crossover drug interaction study of the standard therapeutic dose of acamprosate (2 g/d) and the standard therapeutic dose of naltrexone (50 mg/d), given alone and in combination, with seven days per treatment condition and seven days washout between treatments. Blood samples were collected on a standardized schedule for pharmacokinetic analysis of naltrexone, 6-beta-naltrexol, and acamprosate. A computerized assessment system evaluated potential drug effects on cognitive functioning. Coadministration of acamprosate with naltrexone significantly increased the rate and extent of absorption of acamprosate, as indicated by an average 33% increase in acamprosate maximum plasma concentration, 33% reduction in time to maximum plasma concentration, and 25% increase in area under the plasma concentration-time curve. Acamprosate did not affect the pharmacokinetic parameters of naltrexone or 6-beta-naltrexol. A complete absence of negative interactions on measures of safety and cognitive function supports the absence of a contraindication to co-administration of acamprosate and naltrexone in clinical practice.
PURPOSE: Baclofen is widely used off-label for alcohol use disorders (AUD) in France, despite its uncertain efficacy and safety, particularly at high doses. This study was designed to evaluate the safety of this off-label use compared to the main approved drugs for AUD (acamprosate, naltrexone, nalmefene). METHODS: This cohort study from the French Health Insurance claims database included patients, aged 18 to 70 years, with no serious comorbidity (assessed by the Charlson score) initiating baclofen or approved drugs for AUD between 2009 and 2015. The risk of hospitalisation or death associated with baclofen, at variable doses over time (from low doses <30 mg/day to high doses >/=180 mg/day), compared to approved drugs, was evaluated by a Cox model adjusted to sociodemographic and medical characteristics. RESULTS: The cohort included 165 334 patients, 47 614 of whom were exposed to baclofen. Patients exposed to baclofen differed from those treated with approved drugs in terms of sociodemographic and medical characteristics (more females, higher socioeconomic status, fewer hospitalisations for alcohol-related problems), but these differences tended to fade at higher doses of baclofen. Baclofen exposure was significantly associated with hospitalisation (hazard ratio [HR] = 1.13 [95%CI: 1.09-1.17]) and death (HR = 1.31 [95%CI: 1.08-1.60]). The risk increased with dose, reaching 1.46 [1.28-1.65] for hospitalisation and 2.27 [1.27-4.07] for death at high doses. Similar results were in patients with a history of hospitalisation for alcohol-related problems. CONCLUSIONS: This study raises concerns about the safety of baclofen for AUD, particularly at high doses, with higher risks of hospitalisation and mortality than approved drugs.
BACKGROUND: Naltrexone and acamprosate have been shown to be effective in relapse prevention of alcoholism via different pharmacologic mechanisms. Since it remains uncertain whether both substances are equally efficient and whether a combination of both drugs potentiates the efficacy, we conducted the first published controlled study comparing and combining both compounds. METHODS: After detoxification, 160 patients with alcoholism participated in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled protocol. Patients received naltrexone, acamprosate, naltrexone plus acamprosate, or placebo for 12 weeks. Patients were assessed weekly by interview, self-report, questionnaires, and laboratory screening. Time to first drink, time to relapse, and the cumulative abstinence time were the primary outcome measures. RESULTS: Naltrexone, acamprosate, and the combined medication were significantly more effective than placebo. Comparing the course of nonrelapse rates between naltrexone and acamprosate, the naltrexone group showed a tendency for a better outcome regarding time to first drink and time to relapse. The combined medication was most effective with significantly lower relapse rates than placebo and acamprosate but not naltrexone. CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study support the efficacy of pharmacotherapeutic strategies in the relapse prevention of alcoholism. Naltrexone and acamprosate, especially in combination, considerably enhance the potential of relapse prevention.
Researchers have sought to distinguish between individuals whose alcohol use disorder (AUD) is maintained by drinking to relieve negative affect ('relief drinkers') and those whose AUD is maintained by the rewarding effects of alcohol ('reward drinkers'). As an opioid receptor antagonist, naltrexone may be particularly effective for reward drinkers. Acamprosate, which has been shown to down-regulate the glutamatergic system, may be particularly effective for relief drinkers. This study sought to replicate and extend prior work (PREDICT study; Glockner-Rist et al. ) by examining dimensions of reward and relief temptation to drink and subtypes of individuals with distinct patterns of reward/relief temptation. We utilized data from two randomized clinical trials for AUD (Project MATCH, n = 1726 and COMBINE study, n = 1383). We also tested whether classes of reward/relief temptation would predict differential response to naltrexone and acamprosate in COMBINE. Results replicated prior work by identifying reward and relief temptation factors, which had excellent reliability and construct validity. Using factor mixture modeling, we identified five distinct classes of reward/relief temptation that replicated across studies. In COMBINE, we found a significant class-by-acamprosate interaction effect. Among those most likely classified in the high relief/moderate reward temptation class, individuals had better drinking outcomes if assigned to acamprosate versus placebo. We did not find a significant class-by-naltrexone interaction effect. Our study questions the orthogonal classification of drinkers into only two types (reward or relief drinkers) and adds to the body of research on moderators of acamprosate, which may inform clinical decision making in the treatment of AUD.
We examined kinetic and dynamic factors to determine the pharmacological and behavioral safety and tolerability of low versus high doses of an opiate antagonist, naltrexone (50 mg/day vs. 100 mg/day), and acamprosate (2 g/day vs. 3 g/day), a functional N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, both independently and combined, among non-treatment-seeking, alcohol-dependent individuals. This double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled, randomized, 23-day, four-way crossover study involved 23 subjects assigned to one of four groups. Placebo washout (phase I) preceded phase II, where subjects received low-dose or high-dose naltrexone or acamprosate. In phases III and IV, the alternative medication type at its lower and higher doses, respectively, was administered with continuation of the phase II medication. Predetermined behavioral, performance, and pharmacological criteria determined significant pathological change from baseline (phase I). Case records were reviewed. Criterion-significant increases in symptoms from baseline with monotherapy included nervousness and fatigue with 3 g acamprosate and somnolence and headache with 50 mg and 100 mg naltrexone, respectively. Combined treatment at various doses evinced anger, depression, somnolence, nervousness, diarrhea, and headache. Notably, for all but one subject who dropped out, increased symptoms did not produce any remarkable clinical deterioration. Naltrexone administration significantly increased plasma acetylhomotaurine (i.e., acamprosate) levels, presumably by prolonging gastric emptying. The level of neither plasma acetylhomotaurine nor plasma 6-beta naltrexol (i.e., naltrexone's metabolite) predicted adverse-event frequency. Naltrexone and acamprosate, both alone and in combination at the tested doses, were behaviorally and pharmacologically safe. Adverse events were infrequent, were of moderate intensity, and resolved with reassurance and symptomatic treatment. More side effects were noted with the combination of medications than with either medication alone. Naltrexone administration significantly increased plasma acamprosate levels.
