BACKGROUND: Whether acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor that reduces proximal tubular sodium reabsorption, can improve the efficiency of loop diuretics, potentially leading to more and faster decongestion in patients with acute decompensated heart failure with volume overload, is unclear. METHODS: In this multicenter, parallel-group, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial, we assigned patients with acute decompensated heart failure, clinical signs of volume overload (i.e., edema, pleural effusion, or ascites), and an N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level of more than 1000 pg per milliliter or a B-type natriuretic peptide level of more than 250 pg per milliliter to receive either intravenous acetazolamide (500 mg once daily) or placebo added to standardized intravenous loop diuretics (at a dose equivalent to twice the oral maintenance dose). Randomization was stratified according to the left ventricular ejection fraction (</=40% or >40%). The primary end point was successful decongestion, defined as the absence of signs of volume overload, within 3 days after randomization and without an indication for escalation of decongestive therapy. Secondary end points included a composite of death from any cause or rehospitalization for heart failure during 3 months of follow-up. Safety was also assessed. RESULTS: A total of 519 patients underwent randomization. Successful decongestion occurred in 108 of 256 patients (42.2%) in the acetazolamide group and in 79 of 259 (30.5%) in the placebo group (risk ratio, 1.46; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.17 to 1.82; P<0.001). Death from any cause or rehospitalization for heart failure occurred in 76 of 256 patients (29.7%) in the acetazolamide group and in 72 of 259 patients (27.8%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio, 1.07; 95% CI, 0.78 to 1.48). Acetazolamide treatment was associated with higher cumulative urine output and natriuresis, findings consistent with better diuretic efficiency. The incidence of worsening kidney function, hypokalemia, hypotension, and adverse events was similar in the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: The addition of acetazolamide to loop diuretic therapy in patients with acute decompensated heart failure resulted in a greater incidence of successful decongestion. (Funded by the Belgian Health Care Knowledge Center; ADVOR ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03505788.).
Doherty, Connor J., Jou-Chung Chang, Benjamin P. Thompson, Erik R. Swenson, Glen E. Foster, and Paolo B. Dominelli. The impact of acetazolamide and methazolamide on exercise performance in normoxia and hypoxia. High Alt Med Biol. 24:7-18, 2023.-Carbonic anhydrase (CA) inhibitors are commonly prescribed for acute mountain sickness (AMS). In this review, we sought to examine how two CA inhibitors, acetazolamide (AZ) and methazolamide (MZ), affect exercise performance in normoxia and hypoxia. First, we briefly describe the role of CA inhibition in facilitating the increase in ventilation and arterial oxygenation in preventing and treating AMS. Next, we detail how AZ affects exercise performance in normoxia and hypoxia and this is followed by a discussion on MZ. We emphasize that the overarching focus of the review is how the two drugs potentially affect exercise performance, rather than their ability to prevent/treat AMS per se, their interrelationship will be discussed. Overall, we suggest that AZ hinders exercise performance in normoxia, but may be beneficial in hypoxia. Based upon head-to-head studies of AZ and MZ in humans on diaphragmatic and locomotor strength in normoxia, MZ may be a better CA inhibitor when exercise performance is crucial at high altitude.
BACKGROUND: Acetazolamide facilitates decongestion in acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF). OBJECTIVES: This study sought to investigate the effect of acetazolamide on natriuresis in ADHF and its relationship with outcomes. METHODS: Patients from the ADVOR (Acetazolamide in Decompensated Heart Failure with Volume Overload) trial with complete data on urine output and urine sodium concentration (UNa) were analyzed. Predictors of natriuresis and its relationship with the main trial endpoints were evaluated. RESULTS: This analysis included 462 of 519 patients (89%) from the ADVOR trial. During 2 days after randomization, UNa was 92 +/- 25 mmol/L on average, and total natriuresis was 425 +/- 234 mmol. Allocation to acetazolamide strongly and independently predicted natriuresis with a 16 mmol/L (19%) increase in UNa and 115 mmol (32%) greater total natriuresis. Higher systolic blood pressure, better renal function, higher serum sodium levels, and male sex also independently predicted both a higher UNa and greater total natriuresis. A stronger natriuretic response was associated with faster and more complete relief of signs of volume overload, and this effect was already significant on the first morning of assessment (P = 0.022). A significant interaction was observed between the effect of allocation to acetazolamide and UNa on decongestion (P = 0.007). Stronger natriuresis with better decongestion translated into a shorter hospital stay (P < 0.001). After multivariable adjustments, every 10 mmol/L UNa increase was independently associated with a lower risk of all-cause death or heart failure readmission (HR: 0.92; 95% CI: 0.85-0.99). CONCLUSIONS: Increased natriuresis is strongly related to successful decongestion with acetazolamide in ADHF. UNa may be an attractive measure of effective decongestion for future trials. (Acetazolamide in Decompensated Heart Failure with Volume Overload [ADVOR]; NCT03505788).
The primary treatment for acute heart failure includes the use of intravenous loop diuretics to reduce congestion. Successful decongestion at the time of hospital discharge improves mortality and prevents rehospitalization in these patients. Loop diuretic therapy alone may not be enough for adequate decongestion, especially as diuretic resistance becomes more common. Other therapies include the addition of thiazide diuretics, though increasing evidence might suggest a better alternative to add-on therapy. In this review, we will discuss the new evidence for the use of the diuretic acetazolamide in acute heart failure.
Acetazolamide (AZM) is a strong pharmacological sulphonamide-type (R-SO(2)-NH(2), pK(a) 7.2) inhibitor of the activity of several carbonic anhydrase (CA) isoforms, notably of renal CA II (K(i), 12 nM) and CA IV (K(i), 74 nM). AZM is clinically used for about eighty years in various diseases including epilepsy and glaucoma. Pharmacological AZM increases temporarily the urinary excretion of bicarbonate (HCO(3)(-)) and sodium ions (Na(+)) and sustainably the urinary pH. AZM is excreted almost unchanged over several hours at high rates in the urine. Closely parallel concentrations of circulating and excretory AZM are observed upon administration of therapeutical doses of AZM. In a proof-of-principle study, we investigated the effects of the ingestion of a 250-mg AZM-containing tablet by a healthy volunteer on the urinary excretion of organic and inorganic substances over 5 h (range, 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 3, 4, 5 h). Measured analytes included: AZM, amino acids and their metabolites such as guanidinoacetate, i.e. the precursor of creatine, of asymmetrically (ADMA) and symmetrically (SDMA) dimethylated arginine, nitrite (O = N-O(-), pK(a) 3.4) and nitrate (O(2)N-O(-), pK(a) -1.37), the major metabolites of nitric oxide (NO), the C-H acidic malondialdehyde (MDA; (CHO)(2)CH(2), pK(a) 4.5), and creatinine for correction of analytes excretion. All analytes were measured by validated isotopologues using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) methods. AZM excretion in the urine reached its maximum value after 2 h and was fairly stable for the next 3 h. Time series analysis by the ARIMA method was performed. AZM ingestion increased temporarily the urinary excretion of the amino acids Leu + Ile, nitrite and nitrate, decreased temporarily the urinary excretion of other amino acids. AZM decreased sustainably the urinary excretion of MDA, a biomarker of oxidative stress (i.e. lipid peroxidation). Whether this decrease is due to inhibition of the excretion of MDA or attenuation of oxidative stress by AZM is unknown. The acute and chronic effects of AZM on the urinary excretion of electrolytes and physiological substances reported in the literature are discussed in depth in the light of its extraordinary pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Tolerance development/drug resistance to AZM in chronic use and potential mechanisms are also addressed.
OBJECTIVE: We report a patient with recurrent shock and transient non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema within a period of two months - every time occurring after cataract surgery and a single oral dose of standard post-operative medication with acetazolamide. DATA SOURCES: Records of the intensive care unit, review of the literature. CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrates a rare but severe side effect of acetazolamide. We also present a review of the literature to raise the awareness of health care providers for this special form of non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
We compared the intraocular pressure-decreasing effect of timolol maleate alone, acetazolamide alone, and combined timolol and acetazolamide therapy in nine patients with bilateral chronic open-angle glaucoma. Timolol decreased intraocular pressure at least as effectively as acetazolamide. The two medications together were more effective than either medication alone, but they did not have a fully additive effect. Episcleral venous pressures and outflow facilities did not vary significantly with any of the three treatment regimens.
Diabetic macular edema (DME) is defined as fluid accumulation in the macular region, between the retinal layers, due to many diseases, especially diabetes. DME is one of the major complications of diabetic retinopathy (DRP). Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAI) are a pharmaceutical agent used in different fields, especially glaucoma treatment. Acetazolamide (ACZ), which is a CAI, is an active substance that has been used off-label for many years in the treatment of macular edema due to diabetes and many other diseases. The low solubility and bioavailability of ACZ limit its use in the treatment of DME. In this study, a nanoparticulate formulation was developed that would increase the solubility and bioavailability of ACZ and allow it to be administered intravitreally. ACZ was loaded on poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-Hydroxyvalerate) (PHBV) nanoparticles and the loading efficiency was 71.58 +/- 1.22%. Toxicity of nanoparticles after intravitreal application was evaluated with anterior segment and posterior segment examination findings, intraocular pressure (IOP) measurements and electrophysiological tests. At the end of the 3-month follow-up, electroretinography (ERG) measurements demonstrated that ACZ loaded PHBV (PHBV-ACZ) nanoparticles did not cause loss of function in retinal cells. On histological examination, rare degenerative changes were observed in several cell groups. In addition, pharmacokinetic studies were performed to determine the tissue distribution of ACZ at various periods. ACZ was identified in vitreous humor and retina at the highest concentration. Based on our results, the prepared nanoparticle formulation can release long-term CAI for DRP therapy and accordingly can reduce the need for monthly intravitreal injections.
Allergies and adverse reactions to sulfonamide medications are quite common. Two distinct categories of drugs are classified as sulfonamides: antibiotics and nonantibiotics. The two groups differ in their chemical structure, use, and the rate at which adverse reactions occur. Cross-reactivity between the two groups has been implied in the past, but is suspect. Acetazolamide, from the nonantibiotic group, is routinely used in the prevention and treatment of high altitude issues and may not need to be avoided in individuals with a history of sulfonamide allergy. This review addresses the differences between the groups and the propensity for intergroup and intragroup adverse reactions based on the available literature. We also examine the different clinical presentations of allergy and adverse reactions, from simple cutaneous reactions with no sequelae through Stevens-Johnson syndrome and anaphylaxis, with risk for significant morbidity and mortality. We offer a systematic approach to determine whether acetazolamide is a safe option for those with a history of allergy to sulfonamides.
When performing detailed tasks related to climbing or hiking, accurate vision is important for safety. Acetazolamide is a medication commonly used to prevent acute mountain sickness, but it has an uncommon side effect of transient myopia. Reports of this side effect are mainly associated with its use in obstetrics, where it is often prescribed in higher doses than used in acute mountain sickness prophylaxis. We describe the case of a climber taking low-dose acetazolamide who developed transient myopia. We further describe potential mechanisms of this rare side effect as well as a novel approach of field management utilizing possible materials at hand.
INTRODUCTION: Acetazolamide (AZM) is used for various conditions (eg, altitude sickness, sleep apnoea, glaucoma), but therapy is often limited by its side effect profile. Our objective was to estimate the risk of commonly reported side effects based on meta-analyses. We hypothesised that these risks are dose-dependent. METHODS: We queried MEDLINE/EMBASE (Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online/Excerpta Medica dataBASE) up until 04/10/2019, including any randomised placebo-controlled trial in which adults received oral AZM versus placebo reporting side effects. Eligibility assessment was performed by two independent reviewers. Data were abstracted by one reviewer who verified key entries at a second time point. For side effects reported by >3 studies a pooled effect estimate was calculated, and heterogeneity assessed via I(2); for outcomes reported by >5 studies effect modification by total daily dose (EMbyTDD; <400 mg/d, 400-600 mg/d, >600 mg/d) was assessed via meta-regression. For pre-specified, primary outcomes (paraesthesias, taste disturbances, polyuria and fatigue) additional subgroup analyses were performed using demographics, intervention details, laboratory changes and risk of bias. RESULTS: We included 42 studies in the meta-analyses (N(subjects)=1274/1211 in AZM/placebo groups). AZM increased the risk of all primary outcomes (p<0.01, I(2) </=16% and low-to-moderate quality of evidence for all)-the numbers needed to harm (95% CI; n(Studies)) for each were: paraesthesias 2.3 (95% CI 2 to 2.7; n=39), dysgeusia 18 (95% CI 10 to 38, n=22), polyuria 17 (95% CI 9 to 49; n=22), fatigue 11 (95% CI 6 to 24; n=14). The risk for paraesthesias (beta=1.8 (95% CI 1.1 to 2.9); P(EMbyTDD)=0.01) and dysgeusia (beta=3.1 (95% CI 1.2 to 8.2); P(EMbyTDD)=0.02) increased with higher AZM doses; the risk of fatigue also increased with higher dose but non-significantly (beta=2.6 (95% CI 0.7 to 9.4); P(EMbyTDD)=0.14). DISCUSSION: This comprehensive meta-analysis of low-to-moderate quality evidence defines risk of common AZM side effects and corroborates dose dependence of some side effects. These results may inform clinical decision making and support efforts to establish the lowest effective dose of AZM for various conditions.
The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide (AcmH2) reacted with [(eta6-p-cymene)RuCl(mu-Cl)]2 to afford [(eta6-p-cymene)RuCl2(kappaN-AcmH2)], 1A, in near-quantitative yield. In methanol, 1A exists in equilibrium with 1B, being probably a coordination isomer, as established by VT 1H-EXSY NMR spectroscopy. DFT calculations pointed to a higher stability of 1A with respect to 1B. [(eta6-p-cymene)RuCl(kappa2N,N'-AcmH)], 2, was obtained in 86% yield from [(eta6-p-cymene)RuCl(mu-Cl)]2 and AcmH2 in the presence of NaOH. The reactions of 2 with AgNO3 (in water), pta/AgNO3 or pta/AgOTf/Et3N (in methanol) afforded the nitrate-coordinated complex [(eta6-p-cymene)Ru(kappaO-NO3)(kappa2N,N'-AcmH)], 3, the salt [(eta6-p-cymene)Ru(kappa2N,N'-AcmH)(kappaP-pta)]NO3, [4]NO3, and the zwitterion [(eta6-p-cymene)Ru(kappa2N,N'-Acm)(kappaP-pta)], 5, respectively, in high yields (pta = 1,3,5-triaza-7-phosphatricyclo[3.3.1.1]decane). The reactions of 5 with Bronsted acids yielded the protonated-pta species [(eta6-p-cymene)Ru(kappa2N,N'-Acm)(kappaP-ptaH)]X [6]X (X = NO3, TsO). All compounds were fully characterized by analytical and spectroscopic methods, and the structures of 1A, 2 and 5 were elucidated by X-ray diffraction. The stability of the compounds was investigated in aqueous media and 2 and 5 were evaluated for their cytotoxicity towards human ovarian A2780 and A2780cisR cancer cells and non-tumorigenic HEK-293 cells.
Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase (CA) inhibitor used clinically and to prevent acute mountain sickness, worsens skeletal muscle fatigue in animals and humans. In animals, methazolamide, a methylated analog of acetazolamide and an equally potent CA inhibitor, reportedly exacerbates fatigue less than acetazolamide. Accordingly, we sought to determine, in humans, if methazolamide would attenuate diaphragm and dorsiflexor fatigue compared with acetazolamide. Healthy men (dorsiflexor: n = 12; diaphragm: n = 7) performed fatiguing exercise on three occasions, after ingesting acetazolamide (250 mg three times a day) and then in random order, methazolamide (100 mg twice a day) or placebo for 48 h. For both muscles, subjects exercised at a fixed intensity until exhaustion on acetazolamide, with subsequent iso-time and -workload trials. Diaphragm exercise was performed using a threshold-loading device, while dorsiflexor exercise was isometric. Neuromuscular function was determined pre- and postexercise by potentiated transdiaphragmatic twitch pressure and dorsiflexor torque in response to stimulation of the phrenic and fibular nerve, respectively. Diaphragm contractility 3-10 min postexercise was impaired more for acetazolamide than methazolamide or placebo (82 +/- 10, 87 +/- 9, and 91 +/- 8% of pre-exercise value; P < 0.05). Similarly, dorsiflexor fatigue was greater for acetazolamide than methazolamide (mean twitch torque of 61 +/- 11 vs. 57 +/- 13% of baseline, P < 0.05). In normoxia, methazolamide leads to less neuromuscular fatigue than acetazolamide, indicating a possible benefit for clinical use or in the prophylaxis of acute mountain sickness. NEW & NOTEWORTHY Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, may worsen diaphragm and locomotor muscle fatigue after exercise; whereas, in animals, methazolamide does not impair diaphragm function. Compared with both methazolamide and the placebo, acetazolamide significantly compromised dorsiflexor function at rest and after exhaustive exercise. Similarly, diaphragm function was most compromised on acetazolamide followed by methazolamide and placebo. Methazolamide may be preferable over acetazolamide for clinical use and altitude illness prophylaxis to avoid skeletal muscle dysfunction.
STUDY OBJECTIVES: To assess altitude-induced sleep and nocturnal breathing disturbances in healthy lowlanders 40 y of age or older and the effects of preventive acetazolamide treatment. METHODS: Clinical examinations and polysomnography were performed at 760 m and in the first night after ascent to 3100 m in a subsample of participants of a larger trial evaluating altitude illness. Participants were randomized 1:1 to treatment with acetazolamide (375 mg/day) or placebo, starting 24 h before and while staying at 3100 m. The main outcomes were indices of sleep structure, oxygenation, and apnea/hypopnea index (AHI). RESULTS: Per protocol analysis included 86 participants (mean +/- SE 53 +/- 7 y old, 66% female). In 43 individuals randomized to placebo, mean nocturnal pulse oximetry (SpO2) was 94.0 +/- 0.4% at 760 m and 86.7 +/- 0.4% at 3100 m, with mean change (95%CI) -7.3% (-8.0 to -6.5); oxygen desaturation index (ODI) was 5.0 +/- 2.3 at 760 m and 29.2 +/- 2.3 at 3100 m, change 24.2/h (18.8 to 24.5); AHI was 11.3 +/- 2.4/h at 760 m and 23.5 +/- 2.4/h at 3100 m, change 12.2/h (7.3 to 17.0). In 43 individuals randomized to acetazolamide, altitude-induced changes were mitigated. Mean differences (Delta, 95%CI) in altitude-induced changes were: DeltaSpO2 2.3% (1.3 to 3.4), DeltaODI -15.0/h (-22.6 to -7.4), DeltaAHI -11.4/h (-18.3 to -4.6). Total sleep time, sleep efficiency, and N3-sleep fraction decreased with an ascent to 3100 m under placebo by 40 min (17 to 60), 5% (2 to 8), and 6% (2 to 11), respectively. Acetazolamide did not significantly change these outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: During a night at 3100 m, healthy lowlanders aged 40 y or older revealed hypoxemia, sleep apnea, and disturbed sleep. Preventive acetazolamide treatment improved oxygenation and nocturnal breathing but had no effect on sleep duration and structure. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial is registered at Clinical Trials, https://clinicaltrials.gov, NCT03561675.
Nephrocalcinosis has been reported in patients treated with acetazolamide and other agents, such as furosemide or bicarbonate. We present a case of nephrocalcinosis induced solely by acetazolamide and diagnosed radiographically. Possible mechanisms of pathogenesis are reviewed.
Co-crystals have great potential for drug research and development because the formation of co-crystal is accompanied by changes inter-molecular interactions between starting materials that enable to improve both physical and chemical properties of active pharmaceutical ingredients. In order to provide a more profound insight into the structural changes of specific drugs upon co-crystallization, spectroscopic characterization of solid-state acetazolamide (ACZ), 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (4HBA) and their co-crystal prepared by mechanical grinding approach has been performed with spectral techniques including terahertz time-domain spectroscopy (THz-TDS) and Raman spectroscopy. Experimental THz spectra show that the ACZ-4HBA co-crystal has a few significantly different absorption peaks in 0.82, 1.16, 1.28 and 1.64 THz respectively compared with parent materials in the frequency region from 0.2 to 1.8 THz. Likewise, such differences between the co-crystal and starting compounds could also be characterized by Raman vibrational spectra. Moreover, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed to simulate optimized structures and vibrational modes of three kind of possible co-crystal theoretical forms (form I, II and III) between ACZ and 4HBA. Theoretical results and THz/Raman vibrational spectra of ACZ-4HBA co-crystal show that the 4HBA links to the thiadiazole acetamide fragment of ACZ via the double-bridged heterodimeric synthon C(N)NHcdots, three dots, centeredHOOC inter-molecular hydrogen bonding interaction establishing the theoretical form I, which is more consistent with experimental observations than other two possible theoretical co-crystal forms. These results provide rich information and unique method for characterizing the composition of co-crystal structures and also inter-molecular interactions shown within pharmaceutical co-crystallization process at the molecular level.
Acetazolamide is the only carbonic anhydrase inhibitor with significant diuretic effects. It is readily absorbed and undergoes renal elimination by tubular secretion. Its administration is ordinarily marked by a brisk alkaline diuresis. Although carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are proximal tubular diuretics (where the bulk of sodium re-absorption occurs), their net diuretic effect is modest in that sodium re-absorption in more distal nephron segments offsets proximal sodium losses. Acetazolamide use is limited by both its transient action and the development of metabolic acidosis with extended administration. Acetazolamide can, however, correct the significant metabolic alkalosis which occasionally occurs with loop diuretic therapy.
BACKGROUND: Few cases of cutaneous adverse drug reactions (CADR) to oral acetazolamide, a non-antimicrobial sulfonamide, have been previously reported, and the interest of acetazolamide skin tests has never been studied. OBJECTIVES: We report a series of ten patients with oral acetazolamide CADR and skin tests. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The files of ten patients with CADR secondary to oral acetazolamide prescribed for cataract surgery in most cases referred between 2001 and 2011 in four French dermatology and allergy departments were retrospectively reviewed. Skin tests with acetazolamide were performed in nine patients and twelve controls. Other sulfonamides were tested in five of ten patients. RESULTS: Seven patients developed maculopapular exanthema and four had acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis. Patch tests were positive for 8/9 patients, prick tests for 2/4 and intradermal tests for 3/3. Patch and prick or intradermal test results were concordant in 2/3 positive subjects. Patch tests for other sulfonamides were negative, as were patch tests in controls. CONCLUSIONS: We report the largest series of CADR to oral acetazolamide (maculopapular exanthema or acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis). A drug eruption after cataract surgery should be investigated for accountability of acetazolamide. In view of this retrospective study, skin tests and particularly intradermal tests appear to be an important contribution to demonstrate accountability.
