Herpes simplex virus (HSV) keratitis is a common cause of ocular morbidity. Resistance to aciclovir is probably under recognized. We describe three cases of aciclovir-resistant herpes simplex virus keratitis treated with systemic foscarnet and present a review of the pharmacological options available to manage this condition.
Aciclovir is considered the first-line treatment against Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections in new-borns and infants. As renal excretion is the major route of elimination, in renally-impaired patients, aciclovir doses are adjusted according to the degree of impairment. However, limited attention has been given to the implications of immature renal function or dysfunction due to the viral disease itself. The aim of this investigation was to characterize the pharmacokinetics of aciclovir taking into account maturation and disease processes in the neonatal population. Pharmacokinetic data obtained from 2 previously published clinical trials (n = 28) were analyzed using a nonlinear mixed effects modeling approach. Post-menstrual age (PMA) and creatinine clearance (CL(CR)) were assessed as descriptors of maturation and renal function. Simulation scenarios were also implemented to illustrate the use of pharmacokinetic data to extrapolate efficacy from adults. Aciclovir pharmacokinetics was described by a one-compartment model with first-order elimination. Body weight and diagnosis (systemic infection) were statistically significant covariates on the volume of distribution, whereas body weight, CL(CR) and PMA had a significant effect on clearance. Median clearance varied from 0.2 to 1.0 L/h in subjects with PMA <34 or >/=34 weeks, respectively. Population estimate for volume of distribution was 1.93 L with systemic infection increasing this value by almost 3-fold (2.67 times higher). A suitable model parameterization was identified, which discriminates the effects of developmental growth, maturation, and organ function. Exposure to aciclovir was found to increase with decreasing PMA and renal function (CL(CR)), suggesting different dosing requirement for pre-term neonates.
PURPOSE: To report a rare case of herpes virus type 2-related conjunctivitis, resistant to aciclovir (ACV). METHODS: Case report and review of literature. RESULTS: A 28-year-old human immunodeficiency virus-positive man presented with chronic, recurrent follicular conjunctivitis. Multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction assay testing was positive for herpes simplex virus (HSV); subsequent typing with HSV assay revealed the presence of HSV type 2. Oral ACV failed to control the disease, and the patient continued to worsen clinically until resistance testing was performed. This revealed an M183stop within thymidine kinase, thus confirming the suspected resistance. The patient improved after 14 days of high-dose continuous intravenous infusion of ACV. CONCLUSIONS: This is a rare case of isolated conjunctivitis due to herpes virus type 2, in an human immunodeficiency virus-positive patient, which was found to be resistant to ACV. Drug-resistant HSV is likely to emerge as an important clinical entity in the future, increasing the need for new drugs with novel mechanisms of action.
Aciclovir-induced neurotoxicity results from the accumulation of aciclovir and its metabolite 9-carboxymethoxymethylguanine (CMMG). It occurs predominantly in older patients with impaired renal function and is characterised by a combination of confusion and psychiatric changes. Seizures, myoclonus and dysarthria may also occur. Critically, peritoneal dialysis has little effect on reversing the toxic effects of aciclovir. We describe a woman in her 70s with renal failure who developed confusion and seizures after receiving aciclovir. She was ultimately diagnosed with aciclovir-induced neurotoxicity, confirmed by an elevated serum CMMG concentration. This condition is likely to be underdiagnosed and the neurologist's primary challenge is differentiating aciclovir-induced neurotoxicity from viral encephalitis.
A sensitive HPLC method has been developed for the assay of aciclovir and ganciclovir in human plasma, by HPLC coupled with spectrofluorimetric detection. Plasma (1000 microl), with 9-ethyl-guanine added as internal standard, is submitted to protein precipitation with trichloroacetic acid solution 20%. The supernatant, evaporated to dryness at 37 degrees C, is reconstituted in 100 microl of a solution of sodium heptanosulfonate 0.4% adjusted with acetic acid to pH 2.60 and a 30 microl volume is then injected onto a Nucleosil 100-5 microm C18 column. Aciclovir and ganciclovir are analysed by spectrofluorimetric detection set at 260 nm (excitation) and 380 nm (emission) using a gradient elution program with solvents constituted of acetonitrile and a solution of sodium heptanosulfonate 0.4% adjusted to pH 2.60. The calibration curves are linear between 0.1 and 10 microg/ml. The mean absolute recovery of aciclovir and ganciclovir are 99.2+/-2.5 and 100.3+/-2.5%, respectively. The method is precise (with mean inter-day C.V.s within 1.0-1.6% for aciclovir and 1.2-3.5% for ganciclovir), and accurate (range of inter-day deviations -1.6 to +1.6% for aciclovir and -0.4 to -1.4% for ganciclovir). The method has been applied in stability studies of ganciclovir in patients' blood samples, demonstrating its good stability in plasma at -20 degrees C and at room temperature. The distribution of ganciclovir and aciclovir in plasma and red blood cells was also investigated in vitro in spiking experiments with whole blood, which showed an initial drop of ganciclovir and aciclovir levels in plasma (about -25%) due to the cellular uptake of aciclovir and ganciclovir by red blood cells. The method has been validated and is currently applied in a clinical study assessing the ganciclovir plasma concentration variability after administration of valganciclovir in a population of solid organ transplant patients.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the comparability of systemic aciclovir exposure at steady state in immunocompromised patients following oral valaciclovir 1000 mg tds and intravenous (iv) aciclovir 5 mg/kg tds. A two-centre, randomized, open label, two-way crossover study was undertaken. Patients aged 18-65 years who had undergone high-dose chemotherapy for cancer and were neutropenic (neutrophil count <0.5 x 109/mL) with normal renal function were recruited. The pharmacokinetic parameters of aciclovir after oral valaciclovir 1000 mg or iv aciclovir 5 mg/kg given as 1 h infusion, each administered every 8 h for seven doses, were compared. Fifteen patients were enrolled and 13 completed both treatments. The mean (s.d.) values for aciclovir after oral valaciclovir and iv aciclovir were: AUC0-8 76.3 (29.7) and 64.2 (20.0) microM x h; peak plasma concentration (Cmax) 26.6 (10.5) and 34.0 (11.9) microM; time to maximal plasma concentration (tmax) 2.01 (0.65) and 0.95 (0.19); and plasma elimination half-life (t1/2) 2.83 (0.91) and 2.44 (0.62) h, respectively. The mean absolute bioavailability of aciclovir from oral valaciclovir was 60 +/- 21%. Equivalent systemic exposure to aciclovir after oral valaciclovir 1000 mg and iv aciclovir 5 mg/kg was observed with AUC0-8 (oral/iv ratio = 1.16; 90% CI 0.98-1.39), whilst significantly reduced peak aciclovir concentrations were obtained with oral valaciclovir (ratio = 0.75; 90% CI 0.60-0.94). Oral valaciclovir offers a convenient, and possibly safer, alternative to iv aciclovir, delivering comparable systemic exposures with reduced peak levels. This may contribute to shorter hospitalization, reduced costs for healthcare providers and improved quality of life for patients.
BACKGROUND: Topical or systemic antiviral drugs reduce the duration of genital herpes recurrences but may not always alleviate functional symptoms. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of oxygenated glycerol triesters-based CS21 barrier genital gel((R)) vs. topical aciclovir and placebo (vehicle) in resolving functional symptoms and in healing of genital herpes recurrences. METHODS: A prospective randomized controlled, investigator-blinded trial of CS21 barrier genital gel((R)) vs. topical aciclovir (reference treatment) and placebo (vehicle) was designed. The primary endpoint was the cumulative score of four herpes-related functional symptoms (pain, burning, itching and tingling sensations). Secondary endpoints included objective skin changes (erythema, papules, vesicles, oedema, erosion/ulceration, crusts), time to heal, local tolerance and overall acceptability of the treatment as reported by a self-administered questionnaire. RESULTS: Overall, 61 patients were included. CS 21 barrier genital gel((R)) was significantly more efficient than topical aciclovir and vehicle for subjective symptoms and pain relief in genital herpes recurrences; additionally, time to heal was significantly shorter with CS 21 than with vehicle, whereas no significantly difference was observed between patients receiving topical aciclovir and vehicle. The treatments under investigation were well tolerated and the adverse events were comparable in the three treatment groups. CONCLUSION: Overall, these results support the interest of using of CS 21 barrier genital gel((R)) in symptomatic genital herpes recurrences. Accordingly, this product offers a valuable alternative in topical management of recurrent genital herpes.
9-Carboxymethoxymethylguanine (CMMG), the main metabolite of aciclovir (ACV), is a putative neurotoxin. Measurement of CMMG in body fluids may aid patient management. We describe the development, validation and application of a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method for the simultaneous determination of ACV and CMMG in human serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Recovery was between 94% and 100% at all concentrations both from serum (range 0-20 mg/L) and CSF (0-5 mg/L). The intra-assay precision (coefficient of variation (CV)) was <2% and the inter-assay precision (CV) was <5%. The limits of detection and quantification were 0.1 and 0.25 mg/L, respectively, in both body fluids. Significant interference from endogenous material or from drugs in clinical samples was not seen. CMMG was detected in most of the 55 clinical samples containing ACV, but little correlation was found between the levels of the drug and its metabolite.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the likely rate of patient randomisation and to facilitate sample size calculation for a full-scale phase III trial of varicella zoster immunoglobulin (VZIG) and aciclovir as postexposure prophylaxis against chickenpox in children with cancer. DESIGN: Multicentre pilot randomised controlled trial of VZIG and oral aciclovir. SETTING: England, UK. PATIENTS: Children under 16 years of age with a diagnosis of cancer: currently or within 6 months of receiving cancer treatment and with negative varicella zoster virus (VZV) serostatus at diagnosis or within the last 3 months. INTERVENTIONS: Study participants who have a significant VZV exposure were randomised to receive PEP in the form of VZIG or aciclovir after the exposure. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Number of patients registered and randomised within 12 months of the trial opening to recruitment and incidence of breakthrough varicella. RESULTS: The study opened in six sites over a 13-month period. 482 patients were screened for eligibility, 32 patients were registered and 3 patients were randomised following VZV exposure. All three were randomised to receive aciclovir and there were no cases of breakthrough varicella. CONCLUSIONS: Given the limited recruitment to the PEPtalk2 pilot, it is unlikely that the necessary sample size would be achievable using this strategy in a full-scale trial. The study identified factors that could be used to modify the design of a definitive trial but other options for defining the best means to protect such children against VZV should be explored. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN48257441, EudraCT number: 2013-001332-22, sponsor: University of Birmingham.
OBJECTIVES: Neuropsychiatric symptoms related to aciclovir or valaciclovir treatment have been a problem since aciclovir was introduced in the early 1980s. We have previously found that subjects with aciclovir-related neuropsychiatric symptoms have increased serum concentrations of aciclovir's main metabolite, 9-carboxymethoxymethylguanine (CMMG). The aim of this study was to investigate whether CMMG was present in the CSF of aciclovir- or valaciclovir-treated subjects with or without neuropsychiatric side effects that appeared during therapy. METHODS: We investigated retrospectively CSF collected from 21 aciclovir- or valaciclovir-treated subjects. Of these, 9 were subjects with neuropsychiatric signs and symptoms and 12 were asymptomatic subjects, including 10 subjects from a valaciclovir multiple sclerosis trial and 2 subjects with recurrent herpes encephalitis. RESULTS: CMMG could only be detected in the CSF of subjects with neuropsychiatric symptoms and signs (median CMMG concentration 1.0 micromol/L, range 0.6-7.0). The concentration of CMMG was below the limit of quantification (<0.5 micromol/L) in asymptomatic subjects (P < 0.001). All patients with neuropsychiatric signs and symptoms, except one, had acute renal function impairment or chronic renal failure. CONCLUSIONS: These results are consistent with the hypothesis that CMMG is involved in the development of neuropsychiatric side effects in aciclovir- or valaciclovir-treated patients. Measurement of CMMG in CSF and/or serum is a promising tool in the diagnostic procedure for aciclovir- or valaciclovir-treated patients with neuropsychiatric symptoms and may help to differentiate between side effects and herpes encephalitis.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate a potential pharmacokinetic interaction between mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and aciclovir or valaciclovir. STUDY DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: Fifteen healthy subjects were enrolled in a prospective, randomised, open-label, single-dose, cross-over study conducted at a single centre. Subjects received each of the following five oral treatments: (i) aciclovir 800 mg alone; (ii) valaciclovir 2 g alone; (iii) MMF 1 g alone; (iv) valaciclovir 2 g + MMF 1 g; and (v) aciclovir 800 mg + MMF 1 g. The following pharmacokinetic parameters were estimated for aciclovir, mycophenolic acid (MPA) and its inactive glucuronide metabolite (MPAG) from the plasma concentration-time data using noncompartmental methods: area under the concentration-time curve from zero to infinity (AUC infinity), terminal elimination half-life (t1/2z), peak concentration (Cmax) and time to Cmax (tmax). The renal clearance (CLR) of aciclovir was also calculated. These parameters were compared when aciclovir or valaciclovir were coadministered with MMF relative to aciclovir, valaciclovir or MMF given alone. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Aciclovir Cmax, tmax and AUC infinity were significantly increased by 40%, 0.38 hour and 31%, respectively, following coadministration of aciclovir and MMF, whereas aciclovir t1/2z was significantly decreased by 11%. Following coadministration of valaciclovir and MMF, aciclovir pharmacokinetic parameters were not significantly modified except for tmax (about 0.5 hour shorter with MMF). MPA and MPAG pharmacokinetic parameters were not significantly modified following coadministration of MMF with valaciclovir or aciclovir except for MPAG AUC infinity, which was decreased by 12% with valaciclovir. Our results are similar to those reported in the literature, except for MPAG AUC. In urine, following coadministration of aciclovir and MMF, aciclovir CLR was significantly decreased by 19%. Competition between MPAG and aciclovir for renal tubular secretion could partly explain this phenomenon. Following coadministration of valaciclovir and MMF, aciclovir CLR was not significantly modified. CONCLUSION: In healthy subjects, interactions are observed after coadministration of MMF and aciclovir, but the extent of the interactions is unlikely to be of clinical significance. These interactions should be investigated in patients with abnormal renal function.
OBJECTIVES: Bell's palsy (BP), which causes facial paralysis, affects 11-40 people per 100 000 per annum in the UK. Its cause is unknown but as many as 30% of patients have continuing facial disfigurement, psychological difficulties and occasionally facial pain. We present an randomised controlled trial (RCT)-based economic evaluation of the early administration of steroids (prednisolone) and/or antivirals (acyclovir) compared to placebo, for treatment of BP. METHODS: The RCT was not powered to detect differences in the cost-effectiveness; therefore, we adopted a decision analytic model approach as a way of gaining precision in our cost-effectiveness comparisons [e.g. prednisolone only (PO) versus acyclovir only versus prednisolone and acyclovir versus placebo, prednisolone versus no prednisolone (NP) and acyclovir versus no acyclovir]. We assumed that trial interventions affect the probability of being cured/not cured but their consequences are independent of the initial therapy. We used the percentage of individuals with a complete recovery (based on House-Brackmann grade = 1) at 9 months and Quality Adjusted Life Years (e.g. derived on responses to the Health Utilities Index III) as measures of effectiveness. Other parameter estimates were obtained from trial data. RESULTS: PO dominated-i.e. was less costly and more effective-all other therapy strategies in the four arms model [77% probability of cost-effective (CE)]. Moreover, Prednisolone dominated NP (77% probability of being CE at 30 000 UK pounds threshold) while no acyclovir dominated aciclovir (85% chance of CE), in the two arms models, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of BP with prednisolone is likely to be considered CE while treatment with acyclovir is highly unlikely to be considered CE. Further data on costs and utilities would be useful to confirm findings.
BACKGROUND: Several studies suggest that herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) may enhance HIV-1 transmission and disease progression. METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of aciclovir 400 mg twice daily for 3 months in 300 HSV-2/HIV-1 co-infected women not yet on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Participants were evaluated prerandomization and at monthly visits for 3 months. Primary outcomes were the detection and quantity of genital HIV-1 RNA at the month 3 (M3) visit. Analyses were also undertaken using data from all visits. The treatment effects on plasma HIV-1 RNA, CD4 cell count and genital HSV-2 DNA were also assessed. RESULTS: At M3 fewer women had detectable genital HIV in the aciclovir group compared to placebo, but this was not significant [61/132 (46%) vs. 71/137 (52%), risk ratio (RR) 0.89, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.70-1.14; P = 0.36]. There was also little difference in quantity of HIV-1 RNA among shedders (+0.13 log10 copies/ml, 95% CI -0.14 to 0.39) at M3. However, aciclovir significantly decreased the frequency of HIV-1 shedding over all visits [adjusted odds ratio (OR) 0.57, 95% CI 0.36-0.89]. Significant reductions in M3 plasma HIV-1 RNA (-0.34 log10 copies/ml, 95% CI 0.15-0.54), genital HSV-2 DNA (8 vs. 20%, RR 0.37, 95% CI 0.19-0.73) and genital ulceration (8 vs. 18%, RR 0.43, 95% CI 0.22-0.84) were observed in the aciclovir group. CONCLUSION: HSV-2 suppressive therapy, by reducing HIV-1 plasma viral load and altering the pattern of genital HIV-1 shedding, may contribute to the reduction in sexual transmission of HIV-1 and may delay the requirement for HAART initiation.
The median bioavailabilities of aciclovir after administration of aciclovir and its prodrug valaciclovir were 21.5 and 70.1%, respectively, in 12 patients with malignant hematological diseases with leukopenia after chemotherapy. The interindividual variations of the bioavailability were 48.5 and 21.0% after administration of aciclovir and valaciclovir, respectively. Neither the bioavailability nor the interindividual variation of area under the concentration-time curve of oral aciclovir or valaciclovir differed from that reported in healthy volunteers.
BACKGROUND: Topical or systemic antiviral drugs reduce the duration of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) recurrences but may not alleviate functional symptoms. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of CS20 (Acura 24((R)) ) protective barrier gel versus topical aciclovir and placebo in resolving functional symptoms in HSV-1 labial recurrences. METHODS: A prospective, randomized, single-centre, assessor-blinded study of CS20 versus topical aciclovir or placebo. The primary endpoint was the total score of four herpes-related functional symptoms (pain, burning, itching, and tingling sensations), evaluated by visual analogue scale (VAS). Secondary endpoints encompassed objective skin changes (oedema, crusting and erythema), evaluated by specific clinical scores. RESULTS: In a study of 106 patients, compared with placebo, a significant improvement in total functional symptom score was observed after 1 day of treatment in the CS20 group, but only after 7 days of treatment in the topical aciclovir group. Burning sensations were significantly reduced by CS20 compared with aciclovir (Days 1-2) or placebo (Days 1-7). Compared to placebo, CS20 significantly reduced pain intensity on Days 1-6. CS20 induced significant and early improvements in the clinical scores for oedema and crusting compared with placebo. Time to cure was similar for CS20 and aciclovir. The treatments were well tolerated and adverse events were comparable in the three treatment groups. Limitations  The single-centre and single-blind design of the study and the preselection of patients. CONCLUSION: CS20 showed superior effectiveness against functional symptoms (pain and burning) associated with HSV-1 labial recurrences and was similar to aciclovir for time to cure.
Varicella zoster virus is highly contagious and can cause serious complications in immunocompromised patients. To prevent people exposed to the virus from developing secondary varicella we have used oral aciclovir as post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) since 2000. Between 2000 and 2007, there were 11 unexpected occurrences of varicella and 11 unexpected occurrences of zoster in our paediatric wards. There were 174 contacts, 131 exposed to varicella and 43 exposed to zoster. A total of 163 (94%) received PEP and 11 (6%) did not. The rates of secondary infection among contacts given prophylaxis with aciclovir only were 2.1% (3/141) for all contacts and 1.3% (1/76) for immunocompetent contacts. The rate of secondary infection among contacts not given PEP was significantly higher (18%, 2/11) (P<0.05). No adverse events due to PEP were reported. We conclude that oral aciclovir PEP following exposure to VZV on paediatric wards is both safe and effective.
