Annular atrophic lichen planus (AALP) is a rare variant of lichen planus. The clinical presentation of AALP shows distinct atrophic plaques with elevated borders on the trunk and extremities. Histopathologic findings generally reveal a lichenoid dermatitis in active lesions with a distinct loss of elastic fibers in the center of the lesions. We report a unique case of AALP, which highlights the chronicity of the eruption. Our patient showed early signs of improvement with hydroxychloroquine and acitretin, suggesting a role for systemic therapy in the treatment of AALP.
Keratoacanthoma centrifugum marginatum (KCM) is a very rare variant of keratoacanthoma, characterized with progressive centrifugal growth, central healing, and atrophy. Due to its rarity and lack of distinctive histopathological features, KCM often raises diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. We present a case of a 76-year-old Caucasian woman with a single large tumor on her right shin that responded to oral retinoids. The patient presented history of local trauma. The tumor developed over the course of 20 months from a scar. To the best of our knowledge, this is the fifth case of KCM associated with mechanical trauma as a possible triggering factor.
Psoriasis is a chronic, immune-mediated, hyperproliferative skin disease. Etiopathogenesis of psoriasis is not well understood. Plexin B2 was found to have effects on CD100-mediated T-cell morphology and expressed in the immune system. It may play a role in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. To assess the tissue level of plexin-B2 and plexin B2 related gene polymorphism which is signal regulatory protein gamma (SIRPgamma-rs71212732) in psoriatic patients before and after NB-UVB, acitretin therapy alone or in combination and to detect correlation between level of tissue plexin B2 and disease severity and improvement. This single blinded randomized controlled trial was carried on 50 psoriatic patients and 50 healthy controls. Psoriasis Area and Severity Index score (PASI) was used to evaluate the disease severity. Tissue plexin-b2 level was measured using ELISA and SIRPgamma-rs71212732 (T\C) was assessed using TaqMan assays and real-time PCR. A significant lower tissue plexin-B2 level was observed in control group (2.9 +/- 0.6 pg/g) than cases (25.8 +/- 2.8, pg/g) (p < 0.001). Also, a significantly higher tissue plexin-B2 level was observed in sever psoriasis (32.7 +/- 3.8 pg/ml) in than moderate psoriasis (13.6 +/- 2.1 pg/ml, p = 0.001). Tissue plexin B2 was positively correlated with diseases severity. Significantly higher (TC& TT) genotypes and mutant (C) allele among patients compared to the controls, p < 0.001 for all. Tissue plexin-b2 level was high in psoriasis vulgaris with positive correlation with disease severity and decreased after treatment. This may indicate a role of plexin-b2 in psoriasis vulgaris pathogenesis.
Nearly two decades after the advent of synthetic retinoids for the treatment of many severe and incapacitating dermatologic conditions, the usefulness of these drugs is not universally accepted. The safety profile is well established. Other than teratogenicity, which can be avoided if the recommended precautions for use are followed, serious or unexpected adverse reactions rarely occur. This article concisely addresses some questions about etretinate and acitretin therapy that are most pertinent for the dermatologist.
D-penicillamine (DPA)-induced pseudo-pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) and elastosis perforans serpiginosa (EPS) has been reported in the past, but most of the treatment modalities used before have a sub.optimal response. We report a case of DPA-induced pseudo-PXE with extensive EPS who had an excellent rapid response to acitretin. To the best of our knowledge no such report has been published in the past, even though there is a single report of effectiveness of isotretinoin in elastosis perforans serpiginosa. SIMILAR CASES PUBLISHED: One similar case but with a different medication (reference 13).
Acitretin over the last 20 years has proven useful in a number of dermatologic diseases. Evidence of efficacy, side-effect profile, and approach to its use will be reviewed.
Primary localized cutaneous amyloidosis is a skin-limited amyloidosis that does not involve internal organs. It is clinically subclassified into 3 general categories and some rare variants. However, there is considerable overlap within the classification. Though there are a variety of therapeutic measures, the treatment is often unsatisfactory, particularly when the disease is severe and extensive. We describe a rare case of primary localized cutaneous amyloidosis with lichen and poikiloderma-like lesions that showed an excellent response to systemic acitretin.
We present the case of a 59-year-old male patient who developed lesions of a bullous pemphigoid during the course of a long-lasting severe psoriasis which had been treated for years with different topical treatments as well as with PUVA and UV-B radiations. Our patient was successfully treated with a combination of acitretin and azathioprine (follow up 28 months). Our case shows that it is possible to avoid systemic corticosteroid treatment in this difficult therapeutic situation.
INTRODUCTION: Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by the triad of ichthyosis, spasticity, and mental retardation. Patients are usually referred to dermatology clinics during infancy. As paraplegia becomes the most debilitating symptom of the disease within a few years, ichthyosis, although a major burden for the patient, takes a back seat. Optimum treatment of ichthyosis in these children and the effect of treatment on different aspects such as severity of the ichthyosis, pruritus, or quality of life of the patients' and their caregivers is not well established. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genetic background of eight patients from three families diagnosed clinically with SLS was determined with whole-exome and Sanger sequencing. Clinical phenotypes, laboratory findings, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and treatment of the ichthyosis with acitretin were assessed. RESULTS: All patients had the classical triad of Sjogren-Larsson syndrome. Genetic analysis revealed that one patient had a novel c.799-1 (+/+) homozygous splicing mutation in the ALDH3A2 gene. Other patients had the c.683G>A p.R228H (NM_000382.2) mutation in the same gene. Other manifestations included skeletal anomalies, enamel hypoplasia, bilateral T2-hyperintensities in white matter, and moderate-severe pruritus. Acitretin treatment in a maintenance dose of 0.25 mg/kg/day decreased the severity of ichthyosis in all children. It increased quality of life significantly in all of the children and their caregivers. CONCLUSION: We conclude that ichthyosis can be treated effectively with low-dose acitretin in children with Sjogren-Larsson syndrome, and this treatment is associated with a significant improvement in the quality of life.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Acitretin has long-lasting teratogenic properties. Therefore, pregnancies must be avoided during and within 3 years after acitretin treatment. We aimed to describe (i) acitretin use in women of childbearing age in Germany, (ii) the occurrence of acitretin-exposed pregnancies, and (iii) malformations among children exposed in utero. METHODS: Using 2004-2019 data from the German Pharmacoepidemiological Research Database (GePaRD-claims data from ~ 20% of the German population), we determined annual age-standardized prevalence of acitretin use among girls and women aged 13-49 years. In longitudinal analyses, we estimated the number of exposed pregnancies by assessing whether the exposure window assigned to the last dispensation before pregnancy (days covered by dispensation plus 3 years) overlapped the onset of pregnancy or whether there was a dispensation in the first eight weeks of pregnancy. Data of live-born children with in utero exposure to acitretin were reviewed to assess the presence of congenital malformations. RESULTS: The age-standardized prevalence of acitretin use per 1000 girls and women was 0.04 in 2019. We identified 35 acitretin-exposed pregnancies; 94.3% of these pregnancies were classified as exposed because they occurred within 3 years after stopping acitretin treatment. Among 18 live-born children linked to their mother, four children (22.2%) had congenital malformations (three children with a major malformation). CONCLUSIONS: We observed 35 acitretin-exposed pregnancies mainly because treatment ended too late before pregnancy. Approximately one in five children born from these pregnancies had malformations, highlighting the importance of drawing more attention to the long-lasting teratogenicity of this drug.
BACKGROUND: Real-world data evaluating effectiveness and persistence of systemic therapies for patients with psoriasis are limited. Objectives To determine the effectiveness and persistence of acitretin, ciclosporin, fumaric acid esters (FAEs) and methotrexate in patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis. METHODS: Data from the British Association of Dermatologists Biologics and Immunomodulators Register (BADBIR), a prospective, multicentre pharmacovigilance register of patients with moderate-to-severe psoriasis receiving biologic and/or conventional systemic therapies, were analysed. Eligible patients were >/= 16 years of age receiving a first course of acitretin, ciclosporin, FAEs or methotrexate between 2007 and 2021 with >/= 6 months' follow-up. Effectiveness was defined as achieving absolute Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (aPASI) </= 2 reported >/= 4 weeks after treatment start date until date of cessation. To identify baseline clinical variables associated with treatment effectiveness, we used multivariable logistic regression models estimating the adjusted odds ratio (aOR) of achieving aPASI </= 2. To describe drug persistence associated with ineffectiveness, occurrence of adverse events or other reasons for discontinuation, survival estimates with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were obtained using a flexible parametric model. Results were obtained using multiple imputed data. RESULTS: In total, 5430 patients were included in the analysis. Overall, 1023 (19%) patients were receiving acitretin, 1401 (26%) patients were on ciclosporin, 347 (6%) patients were on FAEs, and 2659 (49%) patients were receiving methotrexate at registration. The proportion of patients who achieved aPASI </= 2 was lower for those treated with acitretin [n = 118 (21%)] compared with those receiving ciclosporin [n = 233 (34%)], FAEs [n = 43 (29%)] and methotrexate [n = 372 (32%)]. Factors associated with ineffectiveness included prior experience to previous nonbiologic systemic therapies (acitretin) (aOR 0.64, 95% CI 0.42-0.96), male sex (methotrexate) (aOR 0.58, 95% CI 0.46-0.74), comorbidities (aOR 0.70, 95% CI 0.51-0.97) and alcohol consumption (</= 14 units per week) (ciclosporin) (aOR 0.70, 95% CI 0.50-0.98). Persistence associated with all reasons for discontinuation showed better survival for methotrexate compared with acitretin, ciclosporin and FAEs cohorts at 12 months [survival estimate 46.1 (95% CI 44.0-48.3), 31.9 (95% CI 29.4-34.7), 30.0 (95% CI 27.5-32.4) and 35.0 (95% CI 29.9-40.9), respectively]. CONCLUSIONS: The real-world effectiveness and persistence of acitretin, ciclosporin, FAEs and methotrexate were generally low. Previous nonbiologic systemic therapies, male sex, comorbidities and alcohol consumption were risk factors associated with treatment ineffectiveness.
Keratosis lichenoides chronica (KLC) is a rare chronic progressive cutaneous disease that is part of the heterogeneous group of lichenoid dermatoses. The typical clinical presentation is characterized by lichenoid hyperkeratotic papules and nodules arranged in a linear and reticular pattern on the trunk and extremities. Our case confirms the existence of a vascular variant of KLC. There is no consensus about its treatment, since it is refractory to many different treatment modalities. We report the effectiveness of acitretin in KLC in combination with tacalcitol. KLC is of unknown aetiology, but is perhaps associated with systemic diseases, most importantly glomerulonephritis and lymphoma. This is the second case associated with hypothyroidism.
Lichen planus and lupus erythematosus may occur as an overlap syndrome. Here we report the clinical characteristics of a 49-year-old man with palmoplantar lichen planus and lupus erythematosus. He showed a remarkable clinical response to treatment with acitretin, which resulted in prolonged remission of the disorder.
The potential relationship between systemic retinoids used in dermatology and affective disorders is controversial. Acitretin, which is widely used in the treatment of psoriasis is part of this controversy secondary to its chemical relation to isotretinoin, a drug which has been associated with a large number of anecdotal case reports of depression and suicidal ideation. Moreover, an FDA package insert precaution regarding acitretin's association with depression and suicide has elevated the level of concern for patient safety. The objective of this article is to review the evidence in the literature regarding acitretin's association with affective disorders. After 12 years of worldwide use only two cases involving acitretin have been reported in the literature. In addition, despite many anecdotal cases involving isotretinoin, there have been no clinical studies that have proven a causal relationship between isotretinoin and depression or suicidal ideation. For acitretin there have been no systematic clinical studies that examine such a relationship. Moreover, it is notable that the FDA precaution regarding depression and suicide on the package insert of acitretin predates the publication of the aforementioned two cases. This suggests that a relationship between acitretin and affective disorders is a class labeling rather than a scientifically proven association.
Acitretin, an active metabolite of etretinate, is the most widely used systemic retinoid in the treatment of psoriasis. There are several unique characteristics of this drug, which set it apart from other options in the therapeutic armamentarium of psoriasis. It is highly efficacious as monotherapy in some specific clinical subtypes of psoriasis. It has dose-sparing effects when used as combination therapy with conventional systemic drugs as well as the biologics. It is a good option for long-term maintenance therapy. Side effects are common but usually mild and can be managed by its proper dosing and monitoring. With appropriate patient selection, gradual dose escalation, and patient counseling, we can deliver good results in psoriasis with this useful drug. This review gives a comprehensive recount of acitretin use in the present era of biologics in psoriasis.
Treatment of acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau (ACH) is difficult and often disappointing. We describe a patient with an extensive ACH of all finger- and toetips, who was treated with acitretin combined with calcipotriol. A within-subject left/right comparison was carried out between calcipotriol ointment (50 micrograms/g) and the ointment base to investigate the additional value of calcipotriol above the ointment base. The side treated with calcipotriol as adjunct therapy showed an impressive improvement, well beyond the degree of improvement at the side treated with the ointment base only.
Psoriasis is a systemic disease associated with metabolic syndrome and cardiometabolic diseases. Adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein (A-FABP, FABP4) is a relevant mediator of lipid metabolism and several comorbidities development. Aim of the study was to explore the possible role of FABP4 in psoriasis and assess its relationship with disease activity, inflammation or metabolic disturbances, and impact of systemic treatment. Fasting blood samples were obtained from 33 patients with active plaque-type psoriasis before and after 12 weeks of therapy and from 11 healthy volunteers. Serum FABP4 concentrations were analyzed by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and statistically analyzed for their correlations with clinical outcomes and the treatment introduced. Serum FABP4 levels were significantly increased in psoriatics compared to controls (p = 0.03). No relationship between the protein and psoriasis severity expressed through psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) was noted (p = 0.57). FABP4 did not correlate with CRP (p = 0.41), lipid profile, and body mass index (BMI) nor the glucose level or liver enzyme activity. FABP4 significantly correlated with morphotic blood elements. After total therapy, FABP4 did not statistically change (p = 0.07), but significantly decreased after administering acitretin (p = 0.03). FABP4 is a potential marker of psoriasis and clinical outcome after therapy with acitretin. Adipocyte-type FABP may be related to hematological disorders or obesity-mediated comorbidities in psoriasis.
