BACKGROUND: A three-pronged approach to acne treatment-combining an antibiotic, antibacterial, and retinoid-could provide greater efficacy and tolerability than single or dyad treatments, while potentially improving patient compliance and reducing antibiotic resistance. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of triple-combination, fixed-dose topical clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/benzoyl peroxide (BPO) 3.1%/adapalene 0.15% (IDP-126) gel for the treatment of acne. METHODS: In a phase II, double-blind, multicenter, randomized, 12-week study, eligible participants aged >/= 9 years with moderate-to-severe acne were equally randomized to once-daily IDP-126, vehicle, or one of three component dyad gels: BPO/adapalene; clindamycin phosphate/BPO; or clindamycin phosphate/adapalene. Coprimary endpoints were treatment success at week 12 (participants achieving a >/= 2-grade reduction from baseline in Evaluator's Global Severity Score and clear/almost clear skin) and least-squares mean absolute changes from baseline in inflammatory and noninflammatory lesion counts to week 12. Treatment-emergent adverse events and cutaneous safety/tolerability were also assessed. RESULTS: A total of 741 participants were enrolled. At week 12, 52.5% of participants achieved treatment success with IDP-126 vs vehicle (8.1%) and dyads (range 27.8-30.5%; P </= 0.001, all). IDP-126 also provided significantly greater absolute reductions in inflammatory (29.9) and noninflammatory (35.5) lesions compared with vehicle or dyads (range inflammatory, 19.6-26.8; noninflammatory, 21.8-30.0; P < 0.05, all), corresponding to > 70% reductions with IDP-126. IDP-126 was well tolerated, with most treatment-emergent adverse events of mild-to-moderate severity. CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily treatment with the novel fixed-dose triple-combination clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/BPO 3.1%/adapalene 0.15% gel demonstrated superior efficacy to vehicle and all three dyad component gels, and was well tolerated over 12 weeks in pediatric, adolescent, and adult participants with moderate-to-severe acne. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT03170388 (registered 31 May, 2017).
Topical adapalene gel is an effective and well tolerated acne treatment that transitioned from prescription to over-the-counter (OTC) availability in 2016. Historically, prescription to OTC transitions have lowered costs to patients and payers and increased access to medications. This study used sales and prescriber data to assess access to topical retinoid therapies and their costs in the pre- and post- Rx-to-OTC transition. We demonstrate that the prescription to OTC transition of adapalene gel increased access to this medication, while lowering costs to patients and payers, including Medicare patients. These results provide a necessary call to action for future OTC shifts with other high safety profile, well-tolerated medications in ultimate efforts and hopes of cost savings for patients, insurers, and Medicare within our healthcare industry.
BACKGROUND: Topical clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/adapalene 0.15%/benzoyl peroxide 3.1% gel (CAB) is the first fixed-dose triple-combination approved for the treatment of acne. This post hoc analysis investigated the efficacy and safety of CAB in pediatric (&lt;18 years) and adult (greater than or equal to 18 years) participants. METHODS: In two multicenter, double-blind, phase 3 studies (NCT04214639 and NCT04214652), participants greater than or equal to 9 years of age with moderate-to-severe acne were randomized (2:1) to 12 weeks of once-daily treatment with CAB or vehicle gel. Pooled data were analyzed for pediatric and adult subpopulations. Assessments included treatment success (greater than or equal to 2-grade reduction from baseline in Evaluator's Global Severity Score and a score of 0 [clear] or 1 [almost clear], inflammatory/noninflammatory lesion counts, Acne-Specific Quality of Life (Acne-QoL) questionnaire, treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), and cutaneous safety/tolerability. RESULTS: At week 12, treatment success rates for both pediatric and adult participants were significantly greater with CAB (52.7%; 45.9%) than with vehicle (24.0%; 23.5%; P&lt;0.01, both). CAB-treated participants in both subgroups experienced greater reductions from baseline versus vehicle in inflammatory (pediatric: 78.6% vs 50.4%; adult: 76.6% vs 62.8%; P&lt;0.001, both) and noninflammatory lesions (pediatric: 73.8% vs 41.1%; adult: 70.7% vs 52.2%; P&lt;0.001, both). Acne-QoL improvements from baseline to week 12 were significantly greater with CAB than with a vehicle. Most TEAEs were of mild-to-moderate severity; no age-related trends for safety/tolerability were observed.&nbsp; Conclusions: CAB gel demonstrated comparable efficacy, quality of life improvements, and safety in pediatric and adult participants with moderate-to-severe acne. As the first fixed-dose, triple-combination topical formulation, CAB represents an important new treatment option for patients with acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2024;23(6):394-402.&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; doi:10.36849/JDD.8357.
BACKGROUND: Irritation with topical retinoids presents a significant impediment to acne treatment adherence. Two studies assessed the irritation potential of tazarotene 0.045% lotion versus adapalene 0.3% gel and trifarotene 0.005% cream. METHODS: In two double-blind, 12-day modified cumulative irritation patch studies, healthy adults (N = 20 each) had two active patches, containing 0.1 cc of tazarotene 0.045% lotion and either adapalene 0.3% gel (Study 1) or trifarotene 0.005% cream (Study 2), and one control patch (no product) placed on their upper back. Skin irritation was assessed and patches were replaced every 2-3 days. RESULTS: In Study 1, tazarotene 0.045% lotion and adapalene 0.3% gel were both mildly irritating, though irritation was lower overall with tazarotene 0.045% lotion. In Study 2, significantly greater irritation was observed with trifarotene 0.005% cream than tazarotene 0.045% lotion, beginning two days after the first patch application and at each subsequent visit. In sub-analyses of data from both studies, irritation among participants with acne was similar to the overall study populations. CONCLUSIONS: In two head-to-head studies comparing the irritation potential of third- and fourth-generation retinoids, tazarotene 0.045% lotion was significantly less irritating than trifarotene 0.005% cream and numerically less irritating than adapalene 0.3% gel.
Topical retinoids help address the early lesions of acne vulgaris. Consensus guidelines advocate the use of topical retinoids as the primary treatment for most forms of acne vulgaris. However, all topical retinoid preparations may be irritating, and this may contribute to underutilization in clinical practices. Topical adapalene fosters topical retinoid treatment of acne with less irritation. Adapalene is a more stable molecule than tretinoin. Adapalene can be used without concern for photo-deactivation. Because of its chemical stability, adapalene can be used in combination with benzoyl peroxide products. The availability of a stable topical retinoid associated with little irritation may facilitate meeting acne treatment consensus guidelines.
BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Topical clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/benzoyl peroxide 3.1%/adapalene 0.15% gel (IDP-126) is the first fixed-dose triple-combination formulation in development for acne. This post hoc analysis investigated efficacy and safety of IDP-126 in children and adolescents with moderate-to-severe acne. METHODS: In a randomized, double-blind phase 2 study (NCT03170388), participants >/=9 years of age with moderate-to-severe acne were eligible for randomization (1:1:1:1:1) to once-daily IDP-126, one of three dyad combination gels, or vehicle gel for 12 weeks. This post hoc analysis of pediatric participants (n = 394) included children and adolescents up to 17 years of age. Assessments included treatment success, inflammatory/noninflammatory lesion counts, Acne-Specific Quality of Life (Acne-QoL) questionnaire, treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), and cutaneous safety/tolerability. RESULTS: At Week 12, treatment success rates were significantly greater with IDP-126 (55.8%) than with vehicle (5.7%; p < .001) or any of the dyad combinations (range: 30.8%-33.9%; p < .01, all). Lesion reductions with IDP-126 were also significantly greater than with vehicle (inflammatory: 78.3% vs. 45.1%; noninflammatory: 70.0% vs. 37.6%; p < .001, both) and 9.2%-16.6% greater than with any of the dyad combinations. Increases (improvements) from baseline in Acne-QoL domain scores were generally greater with IDP-126 than in any other treatment group. The most common treatment-related TEAEs across treatment groups were application site pain and dryness. Most treatment-related TEAEs were of mild-to-moderate severity. CONCLUSION: IDP-126 gel-a novel fixed-dose, triple-combination topical formulation for acne-demonstrated superior efficacy to vehicle and three dyad component gels and was well tolerated in children and adolescents with moderate-to-severe acne.
Maintenance therapy after remission of inflammation is strongly recommended in the guideline for the treatment of acne vulgaris published by the Japanese Dermatological Association. One advantage of continuing maintenance therapy is the alleviation of atrophic scarring. This study investigated the efficacy of maintenance therapy using adapalene 0.1%/benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel and benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel, and its effects on atrophic scarring. Overall, 126 patients were randomized to the adapalene/benzoyl peroxide group (n = 40), benzoyl peroxide group (n = 44), and control group (without maintenance treatment drugs; n = 42), and 111 of these completed a trial lasting 24 weeks. As the primary endpoint, the treatment success rate (the percentage of patients in whom the number of inflammatory lesions was maintained at </=10) was 89.2% in the adapalene/benzoyl peroxide group, 87.5% in the benzoyl peroxide group, and 47.4% in the control group. Compared with the control group, the success rates were significantly higher in the adapalene/benzoyl peroxide and benzoyl peroxide groups (P = 0.0006 for both). As one of the secondary endpoints, the rate of change in the number of atrophic scars showed significant improvement from the baseline in the adapalene/benzoyl peroxide and benzoyl peroxide groups at week 24 (P = 0.0004 and P < 0.0001, respectively). Although the three-dimensional image analysis parameters did not change significantly from the baseline in the adapalene/benzoyl peroxide and benzoyl peroxide groups at week 24, significant worsening was noted in the control group (P = 0.0276 for affected area, P = 0.0445 for volume, and P = 0.0182 for maximum depth). Adverse drug reactions were noted in three patients in the adapalene/benzoyl peroxide group (7.5%) but not in the benzoyl peroxide group. These findings suggest that maintenance therapy using adapalene 0.1%/benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel and benzoyl peroxide 2.5% gel is effective in preventing the worsening of scars in Japanese patients with acne vulgaris.
INTRODUCTION: Topical clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/adapalene 0.15%/benzoyl peroxide 3.1% (CAB) gel is the only fixed-dose, triple-combination formulation approved for acne treatment. In 3 clinical studies of participants with moderate-to-severe acne, CAB demonstrated superior efficacy to vehicle and component dyads, with good safety and tolerability. Detailed efficacy/safety data from individual clinical study participants are presented. METHODS: In two phase 3 (NCT04214652, NCT04214639) randomized, double-blind, 12-week studies, participants aged at least 9 years with moderate-to-severe acne were randomized to once-daily CAB or vehicle gel. Descriptive data - including lesion count changes, treatment success (at least 2-grade reduction from baseline in Evaluator's Global Severity Score and clear/almost clear skin), compliance, treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs), and cutaneous safety/tolerance assessments - were summarized from 6 CAB-treated cases. RESULTS: By week 12, all cases achieved &gt;70% lesion reductions, 4/6 achieved treatment success, and 1/6 achieved a 2-grade reduction in severity. All cases were compliant with CAB treatment. No cases reported serious AEs. Transient increases occurred on cutaneous safety and tolerability assessments, with scores generally decreasing back to/below baseline levels by week 12. CONCLUSIONS: In two phase 3 clinical trials, fixed-dose, triple-combination CAB demonstrated good efficacy/safety. All 6 CAB-treated cases achieved substantial (&gt;70%) lesion reductions, with 5/6 achieving treatment success or 2-grade reduction in severity by week 12. Transient cutaneous safety/tolerability severity increases generally resolved to baseline values by week 12. These clinical study cases reinforce the importance of patient education regarding adherence, expectations, and AEs. J Drugs Dermatol. 2024;23(11):1017-1024. doi:10.36849/JDD.8639.
BACKGROUND: Acne vulgaris is a commonly diagnosed dermatological condition characterised by pilosebaceous unit blockage or inflammation. It may manifest as inflammatory, non-inflammatory, or a combination of the two. The acne vulgaris mostly the face of individual and chest and back of individual is also affected sometime. The aim of my research is to compare the effectiveness of topical adapalene plus oral azithromycin versus topical adapalene plus oral doxycycline in treating acne. Acne is one of most common reason compelling a patient to see dermatological advice. Our goal is to find the most effective antibiotic to produce the best outcomes with the fewest possible unwanted effect (side effects) and a maximum level of patient satisfaction. METHODS: From May 1 to October 31, 2019, a randomised control trial was performed at Dermatology department MTI Lady Reading Hospital Peshawar. Using the lottery form, all of the patients were split into 2 groups. For 12 weeks, patients in Group A were given oral doxycycline 100 mg once daily and topical adapalene, while patients in Group B were given oral azithromycin 250 mg on alternating days and topical adapalene. All patients were followed at the end of 12 weeks after start of therapy to determine the efficacy in term of clearance of at least 60% of the number of lesions from baseline. RESULTS: In Group A, 22 (59.45%) patients expressed positive results whereas in Group B, only 9 (24.32%) patients expressed positive results. p value (0.0021.). CONCLUSIONS: My data suggest that oral doxycycline 100mg in combination with adapalene gave better results as compared to oral azithromycin which was also found well-tolerated option for treatment of acne on face.
Acne vulgaris is the most common dermatological disorder worldwide, causing significant physical and psychological morbidity. Topical combination therapy has shown superior efficacy compared to monotherapy, especially when combined with retinoids. Few studies have directly compared combined formulations. This evaluator-blinded pilot study compared the efficacy and tolerability of two marketed topical combination acne gels, clindamycin 1%-tretinoin 0.025% (CT) and benzoyl peroxide 2.5%-adapalene 0.1% (BA) in 20 patients with mild to moderate acne vulgaris. Gels were applied daily on opposite sides of the face for 21 days. The primary outcome was difference in transepidermal water loss (TEWL) at the end of treatment. Secondary endpoints were skin moisture content measurement, Investigators' Global Assessment, subject self-assessments (SSA) of burning/stinging, itching, erythema, and dryness/scaling, and Comparative Participant Satisfaction Questionnaire (CPSQ). Efficacy was assessed by inflammatory and non- inflammatory acne efflorescences counts. TEWL increased significantly for both CT and BA (+57.74%, P=0.002; +58.77%, P&lt;0.001); skin moisture content significantly decreased only for BA (-16.47%, P=0.02). Only BA showed a significant increase in erythema and dryness/scaling (P=0.027 and P=0.014) and in SSA burning/stinging (P=0.04). Patient satisfaction evaluation also reflected the strong BA irritation. Although CT and BA both reduced acne lesions (P&lt;0.001) and more patients preferred to continue with CT, subject perception of acne improvement was higher for BA. These findings suggest that CT and BA have similar efficacy in the treatment of mild to moderate papulopustular acne. However, CT was better tolerated than BA by both medical and subject evaluation. CT is an effective and tolerated treatment option.J Drugs Dermatol. 2021;20(3):295-301. doi:10.36849/JDD.2021.5641.
BACKGROUND: Topical clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/adapalene 0.15%/benzoyl peroxide 3.1% (CAB) gel is the only fixed-dose triple-combination approved for acne (indicated in patients 12 years and older). As topical acne treatment in pediatric patients may be complicated by tolerability and/or a perceived lack of efficacy, post hoc analyses were used to investigate efficacy/safety of CAB in children and adolescents. METHODS: Data were pooled from 2 phase 3, double-blind, 12-week studies (NCT04214639; NCT04214652). Participants aged 9 years and older with moderate-to-severe acne were randomized (2:1) to once-daily CAB or vehicle gel. Endpoints included treatment success (at least 2-grade reduction from baseline in Evaluator's Global Severity Score and clear/almost clear skin) and least-squares mean percent change from baseline in inflammatory/noninflammatory lesions. Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and cutaneous safety/tolerability were evaluated. Post hoc analyses were conducted in adolescents aged 12 to 17 years (CAB, n=123; vehicle, n=50) with descriptive data shown for children aged 10 to 11 (CAB, n=3; vehicle, n=2). RESULTS: At week 12, 51.5% of CAB-treated adolescents achieved treatment success vs 24.9% with vehicle (P&lt;0.01). CAB also provided inflammatory/noninflammatory lesion reductions of 78.3%/73.7% vs 50.5%/42.9% with vehicle (P&lt;0.001, both). Most TEAEs were of mild-to-moderate severity, and &lt;2.5% of participants discontinued due to adverse events. Only the 3 children treated with CAB achieved treatment success, with lesion reductions ranging from 76% to 100%. One CAB-treated child experienced TEAEs and none discontinued. CONCLUSIONS: In 2 pooled phase 3 studies, once-daily CAB gel was well tolerated and efficacious in pediatric participants with acne, with over half achieving treatment success at week 12. J Drugs Dermatol. 2024;23(12):1049-1057. doi:10.36849/JDD.8643.
Adapalene, a naphthoic acid derivative with retinoid-like activity, is used for the topical treatment of mild to moderate acne vulgaris. It binds to retinoic acid receptors found predominantly in the terminal differentiation zone of epidermis and is more active than tretinoin in modulating cellular differentiation. Adapalene exhibits anti-inflammatory activity in various in vitro and in vivo models. To date, adapalene 0.1% gel and lotion formulations have been compared only with tretinoin 0.025% gel. In these comparisons, adapalene 0.1% aqueous gel was at least as effective as tretinoin and in some studies was significantly better at reducing the numbers of noninflammatory, inflammatory and total facial lesions in patients with mild to moderate acne. In such comparisons, the cutaneous tolerability of adapalene aqueous gel was generally better than that of tretinoin. On the basis of published data, adapalene aqueous 0.1% gel is an effective and generally better tolerated alternative to tretinoin 0.025% gel for the topical treatment of patients with mild to moderate acne.
The central role of inflammation in acne is now more clearly understood. Adapalene, a third-generation topical retinoid, down-regulates toll-like receptor 2 expression and inhibits activator protein-1 activity. In a fixed-dose combination, adapalene and benzoyl peroxide (BPO) act synergistically on inflammatory patterns through regulation of innate immunity. In addition to reducing inflammatory and non-inflammatory lesions, adapalene/BPO helps prevent lesion and microcomedone formation. The combination of a topical retinoid and antimicrobial agent remains the preferred approach for almost all patients with acne. In cases of more severe disease, there is a clinical benefit in combining adapalene/BPO with an oral antibiotic for 12 weeks. Most recently, adapalene/BPO plus doxycycline 200 mg was found to be highly effective when compared with isotretinoin in the treatment of patients with severe acne with nodules. Long-term maintenance therapy is needed for most patients. Retinoids are the preferred agents, with BPO added in patients with more severe disease if needed. Adapalene is anticomedogenic, reduces comedones and has anti-inflammatory properties, while BPO is a unique antimicrobial agent not shown to induce microbial resistance after more than 50 years of use. Maintenance therapy for 6 months with adapalene/BPO prevents relapse among patients with severe acne and continues to reduce disease symptoms.
BACKGROUND: The present study was undertaken to compare the efficacy, safety and tolerability of a new microsphere adapalene formulation and conventional adapalene in adult patients with mild to moderate acne vulgaris. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This prospective, randomized, assessor-blind, multi-centric (3 centres) comparative, post-marketing phase IV study was undertaken in 175 patients with mild to moderate acne after approval by respective Institutional review boards. Patients fulfilling selection criteria were randomly assigned to either microsphere adapalene gel or conventional adapalene gel both once daily in the evening for 12 weeks after obtaining their informed consent. Efficacy variables included success rate and percent lesion reduction from baseline. Safety and tolerability was assessed on the basis of physical examination and monitoring of treatment-emergent adverse events. RESULTS: Of the 175 patients (88 in microsphere and 87 in conventional) 21 were lost to follow-up and considered drop-outs. There was a significant decrease (P < 0.05) in mean inflammatory and non-inflammatory lesion and total lesion counts from 1st week onwards in both groups. A significantly lower number of microsphere treated patients (50%) reported a side effect (P < 0.05) as compared to 71.3% in conventional users. A highly significant decrease was observed in dryness and erythema (P < 0.01) in microsphere group compared to conventional. Eight patients in conventional group discontinued therapy due to severe irritation as compared to none in microsphere adapalene group. COMMENT: Therapy with microsphere adapalene provided a better tolerability with minimal irritation compared to conventional adapalene, without compromising efficacy and could be a better therapeutic option for acne.
BACKGROUND: The efficacy of topical retinoids is well known according to several clinical studies conducted predominantly among Caucasian patients. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety profile of adapalene and tretinoin among Mexican patients. AIMS: To compare adapalene 0.1 and 0.3% and tretinoin 0.05% in Mexican subjects with acne vulgaris. METHODS: We enrolled 171 patients in this single-center, randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial. The patients applied on the face either adapalene 0.1%, adapalene 0.3%, tretinoin 0.05%, or placebo for 90 days and were evaluated for the reduction in total lesion counts and for the level of irritation. RESULTS: Tretinoin 0.05% and adapalene 0.3% were more effective than adapalene 0.1% and placebo in the reduction of both inflammatory and noninflammatory lesions. Most of adverse events to adapalene and many on tretinoin group were related to skin irritation, dry skin, scaling, pruritus, burning, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. CONCLUSION: Adapalene 0.3% and tretinoin 0.05% are comparable in efficacy, and adapalene 0.1% offers a better safety profile in Mexican patients.
INTRODUCTION: Despite the common occurrence of cetuximab (Cmab)-induced skin toxicity, management strategies are not well established. The traditional mainstay method consists of topical steroids, which, if used excessively, may give rise to other concerns. Alternatively, adapalene can activate epidermal growth factor receptor pathways to potentially alleviate these toxicities. METHODS: We prospectively studied 31 patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (R/M SCCHN) who were eligible to use adapalene gel as a reactive treatment for topical steroid-refractory skin toxicity. For comparison, we retrospectively reviewed 99 patients with R/M SCCHN (historical control cohort) whose skin toxicity was mainly treated with topical steroids. We compared the frequency and severity of Cmab-induced skin toxicity, Cmab therapy status (e.g., dose modification), side effects caused by topical steroids and adapalene gel itself, and other medical interventions. RESULTS: Adapalene gel was used by eight patients (25.8%) in the prospective cohort. Patients in the historical control cohort more frequently required escalation of topical steroid potency (34.3% vs. 12.9%, p = 0.022). Although there was no statistically significant difference in the frequency of grade >/=3 facial skin rash and paronychia between the two cohorts, the prospective cohort showed a significantly shorter time to complete recovery from grade 2/3 paronychia (16 vs. 47 days, p = 0.017). Further, while no skin infections were observed in the prospective cohort, 13 patients in the historical control cohort developed skin infections, especially periungual infection (0% vs. 13.1%, p = 0.024). In addition, no patients in the prospective cohort received a dose reduction of Cmab due to skin toxicities, compared to 20 patients in the historical control cohort (0% vs. 20.2%, p = 0.003). No apparent adapalene gel-related side effects were observed. CONCLUSIONS: Adapalene gel may be an effective management option for topical steroid-refractory Cmab-induced skin toxicities and could improve compliance with Cmab therapy.
