BACKGROUND: Drug-induced hyperglycemia and diabetes have negative and potentially serious health consequences but can often be unnoticed. METHODS: We reviewed the literature searching Medline database for articles addressing drug-induced hyperglycemia and diabetes up to January 31, 2023. We also selected drugs that could induce hyperglycemia or diabetes according official data from drug information databases Theriaque and Micromedex. For each selected drug or pharmacotherapeutic class, the mechanisms of action potentially involved were investigated. For drugs considered to be at risk of hyperglycemia or diabetes, disproportionality analyses were performed using data from the international pharmacovigilance database VigiBase. In order to detect new pharmacovigilance signals, additional disproportionality analyses were carried out for drug classes with more than 100 cases reported in VigiBase, but not found in the literature or official documents. RESULTS: The main drug classes found to cause hyperglycemia are glucocorticoids, HMG-coA reductase inhibitors, thiazide diuretics, beta-blockers, antipsychotics, fluoroquinolones, antiretrovirals, antineoplastic agents and immunosuppressants. The main mechanisms involved are alterations in insulin secretion and sensitivity, direct cytotoxic effects on pancreatic cells and increases in glucose production. Pharmacovigilance signal were found for a majority of drugs or pharmacological classes identified as being at risk of diabetes or hyperglycemia. We identified new pharmacovigilance signals with drugs not known to be at risk according to the literature or official data: phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, endothelin receptor antagonists, sodium oxybate, biphosphonates including alendronic acid, digoxin, sartans, linosipril, diltiazem, verapamil, and darbepoetin alpha. Further studies will be needed to confirm these signals. CONCLUSIONS: The risks of induced hyperglycemia vary from one drug to another, and the underlying mechanisms are multiple and potentially complex. Clinicians need to be vigilant when using at-risk drugs in order to detect and manage these adverse drug reactions. However, it is to emphasize that the benefits of appropriately prescribed treatments most often outweigh their metabolic risks.
Cherubism is a rare disease of the jaws characterized by bilateral symmetrical painless expansion of the mandible and maxilla. In extreme cases, larger lesions can become exophytic and have profound functional and esthetic implications. Several pharmacologic agents have been trialed in the treatment of cherubism with variable success reported. Bisphosphonates have not been significantly studied in this setting. We present a case where oral alendronic acid was used as an adjuvant treatment after surgical debulking of the maxilla in a 13-year-old boy with a severe case of cherubism.
BACKGROUND: We recently developed a liposomal nanoparticle system that can be used for drug delivery and simultaneously be monitored by optical or photoacoustic imaging devices. Here we tested the efficacy of alendronate as a homing molecule in SM-liposomes for bone targeting. METHODS: Alendronate was immobilized covalently on the liposomal surface and the fluorescent dye indocyanine green was used as a payload in the liposomes. The indocyanine green delivery was analyzed by 3D optical tomography, optical fluorescence scanner, photoacoustic imaging, and by ex-vivo biodistribution studies. RESULTS: The results show that the alendronate, coupled to the liposomal surface, increases sphingomyelin containing liposome targeting up to several-folds. CONCLUSION: The alendronate targeted liposomes open possibilities for an application in active bone targeting.
Interactions between food and drugs may inadvertently reduce or increase the drug effect. The majority of clinically relevant food-drug interactions are caused by food-induced changes in the bioavailability of the drug. Since the bioavailability and clinical effect of most drugs are correlated, the bioavailability is an important pharmacokinetic effect parameter. However, in order to evaluate the clinical relevance of a food-drug interaction, the impact of food intake on the clinical effect of the drug has to be quantified as well. As a result of quality review in healthcare systems, healthcare providers are increasingly required to develop methods for identifying and preventing adverse food-drug interactions. In this review of original literature, we have tried to provide both pharmacokinetic and clinical effect parameters of clinically relevant food-drug interactions. The most important interactions are those associated with a high risk of treatment failure arising from a significantly reduced bioavailability in the fed state. Such interactions are frequently caused by chelation with components in food (as occurs with alendronic acid, clodronic acid, didanosine, etidronic acid, penicillamine and tetracycline) or dairy products (ciprofloxacin and norfloxacin), or by other direct interactions between the drug and certain food components (avitriptan, indinavir, itraconazole solution, levodopa, melphalan, mercaptopurine and perindopril). In addition, the physiological response to food intake, in particular gastric acid secretion, may reduce the bioavailability of certain drugs (ampicillin, azithromycin capsules, didanosine, erythromycin stearate or enteric coated, and isoniazid). For other drugs, concomitant food intake may result in an increase in drug bioavailability either because of a food-induced increase in drug solubility (albendazole, atovaquone, griseofulvin, isotretinoin, lovastatin, mefloquine, saquinavir and tacrolimus) or because of the secretion of gastric acid (itraconazole capsules) or bile (griseofulvin and halofantrine) in response to food intake. For most drugs, such an increase results in a desired increase in drug effect, but in others it may result in serious toxicity (halofantrine).
Gateways to Clinical Trials is a guide to the most recent clinical trials in current literature and congresses. The data in the following tables has been retrieved from the Clinical Studies knowledge area of Prous Science Integrity, the drug discovery and development portal, http://integrity.prous.com. This issue focuses on the following selection of drugs: Aciclovir, alemtuzumab, alendronic acid sodium salt, alicaforsen sodium, alteplase, amifostine hydrate, antithymocyte globulin (equine), aspirin, atorvastatin calcium, azathioprine; Bacillus Calmette-Guerin, basiliximab, bicalutamide, bimatoprost, BMS-214662, brimonidine tartrate, buprenorphine hydrochloride; Cabergoline, carbamazepine, carboplatin, ciclosporine, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide; Daclizumab, desmopressin acetate, dihydroergotamine mesylate, dorzolamide hydrochloride, doxorubicin, dutasteride; Everolimus; Fluocinolone acetonide, frovatriptan, FTY-720, fulvestrant; Gabapentin, galantamine hydrobromide, ganciclovir, gemcitabine, glatiramer acetate; Hydrocodone bitartrate; Interferon beta, interferon beta-1a, interferon beta-1b, ipratropium bromide; Ketotifen; Lamivudine, latanoprost, levodopa, lidocaine hydrochloride, lonafarnib; Metformin hydrochloride, methylprednisolone, metoclopramide hydrochloride, mirtazapine, mitoxantrone hydrochloride, modafinil, muromonab-CD3, mycophenolate mofetil; NS-2330; Olopatadine hydrochloride, omalizumab, oxcarbazepine, oxycodone hydrochloride; Paclitaxel, paracetamol, piribedil, pramipexole hydrochloride, pravastatin sodium, prednisone; Quetiapine fumarate; Raloxifene hydrochloride, rituximab, rizatriptan sulfate, Ro-63-8695, ropinirole hydrochloride, rosiglitazone maleate; Simvastatin, siplizumab, sirolimus; Tacrolimus, tegaserod maleate, timolol maleate, tiotropium bromide, tipifarnib, tizanidine hydrochloride, tolterodine tartrate, topiramate, travoprost; Unoprostone isopropyl ester; Valganciclovir hydrochloride, visilizumab; Zidovudine.
