OBJECTIVES: Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a common and progressive disease affecting elderly males, often associated with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). alpha1-blockers are the mainstay in symptomatic therapy of BPH. Because of their greater uroselectivity and minimal hemodynamic effects, alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin are generally preferred. The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and tolerability of alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin in patients with BPH and LUTS. METHODS: Ninety subjects with BPH and LUTS were randomized into three groups of thirty in each, to receive alfuzosin sustained release (SR) 10 mg, tamsulosin 0.4 mg, or silodosin 8 mg for 12 weeks. The primary outcome measure was a change in the International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), and the secondary outcome measures were changes in individual subjective symptom scores, quality of life score (QLS), and peak flow rate (Qmax) from baseline. The treatment response was monitored at 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. RESULTS: IPSS improved by 88.18%, 72.12%, and 82.23% in alfuzosin SR, tamsulosin and silodosin groups (P < 0.001) at 12 weeks. Improvement in QLS was >75% in all the three groups (P < 0.001). A significant improvement in Qmax was seen with alfuzosin and tamsulosin (P = 0.025 and P < 0.001) but not with silodosin (P = 0.153). However, the intergroup differences in IPSS, QLS, and Qmax were not significant. Ejaculatory dysfunction was more common with silodosin and corrected QT (QTc) prolongation occurred only with alfuzosin (two subjects) and tamsulosin (three subjects). CONCLUSION: Alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin showed similar efficacy in improvement of LUTS secondary to BPH, with good tolerability, acceptability, and minimum hemodynamic adverse effects. Alfuzosin, tamsulosin, and silodosin are comparable in efficacy in symptomatic management of BPH. The occurrence of QTc prolongation in three subjects with tamsulosin in the present study is an unexpected adverse event as there are no reports of QTc prolongation with tamsulosin in any of the previous studies.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Terazosin, doxazosin, and alfuzosin (Tz/Dz/Az) are alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonists that also bind to and activate a key adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-producing enzyme in glycolysis. It is hypothesized that the increase in energy availability in the brain may slow or prevent neurodegeneration, potentially by reducing the accumulation of alpha-synuclein. Recent work has suggested a potentially neuroprotective effect of the use of Tz/Dz/Az in Parkinson disease in both animal and human studies. We investigated the neuroprotective effects of Tz/Dz/Az in a closely related disease, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). METHODS: We used a new-user active comparator design in the Merative Marketscan database to identify men with no history of DLB who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az or 2 comparator medications. Our comparator medications were other drugs commonly used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia that do not increase ATP: the alpha-1 adrenergic receptor antagonist tamsulosin or 5alpha-reductase inhibitor (5ARI). We matched the cohorts on propensity scores and duration of follow-up. We followed up the matched cohorts forward to estimate the hazard of developing DLB using Cox proportional hazards regression. RESULTS: Men who were newly started on Tz/Dz/Az had a lower hazard of developing DLB than matched men taking tamsulosin (n = 242,716, 728,256 person-years, hazard ratio [HR] 0.60, 95% CI 0.50-0.71) or 5ARI (n = 130,872, 399,316 person-years, HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.57-0.93). while the hazard in men taking tamsulosin was similar to that of men taking 5ARI (n = 159,596, 482,280 person-years, HR 1.17, 95% CI 0.96-1.42). These results were robust to several sensitivity analyses. DISCUSSION: We find an association in men who are taking Tz/Dz/Az and a lower hazard of DLB compared with similar men taking other medications. When combined with the literature of Tz/Dz/Az on Parkinson disease, our findings suggest that glycolysis-enhancing drugs may be broadly protective in neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. A future randomized trial is required to assess these associations for causality. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class III evidence that Tz/Dz/Az use reduces the rate of developing DLB in adult men.
PURPOSE: Tamsulosin has been associated with dementia, but the results have been inconsistent. Concerns have been raised about using exposure assessment time too close to the outcome. We investigated the association between use of alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists indicated for benign prostate hyperplasia and risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD) using different exposure windows. METHODS: The study (24 602 cases and 98 397 matched controls) included men from the Finnish nationwide nested case-control study on Medication and Alzheimer's disease (MEDALZ). Cases received clinically verified AD diagnosis during 2005-2011 and were community-dwelling at the time of diagnosis. Use of tamsulosin and alfuzosin in 1995-2011 was identified from the Prescription Register and categorized based on whether it had occurred within 3 years before AD diagnosis (lag time) or before that. Dose-response analysis using defined daily doses of drug (DDDs) was conducted. Associations were investigated with conditional logistic regression, adjusted for confounders and mediators. RESULTS: The use of alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists before lag time associated with an increased risk of AD (OR 1.24 [1.20-1.27]). After adjustment for comorbidities and concomitant drug use throughout the assessment time (confounders) and healthcare contacts within the lag period (mediators), the association weakened (aOR 1.10 [1.06-1.14]). We found no evidence of dose-response-relationship when comparing the users of higher than median DDDs to the users of lower than median DDDs. CONCLUSION: Our findings, especially the lack of dose-response-relationship and attenuation after mediator adjustment, do not provide strong support for the previous hypothesis on alpha1-adrenoceptor antagonists as a risk factor for dementia.
Efficacy and safety of alfuzosin administered as 3-times-daily and 2-times-daily formulations have been previously demonstrated in placebo-controlled studies, and these formulations have been commercially available in many countries. A once-daily formulation of alfuzosin administered through a novel prolonged-release system has been recently developed to improve the convenience of dosing and to provide optimal pharmacokinetic coverage over 24 hours. The results of 2 double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 studies in patients with lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia suggests that 10 mg of alfuzosin administered once daily without dose titration is superior to placebo in terms of symptom and urinary flow rate improvement. Orthostatic hypotension and first-dose phenomenon related to the alpha-blocking property were rare. The incidences of asthenia and fatigue were comparable to those seen with placebo. Ejaculatory disorders were very rare. The most frequently reported adverse event potentially related to alpha blockade was dizziness, which occurred in 5.0% of patients treated with 10 mg alfuzosin compared with 2.1% of patients given placebo.
BACKGROUND: Alfuzosin has been widely used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis, and is claimed to be a selective agent for the lower urinary tract with low incidence of adverse side-effects and hypotensive changes. Recently, several randomized controlled trials have reported using Alfuzosin as an expulsive therapy of ureteral stones. Tamsulosin, another alpha blocker, has also been used as an agent for the expulsive therapy for ureteral stones. It is unclear whether alfuzosin has similar efficacy as Tamsulosin in the management of ureteral stones. OBJECTIVE: To perform a systematic review and analysis of literatures comparing Alfuzosin with Tamsulosin or standard conservative therapy for the treatment of ureteral stones less than 10 mm in diameter. METHODS: A systematic literature review was performed in December 2014 using Pubmed, Embase, and the Cochrane library databases to identify relevant studies. All randomized and controlled trials were included. A subgroup analysis was performed comparing Alfuzosin with control therapy on the management of distal ureteral stones. RESULTS: Alfuzosin provided a significantly higher stone-free rate than the control treatments (RR: 1.85; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.35-2.55; p<0.001), and a shorter stone expulsion time (Weighted mean difference [WMD]: -4.20 d, 95%CI, -6.19 to -2.21; p<0.001), but it has a higher complication rate (RR: 2.02; 95% CI, 1.30-3.15; p<0.01). When Alfuzosin was compared to Tamsulosin, there was no significant difference in terms of stone-free rate (RR: 0.90; 95% CI, 0.79-1.02; p = 0.09) as well as the stone expulsion time (WMD: 0.52 d, 95%CI, -1.61 to 2.64; p = 0.63). The adverse effects of Alfuzosin were similar to those of Tamsulosin (RR: 0.88; 95% CI, 0.61-1.26; p = 0.47). CONCLUSIONS: Alfuzosin is a safe and effective agent for the expulsive therapy of ureteral stones smaller than 10 mm in size. It is more effective than therapeutic regiment without alpha blocker. It is equivalent to Tamsulosin in its effectiveness and safety profile. Adverse effects should always be kept in mind when use this class of drugs.
Alfuzosin, a new quinazoline derivative, acts as a selective and competitive antagonist of alpha 1-adrenoceptor-mediated contraction of prostatic, prostatic capsule, bladder base and proximal urethral smooth muscle, thereby reducing the tone of these structures. Consequently, urethral pressure and resistance, bladder outlet resistance, bladder instability and symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia are reduced. A limited range of clinical studies have shown oral alfuzosin to be more effective than placebo (in studies of < or = 6 months duration), to have sustained effects on long term administration (< or = 30 months), and to be comparable with the alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist prazosin, in the symptomatic treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia. This is reflected in increases in urinary flow rate and decreases in symptom score and residual urinary volume. The most marked improvements occur in patients with severe pretreatment urinary flow abnormalities. Furthermore, preliminary results suggest a beneficial effect of alfuzosin on quality of life in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. The overall incidence of adverse effects appears similar to that with placebo, and the incidence of vasodilatory-related adverse effects appears lower than that with prazosin. The relative selectivity of alfuzosin for alpha 1-adrenoceptors in the genitourinary tract compared with receptors in the vasculature is a potential advantage over other alpha-adrenoceptor antagonists, including prazosin, as the symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia may be reduced by alfuzosin at doses that have minimal vasodilatory effects, thereby minimising postural hypotension and syncope. However, vasodilatory-related adverse effects are the most common adverse effects that occur with alfuzosin, and dose and first-dose hypotensive relationships, especially in the elderly, cannot be excluded at this stage in the clinical use of alfuzosin. The full potential of alfuzosin in the symptomatic treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia will be clarified by further long term comparative studies (with large patient numbers) against placebo and other alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonists. Nevertheless, oral alfuzosin 7.5 to 10 mg/day in divided doses appears to be a promising first-line agent for symptomatic treatment of noncomplicated mild to moderate benign prostatic hyperplasia in patients with a high dynamic component to their obstruction. In addition, alfuzosin offers an alternative to prostatectomy (the current 'gold standard') in patients who require surgery but are unfit for this treatment, and in patients requiring symptomatic relief while awaiting surgery.
Alfuzosin is a medication approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia symptoms. Bioequivalence studies are demanded by regulatory authorities to evaluate the expected in vivo biological similarity of 2 formulations of a medication. The aim of this study is to assess the bioavailability of the generic (test) and branded (reference) formulations of 10-mg alfuzosin extended-release tablets after oral administration to healthy adults under fed conditions. The study used a comparative randomized, single-dose, 2-way crossover open-label study design. Thirty-three participants were recruited and completed the clinical assessment. The pharmacokinetic parameters maximum plasma concentration (C(max) ), area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC(0-t) ), AUC extrapolated to infinity (AUC(0-infinity) ), time to maximum concentration, and elimination half-life were estimated to prove bioequivalence. The confidence intervals for the log-transformed test/reference ratios for alfuzosin 110.7% (98.0-124.9) and 112.0% (101.9-123.1) for C(max) and AUC(0-t) respectively, which are within the allowed limits specified by the regulatory authorities (80-125% for C(max) and AUC(0-t) ). The test formulation can therefore be prescribed as an alternative to the reference for symptomatic treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
BACKGROUND: This study was carried out a network meta-analysis of evidence from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to evaluate stent-related discomfort in patients with alfuzosin or tamsulosin versus placebo. METHODS: Relevant RCTs were identified from electronic databases. The proceedings of appropriate meetings were also searched. Seven articles on the basis of RCTs were included in our meta-analysis. Using pairwise and network meta-analyses, comparisons were made by qualitative and quantitative syntheses. Evaluation was performed with the Ureteric Stent Symptoms Questionnaire to assess the urinary symptom score (USS) and body pain score (BPS). RESULTS: One of the seven RCTs was at moderate risk of bias for all quality criteria; two studies had a high risk of bias. In the network meta-analysis, both alfuzosin (mean difference [MD];-4.85, 95 % confidence interval [CI];-8.53--1.33) and tamsulosin (MD;-8.84, 95 % CI;-13.08--4.31) showed lower scores compared with placebo; however, the difference in USS for alfuzosin versus tamsulosin was not significant (MD; 3.99, 95 % CI;-1.23-9.04). Alfuzosin (MD;-5.71, 95 % CI;-11.32--0.52) and tamsulosin (MD;-7.77, 95 % CI;-13.68--2.14) showed lower scores for BPS compared with placebo; however, the MD between alfuzosin and tamsulosin was not significant (MD; 2.12, 95 % CI;-4.62-8.72). In the rank-probability test, tamsulosin ranked highest for USS and BPS, and alfuzosin was second. CONCLUSION: The alpha-blockers significantly decreased USS and BPS in comparison with placebo. Tamsulosin might be more effective than alfuzosin.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and adverse effects of alfuzosin for the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). METHODS: The included studies were randomized controlled trials involving men with symptomatic BPH treated with alfuzosin versus placebo or active control for at least 4 weeks. RESULTS: The search strategy identified 11 trials involving 3901 men with a mean age of 64 years. Eight trials were placebo-controlled studies, two were alfuzosin versus alternative alpha-blockers, and one was alfuzosin versus finasteride and combination alfuzosin/finasteride therapy. The study durations were short term, 4 to 26 weeks. The mean baseline symptom scores and peak urinary flow rates were indicative of moderate BPH. Alfuzosin (7.5 or 10 mg) improved lower urinary tract symptoms assessed by the International Prostate Symptom Score compared with placebo. The mean absolute change from baseline was -5.4 points for alfuzosin compared with -3.6 points for placebo, a weighted mean difference of 1.8 points (three studies). Alfuzosin increased the peak urinary flow more than did placebo, although the improvement varied across the eight studies. Symptom and flow improvements were generally comparable to that with combination therapy and with other alpha1-blockers. Alfuzosin had good short-term tolerability, and the numbers of study withdrawals were comparable to those with placebo and controls. Efficacy and short-term safety were similar across the various (immediate-release, sustained, and once-daily) formulations. CONCLUSIONS: The results from short-term studies have indicated that alfuzosin improves lower urinary tract symptoms and urinary flow more than does placebo and is generally well tolerated in men with symptomatic BPH. Long-term efficacy and safety studies in combination with a 5-alpha-reductase inhibitor should be initiated.
Two simple and validated chromatographic studies were performed for simultaneous estimation of sildenafil citrate (SIL) and alfuzosin hydrochloride (ALF) in bulk, pharmaceuticals, and in the presence of their main degradation products. Two systems of mobile phase were applied isocratically for their first chromatographic separation using conventional and micellar mobile phases. Methanol, acetonitrile, and 0.02 M potassium dihydrogen phosphate (43:14:43 v/v; pH 4.66) were pumped at 1.3 mL/min in method I. Meanwhile, method II was based on less hazardous micellar mobile phase of nonionic surfactant (0.005 M Brij-35 in water; pH 2.5 adjusted with 0.1% orthophosphoric acid) with a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Both methods were carried on C18 column and coupled with UV detection at 225 nm at ambient temperature. The first method was rectilinear over the concentration range of 5-62.5 mug/mL for both drugs, while the second method showed higher linearity ranges of 0.5-40, 2.5-62.5 mug/mL for ALF and (SIL), respectively. The developed methods successfully enabled the quantification of the studied binary mixture in their tablets dosage form and evaluation their stabilities. Validation of the proposed methods according to ICH guidelines and system suitability were ascertained. Moreover, the applied methods were evaluated and compared from the perspective of green analytical chemistry, employing the National Environmental Methods Index, analytical Eco-Scale score, and Green Analytical Procedure Index, as three assessment tools.
The current work aimed to develop low-density gastroretentive sponges loaded with alfuzosin HCl (ALF) to sustain the rate of drug release, improve its oral bioavailability and deliver it to the main site of absorption. Sponges were developed, according to a 2(3) full factorial design, by compression of the lyophilized ALF-loaded hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC) or chitosan (CH) solutions. The influences of the polymer type, grade and concentration on the appearance, topography, porosity, density, in vitro ALF release, floating behavior, swelling, erosion, and mucoadhesive potential of the developed sponges were explored. Based on the desirability value, the best achieved system was selected. The gastroretentive potential of this system was evaluated in healthy male volunteers via MRI. Soft and flexible sponges were developed. They were characterized with interconnecting pores and channels and had excellent floating properties with respect to floating lag time and duration. Compared to HPMC-based sponges, CH-based ones exhibited higher porosity, larger pore diameters, lower bulk densities, higher drug release rates, larger swelling ratios, faster erosion rates and better mucoadhesive properties. MRI of magnetite-loaded best-achieved CH-based system (F8) ascertained the development of a promising gastroretentive system; exhibiting a gastric residence period of at least 5 h.
BACKGROUND: Extended-release (ER) alfuzosin hydrochloride is the most recently approved alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonist (AARA) for the management of symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Although new to the United States, alfuzosin has been available in immediate-release (IR) and sustained-release (SR) formulations in other countries for many years. OBJECTIVE: This article reviews data on the pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, tolerability, drug-interaction potential, and dosing of alfuzosin ER. METHODS: Relevant articles were identified through MEDLINE, EMBASE, and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts searches of the English-language literature published between 1986 and September 2003 using the terms alfuzosin, alpha-adrenergic receptor antagonists, and quinazolines. The reference lists of identified articles were also searched, as were abstracts from annual meetings of the American Urological Association for the past 5 years. Data regarding the ER formulation were emphasized, and data involving the IR/SR formulations were included only when data for the ER formulation were not available or as needed for clarification. RESULTS: In comparative trials with its IR counterpart (alfuzosin ER 10 mg QD vs alfuzosin IR 2.5 mg TID), alfuzosin ER was an equieffective once-daily AARA. No comparative trials of alfuzosin ER with the SR (BID) formulation or with other AARAs were identified. Food has been found to exert a clinically important effect by enhancing the bioavailability of the ER formulation; thus, the drug should be taken on a full stomach. Hepatic impairment has been found to significantly delay the elimination of alfuzosin IF, which constitutes a contraindication to use of the ER formulation. Renal impairment does not appear to exert clinically important effects on the pharmacokinetics of alfuzosin ER. Adverse events with alfuzosin ER include dizziness, upper respiratory tract infection, headache, and fatigue, with hypotension and syncope reported rarely. Concurrent use of inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 3A4 isozyme (eg, ketoconazole, diltiazem, cimetidine, atenolol) can significantly elevate serum concentrations of alfuzosin and enhance its pharmacodynamic effects. CONCLUSIONS: In the absence of direct head-to-head comparative trials, the role of alfuzosin ER in the management of symptomatic BPH relative to that of other AARAs is unclear. Because the effect size (drug response minus placebo response) of alfuzosin ER is comparable to that of other AARAs, marked differences in efficacy are unlikely. Extrapolating from direct comparative trials between these agents and alfuzosin IR/SR, alfuzosin ER would be expected to have better cardiovascular tolerability (eg, in terms of dizziness and orthostasis) than prazosin, terazosin, or doxazosin, and to have similar tolerability to tamsulosin. However, the existing data do not suggest that alfuzosin ER is likely to represent a significant advance over tamsulosin.
Alfuzosin, a quinazoline derivative, is a selective and competitive alpha(1)-adrenoceptor antagonist. It distributes preferentially in the prostate, compared with plasma, and decreases the sympathetically controlled tone of prostatic smooth muscle. As a result lower urinary tract symptoms suggestive of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) are improved. The once-daily formulation of alfuzosin contains inactive barrier layers which have been added to the planar surfaces of compressed tablets. Drug release is sustained over 20 hours with a near constant dissolution rate between 2 and 12 hours. Mean values for area under the plasma concentration-time curve over 24 hours (AUC(24)) were similar after administration of prolonged-release alfuzosin 10mg once daily and immediate-release alfuzosin 2.5mg three times daily. Likewise, similar AUC(24) values were reported when prolonged-release alfuzosin 10mg once daily and sustained-release alfuzosin 5mg twice daily were compared. These data suggest that these alfuzosin regimens provide similar average systemic exposure. Data from short- (3 months) and long-term (up to 12 months) clinical trials show that the prolonged-release formulation of alfuzosin controls the symptoms associated with BPH as effectively as immediate-release alfuzosin 2.5mg three times daily and clinical improvement is maintained for up to 1 year. Improvements in International Prostate Symptom Score, maximum urinary flow rate and quality-of-life index were improved to a similar extent in patients treated with immediate- or prolonged-release alfuzosin and improvements were statistically significant compared with placebo. Prolonged-release alfuzosin 10mg is well tolerated and the overall incidence of adverse events is similar to that seen with placebo. The once-daily formulation of alfuzosin 10mg caused fewer vasodilatory adverse events than immediate-release alfuzosin 2.5mg three times daily and caused only slight decreases in systolic and diastolic blood pressure which were not clinically significant and did not differ significantly from those with placebo. No dosage titration is required. The incidence of ejaculatory disorders was <1%. CONCLUSION: Prolonged-release alfuzosin 10mg once daily controls symptoms associated with BPH throughout a 24-hour dosage interval as effectively as immediate-release alfuzosin 2.5mg three times daily but with fewer vasodilatory adverse events. A nonblind extension study showed that clinical benefits were maintained for up to 1 year and the once-daily 10mg formulation continued to be well tolerated, particularly in terms of cardiovascular effects and sexual function. Thus, for the medical management of men with BPH, prolonged-release alfuzosin 10mg is an effective, well tolerated and convenient treatment option.
In an open dose ranging study with random inclusion of placebo, alfuzosin (alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist) 1, 2.5 and 5 mg was administered to 6 healthy volunteers, 3 of the volunteers received 10 mg alfuzosin. Supine systolic blood (SBP) pressure was not reduced by alfuzosin although significant increases occurred in supine heart rate (HR) after 2.5 and 5 mg. In the standing position, SBP was reduced at 2 and 4 h with 5 mg alfuzosin; significant increases in HR occurred following 1, 2.5 and 5 mg at 2, 4, 6 and 8 h after administration. Exercise SBP was not reduced; diastolic blood pressure was significantly reduced at 4 and 6 h with 5 mg alfuzosin. More marked effects were seen in the 3 subjects who received 10 mg alfuzosin. After 1 and 5 mg, tmax ranged from 1-2 h; Cmax (4.1 to 20.8 ng.ml-1; AUC (0-24) 20 to 132 ng.ml-1.h (1 and 5 mg respectively) increased progressively with dose indicating dose dependent kinetics; no significant changes occurred in the visual analogue scale for sedation. A comparison of alfuzosin 5 mg, prazosin 1 mg and placebo each administered for 4 days, indicated that alfuzosin did not significantly reduce standing SBP on either Day 1 or Day 4; prazosin reduced SBP at 2 and 4 h on Day 1 and 6 h on Day 4 compared to placebo. Standing HR was increased by alfuzosin at 2 h on Day 1 and Day 4; increases occurred with prazosin at 2, 4, 6 and 8 h on Day 1 and 6 h on Day 4.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
PURPOSE: To compare the effects of alfuzosin hydrochloride and tamsulosin hydrochloride on choroidal thickness (CT) and pupil diameter (PD) sizes in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Sixty-three men patients with newly diagnosis of benign prostatic hyperplasia were randomly assigned to either alfuzosin hydrochloride or to tamsulosin hydrochloride groups in this prospective, randomized, parallel-group clinical trial. Enhanced depth imaging spectral-domain optical coherence tomography, pupillography were obtained at baseline, 1st and 3rd month, and choroidal thicknesses and pupil diameter sizes were compared between the two groups. RESULTS: The mean subfoveal choroidal thickness (SCT), nasal choroidal thickness (NCT), and temporal choroidal thickness (TCT) in AH group were 275.70 +/- 32.14 mum, 269.7 +/- 33.54 mum and 270.71 +/- 33.52 mum at baseline, respectively; and they were 275.46 +/- 31.6 mum, 268.73 +/- 33.08 mum and 270.73 +/- 33.05 mum at baseline in TH group, respectively (P = 0.97, P = 0.84, P = 0.99, for SCT, NCT, and TCT, respectively). The mean SCT, NCT, and TCT after 3 months were 278.93 +/- 34.58 mum, 272.62 +/- 34.17 mum, and 273.6 +/- 34.17 mum in AH group, respectively; and they were 274.36 +/- 31.91 mum, 264.70 +/- 33.59 mum, and 267.72 +/- 33.6 mum in TH group, respectively (P = 0.6, P = 0.37, P = 0.43, for SCT, NCT, and TCT, respectively). The mean scotopic pupil diameter (SPD), mesopic pupil diameter (MPD), and photopic pupil diameter (PPD) sizes in AH group were 6.46 +/- 0.84 mm, 5.07 +/- 0.72 mm and 3.66 +/- 0.46 mm at baseline, respectively; and they were 6.44 +/- 1.14 mm, 5.01 +/- 0.79 mm and 3.62 +/- 0.53 mm at baseline in TH group, respectively (P = 0.89, P = 0.74, P = 0.68, for SPD, MPD, and PPD, respectively). The mean SPD, MPD, and PPD sizes after 3 months were 5.96 +/- 0.76 mm, 4.67 +/- 0.74 mm, and 3.15 +/- 0.47 mm in AH group, respectively; and they were 6.42 +/- 0.89 mm, 5.05 +/- 0.75 mm, and 3.55 +/- 0.53 mm in TH group respectively (P = < 0.001, P = < 0.001, P = < 0.001, for SPD, MPD, and PPD, respectively). CONCLUSION: The repeated measure of ANOVA for the mean CT values within AH group showed statistically significant increases in baseline CTs, although these differences did not reach statistical significance between 2 groups at follow-ups. We found significant different outcomes for PD sizes during study in the groups. The mean outcome in this study is that using alphaAR antagonists have potential effects on CT and PD sizes. Abbreviations and Acronyms: AH: alfuzosin hyrdrochloride; ANOVA: analyses of variance; AR: adrenergic receptor; BCVA: best-corrected visual acuity; BPH: benign prostatic hyperplasia; CT: choroidal thickness; EDI-OCT: enhanced depth imaging spectral-domain optical coherence tomography; IFIS: intraoperative floppy iris syndrome; MPD: mesopic pupil diameter; NCT: nasal choroidal thickness; PD: pupil diameter; PPD: photopic pupil diameter; SCT: subfoveal choroidal thickness; SPD: scotopic pupil diameter; TCT: temporal choroidal thickness; TH: tamsulosin hydrochloride.
Alfuzosin hydrochloride (AZH) is co-formulated with solifenacin succinate (SOS) in Solitral(R) capsules for treating prostate hyperplasia in patients with overactive bladder syndrome. Herein and for the first time, an ultrasensitive synchronous spectrofluorimetric approach coupled with first-order derivative signal processing was designed for simultaneous determination of AZH and SOS in their pure forms, newly-released pharmaceutical capsules, and human biological fluids. AZH and SOS showed their conventional emission spectra in bi-distilled water at 382 nm and 294 nm after excitation at 325 nm and 250 nm, respectively. The native fluorescence intensities of AZH and SOS were greatly enhanced through micellar formation using sodium dodecyl sulfate surfactant (2%). The proposed approach included the use of synchronous mode at Deltalambda of 60 nm where the overlap between the studied analytes' fluorescence spectra wasn't completely resolved. The complete resolution was achieved by derivatization of the synchronized spectra to the first-order yielding two zero-crossing points which allowed the determination of AZH and SOS simultaneously without interference at 408 nm and 321 nm, respectively. Under optimum experimental circumstances, good linearities were accomplished over the concentration ranges of (1-24) ng/mL and (4-250) ng/mL with LOD of 0.26 ng/mL and 1.31 ng/mL for AZH and SOS, respectively. The proposed approach was validated successfully according to guidelines adopted by the ICH and compared statistically with the reported LC method with no discernible differences concerning accuracy or precision at p = 0.05. Successful application of the proposed approach achieved with excellent recovery percentages for analysis of the studied analytes in different matrices (pharmaceutical capsules and biological fluids) confirms its suitability for use in QC laboratories and other bioanalytical applications. The proposed approach's greenness was evaluated using two tools namely; penalty points scoring system and green analytical procedure index (GAPI) divulging excellent greenness of this approach relative to the reported LC method. The proposed approach relied chiefly on water as the cheapest and greenest solvent.
Drug-induced hepatic injury is a potential complication of virtually all drugs because the liver is central to the metabolic disposition of almost all drugs, although precise mechanisms often are unknown. We report a case of severe acute mixed hepatitis (cholestatic and hepatocellular), probably induced by alfuzosin. This event has not been reported previously (MEDLINE 1990, March 1999). Viral causes, autoimmune hepatitis and biliary tree obstruction were excluded. After discontinuation of the drug, liver function test results returned to normal.
Solid contact ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) have witnessed versatile applications in pharmaceutical and biological analysis however they suffer from some limitations. Besides formation of water layer, the doped ion exchanger in sensing membrane fails to distinguish between two ionic species having relatively similar lipophilicity and carrying same charges. Those shortcomings practically hampered the simultaneous determination of alfuzosin and solifenacin in their combined pharmaceutical combination. Hence, this paper was directed to develop two carbon paste electrodes allowing their simultaneous determination based on molecular imprinted polymers (MIPs). Efforts were firstly directed to stabilize the potential signals through synthesis of polyaniline (PANI) nanoparticles with 26 nm particle size as confirmed by means of UV-spectrophotometry, Zeta-sizer and transmission electron microscope. This was followed by its doping at electrode/ion selective membrane interface leading to diminished potential drift, better Nernstian slopes and lower limit of detections. Secondly, MIPs for each drug were prepared by precipitation polymerization technique and fully characterized by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, field-emission scanning electron microscope, differential scanning calorimetry, surface area analysis and rebinding studies. The prepared MIPs were then incorporated in membrane cocktail and doped over PANI layer. The graved cavities inside MIPs act as synthetic host-tailored receptors that could recognize and bind specifically to each drug. The obtained Nernstian slopes were 57.16 mV/decade for alfuzosin MIP-based sensor and 58.17 mV/decade for solifenacin MIP-based one with respective LOD values of 7.9 x 10(-7) M and 8.9 x 10(-8) M. Moreover, no interference was ostensibly detected from dosage form excipients, plasma constituents or degradation products/official impurities allowing quantification of alfuzosin and solifenacin in their combined capsule, spiked human plasma and in presence of their degradation products.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Some patients with defecatory disorders (DD) have high anal pressures that may impede rectal evacuation. Alpha-1 adrenoreceptors mediate as much as 50% of anal resting pressure in humans. We performed a randomized, placebo-controlled study of the effects of alfuzosin, an alpha1-adrenergic receptor antagonist, on anal pressures alone in healthy women and also on bowel symptoms in women with DD. METHODS: In a double-blind study performed from March 2013 through March 2017, anal pressures were evaluated before and after 36 women with DD (constipation for at least 1 year) and 36 healthy women (controls) were randomly assigned (1:1) to groups given oral alfuzosin (2.5 mg immediate release) or placebo. Thereafter, patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to groups given oral alfuzosin (10 mg extended release) or placebo each day for 2 weeks. Participants kept daily diaries of bowel symptoms for 2 weeks before (baseline) and during administration of the test articles (treatment). Weekly questionnaires recorded the overall severity of constipation symptoms, bloating, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting; overall satisfaction with treatment of constipation was evaluated at weeks 2 and 4. The primary endpoint was the change in the number of spontaneous (SBMs) and complete SBMs (CSBMs) between the treatment and baseline periods. We evaluated relationships between stool form, passage, and complete evacuation. RESULTS: Alfuzosin reduced anal resting pressure by 32 +/- 3 mm Hg versus 16 +/- 3 mm Hg for placebo (P = .0001) and anal pressure during evacuation by 26 +/- 3 mm Hg versus 16 +/- 3 mm Hg for placebo, (P = .03). However, alfuzosin did not significantly increase the rectoanal gradient, SBMs or CSBMs compared with placebo. Both formulations of alfuzosin were well tolerated. Hard stools and the ease of passage during defecation accounted for 72% and 76% of the variance in the satisfaction after defecation, respectively, during baseline and treatment periods. CONCLUSIONS: In a randomized trial, alfuzosin reduced anal pressure at rest and during simulated evacuation in healthy and constipated women, compared with placebo, but did not improve bowel symptoms in constipated women. This could be because the drug does not improve stool form or dyssynergia, which also contribute to DD. ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT 01834729.
