The first evidence of the existence of renin was presented over 100 years ago. However, the importance of renin and the renin-angiotensin system in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease was only fully realized in the 1970s. It was another 20 years before the first inhibitors of renin were available for clinical research. Here, we describe the discovery and development of aliskiren, an orally active renin inhibitor, which became the first drug in its class to receive regulatory approval. In 2007, it was approved for the treatment of hypertension by the US Food and Drug Administration and the European Medicines Agency.
Aliskiren gained FDA approval for the treatment of hypertension in 2007. It is the first approved pharmaceutical to manage hypertension by direct renin inhibition. With the introduction of novel drugs and mechanisms of action comes the challenge of monitoring for new unreported adverse events. The side effect profile for aliskiren has not yet been fully described. We describe the first apparent report of aliskiren-induced QT prolongation resulting in torsades de pointes.
A detailed account is given describing the approaches used toward the total synthesis of aliskiren. In particular, ring-closing metathesis with the Hoveyda-Grubbs catalyst accelerates the formation of a 9-membered lactone from an (R)-ester. The diastereomeric (S)-ester leads to the formation of dimeric dilactones, which were characterized by X-ray analysis and chemical conversions.
A rapid procedure based on direct extraction and HILIC separation of aliskiren (ALI) degradation product - 3-amino-2,2-dimethylpropanamide (ADPA) with fluorescence detection has been developed. The formation of ADPA from ALI under different conditions was studied. The evaluation of HILIC method robustness was performed using multifactorial experiments with fixed factors (one-level Plackett-Burman design). XBridge HILIC column with isocratic elution using mobile phase 10 mM K(2)HPO(4) pH 7.2-acetonitrile (26:74; v/v) was employed. Fluorescence detection after post column derivatization using o-phthaldialdehyde (OPA) reagent was performed at excitation and emission wavelength of 345 nm and 450 nm, respectively. The reported method has an advantage of a simple sample pre-treatment and quick and very sensitive measurement. The method was successfully applied for the analysis of commercially available ALI samples.
BACKGROUND: Among patients with chronic heart failure, angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors reduce mortality and hospitalization, but the role of a renin inhibitor in such patients is unknown. We compared the ACE inhibitor enalapril with the renin inhibitor aliskiren (to test superiority or at least noninferiority) and with the combination of the two treatments (to test superiority) in patients with heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction. METHODS: After a single-blind run-in period, we assigned patients, in a double-blind fashion, to one of three groups: 2336 patients were assigned to receive enalapril at a dose of 5 or 10 mg twice daily, 2340 to receive aliskiren at a dose of 300 mg once daily, and 2340 to receive both treatments (combination therapy). The primary composite outcome was death from cardiovascular causes or hospitalization for heart failure. RESULTS: After a median follow-up of 36.6 months, the primary outcome occurred in 770 patients (32.9%) in the combination-therapy group and in 808 (34.6%) in the enalapril group (hazard ratio, 0.93; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.85 to 1.03). The primary outcome occurred in 791 patients (33.8%) in the aliskiren group (hazard ratio vs. enalapril, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.90 to 1.10); the prespecified test for noninferiority was not met. There was a higher risk of hypotensive symptoms in the combination-therapy group than in the enalapril group (13.8% vs. 11.0%, P=0.005), as well as higher risks of an elevated serum creatinine level (4.1% vs. 2.7%, P=0.009) and an elevated potassium level (17.1% vs. 12.5%, P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with chronic heart failure, the addition of aliskiren to enalapril led to more adverse events without an increase in benefit. Noninferiority was not shown for aliskiren as compared with enalapril. (Funded by Novartis; ATMOSPHERE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00853658.).
We report a "macrocycle route" toward aliskiren, a drug presently marketed for the treatment of hypertension, using a highly stereocontrolled approach starting from a common "isopropyl chiron". Highlights of the synthesis include a challenging RCM reaction to produce a nine-membered unsaturated lactone, a highly stereoselective catalytic Du Bois aziridination, and a regio- and diastereoselective aziridine ring-opening to a vicinal amino alcohol.
Aliskiren is the first member of a novel class of antihypertensive agents, the renin inhibitors, that has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of hypertension. This review discusses its potential differences compared with existing renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers, focusing also on the inactive precursor of renin, prorenin, and the recently discovered (pro)renin receptor. The review summarizes the findings from all clinical trials with aliskiren published so far, and provides an overview of the safety and tolerability of the new drug.
Health care providers managing hypertension (HTN) have a large selection of pharmacologic agents to choose from, including several different classes of drugs and many similar drugs within each class. Antagonism of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system has been shown to be very effective for HTN, especially in patients with cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and heart failure. Within this group, there have been 2 new agents recently introduced to the US market and approved by the Food and Drug Administration. It is important for the HTN specialist to be familiar with the merits of these 2 drugs: the angiotensin receptor blocker Edarbi (azilsartan) and the renin inhibitor Tekturna (aliskiren). Additionally, there have been several new, fixed-dose combination antihypertensives introduced to the market since 2006 that use a renin-angiotensin-aldosterone antagonist. Seven of these combine 2 drugs together in a single pill: Edarbyclor (azilsartan/chlorthalidone), Exforge (amlodipine/valsartan), Azor (olmesartan/amlodipine), Twynsta (amlodipine/telmisartan), Tekturna HCT [aliskiren/hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ)], Valturna (aliskiren/valsartan), Tekamlo (aliskiren/amlodipine). Three triple-drug combination medications have also been introduced recently: Exforge HCT (amlodipine/valsartan/HCTZ), Tribenzor (olmesartan/amlodipine/HCTZ), and Amturnide (aliskiren/amlodipine/hydrocholorothiazide). This review will summarize the trial data and important pharmacologic merits of these 2 new renin-angiotensin-aldosterone antagonists and the advantages of initiating treatment with one of the new fixed-dose, combination drugs approved over the last 5 years.
A simple and sensitive HPLC method has been developed for the determination of aliskiren in human plasma through derivatization with 1-naphthyl isocyanate. The separation was achieved on a C18 column using a mobile phase consisting of acetonitrile/water/phosphoric acid (45:55:0.01, v/v/v, pH 3.2) in a flow rate of 1mL/min with UV detection at 230nm. Caffeine was used as an internal standard. The factors influencing the derivatization reaction yields were carefully studied and optimized. The method was linear over the concentration range of 5-400ng/mL with a detection limit of 0.5ng/mL and a limit of quantification of 1.0ng/mL. The relative standard deviation was less than 4.2% for both intra-day assay and inter-day assay results. No interferences from endogenous compounds were encountered. The percentage recovery was in the range 97.1-98.6%. The method is suitable for routine therapeutic drug monitoring and for pharmacokinetic studies.
Bartter syndrome is traditionally treated with large doses of oral potassium with or without suppression of the renin-angiotensin system. Since plasma renin activity is invariably elevated in Bartter syndrome, the availability of the direct renin inhibitor aliskiren should lead to the ability to maintain potassium levels without utilizing large doses of oral potassium. This case report is, to my knowledge, the first to show the efficacy of a renin receptor blocker in Bartter syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Aliskiren might be beneficial for heart failure. However, the results of various studies are controversial. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to explore the efficacy of aliskiren supplementation for heart failure. METHODS: PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, EBSCO, and the Cochrane Library databases were systematically searched. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) assessing the efficacy of aliskiren for heart failure were included. Two investigators independently searched for articles, extracted data, and assessed the quality of included studies. The meta-analysis was performed using the random-effect model. RESULTS: Five RCTs comprising 1973 patients were included in the meta-analysis. Compared with control interventions in heart failure, aliskiren supplementation was found to significantly reduce NT-proBNP levels (standardized mean difference [SMD] = -0.12; 95% CI = -0.21 to -0.03 pg/ml; p = 0.008) and plasma renin activity (SMD = -0.66; 95% CI = -0.89 to -0.44 ng/ml.h; p < 0.00001) while increasing plasma renin concentration (SMD = 0.52; 95% CI = 0.30-0.75 ng/l; p < 0.00001); however, it demonstrated no significant influence on BNP levels (SMD = -0.08; 95% CI = -0.31-0.15 pg/ml; p = 0.49), mortality (RR = 0.97; 95% CI = 0.79-1.20; p = 0.79), aldosterone levels (SMD = -0.09; 95% CI = -0.32-0.14 pmol/l; p = 0.44), adverse events (RR = 3.03; 95% CI = 0.18-49.51; p = 0.44), and serious adverse events (RR = 1.34; 95% CI = 0.54-3.33; p = 0.53). CONCLUSION: Aliskiren supplementation was found to significantly decrease NT-proBNP levels and plasma renin activity and to improve plasma renin concentration in the setting of heart failure.
A formal total synthesis of the potent renin inhibitor aliskiren is disclosed exploiting an alternative coupling strategy recently developed by this laboratory for the preparation of the hydroxyethylene isostere-based class of protease inhibitors. The thioester derivative of the amino acid representing the C5-C9 fragment of the aliskiren carbon skeleton underwent a carbon chain extension via a SmI2-promoted radical addition to n-butyl acrylate. Introduction of the C3-isopropyl group with the correct relative configuration was accomplished via stereoselective reduction of the obtained ketone with concomitant lactonization, followed by an aldol reaction with acetone. Further functional group and protecting group manipulation culminated in a formal total synthesis of aliskiren in 10 steps from the corresponding fully protected non-natural amino acid.
The role of the direct renin inhibitor aliskiren in hypertension is not fully established and use of aliskiren in diabetic patients is especially controversial. A systematic review investigating both short-term diastolic and systolic blood pressure (DBP and SBP) reduction and long-term cardiovascular outcomes has not been conducted. Therefore, we aimed to fill this gap by investigating BP reduction, major cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality of aliskiren compared to other antihypertensive therapy. We searched PubMed and Embase databases for relevant randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Using a random-effects model, weighted mean difference (WMD) and relative risk (WRR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) were used to measure the effect of aliskiren therapy in the management of hypertension and major cardiovascular outcomes. Thirty seven RCTs with a total of 35,916 patients were included. Aliskiren induced slightly greater DBP and SBP reductions than other antihypertensive agents (WMD -0.77 mmHg, 95% CI [-2.01;0.46 mmHg] and WMD -1.14 mmHg, 95% CI [-2.78;0.50 mmHg], respectively). Aliskiren did not reduce total mortality or cardiovascular death. In patients with diabetes, aliskiren add-on therapy may have the potential to increase total mortality and cardiovascular death (WRR 1.06, 95% CI [0.88;1.28] and WRR 1.09, 95% CI [0.94;1.24], respectively). Despite superior BP-reducing effect, aliskiren is not recommended as first-line treatment in hypertensive patients as it does not reduce mortality and major cardiovascular outcomes. Dual renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibition with aliskiren should be avoided in diabetic patients, while the use of aliskiren monotherapy remains to be investigated.
INTRODUCTION: Efficacy of aliskiren combination therapy with other antihypertensive has been evaluated in the treatment of patients with hypertension in recent systematic reviews. However, most previous reviews only focused on one single health outcome or one setting, none of them made a full summary that assessed the impact of aliskiren combination treatment comprehensively. As such, this umbrella review based on systematic reviews and meta-analyses is aimed to synthesise the evidences on efficacy, safety and tolerability of aliskiren-based therapy for hypertension and related comorbid patients. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: A comprehensive search of PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, CNKI published from inception to August 2020 will be conducted. The selected articles are systematic reviews which evaluated efficacy, safety and tolerability of aliskiren combination therapy. Two reviewers will screen eligible articles, extract data and evaluate quality independently. Any disputes will be resolved by discussion or the arbitration of a third person. The quality of reporting evidence will be assessed using the Assessment of Multiple Systematic Reviews V.2 tool tool. We will take a mixed-methods approach to synthesising the review literatures, reporting summary of findings tables and iteratively mapping the results. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval is not required for the study, as we would only collect data from available published materials. This umbrella review will be also submitted to a peer-reviewed journal for publication after completion. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42020192131.
Aliskiren is a novel antihypertensive agent and the first direct renin inhibitor (DRI) in clinical use. Several clinical trials have compared DRI with angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) in the management of essential hypertension. However, systematic comparison of efficacy and safety between DRIs and ARBs is still lacking. We reviewed randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing aliskiren with ARBs for net reduction of blood pressure from baseline, achieved rate of control, and incidences of common and serious adverse events. Weighted mean differences (WMD) and relative risk (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated for continuous and dichotomous data, respectively. Seven RCTs with 5488 patients were included in this meta-analysis. We compared the efficacy of aliskiren and ARBs in reducing systolic blood pressure (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP). No differences were found between the two groups. Aliskiren combined with ARBs was superior to aliskiren monotherapy at the maximum recommended dose on SBP and DBP reduction. (WMD -4.80, 95% CI -6.22-- -3.39, p < 0.0001; WMD -2.96, 95% CI -4.63-- -1.28, p = 0.0001; respectively). Similar results were found with aliskiren combined with ARBs versus ARB monotherapy (WMD -4.43, 95% CI -5.91-- -2.96, p < 0.0001; WMD -2.40; 95% CI -3.41-- -1.39, p < 0.0001; respectively). No differences were found in adverse events between the aliskiren and ARB groups. Similar results were found with aliskiren and ARB combination therapy and its respective monotherapy. We conclude that aliskiren's BP-lowering capabilities were comparable to those of ARBs. Aliskiren and ARB combination therapy provided more effective BP reduction than each respective monotherapy without increasing adverse events.
