In a large observational general practice study (the Standardized Study with Almotriptan in Early Treatment of Migraine [START]), 12.5 mg almotriptan administered within 1 h of pain onset and when pain was mild significantly improved pain-related outcomes, compared with later treatment or when pain was more severe. Migraine triggers at baseline and during treatment were recorded, and it was examined whether trigger factors could affect almotriptan-induced headache improvement. More than 400 patients were enrolled, and 1174 attacks were assessed. At baseline, patients reported a mean of 2.6 types of triggers related to the start of their previous migraine attacks. During the trial, a mean of 1.5 trigger factors for each attack was recorded. The most frequent trigger during the study was stress (37% of migraine attacks), with poor sleep (34%), fatigue (32%) and menses (19%) also being widely reported. Stress and fatigue and/or poor sleep were the most frequent trigger combinations. Early treatment with almotriptan improved clinical outcomes, regardless of the trigger factors involved. Similar results were observed for nonearly administration, although this was less efficacious than early intervention. An exception in the nonearly group was that migraines triggered by poor sleep had better responses than attacks in which sleep disorder was not a factor. Almotriptan maintained its efficacy irrespective of trigger factors in migraine patients treated in everyday clinical practice and, as shown in other studies, it was most effective in reducing pain-free rates when administered early, when pain was still mild.
A meta-analysis of pooled individual patient data from four randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials comparing several doses of almotriptan (n = 1,908) with placebo (n = 386) was used to investigate the efficacy, speed of onset and tolerability of almotriptan in the acute treatment of migraine. As early as 30 min after dosing, almotriptan 12.5 mg was significantly more effective than placebo for pain relief (14.9% vs. 8.2%; P < 0.05) and pain free (2.5% vs. 0.7%; P < 0.05). At 2 h, pain-relief rates were 56.0%, 63.7% and 66.0% for almotriptan 6.25, 12.5 and 25 mg, respectively, compared with 35% for placebo; 2-h pain-free rates were 26.7%, 36.4% and 43.4% compared with 13.9% for placebo. All almotriptan dosages were significantly more effective than placebo in eliminating migraine-associated symptoms (P < 0.05) and in achieving sustained pain relief up to 24 h (P < 0.05). The incidence of adverse events after almotriptan 6.25 mg and 12.5 mg was not significantly different from that of placebo. This meta-analysis confirms the findings of individual clinical trials, while demonstrating for the first time, significant pain-free efficacy at 30 min compared with placebo.
BACKGROUND: Traditional end points in clinical trials of migraine therapy, such as 2-hour pain response, may not fully address the outcomes patients consider most important: rapid and sustained freedom from pain over 24 hours, and a low, placebo-like incidence of adverse events. A composite efficacy measure such as the sustained pain-free rate (no pain by 2 hours after dosing, no recurrence, no use of rescue medication from 2 to 24 hours after dosing) may be more appropriate. OBJECTIVE: Clinically relevant differences between almotriptan and other triptans were reviewed in the context of the attributes of acute migraine treatment that patients consider most important. METHODS: This review was based on published reports of open-label and placebo-controlled clinical trials of almotriptan, results of a survey concerning the attributes patients consider most important in a migraine medication, and a published meta-analysis of 53 placebo-controlled clinical trials of triptans involving >24,000 patients. RESULTS: Almotriptan was effective and well tolerated in the placebo-controlled clinical trials; results of the 6- and 12-month open-label studies supported its good tolerability profile. A respective 87% and 86% of respondents to the patient survey indicated that they considered complete freedom from pain and no recurrence among the most important attributes of migraine treatment, both of which are included in the sustained pain-free rate. In the meta-analysis, almotriptan had a favorable efficacy and tolerability profile compared with other triptans, particularly with respect to sustained pain-free rate, which was significantly higher with almotriptan 12.5 mg compared with sumatriptan 100 mg (25.9% vs 20.0%, respectively; P < 0.05). In addition, the placebo-subtracted rate of adverse events was significantly lower with almotriptan compared with sumatriptan (1.8% vs 4.4%, respectively; P < 0.05). Results of a head-to-head placebo-controlled trial of almotriptan 12.5 mg and sumatriptan 100 mg supported the balance of efficacy and tolerability observed for almotriptan in the meta-analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Data from clinical trials suggest that almotriptan is effective and well tolerated in the treatment of acute migraine pain. Based on a sustained pain-free rate that is among the highest and an adverse-event rate that is among the lowest for the triptans, almotriptan represents a therapeutic option for the initial treatment of acute migraine with or without aura.
Almotriptan is a 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist, or triptan, indicated for the acute treatment of migraine. It has been shown to be effective and well tolerated for the treatment of acute migraine in approximately 5000 patients enrolled in short-term placebo- and active-controlled trials and long-term open-label trials. A recent meta-analysis reported that almotriptan has the highest sustained pain-free (SPF) rate and lowest adverse-event (AE) rate of all oral triptans. Sustained pain free is a composite endpoint of pain freedom at 2 h, no recurrence of moderate-to-severe headache and no use of rescue medication from 2 to 24 h after dosing. Patient surveys have indicated that migraine sufferers consider complete pain relief, no recurrence, rapid onset and no side-effects to be the most important attributes of their acute treatment. Composite endpoints such as SPF and SPF with no AEs (SNAE) contain the attributes that migraine sufferers express as being the most important elements of an acute migraine therapy, and their use in future clinical trials should aid in the selection of agents that can offer patients the highest likelihood of consistent treatment success.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of almotriptan 6.25 mg, 12.5 mg, and 25 mg vs placebo for acute migraine treatment in adolescents. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter trial, 866 patients aged 12 to 17 years with a >1 year history of migraine (per International Headache Society criteria) were randomized to treat one migraine headache with almotriptan 6.25 mg, 12.5 mg, 25 mg, or placebo. The primary efficacy endpoint was headache pain relief 2 hours after dosing, adjusted for baseline severity, with absence of nausea, photophobia, and phonophobia 2 hours after dosing as coprimary endpoints. RESULTS: The 2-hour pain-relief rate was significantly higher with almotriptan 25 mg compared with placebo (66.7% vs 55.3%; P = .022). The incidence of nausea, photophobia, and phonophobia at 2 hours (adjusted for baseline pain intensity) for the almotriptan 25 mg and placebo groups was not significantly different. The 2-hour pain-relief rates (unadjusted) were significantly higher with almotriptan 6.25 mg (71.8%), 12.5 mg (72.9%), and 25 mg (66.7%) than with placebo (55.3%; P = .001, P < .001, and P = .028, respectively). Rates for sustained pain relief also were significantly greater with almotriptan 6.25 mg (67.2%), 12.5 mg (66.9%), and 25 mg (64.5%) than with placebo group (52.4%), P < .01 for the 6.25- and 12.5-mg doses and P < .05 for the 25-mg dose. Age group subanalysis demonstrated significantly greater 2-hour pain-relief rates with all 3 doses of almotriptan compared with placebo for patients aged 15 to 17 years, a significantly lower incidence of photophobia and phonophobia at 2 hours with almotriptan 12.5 mg compared with placebo for patients aged 15 to 17 years, and a significantly lower incidence of photophobia with almotriptan 12.5 mg compared with placebo for those aged 12 to 14 years. Almotriptan treatment was well tolerated, with the most common adverse events (>2%) of nausea, dizziness, and somnolence. CONCLUSIONS: Oral almotriptan was efficacious for relieving migraine headache pain in adolescents, with the 12.5-mg dose associated with the most favorable efficacy profile with respect to relieving headache pain and associated symptoms of migraine (photophobia and phonophobia). Almotriptan treatment was well tolerated in this adolescent population.
Early treatment and combining a triptan with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) are thought to improve outcome during migraine attacks, possibly by counteracting the negative influence of cutaneous allodynia. The aim of this multicentre, double-blind pilot study was to evaluate the prevalence of brush allodynia and its relative influence on the efficacy of a triptan-NSAID combination compared with headache intensity at the time of treatment. In a randomized, cross-over design, 112 migraineurs treated two moderate or severe attacks with almotriptan 12.5 mg combined with either aceclofenac 100 mg or placebo. Patients used a 2-cm brush to assess cutaneous allodynia. Allodynia was reported in 34.4% of attacks. The almotriptan-aceclofenac combination was numerically superior to triptan-placebo on 2-24-h sustained pain-free (P = 0.07), 2-h pain-free (P = 0.07) and headache recurrence (P = 0.05) rates, but not on 1-h headache relief. Allodynia numerically reduced treatment success overall, but this effect was not significant for the primary outcome measures. Headache intensity had a significant negative influence on 1-h relief in both attacks (P = 0.0001 and 0.0008, chi(2)) and on 2-24-h sustained pain-free rates in triptan-placebo-treated attacks (P = 0.013). Multivariate logistic regression analysis confirmed that headache intensity at treatment intake, rather than allodynia, significantly influenced most outcome measures, predominantly so in attacks treated with almotriptan and aceclofenac. In the latter, severe compared with moderate headache intensity reduced the likelihood of achieving the primary efficacy end-points [odds ratios (OR) 0.12 and 0.33], whereas allodynia was not a significant explanatory variable (OR 0.76 and 0.65). The results apply to the protocol used here and need to be confirmed in larger studies using quantitative sensory testing.
OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical characteristics of menstrually related migraines (MRMs) and nonmenstrually related migraines (nonMRMs) and to investigate the efficacy of almotriptan in the treatment of these migraine subtypes. DESIGN/METHODS: These are post hoc analyses of data from the AXERT Early miGraine Intervention Study (AEGIS), a multicenter, double-blind, parallel-group trial that evaluated adults with IHS-defined migraine with and without aura. Patients were randomized 1:1 to treat 3 consecutive headaches with almotriptan 12.5 mg or matching placebo at the first sign of headache typical of their usual migraine, at any level of pain intensity but within 1 hour of onset. MRMs were defined as those occurring +/-2 days of the first day of menstrual flow. Post hoc analyses to describe headache characteristics pooled all migraine attacks experienced by patients who reported > or = 1 menses during the study regardless of assigned treatment group. The post hoc efficacy analyses included outcomes of almotriptan treatment compared with placebo treatment for all migraines in patients with a menstrual record. RESULTS: Of the 275 women in the AEGIS intent-to-treat population, 190 (69.1%; 97 almotriptan, 93 placebo; aged 18-54 years) reported > or = 1 menses during the trial. Of the 506 migraines reported by these patients, 95 (18.8%) occurred +/-2 days of the first day of menstrual flow and were defined as MRM. Aura was associated with 11.7% of MRM and 15.0% of nonMRM. Allodynia-associated symptoms were present with 62.8% of MRM and 57.0% of nonMRM. Prior to treatment, 19.1% of MRM were associated with normal functional ability, 68.1% with disturbed functional ability, and 12.8% required bed rest compared with 18.9%, 68.8%, and 12.3%, respectively, of nonMRM. Pretreatment pain intensity was mild in 40.0%, moderate in 47.4%, and severe in 12.6% of MRM compared with 43.6%, 47.2%, and 9.2%, respectively, of nonMRM. Almotriptan treatment efficacy outcomes for MRM vs nonMRM, respectively, were: 2-hour pain relief, 77.4% vs 68.3%; 2-hour pain free, 35.4% vs 35.9%; and sustained pain free, 22.9% vs 23.8%. Almotriptan was similarly effective in relieving migraine-associated symptoms and improving functional disability associated with both MRM and nonMRM. CONCLUSIONS: Prior to treatment, the presence of migraine-associated characteristics including aura, allodynia-associated symptoms, photophobia, phonophobia, and nausea were similar for both MRM and nonMRM attacks. The pretreatment levels of pain intensity and functional disability were likewise similar across the migraine subtypes. Almotriptan was equally effective in the treatment of both MRM and nonMRM attacks and was associated with an adverse event profile that was similar to placebo treatment.
This study was designed to assess and compare the pharmacokinetics and tolerability of almotriptan, a 5-HT1B/1D agonist used to treat migraine attacks, in adolescents and adults. Healthy adolescents (n = 18) and adults (n = 18) received a single 12.5-mg dose of almotriptan after fasting overnight. Plasma and urinary almotriptan concentrations were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography. Pharmacokinetic parameters of almotriptan were determined by non-compartment analysis. The 90% confidence interval (CI) approach was employed to assess age effects. Mean Cmax, tmax, area under the curve (AUC0- infinity ), half-life, and percentage excreted in urine were nearly identical for the two populations. Mean oral (CLPO) and renal (CLR) clearances were similar between the age groups; however, weight-corrected CLPO was approximately 32% higher (90% CI 16, 51) in adolescents compared with adults. The higher weight-corrected CLPO appeared to offset increases in exposure expected on the basis of lower body weight in adolescents. The findings were the same when a subgroup (n = 9) of 12-14-year-old children was compared with adults. The type, incidence and severity of adverse events were similar between the two age groups and were consistent with those reported previously during adult clinical trials. Based on these pharmacokinetic and tolerability findings, no dose adjustment for almotriptan would be required when treating patients as young as 12 years old.
The objective of the study was to compare the efficacy and safety of frovatriptan and almotriptan in women with menstrually related migraine (IHS Classification of Headache disorders) enrolled in a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, cross-over study. Patients received frovatriptan 2.5 mg or almotriptan 12.5 mg in a randomized sequence: after treating 3 episodes of migraine in no more than 3 months with the first treatment, the patient was switched to the other treatment. 67 of the 96 female patients of the intention-to-treat population of the main study had regular menstrual cycles and were thus included in this subgroup analysis. 77 migraine attacks classified as related to menses were treated with frovatriptan and 78 with almotriptan. Rate of pain relief at 2 and 4 h was 36 and 53 % for frovatriptan and 41 and 50 % for almotriptan (p = NS between treatments). Rate of pain free at 2 and 4 h was 19 and 47 % with frovatriptan and 29 and 54 % for almotriptan (p = NS). At 24 h, 62 % of frovatriptan-treated and 67 % of almotriptan-treated patients had pain relief, while 60 versus 67 % were pain free (p = NS). Recurrence at 24 h was significantly (p < 0.05) lower with frovatriptan (8 vs. 21 % almotriptan). This was the case also at 48 h (9 vs. 24 %, p < 0.05). Frovatriptan was as effective as almotriptan in the immediate treatment of menstrually related migraine attacks. However, it showed a more favorable sustained effect, as shown by a lower rate of migraine recurrence.
Almotriptan is a novel and specific serotonin 5-HT1B/1D agonist for the acute treatment of migraine. This randomized, single-dose, double-blind, multicentre, study assessed the efficacy and safety of oral almotriptan (12.5 mg and 25 mg) in patients with migraine, and compared it with the standard treatment (sumatriptan 100 mg) and placebo. A total of 668 patients treated one migraine attack of moderate or severe intensity with study medication. The primary efficacy assessment was migraine pain relief, improvement from severe or moderate pain to mild or no pain, at 2 h after treatment. Response rates, stratified for variation in baseline pain levels, for both almotriptan doses were equivalent to sumatriptan and significantly better than placebo. Other efficacy assessments confirmed the equivalence of the almotriptan groups with the sumatriptan group. Almotriptan 12.5 mg was as well tolerated as placebo (P=0.493) and significantly better tolerated than sumatriptan (P<0.001), in terms of the overall incidence of adverse events. There was no statistically significant difference in the incidence of adverse events between almotriptan 25 mg and sumatriptan 100 mg (P=0.376). The results from this large clinical study indicate that the new, specific 5-HT1B/1D agonist, almotriptan, is an effective and well-tolerated treatment for migraine pain.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether time-based early treatment, independent of pain intensity, is superior to a pain intensity-based treatment, where patients are asked to treat at least moderate intensity headaches, resulting in a reduction of overall migraine headache duration. BACKGROUND: Retrospective and prospective trials have reported improved outcomes when triptans were used early or to treat mild migraine headache pain. However, tolerability as well as efficacy may be 2 of several key issues that have prevented this new treatment paradigm from becoming universally accepted. METHODS: In this multicenter, open-label, cluster-randomized study, patients with IHS-defined migraine were instructed to treat 2 sequential migraine headaches with almotriptan 12.5 mg using either Early Treatment (ET, ie, treat at earliest onset of headache pain, within 1 hour) or Standard Treatment (ST, ie, treat when headache pain intensity is moderate or severe). The novel trial design uses total migraine headache pain duration as the primary endpoint. RESULTS: Results are presented for the first headache and include an ITT population of 757 ET and 693 ST patients. Median headache duration (time from onset of headache pain until no pain) was significantly shorter in ET patients compared to ST patients (3.18 vs 5.53 hours, P < .001). An analysis of the ET subgroup treating headache pain within 1 hour of onset revealed pain intensity, ie, treating mild or moderate versus severe pain, was significantly correlated with treatment outcomes defined by total headache duration, 2-hour pain free, sustained pain free, and use of rescue medication. Multivariate analyses comparing ST subgroups that treated within 1 hour versus greater than 1 hour after headache onset, demonstrate that both pain intensity, ie, treating moderate versus severe headache pain, and treating early versus late, were significantly correlated with total headache duration, 2-hour pain free, sustained pain free, and use of rescue medication. The overall incidence of adverse events was low; nausea and dizziness were the only adverse events with an incidence > or =1% in either treatment group (nausea: 2.5% and 1.7% and dizziness 1.1% and 0.7%, in the ET and ST groups, respectively). CONCLUSION: Total headache duration was significantly shorter in the early treatment group compared to the standard treatment group. Considering time to treatment within a relatively early range of 1 hour or less, efficacy results when treating mild versus moderate pain were similar and both were associated with better outcomes than treatment of severe pain. When considering the prognostic variables of time to treatment and headache pain intensity (limited to moderate vs severe), both were independent predictors, with time to treatment a better predictor of headache duration and rescue medication use, and pain intensity a better predictor of 2-hour pain free and sustained pain free.
BACKGROUND: Patient-reported outcomes, such as treatment satisfaction, functional status, and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) are essential components of migraine research. Almotriptan is a new selective serotonin 1B/1D agonist triptan migraine treatment. OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this double-blind, multicenter, randomized, parallel-group study was to compare treatment satisfaction, functional status, and HRQOL of patients treated with oral almotriptan versus sumatriptan, the leading triptan on the market. METHODS: Migraine patients, aged 18 to 71 years, took equivalent oral doses of 12.5 mg almotriptan or 50 mg sumatriptan for the abortive treatment of a migraine headache. Treatment satisfaction differences between study groups were assessed using a 6-item measure to determine patients' satisfaction with pain relief and satisfaction with side effects 48 hours after drug administration. Functional status was assessed by analyzing the change in patients' ability to perform normal activities during the course of the migraine. HRQOL was compared between treatment groups at 24 hours using the Migraine Quality of Life Questionnaire. End points were assessed using entries from patients' 48-hour diaries. RESULTS: A total of 1173 patients were treated with almotriptan or sumatriptan. There were no significant differences between the 2 treatment groups in terms of satisfaction with pain relief; however, patients in the almotriptan group were significantly more satisfied (less bothered) with side effects than those receiving sumatriptan (P = 0.016). Functional status and HRQOL outcomes were not significantly different between groups. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, migraine patients treated with almotriptan were significantly more satisfied with the side-effect profile of the drug than patients treated with sumatriptan. The results of this study may help inform practicing physicians and neurologists about the potential treatment satisfaction advantages of almotriptan.
Almotriptan maleate (ALMT), a highly selective 5-hydroxy tryptamine 1B/1D (5-HT1B/1D) receptor agonist used in the treatment of migraine headache was subjected to various ICH (Q1A (R2)) specified guidelines. The drug underwent significant degradation under hydrolytic (acid, base and neutral), oxidative and photolytic stress conditions, while it was stable under thermal stress condition. A total of seven significant degradation products (DPs) were obtained. A simple, selective and reliable UPLC method has been developed for the separation of ALMT and its DPs using Acquity UPLC HSS Cyano (100 x 2.1 mm, 1.8 mum) column with mobile phase consisting of ammonium acetate (10 mM, pH 4.4) buffer and acetonitrile in gradient elution mode. Chromatographic analysis was performed at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min using a PDA detector at a wavelength of 230 nm. All the DPs (DP-1 to DP-7) were characterized using UHPLC-ESI-QTOF based on mass fragmentation pattern and accurate m/z values. The developed UPLC method was validated in terms of specificity, linearity, precision and accuracy. The developed stability-indicating method helps in quantification of drug in the presence of DPs.
The development of a capillary electrophoresis (CE) method for the assay of almotriptan (ALM) and its main impurities using an integrated Quality by Design and mixture-process variable (MPV) approach is described. A scouting phase was initially carried out by evaluating different CE operative modes, including the addition of pseudostationary phases and additives to the background electrolyte, in order to approach the analytical target profile. This step made it possible to select normal polarity microemulsion electrokinetic chromatography (MEEKC) as operative mode, which allowed a good selectivity to be achieved in a low analysis time. On the basis of a general Ishikawa diagram for MEEKC methods, a screening asymmetric matrix was applied in order to screen the effects of the process variables (PVs) voltage, temperature, buffer concentration and buffer pH, on critical quality attributes (CQAs), represented by critical separation values and analysis time. A response surface study was then carried out considering all the critical process parameters, including both the PVs and the mixture components (MCs) of the microemulsion (borate buffer, n-heptane as oil, sodium dodecyl sulphate/n-butanol as surfactant/cosurfactant). The values of PVs and MCs were simultaneously changed in a MPV study, making it possible to find significant interaction effects. The design space (DS) was defined as the multidimensional combination of PVs and MCs where the probability for the different considered CQAs to be acceptable was higher than a quality level pi=90%. DS was identified by risk of failure maps, which were drawn on the basis of Monte-Carlo simulations, and verification points spanning the design space were tested. Robustness testing of the method, performed by a D-optimal design, and system suitability criteria allowed a control strategy to be designed. The optimized method was validated following ICH Guideline Q2(R1) and was applied to a real sample of ALM coated tablets.
