: Alprazolam is one of the most widely prescribed benzodiazepines for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Its clinical use has been a point of contention as most addiction specialists consider it to be highly addictive, given its unique psychodynamic properties which limit its clinical usefulness, whereas many primary care physicians continue to prescribe it for longer periods than recommended. Clinical research data has not fully shed light on its "abuse liability," yet it is one of the most frequently prescribed benzodiazepines. "Abuse liability" is the degree to which a psychoactive drug has properties that facilitate people misusing it, or becoming addicted to it, and is commonly used in the literature. We have replaced it in our manuscript with "misuse liability" as it reflects a more updated terminology consistent with the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). In this paper, we have reviewed alprazolam's indications for use, its effect on pregnant women, misuse liability, withdrawal syndrome, pharmacodynamic properties, and suggest better clinical prescription practice of alprazolam by presenting an indepth theory of its clinical effects with use and withdrawal.
AIMS: Alprazolam is an anxiolytic compound that can lead to psychological and physiological dependence especially with prolonged use. This study utilized physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) modelling to further examine the underlying mechanisms of anxiety treatment and addiction. METHODS: Data and parameter values for this study were obtained from PubMed and DrugBank literature searches. The physiologically based PK models for alprazolam were developed using PK-Sim software and PD models were implemented with the MonolixSuite 2021R platform. RESULTS: After single administrations, peak unbound interstitial brain concentrations range from 4 to 33 nM for 0.25-2 mg-doses of the immediate-release form and 3-54 nM for 0.5-10-mg doses of the extended-release form. With repetitive administrations, peak concentration is 59 nM for a 2-mg alprazolam immediate-release dose and 122 nM for a 10-mg extended-release dose. Potentiation of EC(10) GABA-gated currents from recombinant GABA(A) Rs composed of alpha1beta2gamma2, alpha2beta3gamma2 and alpha5beta3gamma2 subunit combinations is 92, 150 and 75%, respectively, for an alprazolam concentration of 59 nM. The 10-90% rise times for the brain concentration-time profile following a single 1-mg immediate-release administration is 22.8 min and 3.8 h for a 3-mg extended-release administration. CONCLUSION: Unbound interstitial brain concentration-time profiles of alprazolam corresponded to changes in beta rhythm activity, peak saccade velocity, mood improvement, cognitive speed slowing and digit symbol substitution test scores. PD models for these endpoints suggest that alprazolam immediate-release maximal effects on cognitive slowing, cognitive impairment, sedation and mood improvement occur sequentially following the brain concentration-time profile.
BACKGROUND: Zuranolone is an oral, once-daily, 14-day treatment course approved for adults with postpartum depression in the United States. AIMS: To assess cognitive effects, pharmacokinetics, and safety of zuranolone, alone or with alprazolam/ethanol. METHODS: This was a phase 1, two-part, two-period, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial. Participants received zuranolone 50 mg or placebo once daily for 9 days, and additionally received alprazolam (1 mg, Part A), ethanol (males: 0.7 g/kg; females: 0.6 g/kg, Part B), or corresponding placebo on days 1, 5, and 9. Within each part, participants received all treatment combinations. Cognition was assessed using a computerized test battery; pharmacokinetics and safety were also evaluated. RESULTS: All participants (Part A, N = 24; Part B, N = 25) received ⩾1 dose of zuranolone/placebo. Compared to placebo, zuranolone produced small-to-moderate cognitive decline (Cohen's |d| = 0.126-0.76); effects were larger with alprazolam (Cohen's |d| = 0.523-0.93) and ethanol (Cohen's |d| = 0.345-0.88). Zuranolone coadministration with alprazolam (Cohen's |d| = 0.6-1.227) or ethanol (Cohen's |d| = 0.054-0.5) generally worsened cognitive decline when compared with zuranolone alone. Maximal pharmacodynamic effects occurred at approximately 5 h and were resolved by 12 h postbaseline. No pharmacokinetic interactions were observed. Incidence of adverse events was similar between groups; most events were mild or moderate in severity. CONCLUSION: A general small-to-moderate magnitude decline in cognition occurred with zuranolone alone. Coadministration with alprazolam/ethanol increased the magnitude, but not the duration, of effects compared with single-agent administration. Zuranolone prescribers and patients should be aware of the potential for increased central nervous system-depressant effects if coadministered with GABAergic active compounds such as alprazolam and ethanol.
The effects of a single oral dose of alprazolam (1 mg), quazepam (15 mg) and diazepam (10 mg) on the peak saccadic velocity (PSV) of saccadic eye movements (SEM), the Sternberg memory scanning and choice reaction time (SMS-CRT), critical flicker fusion frequency (CFFF), spectral analysis of the EEG and a mood scale were assessed in 9 healthy volunteers in a double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study. Alprazolam revealed greater sedative effects than diazepam in the above-mentioned tests. Quazepam had the least sedative effect of the 3 drugs tested, showed a time lag at the onset of its effects and a more prolonged effect on psychomotor impairment than reported previously.
Benzodiazepines (BZDs) rarely cause respiratory depression and death. On the other hand, high-dose BZDs may lead to profound sedation and diminished brainstem functions that mimic other structural brain lesions as described in our case: a 70-year-old unresponsive woman. She was hypothermic and had rapid shallow breathing. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was E1V1M4, with pinpoint pupils and absent corneal, oculocephalic and oculovestibular reflexes. Other physical exams, laboratory testing and brain imaging were unremarkable. After two doses of 0.4 mg naloxone and intravenous thrombolytics were given, there were no significant responses, and the diagnosis remained a mystery. The cause of her unconsciousness was uncovered when her husband found empty bags of 80 tablets of alprazolam and lorazepam. Her consciousness and brainstem reflexes improved dramatically after 0.25 mg of intravenous flumazenil. The blood for BZDs concentration showed alprazolam 268 ng/mL (20-40 ng/mL), lorazepam 861 ng/mL (20-250 ng/mL) and their metabolites.
We report the case of a male individual who developed a severe photosensitive reaction after sun exposure during therapy with fluoxetin 20 mg bid plus alprazolam 0.25 mg bid due to depressive disturbances. The patients, of North-African origin, was not taking other prescription medications nor over the counter products; in the past he had never shown any reaction to sunlight nor had ever used sun protective agents because of its phenotypical skin mark. Three months later, after a second photosensitive reaction, the pharmacological therapy was finally discontinued.
In a controlled trial of alprazolam and exposure in 154 patients with panic disorder with agoraphobia, relations between panic, anticipatory anxiety, and phobic avoidance were examined. The three symptoms were independent of one another at baseline and improved largely independently during treatment; only early improvement in avoidance predicted global improvement after treatment. Global improvement was more related to reduction of avoidance than a decrease in panics. Panic was not a valuable outcome measure in panic disorder with agoraphobia.
Alprazolam, adinazolam, and clonazepam share the typical pharmacological effects of benzodiazepines yet are diverse in their pharmacokinetic properties. Alprazolam has an average terminal elimination half-life of 12 hours, whereas adinazolam generates a metabolite responsible for its benzodiazepine effects whose half-life is less than 3 hours. Clonazepam shows a much slower elimination with a half-life of 20 to 80 hours. The rate of decline of plasma benzodiazepine concentration may be an important factor in determining the number of daily doses necessary to maintain optimal anti-panic effects and to minimize rebound anxiety and withdrawal effects. Clonazepam, which has a longer half-life, would be expected to have some advantages over the other drugs. The limited data available do not provide evidence for any substantial advantages of one benzodiazepine over another. The potential disadvantage of the rapid elimination half-life of adinazolam and its metabolite may be offset by formulation in a sustained release capsule. When discontinuing therapy abruptly, a benzodiazepine with a longer half-life may be advantageous; however, when pharmacotherapy is discontinued gradually, the importance of half-life is diminished. Studies of the pharmacodynamics of drug-receptor interactions suggest new approaches to minimizing the adverse effects of discontinuing benzodiazepine therapy. Preliminary data relating plasma alprazolam concentrations to anxiolytic and adverse effects are presented.
BACKGROUND: There has been a great deal of clinical concern regarding alprazolam abuse. This paper reported on alprazolam positive cases of sudden or unnatural deaths presenting to the New South Wales Department of Forensic Medicine (DOFM), 1/1/1997-31/12/2012. METHODS: Case series. RESULTS: 412 cases were identified. There was a large increase in the annual number of cases, from 3 in 1997 to 86 in 2012. By 2012, 4.5% of all DOFM case presentations involved alprazolam. The mean age was 41.3 years, and 66.5% were male. Circumstances of death were: accidental drug toxicity (57.0%), deliberate drug toxicity (10.4%), suicide by means other than drug overdose (12.6%), disease (10.0%), accident (5.1%), homicide (2.4%). The major factor driving the increase in cases was accidental drug toxicity involving alprazolam, rising from 0 in 1997 to 58 in 2012. A history of drug/alcohol problems was noted in 80.4%, and 56.6% were injecting drug users. The median alprazolam concentration was 0.08 mg/L (range 0.005-2.10mg/L), with 37.4% of cases having concentrations of >/= 0.1 mg/L. In 94.9% of cases, drugs other than alprazolam and its metabolites were present, including all accidental overdoses. The most commonly detected drugs were opioids (64.6%), other benzodiazepines (44.4%) and alcohol (34.5%). A third (31.8%) of cases were HCV positive. CONCLUSIONS: Cases involving alprazolam increased markedly, driven mostly by toxicity deaths amongst people with known drug and alcohol problems. Caution in prescribing alprazolam would appear appropriate, particularly to those with known drug dependence.
To interpret postmortem toxicology results, reference concentrations for non-toxic and toxic levels are needed. Usually, measurements are performed in blood, but because of postmortem redistribution phenomena this may not be optimal. Rather, measurement in the target organ of psychoactive drugs, the brain, might be considered. Here we present reference concentrations of femoral blood and brain tissue of selected benzodiazepines (BZDs). Using LC-MS/MS, we quantified alprazolam, bromazepam, chlordiazepoxide, diazepam, and the metabolites desmethyldiazepam, oxazepam and temazepam in postmortem femoral blood and brain tissue in 104 cases. BZDs were judged to be unrelated to the cause of death in 88 cases and contributing to death in 16 cases. No cases were found with cause of death solely attributed to BZD poisoning. All BZDs investigated tended to have higher concentrations in brain than in blood with median brain-blood ratios ranging from 1.1 to 2.3. A positive correlation between brain and blood concentrations was found with R(2) values from 0.51 to 0.95. Our reported femoral blood concentrations concur with literature values, but sparse information on brain concentration was available. Drug-metabolite ratios were similar in brain and blood for most compounds. Duplicate measurements of brain samples showed that the pre-analytical variation in brain (5.9%) was relatively low, supporting the notion that brain tissue is a suitable postmortem specimen. The reported concentrations in both brain and blood can be used as reference values when evaluating postmortem cases.
This research study aimed to develop a novel sustained release formulation of alprazolam that can also be used for transdermal delivery. This was carried out, for the first time, through encapsulation of alprazolam in nanoliposomes using ethanol injection. In order to obtain the best formulation, four process variables, including the solvent/nonsolvent volume ratio, phospholipid concentration, alprazolam concentration, and cholesterol content were considered as key factors. Response surface methodology (RSM) and a central composite design (CCD) model were used to investigate the effect of these factors on vesicle size (VS) and encapsulation efficiency (EE) as the major properties of nanoliposomes. Experimental data were statistically analyzed, and two significant quadratic models were developed to test the VS and EE responses. The findings indicate that alprazolam and phospholipid concentrations have a significant effect on the mean VS. However, EE was significantly affected by both the alprazolam and phospholipid concentrations and the cholesterol content. The optimized formulation for preparation of alprazolam-loaded nanoliposomes with appropriate VS and EE was suggested. Small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs), ranging in size from 50 to 100 nm were clearly observed in the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images, which is appropriate for transdermal delivery of alprazolam. The study of the prepared nanoliposomes over 28 days at 4  degrees C confirmed the stability of the formulations containing cholesterol. The results of an in vitro release study of alprazolam-loaded nanoliposomes in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.4 for 24 h at 37  degrees C using dialysis, indicated the sustained release of alprazolam due to encapsulation.
BACKGROUND: Recreational co-consumption of benzodiazepines and alcohol is a common practise; yet, the cognitive effects of this combination remain poorly understood. This study aimed to investigate the acute cognitive effects of combining a 1 mg dose of alprazolam with a moderate dose of alcohol (target 0.04% blood alcohol concentration (BAC)) in a non-clinical population. METHODS: In this randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial, participants completed computerised cognitive assessments and the brief biphasic alcohol effects scale (B-BAES) after consuming 1 mg of alprazolam, both with and without a moderate dose of alcohol (target 0.04% BAC). RESULTS: Among 20 healthy participants (mean age = 28.6, SD +/- 4.0 years, 60% female), we found that a peak BAC of 0.03% had no significant impact on cognitive performance. Both the individual use of alprazolam and its combination with alcohol resulted in impaired reaction time, digit vigilance, and verbal, spatial and numeric working memory tasks, although an additive effect when alcohol and alprazolam were consumed together was not evident. The most pronounced cognitive effects occurred at 100 min after dosing, coinciding with increased alprazolam concentrations. Sedative effects were heightened with alcohol, alprazolam and their combination while no stimulative effects were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the significant implications of a therapeutic dose of alprazolam on impairing cognitive performance. This is particularly relevant considering the frequency of non-medical alprazolam use. Future studies should explore different dosages, administration timings and long-term effects to inform the development of public health policies and guidelines regarding the combined use of alcohol and benzodiazepines.
This review was conducted to identify the current data on drug interactions with alprazolam, midazolam, and triazolam to guide practitioners in the use of these drugs. The Medline electronic database from 1966 through 1998 was used to identify clinical studies of the pharmacokinetic effect of drugs on these three benzodiazepines. Of a total of 491 literature reports identified, 59 prospective studies met our selection criteria. The pharmacokinetic parameters of AUC, Cmax, t1/2, and tmax were evaluated for changes following an interaction. To allow comparison between studies, changes in the parameters were normalized relative to the control values. Pharmacodynamic effects and measures, when reported in the original studies as statistically significant, were classified as a strong interaction, and when the interaction was present but not statistically significant, they were classified as mild in this review. As a result, clinically significant drug interactions were noted for all three benzodiazepines, although it is clear that statistically significant pharmacokinetic changes do not always translate into clinically significant pharmacodynamic consequences. All three benzodiazepines were susceptible to drug interactions, but oral dosing of midazolam and triazolam resulted in greater alterations in the pharmacokinetic parameters than alprazolam due to their larger presystemic extraction. Ketoconazole and itraconazole were found to be the most potent metabolic inhibitors that prolonged the duration of or intensified the magnitude of the dynamic response produced by the three benzodiazepines. Rifampin, carbamazepine, and phenytoin were noted to be potent metabolic inducers, and their treatments result in loss of benzodiazepine therapeutic efficacy. In conclusion, potent metabolic inhibitors and inducers can either significantly prolong or diminish the dynamic effects of benzodiazepines via their influence on the pharmacokinetics of benzodiazepines.
The objectives of the present study were: a) to evaluate the photocatalytic degradation of two benzodiazepine pharmaceuticals, alprazolam and diazepam, using Photo-Fenton, b) to optimize the experimental parameters through a central composite experimental design, c) to assess their mineralization and toxicity variations and d) to identify the transformation products during the process and to propose transformation pathways. Response Surface Methodology proved to be a useful tool for the optimization of the degradation process as the statistical coefficients (R(2) = 0.967 for alprazolam and R(2) = 0.929 for diazepam) showed satisfactory values confirming the adequate correlation between the predicted models and experimental values. Two sets of experimental conditions were proposed taking into consideration criteria related to the reaction rate and the minimum use of iron. Toxicity of the system varied with time after the treatment, indicating the gradual production of transformation products which differ in their toxic potential. Fifteen and twenty-three photocatalytic degradation products were identified for ALP and DZP respectively using LC-(ESI)MS/MS. In the case of ALP, the main degradation reactions included, phenyl-group removal and the opening of the 7-membered ring, while for DZP, degradation occurred through hydroxylation, formation of benzophenone and the opening of the 7-membered cyclic group.
BACKGROUND: There are epidemiological data indicating that medical and/or nonmedical use of prescription opioids oftentimes involves concurrent use of other substances. One of those substances is benzodiazepines. It would be of relevance to characterize the effects of an opioid and a benzodiazepine when taken together to determine if measures related to abuse liability-related effects and psychomotor performance impairment are increased compared to when the drugs are taken alone. METHODS: Twenty volunteers participated in a crossover, randomized, double-blind study in which they received placebo, 0.5mg alprazolam, 10mg oxycodone, and 0.5mg alprazolam combined with 10 mg oxycodone, all p.o. Subjective, psychomotor, and physiological measures were assessed during each of the four sessions. RESULTS: Oxycodone by itself increased drug liking and "take again" ratings relative to placebo, but these ratings were not increased when oxycodone was taken with alprazolam, which by itself did not increase either of these ratings. The two drugs in combination produced stronger effects (larger in magnitude or longer lasting) than when either was taken alone on a number of measures, including psychomotor performance impairment. CONCLUSIONS: In healthy volunteers, abuse liability-related subjective effects of oxycodone were not enhanced by alprazolam. There was enhanced behavioral toxicity when the drugs were taken together, and thus, this is of significant concern from a public safety standpoint.
BACKGROUND: Alprazolam, also known by trade-name Xanax, is regularly detected along with alcohol in blood samples of drivers injured or killed in traffic collisions. While their co-consumption is principally legal, policy guidelines concerning fitness-to-drive are lacking and methods to index impairment are underdeveloped. METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial, we examined whether legally permissible levels of alcohol [target 0.04% blood alcohol concentration (BAC)], alprazolam (1mg), and their combination impacts driving performance, and whether driving impairment can be indexed by ocular activity. Participants completed a test battery consisting of a 40-minute simulated highway drive with ocular parameters assessed simultaneously, the Karolinska Sleepiness Scale, and a confidence to drive assessment following four separate treatment combinations. The predictive efficacy of ocular parameters to identify alcohol and alprazolam-related driving impairment was also examined. RESULTS: Among 21 healthy, fully licensed drivers (37% female, mean age 28.43, SD +/- 3.96), driving performance was significantly impacted by alprazolam, alcohol, and their combination. Linear regression models revealed that the odds of an out-of-lane event occurring increased five-fold under the influence alprazolam alone and when combined with alcohol. An increase in gaze transition entropy (GTE) demonstrated the strongest association with the odds of an out-of-lane event occurring in the same minute, with both microsleeps and fixation rate achieving moderate accuracy across treatments. CONCLUSIONS: Alprazolam and alcohol, alone and in combination, impaired select aspects of vehicle control over time. GTE, microsleeps, and fixation rate show potential as real-time indicators of driving impairment and crash risk associated with alcohol and alprazolam consumption.
A review of the worldwide published literature was conducted to assess the efficacy and safety of alprazolam for the treatment of anxiety disorders, panic disorder, and depression in comparison with those of other active drugs (including other benzodiazepines and antidepressant medications). In all, a total of 8878 patients participated in the 84 active-drug-controlled studies that were reviewed: 3574 were treated with alprazolam, 3666 were treated with another active drug, and 1638 were treated with placebo. Two general findings emerged: (1) Alprazolam demonstrates efficacy for the treatment of anxiety disorders, panic disorder, and depression in the large majority of studies; for these illnesses, it appeared equal in efficacy to the active agents with which it was compared. (2) Medical events, such as depression, suicidality, hostility/aggression, mania/psychosis, abuse, withdrawal reactions, and seizures, were reported infrequently or not at all for alprazolam and the comparator drugs; there were no marked differences between drug classes in the frequencies of these events.
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the benzodiazepine anxiolytic alprazolam (1 mg orally) were compared between young and elderly healthy volunteers. Eight young subjects (mean age 29.8 years) and eight elderly volunteers (mean age 68.4 years) received oral placebo and alprazolam (1.0 mg) in a randomized, double-blind, single-dose crossover study. In the elderly subjects, plasma concentrations were higher, although not significantly so, than in young volunteers 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 hours after dosage. Apparent elimination half-life, time of maximum concentration, maximum concentration, volume of distribution, and apparent clearance were similar for the two groups. In both groups, alprazolam treatment (versus placebo) produced significant changes in typical benzodiazepine agonist effects, such as increased sedation and fatigue, reduced excitement, increased feelings of spaciness, and perception of thinking slowed. For some measures, the alprazolam-placebo difference was greater in young than in elderly subjects. In both groups, alprazolam significantly impaired performance on the digit-symbol substitution test (DSST). EEG studies indicated significant increases in relative beta amplitude (13-30 Hz range) after alprazolam compared to placebo. Percent DSST decrement and percent EEG change were highly correlated with plasma alprazolam concentrations for both groups. There were modest increases in alprazolam plasma concentration in the elderly compared to the younger group shortly after drug administration, but there was no evidence of increased sensitivity to the pharmacodynamic effects of alprazolam in the elderly.
