Amifostine is an organic thiophosphate prodrug used for cytoprotection against toxic effects of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. In a European prospective study of SJS/TEN, six patients were suspected to have SJS/TEN associated with amifostine. Our findings suggest that the risk of life-threatening cutaneous adverse reactions to amifostine could be significantly increased.
Cisplatin in higher doses have been used routinely in the treatment of childhood tumours including neuroblastoma and germ cell tumors. Amifostine, a broad-spectrum cytoprotector of normal tissues, has been approved by U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in patients receiving cisplatin. Such administration of amifostine has been reported to reduce cisplatin-related toxicities in some studies, but not all. The authors report a case of severe toxicity with cisplatin in a girl with epithelial cell carcinoma of the ovary despite the use of amifostine.
Amifostine (WR-2721) was originally developed as a radioprotective agent. In animals, it protects normal tissues from the damaging effects of irradiation and, as shown in more recent studies, of several cytotoxic agents. Protection of tumours is generally reduced compared with that of normal tissues in animals, suggesting that amifostine may increase the therapeutic window of cytotoxic therapies. Clinical data concerning amifostine suggest that cytotoxic chemotherapy-induced haematological toxicity and cisplatin-induced neurotoxicity, nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity are decreased upon administration of amifostine prior to cytotoxic drugs. Similarly, amifostine reduces damage to normal tissues caused by radiotherapy. Available data show that this protection is achieved without adversely affecting tumour response or patient survival. In 1 large trial, the reduction in cyclophosphamide- and cisplatin-related toxicities manifested as a decrease in the incidence and severity of neutropenia-related fever and sepsis and in the number of patients with ovarian cancer who discontinue therapy before completion of treatment, thus improving the tolerability of this antineoplastic regimen. In addition, the incidences of cisplatin-induced nephro- and neurotoxicity were reduced. Increased doses of cytotoxic therapy have also been administered when amifostine was given prior to therapy, which may increase tumour response. The predominant adverse effect associated with amifostine are hypotension, nausea and vomiting, somnolence and sneezing. Thus, amifostine is likely to be a useful adjuvant to the treatment of patients with malignancy, particularly those receiving cyclophosphamide plus cisplatin. discontinued therapy before completion of treatment, thus improving the tolerability of this antineoplastic regimen. In addition, the incidences of cisplatin-induced.
BACKGROUND: Amifostine is the most clinical used chemical radioprotector, but its effect in patients treated with radiation is not consistent. METHODS: By searching Medline, CENTRAL, EMBASE, ASCO, ESMO, and CNKI databases, the published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) about the efficacy of amifostine in HNSCC patients treated with radiotherapy were collected. The pooled efficacy and side effects of this drug were calculated by RevMan software. RESULTS: Seventeen trials including a total of 1167 patients (604 and 563 each arm) were analyzed in the meta-analysis. The pooled data showed that the use of amifostine significantly reduce the risk of developing Grade 3-4 mucositis (relative risk [RR],0.72; 95% confidence interval [CI],0.54-0.95; p<0.00001), Grade 2-4 acute xerostomia (RR,0.70; 95%CI,0.52-0.96; p = 0.02), or late xerostomia (RR,0.60; 95%CI,0.49-0.74; p<0.00001) and Grade 3-4 dysphagia (RR,0.39; 95%CI,0.17-0.92; p = 0.03). However, subgroup analysis demonstrated that no statistically significant reduction of Grade 3-4 mucositis (RR,0.97; 95% CI,0.74-1.26; p = 0.80), Grade 2-4 acute xerostomia (RR,0.35; 95%CI,0.02-5.44; p = 0.45), or late xerostomia (RR,0.40; 95%CI,0.13-1.24; p = 0.11) and Grade 3-4 dysphagia (RR,0.23; 95%CI,0.01-4.78; p = 0.35) was observed in patients treated with concomitant chemoradiotherapy. Compared with placebo or observation, amifostine does not show tumor protective effect in complete response (RR,1.02; 95%CI,0.89-1.17; p = 0.76) and partial response (RR,0.90; 95%CI, 0.56-1.44; p = 0.66). For the hematologic side effect, no statistical difference of Grade 3-4 leucopenia (RR,0.60; 95%CI,0.35-1.05; p = 0.07), anemia (RR,0.80; 95%CI, 0.42-1.53; p = 0.50) and thrombocytopenia (RR,0.43; 95%CI,0.16-1.15; p = 0.09) were found between amifostine and control groups. The most common amifostine related side effects were nausea, emesis, hypotension and allergic with an average incidence rate (Grade 3-4) of 5%, 6%, 4% and 4% respectively. CONCLUSION: This systematic review showed that amifostine significantly reduce the serious mucositis, acute/late xerastomia and dysphagia without protection of the tumor in HNSCC patients treated with radiotherapy. And the toxicities of amifostine were generally acceptable.
Agents capable of scavenging ROS have attracted attention recently because of their potential use as antioxidative agents. Amifostine, a ROS scavenger, has the potential to be used as an antioxidant in therapeutic applications. In this study, the effect of amifostine on neutral zwitterionic dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) and anionic dipalmitoylphosphatidylglycerol (DPPG) model membranes' structure and dynamics is aimed to be examined by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Our results revealed that amifostine at concentrations used (1-24 mol%) does not induce any important alteration in the shape of phase transition curve and phase transition temperature in the DPPC and DPPG membranes. High concentrations of amifostine slightly increased the acyl chain flexibility of DPPC membranes in the liquid crystalline phase and DPPG membranes in the gel phase. A lessening in the dynamics of DPPC liposomes was observed for all concentrations of amifostine in both phases but slight dual effect was observed only in the gel phase as a decrease in dynamics at low concentrations and an increase at higher concentrations of amifostine in DPPG liposomes. Additionally, strong hydrogen bonding was observed for both CO and PO(2)(-) groups in case of DPPC and for PO(2)(-) groups in case of DPPG. Dehydration around the CO regions occurred in case of DPPG. Accordingly, amifostine is proposed to be interacting strongly with zwitterionic and negatively charged membrane head groups and glycerol backbone in all concentrations and because of this interaction it causes some changes in lipid order and dynamics especially at high concentrations.
A silica-based molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) formed by functional silanes (basic 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) and acidic 2-(4-chlorosulfonylphenyl)ethyltrimethoxysilane (CSPTMS)) was crosslinked with carbon dots (CDs) to develop a fluorescent sensor toward an amphiprotic template, amifostine (AMF). The CDs were synthesized by hydrothermal carbonization of succinic acid and an ionic liquid and possessed hydroxyl and pyrrolic functional groups, which enabled the CDs to be derivatized with silanes for subsequent sol-gel polymerization. Except for the CDs derivatized with tetraethoxysilane, CD-APTES, CD-CSPTMS, and CD-APTES/CSPTMS (molar ratio = 1/1) all presented distinct fluorescence dynamic quenching when interacted with AMF. However, APTES/CSPTMS was selected as the sol-gel monomer for the formation of MIP because its quenching ratio and imprinted factor were the highest among the CD-silane-MIPs. Moreover, 0.5 mg/mL of CD-APTES/CSPTMS -MIP in pH 7.5 buffer was used to quantify AMF (0.5-200 nM, LOD = 0.15 nM) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (2-150 muU/mL, LOD = 0.5 muU/mL), which activates the metabolism of AMF, and the calibration curves of AMF and ALP were determined via fluorescence quenching and restoration, respectively. The recoveries of 1, 10, and 60 nM AMF from 360-fold-diluted human serum solutions were 95, 104, and 103%, respectively, with RSD values that were lower than 4.2%. The average ALP activity of the original human serum was determined to be 32.1 U/L (RSD = 5.41%).
The pharmacokinetics of amifostine, a protector against chemotherapy and radiation-induced toxicities, was investigated in the plasma and ascites of a cancer patient. A high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) procedure with electrochemical detection was used to measure amifostine, its active metabolite, WR 1065, and the disulfides (symmetrical plus mixed disulfides). Both amifostine and WR 1065 were rapidly cleared from the plasma (95% and 50% of the peak concentration within 1 h, respectively). The disulfides, which were rapidly formed from WR 1065, were cleared much more slowly (final half-life 13.6 h). Multiple dosing resulted in a tendency toward increasing peak levels of WR 1065 and decreasing peak levels of the disulfides. Only 1% of the delivered dose appeared in the ascites. Therefore, it is not plausible that the presence of ascites or other third spaces would have an impact on the pharmacokinetics of amifostine.
PURPOSE: To review reports of severe skin reactions during amifostine treatment. METHODS AND MATERIAL: The expert panel reviewed postmarketing reports of skin reactions and discussed strategies for evaluation and management. RESULTS: Between 1994 and April 2002, 35 events were classified as severe skin reactions worldwide: erythema multiforme (8), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (10), toxic epidermal necrolysis (11), toxicoderma (3), and bullae (3). Unadjusted incidences were 6-9 per 10,000 radiotherapy patients and 0.8-1 per 10,000 chemotherapy patients. In 10 patients (29%) amifostine was continued after cutaneous signs and symptoms appeared. CONCLUSIONS: Practical recommendations for practicing clinicians were developed. Cutaneous evaluation for rash, ulceration, or lesions-particularly on lips/mucosa, palmar/plantar surfaces, and the trunk-should be performed before amifostine administration. Reactions can be classified as local injection site/radiation port reactions or non-injection site reactions; and non-injection site reactions with associated fever or constitutional symptoms must be differentiated from radiation-induced dermatitis or cutaneous reaction with another etiology. Amifostine should be permanently discontinued for severe skin reactions or reactions associated with constitutional symptoms not known to be due to any other etiology. Increased physician awareness, proper patient management, monitoring before administration, and early intervention/discontinuation for non-injection site reactions may reduce the incidence of cutaneous reactions and enhance amifostine safety.
PURPOSE: Radiotherapy (RT) combined with cisplatin or cetuximab is the standard of care for patients with locally advanced head/neck cancer (LA-HNC). The feasibility of radiochemotherapy with cisplatin and cetuximab, supported with amifostine, was herein investigated. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Forty-three patients with LA-HNC were recruited. Conformal hypofractionated/accelerated RT with amifostine cytoprotection (2.7 Gy/fraction, 21 fractions in 4 weeks) was combined with cisplatin (30 mg/m(2)/week) and cetuximab (standard weekly regimen) therapy. The dose of amifostine was individualized according to tolerance. RESULTS: A high daily amifostine dose (750-1,000 mg) was tolerated by 41.8% of patients, and a standard dose (500 mg) was tolerated by 34.9% of patients. A high amifostine dose was linked to reduced RT delays (p = 0.0003). Grade 3 to 4 (3-4) mucositis occurred in 7/43 (16.2%) patients, and fungal infections occurred in 18/43 (41.8%) patients. Radiation dermatitis was not aggravated. Interruption of cetuximab due to acneiform rash was necessary in 23.3% of patients, while amifostine-related fever and rash were not observed. Severe late radiation sequelae consisted of laryngeal edema (9% laryngeal cases) and cervical strictures (33% of hypopharyngeal cases). Good salivary function was preserved in 6/11 (54.5%) nasopharyngeal cancer patients. The complete response rate was 68.5%, reaching 77.2% in patients with minor radiotherapy delays. The 24-month local control and survival rates were 72.3% and 91%, respectively (median follow-up was 13 months.). CONCLUSIONS: In this feasibility study, weekly administration of cisplatin and cetuximab was safely combined with accelerated RT, supported with amifostine, at the cost of a high incidence of acneiform rash but a reduced incidence of amifostine-related fever/rash. A high daily dose of amifostine allows completion of therapy with minor delays.
PURPOSE: To determine the prophylactic properties of amifostine against acute and late toxicities from radiochemotherapy in patients with head-and-neck cancer. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Fifty patients were randomized to receive conventional radiotherapy (RT) (2-Gy fractions, 5 days weekly, to a total of 60-74 Gy, depending on the tumor localization and TNM classification) and carboplatin (90 mg/m(2) infusion once per week before RT). Amifostine (300 mg/m(2)) was administered in the study group only 15-30 min before RT for 6-7.5 weeks. The primary study end point was the grading of acute and late nonhematologic toxicities (mucositis, dysphagia, xerostomia) induced by radiochemotherapy. Secondary end points included treatment duration, hematologic toxicity, and clinical outcome. RESULTS: The treatment duration was significantly shorter in the amifostine-treated group (p = 0.013), because treatment interruptions were more frequent in the control group. Acute toxicities (mucositis and dysphagia) were less severe in the amifostine-treated group. By Week 3, all in the control group experienced Grade 2 mucositis compared with only 9% in the amifostine-treated group (p <0.0001). By Week 5, 52.2% of the patients in the control group experienced Grade 4 mucositis compared with 4.5% in the amifostine-treated group (p = 0.0006). Similar results were obtained for dysphagia. At 3 months of follow-up, only 27% of patients in the study group experienced Grade 2 xerostomia compared with 73.9% in the control group (p = 0.0001). Eighteen months after cessation of therapy, the proportion of patients with Grade 2 xerostomia was 4.5% vs. 30.4% for each respective treatment group (p = 0.047). Cytoprotection with amifostine did not affect treatment outcome, with 90.9% complete responses in the amifostine-treated group compared with 78.3% in the control group (p = 0.414). CONCLUSION: Amifostine was effective in reducing mucositis and dysphagia resulting from radiochemotherapy in patients with head-and-neck cancer. Furthermore, amifostine reduced the severity of late xerostomia, a side effect of RT with long-lasting consequences. Amifostine treatment did not affect the clinical outcome.
While concurrent chemoradiotherapy is a standard treatment for good-performance patients with non-small cell lung cancer, acute esophagitis is a frequent toxicity. The incidence of severe acute esophagitis > or = grade 3 in patients treated with standard (once-daily) radiation therapy alone is 1.3%, increasing to 14% to 25% with the addition of concurrent chemotherapy, and 24% to 34% for the combination of hyperfractionated (twice-daily) radiation therapy plus concomitant chemotherapy. Although esophagitis is almost never a cause of mortality, it results in significant morbidity and may force treatment breaks, which are associated with inferior outcome in non-small cell lung cancer. Substantial investigative efforts to prevent or ameliorate esophagitis have been conducted. We describe herein the rationale/study design for a multi-institutional, phase II randomized study to evaluate either daily subcutaneous or intravenous bolus infusions of amifostine in patients with non-small cell lung cancer who receive standard fractionated thoracic radiation therapy concurrently with weekly paclitaxel and carboplatin chemotherapy.
