Amiloride is a potassium retaining diuretic and natriuretic which acts by reversibly blocking luminal epithelial sodium channels (ENaCs) in the late distal tubule and collecting duct. Amiloride is indicated in oedematous states, and for potassium conservation adjunctive to thiazide or loop diuretics for hypertension, congestive heart failure and hepatic cirrhosis with ascites. Historical studies on its use in hypertension were poorly controlled and there is insufficient data on dose-response. It is clearly highly effective in combination with thiazide diuretics where it counteracts the adverse metabolic effects of the thiazides and its use in the Medical Research Council Trial of Older Hypertensive Patients, demonstrated convincing outcome benefits on stroke and coronary events. Recently it has been shown to be as effective as spironolactone in resistant hypertension but there is a real need to establish its potential role in the much larger number of patients with mild to moderate hypertension in whom there is a paucity of information with amiloride particularly across an extended dose range.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Proteinuria predicts accelerated decline in kidney function in CKD. The pathologic mechanisms are not well known, but aberrantly filtered proteins with enzymatic activity might be involved. The urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA)-plasminogen cascade activates complement and generates C3a and C5a in vitro / ex vivo in urine from healthy persons when exogenous, inactive, plasminogen, and complement factors are added. Amiloride inhibits uPA and attenuates complement activation in vitro and in vivo . In conditional podocin knockout (KO) mice with severe proteinuria, blocking of uPA with monoclonal antibodies significantly reduces the urine excretion of C3a and C5a and lowers tissue NLRP3-inflammasome protein without major changes in early fibrosis markers. This mechanism provides a link to proinflammatory signaling in proteinuria with possible long-term consequences for kidney function. BACKGROUND: Persistent proteinuria is associated with tubular interstitial inflammation and predicts progressive kidney injury. In proteinuria, plasminogen is aberrantly filtered and activated by urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA), which promotes kidney fibrosis. We hypothesized that plasmin activates filtered complement factors C3 and C5 directly in tubular fluid, generating anaphylatoxins, and that this is attenuated by amiloride, an off-target uPA inhibitor. METHODS: Purified C3, C5, plasminogen, urokinase, and urine from healthy humans were used for in vitro / ex vivo studies. Complement activation was assessed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, immunoblotting, and ELISA. Urine and plasma from patients with diabetic nephropathy treated with high-dose amiloride and from mice with proteinuria (podocin knockout [KO]) treated with amiloride or inhibitory anti-uPA antibodies were analyzed. RESULTS: The combination of uPA and plasminogen generated anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a from intact C3 and C5 and was inhibited by amiloride. Addition of exogenous plasminogen was sufficient for urine from healthy humans to activate complement. Conditional podocin KO in mice led to severe proteinuria and C3a and C5a urine excretion, which was attenuated reversibly by amiloride treatment for 4 days and reduced by >50% by inhibitory anti-uPA antibodies without altering proteinuria. NOD-, LRR- and pyrin domain-containing protein 3-inflammasome protein was reduced with no concomitant effect on fibrosis. In patients with diabetic nephropathy, amiloride reduced urinary excretion of C3dg and sC5b-9 significantly. CONCLUSIONS: In conditions with proteinuria, uPA-plasmin generates anaphylatoxins in tubular fluid and promotes downstream complement activation sensitive to amiloride. This mechanism links proteinuria to intratubular proinflammatory signaling. In perspective, amiloride could exert reno-protective effects beyond natriuresis and BP reduction. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRY NAME AND REGISTRATION NUMBER: Increased Activity of a Renal Salt Transporter (ENaC) in Diabetic Kidney Disease, NCT01918488 and Increased Activity of ENaC in Proteinuric Kidney Transplant Recipients, NCT03036748 .
Among the 5 taste qualities, salt is the least understood. The receptors, their expression pattern in taste cells, and the transduction mechanisms for salt taste are still unclear. Previous studies have suggested that low concentrations of NaCl are detected by the amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC), which in other systems requires assembly of 3 homologous subunits (alpha, beta, and gamma) to form a functional channel. However, a new study from Lossow and colleagues, published in this issue of Chemical Senses, challenges that hypothesis by examining expression levels of the 3 ENaC subunits in individual taste cells using gene-targeted mice in combination with immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. Results show a lack of colocalization of ENaC subunits in taste cells as well as expression of subunits in taste cells that show no amiloride sensitivity. These new results question the molecular identity of the amiloride-sensitive Na+ conductance in taste cells.
Amiloride, triamterene, and the spirolactones are potassium-sparing diuretics which act on the distal parts of the nephron, from the late distal tubule to the collecting duct. In these segments, active sodium reabsorption occurs through the following mechanism: sodium ions enter the cell through specific channels present in the luminal membrane and are extruded out of the cell into the peritubular medium by a sodium-potassium exchange pump, the Na-K-ATPase. Amiloride in micromolar concentrations reduces the sodium transport by blocking the luminal membrane sodium channel. Triamterene has a similar effect, although with a lower affinity; the available studies do not allow to determine if an inhibitory effect of triamterene on the Na-K-ATPase plays an additional role in its diuretic action. The spirolactones are competitive inhibitors of aldosterone, the mineralocorticoid hormone which promotes sodium reabsorption by increasing both the number of active sodium channels in the luminal membrane and the number of active Na-K pumps in the peritubular membrane. By the inhibitory effect on the electrogenic sodium transport, amiloride, triamterene, and the spirolactones decrease the lumen-negative transepithelial potential difference. This reduces the driving force for potassium movement into the tubular lumen and thus decreases potassium excretion.
Whenever studied in a quantitative fashion, hypertonicity-induced cation channels (HICCs) are found to be the main mediators of regulatory volume increase. In most instances, these channels are either inhibited by amiloride (but insensitive to Gd3+ and flufenamate) or they are efficiently blocked by Gd3+ and flufenamate (but insensitive to amiloride). Of note, however, from two preparations so far a mixed type of pharmacology has also been reported. Whereas the ion selectivity of amiloride-sensitive HICCs has not been studied in much detail yet, amiloride-insensitive channels are either equally permeable to Na+, K+, Cs+ and Li+ but impermeable to N-methyl-D-glucamine (NMDG+) or they exhibit a permeability to Li+ and NMDG+ that amounts to some 50% when compared with that of Na+. Also in this respect, however, some peculiarities do exist. Concerning the actual molecular correlate, evidence was reported that HICCs may be related to the (amiloride-sensitive) epithelial Na+ channel and/or to transient receptor potential channels. Recent findings suggest that HICCs may contribute to cell proliferation, just as the K+ channels that are employed in regulatory volume decrease are mediators of the opposing process, i.e. apoptosis.
