Although the pathogenesis of migraine is not fully understood, accumulating evidence indicates migraine may be driven by impaired brain energy metabolism in the context of pathologically high levels of adenosine. Considerable evidence indicates that aminophylline, an adenosine receptor antagonist, can provide strong therapeutic relief in pain, particularly post-dural headache. Moreover, direct observations from a previously published observational case series have demonstrated a strong therapeutic impact of low-dose aminophylline in patients with severe, unremitting migraine attacks. Although higher doses of aminophylline are associated with an unfavourable adverse effect profile, low doses of aminophylline are associated with minimal adverse effects. Despite this promise, double-blinded randomized trials will be needed to determine the true therapeutic efficacy of low-dose aminophylline in migraine.
The diuretic effect of the combined furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline among pediatric patients remains unclear. The primary aim of this systematic review was to examine the clinical diuretic effects (urine output and fluid balance) of co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline as compared to furosemide alone in pediatric population. Ovid MEDLINE, CENTRAL, and EMBASE were searched from its inception until March 2022 for observational studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing the administration of furosemide versus furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline in pediatric population. Case reports, case series, commentaries, letters to editors, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses were excluded. Five articles with a total sample population of 187 patients were included in this systematic review. As compared to the furosemide alone, our pooled data demonstrated that co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline was associated with higher urine output (mean difference: 2.91 [90% CI 1.54 to 4.27], p < 0.0001, I(2) = 90%) and a more negative fluid balance (mean difference - 28.27 [95% CI: - 46.21 to - 10.33], p = 0.002, I(2) = 56%) than those who received furosemide alone. CONCLUSION: This is the first paper summarizing the evidence of combined use of furosemide with aminophylline/theophylline in pediatric population. Our systematic review demonstrated that the co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline could potentially yield better diuretic effects of urine output and negative fluid balance than furosemide alone in pediatric patients with fluid overload. Given the substantial degree of heterogeneity and low level of evidence, future adequately powered trials are warranted to provide evidence regarding the combined use of aminophylline/theophylline and furosemide as diuretic in the pediatric population. WHAT IS KNOWN: * Fluid overload is associated with poor prognosis for children in the intensive care unit. * The ineffective result of furosemide alone, even at high dose, as diuretic agent for children with diuretic resistant fluid overload in the intensive care unit. WHAT IS NEW: * This is the first systematic review that compares furosemide alone and co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline. * This paper showed potential benefit of co-administration of furosemide and aminophylline/theophylline promoting urine output and negative fluid balance compared to furosemide alone.
We hypothesized that concomitant pharmacological inhibition of the endothelin and adenosine pathway is safe and improves exercise performance in hypoxic humans, via a mechanism that does not involve augmentation of blood oxygenation. To test this hypothesis, we established safety and drug interactions for aminophylline (500 mg) plus ambrisentan (5 mg) in normoxic volunteers. Subsequently, a placebo-controlled study was employed to test the combination in healthy resting and exercising volunteers at simulated altitude (4,267 m). No serious adverse events occurred. Drug interaction was minimal or absent. Aminophylline alleviated hypoxia-induced headaches. Aminophylline, ambrisentan, and their combination all significantly (P < 0.05 vs. placebo) improved submaximal hypoxic exercise performance (19.5, 20.6, and 19.1% >placebo). Single-dose ambrisentan increased blood oxygenation in resting, hypoxic subjects. We conclude that combined aminophylline and ambrisentan offer promise to safely increase exercise capacity in hypoxemic humans without relying on increasing blood oxygen availability.
Acute, severe exacerbations of asthma present a challenge due to the significant morbidity associated with this presentation. For exacerbations that are refractory to initial treatments with inhaled and oral therapies, there is still doubt about which intravenous therapies are most likely to be helpful. beta-2 agonists and aminophylline have differing mechanisms of action that also affect their adverse effects profiles and these are considered. A review of the available randomised control trials suggests that a bolus of intravenous salbutamol may reduce symptoms and hasten recovery. Aminophylline infusions may improve lung function, and in some studies have been shown to improve symptoms, but the evidence is not clear cut. Decisions about which treatment to use should include risk management considerations such as ease of prescription, preparation and administration factors and availability of high-dependency beds.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy and safety of standard doses of Caffeine and Aminophylline for Apnea of prematurity. STUDY DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial. SETTING: Tertiary-care referral centre and a teaching institution in Southern India. Trial was conducted from February 2012 to January 2015. PARTICIPANTS: 240 preterm (</=34 wk) neonates with apnea of prematurity. INTERVENTIONS: Neonates randomized into two groups: Caffeine group received loading dose of caffeine citrate (20 mg/kg) followed by 5 mg/kg/day maintenance dose every 24 hour. Aminophylline group received loading dose of Aminophylline - 5 mg/kg and maintenance dose of 1.5 mg/kg 8-hourly. OUTCOME MEASURES: Difference in apneic spells, associated respiratory morbidity, and acute adverse events were assessed. Association of efficacy with therapeutic drug levels was also evaluated. RESULTS: Infants on aminophylline experienced less apnea spells in 4-7 days of therapy (P=0.03). Mean apnea rate and isolated desaturations were similar in 1-3, 4-7 and 8-14 days of therapy. No difference was noted in duration of Neonatal Intensive Care Unit stay and hospital stay. Mean heart rate was significantly high in Aminophylline group (P<0.001). Risk of developing tachycardia was less (RR 0.30; 95% CI range 0.15 to 0.60; P<0.001) in Caffeine- over Aminophylline-treated infants. CONCLUSION: Aminophylline is as effective as caffeine for prevention of apneic spells in preterm neonates; however, dosage optimization needs to be done to reduce toxicity.
The effects of dexamethasone and aminophylline on survival of Jurkat T-lymphocytic leukemia cells and HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cells were investigated. Dexamethasone (10, 1000 nM) and aminophylline (1, 100 microM) induced apoptosis in Jurkat and HL-60 cells in a concentration-dependent manner. Treatment with a combination of dexamethasone (10 nM) and aminophylline (1 microM) significantly increased the number of apoptotic HL-60 cells, but not that of Jurkat cells, compared with dexamethasone (10 nM) or aminophylline (1 microM) treatment alone. Dexamethasone and aminophylline also increased the number of phospho-histone H2B (Ser(14))-positive Jurkat and HL-60 cells. Phospho-histone H2B (pH2B)-positive HL-60 cells were significantly increased by treatment with a combination of dexamethasone (10 nM) and aminophylline (1 microM), although no such effect was observed in Jurkat cells. On the other hand, simultaneous treatment with 10 nM dexamethasone and 1 muM aminophylline activated the 36-kDa MBP kinase, pro-apoptotic protein kinase in HL-60 cells. The activation of 36-kDa MBP kinase by dexamethasone and aminophylline was supported by studies showing an increase in the number of pH2B-positive and apoptotic Jurkat and HL-60 cells upon exposure to these drugs. Thus treatment with a combination of dexamethasone and aminophylline accelerates apoptosis of HL-60 cells via activation of 36-kDa MBP kinase and H2B phosphorylation.
Aminophylline exerts a renovascular effect, acting by adenosine receptor blockade or type IV phosphodiesterase inhibition. Clinically, these drugs have been used with furosemide to induce diuresis in adults and neonates. However, reports on use of aminophylline in diuretic-dependent children are limited to a few studies. We report a case series of four critically ill children unresponsive to furosemide continuous infusion who were subsequently given aminophylline as an adjunct diuretic in the treatment of fluid overload. No side effects were evident. Administration of aminophylline at low doses (3 mg/kg) successfully promoted increased urine output over the 6-h study period in all four children.
We have studied the hemodynamic effects of salbutamol and aminophylline in eight patients with obstructive airways disease. Aminophylline was administered intravenously as a bolus and an infusion for 150 minutes. Salbutamol was administered by nebulizer after 30 minutes and at the end of the infusion. Compared with placebo, salbutamol decreased ventricular afterload (decreased preinjection period and preinjection period to left ventricular ejection time ratio and diastolic blood pressure). Aminophylline decreased total electromechanical systole, corrected for heart rate, only (mean decrease -10.7 msec; range -6.5 to -15.1), indicating a mild positive inotropic effect. When both active treatments were combined, the effect on total electromechanical systole, corrected for heart rate, was potentiated (mean decrease -23.3 msec; range -19.1 to -33.1). Neither aminophylline nor the combination affected heart rate or blood pressure, suggesting no increase in myocardial oxygen consumption. The hemodynamic effects of aminophylline and salbutamol are potentiated in combination but are unlikely to be harmful in patients with obstructive airways disease.
The physical state, melting behaviour and release rate of aminophylline suppositories were studied during storage. The fraction of non-crystallized fat, assessed by pulse NMR, varies between different vehicles. At room temperature several vehicles do not seem to be completely crystalline. Aging, as observed in prolonged melting time and a reduced release rate, is not expressed in a drastic reduction of the fraction of non-crystallized fat, as observed by NMR. On the contrary the mobility of the protons in the non-crystallized state is likely to offer a more promising tool to monitor aging.
BACKGROUND: A patented remote controlled capsule (RCC) has recently been developed to provide noninvasive drug delivery to selected sites in the human gut that allows assessment of regional gastrointestinal (GI) drug absorption under a normal physiological environment. The objective of this study was to investigate the rate and extent of aminophylline absorption after site-specific delivery of the drug in the GI tract using RCC and a magnetic marker monitoring (MMM) technique. METHODS: This study was conducted in twelve healthy male subjects, in a three-treatment, randomized, crossover manner with a 7-day washout. Eligible subjects received a 150 mg aminophylline dose through an oral administration, or via a remote controlled capsule, delivered to the small bowel or ascending colon. MMM was employed to monitor the GI transit of the RCC, and the radio-frequency signal was used to activate capsules at target sites. Blood samples were obtained at regular intervals until 24 hours post dose/activation. Plasma theophylline concentrations were measured by a TDx System Analyzer. A comparison of the PK profile with the oral dosing route of aminophylline was performed after delivery to the small bowel and colon. RESULTS: The RCC was well tolerated in volunteers. The mean capsule activation time for the small bowel and ascending colon was 2.07 hours and 6.08 hours post dose. Aminophylline had similar absorption profiles from the small bowel compared with the stomach, with an area under the curve (AUC(t)) ratio of 92% vs. the stomach, but a lower absorption profile from the ascending colon, with an AUC(t) ratio of 47.2% vs. the stomach. CONCLUSIONS: The proprietary of the RCC and MMM technique offer the opportunity to obtain data on the intestinal absorption of a drug in humans under noninvasive conditions. Aminophylline is rapidly and efficiently absorbed from the small bowel. While colonic absorption was limited by the poor water condition although effective absorption was observed from the ascending colon. This provides an opportunity for rational development of modified-release formulations as well as alternative dosage forms.
A simple score, derived by allocating points to a selection of factors which influence the outcome of pre-term labour, was found to relate to the success of treatment. Used as a measure of the situation before therapy, this score can define a baseline allowing a realistic comparison of therapeutic methods. In this series, despite treatment, a large number of patients still were delivered before term and within a few days of admission to hospital. Thus it would seem that although drugs suppress uterine activity, they cannot neutralize the adverse effects of other factors associated with pre-term labour.
We investigated the effects of intravenously administered aminophylline (A; 6 mg/kg over 20 min, followed by 0.9 mg/kg/h), salbutamol (S; 4 micrograms/kg over 20 min, followed by 3 micrograms/kg/h) and placebo (P; saline solution) on the strength of the respiratory muscles, the ventilatory endurance and the exercise tolerance in 7 healthy humans. Neither A nor S caused bronchodilation, as shown by the lack of change in FEV1. The strength of respiratory muscles, as measured by maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP), and the ventilatory endurance, as measured by sustainable inspiratory pressure (SIP), were not statistically different after A (MIP: 136.5 +/- SE 11.6 cm H2O; SIP: 104.2 +/- 8.4 cm H2O or after S (MIP: 135.7 +/- 11.5; SIP: 107.1 +/- 10.4) compared to after P (MIP: 127.1 +/- 10.1; SIP: 105.0 +/- 5.9). Significant changes in 12-min walking distance, perceived exertion rate, anaerobic threshold, maximal work output, maximal O2 uptake were observed neither after A nor after S. The exchange ratio and heart rate were higher after A and S than after P at some steps of a progressive, symptom-limited, treadmill-based exercise test. This might be the result of metabolic or cardiovascular adaptations elicited by these drugs. We conclude that A or S at therapeutic concentrations have no clinically relevant beneficial effects on ventilatory muscle function and exercise tolerance in healthy subjects.
In 17 patients with moderate to severe asthma, we compared acute bronchodilator effects of the following drugs or drug combinations using a double-blind crossover design: terbutaline, 5; aminophyline 400; terbutaline, 5, plus aminophyline, 400; terbutaline, 2.5; aminophylline, 200; terbutaline, 2.5, plus aminophyline, 200 mg; and placebo. The higher doses of terbutaline and aminophylline alone produced comparable bronchodilation and similarly frequent adverse side effects; low doses of each drug also had comparable effects. The high-dose combination produced significantly (P less than 0.05) greater bronchodilatation than either drug alone. The low dose combination had bronchodilator effects comparable to those produced by the higher dose of either drug alone. These findings suggest therapeutic advantages in combining high doses of theophylline and an oral beta adrenergic agonist (terbutaline) in asthma not well controlled on high doses of either drug alone and in combining these drugs in lower doses in patients experiencing intolerable side effects from a high dose of either drug.
1 The following four treatments were administered by constant intravenous infusion of four healthy volunteers in a balanced randomized study: 1) saline (30 min), salbutamol (0.15 micrograms kg-1 min-1 for 30 min) (sS), 2) saline, aminophylline (0.2 mg kg-1 min-1 for 30 min) (sA), 3) salbutamol, salbutamol (SS) and 4) aminophylline, salbutamol (AS). 2 Heart rate was recorded and venous blood taken for estimation of insulin, glucose, potassium and theophylline before and during the infusions (10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 min). 3 The mean, peak heart rate increases from control, baseline values were 23.0 (sS), 3.5 (sA), 28.5 (SS) and 28.0 (AS) beats/min, the mean, peak insulin increases, 34.0 (sS), 0.5 (sA), 39.0 (SS) and 57.5 (AS) microU ml-1, the mean, peak glucose increases, 1.4 (sS), 0.1 (sA), 2.6 (SS) and 2.0 (AS) mmol 1(-1) and the mean, peak potassium changes, -0.45 (sS), 0.58 (sA), -0.78 (SS) and -0.68 (AS) mmol 1(-1). 4 The mean, peak serum theophylline levels were 48.1 mumol 1(-1) at 60 min in sA and 52.6 mumol 1(-1) at 50 min in AS (39.1 mumol 1(-1) at 30 min). 5 Salbutamol stimulated significant insulin release and produced hypokalaemia and glycogenolysis, whereas aminophylline induced no metabolic effect. 6 A comparison of sS and AS indicated a trend for aminophylline to potentiate the metabolic effects of salbutamol.
The accompanied tissue devastation and systemic toxicity of chemotherapy has shifted the quest for having an effective and palliative cancer therapy towards photodynamic therapy (PDT). Riboflavin (Rf), an essential micronutrient is emerging as a potent tool of PDT, due to its excellent photosensitizing properties. It can be used as an efficient adjuvant for various anticancer drugs. The hemolytic and proteolytic effect of photoilluminated aminophylline (Am), a xanthine derivative, and Rf is well documented in literature. In this study, using human peripheral lymphocytes we have demonstrated the strong pro-oxidant effects of photocatalytic interaction between Am and Rf. The photo degradation kinetics of Am in the presence of Rf was monitored using UV spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. The resultant pro-oxidant action of Am was monitored through various assays like lipid peroxidation, protein carbonylation, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. Furthermore, the cytotoxic potential of this system was studied using comet and MTT (3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay. Treated lymphocytes were visualized using fluorescence and scanning electron microscopy to further validate apoptosis. ROS scavengers ameliorated the oxidative damage caused by this system suggesting pivotal role of ROS in causing apoptotic cell death. As cancer cells exhibit increased absorption of Rf as well as are very sensitive in any further ROS level increment, this putative pathway can serve as an effective anodyne phototherapeutic strategy for cancer treatment. (c) 2017 IUBMB Life, 69(8):611-622, 2017.
Although aminophylline/theophylline has been relegated to third- and fourth-line status in the cardiopulmonary armamentarium, its use in specific pathophysiologic states, especially those of cardiac etiology, can be of significant benefit. The consulting clinician should maintain an awareness of its potential as adjunctive therapy in cases of atrioventricular block, cardiac arrest, heart failure, and bradyarrhythmias in particular. It should not yet be shelved as an archaic agent.
The current study was performed in normal subjects to assess the mechanism of the natriuretic effects of aminophylline, to confirm the effect of acetazolamide on the proximal tubule and to assess the pharmacodynamics of the combination of aminophylline and of acetazolamide with furosemide. None of these agents or their combination affected renal hemodynamics. Aminophylline inhibited solute reabsorption at the diluting segment manifested by a 15% decrease in free water clearance relative to solute delivery (P less than .001). In addition, it decreased solute reabsorption in the proximal nephron. Acetazolamide affected only the proximal tubule. The combination of either aminophylline or of acetazolamide with furosemide was little different from furosemide alone. Analysis of dose-response curves to furosemide revealed a minor additive, i.e., parallel upward shift, of the dose-response curves with both combinations.
Exercise tolerance in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients treated with oral aminophylline may be different from those treated with high-dose inhaled ipratropium bromide. The purpose of this study was to compare the effects of therapeutic doses of oral aminophylline with high-dose ipratropium bromide on spirometry and exercise tolerance. The study was conducted on three consecutive days in a double-blind, randomized, crossover fashion. Baseline studies obtained on each study day included vital signs, simple spirometry and a symptom-limited maximal cardiopulmonary stress test, after which patients received one of the following treatments on each day: Treatment 1, inhaled ipratropium (total dose of 144 micrograms) with placebo tablets; Treatment 2, inhaled placebo with oral aminophylline (400 mg); Treatment 3, inhaled placebo and placebo tablets. Simple spirometry was repeated at 60 and 120 min after baseline. Vital signs and cardiopulmonary stress testing was repeated at 120 min. Eighteen patients were enrolled in the study, and 17 of these completed the study. There was a significant (P < 0.05) increase in both forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), from 0.75 (0.21) to 0.92 (0.3), and forced vital capacity (FVC), from 1.8 (0.79) to 2.11 (0.84), with high-dose ipratropium despite prior beta-agonist therapy. Lack of improvement in exercise capacity was noted with ipratropium despite improvement in spirometry. These results suggest that elderly patients with severe COPD may have exercise limitation that is not directly dependent on severity of airflow obstruction. Ipratropium bromide and aminophylline demonstrated no acute effects on exercise capacity.
