OBJECTIVES: To examine E-aminocaproic acid effectiveness in reducing transfusion requirements in overall and less-invasive cardiac surgery, and to assess its safety. DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study. SETTING: Single-center tertiary academic medical center. PARTICIPANTS: A total of 19,111 adult patients who underwent elective surgery requiring cardiopulmonary bypass from January 1, 2008, through December 31, 2016. INTERVENTIONS: None. MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Propensity matching was used to create well-balanced groups and separately compare both overall cohort and less-invasive surgery with and without E-aminocaproic acid. Supplementary zero-inflated negative binomial regression analysis was used because outcome data were zero-inflated. Effectiveness was assessed by transfusion requirements, and safety by comparison of in-hospital outcomes. In the overall cohort, patients receiving E-aminocaproic acid received fewer red blood cells postoperatively and fewer intra- and postoperativel blood products. In a less-invasive cohort, there was no significant difference in red blood cell transfusion either intra- or postoperatively, but the E-aminocaproic group received fewer intra- and postoperative platelets, intraoperative cryoprecipitate, and postoperative plasma. There were no significant differences for in-hospital outcomes in both less-invasive and overall cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: The reduction of postoperative red blood cell requirement observed when analyzing the overall cohort did not translate to less-invasive cardiac surgery in the authors' patient population; however, both overall and less-invasive cohorts had lower requirements for other blood components with E-aminocaproic acid. There was no association with major Society of thoracic surgeons (STS)-defined morbidity and mortality in both groups.
INTRODUCTION: Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) surgery can be associated with significant blood loss. Among the problems associated with such blood loss is the need for transfusions of banked blood [1]. Transfusions not only have a financial consequence but also carry a small risk of disease transmission to the patient. Antifibrinolytics have been successfully used to reduce transfusion requirements in elective arthroplasty patients. The objective of this meta-analysis is to determine which of tranexamic acid (TXA) and epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) is more effective for reducing peri-operative blood loss, and lessening the need for blood transfusion following knee arthroplasty surgery. MATERIALS AND METHODS: MEDLINE, Embase and CINAHL databases were searched for relevant articles published between January 1980 to January 2018 for the purpose of identifying studies comparing TXA and EACA for TKA surgery. A double-extraction technique was used, and included studies were assessed regarding their methodological quality prior to analysis. Outcomes analysed included blood loss, pre- and post-operative haemoglobin, number of patients requiring transfusion, number of units transfused, operative and tourniquet time, and complications associated with antifibrinolytics. RESULTS: Three studies contributed to the quantitative analysis of 1691 patients, with 743 patients included in the TXA group and 948 in the EACA group. Estimated blood loss was similar between the two groups [95% confidence interval (CI) -0.50, 0.04; Z = 1.69; P = 0.09]. There were no differences between the two groups regarding the percentage of patients requiring transfusion (95% CI 0.14, 4.13; Z = 0.31; P = 0.76). There was no difference in the pre- and post-operative haemoglobin difference between the two groups (95% CI -0.36, 0.24; Z = 0.38; P = 0.70). There was no difference in the average number of transfused units (95% CI -0.53, 0.25; Z = 0.71; P = 0.48). There was no difference in the operative (95% CI -0.35, 0.36; Z = 0.04; P = 0.97) or tourniquet time (95% CI -0.16, 0.34; Z = 0.72; P = 0.47). Similarly, there was no difference in the percentage of venous thromboembolism between the two groups (95% CI 0.17, 2.80; Z = 0.51; P = 0.61). CONCLUSIONS: This study did not demonstrate TXA to be superior to EACA. In fact, both antifibrinolytic therapies demonstrated similar efficacy in terms of intra-operative blood loss, transfusion requirements and complication rates. Currently EACA has a lower cost, which makes it an appealing alternative to TXA for TKA surgery. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3.
OBJECTIVE: At present, the effect of tranexamic acid (TXA) and epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) on total knee arthroplasty (TKA) remains controversial. Therefore, the aim of this meta-analysis is to compare the differences between the effects of TXA and EACA in TKA. METHODS: We used electronic databases, including PubMed, Embase, MEDLINE, Ovid, ScienceDirect, Cochran Library, Google Scholar, clinical trial, and Chinese related databases, for literature search to find any effect of TXA and EACA in TKA. The differences between groups were compared by odds ratio (OR), weighted mean difference (WMD), and 95% confidence interval (CI). A total of four studies, including 3 randomized controlled trials (RCT) and 1 cohort study, were involved in this meta-analysis, involving 1836 participants. Among these participants, 816 belonged to the TXA group and 1020 belonged to the EACA group. RESULTS: Meta-analysis indicated no difference in surgery time (WMD = 0.01, 95% CI -0.35 to 0.36), total amount of blood loss (WMD = 0.14, 95% CI -0.09 to 0.37), transfusion rate (OR = 0.74, 95% CI 0.20 to 2.78), transfusion units per patient (SMD = -0.15, 95% CI -0.54 to 0.25), complications (OR = 0.75, 95% CI 0.37 to 1.55), and length of stay (SMD = -0.01, 95% CI -0.11 to 0.08). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the effect of TXA is not superior to EACA in TKA. However, this conclusion still needs to be further confirmed by multicenter and large-sample clinical trials.
Epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) is a potent anti-fibrinolytic agent that is used in the treatment of excessive bleeding resulting from a systemic fibrinolytic state. It can also be used to treat hematuria through its action on decreasing urinary fibrinolysis. A broad range of renal complications has been ascribed to EACA. Although they are rare, they may be life-threatening and should therefore be immediately recognized.
Bleeding and thrombosis-related complications are common in pediatric cardiac patients supported by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and are associated with morbidity and mortality. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the utility of aminocaproic acid (ACA), an antifibrinolytic agent, as it pertains to bleeding in pediatric cardiac patients on ECMO. This included a retrospective cohort study of pediatric cardiac patients receiving ACA while supported on ECMO between 2013 and 2017. For each patient, data were collected in three time intervals: the 24 hours before ACA initiation, and then 0-24 and 24-48 hours following ACA initiation. For each time frame, bleeding, component transfusion, and laboratory data were collected and analyzed. A total of 62 patients were included, representing 42% of our cardiac ECMO patients during the time period. ACA was initiated at 16.3 +/- 8.7 hours following initiation of ECMO. The mean bleeding rate before ACA was 10.57 mL/kg/h, which reduced to 7.8 mL/kg/h in the 24-hour period after initiation of ACA and a further decrease to 3.65 mL/kg/h during the 24- to 48-hour time period following ACA initiation. ACA administration was associated with reduction in bleeding (p < .001) and packed red blood cell transfusions (p = .02), administration of fresh frozen plasma (p < .001), platelets (p = .017), cryoprecipitate (p = .05), factor VII (p = .002), and Cell Saver (p = .005). Hemoglobin and platelet count were stable, whereas prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time, and international normalized ratio (INR) showed significant reduction over the time course. ACA administration was not associated with specific adverse effects. A clinically significant reduction in bleeding amount, red blood cell transfusions, and other hematologic interventions occurred following ACA administration for pediatric patients on ECMO. Wider consideration for ACA use as a part of a multipronged strategy to manage bleeding during ECMO should be considered.
BACKGROUND: The aim was to compare the efficacy and safety of epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) and tranexamic acid (TXA) in total hip arthroplasty (THA) and total knee arthroplasty (TKA). METHODS: Potential academic articles were identified from the Cochrane Library, Springer, PubMed, and ScienceDirect databases from inception to December 2019. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-RCTs involving EACA and TXA in THA or TKA were included. Pooled data were analyzed using RevMan 5.1. RESULTS: Three RCTs and three non-RCTs met the inclusion criteria. The present meta-analysis reveals that EACA is associated with significantly more blood loss than TXA. No significant differences were identified in terms of blood transfusion rate, transfusion units, hemoglobin (Hb) level at discharge, operation time, length of hospital stay, deep venous thrombosis (DVT), or 30-day readmission. CONCLUSIONS: Compared with TXA, EACA led to more blood loss in patients undergoing THA or TKA. However, there was no significant difference in the blood transfusion rate, transfusion units, Hb level at discharge, operation time, length of hospital stay, DVT, or 30-day readmission between groups.
A prospective, randomized, double-blind trial of bladder irrigation with a 0.5% solution of epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) versus normal saline plus placebo was undertaken in 75 patients undergoing transurethral resection of the prostate for benign or malignant disease. Systemic absorption after irrigation with EACA was not detectable. No significant advantage, however, was demonstrated for the EACA solution over normal saline irrigation in measured postoperative blood loss, irrigant volume, hours of catheterization, or length of hospital stay.
Uncontrolled bleeding is one of the leading causes of human mortality. Existing hemostatic materials or techniques cannot meet the clinical requirements for safe and effective hemostasis. The development of novel hemostatic materials has always been of great interest. Chitosan hydrochloride (CSH), a derivative of chitin, is extensively used on wounds as an antibacterial and hemostatic agent. However, the formation of intra- or intermolecular hydrogen bonds between hydroxyl and amino groups limits its water solubility and dissolution rate and affects its effectiveness in promoting coagulation. Herein, we covalently grafted aminocaproic acid (AA) to the hydroxyl and amino groups of CSH via ester and amide bonds, respectively. The solubility of CSH in water (25  degrees C) was 11.39 +/- 0.98 % (w/v), whereas the AA-grafted CSH (CSH-AA) reached 32.34 +/- 1.23 % (w/v). Moreover, the dissolution rate of CSH-AA in water was 6.46 times higher than that of CSH. Subsequent studies proved that CSH-AA is non-toxic, biodegradable, and has superior antibacterial and hemostatic properties to CSH. Additionally, anti-plasmin activity can be exerted by the dissociated AA from the CSH-AA backbone, which can help to lessen secondary bleeding.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) in reducing the blood loss and transfusion volume during open spinal deformity surgery. METHODS: A systematic search was conducted for all studies written in English published on or before October 2018 in PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library that compared antifibrinolytic agents with placebos for open spinal deformity surgeries. The primary outcomes included the total blood loss, intraoperative, and postoperative blood loss, transfusions volume and complication rate. RESULTS: Seven studies that included 525 patients who were diagnosed with spinal deformity. Compared with placebo, the patients who received EACA showed a reduction in the postoperative blood loss (mean difference [MD] -249.80; 95% confidence interval [CI] -375.65 to -123.95; P = 0.0001) and total blood loss (MD -670.30; 95% CI -1142.63 to -197.98; P = 0.005). Furthermore, the patients treated with EACA received approximately 1.67 fewer units of blood (MD -1.67; 95% CI -3.10 to -0.24; P = 0.02). However, in this cohort, no statistically significant differences were observed in the intraoperative blood loss (MD -452.19; 95% CI -1082.21 to 177.83; P = 0.16) and complication rate (odds ratio 0.73; 95% CI 0.16-3.24; P = 0.68). CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrated that EACA could be safe and potentially efficacious for reducing blood loss and transfusions volume in patients with spinal deformity surgeries when compared with placebo. In light of the significant heterogeneity, the findings of this meta-analysis should be confirmed in methodologically rigorous and adequately powered clinical trials.
BACKGROUND/AIM: Alveolar osteitis (AO), also known as "dry socket", is relatively common post-extraction complication. It probably occurs due to excessive fibrinolytic activity in the coagulum and is characterized by intense pain sensations. The aim of this clinical study was to examine the role of hyaluronic acid and aminocaproic acid in the treatment of AO. METHODS: The study included 60 patients with the clinical diagnosis of AO. All the patients were divided into two groups of 30 patients each according to the applied non-pharmacological measure: irrigation - irrigation of dry socket with sterile saline; curettage - careful curettage. Both of these groups were further divided into three subgroups regarding the applied treatment (hyaluronic acid; hyaluronic acid + aminocaproic acid; Alvogyl (R), an anesthetic and antiseptic paste), each with 10 patients, according to the following protocol: 0.2 mL of hyaluronic acid in the form of a 0.8% gel; 2 mL of aminocaproic acid and hyaluronic acid; Alvogyl(R). During each visit, scheduled for every two days until complete absence of painful sensations, the patients had the therapeutic method repeated as at the first examination. At each control visit the number of present symptoms and signs of AO was recorded, as well as the level of pain (measured with a visual analogue scale). RESULTS: With the use of hyaluronic acid, with or without aminocaproic one, a statistically significantly faster reduction in pain sensations was achieved, along with the reduction in the number of symptoms and signs of AO compared to the use of Alvogyl(R). CONCLUSION: Hyaluronic acid, applied alone or in combination with aminocaproic acid significantly reduces pain sensation, thus it can be successfully used in the treatment of AO.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the literature describing topical use of tranexamic acid or aminocaproic acid for prevention of postoperative bleeding after major surgical procedures. DATA SOURCES: Literature was retrieved through MEDLINE (1946-September 2011) and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1970-September 2011) using the terms tranexamic acid, aminocaproic acid, antifibrinolytic, topical, and surgical. In addition, reference citations from publications identified were reviewed. STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All identified articles in English were evaluated. Clinical trials, case reports, and meta-analyses describing topical use of tranexamic acid or aminocaproic acid to prevent postoperative bleeding were included. DATA SYNTHESIS: A total of 16 publications in the setting of major surgical procedures were included; the majority of data were for tranexamic acid. For cardiac surgery, 4 trials used solutions containing tranexamic acid (1-2.5 g in 100-250 mL of 0.9% NaCl), and 1 trial assessed a solution containing aminocaproic acid (24 g in 250 mL of 0.9% NaCl). These solutions were poured into the chest cavity before sternotomy closure. For orthopedic procedures, all of the data were for topical irrigation solutions containing tranexamic acid (500 mg-3 g in 50-100 mL of 0.9% NaCl) or for intraarticular injections of tranexamic acid (250 mg to 2 g in 20-50 mL of 0.9% sodium chloride, with or without carbazochrome sodium sulfate). Overall, use of topical tranexamic acid or aminocaproic acid reduced postoperative blood loss; however, few studies reported a significant reduction in the number of packed red blood cell transfusions or units given, intensive care unit stay, or length of hospitalization. CONCLUSIONS: Topical application of tranexamic acid and aminocaproic acid to decrease postsurgical bleeding after major surgical procedures is a promising strategy. Further data are needed regarding the safety of this hemostatic approach.
A clinical trial of epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) in preventing recurrent hemorrhage from intracranial arterial aneurysms is reported. Previous reports were reviewed, and their results concerning antifibrinolytic agents were inconclusive in establishing their efficacy. One hundred patients with documented ruptured intracranial aneurysms were admitted to this study within 48 hours of the initial hemorrhage: 45 patients received 36 gm of EACA/day, with 11 documented rebleeds and one suspected rebleed. No benefit was seen from the use of EACA.
This double-blind, randomized study compared the mechanisms by which low-dose aprotinin and epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) inhibited fibrinolysis during cardiopulmonary bypass surgery. D-dimer levels during and after bypass were similar, indicating an equivalent inhibition of fibrinolysis. Effects on tissue plasminogen activator release were not associated with the inhibition of fibrinolysis by either drug. Treatment with EACA was associated with a substantial release of endogenous alpha2-antiplasmin, particularly 1 h after bypass. Compared with the aprotinin group, higher levels of the plasmin-alpha2-antiplasmin complex in the EACA group confirmed an increased inhibition of plasmin by alpha2-antiplasmin. In conclusion, it is hypothesized that EACA inhibited fibrinolysis by stimulating the release of the patients' own alpha2-antiplasmin.
AIMS: Antifibrinolytic agents, including tranexamic acid (TXA) and epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA), have been shown to be safe and effective for decreasing perioperative blood loss and transfusion following total hip arthroplasty (THA) and total knee arthroplasty (TKA). However, there are few prospective studies that directly compare these agents. The purpose of this study was to compare the benefits of intraoperative intravenous TXA with EACA. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 235 patients (90 THA and 145 TKA) were enrolled in this prospective, randomized controlled trial at a single tertiary-care referral centre. In the THA cohort, 53.3% of the patients were female with a median age of 59.8 years (interquartile range (IQR) 53.3 to 68.1). In the TKA cohort, 63.4% of the patients were female with a median age of 65.1 years (IQR 59.4 to 69.5). Patients received either TXA (n = 119) or EACA (n = 116) in two doses intraoperatively. The primary outcome measures included change in haemoglobin level and blood volume, postoperative drainage, and rate of transfusion. Secondary outcome measures included postoperative complications, cost, and length of stay (LOS). RESULTS: TKA patients who received EACA had greater drainage (median 320 ml (IQR 185 to 420) vs 158 ml (IQR 110 to 238); p < 0.001), increased loss of blood volume (891 ml (IQR 612 to 1203) vs 661 ml (IQR 514 to 980); p = 0.014), and increased haemoglobin change from the preoperative level (2.1 ml (IQR 1.7 to 2.8) vs 1.9 ml (IQR 1.2 to 2.4); p = 0.016) compared with patients who received TXA. For the THA cohort, no statistically significant differences were observed in any haematological outcome measure. One patient in the EACA group required transfusion. No patient in the TXA group required transfusion. There were no statistically significant differences in number or type of postoperative complications or LOS for either THA or TKA patients regardless of whether they received TXA or EACA. CONCLUSION: For hip and knee arthroplasty procedures, EACA is associated with increased perioperative blood loss compared with TXA. However, there is no significant difference in transfusion rate. While further prospective studies are needed to compare the efficacy of each agent, we currently recommend orthopaedic surgeons to select their antifibrinolytic based on cost and regional availability. Cite this article: Bone Joint J 2019;101-B:1093-1099.
OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of aminocaproic acid in total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and total hip arthroplasty (THA). METHODS: The electronic databases include PubMed, Medline, Embase, Web of Science and the Cochrane Library from inception to January, 2018. Two reviewers abstracted total blood loss, hemoglobin drop, transfusion requirements, and postoperative complications. Data were using fixed-effects or random-effects models with weighted mean differences and risk difference for continuous and dichotomous variables, respectively. STATA 14.0 was used to perform the meta-analysis. RESULTS: Six studies encompassing 756 participants were retrieved for this meta-analysis. Our study indicated that intravenous aminocaproic acid was associated with a significantly reduction in total blood loss, hemoglobin drop and need for transfusion. Additionally, no increased risk of thromboembolic events were identified. CONCLUSION: Based on the present meta-analysis, intravenous aminocaproic acid is effective and safe in total knee and hip arthroplasty without increasing the incidence of thromboembolic events. Further studies should focus on the comparison of aminocaproic acid and TXA in arthroplasties.
BACKGROUND: Tranexamic acid (TXA) has long been the antifibrinolytic hemostatic drug of choice for orthopedic surgery. In recent years, the hemostatic effect of epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) has gradually been recognized by orthopedic surgeons and has begun to be used in hip and knee arthroplasty with little mention of the comparison of these two drugs; Therefore, this study compared the efficacy and safety of EACA and TXA in the perioperative period of elderly patients with trochanteric fractures to verify whether EAC could be a "qualified alternative" to TXA and to provide theoretical support for the clinical application of TXA. METHODS: Two hundred and forty-three patients who received proximal femoral nail antirotation (PFNA) for trochanteric fractures from January 2021 to March 2022 at our institution were included and divided into the EACA group (n = 146) and the TXA group. (n = 97) determined by the drugs used in the perioperative period The main observations were blood loss and blood transfusion.The second second outcome was blood routine, coagulation, Hospital complications and complications after discharge. RESULTS: The perioperative EACA patients had significantly lower significant blood loss (DBL) than the TXA group (p < 0.0001) and statistically significant lower C-reactive protein in the EACA group than in the TXA group on postoperative day 1 (p = 0.022). Patients on perioperative TXA had better postoperative day one (p = 0.002) and postoperative day five erythrocyte width than the EACA group (p = 0.004). However, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups in the remaining indicators in both drugs: blood items, coagulation indicators, blood loss, blood transfusion, length of hospital(LOH), total hospital expense, and postoperative complications (p > 0.05). CONCLUSION: The hemostatic effects and safety of EACA and TXA in the perioperative application of trochanteric fractures in the elderly are essentially similar, and EACA can be considered for use as an alternative to TXA, increasing the flexibility of physicians to use it in the clinical setting. However, the limited sample size included necessitated a high-quality, large sample of clinical studies and long-term follow-up.
BACKGROUND: Antifibrinolytic agents, tranexamic acid (TXA) and epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA), are often used during cardiac surgery to decrease the number of allogenic blood transfusions and to prevent perioperative bleeding. Weight-based TXA dosing regimens have been compared to fixed-dose regimens of EACA with variable outcomes in perioperative blood product transfusions and chest tube output. Serious adverse events, including seizures, have been reported with higher doses of TXA. Fixed-dose TXA regimens have been evaluated in trauma and orthopedic surgery but there is a paucity of evidence in the cardiac surgery population. AIMS OF THE STUDY: To compare the safety and efficacy of fixed-dose TXA versus EACA in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. METHODS: A single-center, retrospective chart review was conducted at a 793-bed tertiary care academic teaching hospital comparing cardiac surgery patients receiving either fixed-dose TXA 1000 mg followed by a 500-1000 mg infusion or EACA-7.5 g intravenous boluses followed by a 1-1.25 g/h infusion for the duration of the surgery. The major endpoint included chest tube output at 12 h, 24 h, and 7 days postoperatively. Minor endpoints included quantity and incidence of blood product transfusions and reported safety events. RESULTS: There were 1544 patients included. Chest tube output was similar between groups and the TXA group required more intraoperative blood product transfusions (22.7% vs. 18.2%, p = .03). There were no differences in the median quantity of total blood products administered postoperatively at 24 h or at 7 days. Reported safety events were similar between groups. CONCLUSION: Both fixed-dose TXA and EACA may be considered safe and effective options for antifibrinolytic therapy in cardiac surgery patients.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) load of 50 mg∙kg(-1) before skin incision, and infusion of 25 mg∙kg(-1)∙h(-1) until skin closure during cranial vault reconstruction (CVR) were associated with decreased estimated blood loss and transfusion requirements. BACKGROUND: Antifibrinolytic medications decrease bleeding and transfusion requirements during cardiothoracic and orthopedic surgeries with high blood loss, but practical reductions in blood loss and transfusion requirements have not been consistently realized in children undergoing CVR. Current dosing recommendations are derived from adult extrapolations, and may or may not have clinical relevance. METHOD: Retrospective case-controlled study of 45 consecutive infants and children undergoing primary craniosynostosis surgery at Covenant Children's Hospital during years 2010-2014. Exclusion criteria included revision surgery, and chromosomal abnormalities associated with bleeding disorders. Blood loss and blood transfusion volumes as a percent of estimated blood volume were compared in the presence of EACA while controlling for age, suture phenotype, use of bone grafting, and length of surgery. Secondary outcomes measures included volume of crystalloid infused, length of hospital stay, and any postoperative intubation requirement. RESULTS: When analyzed based on length of surgery, EACA did reduce blood loss and blood transfusion (R(2)=0.19, P=.005 and R(2)=0.18, P=.010, respectively) with shorter surgeries. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Using a standardized dosing regimen of EACA during craniosynostosis surgery, we found statistical significance in blood loss and transfusion requirements in surgeries of the shortest duration. We suspect this may be due to our selected dosing regimen, which may be lower than recently recommended. This study contributes to the growing body of evidence supporting EACA in CVR for craniosynostosis.
A controlled study of the effect of aminocaproic acid 3 g six-hourly taken by mouth during menstruation was carried out on 56 women for eight months from the time of insertion of a Lippes D intrauterine device (IUD). Thirty-five women presenting with menorrhagia in association with an IUD were also treated during three out of six consecutive menses. A highly significant reduction in menstrual loss was observed during treatment in both groups.
