Hypertension is the leading cause of death worldwide, affecting 1.4 billion people. Treatment options include the widely used calcium channel blockers, among which amlodipine, a dihydropyridine, has unique characteristics that distinguish it from other drugs within this class. This review aims to provide an updated overview of the evidence supporting the use of amlodipine over the past 30 years and highlights its cardiovascular benefits in current hypertension management. Amlodipine has low renal clearance (7 mL/min/mg) and long half-life (35-50 h) and duration of action, which allows it to sustain its anti-hypertensive effect for more than 24 h following a single dose. Additionally, blood pressure (BP) control is maintained even when a dose has been missed, providing continuous protection in case of incidental noncompliance. It has proven to reduce BP variability and successfully lower BP. Amlodipine also controls BP in patients with a systolic/diastolic BP of 130/80 mm Hg or higher, diabetes, or chronic kidney disease without worsening glycemic or kidney function. Additionally, amlodipine is a wise choice for older adults due to its ability to control BP and protect against stroke and myocardial infarction. Side effects of amlodipine include edema, palpitations, dizziness, and flushing, which are more common with the higher dose of 10 mg. Amlodipine is cost effective and predicted to be cost saving when compared with usual care.
BACKGROUND: Anti-hypertensive drugs can improve vascular endothelial function. However, the mechanism remains to be elucidated. OBJECTIVES: This study sought to investigate mechanisms of anti-hypertensive drugs on improvement of vascular endothelial function in patients with essential hypertension. METHODS: Forty-five patients (mean age 58.5 +/- 11.2 years) with uncontrolled essential hypertension were randomly assigned to receive olmesartan, an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker (ARB) (N = 23), or amlodipine, a calcium channel blocker (CCB) (N = 22), for 6 months. Endothelial function was evaluated by flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) of the brachial artery. Vascular inflammation was measured by blood-normalized standardized uptake value, known as a target-to-background ratio (TBR) within the carotid arteries using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography combined with computed tomography. RESULTS: There were no significant differences of baseline clinical data between the ARB and CCB groups. Both anti-hypertensive drugs comparably lowered blood pressure and increased %FMD. TBR values were reduced by olmesartan (P < .001), while blood pressure variability was decreased by amlodipine (P = .004). Changes in %FMD from baseline (Delta%FMD) were inversely associated with DeltaTBR in the olmesartan group (r = - .606, P = .003) and with Deltasystolic blood pressure variability in the amlodipine group (r = - .434, P = .039). CONCLUSION: Our study indicated that olmesartan and amlodipine could improve endothelial function in patients with essential hypertension in different manners, suppression of vascular inflammation, and decrease in blood pressure variability, respectively.
For the quantifiable amounts of Telmisartan (TLM) and Hydrochlorothiazide (HYD) in the presence of Amlodipine (AML) in a ternary mixture of synthetic laboratory mixture, a novel, sensitive, quick, and practical reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) method was given. In order to separate, a Waters Spherisorb ODS-2 C18 column was used. For HYD, TLM, and AML, these techniques were viable over linearity ranges of 4-12 mug/mL, 4-25 mug/mL, and 5-40 mug/mL, respectively. The mobile phase system was acetonitrile:methanol: phosphate buffer at pH 2.5 (65:5:30 v/v/v), and the flow rate was 1.5 mL/min. Novel spectrophotometric methods were applied for active substances to determine simultaneously. The first method is absorptivity centering using factorized spectrum, and the second method is dual amplitude difference coupled with absorbance subtraction. These approaches have been effectively applied to bulk, laboratory synthetic mixtures to employ active components quantitatively. Correlation coefficients were found to be higher than 0.99 and the limit of detection values lower than 0.49 mug/mL in both spectrophotometric methods. The methodologies were validated following ICH recommendations. In the developed HPLC method, the limit of detection values was found to be 0.01 mug/mL for HYD and 0.02 mug/mL for AML and TLM. The correlation coefficients for the HPLC method were found to be 0.9971 for HYD, 0.9990 for AML, and 0.9983 for TLM. The suggested HPLC technique is a simple, effective, sensitive, environmentally friendly, and time-saving approach for determining TLM and HYD in the presence of AML.
Elderly patients with resistant hypertension are at increased risk for cardiovascular events. Clinical trials suggest that resistant hypertension involves perhaps 10-15% of hypertension study participants. In this study, 157 resistant hypertension patients older than 60 years were randomized to 8 weeks double-blind treatment with placebo, AML 10 mg/day, OM 40 mg/day and AMxL (10 mg/day)+OM (40 mg/day). Research outcomes suggested that ALM+OM combination therapy had superior efficacy than ALM or OM monotherapies in terms of the clinic blood pressure and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure. In addition, more patients receiving combination therapy (62.5%) achieved BP goal than those treated with placebo (18.4%), AML (37.5) or OM (38.5%) monotherapies. The adverse events in both groups were comparable. Thus, the combination of AML+OM provides a safe and effective option for the treatment of resistant hypertension in challenging elderly patient populations.
Pharmacological treatment of hypertension is effective in preventing cardiovascular and renal complications. Calcium antagonists and blockers of the renin-angiotensin system are widely used today to initiate antihypertensive therapy but, when given as monotherapy, do not suffice in most patients to normalize blood pressure. Combining the two types of agents considerably increases the antihypertensive efficacy, but not at the expense of a deterioration of tolerability. This is exemplified by the experience accumulated with the recently developed fixed dose combination containing the AT(1)-receptor blocker valsartan (160 mg) and the dihydropyridine amlodipine (5 or 10 mg). In a randomized trial, an 8-week treatment normalized blood pressure (<140/90 mmHg) within 8 weeks in a large fraction of hypertensive patients (78.4% and 85.2% using the 5/160 [n = 371] and 10/160 mg [n = 377] dosage, respectively). Like all AT(1)-receptor blockers valsartan has a placebo-like tolerability. Valsartan prevents to a large extent the occurrence amlodipine-induced peripheral edema. Both amlodipine and valsartan have beneficial effects on cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, as well as protective effects on renal function. The co-administration of these two agents is therefore very attractive, as it enables a rapid and sustained blood pressure control in hypertensive patients. The availability of a fixed-dose combination based on amlodipine and valsartan is expected therefore to facilitate the management of hypertension, to improve long-term adherence with antihypertensive therapy and, ultimately, to have a positive impact on cardiovascular and renal outcomes.
Gingival overgrowth is a common feature of periodontal diseases. Rarely it occurs as an unwanted side effect of drugs such as anticonvulsants mainly phenytoin, immunosuppressants like cyclosporine and calcium channel blockers particularly nifedipine. Among calcium channel blockers, nifedipine causes gingival overgrowth in 10% of patients whereas amlodipine-induced gingival overgrowth is very limited. Here we report four cases in hypertensives on amlodipine.
Hypertension is a common disorder of major clinical, public health and economic importance. It affects men and women of all ages, and the prevalence is increasing in most countries. Maintenance of blood pressure below 140/90 mm of Hg is recommended by most of the guideline available around the world. Various classes of drugs are being used in the treatment of hypertension. Losartan potassium and amlodipine are two different antihypertensive agents belonging to two different groups used commonly around the world in treating essential hypertension. Losartan potassium is non-peptide Angiotensin-II receptor antagonist. Amlodipine which is the third generation dihydropyridine group of calcium channel blocker. The aim of the study was to compare the efficacy and safety of amlodipine and losartan for the treatment of essential hypertensive patients (18-75 years). A non-randomized comparative observational study was conducted in the Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics in collaboration with Department of Medicine, Sylhet, MAG Osmani Medical College, Sylhet, Bangladesh from July 2021 to June 2022. In this study non-randomization was in two groups. Group A received amlodipine 5mg daily at morning and Group B received losartan potassium 50mg daily at night. The study parameters were systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), ankle oedema, serum K+ level. The result of treatment outcome was compared between two groups. After treatment the reduction of SBP was 5.19+/-2.93mm of Hg versus 3.27+/-1.34mm of Hg (p<0.001); reduction of DBP was 1.7+/-0.70 mm of Hg versus 0.68 mm of Hg (p<0.001) and serum K+ level 4.22+/-0.27mmol/L versus 4.21+/-0.16mmol/L (p<0.719) in amlodipine and losartan group respectively. Amlodipine is more effective than losartan potassium in respect to treatment of essential hypertension. Regarding adverse events losartan potassium causes angioedema, hyperkalemia, headache, dizziness etc. The study concluded that amlodipine is superior to losartan potassium in treating essential hypertension.
The aim of this study was to analyze the binding interactions between a common antihypertensive drug (amlodipine besylate-AML) and the widely distributed plant flavonoid quercetin (Q), in the presence of human serum albumin (HSA). Fluorescence analysis was implemented to investigate the effect of ligands on albumin intrinsic fluorescence and to define the binding and quenching properties. Further methods, such as circular dichroism and FT-IR, were used to obtain more details. The data show that both of these compounds bind to Sudlow's Site 1 on HSA and that there exists a competitive interaction between them. Q is able to displace AML from its binding site and the presence of AML makes it easier for Q to bind. AML binds with the lower affinity and if the binding site is already occupied by Q, it binds to the secondary binding site inside the same hydrophobic pocket of Sudlow's Site 1, with exactly the same affinity. Experimental data were complemented with molecular docking studies. The obtained results provide useful information about possible pharmacokinetic interactions upon simultaneous co-administration of the food/dietary supplement and the antihypertensive drug.
BACKGROUND: Amlodipine has been shown to improve vascular endothelial function in hypertensive patients, but whether S(-)-amlodipine has a similar effect remains controversial. This study compared the effects of amlodipine and S(-)-amlodipine on vascular endothelial function in hypertensive patients and investigated relevant mechanisms of action in cell culture. METHODS: Twenty-four patients with essential hypertension received amlodipine and S(-)-amlodipine for 6 weeks in a randomized, crossover study. Associated flow-mediated dilation (FMD), nitric oxide (NO), and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) levels were determined. NO levels were measured after exposure of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) to amlodipine, S(-)-amlodipine, the eNOS inhibitor N w-nitro-L-arginine (L-NA), and the Protein Kinase C (PKC) inhibitor Ro 31-8220. Phosphorylation levels of Ser(1177) and Thr(495) in eNOS were determined after exposure to amlodipine, S(-)-amlodipine, and Ro 31-8220. RESULTS: FMD, NO, and eNOS levels significantly improved after treatment with amlodipine and S(-)-amlodipine. The levels were all higher with amlodipine, although the between-treatment difference was not statistically significant. Amlodipine and S(-)-amlodipine significantly increased NO levels in cultured HUVECs, but increases in NO levels were more marked with amlodipine. Western blot assay showed that both amlodipine and Ro31-8220 induced Ser(1177) phosphorylation and weakened Thr(495) phosphorylation in eNOS. S(-)-amlodipine had no similar effects. Amlodipine, but not S(-)-amlodipine, decreased the PKC phosphorylation in a time-dependent manner. CONCLUSIONS: Amlodipine and S(-)-amlodipine can both improve endothelial function in hypertensive patients. Amlodipine has greater potential for vascular endothelial protection than S(-)-amlodipine. It affects eNOS phosphorylation at Ser(1177) and Thr(495) by the PKC pathway, further enhancing eNOS activation.
OBJECTIVE: The EXCITE (clinical EXperienCe of amlodIpine and valsarTan in hypErtension) study was designed to evaluate the effectiveness, tolerability and adherence of amlodipine/valsartan (Aml/Val) and amlodipine/valsartan/hydrochlorothiazide (Aml/Val/HCT) single-pill combination therapies in patients with hypertension from the Middle East and Asia studied in routine clinical practice. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This was a prospective, multinational, non-interventional real-world study in which adult patients with hypertension receiving treatment with Aml/Val or Aml/Val/HCT as part of routine clinical practice were observed for a period of 26 +/- 8 weeks. Dosages in milligrams (prescribed in accordance with local prescribing information) were Aml/Val: 5/80, 5/160, 10/160, 5/320 or 10/320; Aml/Val/HCT: 5/160/12.5, 10/160/12.5, 5/160/25, 10/160/25 or 10/320/25. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Treatment effectiveness was assessed by change from baseline in mean sitting systolic blood pressure (BP)/diastolic BP (msSBP/msDBP), and the proportion of patients achieving therapeutic goal and BP response. Safety and tolerability were also assessed. RESULTS: Of 9794 patients analyzed (mean age 53.2 years), 8603 received Aml/Val and 1191 Aml/Val/HCT. At study end (26 +/- 8 weeks), overall msSBP (95% confidence interval [CI]) reductions from baseline were -31.0 (-31.42, -30.67) mmHg for Aml/Val and -36.6 (-37.61, -35.50) mmHg for Aml/Val/HCT; msDBP reductions from baseline were -16.6 (-16.79, -16.34) mmHg for Aml/Val and -17.8 (-18.41, -17.22) mmHg for Aml/Val/HCT. Meaningful reductions in BP from baseline were also consistently observed across all Aml/Val dosages and severities of hypertension. Adverse events (AEs) were reported in 11.2% and 6.1% of patients in the Aml/Val and Aml/Val/HCT groups, respectively. Most frequently reported AEs in the Aml/Val and Aml/Val/HCT groups were edema and peripheral edema. While the observational design of the study has inherent limitations, it enables collection of real-world data from a more naturalistic clinical setting, and the large size of the study increases the robustness of the study, as indicated by the narrow confidence intervals for the main study outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: The EXCITE study provides evidence that Aml/Val and Aml/Val/HCT provide clinically meaningful BP reductions and are well tolerated in a large multi-ethnic hypertensive population studied in routine clinical practice.
Trials with pulverized brand-name antihypertensive drugs suggest that, from the perspective of taste acceptability, crushed candesartan, chlortalidon, hydrochlorothiazide, lercanidipine and lisinopril should be preferred to pulverized amlodipine, atenolol, bisoprolol, enalapril, irbesartan, losartan, ramipril, telmisartan and valsartan. Brand-name antihypertensive drugs and the corresponding generic medicines have never been compared with respect to their taste acceptability. We therefore investigated among healthy health care workers the taste acceptability of a pulverized 1 mg-test dose of the brand-name and two generics containing either the dihydropyridine calcium-channel blocker amlodipine (Norvasc((R)), Amlodipin-Mepha((R)) and Amlodipin Pfizer((R))) or the angiotensin receptor antagonist candesartan (Atacand((R)), Cansartan-Mepha((R)) and Pemzek((R))). For this purpose, a smiley-face scale depicting four degrees of pleasure was used. Between November and December 2013, the taste test was performed among 19 nurses (15 female and 4 male subjects) and 12 physicians (5 female and 7 male subjects) aged between 25 and 49 years. Pulverized brand-names and generics containing either amlodipine or candesartan did not differ with respect to their taste acceptability.
Amlodipine/atorvastatin (Caduet) is a single-tablet, fixed-dose combination of the dihydropyridine calcium channel antagonist amlodipine and the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor atorvastatin. The bioavailability of amlodipine and atorvastatin with a single-tablet, fixed-dose amlodipine/atorvastatin combination was not significantly different to that with coadministered separate amlodipine and atorvastatin tablets. In well controlled clinical trials in patients with hypertension and dyslipidaemia, once-daily amlodipine and atorvastatin (administered as the single-tablet, fixed-dose combination or coadministered as two separate tablets) effectively reduced systolic BP (SBP) and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels, and enabled more patients to achieve BP and LDL-C goals than single-agent or placebo therapy. There was no modification of the effect of amlodipine on SBP when administered in combination with atorvastatin and there was no modification of the effect of atorvastatin on LDL-C when administered in combination with amlodipine. In noncomparative, titration-to-goal, open-label 'real-world' trials, the single-tablet, fixed-dose combination of amlodipine/atorvastatin enabled patients with hypertension and dyslipidaemia to achieve both BP and LDL-C goals. Administration of a single tablet of amlodipine/atorvastatin, compared with coadministration of these agents as two separate tablets, improved patient adherence, according to a retrospective study that utilized prescription refill rates from a large US insurance database. Data from the large, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled ASCOT-LLA trial also demonstrated that the combination of amlodipine-based therapy and atorvastatin was effective in preventing cardiovascular (CV) endpoints in hypertensive patients at risk of CV disease (CVD). In summary, amlodipine/atorvastatin offers a convenient and effective approach to improving adherence and managing CV risk in hypertensive patients with dyslipidaemia or at risk of CVD.
The efficacy and safety of the novel calcium antagonist Amlodipine (Pfizer Laboratories, New York, New York) and hydrochlorothiazide were evaluated and compared in a randomized, single-blind, parallel group study in black Africans with essential hypertension. Twenty Nigerians with newly diagnosed mild to moderate essential hypertension were randomized to receive ascending doses of Amlodipine (5 mg and 10 mg) or hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg or 50 mg), and blood pressure and heart rate were measured at baseline and at 2, 4, and 6 weeks of therapy. Both Amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide significantly reduced supine and erect blood pressure. Supine blood pressure on Amlodipine fell from a mean of 190/104 mm Hg to 150/79 mm Hg, and on thiazide from 180/103 mm Hg to 141/84 mm Hg. There was, however, no significant difference between both drugs in antihypertensive efficacy. Neither drug induced a reflex increase in heart rate. The fall in blood pressure on both agents was associated with an increase in plasma urea. Amlodipine induced no change in plasma potassium, but hydrochlorothiazide caused hypokalemia. Both agents were well tolerated, and Amlodipine should undergo further study in the treatment of hypertension in blacks.
The purpose of this study was to elucidate the therapeutic effect of different antihypertensive drugs (amlodipine and perindopril) on hypertension induced by apatinib and bevacizumab. Sixty patients with hypertension treated with apatinib or bevacizumab were selected and divided into two groups: one group was treated with amlodipine and the other group was treated with perindopril. Before and after treatment, the dynamic blood pressure (BP) measurement (systolic BP [SBP] and diastolic BP [DBP]), echocardiography (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter, interventricular septal thickness [IVST], left ventricular posterior wall thickness [LVPWT], and left atrial diameter [LAD]), and detection of nitric oxide (NO) content in venous blood were performed. In the amlodipine group, the 24hSBP, 24hSSD, 24hSCV, daytime mean SBP (dSBP), daytime mean SSD (dSSD), daytime mean SBP CV, night mean SBP (nSBP), night mean SSD, 24hDBP, 24hDSD, 24 h DBP CV, daytime mean DBP (dDBP), daytime mean DSD (dDSD), daytime mean DBP CV, night mean DBP (nDBP), LAD, and LAD index (LADi) after treatment were all lower than before treatment, while NO was higher than before treatment (all P < 0.05). In the perindopril group, the 24hSBP, dSBP, nSBP, 24hDBP, dDBP, nDBP, LAD, LADi, IVST, LVPWT, and left ventricular mass index (LVMI) after treatment were lower than before treatment, and NO level after treatment was higher than before treatment (all P < 0.05). After treatment, the 24hSBP, 24hSSD, dSBP, dSSD, nSBP, 24hDBP, 24hDSD, dDBP, dDSD, nDBP, night mean DSD, and NO were all lower while the LAD, LADi, IVST, LVPWT, and LVMI were higher in the amlodipine group than those in the perindopril group (all P < 0.05). Our study suggests that the SBP and DBP variability of amlodipine in the treatment of hypertension induced by apatinib and bevacizumab is slightly better than that of perindopril, but the effect of perindopril in improving endothelial function indices NO and echocardiographic data is better than that of amlodipine.
