People with epilepsy (PWE) frequently suffer from comorbid mood and anxiety disorders. Depression is one of the major psychiatric comorbidities having a negative impact on the quality of life in people with epilepsy. A review of the literature indicates that the majority of antidepressant-related seizures have been associated with either ultra-high doses or overdosing and, generally, the risk of antidepressant-associated seizures is low. Correspondingly, there is some evidence indicating that antidepressants of most widely used groups may additionally lower the risk of triggering seizures. Four antidepressants are not recommended for patients with epilepsy, i.e.: amoxapine, bupropion, clomipramine and maprotiline. Clinicians applying first line of depression treatment in patients with epilepsy should consider use of SSRIs or SNRIs, particularly sertraline, citalopram, mirtazapine, reboxetine, paroxetine, fluoxetine, escitalopram, fluvoxamine, venlafaxine, duloxetine. Implementation of anticonvulsive drugs in depressed patients should include valproate, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, gabapentin, pregabalin. The paper reviews the evidence for the clinical use of antidepressants in PWE.
BACKGROUND: Antidepressants-induced movement disorders are rare and imperfectly known adverse drug reactions. The risk may differ between different antidepressants and antidepressants' classes. The objective of this study was to assess the putative association of each antidepressant and antidepressants' classes with movement disorders. METHODS: Using VigiBase(R), the WHO Pharmacovigilance database, disproportionality of movement disorders' reporting was assessed among adverse drug reactions related to any antidepressant, from January 1967 to February 2017, through a case/non-case design. The association between nine subtypes of movement disorders (akathisia, bruxism, dystonia, myoclonus, parkinsonism, restless legs syndrome, tardive dyskinesia, tics, tremor) and antidepressants was estimated through the calculation first of crude Reporting Odds Ratio (ROR), then adjusted ROR on four potential confounding factors: age, sex, drugs described as able to induce movement disorders, and drugs used to treat movement disorders. RESULTS: Out of the 14,270,446 reports included in VigiBase(R), 1,027,405 (7.2%) contained at least one antidepressant, among whom 29,253 (2.8%) reported movement disorders. The female/male sex ratio was 2.15 and the mean age 50.9 +/- 18.0 years. We found a significant increased ROR for antidepressants in general for all subtypes of movement disorders, with the highest association with bruxism (ROR 10.37, 95% CI 9.62-11.17) and the lowest with tics (ROR 1.49, 95% CI 1.38-1.60). When comparing each of the classes of antidepressants with the others, a significant association was observed for all subtypes of movement disorders except restless legs syndrome with serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) only. Among antidepressants, mirtazapine, vortioxetine, amoxapine, phenelzine, tryptophan and fluvoxamine were associated with the highest level to movement disorders and citalopram, paroxetine, duloxetine and mirtazapine were the most frequently associated with movement disorders. An association was also found with eight other antidepressants. CONCLUSIONS: A potential harmful association was found between movement disorders and use of the antidepressants mirtazapine, vortioxetine, amoxapine, phenelzine, tryptophan, fluvoxamine, citalopram, paroxetine, duloxetine, bupropion, clomipramine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, mianserin, sertraline, venlafaxine and vilazodone. Clinicians should beware of these adverse effects and monitor early warning signs carefully. However, this observational study must be interpreted as an exploratory analysis, and these results should be refined by future epidemiological studies.
BACKGROUND: There are no recommendations based on the efficacy of specific drugs for the treatment of psychotic depression. To address this evidence gap, we did a network meta-analysis to assess and compare the efficacy and safety of pharmacological treatments for psychotic depression. METHODS: In this systematic review and network meta-analysis, we searched ClinicalTrials.gov, CENTRAL, Embase, PsycINFO, PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science from inception to Nov 23, 2023 for randomised controlled trials published in any language that assessed pharmacological treatments for individuals of any age with a diagnosis of a major depressive episode with psychotic features, in the context of major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder in any setting. We excluded continuation or maintenance trials. We screened the study titles and abstracts identified, and we extracted data from relevant studies after full-text review. If full data were not available, we requested data from study authors twice. We analysed treatments for individual drugs (or drug combinations) and by grouping them on the basis of mechanisms of action. The primary outcomes were response rate (ie, the proportion of participants who responded to treatment) and acceptability (ie, the proportion who discontinued treatment for any reason). We calculated risk ratios and did separate frequentist network meta-analyses by using random-effects models. The risk of bias of individual studies was assessed with the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool and the confidence in the evidence with the Confidence-In-Network-Meta-Analysis (CINeMA). This study was registered with PROSPERO, CRD42023392926. FINDINGS: Of 6313 reports identified, 16 randomised controlled trials were included in the systematic review, and 14 were included in the network meta-analyses. The 16 trials included 1161 people with psychotic depression (mean age 50.5 years [SD 11.4]). 516 (44.4%) participants were female and 422 (36.3%) were male; sex data were not available for the other 223 (19.2%). 489 (42.1%) participants were White, 47 (4.0%) were African American, and 12 (1.0%) were Asian; race or ethnicity data were not available for the other 613 (52.8%). Only the combination of fluoxetine plus olanzapine was associated with a higher proportion of participants with a treatment response compared with placebo (risk ratio 1.91 [95% CI 1.27-2.85]), with no differences in terms of safety outcomes compared with placebo. When treatments were grouped by mechanism of action, the combination of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor with a second-generation antipsychotic was associated with a higher proportion of treatment responses than was placebo (1.89 [1.17-3.04]), with no differences in terms of safety outcomes. In head-to-head comparisons of active treatments, a significantly higher proportion of participants had a response to amitriptyline plus perphenazine (3.61 [1.23-10.56]) and amoxapine (3.14 [1.01-9.80]) than to perphenazine, and to fluoxetine plus olanzapine compared with olanzapine alone (1.60 [1.09-2.34]). Venlafaxine, venlafaxine plus quetiapine (2.25 [1.09-4.63]), and imipramine (1.95 [1.01-3.79]) were also associated with a higher proportion of treatment responses overall. In head-to-head comparisons grouped by mechanism of action, antipsychotic plus antidepressant combinations consistently outperformed monotherapies from either drug class in terms of the proportion of participants with treatment responses. Heterogeneity was low. No high-risk instances were identified in the bias assessment for our primary outcomes. INTERPRETATION: According to the available evidence, the combination of a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor and a second-generation antipsychotic-and particularly of fluoxetine and olanzapine-could be the optimal treatment choice for psychotic depression. These findings should be taken into account in the development of clinical practice guidelines. However, these conclusions should be interpreted cautiously in view of the low number of included studies and the limitations of these studies. FUNDING: None.
Prolongation of the QRS interval, cardiopulmonary arrest, and death in a 31-year-old woman following an overdose of 2 g amoxapine, a tricyclic antidepressant, is reported. The patient's QRS interval prolonged to beyond 100 ms throughout hospitalization. Thirty-three hours after admission she suffered a bradycardiac-hypotensive event, followed by electromechanical dissociation and subsequent death. Cardiotoxicity has not been directly related to amoxapine; a 2-g acute ingestion is the lowest reported lethal dose.
Analysis of National Health Service prescription data for the antidepressants from 1980 to 1989 shows a consistent secular trend towards the increased use of generic names on prescriptions for this group of drugs. This apparently reflects national trends for all drugs, and was similar for most antidepressants. However, generic prescribing had by 1989 increased significantly more rapidly with fluvoxamine, which was introduced in 1987. The two drugs introduced in 1989, fluoxetine and amoxapine, also had a high generic prescribing rate in their year of introduction. Increased generic prescribing may become a feature with further new drugs. However, the use of the generic name on the prescription has relatively little influence on what is dispensed to the patient. Pharmacists may dispense a brand name when given a generic prescription. Moreover, pressures on doctors to write generic names on prescriptions may have limited relevance for some drugs; generic alternatives were available for only four out of 22 antidepressants.
