Amphetamine is frequently detected in forensic toxicological cases. Differentiating between the two isomers of amphetamine (d-amphetamine and l-amphetamine) and determining their relative proportion are fundamental to correctly interpret the results of toxicological analyses. The aim of this study was to examine the profile of amphetamine as well as storage stability of the isomers in authentic samples from patients chronically treated with lisdexamfetamine (LDX), the most prescribed medical amphetamine product in Sweden. Blood and urine samples were collected from 18 patients. The samples were analyzed with an achiral (racemate) method for quantification of amphetamine and with a chiral method to determine the proportion of each isomer of amphetamine. The median daily dose of LDX was 40 mg (range, 20-70 mg). The median amphetamine concentration was 0.06 microg/g (range, 0.02-0.15 microg/g) in blood and 6 microg/mL (range, 1-22 microg/mL) in urine. Only d-amphetamine was found in the blood and urine samples from the included patients. Furthermore, no formation of l-amphetamine occurred during the storage for 3 months at 4 degrees C, 9 months at -20 degrees C and three freeze-thaw cycles. The results from this study may be helpful in the interpretation of whether the source of identified amphetamine in biological samples is from LDX drug intake or not.
Objective: A retrospective cohort study was performed to evaluate whether birthweight was less among infants of women taking amphetamine-dextroamphetamine during pregnancy at our academic institution. Method: We identified mother-infant pairs with documented exposure to amphetamine-dextroamphetamine in pregnancy from 2005 through 2015. Patients were matched 2:1 with unexposed controls. Charts were reviewed for known causes of intrauterine growth restriction. Analysis of birthweight used generalized estimating equation blocking on matching. Medical histories were analyzed with chi(2) test or Fisher's exact test. Results: We identified 53 exposed mother-infant pairs. The difference in mean birthweight of infants exposed to amphetamine-dextroamphetamine versus those not exposed was 26.9 g, which is not significant (95% confidence interval [CI] = [-141, 195 g]; p = .75). A significant difference was noted for exposed versus unexposed mothers for comorbid psychiatric illness and history of substance abuse (p < .001). Conclusion: With a limited sample size, our study suggests no significant difference in birthweight.
The authors reviewed the studies of the neuroendocrine secretion of growth hormone, prolactin, and cortisol as they relate to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Studies to date have focused on the hormonal responses to the stimulants (amphetamines and methylphenidate) in children and adults. The authors discuss the methodologic limitations of current studies, the implications of this research for an understanding of the pathophysiology of ADHD, as well as the mechanisms of action of the stimulants and the side effect of stimulant-related growth suppression. They also suggest directions for future research.
Lisdexamfetamine (LDX) is a long-acting prodrug stimulant indicated for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and binge-eating disorder symptoms. In vivo hydrolysis of LDX amide bond releases the therapeutically active d-amphetamine (d-AMPH). Since toxicological tests in biological samples can detect AMPH from the use of some legal medications, efficient methods are needed in order to correctly interpret the results. The aim of this study was to develop and validate an LC-MS/MS method for the simultaneous quantification of LDX and its main biotransformation product AMPH in human oral fluid, plasma and urine. Calibration curve range for both analytes was 1-128 ng/mL in oral fluid and plasma and 4-256 ng/mL in urine, being the lowest concentration the limit of quantification. Accuracy of the determined values of the target analytes for the five control levels ranged from 94.8 to 111.7% for oral fluid, from 91.3 to 100.2% for plasma and from 94.8 to 109.8% for urine. Imprecision for the five control levels did not exceeded 12.8% for oral fluid, 16.2% for plasma and 17.1% for urine. The method developed for the three matrices was validated and was also successfully applied to assess real samples, showing for the first time the detection of LDX in oral fluid.
BACKGROUND: Lisdexamfetamine dimesylate (LDX) is a once-daily medication approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the management of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children (aged 6-12 years) and adults. OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the pharmacologic and pharmacokinetic properties, clinical efficacy, and safety profile of LDX. METHODS: Studies, abstracts, reviews, and consensus statements published in English were identified through computerized searches of MEDLINE (1966-August 2008) and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (1977-August 2008) using search headings lisdexamfetamine dimesylate, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, NRP 104, NRP104-201, NRP104-301, NRP104-302, NRP104-303, and stimulant. Selected information provided by the manufacturer of LDX was included, as were all pertinent clinical trials. The reference lists of identified articles were also searched for pertinent information. Relevant abstracts presented at annual professional meetings were included as well. RESULTS: Several studies have evaluated the pharmacokinetics of LDX in pediatric patients (6-12 years of age) and healthy adults with ADHD. LDX, a prodrug that is therapeutically inactive until metabolized in the body to dextroamphetamine (d-amphetamine), follows linear pharmacokinetics at therapeutic doses (30-70 mg). The efficacy of LDX in the treatment of ADHD was established on the basis of 1 long-term and 2 short-term controlled clinical trials in children who met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision, criteria for ADHD (either the combined or the hyperactive-impulsive subtype) and in 1 clinical trial with adults with ADHD. The efficacy trials in children found significant improvements in scores on the Swanson, Kotkin, Agler, M-Flynn, and Pelham deportment sub-scales, the Permanent Product Measure of Performance (Attempted and Correct), and the ADHD Rating Scale Version IV (ADHD-RS-IV) compared with placebo (all, P < 0.001). In the clinical studies designed to measure duration of effect, LDX, compared with placebo, provided efficacy for a full treatment day, up through and including 6 PM, based on parent ratings (Conners' Parent Rating Scale-Revised Short Form) in the morning, afternoon, and early evening (all, P < 0.001). Data from a long-term, open-label extension study that assessed the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of LDX for up to 12 months found LDX treatment resulted in significant improvement (>60%) from baseline in the ADHD-RS-IV at end point (P < 0.001), with good tolerability. The trial in adults found significant improvements in ADHD-RS scores at end point in patients receiving LDX (30,50, and 70 mg) (P < 0.001 for all active doses); significant improvements in ADHD-RS (using adult prompts) scores were observed at each postbaseline weekly assessment, with improvements noted within the first week in all active treatment arms. Results from human abuse liability studies noted that LDX had lower abuse-related drug-liking scores compared with immediate-release d-amphetamine at equivalent doses. The most common adverse events reported with LDX were typical of amphetamine products and included decreased appetite, insomnia, upper abdominal pain, headache, irritability, weight loss, and nausea. CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence supports the efficacy and tolerability of LDX as a treatment option for the management of children (aged 6-12 years) and adults with ADHD. As such, LDX may be an integral part of a total treatment program for ADHD that can include other measures such as psychological, educational, and social interventions.
INTRODUCTION: The Game of Dice Task (GDT) captures probabilistic risk-taking, which is an important feature of addictions and integral to gambling disorder (GD). No research appears to have assessed effects of gambling-specific priming manipulations or the pharmacological basis of such effects on the GDT. AIMS: To investigate effects of slot machine gambling (Slots) and d-amphetamine (AMPH; 20 mg) on risk-taking in people with GD and healthy controls (HCs) (n = 30/group). The role of dopamine (DA) was assessed by pre-treating participants with the D2 receptor (D2R)-preferring antagonist, haloperidol (HAL; 3-mg) or mixed D1R-D2R antagonist, fluphenazine (FLU; 3-mg). HYPOTHESES: Slots and AMPH will each increase risk-taking based on fewer (less probable) possible outcomes selected (POS) and poorer net monetary outcomes (NMO; gains minus losses) on the GDT, with stronger effects in Group GD. If DA mediates these effects, outcomes will vary with pre-treatment. METHOD: Participants attended a pre-experimental baseline session and 4 test sessions. Antagonist Group (HAL, FLU) was manipulated between-participants. Pre-treatment (antagonist, placebo) was manipulated within-participants and counterbalanced over sessions for Slots and AMPH test phases. Moderator/mediator effects of trait and neuropsychological factors and GD severity (South Oaks Gambling Screen; SOGS) were explored via covariance. RESULTS: AMPH led to an escalation in risky POS over trial blocks in both groups, regardless of pre-treatment. Cognitive inflexibility (high perseveration-proneness) moderated this effect in Group HC. In Group GD, SOGS selectively predicted riskier POS on AMPH sessions. Group GD achieved poorer NMO vs. Group HC on the pre-experimental baseline and Placebo-Slots sessions. Group HC selectively displayed poorer NMO on the Antagonist-Slots session. CONCLUSIONS: The GDT can detect behavioral and pharmacological priming effects. Cognitive inflexibility and symptom severity moderate AMPH-induced risk-taking in HC and GD participants, respectively. Sensitization-related "wanting" of risk may contribute to the latter effect in people with GD.
PURPOSE: Lisdexamfetamine (LDX), which is used for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and narcolepsy, is composed of L-lysine attached to dextroamphetamine (d-amphetamine). In this article, we report a forensic autopsy case in which prescription drugs were unknown at autopsy. While amphetamine was detected, methamphetamine could not be detected by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in any of samples collected. Thus, we aimed to quantify LDX concentrations in autopsy samples and to prove that the amphetamine detected in this case was due to metabolized LDX. METHODS: Femoral vein blood, cardiac whole blood, urine, and gastric content samples were taken at autopsy for toxicological analysis. Qualitative and quantitative analyses were performed using LC-MS/MS. In addition, optical isomer separation for the amphetamine detected was conducted. The stability of LDX in whole blood and urine was also examined at three different temperatures. RESULTS: The concentrations of LDX were < 4.00, 30.9, and 4.42 ng/mL in whole blood, urine, and gastric content samples, respectively. The concentrations of amphetamine were 329, 510, 2970, and 915 ng/mL in femoral vein blood, heart whole blood, urine, and gastric contents, respectively. The amphetamine detected in this case was identified to be only d-amphetamine by optical isomer separation. The d-amphetamine detected was considered to be derived from LDX. Stability experiments revealed that LDX in whole blood decreased at ambient temperature. CONCLUSIONS: The results in the present case report may be useful in interpreting whether or not the amphetamine detected in a cadaver is a metabolite of LDX.
Previously, we reported progressively greater behavioral responses to repeated d-amphetamine in human subjects that represented a potential model of behavioral sensitization. To extend this work, 59 healthy volunteers were randomly assigned to one of three protocols: (1) placebo administered on days 1, 3, and 5 (PPP); (2) placebo administered on days 1 and 3, and d-amphetamine (0.25 mg/kg) on day 5 (PPA); and (3) d-amphetamine administered on days 1, 3, and 5 (AAA). Comparisons were made among the three groups to determine whether repeated d-amphetamine produced an increased behavioral response. Subjective ratings of vigor and euphoria exhibited the greatest response following the third dose of the AAA group, as hypothesized. In contrast, drug liking was greatest following a single or first d-amphetamine dose. These effects were greater in women. Progressive changes in subjective responses following repeated d-amphetamine administration may occur in healthy human subjects, although this effect may be greater for women.
