According to the current treatment recommendations, anagrelide, an oral antiplatelet agent, is recommended as a second-line therapy for patients with high-risk essential thrombocythemia experiencing intolerance or refractoriness to first-line approach, such as hydroxyurea or pegylated interferon alpha-2a. If there is a need for introduction of cytoreductive treatment in young patients with a perspective of lifelong exposure, both the efficacy and long-term outcomes should be known. We present the analysis of 48 young patients, diagnosed with essential thrombocythemia below the age of 60, who were exposed to anagrelide treatment for over 10 years. Our observations show that the highest proportion of complete remissions without adverse events and disease progression is seen in the JAK2-mutated patients. By evaluating the changes in hemoglobin concentration and serum erythropoietin throughout the study, we were able to reveal the development of progressive anemia, resulting from diminished susceptibility to erythropoietin and unrelated to bone marrow fibrosis, in patients harboring CALR mutation. Additionally, occurrence of new bone marrow fibrosis was confirmed in seven JAK2-unmutated patients at the end of the study. In summary, in young patient population, we recommend limiting the use of anagrelide to JAK2-mutated subgroup, reducing exposure time and underline the importance of periodic monitoring for the presence of bone marrow fibrosis.
Anagrelide is used worldwide to treat essential thrombocythemia (ET) by reducing platelet counts. Cardiomyopathy and heart failure (HF) are rare but serious complications associated with anagrelide use, although no cases were reported during Japanese Phase I to III studies. A 46-year-old, otherwise healthy, Japanese ET patient developed HF with reduced ejection fraction after 18 months of treatment with 1.0-3.5 mg of anagrelide daily. HF was stabilized with anagrelide withdrawal and guideline-directed HF therapy. The cardiac function returned to normal after six months. This case suggests that anagrelide can cause cardiomyopathy and HF in ET patients, regardless of nationality, comorbid cardiovascular conditions, or therapy duration.
Thrombocytosis is a common paraneoplastic syndrome in patients with lung cancer. However, complications associated with malignancy-related thrombocytosis, including thrombosis and hemorrhage, have rarely been reported. In this case, we describe a 57-year-old man with unresectable adenocarcinoma of the lung who presented with a platelet count over 100 x 10(4)/mm(3). In addition, deep venous thrombosis of the left femoral vein was found during admission. The circumference of the left lower leg and platelet count progressed during the period without chemotherapy and anticoagulants; however, with the addition of anagrelide they improved. We provided an adjuvant therapy with platelet-lowering therapy to treat cancer-induced thrombocytosis during the period without chemotherapy.
Although hydroxyurea is considered the first-line cytoreductive therapy in high-risk patients with polycythemia vera or essential thrombocythemia, approximately 20-25% of patients develop resistance or intolerance and they need an alternative therapy. Anagrelide is the treatment of choice in patients with essential thrombocythemia intolerant or with resistance to hydroxyurea. Anagrelide is usually well tolerated. Although there is concern about the increased risk of cardiac side effects, in most cases these are mild, and easily manageable. In this paper, the available evidence about the management of patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms, with a special focus on the side effects of drug therapies is reviewed.
OBJECTIVE: We report an extension study of patients with essential thrombocythaemia (ET) in the Hungarian Myeloproliferative Neoplasm (HUMYPRON) Registry, which demonstrated that over 6 years anagrelide significantly decreased the number of patients experiencing minor arterial and minor venous thrombotic events (TEs) vs hydroxyurea+aspirin. METHODS: Data on patients with ET were collected through completion of a questionnaire developed according to 2008 WHO diagnostic criteria and with regard to Landolfi, Tefferi and IPSET criteria for thrombotic risk. Data were entered into the registry from 14 haematological centres. TEs, secondary malignancies, disease progression and survival were compared between patients with ET treated with anagrelide (n = 116) and with hydroxyurea+aspirin (n = 121). RESULTS: Patients were followed for (median) 10 years. A between-group difference in the number of patients with TEs was observed (25.9% anagrelide vs 38.0% hydroxyurea+aspirin; P = .052). Minor arterial events were more frequently reported in the hydroxyurea+aspirin group (P < .001); there were marginally more reports of major arterial events in the anagrelide group (P = .049). TE prior to diagnosis was found to significantly influence TE incidence (P > .001). Progression-free survival (P = .004) and survival (P = .001) were significantly increased for the anagrelide group vs hydroxyurea+aspirin. CONCLUSIONS: Anagrelide reduced TEs, and increased progression-free and overall survival vs hydroxyurea+aspirin over (median) 10 years.
Patients diagnosed with high-risk essential thrombocythemia (ET) have limited treatment options to reduce the risk of thrombosis and lessen the progression of the disease by targeting the molecular source. Hydroxyurea is the recommended treatment, but many patients experience resistance or intolerance. Anagrelide is an approved second-line option for ET, but concerns of a higher frequency of disease transformation may affect its role as a suitable long-term option. Interferons have been evaluated in myeloproliferative neoplasms for over 30 years, but early formulations had safety and tolerability issues. SURPASS-ET (NCT04285086) is a phase III, open-label, multicenter, global, randomized, active-controlled trial that will evaluate the safety, efficacy, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of ropeginterferon alfa-2b compared with anagrelide as second-line therapy in high-risk ET.
Nowadays, a nanostructure-based drug delivery system is one of the most noticeable topics to be studied, and in this regard, boron nitride nanoclusters are promising drug carriers for targeted drug delivery systems. In this article, the interaction mechanism of Anagrelide (AG) drug with B12N12 and Al- and Ga-doped B12N12 nanocages have been investigated using DFT with B3LYP/6-31 G (d, p) method in both gas and water media. All our studied complexes are thermodynamically stable, and doped nanocage complexes have higher negative adsorption energy (E(Ad.)) and negative solvation energy than AG/B12N12 complexes which correspond to the stability of these systems in both media. The negative highest E(Ad) value is 64.98 kcal/mol (63.17 kcal/mol) and 65.69 kcal/mol (65.11 kcal/mol) in gas (water) media for complex F (AG/AlB11N12) and complex I (AG/GaB11N12) respectively, which refers to the highest stability of these systems. The enhanced values of dipole moment (from 12.40 (12.65) Debye to 17.21 (17.69) Debye in complex F (complex I)) also confirm their stability. The QTAIM and RDG analysis endorse the strong adsorption nature of the AG drug onto the AlB11N12, and GaB11N12 nanocages, which is consistent with the adsorption energy as chemisorption occurs for these complexes. According to the electronic properties, doped nanocages show high sensitivity that infers their promising nature for drug delivery purposes. Thus, complex F and complex I are promising drug delivery systems, and doped nanocages (AlB11N12 and GaB11N12) are better carriers than pristine nanocages for the AG drug delivery system.Communicated by Ramaswamy H. Sarma.
Anagrelide (ANA) is a platelet-specific cytoreductive agent utilized in the guideline-directed management of high-risk essential thrombocythemia. In the context of polycythemia vera (PV), ANA is occasionally employed in clinical practice, although data has not consistently demonstrated a benefit to targeting a platelet goal as a therapeutic endpoint. The aim of the current study was to delineate the patterns of ANA use in PV, and to describe outcomes and toxicities. Within a multi-center cohort of 527 patients with PV, 48 received ANA (9 excluded for absent data). 27 (69.2%) had high-risk PV, 10 (25.6%) had prior thrombosis, and none had extreme thrombocytosis, acquired von Willebrand disease, and/or documented resistance to hydroxyurea. While ANA effectively lowered median platelet count, 43.5% of patients had an unresolved thrombocytosis at time of ANA discontinuation. Treatment-emergent adverse events-including headaches, cardiac palpitations and arrhythmias, nausea, vomiting and/or diarrhea-led to ANA discontinuation in 76.9% of patients. Further, three patients experienced arterial thromboses during a median duration of 27.5 months of ANA therapy. In conclusion, this study highlights ANA's restrictive tolerability profile which, compounded by the absence of clear advantage to strict platelet control in PV, suggests the use of ANA should be limited in this setting.
BACKGROUND: In Japan, anagrelide has been approved for use in patients with essential thrombocythemia. Here, the safety and efficacy of anagrelide was assessed in clinical practice as post-marketing surveillance. Subgroup analyses were conducted to compare patients (1) with or without a history of cytoreductive therapy (CRT), (2) <60 or >/=60 years of age, and (3) with an anagrelide starting dose of </=0.5 mg/day or 1.0 mg/day. METHODS: Data were collected for all patients who received anagrelide, with an observation period of 12 months after treatment initiation. RESULTS: Of the 648 patients, 54.3% experienced adverse drug reactions (ADRs). The most commonly reported ADRs were headaches, palpitations, and anemia. No significant difference was observed in overall ADRs across patient subgroups. A significantly higher incidence of headaches was observed in patients < 60 years versus those >/= 60 years (P < 0.001). The incidence of anemia and serious ADRs were significantly higher in patients >/= 60 years, and those with a history of CRT (P < 0.05). The discontinuation rate at 6 months was significantly lower in patients started at the lower anagrelide dose (P < 0.05). Platelet counts decreased in all analyzed groups. CONCLUSIONS: This surveillance showed that anagrelide has a tolerable safety and efficacy profile.
An elevated platelet count is the hallmark of essential thrombocythemia (ET). Therapeutic control of platelet counts in ET has proven effective for minimizing the risk of bleeding complications. By contrast, the relationship between platelet count and thrombotic complications is less well defined. The beneficial effects of lowering the platelet count are greatest when levels are reduced close to or within the normal range, thus supporting the trend within the medical community to reduce platelet treatment targets to below 400-450 x 10(9)/l. Platelet counts have further utility in ET as a marker to indicate intolerance/resistance to hydroxyurea according to recently published guidelines. In the current era, where novel risk factors for ET complications are being discussed, this article takes a back-to-basics approach, considering what platelet counts reveal in practice as a risk factor for complications and a marker of treatment efficacy, with particular focus on data for the platelet-selective agent anagrelide.
OBJECTIVE: To ascertain the role of patient age as an influencing factor in the pharmacokinetics of anagrelide and to clarify whether different dosing is required in young (18 - 50 years) vs. elderly (>/= 65 years) patients with essential thrombocythemia (ET). METHOD: This Phase II, multicenter, open-label study compared the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics and tolerability of anagrelide and its active metabolite, 3-hydroxy-anagrelide, in young and elderly patients with ET. Three days prior to pharmacokinetic assessment, patients divided their normal daily anagrelide into a structured twice-daily dosing (BID) schedule. Serial blood samples were obtained for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analysis over a 12-h dosing interval. Anagrelide and 3-hydroxy-anagrelide plasma concentrations were normalized to a common dose (1 mg BID) to control for dosing differences between patients. Patients were monitored routinely for adverse events (AEs) and vital signs. RESULTS: A total of 24 patients (12 young; 12 elderly) completed the study. The dose-normalized anagrelide maximum observed plasma concentration (Cmax) and area under the plasma concentration vs. time curve over one dosing interval (AUCtau), were higher in elderly patients compared with young patients (Cmax: 3.63 vs. 2.66 ng/ml; p = 0.09, AUCtau: 10.3 vs. 6.4 ngxh/ml; p = 0.01). In contrast, the dose-normalized 3-hydroxy-anagrelide Cmax and AUCtau were lower in the elderly patients when compared with young patients (Cmax: 4.19 vs. 7.26 ng/ml; p = 0.02, AUCtau: 17.4 vs. 27.6 ngxh/ml; p = 0.03). No significant difference was observed in the geometric mean terminal half-life (t1/2) of anagrelide in elderly and young patients (1.4 vs. 1.3 h, respectively; p = 0.38), whereas the geometric mean t1/2 of 3-hydroxy-anagrelide was significantly longer in the elderly patients compared with the young patients (3.5 vs. 2.7 h, respectively; p = 0.01). There were no significant differences in platelet count or vital signs between the age groups. Anagrelide was well tolerated; there were no serious AEs or AEs that led to withdrawal from the study. CONCLUSIONS: To conclude, the differences observed in anagrelide and 3-hydroxy-anagrelide pharmacokinetics do not justify using a different dosing regimen in young vs. elderly patients with ET.
In this prospective observational single-center study, 55 patients with essential thrombocythemia who were candidates for second line treatment with anagrelide (ANA) received a preliminary cardiovascular (CV) clinical, instrumental and biochemical evaluation (CV history and symptoms, CV risk factors, blood pressure, heart rate, ECG and ECHO-cardio parameters, Troponin I, NT-proBNP). After this in-depth CV screening, 54 out of 55 patients were deemed to be fit for ANA treatment. Thirty-eight of the 55 patients received ANA treatment for a median of 36 months (range 3-48), and were monitored using the same CV evaluation. Fourteen of these 38 patients manifested CV adverse events (10 palpitation, 4 edema, 2 arterial hypertension, 2 acute myocardial infarction) that were not predicted by the in-depth CV evaluation, and that led to ANA withdrawal in only one case (non-cardiac refractory edema). In conclusion, the planned in-depth CV evaluation did not appear to be necessary in ET patients to evaluate their suitability for ANA treatment, and, moreover, was not able to predict the occurrence of CV adverse events during ANA treatment. Nevertheless, the CV adverse events (mostly palpitations and edema) were easily managed by the hematologists, and required the cardiologist involvement in very few selected cases.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Anagrelide represents a treatment option for essential thrombocythemia patients. It lowers platelet counts through inhibition of megakaryocyte maturation and polyploidization, although the basis for this effect remains unclear. Based on its rapid onset of action, we assessed whether, besides blocking megakaryopoiesis, anagrelide represses proplatelet formation (PPF) and aimed to clarify the underlying mechanisms. METHODS AND RESULTS: Exposure of cord blood-derived megakaryocytes to anagrelide during late stages of culture led to a dose- and time-dependent inhibition of PPF and reduced proplatelet complexity, which were independent of the anagrelide-induced effect on megakaryocyte maturation. Whereas anagrelide was shown to phosphorylate cAMP-substrate VASP, two pharmacologic inhibitors of the cAMP pathway were completely unable to revert anagrelide-induced repression in megakaryopoiesis and PPF, suggesting these effects are unrelated to its ability to inhibit phosphodiesterase (PDE) 3. The reduction in thrombopoiesis was not the result of down-regulation of transcription factors which coordinate PPF, while the myosin pathway was identified as a candidate target, as anagrelide was shown to phosphorylate the myosin light chain and the PPF phenotype was partially rescued after inhibition of myosin activity with blebbistatin. CONCLUSIONS: The platelet-lowering effect of anagrelide results from impaired megakaryocyte maturation and reduced PPF, both of which are deregulated in essential thrombocythemia. These effects seem unrelated to PDE3 inhibition, which is responsible for anagrelide's cardiovascular side-effects and antiplatelet activity. Further work in this field may lead to the potential development of drugs to treat thrombocytosis in myeloproliferative disorders with an improved pharmacologic profile.
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: When choosing a cytoreduction method for patients suffering from essential thrombocythemia (ET), it is important to know the safety profile of the medicine used. Few articles have been published about the effects of hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea, HU) and anagrelide (ANA) on renal function in ET patients. This study is the largest analysis of nephrotoxicity of cytoreductive drugs used in ET therapy so far, which additionally includes risk factors for the progression of kidney disease and coexisting genetic mutation. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The retrospective study included 310 patients diagnosed with ET. Demographic data, comorbidities, Cr, and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were all taken into account prior to diagnosis and after 6 months of HU and ANA treatment. KEY RESULTS: A statistically significant difference was found between Cr and eGFR levels at baseline and after 6 months of treatment (p < 0.001). The applied treatment (HU and ANA) had the greatest impact on kidney function. ANA significantly increased the risk of worsening renal function in contrary to hydroxycarbamide after 6 months of treatment (eGFR change: median +1 mL/min/1.73 m2 [interquartile range (IQR) (-4)-(+7)] in the HU group vss. median -13 mL/min/1.73 m2 [IQR (-18)-(-6)] in the ANA group, odds ratio [OR] 7.92 95% confidence interval [95% CI] [4.17-15.08], p < 0.001). Lowering of eGFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2 occurred in 31 patients (31.0%) from the ANA group and 10 people (4.8%) treated with HU (p = 0.000). In 1 patient from the ANA group, >50% decrease in eGFR was observed. The chance for an increase in Cr levels was higher in people with pre-existing arterial hypertension (OR 1.92 CI = 95% [1.21-3.05], p = 0.006). Sex, type of mutation found (JAK2 V617F or CALR), and previous renal impairment did not affect renal function after 6 months of treatment. In addition, there was no difference in the efficacy of ET treatment between HU and ANA (p = 0.998). CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The observations indicate that ANA should be used in patients with ET with great caution and taking into account the risk of worsened kidney function.
Thrombocytosis is an increasingly recognized clinical problem due to the widespread availability of automated cell counters. While reactive thrombocytosis does not require any therapeutic intervention, clonal thrombocytosis may require therapy to prevent thrombohemorrhagic complications. The clinician has a number of therapeutic options available when confronted with a patient having clonal thrombocytosis. One of these agents is anagrelide (Agrylin, Bristol-Myers Squibb). In this drug profile, a synopsis of the available data on this agent and its role in the control of thrombocytosis will be provided. The main side effects of the medication are discussed, as well as the potential future developments in the field.
