Dopaminergic therapies dominate the treatment of the motor and non-motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) but there have been no major advances in therapy in many decades. Two of the oldest drugs used appear more effective than others-levodopa and apomorphine-but the reasons for this are seldom discussed and this may be one cause for a lack of progress. This short review questions current thinking on drug action and looks at whether adopting the philosophy of ex-US Secretary of State Donald Rumsfeld reveals 'unknown' aspects of the actions of levodopa and apomorphine that provide clues for a way forward. It appears that both levodopa and apomorphine have a more complex pharmacology than classical views would suggest. In addition, there are unexpected facets to the mechanisms through which levodopa acts that are either forgotten as 'known unknowns' or ignored as 'unknown unknowns'. The conclusion reached is that we may not know as much as we think about drug action in PD and there is a case for looking beyond the obvious.
A decreased motor response after repeated doses of apomorphine is observed in severely affected Parkinson's disease patients. We simultaneously studied clinical symptoms and internal pallidus single unit activity in three parkinsonian patients underlying stereotaxic neurosurgery for deep brain stimulation. In each patient, two closely spaced doses of intraoperatory apomorphine were administered, while recording the same extracellular unit. The reduced clinical effect of the second administration was correlated to a lessened inhibition of the pallidal single unit recorded throughout the double administration. Our data support the proposition that fast postsynaptic desensitization to dopamine agonists may take place in the basal ganglia nuclei and play a role in the physiopathology of levodopa long-term treatment syndrome.
BACKGROUND: Apomorphine is a potent dopamine agonist used in the treatment of advanced and fluctuating Parkinson's Disease. However the need for its subcutaneous infusion can lead to skin reactions. PHENOMENOLOGY SHOWN: We illustrate necrotic ulcers at infusion sites as a rare event during continuous subcutaneous apomorphine infusion. EDUCATIONAL VALUE: This case demonstrates the rare adverse event of necrotic ulcers in a patient with long term apomorphine infusion.
Oral delivery of apomorphine via prodrug principle may be a potential treatment for Parkinson's disease. The purpose of this study was to investigate the transport and stability of apomorphine and its esters across Caco-2 cell monolayer and their affinity towards chylomicrons. Apomorphine, monolauroyl apomorphine (MLA) and dilauroyl apomorphine (DLA) were subjected to apical to basolateral (A-B) and basolateral to apical (B-A) transport across Caco-2 cell monolayer. The stability of these compounds was also assessed by incubation at intestinal pH and physiological pH with and without Caco-2 cells. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were performed to understand the stability of the esters on a molecular level. The affinity of the compounds towards plasma derived chylomicrons was assessed. The A-B transport of intact DLA was about 150 times lower than the transport of apomorphine. In contrast, MLA was highly unstable in the aqueous media leading to apomorphine appearance basolaterally. MD simulations possibly explained the differences in hydrolysis susceptibilities of DLA and MLA. The affinity of apomorphine diesters towards plasma derived chylomicrons provided an understanding of their potential lymphatic transport. The intact DLA transport is not favorable; therefore, the conversion of DLA to MLA is an important step for intestinal apomorphine absorption.
This study deals with the question of whether apomorphine (CAS 314-19-2; e.g. in Ixense) and its metabolites or decomposition products interfere with the specificity of immunochemical screening tests (immunoassays) for legal and illicit drugs. It was the result of the investigations that after the therapeutic use of apomorphine no relevant false-positive screening findings were observed with the CEDIA (cloned enzyme donor immuno assay) and FPIA (fluorescence polarisation immuno assay) tests, which are commonly encountered in drug-screening programs, when using recommended cut-off values for urine.
Apomorphine is a dopamine receptor agonist increasingly used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). In the present study, we examined the plasma and ventricular cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pharmacokinetics of apomorphine as well as its effects on dopamine metabolism in six patients (one woman and five men, mean age 79.5 years) without evidence of PD who underwent 48-h intracranial pressure monitoring for suspected normal pressure hydrocephalus. Maximal plasma apomorphine concentration (25.04 ng/ml) is found 20 min after subcutaneous injection (50 micrograms/kg), and the mean area under the curve is 1,439.37 ng/ml for 120 min. In contrast to plasma values, the maximal ventricular CSF apomorphine concentration (1.08 ng/ml) is found 30 min after injection and the mean area under that curve is 7% of that of plasma (96.69 ng/ml for 120 min). Apomorphine administration causes a significant reduction in ventricular CSF concentrations of dopamine and of its major metabolites sulfoconjugated dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), and homovanillic acid (HVA). This effect starts 10 min after the injection of apomorphine, is maximal after 30 min (free dopamine, -30%; sulfoconjugated dopamine, -28%; HVA, -21%; DOPAC, -31%) and is still present, although to a lesser extent (-5 to -10%), 120 min after the injection of apomorphine. This study shows that in humans a dose of apomorphine commonly used in PD causes significant inhibition of dopamine metabolism lasting > 120 min. In addition to their symptomatic effects, dopamine agonists such as apomorphine may play a role in preventing or slowing the neurodegeneration in PD by autoreceptor-mediated inhibition of dopamine metabolism.
A liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method has been developed and validated for the simultaneous quantification of apomorphine and its metabolites apomorphine sulfate and norapomorphine in human plasma for supporting clinical development of a novel apomorphine sublingual thin film (APL) for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Analytes and internal standards (IS) were extracted from human plasma by Oasis HLB SPE cartridge, followed by a reversed phase LC-MS/MS analysis using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) in positive mode (m/z 268 --> 237 for apomorphine, 348 --> 237 for apomorphine sulfate, and 348 --> 237 for norapomorphine). Stable isotope-labeled compounds were used as IS for respective analytes. The validated curve ranges were 0.02-20 ng/mL, 10-1000 ng/mL, and 0.5-20 ng/mL for apomorphine, apomorphine sulfate and norapomorphine, respectively. Extraction recoveries were found to be 73.4 % (apomorphine), 81.1 % (apomorphine sulfate), and 58.6 % (norapomorphine). Established long-term plasma frozen storage stabilities were 504 days at -20  degrees C and276 days at -60  degrees C, respectively. The method has been successfully used for analyzing pharmacokinetics (PK) samples collected from a comparative bioavailability study of APL and the marketed apomorphine subcutaneous (s.c.) product Apo-go(R). The results demonstrated that the 15-mg APL film administrated via sublingual produced comparable PK characteristics of apomorphine when compared to the commercial product Apo-go (2-mg) via s.c. administration, hence establishing the dose regimen for this sublingual formulation. It was also noticed that the sublingual 15-mg APL film produced a significantly higher apomorphine sulfate metabolite level than the 2-mg s.c. Apo-go, and both treatments yielded a negligible level of norapomorphine metabolite in humans.
