The original manufacturer of azelastine‒fluticasone (AZ‒FL) prevented generic availability until 2020 via patent enforcement. Following generic availability of AZ‒FL, Medicare utilization increased and spending decreased. Retail prices for generic AZ‒FL remain high due to markup by manufacturers and pharmacies.
OBJECTIVE: Combination therapy with intranasal azelastine and fluticasone propionate is an option for treatment of allergic rhinitis. This systematic review and meta-analysis examines existing literature to determine efficacy in treating allergic rhinitis compared to monotherapy. DATA SOURCES: The PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, and MEDLINE databases were systematically searched for randomized controlled trials using AzeFlu nasal spray. REVIEW METHODS: Randomized, controlled trials that reported symptom relief of allergic rhinitis in males and females of all ages were included. Results were reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) standard. RESULTS: Systematic review identified 8 articles suitable for review. The risk of bias was generally low. All studies exhibited a greater decrease in patient-reported symptom scores in patients treated with combination therapy compared to monotherapy or placebo. Meta-analysis revealed superiority of combination therapy in reducing Total Nasal Symptom Score compared to placebo (mean change from baseline: -2.41; 95% confidence interval [CI], -2.82 to -1.99; P < .001; I(2) = 60%), azelastine (mean change from baseline: -1.40; 95% CI, -1.82 to -0.98; P < .001; I(2) = 0%), and fluticasone (mean change from baseline: -0.74; 95% CI, -1.17 to -0.31; P < .001; I(2) = 12%). CONCLUSION: Current evidence supports both efficacy and superiority of combination intranasal azelastine and fluticasone in reducing patient-reported symptom scores in patients with allergic rhinitis. Combination nasal spray should be considered as second-line therapy in patients with allergic rhinitis that is not controlled with monotherapy.
Background: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is the most common chronic noncommunicable disease worldwide that affects any age during the human life span but raises particular concerns among the parents and caregivers of the children who are affected. H(1)-receptor antagonists and corticosteroids provide the most effective way of bringing the condition under control. Intranasal application of these medications has the advantage of a faster onset of action and avoids systemic unwanted adverse effects. The only combination treatment, which comprises azelastine hydrochloride and fluticasone propionate, so far in a single advanced delivery system has proven its efficacy and safety in clinical trials of adult patients with AR. Objective: To critically review and identify gaps in the existing data for children in all different strata of pediatric ages. Methods: We searched the specialized medical literature for publications on the efficacy and safety of the combined formulation of azelastine and fluticasone in a single delivery device in adolescents (ages < 18 years) and children (ages < 12 years). Results: Altogether, 12 peer-reviewed articles have been published about trials that also involved subjects in different strata of the pediatric ages, seven of the articles pooled adolescents and adults. Three articles presented the results of studies in children ages 4 to 11 years specifically designed to overcome the difficulties that children experience in expressing themselves verbally. Conclusion: All the trials with the novel combination product that involved young children and adolescents documented its efficacy, effectiveness, and safety. However, the numbers of the youngest children (ages 4 and 5 years) were low, which suggested that further data about safety and efficacy in this age group are needed.
Topical aqueous nasal sprays are widely used in treating patients with a variety of nasal diseases. Previous studies have suggested that drug delivery to the ciliated mucosa is generally suboptimal. Little is known about the effects of nasal spray delivery technique on intranasal distribution and efficacy of topical nasal drugs. We assessed the intranasal distribution of a nasal spray with two commonly used techniques using azelastine hydrochloride labelled with fluorescein. After spraying, the nasal cavity was photographed endoscopically in two standardized positions, one showing the anterior portion in the region of the nasal valve and one the area of the middle meatus. The photographs were computer analysed to identify the proportion of coverage of fluorescein in each image field. The majority of drug was distributed anteriorly with poor coverage posterior to the nasal valve area. This was the case with both of the positions tested.
BACKGROUND: The combination of the antihistamine azelastine (AZE) with the corticosteroid fluticasone propionate (FP) in a single spray, has been reported to be significantly more effective at reducing allergic rhinitis (AR) symptoms than treatment with either corticosteroid or antihistamine monotherapy. However, the biological basis for enhanced symptom relief is not known. This study aimed to compare gene expression profiles (760 immune genes, performed with the NanoString nCounter) from peripheral blood and nasal brushing/lavage lysate samples in response to nasal spray treatment. METHODS: Moderate/severe persistent dust mite AR sufferers received either AZE (125 mug/spray) nasal spray (n = 16), FP (50 mug/spray) nasal spray (n = 14) or combination spray AZE/FP (125 mug AZE and 50 mug FP/spray) (n = 14) for 7 days, twice daily. Self-reported symptom questionnaires were completed daily for the study duration. Gene expression analysis (760 immune genes) was performed with the NanoString nCounter on purified RNA from peripheral blood and nasal brushing/lavage lysate samples. RESULTS: In nasal samples, 206 genes were significantly differentially expressed following FP treatment; 182 genes downregulated (-2.57 to -0.45 Log2 fold change [FC]), 24 genes upregulated (0.49-1.40 Log2 FC). In response to AZE/FP, only 16 genes were significantly differentially expressed; 10 genes downregulated (-1.53 to -0.58 Log2 FC), six genes upregulated (1.07-1.62 Log2 FC). Following AZE treatment only five genes were significantly differentially expressed; one gene downregulated (-1.68 Log2 FC), four genes upregulated (0.59-1.19 Log2 FC). Immune gene changes in peripheral blood samples following treatment were minimal. AR symptoms improved under all treatments, but improvements were less pronounced following AZE treatment. CONCLUSION: AZE/FP, FP, and AZE had diverse effects on immune gene expression profiles in nasal mucosa samples. The moderate number of genes modulated by AZE/FP indicates alternative pathways in reducing AR symptoms whilst avoiding extensive local immune suppression.
OBJECTIVE: Adenoid hypertrophy (AH) is one of the common childhood diseases. Surgical and non-surgical treatment of AH in children is planned according to the severity of symptoms and associated complications. In recent years, treatment methods with intranasal sprays have been reported quite frequently in uncomplicated cases. We aim to evaluate the effectiveness of a new combination of azelastine - fluticasone (AZE-FLU) (137mcg azelastine and 50mcg fluticasone) nasal spray in children with uncomplicated AH. METHODS: Sixty-five children diagnosed with AH were included in the study. The mean age of the children was 7.42 +/- 2.26 (4-13 years). The cohort consisted of 29 males and 36 females. All children were evaluated clinically and endoscopically. AZE-FLU nasal spray was applied to both nostrils twice a day for three months. Adenoid/choana ratio and symptom scores were evaluated before treatment and at the end of the 12th week. RESULTS: At the end of 24 weeks of AZE-FLU application, there was a statistically significant decrease in both adenoid/choana ratio and symptom scores. While the initial adenoid/choana (A/C) score was 3.57 +/- 0.58, it decreased to 1.74 +/- 0.61 following treatment. A dramatic decrease in total symptom scores was observed. The total symptom score average was 15.63 +/- 1.28 before treatment, while it was 2.31 +/- 1.4 after the treatment with the difference being statistically significant (P < .01). CONCLUSION: In this study, the effectiveness of AZE-FLU nasal spray on AH was investigated for the first time. This treatment provides an effective alternative to the surgical approach in children with uncomplicated adenoid hypertrophy. Using this protocol, 96% of patients were removed from the surgery list. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: is IV.
Conditions for determination of: ketotifen hydrogen fumarate, azelastine hydrochloride, dimetindene maleate and promethazine hydrochloride by densitometric method in substances and pharmaceuticals were provided. Maximum wavelenghts were: 228 nm for ketotifen hydrogen fumarate, 295 nm for azelastine hydrochloride, 265 nm for dimetindene maleate and 255 nm for promethazine hydrochloride. The limits of quantification were in the ranges of 0.2-5 microg/spot. The statistical data showed adequate accuracy and precision of developed methods.
With the changing epidemiology of COVID-19 and its impact on our daily lives, there is still an unmet need of COVID-19 therapies treating early infections to prevent progression. The current study was a randomized, parallel, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ninety SARS-CoV-2 positive patients were randomized into 3 groups receiving placebo, 0.02% or 0.1% azelastine nasal spray for 11 days, during which viral loads were assessed by quantitative PCR. Investigators assessed patients' status throughout the trial including safety follow-ups (days 16 and 60). Symptoms were documented in patient diaries. Initial viral loads were log(10) 6.85 +/- 1.31 (mean +/- SD) copies/mL (ORF 1a/b gene). After treatment, virus load was reduced in all groups (p < 0.0001) but was greater in the 0.1% group compared to placebo (p = 0.007). In a subset of patients (initial Ct < 25) viral load was strongly reduced on day 4 in the 0.1% group compared to placebo (p = 0.005). Negative PCR results appeared earlier and more frequently in the azelastine treated groups: being 18.52% and 21.43% in the 0.1% and 0.02% groups, respectively, compared to 0% for placebo on day 8. Comparable numbers of adverse events occurred in all treatment groups with no safety concerns. The shown effects of azelastine nasal spray may thus be suggestive of azelastine's potential as an antiviral treatment.Trial registration: The study was registered in the German Clinical Trial Register (DRKS-ID: DRKS00024520; Date of Registration in DRKS: 12/02/2021). EudraCT number: 2020-005544-34.
Introduction. Azelastine hydrochloride, a second-generation histamine H1 receptor (H1R) antagonist, exhibits anti-chlamydial effects against Chlamydia trachomatis (CT) in HeLa cells (genital infection model).Hypothesis/Gap Statement. Non-antibiotic pharmaceutical interactions with CT are an understudied field and the anti-chlamydial effects of azelastine are a potential interaction requiring further elucidation.Aim. To explore the underlying anti-chlamydial mechanisms of azelastine.Methodology. We assessed the specificity of azelastine for the chlamydial species and host cell type, the timing of azelastine application and whether the anti-chlamydial effects could be reproduced with different H1R-modulating compounds.Results. We observed similar anti-chlamydial azelastine effects for Chlamydia muridarum as well as for an ocular CT strain in human conjunctival epithelial cells (ocular infection model). Pre-incubating host cells with azelastine before infection mildly reduced chlamydial inclusion numbers and infectivity. Incubation of cells with azelastine initiated concomitantly with the chlamydial infection, or initiated several hours post-infection, reduced inclusion size, number and infectivity, and altered chlamydial morphology. These effects were strongest when azelastine was added shortly after or with the infection. Azelastine effects were not alleviated by increased concentrations of culture medium nutrients. Additionally, we did not observe anti-chlamydial effects when incubating cultures either with a different H1R antagonist or agonist, indicating that azelastine effects are probably H1R-independent.Conclusion. Accordingly, we conclude that azelastine anti-chlamydial effects are not restricted to a specific chlamydial species, strain or culture model, and are probably not mediated by H1R antagonism. Thus, it appears likely that off-target mechanisms of azelastine may explain our observations.
Azelastine hydrochloride is a pharmacologically distinct H1-receptor antagonist with a broad spectrum of antiallergic and anti-inflammatory activity. Azelastine has established antiallergic and anti-inflammatory effects that are unrelated to H1-receptor antagonism, including inhibitory effects on the synthesis of leukotrienes, kinins, and cytokines; the generation of superoxide free radicals; and the expression of the intercellular adhesion molecule 1. Azelastine is available in the United States as a nasal spray formulation (Astelin) and is approved for treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis and nonallergic vasomotor rhinitis. In U.S. clinical trials, azelastine nasal spray was effective in treating all of the symptoms of the allergic rhinitis symptom complex including ocular symptoms, and in double-blind clinical trials in nonallergic vasomotor rhinitis, azelastine nasal spray was effective in treating the total vasomotor rhinitis symptom complex including individual symptoms of nasal congestion and postnasal drip. This article reviews the pharmacologic profile and clinical efficacy and safety of azelastine nasal spray.
Introduction . Chlamydia trachomatis (Ct) is an obligate intracellular bacterium, causing a range of diseases in humans. Interactions between chlamydiae and antibiotics have been extensively studied in the past.Hypothesis/Gap statement: Chlamydial interactions with non-antibiotic drugs have received less attention and warrant further investigations. We hypothesized that selected cytokine inhibitors would alter Ct growth characteristics in HeLa cells.Aim. To investigate potential interactions between selected cytokine inhibitors and Ct development in vitro.Methodology. The CCR5 receptor antagonist maraviroc (Mara; clinically used as HIV treatment), the triterpenoid celastrol (Cel; used in traditional Chinese medicine) and the histamine H1 receptor antagonist azelastine (Az; clinically used to treat allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis) were used in a genital in vitro model of Ct serovar E infecting human adenocarcinoma cells (HeLa).Results. Initial analyses revealed no cytotoxicity of Mara up to 20 microM, Cel up to 1 microM and Az up to 20 microM. Mara exposure (1, 5, 10 and 20 microM) elicited a reduction of chlamydial inclusion numbers, while 10 microM reduced chlamydial infectivity. Cel 1 microM, as well as 10 and 20 microM Az, reduced chlamydial inclusion size, number and infectivity. Morphological immunofluorescence and ultrastructural analysis indicated that exposure to 20 microM Az disrupted chlamydial inclusion structure. Immunofluorescence evaluation of Cel-incubated inclusions showed reduced inclusion sizes whilst Mara incubation had no effect on inclusion morphology. Recovery assays demonstrated incomplete recovery of chlamydial infectivity and formation of structures resembling typical chlamydial inclusions upon Az removal.Conclusion. These observations indicate that distinct mechanisms might be involved in potential interactions of the drugs evaluated herein and highlight the need for continued investigation of the interaction of commonly used drugs with Chlamydia and its host.
A green, simple, quick and economical method is implemented for the first time for the simultaneous estimation of cetirizine (CTZ) and azelastine (AZE) as co-administered eye drops. The method relies on synchronous spectrofluorimetry with ∆lambda = 60 nm. Cetirizine can be estimated at 231 nm and AZE can be measured at 294 nm, each at the other's zero crossing point. All factors affecting the method were studied and properly optimized. Good correlation was obtained in the range of 0.1-2 microg mL(-1) for both drugs. The limits of detection were 0.014 and 0.010 microg mL(-1) and limits of quantitation were 0.043 and 0.029 microg mL(-1) for CTZ and AZE, respectively. Moreover, ICH guidelines were carried out to validate the adopted method. The method was suitable for the analysis of CTZ and AZE in synthetic mixtures, eye drops and aqueous humor. The mean percentage of recoveries of CTZ and AZE in spiked aqueous humor were 99.83 and 99.37, respectively. Furthermore, Green Analytical Procedure Index (GAPI) and analytical Eco-scale approaches were used to evaluate the greenness of the suggested method.
We examined the effects of a new anti-asthmatic drug, azelastine, and its principal metabolite, desmethylazelastine, on the in vitro electromechanical response of human airway smooth muscle during cholinergic stimulation. Membrane potential and isometric force were simultaneously measured using an intracellular microelectrode and a microforce transducer. Desmethylazelastine significantly suppressed acetylcholine-induced depolarization and contraction at 10(-6) M, whereas azelastine produced similar results at 10(-4) M, suggesting that the metabolite may be the principal compound acting upon the airway smooth muscle cell.
