BACKGROUND: Acne is an inflammatory disorder with a high global burden. It is common in adolescents and primarily affects sebaceous gland-rich areas. The clinical benefit of the topical acne treatments azelaic acid, salicylic acid, nicotinamide, sulphur, zinc, and alpha-hydroxy acid is unclear. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of topical treatments (azelaic acid, salicylic acid, nicotinamide, zinc, alpha-hydroxy acid, and sulphur) for acne. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases up to May 2019: the Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and LILACS. We also searched five trials registers. SELECTION CRITERIA: Clinical randomised controlled trials of the six topical treatments compared with other topical treatments, placebo, or no treatment in people with acne. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Key outcomes included participants' global self-assessment of acne improvement (PGA), withdrawal for any reason, minor adverse events (assessed as total number of participants who experienced at least one minor adverse event), and quality of life. MAIN RESULTS: We included 49 trials (3880 reported participants) set in clinics, hospitals, research centres, and university settings in Europe, Asia, and the USA. The vast majority of participants had mild to moderate acne, were aged between 12 to 30 years (range: 10 to 45 years), and were female. Treatment lasted over eight weeks in 59% of the studies. Study duration ranged from three months to three years. We assessed 26 studies as being at high risk of bias in at least one domain, but most domains were at low or unclear risk of bias. We grouped outcome assessment into short-term (less than or equal to 4 weeks), medium-term (from 5 to 8 weeks), and long-term treatment (more than 8 weeks). The following results were measured at the end of treatment, which was mainly long-term for the PGA outcome and mixed length (medium-term mainly) for minor adverse events. Azelaic acid In terms of treatment response (PGA), azelaic acid is probably less effective than benzoyl peroxide (risk ratio (RR) 0.82, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.72 to 0.95; 1 study, 351 participants), but there is probably little or no difference when comparing azelaic acid to tretinoin (RR 0.94, 95% CI 0.78 to 1.14; 1 study, 289 participants) (both moderate-quality evidence). There may be little or no difference in PGA when comparing azelaic acid to clindamycin (RR 1.13, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.38; 1 study, 229 participants; low-quality evidence), but we are uncertain whether there is a difference between azelaic acid and adapalene (1 study, 55 participants; very low-quality evidence). Low-quality evidence indicates there may be no differences in rates of withdrawal for any reason when comparing azelaic acid with benzoyl peroxide (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.60 to 1.29; 1 study, 351 participants), clindamycin (RR 1.30, 95% CI 0.48 to 3.56; 2 studies, 329 participants), or tretinoin (RR 0.66, 95% CI 0.29 to 1.47; 2 studies, 309 participants), but we are uncertain whether there is a difference between azelaic acid and adapalene (1 study, 55 participants; very low-quality evidence). In terms of total minor adverse events, we are uncertain if there is a difference between azelaic acid compared to adapalene (1 study; 55 participants) or benzoyl peroxide (1 study, 30 participants) (both very low-quality evidence). There may be no difference when comparing azelaic acid to clindamycin (RR 1.50, 95% CI 0.67 to 3.35; 1 study, 100 participants; low-quality evidence). Total minor adverse events were not reported in the comparison of azelaic acid versus tretinoin, but individual application site reactions were reported, such as scaling. Salicylic acid For PGA, there may be little or no difference between salicylic acid and tretinoin (RR 1.00, 95% CI 0.92 to 1.09; 1 study, 46 participants; low-quality evidence); we are not certain whether there is a difference between salicylic acid and pyruvic acid (1 study, 86 participants; very low-quality evidence); and PGA was not measured in the comparison of salicylic acid versus benzoyl peroxide. There may be no difference between groups in withdrawals when comparing salicylic acid and pyruvic acid (RR 0.89, 95% CI 0.53 to 1.50; 1 study, 86 participants); when salicylic acid was compared to tretinoin, neither group had withdrawals (both based on low-quality evidence (2 studies, 74 participants)). We are uncertain whether there is a difference in withdrawals between salicylic acid and benzoyl peroxide (1 study, 41 participants; very low-quality evidence). For total minor adverse events, we are uncertain if there is any difference between salicylic acid and benzoyl peroxide (1 study, 41 participants) or tretinoin (2 studies, 74 participants) (both very low-quality evidence). This outcome was not reported for salicylic acid versus pyruvic acid, but individual application site reactions were reported, such as scaling and redness. Nicotinamide Four studies evaluated nicotinamide against clindamycin or erythromycin, but none measured PGA. Low-quality evidence showed there may be no difference in withdrawals between nicotinamide and clindamycin (RR 1.12, 95% CI 0.49 to 2.60; 3 studies, 216 participants) or erythromycin (RR 1.40, 95% CI 0.46 to 4.22; 1 study, 158 participants), or in total minor adverse events between nicotinamide and clindamycin (RR 1.20, 95% CI 0.73 to 1.99; 3 studies, 216 participants; low-quality evidence). Total minor adverse events were not reported in the nicotinamide versus erythromycin comparison. Alpha-hydroxy (fruit) acid There may be no difference in PGA when comparing glycolic acid peel to salicylic-mandelic acid peel (RR 1.06, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.26; 1 study, 40 participants; low-quality evidence), and we are uncertain if there is a difference in total minor adverse events due to very low-quality evidence (1 study, 44 participants). Neither group had withdrawals (2 studies, 84 participants; low-quality evidence). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Compared to benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid probably leads to a worse treatment response, measured using PGA. When compared to tretinoin, azelaic acid probably makes little or no difference to treatment response. For other comparisons and outcomes the quality of evidence was low or very low. Risk of bias and imprecision limit our confidence in the evidence. We encourage the comparison of more methodologically robust head-to-head trials against commonly used active drugs.
Acne is a common skin disorder that can be problematic for adults as well as for adolescents. It has several key pathophysiological features such as follicular hyperkeratosis, elevated Propionibacterium acnes proliferation, and reactive inflammation, all of which should be targeted for an optimal outcome. Azelaic acid (AzA) has profound anti-inflammatory, antioxidative effects, and is bactericidal against a range of Gram-negative and Gram-positive microorganisms as well, including antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains. In addition, AzA's antikeratinizing effects are inhibitory toward comedones. AzA is effective overall in targeting multiple causes of acne and has been proven to be well tolerated in numerous clinical trials.
Azelaic acid is a complex molecule with many diverse activities. The latter include anti-infective and anti-inflammatory action. The agent also inhibits follicular keratinization and epidermal melanogenesis. Due to the wide variety of biological activities, azelaic acid has been utilized as a management tool in a broad spectrum of disease states and cutaneous disorders. This paper reviews the clinical utility of azelaic acid, noting the quality of the evidence supporting each potential use.
Azelaic acid is a naturally occurring saturated dicarboxylic acid which, on topical application (usually as a 20% cream), has been shown to be effective in the treatment of comedonal acne and inflammatory (papulopustular, nodular and nodulocystic) acne, as well as various cutaneous hyperpigmentary disorders characterised by hyperactive/abnormal melanocyte function, including melasma and, possibly, lentigo maligna. In addition, azelaic acid has an antiproliferative and cytotoxic effect on the human malignant melanocyte, and preliminary findings indicate that it may arrest the progression of cutaneous malignant melanoma. The mechanism of this selective cytotoxic action of azelaic acid is unclear, but may possibly be related to its inhibition of mitochondrial oxidoreductase activity and DNA synthesis. In controlled studies, topical azelaic acid demonstrated comparable anti-acne efficacy to topical tretinoin, benzoyl peroxide, erythromycin and oral tetracycline, while in patients with melasma azelaic acid proved at least as effective as topical hydroquinone. On topical application azelaic acid is well tolerated, with adverse effects apparently limited to a generally mild and transient local cutaneous irritation. Thus, topical azelaic acid, employed either as monotherapy or in combination with other treatments, is likely to prove of value in the management of acne and several hyperpigmentary disorders, most notably melasma.
BACKGROUND: Topical azelaic acid (AA) is indicated for acne and rosacea, but there is some evidence for its use for other dermatological conditions. AIMS: To assess the effectiveness and safety of topical AA for acne vulgaris, rosacea, hyperpigmentation/melasma, and skin aging. METHODS: RCTs of at least 6 weeks' treatment duration were eligible for inclusion. Databases including MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, and ClinicalTrials.gov were searched up to December 2022. Two reviewers were involved in all stages of the systematic review process. RESULTS: Forty-three RCTs met the inclusion criteria. Meta-analyses within 20 rosacea studies demonstrated that erythema severity, inflammatory lesion counts, overall improvement, and treatment success (achieving skin clarity) were significantly improved with AA compared with vehicle after 12 weeks. AA was more effective than metronidazole 0.75% for improved erythema severity, overall improvement, and inflammatory lesion counts. Sixteen acne studies suggest that AA is more effective than vehicle for improving global assessments and reducing acne severity. AA 20% also significantly reduced more lesions than erythromycin gel. Within seven melasma studies, AA 20% was significantly better than vehicle for both severity and global improvement. AA 20% demonstrated significantly better results compared with hydroquinone 2% for global improvement. Very few significant differences between AA and comparators were observed for commonly reported adverse events. No eligible RCTs were found that evaluated skin aging. CONCLUSIONS: AA is more effective than vehicle for rosacea, acne and melasma. Comparisons between AA and other treatments were often equivalent. Where there is equivalence, AA may be a good option for some clinical situations. RCT evidence is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of AA on skin aging.
Azelaic acid has numerous pharmacological uses in dermatology. Its anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant properties are thought to correlate with its efficacy in papulopustular rosacea and acne vulgaris, amongst other cutaneous conditions. We conducted a review of the literature on the use of azelaic acid in dermatology using key terms 'acne', 'azelaic acid', 'dermatology', 'melasma', 'rosacea', searching databases such as MEDLINE, EMBASE and PubMed. Only articles in English were chosen. The level of evidence was evaluated and selected accordingly listing the studies with the highest level of evidence first using the Oxford Center of Evidence-Based Medicine 2011 guidance.This review found the strongest evidence supporting the use of azelaic acid in rosacea, followed by its use off-label in melasma followed by acne vulgaris. Weaker evidence is currently available to support the use of azelaic acid in several other conditions such as hidradenitis suppurativa, keratosis pilaris and male androgenic alopecia.Azelaic acid, as a monotherapy or in combination, could be an effective first-line or alternative treatment, which is well-tolerated and safe for a range of dermatological conditions.
In this review, we examine published data reporting the efficacy of pharmaceutical agents to treat associated postinflammatory hyperpigmentation commonly seen in skin of color. Retinoids and azelaic acid have been widely used to treat acne. Now there are increasing data describing their use in skin of color for the treatment of both acne and the subsequent postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Historically, some dermatologists have been hesitant to use retinoids in skin of color because of perceived hypersensitivity in this patient population. However, recent data support the use of retinoids and azelaic acid in skin of color as both safe and beneficial.
In a series of investigations using 20% azelaic acid cream as a therapy for acne, it was found that the treatment, compared with its placebo, significantly reduced inflamed lesions after 1 month and non-inflamed lesions after 2 months. No changes in sebum excretion rate occurred, but a significant reduction, 15.9 to 10.5%, of free fatty acids of skin surface lipid was detected after 1 month. The follicular Micrococaceae density was significantly reduced after 1 month, and after 2 months there was a significant reduction in follicular Propionibacterium spp density. The final reductions were 2,500 and 44 fold, respectively.
Azelaic acid 20% cream (AZELEX) is a novel anti-acne agent with antimicrobial activity and keratinization-normalizing properties. In acne it is broadly comparable in efficacy to 0.05% tretinoin, 5% benzoyl peroxide, and 2% erythromycin, but is less irritating than tretinoin and benzoyl peroxide.
Seborrhea and the associated oily skin are undoubtedly the problem of women and men around the world. The pathogenesis of acne vulgaris involves excessive activity of sebaceous glands, as well as disturbances in the composition of sebum. The aim of the study was to assess the severity of seborrhea in a group of acne vulgaris patients and to determine the effect of a 20% azelaic acid solution on the activity of sebaceous glands. Twenty seven women, aged 19-25 years, underwent a series of six treatments with the application of a 20% solution of azelaic acid to the face. The mean values of sebum level showed a decreasing tendency. On the forehead, the results were as follows-195.5 before the treatment and 162.7 2 weeks after the last treatment. Measurements of the right cheek decreased from 175.3 to 141.3 The measurements taken 3 months after the study were 151.3 on the forehead and 138.9 on the cheek. Similarly, the values determining the total number of acne lesions and the severity of the disease according to the IGA scale also changed significantly. Chemical peel with 20% azelaic acid shows long-term sebostatic action, which inhibits the formation of new acne lesions.
Local interactions between individual plant organs and diverse microorganisms can lead to whole plant immunity via the mobilization of defense signals. One such signal is the plastid lipid-derived oxylipin azelaic acid (AZA). Arabidopsis lacking AZI1 or EARLI1, related lipid transfer family proteins, exhibit reduced AZA transport among leaves and cannot mount systemic immunity. AZA has been detected in roots as well as leaves. Therefore, the present study addresses the effects on plants of AZA application to roots. AZA but not the structurally related suberic acid inhibits root growth when directly in contact with roots. Treatment of roots with AZA also induces resistance to Pseudomonas syringae in aerial tissues. These effects of AZA on root growth and disease resistance depend, at least partially, on AZI1 and EARLI1. AZI1 in roots localizes to plastids, similar to its known location in leaves. Interestingly, kinases previously shown to modify AZI1 in vitro, MPK3 and MPK6, are also needed for AZA-induced root-growth inhibition and aboveground immunity. Finally, deuterium-labeled AZA applied to the roots does not move to aerial tissues. Thus, AZA application to roots triggers systemic immunity through an AZI1/EARLI1/MPK3/MPK6-dependent pathway and AZA effects may involve one or more additional mobile signals.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical efficacy of topical 20% azelaic acid cream and 15% azelaic acid gel compared with their respective vehicles and metronidazole gel in the treatment of papulopustular rosacea. DATA SOURCES: Electronic searches of MEDLINE, EMBASE, BIOSIS, and SciSearch through July or August 2004 and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials through 2004 (issue 3). We performed hand searches of reference lists, conference proceedings, and clinical trial databases. Experts in rosacea and azelaic acid were contacted. STUDY SELECTION: Randomized controlled trials involving topical azelaic acid (cream or gel) for the treatment of rosacea compared with placebo or other topical treatments. Two authors independently examined the studies identified by the searches. Ten studies were identified, of which 5 were included (873 patients). DATA EXTRACTION: Two authors independently extracted data from the included studies, then jointly assessed methodological quality using a quality assessment scale. DATA SYNTHESIS: Because standard deviation data were not available for 4 of the 5 studies, a meta-analysis could not be conducted. Four of the 5 studies demonstrated significant decreases in mean inflammatory lesion count and erythema severity after treatment with azelaic acid compared with vehicle. None of the studies showed any significant decrease in telangiectasia severity. CONCLUSIONS: Azelaic acid in 20% cream and 15% gel formulations appears to be effective in the treatment of papulopustular rosacea, particularly in regard to decreases in mean inflammatory lesion count and erythema severity. Compared with metronidazole, azelaic acid appears to be an equally effective, if not better, treatment option.
Nine patients with lentigo maligna were treated with topical azelaic acid. Clinical improvement was observed in four, with complete clearing in one. Two patients developed invasive lentigo maligna melanoma while on treatment. Caution should be exercised in the use of topical azelaic acid in the treatment of lentigo maligna.
Rosacea is one of the most commonly occurring dermatoses treated by dermatologists. There are multiple therapeutic options available for the treatment of papulopustular rosacea. Rosacea is an inflammatory condition, classically presenting with flushing and/or blushing along with erythema, edema, telangiectasia, papules, pustules, and nodules of the face. Minocycline, a member of the tetracycline family, has demonstrated benefit in the treatment of inflammatory lesions in patients with rosacea. This manuscript highlights the use of a new sustained-release low-dose minocycline 45 mg tablet, with or without azelaic acid, for the treatment of papulopustular rosacea.
In this study, hydrogels containing azelaic acid were developed using chitosan or HPMC (1-7%) for local treatment of acne vulgaris. Physicochemical properties such as viscosity, pH and mechanical properties were evaluated. In vitro release and ex vivo permeability studies were performed using the Franz diffusion cell system. The pH of the hydrogels was highly compatible with the skin pH and varied between 4.38 and 5.84. The cumulative release percentages of the hydrogels at the end of 6 hours were 65-78%, whereas the marketed product yielded 50% drug release. According to the ex vivo permeability results, azelaic acid accumulated in the skin was found to be 9.38 +/- 0.65% (marketed cream), 19.53 +/- 1.06% (K3), 10.96 +/- 1.91% (H6). The antiacne studies with Cutibacterium acnes revealed that K3 (29.45 +/- 0.95) and H6 (32.35 +/- 0.15) had higher inhibition zones compared to the marketed cream (24.50 +/- 0.90). Additionally, the gels were found to be highly stable as a result of the stability studies for 6 months. Among the hydrogels that were prepared based on experimental findings, K3 (3% Chitosan) and H6 (6% HPMC) represented elevated in vitro release profile, higher permeability and increased antiacne activity. The findings of this research suggest that the developed hydrogels might be an alternative to the marketed product.
Azelaic acid is a dicarboxylic acid compound used in treatment of acne vulgaris. However, high concentration (ca 20%) is needed to guarantee the drug availability in the skin. The latter increases the incidence of side effects such as local irritation. The prodrug strategy to enhance azelaic acid diffusion through skin was not reported before. Thus, a lipophilic prodrug of azelaic acid (diethyl azelate [DEA]) was synthesized and investigated to improve percutaneous availability of azelaic acid, with a subsequent full physical, chemical, and biological characterization. Expectedly, DEA exhibited a significant increase in diffusion compared to azelaic acid through silicone membrane. In contrast, the diffusion results through human stratum corneum (SC) displayed weaker permeation for DEA with expected retention in the SC. Therefore, a desorption study of DEA from SC was conducted to examine the reservoir behavior in SC. Results showed an evidence of sustained release behavior of DEA from SC. Consequently, enhancement of keratolytic effect is expected due to azelaic acid produced from enzymatic conversion of DEA released from SC.
PURPOSE: Melasma remains a refractory skin condition that needs to be actively explored. Azelaic acid has been used for decades as a topical agent to improve melasma through multiple mechanisms, however, there is a lack of research on its combination with laser therapy. This study evaluated the effectiveness of isolated treatment with topical 20% azelaic acid and its combination with 755-nm picosecond laser in facial melasma patients. METHODS: A randomized, evaluator-blinded, controlled study was conducted on 30 subjects with facial melasma in a single center from October 2021 to April 2022. All subjects received topical 20% azelaic acid cream (AA) for 24 weeks, and after 4 weeks, a hemiface was randomly assigned to receive 755-nm picosecond (PS) laser therapy once every 4 weeks for 3 treatments. Treatment efficacy was determined by mMASI score evaluations, dermoscopic assessment, reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) assessments and patient's satisfaction assessments (PSA). RESULTS: Treatment with 20% azelaic acid, with or without picosecond laser therapy, significantly reduced the hemi-mMASI score (P < 0.0001) and resulted in higher patient satisfaction. Improvements in dermoscopic and RCM assessments were observed in both sides of the face over time, with no difference between the two sides. RCM exhibited better dentritic cell improvement in the combined treatment side. No patients had serious adverse effects at the end of treatment or during the follow-up period. CONCLUSION: The additional use of picosecond laser therapy showed no clinical difference except for subtle differences detected by RCM assessments.The study was registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR2100051294; 18 September 2021).
