The treatment spectrum for ulcerative colitis has greatly increased in recent years. Mesalazine is still the standard drug treatment for uncomplicated ulcerative colitis in various forms of administration. Glucocorticoids are highly effective in the acute treatment of ulcerative colitis but should only be used on a short-term basis due to the pronounced side effects. For forms with a complicated course of ulcerative colitis, immunosuppressive and immunomodulating substances, such as azothioprine as well as various biologicals, Janus kinase inhibitors (JAKi), sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonists (S1PR agonists) and calcineurin inhibitors are available after failure of conventional treatment. A proctocolectomy should be considered in cases of a treatment-refractive course or with detection of carcinomas and high-grade epithelial dysplasia.
A case of cutaneous Crohn's disease (CD) involving the areola-nipple region of both breasts in a 45-year-old woman is reported. The lesion had initially been diagnosed and treated as a simple abscess. Histopathological examination, however, showed granulomatous inflammation with eosinophils suggesting extraintestinal CD. The patient also had a minor area of cutaneous CD localized at the umbilicus and severe anogenital lesions. Twenty-six years previously the woman had undergone a course of sulphasalazine treatment together with steroid enema for chronic inflammatory colitis, but the colitis had been inactive for 25 years. Treatment with sulphasalazine, metronidazole, prednisolone and azothioprine had only minor effect on the skin lesions. CD is a systemic disorder and the most prominent manifestations may be extraintestinal.
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a rare autoimmune inflammation of the liver mostly with a chronic course, which can also be acutely manifested up to acute liver failure. It affects women 3-4 times more frequently than men and can be diagnosed in all age groups. In one third of the patients a liver cirrhosis is present at the time of diagnosis. It is characterized by a hepatic inflammation pattern, a polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia of immunoglobulin G and the detection of autoantibodies. A liver biopsy is necessary to make the diagnosis. The AIH is histologically characterized in particular by a lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate in the portal fields. In cases with a relevant disease activity, AIH is typically treated by immunosuppression. The immunosuppressive treatment is associated with a prevention of disease progression to liver cirrhosis and a better survival. The success of treatment is measured by achieving biochemical remission, i.e., normalization of the transaminase and immunoglobulin G levels as a good noninvasive predictor of a histological remission. Another treatment target is an improvement of the symptoms of the patient. The first-line treatment consists of a glucocorticoid, mostly prednisolone or in cases without advanced fibrosis budesonide, and azothioprine. For reduction of steroid-specific treatment side effects the maintenance treatment should be carried out steroid-free whenever possible. In cases of insufficient response to azothioprine or side effects a treatment attempt using antimetabolites, such as 6‑mercaptopurine or mycophenolate mofetil is primarily carried out as second-line treatment. For patients who do not achieve biochemical remission through first-line or second-line treatment, a variety of medications are available for third-line treatment, e.g., rituximab, calcineurin inhibitors or antitumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) antibodies. Third-line treatment should be carried out in expert centers and registered in the European Reference Network for Rare Liver Diseases in order to improve the currently sparse database for these forms of treatment in the future.
The antiviral effect of interferon was studied in a number of experimental virus infections in the rat. Interferon was shown to protect rats infected with pseudorabies virus, herpes simplex virus or vesicular stomatitis virus. The antiviral activity was not inhibited by immune suppression induced by azothioprine, prednisolone or cyclosporin A treatment. Cyclophosphamide completely blocked the in vivo activity of interferon in rats.
BACKGROUND: With current techniques, renal failure patients are now able to regain near-normal health following renal transplantation. However, the development of premature cardiovascular disease is a major problem. Dyslipidaemia may be an important contributor to this. The use of lipid lowering agents in renal allograft recipients has been limited by potential interaction of these agents with the now widely used immunosuppressive agent, cyclosporine. AIM: This study was designed to investigate efficacy and safety of simvastatin in subjects taking either cyclosporine or azothioprine post renal transplantation. METHODS: Fifty-one subjects (32 females, 19 males -- mean age 51 +/- 12.5 yr) who were at least 1 yr post transplant, had creatinine < or = 2.5 mmol/L and a total cholesterol > or = 6 mmol/L were enrolled in a prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. After an initial 10-wk dietary period, the last 4 wk on placebo, subjects were randomised to receive either 5 mg simvastatin/d for 6 wk followed by 10 mg simvastatin/d for 6 wk, or matching placebo. After this 12-wk double-blind phase, there was an open-label phase when all subjects were treated with 10 mg simvastatin/d for a period of 36 wk. RESULTS: Compared to placebo, 5 mg simvastatin/d significantly decreased total cholesterol by 20% (p < 0.01), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL cholesterol) by 29% (p < 0.01), and Apolipoprotein B (ApoB) by 26% (p < 0.01). Increasing simvastatin to 10 mg/d did not lead to further significant changes. But high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL cholesterol) increased by 9% (p < 0.01) and Apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) by 7% (p < 0.01) only on 10 mg simvastatin/d. During the open-label phase, subjects previously randomised to placebo achieved similar significant changes to their lipoprotein profile. The benefits achieved from simvastatin were maintained to the end of the study. There were three withdrawals from the study, all from the simvastatin/ cyclosporine group. Two subjects had musculoskeletal pain and 1 had abdominal pain. Minor adverse events were similar in both the simvastatin- and placebo-treated groups. CONCLUSION: Low-dose simvastatin is an effective and well-tolerated agent in the treatment of dyslipidaemia in renal allograft recipients.
