BACKGROUND: 5-Aminosalicylates are the standard treatment for induction and maintenance of remission in mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis. In recent years, the 5-aminosalicylic acid-containing pro-drug balsalazide has been the focus of attention. AIM: To compare the efficacy and tolerance of balsalazide and mesalazine by meta-analysis. METHODS: Pubmed, Embase, Scopus, Web of Science, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials were searched for studies comparing the efficacy and/or tolerance of balsalazide with mesalazine in the management of UC. The search terms were: "mesalazine" or "5-aminosalicylic acid" and "balsalazide" and "ulcerative colitis." Data were collected from 1966 to 2007 (up to February). There was no language restriction. "Symptomatic remission," "complete remission," "relapse rate," "total adverse events," and "withdrawals because of adverse events" were the key outcomes of interest. RESULTS: Six randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials met our criteria and were included in the meta-analysis. In these "symptomatic remission," "complete remission," "relapse rate," "total adverse events," and "withdrawals because of adverse events" were evaluated in three, three, two, five, and six of the trials, respectively. They included 653 patients consisting of 55.4% men and 44.6% women randomized to receive either balsalazide or mesalazine. Pooling of three trials for symptomatic remission yielded a significant relative risk (RR) of 1.23 (95% confidence interval of 1.03-1.47, P = 0.02). The summary RR for complete remission in three trials was 1.3 (95% CI of 1.002-1.68, P = 0.048). Pooling of two trials for the outcome of relapse yielded a non-significant RR of 0.77 (95% CI of 0.56-1.07, P = 0.12). Pooling five studies from which data for any adverse events were extracted, yielded a non-significant RR of 0.87 (95% CI of 0.75-1.001, P = 0.53). The summary RR for withdrawals because of adverse events in six trials was 0.69, a non-significant RR (95% CI of 0.37-1.29, P = 0.24). CONCLUSION: Balsalazide is more effective than mesalazine in induction of remission, but balsalazide has no benefit compared with mesalazine in preventing relapse in the population selected. The number of patients with any adverse events and withdrawals because of severe adverse events is similar for mesalazine and balsalazide.
Balsalazide is a 5-amino salicylic acid prodrug well-tolerated and effective in treating acute ulcerative colitis. VSL[sharp]3, a high-potency probiotic mixture, has proved to be effective in preventing flare-ups of chronic pouchitis and in obtaining remission of mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis. Recent studies found the association of low-dose balsalazide/VLS no. 3 effective in treating mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis and in preventing the recurrence of uncomplicated diverticulitis of the colon. In this paper, the framework for using this association to treat ulcerative colitis or to prevent the recurrence of colonic diverticulitis is reviewed, and 2 studies on this therapeutic approach are briefly summarized.
AIM: We evaluated the effect of coadministration of sulphasalazine, mesalamine, and balsalazide on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine. METHODS: Thirty four patients with Crohn's disease receiving azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine were enrolled in an eight week non-randomised parallel group drug interaction study and treated with mesalamine 4 g/day, sulphasalazine 4 g/day, or balsalazide 6.75 g/day. The primary outcome measure was the occurrence of clinically important leucopenia during the study, defined separately as total leucocyte counts < 3.0 x 10(9)/l and < or = 3.5 x 10(9)/l. Whole blood 6-thioguanine nucleotide concentrations were determined. RESULTS: Three patients could not be evaluated for the primary outcome measure. In the remaining 31 patients, the frequency of total leucocyte counts < 3.0 and < or = 3.5 were: 1/10 and 5/10 in the mesalamine group; 1/11 and 6/11 in the sulphasalazine group; and 0/10 and 2/10 in the balsalazide group. There were significant increases in mean whole blood 6-thioguanine nucleotide concentrations from baseline at most time points in the mesalamine and sulphasalazine groups but not in the balsalazide group. CONCLUSIONS: In patients with Crohn's disease receiving azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine, coadministration of mesalamine, sulphasalazine, and possibly balsalazide results in an increase in whole blood 6-thioguanine nucleotide concentrations and a high frequency of leucopenia.
BACKGROUND: Balsalazide is well tolerated and effective in treating acute ulcerative colitis. VSL#3 is a probiotic cocktail proven to be effective in preventing flare-ups of chronic pouchitis. We compared the efficacy and safety of low-dose balsalazide (2.25 g/day) plus 3 g/day VLS#3 (group A) with medium-dose balsalazide alone (group B) and with mesalazine (group C) in the treatment of mild-to-moderate active ulcerative colitis. MATERIAL/METHODS: Ninety patients (30 per group) were randomly enrolled, with a treatment duration of 8 weeks. Efficacy was assessed by symptoms assessment, endoscopic appearance, and histological evaluation. RESULTS: Balsalazide/VSL#3 was significantly superior to balsalazide alone and to mesalazine in obtaining remission: 24 patients of group A were in remission [per-protocol: 85.71% (C.I.95%: 62-96), on intention-to-treat: 80% (C.I.95%: 59-91)], while 21 group B [per-protocol: 80.77% (C.I. 95%: 51-82), on intention-to-treat: 77% (C.I.95%: 43-81)] and 16 group C patients [per-protocol: 72.73% (C.I. 95%: 30-75), on intention-to-treat: 53.33% (C.I.95%: 42-62)] were in remission (p<0.02). Balsalazide with or without VSL#3 was better tolerated than mesalazine: two group C patients were withdrawn from the study because of severe side-effects; 1 group A (3.33%), 3 group B (10%) and 4 group C (13.33%) patients experienced slight side-effects. The balsalazide/VSL#3 combination was faster in obtaining remission than balsalazide alone or mesalazine (4, 7.5, and 13 days in groups A, B and C, respectively) and also better in improving all parameters evaluated. CONCLUSIONS: Balsalazide/VSL#3 may be a very good choice in the treatment of active mild-to-moderate active ulcerative colitis instead of balsalazide alone or mesalazine.
BACKGROUND: Balsalazide is a new 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) containing prodrug. Its efficacy in comparison with standard mesalazine therapy and the optimum dose for maintaining remission of ulcerative colitis are still unclear. AIMS: To compare the relapse preventing effect and safety profile of two doses of balsalazide and a standard dose of Eudragit coated mesalazine. METHODS: A total of 133 patients with ulcerative colitis in remission were recruited to participate in a double blind, multicentre, randomised trial: 49 patients received balsalazide 1.5 g twice daily, 40 received balsalazide 3.0 g twice daily, and 44 received mesalazine 0.5 g three times daily. Efficacy assessments were clinical activity index (CAI) and endoscopic score according to Rachmilewitz, and a histological score. In addition, laboratory tests were performed and urinary excretion of 5-ASA and its metabolite N-Ac-5-ASA was analysed. The study lasted for 26 weeks. RESULTS: Balsalazide 3.0 g twice daily resulted in a significantly higher clinical remission rate (77.5%) than balsalazide 1.5 g twice daily (43.8%) and mesalazine 0.5 g three times daily (56.8%) (p=0.006). The respective times to relapse were 161 days, 131 days (p=0.003), and 144 days (NS). Accordingly, pairwise contrasts of the final endoscopic score demonstrated a significant difference (p=0.005) between the two balsalazide treatment groups while differences between either of these two groups and mesalazine were not statistically significant. Patients treated with balsalazide excreted less 5-ASA and N-Ac-5-ASA than patients receiving mesalazine but these differences were not statistically significant. Discontinuation of the trial because of adverse effects occurred in nine patients: three in the balsalazide 1.5 g twice daily group, two in the balsalazide 3.0 g twice daily group, and four in the mesalazine 0.5 g three times daily group. No clinically important new drug safety related findings were identified in this study. CONCLUSIONS: High dose balsalazide (3.0 g twice daily) was superior in maintaining remission in patients with ulcerative colitis compared with a low dose (1.5 g twice daily) or a standard dose of mesalazine (0.5 g three times daily). All three treatments were safe and well tolerated.
OBJECTIVE: Balsalazide is a new innovative, mesalamine-containing prodrug that is activated by bacteria in the colon. Balsalazide has been shown previously to be well tolerated and effective in the treatment of acute ulcerative colitis. The aim of this study was to determine the dose-response of balsalazide for efficacy and safety in active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis and to compare this profile with that of mesalamine, pH-dependent, delayed-release tablets. METHODS: A multicenter, randomized, active control, double-blind, double-dummy, dose-response, parallel-group study was performed comparing balsalazide (6.75 g daily), balsalazide (2.25 g daily), and mesalamine (2.4 g daily), administered for 8 wk to 154 patients with active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis as verified by sigmoidoscopy. RESULTS: Eight weeks of treatment with 6.75 g of balsalazide daily provided significantly greater improvement than did balsalazide (2.25 g daily) in rectal bleeding (64.7% [6.75-g balsalazide] vs 32.4% [2.25-g balsalazide], p < 0.006), stool frequency (58.8% vs 29.4%, p < 0.006), sigmoidoscopic score (78.9% vs 52.5%, p < 0.015), and Physician's Global Assessment (73.7% vs 51.3%, p < 0.03). The efficacy of balsalazide showed a significantly more rapid onset of action than that of mesalamine (2.4 g daily) (2-wk sigmoidocopic score improvement, 54.7% [6.75-g balsalazide] vs 29.4% [2.4-g mesalamine], p = 0.006) with numerically greater improvement at 8 wk in five of seven measured signs and symptoms. Balsalazide (6.75 g daily) was well tolerated, and the safety profile did not differ significantly from that of balsalazide (2.25 g daily) or mesalamine. CONCLUSIONS: Eight weeks of treatment with balsalazide (6.75 g daily) is significantly more effective than balsalazide (2.25 g daily) and more rapid in onset than mesalamine (2.4 g daily) in improving signs and symptoms of acute ulcerative colitis. Balsalazide (6.75 g daily) is well tolerated, and the safety profile does not differ from that of balsalazide (2.25 g daily) and mesalamine (2.4 g daily).
A 38 year-old man with ulcerative colitis recently treated with balsalazide was admitted with chest pain. Investigations demonstrated myocardial necrosis, ECG changes, echocardiographic wall motion abnormalities but normal epicardial coronary arteries and no LV scar on cardiac MRI. Myocarditis was diagnosed and balsalazide therapy was withdrawn, resulting in a full recovery and resolution of abnormalities.
OBJECTIVE: Balsalazide is a novel azo-bonded 5-aminosalicylic acid treatment for mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis. The study objective was to compare symptomatic remission rates with balsalazide and mesalamine while controlling for extent of disease and time since diagnosis in patients with active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis. METHODS: A total of 173 patients with sigmoidoscopically verified ulcerative colitis were randomized to 8 wk of double-blind treatment with balsalazide 6.75 g/day or mesalamine 2.4 g/day. Both treatments provided 2.4 g/day of oral 5-aminosalicylic acid. Patients maintained symptom diaries throughout the treatment period. RESULTS: Overall, 46% of balsalazide- and 44% of mesalamine-treated patients achieved symptomatic remission. Higher response rates were noted in newly diagnosed patients with < or = 40 cm of disease (68% vs 61%) than in recently relapsed patients with >40 cm of disease (36% vs 25%). The median time to symptomatic remission was 12 days shorter with balsalazide (25 days) than with mesalamine (37 days). Significantly more balsalazide patients showed sigmoidoscopic (p = 0.002), stool frequency (p = 0.006), rectal bleeding (p = 0.006), and physician's global assessment score (p = 0.013) improvement by 14 days than did mesalamine patients. Similar proportions of patients reported adverse events (54% vs 64%), which were most commonly related to the gastrointestinal and central and peripheral nervous systems. CONCLUSIONS: Balsalazide is an effective and safe treatment for mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis. Improvement of symptoms occurs considerably earlier with balsalazide than with mesalamine.
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a costly disease, especially if not properly treated. Epidemiologic studies have shown that many patients progress in one year from initial treatment with prednisone to expensive colonectomy surgery if the UC is not managed with drug therapy. A two-stage decision analysis was conducted to (1) estimate the cost of a 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) treatment failure using the treatment guidelines recommended by the American College of Gastroenterology and (2) incorporate the cost of a 5-ASA treatment failure to determine which oral 5-ASA agent results in cost minimization and cost effectiveness. The analysis was conducted from the payer perspective, incorporating results from clinical trials directly comparing oral balsalazide capsules and a specific formulation of oral mesalamine. Health care costs related to UC for an oral 5-ASA failure is greater than dollar 11,500 on average in the first six months after therapy. Patients treated with balsalazide capsules had 16% lower total direct health care costs, 32% better outcomes (days without symptoms or steroids), and 37% greater cost effectiveness compared with patients treated with a specific formulation of oral mesalamine. Coordinated efforts should be taken to avoid the cost and morbidity associated with 5-ASA treatment failures.
OBJECTIVES: : A multicenter, double-blind study was conducted to evaluate the safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of balsalazide in pediatric patients with mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis (UC). PATIENTS AND METHODS: : Sixty-eight patients, 5 to 17 years of age, with mild-to-moderate active UC based on the modified Sutherland UC activity index (MUCAI) were randomized to receive oral balsalazide 2.25 or 6.75 g/day for 8 weeks. The primary endpoint was clinical improvement (reduction of the MUCAI score by > or =3 points from baseline). Clinical remission (MUCAI score of 0 or 1 for stool frequency) and histological improvement after 8 weeks were also assessed. Pharmacokinetic parameters for balsalazide, 5-aminosalicylic acid, and N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid were determined at 2 weeks. Adverse events and laboratory changes were monitored throughout the study. RESULTS: : Clinical improvement was achieved by 45% and 37% of patients and clinical remission by 12% and 9% of patients receiving 6.75 and 2.25 g/day, respectively. Improvement in histologic grade was achieved by 8 of 16 (50%) and 3 of 10 (30%) patients receiving 6.75 and 2.25 g/day, respectively. No significant differences were seen in efficacy. Pharmacokinetics in 12 patients were characterized by large interpatient variability and low systemic exposure. Adverse events were similar between the treatment groups, the most common being headache and abdominal pain. No clinically significant changes were observed in laboratory values, including those indicative of hepatic or renal toxicity. CONCLUSIONS: : Balsalazide is well tolerated and improves the signs and symptoms of mild-to-moderate active UC in pediatric patients 5 to 17 years of age.
BACKGROUND: Sulfasalazine is well established in the treatment of active ulcerative colitis. Intolerance to sulfasalazine, however, is a common problem. Balsalazide has been designed to deliver 5-aminosalicylic acid to the colon without the poor tolerability of sulfasalazine. AIM: To compare the safety and efficacy of balsalazide, 6.75 g daily, with sulfasalazine, 3 g daily, in the treatment of active ulcerative colitis of all grades of severity. METHODS: Balsalazide and sulfasalazine were compared in a multicentre, double-blind, parallel group study over 12 weeks. Patients were stratified for disease severity and topical and/or oral steroids were co-administered where clinically necessary. RESULTS: Fifty-seven patients were randomized: 28 to receive balsalazide and 29 to receive sulfasalazine. Significantly fewer patients withdrew from the balsalazide group due to adverse events (2/28 vs. 9/29, P=0.041). These data confirm that balsalazide is better tolerated than sulfasalazine. In patients able to tolerate the treatment, similar improvements were recorded in clinical, sigmoidoscopic and histological assessments in both treatment groups. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the better tolerability of balsalazide compared to sulfasalazine, and supports the use of balsalazide in ulcerative colitis of all grades of severity.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The role of probiotics in the treatment of diverticulitis is still not known. The aim of our study was to investigate whether balsalazide and/or VSL#3 is effective in preventing diverticulitis recurrence. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this pilot study, 30 consecutive patients (19 males, 11 females, mean age 60.1 years, range 47-75 years) affected by uncomplicated diverticulitis of the colon were monitored. After obtaining remission, the patients were randomly assigned to one of the following groups as follows: group A, balsalazide 2.25 g daily for 10 days every month plus VSL#3 450 billions/day for 15 days every month and group B, VSL#3 alone 450 billions/day for 15 days every month. Primary end-point was considered the maintaining of remission throughout a 12-month follow-up. Secondary end-points considered were (1) the assessment of the overall scores at the end of the follow-up and (2) the effects of the two different treatments with regards to every symptom assessed. RESULTS/FINDINGS: One group A patient was withdrawn from the study at the 6th month and one group B patient was lost at the 6th month of follow-up. One group A patient (6.66%) showed relapse of symptoms at the 10th month of follow-up. At the end of follow-up, 11 patients were completely symptom-free (73.33%), whilst 2 patients complained of only mild, recurrent symptoms (13%). Two group B patients (13.33%) showed relapse of the disease at the 5th and 8th month of follow-up, respectively. At the end of follow-up, 8 patients were completely symptom-free (60%), 2 patients complained of mild, recurrent symptoms (13.33%), 1 patient (6.66%) complained of mild but continuous symptoms. No side effects were recorded throughout the follow-up in both groups. INTERPRETATION/CONCLUSIONS: Combination probiotic/anti-inflammatory drug was found better than probiotic treatment in preventing relapse of uncomplicated diverticulitis of the colon, even if without statistical significance.
PURPOSE: A common complication of pelvic radiotherapy (RT) is acute radiation-induced proctosigmoiditis (RIPS), for which a multitude of therapies have been tried. The 5-aminosalicylates (5-ASA), which are traditionally used to treat inflammatory bowel disease, have been tested; however, all but one prior randomized attempt to limit or prevent RIPS with 5-ASA-type agents have failed. We sought to evaluate balsalazide, a new 5-ASA drug, for its potential to prevent or limit RIPS in patients undergoing RT for carcinoma of the prostate, as a representative sample of pelvic RT patients. Balsalazide has a unique delivery system in that 99% of ingested drug is delivered to and activated in the colon, a higher yield than all other oral agents currently available in this class. Furthermore, it lacks the antigenic sulfa moiety present in sulfasalazine, the only other 5-ASA with demonstrated benefit in this setting. Thus, it was deemed an ideal candidate for preventing or limiting RIPS. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Eligible patients included prostate cancer patients, American Joint Committee on Cancer Stage T1-3, M0 being treated with external beam radiotherapy in the University of Kentucky Department of Radiation Medicine. Between January 1, 2003 and July 1, 2004, 27 eligible patients were enrolled in the study. Patients were administered 2250 mg of balsalazide or an identical-appearing placebo twice daily beginning 5 days before RT and continuing for 2 weeks after completion. Toxicities were graded weekly according to National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria v. 2.0 for each of the following: proctitis, diarrhea, dysuria, weight loss, fatigue, nausea, and vomiting. A symptom index was formulated for each toxicity consisting of the toxicity's numeric grade multiplied by the number of days it was experienced, and summed for each grade experienced throughout the course of RT. RESULTS: With the exception of nausea or vomiting, seen in 3 patients on balsalazide and 2 on placebo, all toxicities were appreciably lower in patients taking balsalazide. Proctitis was prevented most significantly with a mean proctitis index of 35.3 in balsalazide patients and 74.1 in placebo patients (p = 0.04). Placebo patients lost an average of 2.7 pounds, whereas balsalazide patients on average gained weight. Unexpectedly, dysuria was also lower in balsalazide-treated patients. CONCLUSIONS: Balsalazide is a new-generation 5-ASA drug that yields a high concentration of active drug to the distal colon. Results of this pilot study suggest that it is able to prevent or reduce symptoms of RIPS in patients undergoing RT for prostate cancer. We feel that these results justify the formation of a cooperative group trial to assess its efficacy in a multi-institutional setting.
Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an idiopathic chronic inflammatory disorder that affects the colonic mucosa. One class among the drugs used for its treatment is the 5-aminosalicylates (5-ASAs). While highly efficacious in treating mild-to-moderate UC, 5-ASAs are associated with rare but potentially life-threatening side effects such as pericarditis, myocarditis and pneumonitis. These adverse events appear to be caused by a hypersensitivity reaction and resolve after cessation of 5-ASA drugs. This article presents a case report of febrile pleuropericarditis in a UC patient treated with balsalazide, and provides a thorough literature review of the rare side effects of 5-ASAs, their incidence, clinical presentation, differential diagnosis and treatment. In conclusion, the clinicians should be aware that this type of adverse events to 5-ASA compounds can be easily overlooked but it has significant morbidity if not promptly diagnosed.
5-aminosalicylates remain the first-line treatment for patients with ulcerative colitis. A number of formulations are available for the treatment of active ulcerative colitis, including encapsulated mesalazine and mesalazine in combination with other molecules. Balsalazide is an aminosalicylate prodrug that releases mesalazine in the colon, thus exerting its multiple anti-inflammatory effects in areas of colitis. This review will examine the pharmacological and therapeutic features of balsalazide as an anti-inflammatory agent in ulcerative colitis. The introduction of novel aminosalicylate formulations and an appreciation of their molecular mode of action, has renewed interest in these agents in both maintenance of disease remission and cancer prevention.
BACKGROUND: The patient-centred approach is new to the management of ulcerative colitis. To date, it has only been shown to be successful in a short-term study. AIM: To assess the feasibility, safety and efficacy of patient-led dosing using balsalazide in the long-term treatment of ulcerative colitis. METHODS: This was a 3-year, two-cohort, multi-centre study: one cohort was in stable remission (52 patients) and the other was newly in remission (76 patients) from ulcerative colitis. Two 750-mg balsalazide capsules were given twice daily for maintenance, increased by 750-mg increments to a maximum of 6 g for up to 7 days depending on symptom severity. Clinical assessments were made every 12-14 weeks; laboratory assessments were made every 6 months. RESULTS: The average median daily dose of balsalazide was 3 g (range, 1.5-6 g). In the cohort with stable remission, 23 patients (44%) had relapsed by 3 years [median time to relapse, > 1095 days (36 months)]. In the cohort newly in remission, these values were 45 patients (59%) and 656 days (22 months), respectively. In the cohort with stable remission, the time since last relapse was significantly associated with relapse during the first year of treatment (P < 0.033). CONCLUSIONS: Long-term, patient-led, maintenance treatment with balsalazide is well tolerated with a good safety profile and is effective for patients with ulcerative colitis.
Balsalazide is a prodrug of mesalazine which has an inert carrier molecule instead of the sulfapyridine moiety of sulfasalazine. Balsalazide 6.75 g/day was more effective than mesalazine 2.4 g/day in at least 1 trial and as effective as sulfasalazine 3 g/day for inducing remission in patients with acute ulcerative colitis in 8- and 12-week trials. Moreover, complete symptom relief occurred more promptly with balsalizide 6.75 g/day than with mesalazine 2.4g/day. In long term studies, balsalazide 2 g/day was as effective as sulfasalazine 2 g/day and balsalazide 6 g/day was as effective as mesalazine 1.5 g/day, in maintaining remission in patients with ulcerative colitis. The tolerability profile of balsalazide is significantly better than that of sulfasalazine; 70% of sulfasalazine-intolerant patients were able to tolerate balsalazide.
BACKGROUND: 5-Aminosalicylate (5-ASA) agents are the mainstay of oral therapy for ulcerative colitis (UC). Balsalazide, a prodrug of 5-ASA, has recently been approved for the treatment of UC. OBJECTIVE: To summarize current data on balsalazide and to discuss its impact on management of UC. METHODS: A systematic review of published literature was performed on PubMed using the search terms 'Balsalazide' and 'Colazal(TM)'. The Cochrane database was also reviewed. RESULTS: Balsalzide, a 5-ASA prodrug, ulilizes azoreduction by colonic bacteria to achieve a sustained release of active 5-ASA throughout the colon. A recent clinical trial has demonstrated balsalazide 6.7 g/day to be superior to placebo in inducing remission in symptomatic UC. The drug is well tolerated with a safety profile comparable to other oral 5-ASA agents. The current data suggests that symptomatic remission occurs with both greater swiftness and greater frequency when compared with mesalamine. CONCLUSION: Balsalazide is approved for the treatment of mild-to-moderate active UC. It is efficacious for the induction of remission in mild to moderate UC and has a favorable safety profile, with the added advantages of greater efficacy of remission induction and rapidity of onset.
