In a double-blind, placebo controlled study of 10 infants with upper gastrointestinal motor disorders, metoclopramide (1 mg/kg, intravenous) but not bethanechol (0.075 mg/kg, subcutaneous), significantly increased the fractional rate of gastric emptying following a 5% glucose meal. Infants were tested on 3 consecutive days with a phenol red dye-dilution technique which, if combined with acid titration of gastric samples, permits simultaneous measurements of gastric volume, fractional emptying rate, fluid output, and acid output. Metoclopramide increased the fractional emptying rate in eight of 10 infants (mean +/- SE increasing from 4.6 +/- 0.6 to 7.3 +/- 1.0%/min, p less than 0.02). Neither drug altered gastric acid secretion, but metoclopramide significantly increased gastric fluid output (mean +/- SE increased from 3.5 +/- 0.6 to 6.5 +/- 1.4 ml/min, p less than 0.02). No undesirable side effects or complications occurred during testing. We conclude that trials are warranted to assess the clinical efficacy of metoclopramide in infants with nonobstructive causes of delayed gastric emptying.
A double-blind crossover study utilizing bethanechol was performed among 45 pediatric-aged patients with gastroesophageal reflux. Thirty young children (age = less than 1 year) were studied. These infants did significantly better while taking bethanecol than when they were receiving placebo. Fifteen children (age greater than 1 year) were also studied. These patients also had significant clinical improvement while on the drug when compared to the period when they were receiving placebo. Esophageal pH probe testing after the oral administration of bethanecol showed a significant decrease in frequency and duration of episodes of gastroesophageal reflux. This improvement may be secondary to the increases in lower esophageal sphincter pressure and persistaltic activity seen during esophageal manometrics. Bethanechol should be considered for pediatric-aged patients who are not benefited by conventional medical therapeutic regimens.
The author describes the use of bethanechol chloride to relieve side effects, including salivary inactivation, constipation, and bladder inhibition, which result from the anticholinergic action of tricyclic antidepressants. He suggests that the use of cholinergic medication during antidepressant therapy may extend the use of the tricyclics to patients who find anticholinergic side effects especially troublesome.
BACKGROUND AND PORPUSE: Salivary glands sustain collateral damage following radiotherapy (RT) to treat cancers of the head and neck, leading to complications, including xerostomia and hyposalivation. This systematic review (SR) with meta-analysis was performed to determine the effectiveness of bethanechol chloride in preventing salivary gland dysfunction in this context. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Medline/Pubmed, Embase, Scopus, LILACS via Portal Regional BVS and Web of Science were searched electronically in accordance with the Cochrane manual and reported PRISMA guidelines. RESULTS: 170 patients from three studies were included. Results from the meta-analysis suggest that bethanechol chloride is associated with increases in: whole stimulating saliva (WSS) after RT (Std. MD 0.66, 95% CI 0.28 to 1.03, P < 0.001); whole resting saliva (WRS) during RT (Std. MD 0.4, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.76, P = 0.03); and WRS after RT (Std. MD 0.45, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.86, P = 0.03). CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that bethanechol chloride therapy may be effective in patients with xerostomia and hyposalivation.
A double blind balanced Latin-square study was conducted on 20 adult patients with decompensated bladders to determine the relative effectiveness of oral and parenteral bethanechol chloride (Urecholine) on the stretch response of bladder muscle. Detrusor reaction was measured by modified cystometry. Five mg. of subcutaneous bethanechol chloride produced a significant increase in intravesical pressure which was more rapid in onset, of larger magnitude, and of shorter duration than oral doses of 100 and 200 mg.
Bethanechol, a muscarinic cholinergic agonist, was injected subcutaneously in eight cases of senile dementia of the Alzheimer type. Simple reaction time was measured before, 15 min and 30 min following the injection. Before injection, the patients had significantly longer reaction time than non-demented controls. A significant shortening of the reaction time was observed 15 min but not 30 min after injection. A second group of eight patients with senile dementia of the Alzheimer type, matched for age and mental impairment were injected with saline. No significant shortening of the reaction time was observed. These results suggest that the reaction time can be shortened by a muscarinic agonist in dementia of the Alzheimer type.
The anticholinergic properties of currently available antidepressants sometimes cause sexual dysfunction. Bethanechol, a cholinergic drug, was found to give total relief of impotence in two men and of anorgasmy in one woman; none of the subjects suffered side effects.
Present evidence suggests that malacoplakia is the result of a functional defect in the mononuclear cells of the lesion caused by a deficiency of cyclic 3',5' guanosine monophosphate. This defect results in the impaired ability of the macrophage to release lysosomal enzymes necessary for the digestion of phagocytized bacteria. The persistent inflammatory reaction produces the characteristic granuloma of malacoplakia. Previous laboratory studies indicate that the phagocytic defect is reversible by cholinergic agonists, which led to the use of bethanechol chloride in the treatment of patients with malacoplakia. We report on 3 patients with vesical malacoplakia who were treated successfully with bethanechol chloride.
Symptoms related to salivary gland damage are one of the most frustrating complications after radioactive iodine ((131)I) therapy. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that aimed to evaluate the prophylactic effect of Bethanechol on the radioiodine content of salivary gland. Fifty patients who were referred to (131)I therapy were randomized into Bethanechol and placebo groups. Patients received Bethanechol or Placebo (25 mg, 2 times daily), starting 2 h after (131)I therapy to 1-month.  Both groups were compared at baseline, 10, 30 and 90 days after (131)I therapy based on the following: symptoms related to salivary gland damage; unstimulated whole saliva (UWS) and quality of life using University of Washington Quality of Life 4 questionnaire. Bethanechol group presented significantly lower complaints of dry mouth on 10 (p = 0.047) and 30 (p = 0.003) days compared with placebo. Salivary gland pain and swelling were more frequent among placebo patients at 10 days (p = 0.047). Comparison of the two groups by UWS, no statistical difference was found. Placebo group presented worse score related to activity (p = 0.034), saliva (p = 0.05) and humor (p = 0.05) at 10 days; palate (p = 0.05) and saliva (p = 0.05) at 1 month. Interestingly, Bethanechol patients who received (131)I dose > 125mCi, showed better xerostomia indices when compared to the Placebo with same dose. Bethanechol during (131)I therapy was found to be effective in decreasing the acute salivary gland damage with impact on patients' quality of life.
An 11-year-old girl with hereditary sensory neuropathy (type II) presented with neurogenic bladder disease. Urodynamic evaluation revealed a sensory neurogenic bladder and a markedly positive bethanechol chloride supersensitivity test. This case report supports Lapides' original observation that a positive bethanechol chloride supersensitivity test may occur in pure sensory neurogenic bladder disease.
A double-blind study of the effects of placebo and oral bethanechol chloride (25, 50 and 100 mg.) on the carbon dioxide cystometrogram of the normal male adult was done. Statistical analysis of the data showed no significant dose-response relationship for any of the parameters measured.
We evaluated the cystometric and uroflowmetric effects of bethanechol chloride on non-neurogenic, non-decompensated human bladders. Statistically significant changes were measured using cystometric and uroflowmetric parameters. We discuss the indications and methods for therapy with bethanechol chloride.
A total of 33 patients who demonstrated detrusor areflexia during cystometry underwent the bethanechol denervation supersensitivity test. In each instance the presence or absence of a neurologic lesion was documented carefully by complete neurologic evaluation. Of the 21 patients with a neurogenic bladder there was a falsely negative rate of 24 per cent. Of the 12 patients without a neurogenic bladder the falsely positive rate was 50 per cent. It is concluded that a positive bethanechol test is not by itself indicative of neurogenic bladder nor does a negative test exclude this diagnosis.
PURPOSE: Topical glyceryl trinitrate heals anal fissures, but a majority of patients experience headache. Topical gels of the calcium channel blocker diltiazem and the cholinomimetic bethanechol significantly lower anal sphincter pressure in volunteers. This study investigated the use of these two new pharmacologic agents in the treatment of patients with chronic anal fissure. METHODS: Two studies were conducted, each involving 15 patients with chronic anal fissure. In each study patients underwent anal manometry and laser doppler flowmetry before treatment. They were treated with either 2 percent diltiazem gel or 0.1 percent bethanechol gel three times daily for eight weeks. Assessment every two weeks was by clinical examination, repeat anal manometry, and laser doppler flowmetry. Daily pain was assessed by linear analog charts. RESULTS: Fissures healed in 10 of 15 (67 percent) patients treated with 2 percent diltiazem gel and in 9 (60 percent) patients treated with 0.1 percent bethanechol gel. There was no significant difference in the pretreatment maximum resting sphincter pressure (MRP) between responders and nonresponders in either group. There was significant reduction in the pain score after treatment with diltiazem (P = 0.002) and bethanechol (P = 0.005) compared with that before treatment. MRP was significantly lower after diltiazem (P = 0.0001) and bethanechol (P = 0.02) compared with pretreatment MRP. No headaches or side effects were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Both topical diltiazem and bethanechol substantially reduce anal sphincter pressure and achieve fissure healing to a similar degree reported with topical nitrates, but without side effects.
An 86-year-old diabetic man developed nausea, emesis, abdominal distention, and decreased gastrointestinal motility. A Hollander test confirmed incomplete vagal dysfunction. Treatment with bethanechol chloride resulted in marked improvement which was reproducible after withdrawal and reinstitution of therapy. We believe that treatment with bethanechol chloride deserves further investigation in selected patients with diabetic visceral neuropathy.
