Mycosis fungoides (MF) is a rare subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, for which no standard treatment exists. The objective of this study is to provide evidence-based recommendations for adult patients with early-stage MF treated with oral bexarotene and phototherapy. A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted utilizing studies identified via Embase, Pubmed, Web of Science, and the Cochrane Library from inception to April 2020 to evaluate the clinical efficacy and adverse events of oral bexarotene and phototherapy. Of 645 abstracts retrieved, 17 full-text articles with 143 subjects were included for analysis. There were nine case reports, five retrospective cohort studies, two prospective cohort studies, and one randomized controlled trial. Most subjects were men (24.48%) with stage IB disease (54.4%), and the mean age at presentation was 63. One patient had folliculotropic disease. The retrospective studies' analysis included 67 subjects and indicated that the partial response was 40.36% (95% CI 18.24-64.92), complete response was 34.06% (95% CI 10.73-62.56), and overall response was 64.48% (95% CI 48.56-78.89). Side effects from bexarotene were hypertriglyceridemia (54%), hypothyroidism (50%), and hypercholesterolemia (46%). Similar results were noted in the prospective studies. The literature consists mostly of uncontrolled studies, which suggest that combination therapy with oral bexarotene and phototherapy is a therapeutic option. Future randomized control studies with longer follow-up and standardized definitions of treatment responses and dosages are needed to support the development of evidence-based approaches for the treatment of early-stage MF.
Bexarotene is an effective oral drug for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, but careful management is required due to its various side effects. In particular, hypertriglyceridemia often requires a reduction or even suspension of bexarotene therapy. The risk factors of bexarotene-associated severe hypertriglyceridemia are not clear. Here, we conducted a post hoc analysis of the data from our previous clinical trial, which confirmed the efficacy and safety of combined bexarotene and phototherapy, to evaluate the effect of body mass index on bexarotene-associated hypertriglyceridemia. Twenty-five subjects were divided into two subgroups: normal and underweight (body mass index [BMI] <25 kg/m(2) group) and overweight and obese (BMI >/=25 kg/m(2) group) patients. The overall incidence of hypertriglyceridemia was 81.3% (13/16) in the BMI <25 kg/m(2) group and 88.9% (8/9) in the BMI >/=25 kg/m(2) group. The incidence of grade >/=3 hypertriglyceridemia (>/=500 mg/dL) was 7.7% (1/13) in the BMI <25 kg/m(2) group and 7/8 (87.5%) in the BMI >/=25 kg/m(2) group (P < 0.001). Consequently, dose reduction in the BMI >/=25 kg/m(2) group was larger than that in the BMI <25 kg/m(2) group. The bexarotene-induced change in the serum triglyceride concentration was significantly increased in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients with a higher body mass index (rho = 0.508, P = 0.009). The area under the curve was 0.886 (95% confidence interval 0.748-1.000, P = 0.002). With a body mass index cut-off of 24.85 kg/m(2) , the sensitivity and specificity for identifying grade >/=3 hypertriglyceridemia were 0.875 and 0.882, respectively. The present findings suggest that BMI >/=25 kg/m(2) is a risk factor for bexarotene-associated severe hypertriglyceridemia, therefore overweight and obese patients treated with bexarotene should receive lipid-lowering drugs prophylactically. Further studies for optimizing the initial bexarotene dose in such patients are required.
Bexarotene is an FDA-approved drug for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL); however, its use provokes or disrupts other retinoid-X-receptor (RXR)-dependent nuclear receptor pathways and thereby incites side effects including hypothyroidism and raised triglycerides. Two novel bexarotene analogs, as well as three unique CD3254 analogs and thirteen novel NEt-TMN analogs, were synthesized and characterized for their ability to induce RXR agonism in comparison to bexarotene (1). Several analogs in all three groups possessed an isochroman ring substitution for the bexarotene aliphatic group. Analogs were modeled for RXR binding affinity, and EC(50) as well as IC(50) values were established for all analogs in a KMT2A-MLLT3 leukemia cell line. All analogs were assessed for liver-X-receptor (LXR) activity in an LXRE system to gauge the potential for the compounds to provoke raised triglycerides by increasing LXR activity, as well as to drive LXRE-mediated transcription of brain ApoE expression as a marker for potential therapeutic use in neurodegenerative disorders. Preliminary results suggest these compounds display a broad spectrum of off-target activities. However, many of the novel compounds were observed to be more potent than 1. While some RXR agonists cross-signal the retinoic acid receptor (RAR), many of the rexinoids in this work displayed reduced RAR activity. The isochroman group did not appear to substantially reduce RXR activity on its own. The results of this study reveal that modifying potent, selective rexinoids like bexarotene, CD3254, and NEt-TMN can provide rexinoids with increased RXR selectivity, decreased potential for cross-signaling, and improved anti-proliferative characteristics in leukemia models compared to 1.
BACKGROUND: The new rexinoid bexarotene is a retinoid X receptor antagonist and immune response modifier. Although combinations of oral bexarotene and psoralen plus UVA (PUVA) have been tried in patients with all stages of mycosis fungoides (MF), the dosage of bexarotene used in these combination regimens has been variable. OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and safety of low-dose oral bexarotene and PUVA in patients with relapsed or treatment-refractory MF following monotherapy with multiple agents including PUVA, narrow-band UVB, interferon-alpha, oral bexarotene, and topical corticosteroids. METHOD: Combination therapy with PUVA three times weekly and low-dose oral bexarotene (150 or 300 mg/day, depending on physicians' preference) was administered to 14 patients, seven men and seven women (median age 49.5 years, range 30-75 years), with relapsed or refractory MF stages I-III. All responders received maintenance treatment at the same bexarotene dose that induced remission until progression or unacceptable toxicity. RESULTS: Low-dose oral bexarotene combined with PUVA was associated with an overall response rate (complete response or partial response) in 67% of the nine patients with refractory MF who completed the treatment course. Of these nine patients, four had a complete response, two had a partial response, one had stable disease, and two had progressive disease. Five patients withdrew because of hyperlipidemia. Oral bexarotene was continued as maintenance therapy in three of the four complete responders (one refused); two of these patients relapsed 2-10 months after PUVA discontinuation. Patients with partial response or stable disease received the combination for 3-5 months and were switched to another treatment regimen because of lack of further response. Therapy was fairly well tolerated. CONCLUSION: In a select population of patients who had not responded to at least one monotherapy for early-stage MF, a combination of low-dose oral bexarotene and PUVA was successful in achieving a satisfactory overall response rate in 67% of patients who completed the treatment course and was fairly well tolerated. Limitations of the study include the small number of patients evaluated, its retrospective nature, and the fact that patients were commenced on different bexarotene starting doses (150 or 300 mg/day), depending on physicians' preference.
Bexarotene is a pleiotropic molecule that has been proposed as an amyloid-beta (Abeta)-lowering drug for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). It acts by upregulation of an apolipoprotein E (apoE)-mediated Abeta clearance mechanism. However, whether bexarotene induces removal of Abeta plaques in mouse models of AD has been controversial. Here, we show by NMR and CD spectroscopy that bexarotene directly interacts with and stabilizes the transmembrane domain alpha-helix of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in a region where cholesterol binds. This effect is not mediated by changes in membrane lipid packing, as bexarotene does not share with cholesterol the property of inducing phospholipid condensation. Bexarotene inhibited the intramembrane cleavage by gamma-secretase of the APP C-terminal fragment C99 to release Abeta in cell-free assays of the reconstituted enzyme in liposomes, but not in cells, and only at very high micromolar concentrations. Surprisingly, in vitro, bexarotene also inhibited the cleavage of Notch1, another major gamma-secretase substrate, demonstrating that its inhibition of gamma-secretase is not substrate specific and not mediated by acting via the cholesterol binding site of C99. Our data suggest that bexarotene is a pleiotropic molecule that interfere with Abeta metabolism through multiple mechanisms.
BACKGROUND: Bexarotene, which has been approved for use in Japan since 2016, is an effective drug for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma; however, careful management is imperative because of its adverse events. We previously demonstrated the severity of bexarotene-associated hypertriglyceridemia and the need for bexarotene dose reduction for patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and high body mass index (BMI); however, high BMI does not affect the efficacy of combined bexarotene and phototherapy treatment. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to verify the effects of BMI on hypertriglyceridemia associated with oral bexarotene therapy. METHODS: We conducted a post hoc analysis of data from a previous randomized, open-label clinical study that compared combined bexarotene-phototherapy treatment with bexarotene monotherapy for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma by dividing patients into two groups based on BMI (<23 kg/m(2) and >/=23 kg/m(2)). RESULTS: No statistically significant association was observed between patients with BMI >/=23 kg/m(2) and severe hypertriglyceridemia; however, there was a significant association between BMI >/=23 kg/m(2) and severe hypertriglyceridemia for patients who received bexarotene monotherapy, but not for those who received combined bexarotene-phototherapy treatment. The exact reasons for the discrepancies between the results of this thorough analysis and those of our past research are unclear. However, high BMI may be a risk factor for hypertriglyceridemia. Additional unidentified risk factors could also affect treatment outcomes. CONCLUSION: High BMI is the primary reason for hypertriglyceridemia-associated bexarotene dose reduction; however, unexplored risk factors other than high BMI could exist.
Many breast cancer cells acquire multidrug resistance (MDR) mediated by ABC transporters such as breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2). Here we show that incubation of human breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells with farnesoid X receptor antagonist guggulsterone (gug) and retinoid X receptor agonist bexarotene (bex) elevated ceramide, a sphingolipid known to induce exosome secretion. The gug+bex combination reduced cellular levels of BCRP to 20% of control cells by inducing its association and secretion with exosomes. Exogenous C6 ceramide also induced secretion of BCRP-associated exosomes, while siRNA-mediated knockdown or GW4869-mediated inhibition of neutral sphingomyelinase 2 (nSMase2), an enzyme generating ceramide, restored cellular BCRP. Immunocytochemistry showed that ceramide elevation and concurrent loss of cellular BCRP was prominent in Aldefluor-labeled breast cancer stem-like cells. These cells no longer excluded the BCRP substrate Hoechst 33342 and showed caspase activation and apoptosis induction. Consistent with reduced BCRP, ABC transporter assays showed that gug+bex increased doxorubicin retention and that the combination of gug+bex with doxorubicin enhanced cell death by more than fivefold. Taken together, our results suggest a novel mechanism by which ceramide induces BCRP secretion and reduces MDR, which may be useful as adjuvant drug treatment for sensitizing breast cancer cells and cancer stem cells to chemotherapy.
