Female pattern hair loss (FPHL) is the most common form of alopecia in women. FPHL may compromise body image and strongly affect self-esteem, negatively impacting quality of life. Currently, the only Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved drug for its treatment is topical minoxidil, with a variable response rate. Recently, a few studies in FPHL have pointed out bicalutamide as an emergent selective androgen receptor antagonist with a favorable safety and tolerability profile. This review aimed to summarize and discuss the key information on this new therapy for FPHL. Bicalutamide has no diuretic effect. It does not cross the blood-brain barrier, and it has little effect on serum luteinizing hormone. Additionally, bicalutamide was found to be effective on women presenting with other features of hyperandrogenism such as seborrhea, acne, and hirsutism with mild and well-tolerated adverse effects. Despite the high prevalence and psychosocial impairment, FPHL treatment remains challenging. Therefore, although future prospective, comparative, randomized clinical trials are essential to establish the ideal dose and efficacy of the drug, oral bicalutamide appears to be a promising option to expand the arsenal of FPHL treatment.
A series of PROTACs (PROteolysis-TArgeting Chimeras) consisting of bicalutamide analogs and thalidomides were designed, synthesized, and biologically evaluated as novel androgen receptor (AR) degraders. In particular, we found that PROTAC compound 13b could successfully demonstrate a targeted degradation of AR in AR-positive cancer cells and might be a useful chemical probe for the investigation of AR-dependent cancer cells, as well as a potential therapeutic candidate for prostate cancers.
A catalytic enantioselective synthesis of bicalutamide derivatives with promising potentials in prostate cancer treatment has been disclosed. The key intermediates, alpha-hydroxy-beta-keto esters, were efficiently constructed through cinchoninium-mediated asymmetric oxohydroxylation of easily accessible alkenes with potassium permanganate. Good yields and high levels of asymmetric induction are achieved. This method provides a new synthetic route to bicalutamide analogues with high structural diversity, which will beneficially support subsequent structure-activity relationship studies and boost prostate cancer drug development.
BACKGROUND: Rezvilutamide, a novel androgen-receptor inhibitor with low blood-brain barrier penetration, has shown potent antitumour activity against metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of rezvilutamide versus bicalutamide in combination with androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT) for high-volume, metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. METHODS: CHART is a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study done at 72 hospitals in China, Poland, Czech Republic, and Bulgaria. Eligible patients were aged 18 years or older, had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 or 1, and had high-volume metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. Previous chemotherapy or other localised treatment for prostate cancer were not allowed. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to receive ADT plus either rezvilutamide (240 mg) or bicalutamide (50 mg) orally once daily. Randomisation was done via an interactive response technology system (block size of four) and stratified according to ECOG performance status and presence of visceral metastasis (excluding lymph nodes). Herein, we present the results of the preplanned interim analyses for the two co-primary endpoints of radiographic progression-free survival assessed by a blinded independent review committee and overall survival in the intention-to-treat population. Safety was assessed in all patients who received at least one dose of study medication. This study is ongoing, but is closed to recruitment. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03520478. FINDINGS: Between June 28, 2018, and Aug 6, 2020, 792 patients were screened and 654 patients were randomly assigned to receive rezvilutamide plus ADT (n=326) or bicalutamide plus ADT (n=328). At the preplanned interim analysis for radiographic progression-free survival (data cutoff May 16, 2021), the median follow-up duration was 21.2 months (IQR 16.6-25.8). Rezvilutamide significantly improved radiographic progression-free survival compared with bicalutamide (median radiographic progression-free survival not reached [95% CI not reached-not reached] vs 25.1 months [95% CI 15.7-not reached]; hazard ratio [HR] 0.44 [95% CI 0.33-0.58]; p&lt;0.0001). At the preplanned interim analysis for overall survival (data cutoff Feb 28, 2022), the median follow-up duration was 29.3 months (IQR 21.0-33.3). Rezvilutamide significantly improved overall survival compared with bicalutamide (HR 0.58 [95% CI 0.44-0.77]; p=0.0001; median overall survival was not reached [95% CI not reached-not reached] vs not reached [36.2-not reached]). The most common grade 3 or worse adverse events of any cause in the safety population were hypertension (26 [8%] of 323 patients in the rezvilutamide group vs 24 [7%] of 324 patients in the bicalutamide group), hypertriglyceridaemia (24 [7%] vs seven [2%]), increased weight (20 [6%] vs 12 [4%]), anaemia (12 [4%] vs 16 [5%]), and hypokalaemia (11 [3%] vs four [1%]). Serious adverse events were reported in 90 (28%) of 323 patients in the rezvilutamide group and 69 (21%) of 324 patients in the bicalutamide group. No treatment-related deaths occurred in patients in the rezvilutamide group; one treatment-related death of unknown specific cause (&lt;1%) occurred in the bicalutamide group. INTERPRETATION: In the two interim analyses, rezvilutamide plus ADT significantly improved radiographic progression-free survival and overall survival compared with bicalutamide plus ADT in patients with high-volume, metastatic, hormone-sensitive prostate cancer, with a tolerable safety profile. FUNDING: Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceuticals.
Bicalutamide is a new, nonsteroidal antiandrogen with a favorable toxicity profile. We report the first case of fulminant hepatic failure associated with its use.
Trial 24, one of three ongoing trials in the Early Prostate Cancer programme, is evaluating the efficacy and tolerability of bicalutamide (Casodex) 150 mg following standard care (radiotherapy, radical prostatectomy or watchful waiting) in patients with early, non-metastatic prostate cancer. At 7 years' median follow-up, addition of bicalutamide significantly improved objective progression-free survival (PFS) for patients with locally advanced disease, reducing the risk of progression by 34% versus standard care alone (hazard ratio 0.66; 95% confidence interval 0.55, 0.79; P<0.001). In localized disease, a significant difference in objective PFS was not found. There was no significant difference in overall survival.
Currently, the early introduction of new antiandrogens is popular for castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, adverse events can be severe and their costs are high. Here, we present a patient with CRPC in whom flutamide controlled disease progression for 10 years. This case report shows that conventional alternative antiandrogens are cost effective and are still an important option for the treatment for CRPC.
The anticancer drug (R,S)-biscaltamide was prepared in three steps in >90% overall yield. A key step in the new synthesis involved a new nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction of methacrylamide anion.
The purpose of our study was to formulate and evaluate bicalutamide (BL) solid dispersions (SD). The physicochemical properties were evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), Fourier-Transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, Powder X-ray diffractometry (PXRD), dissolution studies, and stability studies. The dissolution studies demonstrated that the dissolution of BL from BL-SD increased with an increase in carrier content (PVP K30). X-ray assays and DSC results both confirmed the amorphous state of BL in BL-SD. Stability studies conducted after 6 months showed that BL exhibited excellent stability in the solid dispersion of PVP K30 (1:5).
BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the second most common type of cancer and the fifth leading cause of cancer-related death in men. Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) has become the first-line therapy for inhibiting PCa progression; however, nearly all patients receiving ADT eventually progress to castrate-resistant prostate cancer. Therefore, this study aimed to identify hub genes related to bicalutamide resistance in PCa and provide new insights into endocrine therapy resistance. METHODS: The data were obtained from public databases. Weighted correlation network analysis was used to identify the gene modules related to bicalutamide resistance, and the relationship between the samples and disease-free survival was analyzed. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses were performed, and hub genes were identified. The LASSO algorithm was used to develop a bicalutamide resistance prognostic model in patients with PCa, which was then verified. Finally, we analyzed the tumor mutational heterogeneity and immune microenvironment in both groups. RESULTS: Two drug resistance gene modules were identified. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses revealed that both modules are involved in RNA splicing. The protein-protein interaction network identified 10 hub genes in the brown module LUC7L3, SNRNP70, PRPF3, LUC7L, CLASRP, CLK1, CLK2, U2AF1L4, NXF1, and THOC1) and 13 in the yellow module (PNN, PPWD1, SRRM2, DHX35, DMTF1, SALL4, MTA1, HDAC7, PHC1, ACIN1, HNRNPH1, DDX17, and HDAC6). The prognostic model composed of RNF207, REC8, DFNB59, HOXA2, EPOR, PILRB, LSMEM1, TCIRG1, ABTB1, ZNF276, ZNF540, and DPY19L2 could effectively predict patient prognosis. Genomic analysis revealed that the high- and low-risk groups had different mutation maps. Immune infiltration analysis showed a statistically significant difference in immune infiltration between the high- and low-risk groups, and that the high-risk group may benefit from immunotherapy. CONCLUSION: In this study, bicalutamide resistance genes and hub genes were identified in PCa, a risk model for predicting the prognosis of patients with PCa was constructed, and the tumor mutation heterogeneity and immune infiltration in high- and low-risk groups were analyzed. These findings offer new insights into ADT resistance targets and prognostic prediction in patients with PCa.
A 69-year-old man with advanced prostate cancer was receiving antiandrogen therapy (bicalutamide [Casodex]). He developed dyspnea, peripheral eosinophilia and bilateral pulmonary interstitial infiltrates. Transbronchial biopsy confirmed pulmonary eosinophilia. Withdrawal of bicalutamide and initiation of steroid therapy resulted in clinical improvement.
Bicalutamide (BCL) is a nonsteroidal antiandrogen drug that represents an alternative to castration in the treatment of prostate cancer, due to its relatively long half-life and tolerable side effects. However, it possesses a very low water solubility that can affect its oral bioavailability. In this work, we developed inclusion complexes of BCL with the highly soluble hydroxypropyl-beta-cyclodextrin (HP-beta-CyD) and sulfobutylether-beta-cyclodextrin (SBE-beta-CyD) to increase the water solubility and anticancer activity of BCL. The inclusion complexes were prepared using the freeze-drying method and were then characterized in a solid state via differential scanning calorimetry and X-ray analysis and in solution via phase-solubility studies and UV-vis and NMR spectroscopy. The BCL/HP-beta-CyD and BCL/SBE-beta-CyD inclusion complexes were amorphous and rapidly dissolved in water. Both the (1)H-NMR spectra and molecular modeling studies confirmed the penetration of the 2-(trifluoromethyl)benzonitrile ring of BCL within the cavity of both cyclodextrins (CyDs). Due to the consistent improvement of the water solubility of BCL, the inclusion complexes showed higher antiproliferative activity toward the human prostate androgen-independent cell lines, DU-145 and PC-3, with respect to free BCL. These results demonstrate the ability of HP-beta-CyD and SBE-beta-CyD to complex BCL, permitting the realization of liquid formulations with potentially high oral bioavailability and/or possible parenteral administration.
BACKGROUND: A robust decrease in prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in response to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) has been evaluated as a prognostic factor in patients with metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC) since 2006, but the treatment of mHSPC has since evolved to include intensified therapy. OBJECTIVE: We assessed the association of PSA levels at 3 (PSA-3mo) and 7 (PSA-7mo) mo with overall survival (OS) in patients with mHSPC treated with ADT combined with either bicalutamide or orteronel in the S1216 phase 3 clinical trial. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: PSA responses to treatment of patients in the S1216 trial were categorized as: complete response (CR) if PSA was </=0.2 ng/ml, partial response if PSA was >0.2 and </=4 ng/ml, and no response (NR) if PSA was >4 ng/ml. OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: A Cox analysis (adjusted for treatment arm and three stratification factors: performance status, severity of disease, and early vs late induction) was used for OS association. While PSA-7mo association was a prespecified objective, PSA-3mo association was also evaluated. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: A total of 1251 and 1231 patients from the S1216 study were evaluable for PSA-3mo and PSA-7mo, respectively. A PSA-7mo CR was associated with improved OS compared with NR (HR: 0.20; p < 0.0001). A PSA-3mo CR showed a similar association to NR (HR: 0.34; p < 0.0001). The association of a PSA response with survival did not differ by treatment arm at either time point. CONCLUSIONS: The PSA-3mo and PSA-7mo responses were strongly associated with OS; taken with other emerging prognostic biomarkers, these markers may allow for early identification of patients at the highest risk of death, aid with counseling in clinical practice, and permit design of future clinical trials targeting these patients. PATIENT SUMMARY: A low prostate-specific antigen level at 3 or 7 mo after starting treatment for metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer predicts longer survival regardless of the first treatment given with androgen deprivation therapy.
Objectives: Enhance the dissolution rate of bicalutamide via co-crystallization with sucralose (sweetener), with the aim to develop rapidly disintegrating tablets with subsequent prompt dissolution. Significance: Bicalutamide is antiandrogenic agent for the treatment of prostate cancer but has low and variable oral bioavailability, mainly attributed to poor dissolution. Co-crystallization with benign excipients is promising for dissolution enhancement with the additive serving dual functions. The benefit will become greater if dissolution enhancement is associated with the development of orodispersible tablets which is suitable for elderly patients who are the most vulnerable for prostate cancer. Methods: Bicalutamide was dissolved in acetone in the presence of increasing molar ratios of sucralose. The solvent was evaporated while mixing to deposit crystals that were subjected to wet co-grinding until drying. The developed solids were characterized using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, differential thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction in addition to monitoring bicalutamide dissolution. Results: Instrumental analysis provided evidences for co-crystallization which was initiated at 1:1 molar ratio of bicalutamide to sucralose with complete co-crystallization at 1:4 molar ratio. The co-crystals provided faster bicalutamide dissolution compared with the unprocessed drug and that recrystalized from acetone in the absence of sucralose. The formulation containing bicalutamide with sucralose at 1:4 molar ratio was selected for tablet formulation into which superdisintegrants were included. The developed tablets exhibited flash disintegration with subsequent fast dissolution of bicalutamide. Conclusions: The study introduced co-crystallization of bicalutamide with sucralose as an efficient tool to enhance the dissolution rate and to develop rapidly dissolving tablets for intraoral administration.
Bicalutamide is a competitive nonsteroidal androgen receptor antagonist. In the European Union and a number of other countries, bicalutamide 150 mg per day is approved as an adjuvant to primary treatments (radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy) or as monotherapy as an alternative to surgical or medical castration in men with locally advanced, nonmetastatic prostate cancer. The ongoing bicalutamide Early Prostate Cancer (EPC) program has shown that breast events, defined as gynecomastia, breast pain or both, are a significant limitation of bicalutamide. Nearly 90% of patients experienced one or both symptoms and nearly 16% of patients withdrew from the EPC program as a consequence of bicalutamide-induced breast events. Tamoxifen, anastrozole and radiotherapy have all been studied as options for the treatment of breast events. To date, tamoxifen appears to be the superior agent in terms of outcomes; however, further studies are still required to determine the optimal dose and timing of tamoxifen administration for both prophylaxis and treatment. In addition, the impact on prostate cancer control remains uncertain. An ongoing clinical trial using toremifene to prevent morphometric vertebral fractures in men undergoing medical and/or surgical castration will provide some additional data on the effects of selective estrogen receptor modulators in men with prostate cancer.
