PURPOSE   : To compare the efficacy and safety of the fixed-dose combination (FDC) of netarsudil 0.02%/latanoprost 0.005% ophthalmic solution (NET/LAT; Roclanda((R))) with bimatoprost 0.03%/timolol maleate 0.5% (BIM/TIM; Ganfort((R))) ophthalmic solution in the treatment of open-angle glaucoma (OAG) and ocular hypertension (OHT). METHODS: MERCURY-3 was a 6-month prospective, double-masked, randomized, multicenter, active-controlled, parallel-group, non-inferiority study. Patients (>/= 18 years) with a diagnosis of OAG or OHT in both eyes that was insufficiently controlled with topical medication (IOP >/= 17 mmHg in >/= 1 eye and < 28 mmHg in both eyes) were included. Following washout, patients were randomized to once-daily NET/LAT or BIM/TIM for up to 6 months; efficacy was assessed at Week 2, Week 4, and Month 3; safety was evaluated for 6 months. Comparison of NET/LAT relative to BIM/TIM for mean IOP at 08:00, 10:00, and 16:00 h was assessed at Week 2, Week 6, and Month 3. Non-inferiority of NET/LAT to BIM/TIM was defined as a difference of </= 1.5 mmHg at all nine time points through Month 3 and </= 1.0 mmHg at five or more of nine time points through Month 3. RESULTS: Overall, 430 patients were randomized (NET/LAT, n = 218; BIM/TIM, n = 212), and all received at least one dose of study medication. Efficacy analyses were performed at Month 3 on 388 patients (NET/LAT, n = 184; BIM/TIM, n = 204). NET/LAT demonstrated non-inferiority to BIM/TIM, with a between-treatment difference in IOP of </= 1.5 mmHg achieved at all time points and </= 1.0 mmHg at the majority of time points (six of nine) through Month 3. Mean diurnal IOP during the study ranged from 15.4 to 15.6 mmHg and 15.2 to 15.6 mmHg in the NET/LAT and BIM/TIM groups respectively, with no between-group statistically significant difference. No significant differences were observed in key secondary endpoints. No serious, treatment-related adverse events (AEs) were observed, and AEs were typically mild/moderate in severity. The most common treatment-related AEs were conjunctival hyperemia (NET/LAT, 30.7%; BIM/TIM, 9.0%) and cornea verticillata (NET/LAT, 11.0%; BIM/TIM, 0%). CONCLUSIONS: Once-daily NET/LAT was non-inferior to BIM/TIM in IOP reduction in OAG and OHT, with AEs consistent with previous findings. NET/LAT offers a compelling alternative FDC treatment option for OAG and OHT.
When a single medication does not adequately control intraocular pressure, additional intraocular hypotensive agents are often added to the therapeutic regime. However, regimen complexity has been associated with reduced patient compliance. Treatment with a fixed combination may, therefore, increase compliance as a result of simplifying the dosage regimen. Bimatoprost/timolol fixed combination (BTFC) combines two clinically effective agents that decrease elevated intraocular pressure by independent mechanisms. In two clinical studies, BTFC was more effective than its individual components. Furthermore, in a non-inferiority study BTFC has been shown to be as effective as the association of its individual components. BTFC was clinically effective and generally well tolerated, with no unexpected adverse reactions reported for the BTFC compared with those reported for bimatoprost or timolol monotherapies.
PURPOSE: To compare intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering efficacy and safety of NCX 470, a nitric oxide (NO)-donating bimatoprost, to latanoprost in subjects with open-angle glaucoma (OAG) or ocular hypertension (OHT). DESIGN: Prospective, phase 3, randomized, adaptive dose-selection, double-masked, parallel-group trial. METHODS: 691 subjects with OAG or OHT and unmedicated IOP >/=26 mmHg at 8AM, >/=24 mmHg at 10AM, and >/=22 mmHg at 4PM in the study eye were randomized to NCX 470 0.065%, NCX 470 0.1%, or latanoprost 0.005%. An interim analysis was performed to select the final dose of NCX 470. We evaluated noninferiority of NCX 470 versus latanoprost, based on IOP reduction from baseline at 8AM and 4PM at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months. RESULTS: 661 subjects were analyzed; IOP was significantly reduced at all on-treatment time points, with reductions ranging from 8.0 to 9.7 mmHg (P < .0001 at each time point) in the NCX 470 0.1% group. Mean IOP reductions were greater with NCX 470 0.1% than latanoprost 0.005% at all 6 time points and significantly greater (P < .05) at 4 of the 6 time points. The most common adverse event was conjunctival/ocular hyperemia. CONCLUSION: The NO-donating prostaglandin analogue NCX 470 0.1% was well-tolerated and lowered IOP more than latanoprost in subjects with OAG or OHT at all 6 time points. With a dual mechanism of action that enhances both uveoscleral and trabecular outflow, NCX 470 could become an important first-line therapy for IOP reduction in glaucoma.
PURPOSE: To study and compare the efficacy and safety profile of Rho-kinase inhibitor (netarsudil 0.02%) and prostaglandin analog (bimatoprost 0.01%) both as monotherapy and in combination. DESIGN: Prospective, randomized, monocentric, open-label clinical trial. METHODS: Patients >/=20 years of age with primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension (IOP >21 mmHg) were recruited and randomized to receive either netarsudil 0.02%, netarsudil 0.02% + bimatoprost 0.01%, or bimatoprost 0.01% once daily for a period of 12 weeks. IOP and side effects were documented at 4, 8, and 12 weeks. RESULTS: The mean treated IOP ranged 17.51-18.57 mmHg for netarsudil, 15.80-16.46 mmHg for bimatoprost, and 14.00-14.87 mmHg for the combination therapy group. The mean IOP reduction from baseline at 4, 8, and 12 weeks was found to be statistically significant ( P < 0.001) in all three groups. The safety profile of netarsudil/bimatoprost combination was consistent with each constituent individually. The only frequently observed ocular adverse event was conjunctival hyperemia, which was seen mostly in netarsudil and netarsudil + bimatoprost groups ( P < 0.001). CONCLUSION: The IOP-lowering effect of netarsudil 0.02% once daily is non-inferior to bimatoprost 0.01% in patients with POAG and ocular hypertension with acceptable ocular safety, and the combination therapy achieved a higher IOP-lowering effect. This group of medications can be a useful adjunct in patients on maximal therapy.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering efficacy and safety of 10 and 15 microg bimatoprost implant in patients with open-angle glaucoma (OAG) or ocular hypertension (OHT). METHODS: This randomized, 20-month, multicenter, masked, parallel-group, phase 3 trial enrolled 528 patients with OAG or OHT and an open iridocorneal angle inferiorly in the study eye. Study eyes were administered 10 or 15 microg bimatoprost implant on day 1, week 16, and week 32, or twice-daily topical timolol maleate 0.5%. Primary endpoints were IOP and IOP change from baseline through week 12. Safety measures included treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and corneal endothelial cell density (CECD). RESULTS: Both 10 and 15 microg bimatoprost implant met the primary endpoint of noninferiority to timolol in IOP lowering through 12 weeks. Mean IOP reductions from baseline ranged from 6.2-7.4, 6.5-7.8, and 6.1-6.7 mmHg through week 12 in the 10 microg implant, 15 microg implant, and timolol groups, respectively. IOP lowering was similar after the second and third implant administrations. Probabilities of requiring no IOP-lowering treatment for 1 year after the third administration were 77.5% (10 microg implant) and 79.0% (15 microg implant). The most common TEAE was conjunctival hyperemia, typically temporally associated with the administration procedure. Corneal TEAEs of interest (primarily corneal endothelial cell loss, corneal edema, and corneal touch) were more frequent with the 15 than the 10 microg implant and generally were reported after repeated administrations. Loss in mean CECD from baseline to month 20 was ~ 5% in 10 microg implant-treated eyes and ~ 1% in topical timolol-treated eyes. Visual field progression (change in the mean deviation from baseline) was reduced in the 10 microg implant group compared with the timolol group. CONCLUSIONS: The results corroborated the previous phase 3 study of the bimatoprost implant. The bimatoprost implant met the primary endpoint and effectively lowered IOP. The majority of patients required no additional treatment for 12 months after the third administration. The benefit-risk assessment favored the 10 over the 15 microg implant. Studies evaluating other administration regimens with reduced risk of corneal events are ongoing. The bimatoprost implant has the potential to improve adherence and reduce treatment burden in glaucoma. CLINICALTRIALS. GOV IDENTIFIER: NCT02250651.
We quantitatively determined the relation between the decrease in orbital fat and enophthalmos due to bimatoprost using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Nine orbits in nine patients were treated unilaterally with bimatoprost for glaucoma or ocular hypertension. The contralateral orbits were used as controls. The volumes of the orbital tissues and the enophthalmos were measured using MRI. The mean volumes on the treated and untreated sides were, respectively, 14.6 +/- 2.1 and 17.0 +/- 4.3 cm3 for orbital fat (P = 0.04) and 3.4 +/- 0.5 and 3.3 +/- 0.5 cm3 for total extraocular muscles (P = 0.85). The mean enophthalmos values were 14.7 +/- 2.5 and 16.0 +/- 2.3 mm on the treated and untreated sides, respectively (P = 0.002). The data acquired by quantitatively measuring the volumes of orbital fat and enophthalmos on MRI showed that each might be reduced by bimatoprost administration. The enophthalmos could be caused by the bimatoprost-induced decrease in orbital fat.
Eyebrows are an important feature of facial identity and communications in human beings as well as an important eye defense shield from dust and foreign bodies. To compare the efficacy and safety between 0.01%, 0.03% bimatoprost and minoxidil 2% in gel formulations for eyebrow enhancement. Sixty eligible subjects were female or male, aged 18 years or older with eyebrow hypotrichosis, defined as either a Grade 1 or 2 on the Global Eyebrow Assessment (GEBA) scale. Patients were randomized into 3 groups using block randomization. Group a (20 patients) applied topical 0.03% bimatoprost gel once daily onto both eyebrows, group b (20 patients) applied topical 0.01% bimatoprost gel once daily onto both eyebrows while group c (20 patients) applied topical minoxidil 2% gel once daily onto both eyebrows. A significant improvement in GEBA score was reported in all the three groups after treatment (P </= 0.001); however, there was no statistically significant difference between the three groups (P1 = 0.091; P2 = 0.102; P3 = 0.663). Bimatoprost is equally efficacious as minoxidil in enhancement of eyebrows with a more favorable response produced by the 0.03% concentration.
Recently, many new types of cosmetic illegal additives have been screened in the market. Most of the new additives were new drugs or analogues with very similar structures to other prohibited additives, which were difficult to be identified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) only. Therefore, a new strategy is proposed, which is chromatographic separation combined with nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) structural identification. The suspected samples were screened by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem high-resolution mass spectrometry (UPLC-Q-TOF-MS), followed by purification and extraction through silica-gel column chromatography and preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Finally, the extracts were identified unambiguously by NMR as bimatoprost and latanoprost, which were identified to be new cosmetic illegal additives in eyelash serums in China. Meanwhile, bimatoprost and latanoprost were quantified by high-performance liquid chromatography tandem triple quadrupole mass spectrum (HPLC-QQQ-MS/MS). The quantitative method demonstrated good linearity in the range of approximately 0.25-50 ng/mL (R(2) > 0.9992), with limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) values of 0.01 and 0.03 mg/kg, respectively. The accuracy, precision, and reproducibility were confirmed to be acceptable.
BACKGROUND: Differences in the increase in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) and decrease in tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP) activity may contribute to the different characteristics observed clinically on decreased intraocular pressure in patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension. The purpose of this study was to investigate differences in the expression profiles of MMPs and TIMPs induced by the prostaglandin analogs bimatoprost, latanoprost, and tafluprost in human non-pigmented ciliary epithelial cells (HNPCECs). METHODS: HNPCECs were cultured for 24 h with 0, 10, 100, or 1000 muM of the free acid forms of bimatoprost, latanoprost, and tafluprost. We measured the expression levels of MMPs and TIMPs using real-time polymerase chain reaction, and compared the results. Enzyme activities of MMP-2 and -9 in conditioned media were measured by gelatin zymography. RESULTS: All prostaglandin analogs we examined dose-dependently increased expression levels of MMP-1, -2, -3, -9, and -17, whereas expression levels of TIMP-1 and -2 decreased with increasing concentrations of each analog. Each prostaglandin analog induced different levels of increases in MMPs and decreases in TIMPs. CONCLUSIONS: Unique expression profiles of MMPs and TIMPs induced by bimatoprost, latanoprost, and tafluprost, as shown in HNPCECs, may contribute to clinically different effects on intraocular pressure decreases in patients with glaucoma or ocular hypertension.
Purpose: To investigate the influence of benzalkonium chloride (BAK) on ocular surface disease (OSD) in glaucoma patients receiving ocular-hypotensive agent. Methods: Patients were randomized to receive BAK-containing latanoprost (Xalatan) or preservative-free bimatoprost (Lumigan PF). Intraocular pressure (IOP), basal Schirmer's test, noninvasive keratograph tear-breakup time (TBUT), conjunctival redness score (R score), OSD index (OSDI), and corneal Oxford staining were recorded and compared between the 2 groups at 1-month and 4-month visits. The influence of BAK was analyzed by a generalized estimating equation model. Results: We enrolled 74 and 76 eyes treated with latanoprost and bimatoprost, respectively. The IOP decreased in both groups, although greater reduction was observed for latanoprost (13.95 vs. 15.42 mmHg, P = 0.0264). There was a significantly negative association between tear flow and latanoprost use (beta = -0.763, P = 0.0243). The first and average TBUT did not show intergroup differences, but the area with unstable tear film increased with latanoprost use and showed marginal significance at 4-month visit (9.33% vs. 5.94% P = 0.055). In both groups, OSDI decreased, whereas Oxford stain increased over time, and R scores showed improvement after transient increase in the first month. The bimatoprost group had significantly worse conjunctival hyperemia, whereas a negative association with conjunctival hyperemia was revealed for latanoprost use (R score-bulbar nasal: beta = -0.045, P = 0.0423). Conclusions: BAK-containing latanoprost was associated with decreased tear secretion and may be associated with tear-film instability, whereas bimatoprost was associated with worse conjunctival hyperemia. Ocular surface side effects should be considered when prescribing BAK-containing medication to glaucoma patients.
PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of bimatoprost in Japanese patients with normal-tension glaucoma (NTG) who showed insufficient response to latanoprost. METHODS: A prospective, nonrandomized study was conducted in patients with NTG, with </=20% intraocular pressure (IOP) decrease from pretreatment baseline with latanoprost monotherapy who had been switched to bimatoprost. The IOP was measured at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after the switch to bimatoprost. In 12 weeks after the switch to bimatoprost, efficacy and safety were evaluated. RESULTS: Postswitch to bimatoprost, IOP was significantly reduced at every visit. Bimatoprost produced significantly greater mean% IOP reduction rate from pretreatment than that of latanoprost at week 12 (P<0.01). There was a significant correlation between% IOP reduction of bimatoprost and that of latanoprost (Pearson r(2)=0.374; P=0.007). No significant difference was observed in the mean scores of conjunctival hyperemia and corneal epithelial disorder between bimatoprost-treated eyes and latanoprost-treated eyes. CONCLUSIONS: Significant additional IOP lowering was achieved by switching to bimatoprost in Japanese patients with NTG with insufficient response to latanoprost. Bimatoprost treatment was safe and well tolerated.
Prostaglandin analogues (PGAs), including bimatoprost (BIM), are generally the first-line therapy for glaucoma due to their greater efficacy, safety, and convenience of use. Commercial solutions of preservative-free BIM (BIM 0.03% and 0.01%) are already available, although their topical application may result in ocular discomfort. This study aimed to evaluate the in vitro effects of preservative-free BIM 0.03% vs. 0.01% in the human conjunctival epithelial (HCE) cell line. Our results showed that long-term exposure to BIM 0.03% ensues a significant decrease in cell proliferation and viability. Furthermore, these events were associated with cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and alterations of DeltaPsi(m). BIM 0.01% does not exhibit cytotoxicity, and no negative influence on conjunctival cell growth and viability or mitochondrial activity has been observed. Short-time exposure also demonstrates the ability of BIM 0.03% to trigger reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and mitochondrial hyperpolarisation. An in silico drug network interaction was also performed to explore known and predicted interactions of BIM with proteins potentially involved in mitochondrial membrane potential dissipation. Our findings overall strongly reveal better cellular tolerability of BIM 0.01% vs. BIM 0.03% in HCE cells.
The efficacy of bimatoprost and travoprost in patients with glaucoma and ocular hypertension
PURPOSE: To investigate the intraocular pressure (IOP) lowering effect of bimatoprost (BIM) 0.03% and the potential additional effect of the BIM 0.03%/timolol 0.5% fixed combination (BTFC) in eyes with ocular hypertension, primary open-angle glaucoma, or exfoliation glaucoma. METHODS: Following an appropriate washout period that varied with previous medication, participants with ocular hypertension, primary open-angle glaucoma, or exfoliation glaucoma were treated with evening-dosed BIM for 5 weeks. They were then given evening-dosed BTFC for another 5 weeks. One randomly selected eye was evaluated. Goldmann applanation tonometry was performed by the same investigator at 8 a.m., 12 noon, 4 p.m., and 8 p.m. at baseline and at the end of each treatment period. RESULTS: Thirty-three participants completed the study. Three patients discontinued because of local adverse effects during the BIM treatment period. The mean diurnal IOP (mean +/- SD) at baseline, on BIM, and on BTFC were 24.8 +/- 5.4, 17.3 +/- 3.5, and 14.9 +/- 3.1 mmHg, respectively (repeated measures analysis of variance, P < 0.001 for all pairwise comparisons). The individual time-point IOP values showed similar significant reductions. The percentage of IOP reduction from baseline was 30.2% for BIM and 39.9% for the BTFC. The mean +/- SD diurnal fluctuation at baseline was 6.8 +/- 3.2 mmHg, which decreased to 4.0 +/- 3.1 and 2.9 +/- 1.4 mmHg on BIM and BTFC, respectively (P < 0.05 for both treatments versus baseline). CONCLUSIONS: Both BIM 0.03% and the BTFC were effective in lowering IOP in eyes with ocular hypertension and open-angle glaucoma. However, the fixed combination provided an additional statistically significant reduction in IOP compared with BIM 0.03%.
BACKGROUND: Laser pretreatment with cosmeceutical topicals is growing in popularity. However, lasers may also enhance the uptake of medical topicals that treat dermatologic conditions, such as vitiligo, alopecia, and cancerous and precancerous lesions. Permeation of these topicals must be quantified to optimize treatment protocols. OBJECTIVE: To analyze transdermal uptake of 3 topicals after nonablative fractional 1,550-nm erbium-doped glass or 1,927-nm thulium fiber laser pretreatment. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Human donor tissue was pretreated with a nonablative fractional 1,550-nm erbium-doped glass or 1,927-nm thulium fiber laser followed by application of 0.03% bimatoprost, 0.5% 5-fluorouracil, or 5% minoxidil. Permeation and retention were measured over 24 hours (bimatoprost and 5-fluorouracil) or 90 minutes (minoxidil), and uptake was calculated. RESULTS: Pretreatment with 1,927-nm thulium laser (500 MTZ/cm2; 5 mJ; 5 W) enhanced uptake and retention of bimatoprost versus untreated control at 24 hours post-treatment. Pretreatment with 1,550-nm erbium-doped glass laser (2,000 MTZ/cm2; 10 mJ; 30 W) enhanced permeation, uptake, and retention of 5-fluorouracil at 24 hours post-treatment and enhanced permeation and uptake of minoxidil at 90 minutes post-treatment. CONCLUSION: Nonablative laser pretreatment may enhance topical treatment of dermatologic conditions. Device settings must be optimized to maximize topical permeation while minimizing laser-associated thermal side effects.
