IMPORTANCE TO THE FIELD: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a morbid condition with high mortality if left untreated. Bosentan is an effective treatment option for group 1 pulmonary arterial hypertension. Bosentan improves exercise tolerance and functional class and delays the time to clinical worsening in these patients. Investigation is ongoing to determine its efficacy in other groups of pulmonary hypertension. AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: This review provides a background on endothelin activity in PAH, as a rationale for the use of bosentan in this disease. It also presents evidence from key clinical trials of bosentan and discusses future directions in the study of bosentan to help the clinician better understand the role of bosentan in PAH management. WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: i) An understanding of the rationale for using endothelin receptor antagonists in treating PAH; ii) an understanding of the clinical evidence to support bosentan for the treatment of PAH; and iii) an understanding of how to use bosentan optimally in the treatment of PAH. TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Bosentan is an effective and safe treatment for patients with PAH. Patients with suspected PAH should be evaluated carefully as the use of bosentan in non-group 1 pulmonary hypertension is still being investigated. Patients on bosentan should be monitored with monthly liver transaminase testing. Coadministration with other drugs should be reviewed carefully as drug-drug interactions may be important.
Bosentan (Tracleer, Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd) is an oral dual endothelin receptor antagonist approved for use in functional class III to IV pulmonary arterial hypertension. In two placebo-controlled trials, patients receiving bosentan showed improved functional class, 6-minute walk distance and hemodynamics over a 12- to 16-week period. Follow-up data over 3 years has shown few deteriorations,with the majority of patients maintaining their response to bosentan alone. Investigations exploring the use of bosentan as an add-on agent to intravenous epoprostenol (Flolan, GlaxoSmithKline Plc) in those with the most severe disease are ongoing. Bosentan may also have antifibrotic properties and its use in pulmonary fibrosis is being explored. Ease of administration of bosentan with twice-daily oral dosing will provide many patients with pulmonary hypertension an option for treatment without the risks and discomforts of continuous intravenous medication.
We summarize the role of endothelin as a potent vasoconstrictor, pro-inflammatory, pro-oxidative agent in the pathophysiologic effects and end-organ dysfunction of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Endotheliitis is an under-recognized pathophysiologic process that causes various types of dysfunction in end organs, including heart, lung, kidney, and brain. Endothelin receptor blockers, such as bosentan and sitaxentan, can pave a path ahead in the realm of COVID-19 therapies. These agents have a potential role against COVID-19 and should be studied in research trials to determine their efficacy in treatment of this severe disease.
The endothelin system appears to play an important role in the pathophysiology of congestive heart failure (CHF). Endothelin receptor antagonists represent a novel class of agents that are being evaluated for their potential benefits in treating various cardiovascular disorders. Bosentan is an orally active endothelin receptor antagonist that has been studied for the treatment of CHF. Early clinical experience with bosentan has confirmed some benefits on hemodynamic parameters in patients with CHF. Its role in slowing the progression of the disease and improving survival remains to be elucidated.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease that, without treatment, ultimately results in right heart failure and death. For the majority of patients with advanced PAH, therapy requires cumbersome drug delivery devices with serious side effects. Endothelin, a potent endogenous vasoconstrictor, is increased in individuals with PAH. The development of bosentan, a novel, well-tolerated, orally active endothelin antagonist, has significantly changed the therapeutic approach to PAH. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated that treatment with bosentan produces favourable effects on cardiopulmonary haemodynamics, exercise capacity, WHO functional class and time to clinical worsening in PAH.
