PURPOSE: To confirm the superiority of the intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering effect of the ripasudil-brimonidine fixed-dose combination (RBFC, K-232) to ripasudil 0.4% or brimonidine 0.1% ophthalmic solution. DESIGN: Two prospective multicenter, randomized, double- or single-masked, active-controlled, phase 3 trials. METHODS: Patients with primary open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension whose IOP level was >/=18 mm Hg during treatment with ripasudil or brimonidine alone were randomized to 2 groups (RBFC and ripasudil) in a 1:1 ratio in the ripasudil-controlled trial and to 3 groups (RBFC, brimonidine, and ripasudil-brimonidine combination) in a 2:2:1 ratio in the brimonidine-controlled trial. The allocated study drugs were instilled twice daily for 8 weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was the change in IOP 2 hours after instillation (11 AM) from the baseline to weeks 4, 6, and 8. RESULTS: There were 206 patients randomized in the ripasudil-controlled trial. Changes in IOP were -2.6 and -1.2 mm Hg in the RBFC and ripasudil groups, respectively, with a difference of -1.4 mm Hg (95% CI = -1.8 to -1.0 mm Hg; P < .001). There were 282 randomized patients in the brimonidine-controlled trial. Changes in IOP were -3.4 and -1.5 mm Hg in the RBFC and brimonidine groups, respectively, with a difference of -1.8 mm Hg (95% CI = -2.3 to -1.4 mm Hg; P < .001). The most frequent adverse event was conjunctival hyperemia. CONCLUSIONS: The IOP-lowering effect of RBFC was superior to that of ripasudil or brimonidine.
INTRODUCTION: Multidrug regimens for glaucoma treatment often result in adherence issues due to inconvenience; these issues may be improved with fixed-dose combination drugs. The ophthalmic solution of ripasudil-brimonidine fixed-dose combination (RBFC; K-232) is the first treatment combining a Rho kinase inhibitor and an alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonist, and has demonstrated ability to lower intraocular pressure (IOP) and have various effects on conjunctival hyperemia and corneal endothelial cell morphology. This study evaluates the pharmacologic effects of RBFC treatment versus its separate components-ripasudil or brimonidine. METHODS: This single-center, prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded endpoint study with 3 x 3 crossover design randomly assigned healthy adult men to three groups (1:1:1) to undergo consecutive 8-day administration phases (with drug-free intervals of at least 5 days). Subjects received twice-daily instillation of RBFC --> ripasudil --> brimonidine (group A), ripasudil --> brimonidine --> RBFC (group B), or brimonidine --> RBFC --> ripasudil (group C). Endpoints included change in IOP, severity of conjunctival hyperemia, corneal endothelial cell morphology, pupil diameter, and pharmacokinetics. RESULTS: Eighteen subjects were assigned in total (six to each group). RBFC significantly reduced IOP from baseline at 1 h post-instillation on days 1 and 8 (12.7 vs. 9.1 and 9.0 mmHg, respectively; both P < 0.001), and provided significantly greater IOP reductions than ripasudil or brimonidine at several time points. The most common adverse drug reaction with all three treatments was mild conjunctival hyperemia, which transiently increased in severity with RBFC or ripasudil, peaking at 15 min post-instillation. In post hoc analyses, conjunctival hyperemia scores were lower with RBFC than with ripasudil at several time points. Transient morphologic changes in corneal endothelial cells occurred for up to several hours with RBFC or ripasudil, but not with brimonidine. Pupil diameter did not change with RBFC. CONCLUSION: RBFC significantly reduced IOP compared with each agent alone. A combination of each agent's pharmacologic profile was observed in that of RBFC. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Japan Registry of Clinical Trials; Registration No. jRCT2080225220.
INTRODUCTION: Ocular allergies to brimonidine are frequent in patients treated for glaucoma. There is variability in reporting due to the lack of diagnostic criteria and the absence of cutaneous testing. Many false-negative patch tests (PT) have been described. Alternative methods, such as strip and scratch PT, have been used without a standardized method. OBJECTIVES: The primary objective is to identify the best method of cutaneous testing and brimonidine concentration for patch testing. The secondary objective is to identify clinical signs and symptoms suggestive of ocular allergy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective review of patient files suspected of brimonidine ocular allergy was performed. Patch testing method, brimonidine concentration and clinical symptoms were reviewed. RESULTS: Of the 36 patients identified, half tested positive for brimonidine for at least one of the testing methods. The scratch PT demonstrated 17 positive reactions (94% detection rate). Three patients reacted with strip PT. No positive results were found with standard PT. The 5% brimonidine concentration demonstrated the highest sensitivity. The absence of eyelid pruritus was associated with negative testing. CONCLUSION: In the investigation of ocular allergy to brimonidine, scratch PT proved to be an essential tool. Brimonidine 5% pet. appeared as the most sensitive concentration for scratch PT.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the long-term efficacy and safety of ripasudil-brimonidine fixed-dose combination (RBFC), a new intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering medication for glaucoma and ocular hypertension (OHT). METHODS: This prospective, multicentre (23 sites in Japan), open-label study enrolled patients with primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), OHT or exfoliative glaucoma and assigned them to one of four combination therapy cohorts, based on previous treatment(s) received: prostaglandin (PG) analogue (Cohort 1); PG analogue and beta-adrenoceptor blocker (beta-blocker) (Cohort 2); PG analogue, beta-blocker and carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (Cohort 3); or other/no treatment (Cohort 4). After a >/= 4-week screening period, eligible patients received twice-daily RBFC for 52 weeks in addition to the treatments they were already receiving. Efficacy was assessed by change in IOP from baseline through week 52. Adverse events and adverse drug reactions (ADRs) were monitored throughout. RESULTS: In total, 179 patients from Cohort 1 (n = 48), Cohort 2 (n = 44), Cohort 3 (n = 41) and Cohort 4 (n = 46) entered the RBFC treatment period. For all cohorts, mean IOP was significantly reduced at 11:00 (2 h after instillation of RBFC) through week 52 with the changes from baseline at week 52 of - 2.7 to - 4.1 mmHg across cohorts; all p < 0.001. Common ADRs were conjunctival hyperaemia (58%), allergic conjunctivitis (18%) and blepharitis (17%), most of which were mild in severity. CONCLUSION: These data demonstrated the long-term efficacy and safety of RBFC, both alone and in combination with other anti-glaucoma agents. RBFC may offer a new treatment option for the long-term management of glaucoma and OHT. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Japan Registry of Clinical Trials Identifier: jRCT2080225063. DATE OF REGISTRATION: 17 February 2020.
Purpose: This study aims to compare the cytotoxic, apoptotic, and oxidative effects of preserved and preservative-free forms of brimonidine 0.15% on the human corneal epithelial cell (HCEC) line. Methods: Time-dependent cytotoxicity studies were performed with the Alamar Blue method. For apoptotic studies, PE Annexin V and 7-amino-actinomycin (7-AAD) staining and flow cytometry were performed. Messenger RNA (mRNA) expressions of Bax, Bcl-2, and caspase-3, -9, -12, and protein expressions of Bax and Bcl-2 were evaluated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot method, respectively. Results: Cell viability was 76.4% with the preserved solution and 36.05% with the preservative-free solution at the fifth minute. No significant difference was observed with either solution at the 15-min mark, whereas cell viability did not change significantly after 1 h. In the apoptosis evaluation, it was observed that the preservative-free solution increased the early apoptotic activity to a greater degree (P < 0.05). Preservative-free solution also induced gene expression of proapoptotic Bax, caspase-9 and -12, and protein expression of Bax while reducing the protein expression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 (P < 0.0001). Preserved solution induced only the gene expression of caspase-12, and reduced the protein expression of Bcl-2 (P < 0.0001). No significant difference was observed in the reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels of either solution compared with the control group (P > 0.05). Conclusion: It was demonstrated that the preserved solution is less cytotoxic to the HCEC line in the early period, has less early apoptotic activity, and does not significantly increase ROS levels.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering effect based on the number of ingredients and survival rate due to adverse reactions of brinzolamide (1%)/brimonidine (0.1%) fixed combination (BBFC). METHODS AND ANALYSIS: Among 424 patients newly administered BBFC from June 2020 to May 2021, 406 were retrospectively evaluated for adverse reactions and 299 were evaluated for the IOP-lowering effect of BBFC. Among those evaluated for IOP, group A (n=86) included patients whose treatment was changed to BBFC from other two ingredients, Group B (n=90) included patients who added one ingredient by switching to BBFC, and group C (n=123) included patients who added BBFC in addition to other drugs. RESULTS: The mean IOP (mm Hg) at BBFC initiation and at 3, 6 and 12 months after BBFC initiation was 14.1, 14.0, 14.3 and 13.8 in group A, 15.9, 14.4, 13.8 and 14.5 in group B and 17.2, 14.0, 14.1 and 14.9 in group C, respectively. Group A showed no significant difference in mean IOP from baseline to any time point after BBFC initiation, whereas groups B and C showed significant IOP reductions at all time points. Seventy-three (18%) patients discontinued treatment due to adverse reactions. The survival rate was 72% at 12 months after the start of BBFC when discontinuation due to adverse reactions was defined as failure. CONCLUSION: Using BBFC, sustained IOP or decreasing IOP were observed depending on the number of ingredients. Drop-outs due to the adverse reactions should also be given attention.
Oxidative stress is to upregulate the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). The PPP consists of two functional branches, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and 6-phosphogluconaste dehydrogenase (6PGD). Glutathione reductase (GR) has a significant role in catalyzing an oxidized glutathione form into a reduced form. The purpose of this study is to investigate the effects of brimonidine and proparacaine on the activity of 6PGD, G6PD, and GR enzymes purified from human erythrocytes. Brimonidine displayed considerable inhibition profile against G6PD with IC(50) value and K(I) constant of 29.93 +/- 3.56 and 48.46 +/- 0.66 muM, respectively. On the other hand, proparacaine had no inhibitory effect against G6PD. K(I) values were found to be 66.06 +/- 0.78 and 811.50 +/- 11.13 muM for brimonidine and proparacaine, respectively, for 6PGD. K(I) values were found to be 144.10 +/- 2.01 and 1,654.00 +/- 26.29 muM for brimonidine and proparacaine, respectively, for GR. Herein, also in silico molecular docking studies were performed between drugs and enzymes.
This study evaluated the effects of alpha2-adrenergic agonist, prostaglandin F2alpha analog, and EP2 receptor agonist on tunicamycin-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and fibrosis in human trabecular meshwork (TM) cells. Human TM cells were treated with tunicamycin for 24 h, followed by cotreatment with brimonidine (BRI), latanoprost (LAT), or omidenepag (OMD). Immunocytochemistry was used to assess expressions of collagen type I alpha 1 chain (COL1A1), fibronectin, F-actin, and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA). Western blotting was performed to evaluate levels of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), 78-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), and splicing X-box binding protein-1 (sXBP-1). Real-time qPCR was used to examine the mRNA expressions of COL1A1, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), fibronectin, alpha-SMA, CHOP, GRP78, and sXBP-1. Expressions of COL1A1, CTGF, F-actin, fibronectin, alpha-SMA, CHOP, GRP78, and sXBP-1 significantly increased after tunicamycin treatment. BRI cotreatment significantly downregulated the mRNA and protein expressions of GRP78, and LAT or OMD cotreatment significantly reduced the CHOP and sXBP-1 expressions compared to the tunicamycin-treated group. BRI, LAT, or OMD cotreatment significantly attenuated cellular cytoskeletal changes and the increase of fibrosis markers such as COL1A1, CTGF, fibronectin, and alpha-SMA. In addition, COL1A1 mRNA expression was significantly lowered with LAT or OMD cotreatment compared to the BRI-cotreated group. Cotreatment with alpha2-adrenergic agonist, prostaglandin F2alpha analog, or EP2 receptor agonist alleviates tunicamycin-induced ER stress in human TM cells.
PURPOSE: To investigate whether dilute brimonidine (0.025%) reduces patient discomfort, subconjunctival hemorrhage, and injection after LASIK without a significant increase in the rate of flap complications or surgical enhancements. METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, prospective study enrolled 180 patients (360 eyes) in a contralateral eye comparison of topical dilute brimonidine, naphazoline/pheniramine, or Systane Ultra (Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX) administered shortly before LASIK for any indication. Patients were evaluated for subconjunctival hemorrhage, injection, and flap dislocation 1 hour and 1 day postoperatively. Patient questionnaires measuring patient comfort and ocular symptoms were administered at these same follow-up visits. Patients were examined for 3 months to determine similar outcomes for standard indices of safety, predictability, efficacy, and enhancement rates. RESULTS: Scores of patient discomfort, subconjunctival hemorrhage, and injection were significantly lower in eyes treated with dilute brimonidine at the 1 hour and 1 day postoperative examinations. Refloats for mild-flap edge wrinkling were required in 3 brimonidine eyes (2.5%), 1 naphazoline/pheniramine eye (0.8%), and no control eyes, but this difference did not reach statistical significance (P = .18). There was no significant difference between eyes at 3 months in terms of visual acuity, refractive error, corrected distance visual acuity, or rate of enhancement. CONCLUSIONS: Use of dilute brimonidine before LASIK reduces subconjunctival hemorrhage and injection and improves patient comfort after surgery. Flap edge wrinkling requiring refloat may still be a complication with dilute brimonidine.
This multicenter (four institutions), randomized, investigator-masked, parallel-group clinical trial evaluated and compared the efficacy and safety of preservative-free and preserved brimonidine tartrate 0.15% in open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension. Sixty eyes of 60 patients with intraocular pressure (IOP) >/= 15 mmHg diagnosed with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension were randomized to preserved (n = 31) and preservative-free (n = 29) brimonidine groups. The enrolled eyes received brimonidine monotherapy three times daily. Main outcome measures were corneal/conjunctival staining score, ocular surface disease index, patient satisfaction score, drug tolerance, and drug adherence rate 12 weeks post first administration. Secondary outcome measurements included visual acuity, IOP, drug tolerance, tear-film break-up time, hemodynamic changes including blood pressure and heart rates, and ocular adverse events. After 12 weeks, both preserved and preservative-free groups showed similar IOP reduction, corneal and conjunctival staining scores, drug tolerance, and adherence rates. The preservative-free group showed significantly better tear-film break-up time and higher patient satisfaction regarding drug use and management. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure reductions during the 12 weeks were significantly lower in the preserved group than in the preservative-free group. Preservative-free brimonidine tartrate showed comparable efficacy and safety, better corneal tear film stability, and patient satisfaction than preserved brimonidine.
Brimonidine is a highly selective 2-adrenoceptor agonist that lowers intraocular pressure (IOP) by decreasing aqueous humor production and increasing aqueous humor outflow via the uveoscleral route. Brimonidine is used to treat glaucoma and other eye conditions. Brimonidine is a topical medication that is used mainly to treat open-angle glaucoma and ocular hypertension in the eyelids. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive discussion of Brimonidine's nomenclature, physiochemical properties, preparation methods, identification procedures, and numerous qualitative and quantitative analytical techniques, as well as its ADME profiles and pharmacological effects. In addition, the chapter contains numerous approaches for separating brimonidine from other medications in combination formulations utilizing chromatographic techniques and other spectroscopic approaches.
PURPOSE: To assess the efficacy and safety of switching from timolol 0.5% to brimonidine 0.1% in patients with glaucoma treated with a prostaglandin analog (PGA) and timolol combination. METHODS: This prospective, open-label multicenter study enrolled patients with open-angle glaucoma or ocular hypertension who were being treated with a PGA and timolol. After baseline measurements, timolol was switched to brimonidine 0.1%, and patients were followed for 12 weeks. Patients visited at 4 and 12 weeks after switching. The main outcome measure was the change in intraocular pressure (IOP). For safety evaluations, hyperemia, formation of conjunctival follicles, superficial punctate keratopathy as a local side effect, blood pressure (BP), and heart rate (HR) were evaluated. RESULTS: One hundred seven patients participated in this study. Among them, 103 patients completed the study. The IOP values at baseline, 4 weeks, and 12 weeks after the transition were 15.7 +/- 2.7, 14.3 +/- 2.8, and 14.0 +/- 2.8 mmHg, respectively. IOP was significantly reduced at 4 and 12 weeks compared with baseline (p<0.001). There were no significant changes in hyperemia or follicle formation. The superficial punctate keratopathy score was significantly reduced at 12 weeks compared with baseline (p<0.05). Systolic and diastolic BP values were significantly reduced and HR significantly increased after switching (p<0.05). CONCLUSION: Switching from timolol 0.5% to brimonidine 0.1% may not change IOP in the combination use of timolol 0.5% and a PGA and was well tolerated by patients without severe ocular or systemic side effects.
Brimonidine is a selective alpha-2 adrenergic agonist used to treat glaucoma. There have been several reports of central nervous system depression after its use in infants. We observed rapid-onset bradycardia and decreased blood pressure in addition to central nervous system depression in 2 infants who received concomitant topical brimonidine and beta-blockers.
