Bumetanide and furosemide are potent loop diuretics; the former is 40 to 50 times more potent than the latter on a weight basis. Bumetanide is absorbed more quickly than furosemide and is twice as bioavailable. Both drugs exhibit changes in elimination in the presence of renal insufficiency as well as changes in the time course of absorption in congestive heart failure. More data are needed to assess potential differences between them in various clinical conditions.
Bumetanide, a pharmacologically new diuretic, was evaluated in 27 subjects. Its onset of action was within 30 minutes with a peak at 90 minutes and a total duration of action of about 270 minutes. In a controlled study in oedematous patients it was equipotent with frusemide at one-fortieth the molar dosage and did not differ from frusemide with regard to its pattern of electrolyte excretion. On continuous oral administration for eight days it produced effective diuresis with minimal alteration in biochemical and haematological status. The only adverse effect was gastric discomfort in one patient.
The efficacy of bumetanide (oral liquid formulation 0.5 mg bid) as a treatment for the core symptoms of autism spectrum disorders in children and adolescents aged 7-17 years is being investigated in an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III study. The primary endpoint is the change in Childhood Autism Rating Scale 2 (CARS2) total raw score after 6 months of treatment. At baseline, the 211 participants analysed are broadly representative of autistic subjects in this age range: mean (SD) age, 10.4 (3.0) years; 82.5% male; 47.7% with intelligence quotient >/= 70. Mean CARS2 score was 40.1 (4.9) and mean Social Responsiveness Scale score was 116.7 (23.4). Final study results will provide data on efficacy and safety of bumetanide in autistic children and adolescents.
Death rattle, which could often be associated with a pulmonary fluid overload, occurs in 25% to 90% of dying patients. The co-administration of scopolamine (anticholinergic drug) and bumetanide (loop diuretic) could be considered in order to avoid unnecessary fluid overload at end-stage of life. The objective of this study was to investigate the physical and chemical stabilities of the admixture bumetanide and scopolamine in order to prepare them in advance by a centralized intravenous additive service in-hospital pharmacy. The stability of the lowest (LOW) concentration was evaluated on five polypropylene syringes containing the admixture bumetanide (Burinex, 2 mg/4 mL) and scopolamine (0.25 mg/mL) at 41.67 microg/mL and 5.21 microg/mL. The highest (HIGH) concentration with 125 microg/mL of bumetanide and 31.25 microg/mL of scopolamine was evaluated on five polypropylene syringes. All syringes were stored for 18 days at 5 degrees C +/- 3 degrees C. Periodic samples were visually and microscopically examined to observe any particle appearance or color change. The pH and absorbance at 3 wavelengths (350 nm, 410 nm, and 550 nm) were monitored. The concentrations were measured by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-photodiode array detection, using a newly developed method. During the 18 days of test, there was no change in color or appearance of opacity, turbidity, or precipitation, and the pH remained stable. Mean concentrations of bumetanide and scopolamine at LOW and HIGH concentrations after 18 days remained statistically unchanged. The lower limits of the 95% confidence intervals of both molecules at LOW and HIGH concentrations remained higher than a 90% threshold of concentration, indicating the mixture was chemically stable. Degradation rates of bumetanide and scopolamine content at LOW and HIGH concentrations should not exceed a maximum of 0.70% every 10 days. This study was the first to show that the admixture of bumetanide and scopolamine is physically and chemically stable at two concentrations used in a palliative-care unit. This combination available in ready-to-use polypropylene syringes presents numerous advantages for patient's comfort and safety.
A screening of several families of compounds on NEM-stimulated K+ efflux in human red cells allowed us to select a [(dihydroindenyl)oxy] alkanoic acid (DIOA) as the first potent inhibitor of this K+ flux (IC50 of 10(-5) M) without side effects on the bumetanide-sensitive [Na+,K+,Cl-]-cotransport system. Incubation of human red cells in hypotonic media (179 mosm) increased cell volume (by 18-20%) and provoked the appearance of a DIOA-sensitive K+ efflux of 4.48 +/- 0.83 mmol.(liter of cells X hr)-1 (mean +/- SD of nine experiments). This DIOA-sensitive K+ efflux exhibited a Michaelian-like dependence on the Cl- concentration of the incubation media (freely equilibrated with intracellular Cl-) with an apparent dissociation constant of 39.6 +/- 14.7 mM and a maximal rate of 4.7 +/- 0.9 mmol.(liter of cells X hr)-1 (mean +/- SD of five experiments). The chloride effect was mediated by intracellular and not by extracellular Cl-, as expected for an outward [K+,Cl-]-cotransport. The above properties of DIOA-sensitive K+ efflux clearly confirm that human red cells have a [K+,Cl-]-cotransport system that regulates cell swelling. The regulatory response to hypotonic media was also strongly depressed by cytochalasin B at a concentration of 1 mM, suggesting that the activating signal is probably transduced by the cytoskeleton.
Nitrosamine compounds are classified as potential human carcinogens, the origin of these impurities can be broadly classified in two categories, nitrosamine impurity found in drug products that are not associated with the Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API), such as N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) or nitrosamine impurities associated with the API, such as nitrosamine drug substance-related impurities (NDSRIs). The mechanistic pathway for the formation of these two classes of impurities can be different and the approach to mitigate the risk should be tailored to address the specific concern. In the last couple of years number of NDSRIs have been reported for different drug products. Though, not the only contributing factor for the formation of NDSIRs, it is widely accepted that the presence of residual a nitrites/nitrates in the components used in the manufacturing of the drug products can be the primary contributor to the formation of NDSRIs. Approaches to mitigate the formation of NDSRIs in drug products include the use of antioxidants or pH modifiers in the formulation. The primary objective of this work was to evaluate the role of different inhibitors (antioxidants) and pH modifiers in tablet formulations prepared in-house using bumetanide (BMT) as a model drug to mitigate the formation of N-nitrosobumetanide (NBMT). A multi-factor study design was created, and several bumetanide formulations were prepared by wet granulation with and without sodium nitrite spike (100 ppm) and different antioxidants (ascorbic acid, ferulic acid or caffeic acid) at three concentrations (0.1%, 0.5% or 1% of the total tablet weight). Formulations with acidic and basic pH were also prepared using 0.1 N hydrochloric acid and 0.1 N sodium bicarbonate, respectively. The formulations were subjected to different storage (temperature and humidity) conditions over 6 months and stability data was collected. The rank order of N-nitrosobumetanide inhibition was highest with alkaline pH formulations, followed by formulations with ascorbic acid, caffeic acid or ferulic acid present. In summary, we hypothesize that maintaining a basic pH or the addition of an antioxidant in the drug product can mitigate the conversion of nitrite to nitrosating agent and thus reduce the formation of bumetanide nitrosamines.
A recent Phase II randomized, controlled trial of bumetanide as an adjunctive treatment for neonatal seizures showed a robust efficacy signal and no evidence of toxicity. Concerns regarding bumetanide as an adjunctive anticonvulsant are addressed here. An adequately powered multi-institutional trial is needed to accurately determine efficacy.
BACKGROUND: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a common child neurodevelopmental disorder, whose pathogenesis is not completely understood. Until now, there is no proven treatment for the core symptoms of ASD. However, some evidence indicates a crucial link between this disorder and GABAergic signals which are altered in ASD. Bumetanide is a diuretic that reduces chloride, shifts gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) from excitation to inhibition, and may play a significant role in the treatment of ASD. OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to assess the safety and efficacy of bumetanide as a treatment for ASD. METHODS: Eighty children, aged 3-12 years, with ASD diagnosed by Childhood Autism Rating Scale (CARS), ⩾ 30 were included in this double-blind, randomized, and controlled study. Group 1 received Bumetanide, Group 2 received a placebo for 6 months. Follow-up by CARS rating scale was performed before and after 1, 3, and 6 months of treatment. RESULTS: The use of bumetanide in group 1 improved the core symptoms of ASD in a shorter time with minimal and tolerable adverse effects. There was a statistically significant decrease in CARS and most of its fifteen items in group 1 versus group 2 after 6 months of treatment (p-value <0.001). CONCLUSION: Bumetanide has an important role in the treatment of core symptoms of ASD.
The loop diuretics furosemide and bumetanide are used widely for the management of fluid overload in both acute and chronic disease states. To date, most pharmacokinetic studies in neonates have been conducted with furosemide and little is known about bumetanide. The aim of this article was to review the published data on the pharmacology of furosemide and bumetanide in neonates and infants in order to provide a critical analysis of the literature, and a useful tool for physicians. The bibliographic search was performed electronically using PubMed and EMBASE databases as search engines and March 2011 was the cutoff point. The half-life (t((1/2))) of both furosemide and bumetanide is considerably longer in neonates than in adults and consequently the clearance (CL) of these drugs is reduced at birth. In healthy volunteers, plasma t((1/2)) of furosemide ranges from 33 to 100 minutes, whereas in neonates it ranges from 8 to 27 hours. The volume of distribution (V(d)) of furosemide undergoes little variation during neonate maturation. The dose of furosemide, administered by intermittent intravenous infusion, is 1 mg/kg and may increase to a maximum of 2 mg/kg every 24 hours in premature infants and every 12 hours in full-term infants. Comparison of continuous infusion versus intermittent infusion of furosemide showed that the diuresis is more controlled with fewer hemodynamic and electrolytic variations during continuous infusion. The appropriate infusion rate of furosemide ranges from 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg/h and when the diuresis is <1 mL/kg/h the infusion rate may be increased to 0.4 mg/kg/h. Treatment with theophylline before administration of furosemide results in a significant increase of urine flow rate. Bumetanide is more potent than furosemide and its dose after intermittent intravenous infusion ranges from 0.005 to 0.1 mg/kg every 24 hours. The t((1/2)) of bumetanide in neonates ranges from 1.74 to 7.0 hours. Up to now, no data are available on the continuous infusion of bumetanide. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is used for a variety of indications including sepsis, persistent pulmonary hypertension, meconium aspiration syndrome, cardiac defects and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. There are two studies of furosemide in neonates undergoing ECMO and only one on the pharmacokinetics of bumetanide under ECMO. When ECMO was conducted for 72 hours, the total amount of furosemide administered was 7.0 mg/kg, and the urine production in the 3 days of treatment was about 6 mL/kg/h, which is the target value. The t((1/2)) of bumetanide in neonates during ECMO was extremely variable. CL, t((1/2)), and V(d) were 0.63 mL/min/kg, 13.2 hours, and 0.45 L/kg, respectively. Furosemide may be administered by inhalation and inhibits the bronco-constrictive effect of exercise, cold air ventilation and antigen challenge. However, inhaled furosemide is not active in infants with viral bronchiolitis and its effect on broncho-pulmonary dysplasia is still uncertain. Furosemide does not significantly increase the risk of failure of patent ductus arteriosus closure when indomethacin or ibuprofen have been co-administered. Infants with low birth weight treated long-term with furosemide are at risk for the development of intra-renal calcification. Furosemide therapy above 10 mg/kg bodyweight cumulative dose had a 48-fold increased risk of nephrocalcinosis. The use of furosemide in combination with indomethacin increased the incidence of acute renal failure. The maturation of the kidney governs the pharmacokinetics of furosemide and bumetanide in the infant. CL and t((1/2)) are influenced by development, and this must be taken into consideration when planning a dosage regimen with these drugs.
INTRODUCTION: Limited data exist comparing the efficacy and safety of bumetanide- or metolazone-based diuretic regimens to furosemide in acute heart failure (HF). Our purpose was to evaluate the comparative effect on urine output (UO) and renal function between these regimens. METHODS: A retrospective study of hospitalized HF patients treated with continuous infusion furosemide (CIF), combination furosemide plus metolazone (F + M), or continuous infusion bumetanide (CIB). Primary end points were between regimen comparisons for change in mean hourly UO versus baseline and incidence of worsening renal function. RESULTS: Data on 242 patients with acute HF (age 58 +/- 12 years, 63% male, left ventricular ejection fraction 38% +/- 17%) were analyzed (160 CIF, 42 F + M, 40 CIB). The mean duration of diuretic regimens was 41 +/- 32 hours. Compared to baseline, all regimens increased mean hourly UO (P < .0001 for all), with greater increases with F + M (109 +/- 171 mL) and CIB (90 +/- 90 mL) compared to CIF (48 +/- 103 mL; P = .009). Incidence of worsening renal function was not different between regimens; however, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) tended to increase more with F + M (4.4 +/- 9.8 mg/dL) and CIB (4.3 +/- 9.7 mg/dL) than CIF (1.8 +/- 10.8 mg/dL), P = .09. The incidence of hyponatremia was higher with F + M and CIB. Differences in UO, BUN, and hyponatremia were retained in the subgroup analysis limited to patients with baseline serum creatinine <1.5 mg/dL, where renal function between the groups was not different. CONCLUSION: Compared to CIF, F + M or CIB was associated with greater increases in UO. No difference in the incidence of worsening renal function was found; however, electrolyte abnormalities may be more prevalent when furosemide is combined with metolazone or when bumetanide is used. These therapeutic differences warrant prospective study.
Bumetanide is an effective diuretic for the treatment of ascites. Fifteen out of 17 patients with chronic liver disease responded satisfactorily and the incidence of hepatic encephalopathy and electrolyte disturbances was similar to that previously observed with frusemide. Colicky abdominal pain was reported in three patients but no other adverse effects were noted. An unexpected response was obtained in two patients who had diuresis without natriuresis.
