Manipulating the density of local anesthetic solutions by using a simple formula may be clinically useful in producing optimal density solutions for spinal anesthesia under a variety of clinical conditions.
BACKGROUND: Liposomal bupivacaine is purported to extend analgesia of peripheral nerve blocks when administered perineurally. However, evidence of the clinical effectiveness of perineural liposomal bupivacaine is mixed. This meta-analysis seeks to evaluate the effectiveness of perineural liposomal bupivacaine in improving peripheral nerve block analgesia as compared with nonliposomal local anesthetics. METHODS: The authors identified randomized trials evaluating the effectiveness of peripheral nerve block analgesic that compared liposomal bupivacaine with nonliposomal local anesthetics. The primary outcome was the difference in area under the receiver operating characteristics curve (AUC) of the pooled 24- to 72-h rest pain severity scores. Secondary outcomes included postoperative analgesic consumption, time to first analgesic request, incidence of opioid-related side effects, patient satisfaction, length of hospital stay, liposomal bupivacaine side effects, and functional recovery. AUC pain scores were interpreted in light of a minimal clinically important difference of 2.0 cm . h. RESULTS: Nine trials (619 patients) were analyzed. When all trials were pooled, AUC pain scores +/- SD at 24 to 72 h were 7.6 +/- 4.9 cm . h and 6.6 +/- 4.6 cm . h for nonliposomal and liposomal bupivacaine, respectively. As such, perineural liposomal bupivacaine provided a clinically unimportant benefit by improving the AUC (95% CI) of 24- to 72-h pain scores by 1.0 cm . h (0.5 to 1.6; P = 0.003) compared with nonliposomal bupivacaine. Excluding an industry-sponsored trial rendered the difference between the groups nonsignificant (0.7 cm . h [-0.1 to 1.5]; P = 0.100). Secondary outcome analysis did not uncover any additional benefits to liposomal bupivacaine in pain severity at individual timepoints up to 72 h, analgesic consumption, time to first analgesic request, opioid-related side effects, patient satisfaction, length of hospital stay, and functional recovery. No liposomal bupivacaine side effects were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Perineural liposomal bupivacaine provided a statistically significant but clinically unimportant improvement in the AUC of postoperative pain scores compared with plain local anesthetic. Furthermore, this benefit was rendered nonsignificant after excluding an industry-sponsored trial, and liposomal bupivacaine was found to be not different from plain local anesthetics for postoperative pain and all other analgesic and functional outcomes. High-quality evidence does not support the use of perineural liposomal bupivacaine over nonliposomal bupivacaine for peripheral nerve blocks.
Arterial and peripheral venous plasma levels of bupivacaine were determined in 30 patients following epidural anesthesia using 150 and 225 mg, as well as following intercostal nerve block with 400 mg. Arterial levels were consistently higher than levels in simultaneously sampled venous blood, and the highest levels occurred with bilateral intercostal nerve block. No evidence of systemic toxicity was observed. The results suggest that bupivacaine may have a wider margin of safety in man than is now stated.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate bupivacaine concentrations in maternal plasma and transfer into breast milk in women undergoing liposomal bupivacaine infiltration in the transversus abdominis plane after cesarean birth. METHODS: Prospective cohort study of healthy pregnant women who underwent cesarean birth at term followed by a transversus abdominis plane block using 52 mg bupivacaine hydrochloride 0.25% (20 mL) and 266 mg liposomal bupivacaine 1.3% (20 mL). Simultaneous blood and milk samples were collected in a staggered fashion, three to four samples per patient at the following timepoints after block administration: 2, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours. Quantification of bupivacaine was performed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Neonatal drug exposure was modeled by calculating milk/plasma area under the curve (AUC) ratios, neonatal dosage, and relative neonatal dosage of bupivacaine at each sampling time. RESULTS: Thirty patients were enrolled. Concentrations in breast milk peaked at 6 hours (mean 58 ng/mL), followed by constant and steady decline to low levels at 96 hours (mean 5.2 ng/mL). Maternal plasma concentrations had two peaks, first at 6 hours (mean 155.9 ng/mL) and then at 48 hours (mean 225.8 ng/mL), followed by steady decline. Milk/plasma AUC0-t ratios ranged between AUC0-2 of 0.45 (80% CI 0.38-0.52) and AUC0-96 of 0.15 (80% CI 0.14-0.17). Neonatal dosage ranged between a mean of 355.9 ng/kg at 0-2 hours and a mean of 15,155.4 ng/kg at 0-96 hours. Relative neonatal dosage was less than 1% at all time intervals. No serious adverse reactions occurred in any neonate. CONCLUSION: Bupivacaine is excreted in breast milk after local infiltration of liposomal bupivacaine and bupivacaine hydrochloride mixture into transversus abdominis plane blocks after cesarean birth. Relative neonatal dosages of less than 1% (less than 10% is considered to be unlikely to be of clinical concern) suggest minimal risks for breastfeeding healthy, term neonates after the administration of this combination of local anesthetics to mothers. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03526419.
PURPOSE: In this study, we aimed to compare the effects of bupivacaine alone, bupivacaine plus fentanyl, and bupivacaine plus dexmedetomidine for postoperative analgesia in women undergoing cesarean section under spinal anesthesia. MATERIAL AND METHODS: 90 term parturients scheduled to have elective cesarean section and ASA physical status I or II were allocated randomly into 3 groups to receive either bupivacaine (Bv group) or bupivacaine plus fentanyl (BvF group) or bupivacaine plus dexmedetomidine (BvD group). The onset time of sensory block, maximum sensory block level, duration of motor and sensory block, onset of post-operative pain, sedation scores, Apgar scores and side effects were recorded and statistically compared across 3 groups. RESULTS: Regression time to T10 was significantly longer in BvD group, sensory block was also prolonged in BvD group without any difference in duration of motor block. Onset of post-operative pain was delayed in BvD group. Sedation scores (VAS) were improved in case of BvD with least values of 0-3 followed by BvF (1-4). There was no significant difference in Apgar scores and neonatal arterial gas pressures across 3 groups. CONCLUSION: The use of dexmedtomidine as an adjuvant to bupivacaine in cesarean surgeries provides better intra-operative and post-operative analgesia without having significant impact on Apgar scores or incidence of side effects.
INTRODUCTION: Although generally considered both safe and effective, local anesthetics are often used in conjunction with opioids postoperatively in part because of the limited duration of drug action of local anesthetics. Much interest exists in extending the duration of local anesthetics' effects, which may reduce the requirement for opioid pain medications that are frequently associated with side effects, including nausea and vomiting, pruritus and respiratory depression. AREAS COVERED: This article introduces liposomal bupivacaine and SABER(R)-Bupivacaine, two new formulations of bupivacaine that increase the duration of analgesia postoperatively through two novel slow-release technologies. The pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety of both preparations of bupivacaine are reviewed. An electronic database search conducted using the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and MEDLINE/PubMed with the following search terms: 'bupivacaine,' 'liposomal bupivacaine', 'liposome bupivacaine', 'Exparel', 'SABER-Bupivacaine', 'SABER Bupivacaine', and 'SABER' yielded 90 articles (no language or date of publication restrictions were imposed). EXPERT OPINION: Clinical trials involving liposomal bupivacaine and SABER-Bupivacaine indicate that both safely prolong analgesia, while decreasing opioid requirements when compared with placebo. However, additional clinical studies are necessary to better determine the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of these long-acting local anesthetic formulations.
Thirty-one healthy women who underwent Caesarean section were studied in a double-blind trial to compare the effectiveness of epidural 0.5% bupivacaine plain, 0.5% bupivacaine plus 100 micrograms fentanyl and 0.5% bupivacaine plus 50 micrograms fentanyl in the prevention of intraoperative pain. There was no difference in the quality of analgesia between the three groups. The incidence of complications was significantly higher in the 0.5% bupivacaine plus 100 micrograms fentanyl group compared with the other two groups.
OBJECTIVE: Epidural anesthesia for the parturient is often provided in a clinical context where rapid onset of segmental analgesia is important; however, little is published on the ideal local anesthetic to safely achieve this onset. To fi ll this gap in knowledge, we studied bupivacaine and lidocaine, two local anesthetics (LA) commonly used for labor epidural activation, either as a single drug or in combination to determine the onset of epidural analgesia. METHODS: In this double-blinded study, seventy-five patients were randomized into three groups (n = 25 each) for labor epidural activation: 10 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine, 10 mL of 1% lidocaine, or 5 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine plus 5 mL of 1% lidocaine. Patients were assessed for the fi rst 20 min after drug administration at 5-min intervals. Data collected included sensory level to pinprick, maternal blood pressure, vasopressor administration, and peak motor blockade. RESULTS: Data were analyzed on 71 of 75 patients. Time to loss of sensation to pinprick at the T10 dermatome in the bupivacaine group was signifi cantly longer than the lidocaine group (p = 0.006), but the time to loss of sensation to pinprick at the T10 dermatome did not signifi cantly differ in the bupivacaine plus lidocaine group when compared to both the bupivacaine (p = 0.114) as well as the lidocaine (p = 0.203) groups. Phenylephrine usage did not signifi cantly differ amongst the three groups (p = 0.062). CONCLUSION: Lidocaine provides statistically signifi cant faster onset of epidural analgesia when compared to bupivacaine only. Combining the two LA did not signifi cantly affect onset.
In a double-blind study, 0.5% bupivacaine 3 ml in plain (n = 10) or hyperbaric (n = 10) solution was injected intrathecally to 20 patients who were in the sitting position, to produce spinal anaesthesia for transurethral resection of prostate. No statistically significant differences were found in time to maximum cephalad spread of analgesia nor in the level reached. However, the plain solution produced a smaller scatter around the mean level than the hyperbaric solution. The duration of analgesia was not significantly different between two groups. There was no difference in the incidence of complete motor block, but a longer duration of lesser degrees of motor block was found with the plain solution (P less than 0.05). The plain solution produced a more predictable level of blockade.
PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy and pharmacokinetics of racemic bupivacaine (rac-bupivacaine) with S-bupivacaine as primary local anesthetic agent in bilateral impacted third molar extractions. METHOD: A randomised, double blind, two period cross-over design was employed. Six subjects (2 males, 4 females; age 19-25 years; weight 69.2+/-9.4 kg) received bupivacaine hydrochloride injection (6.6 ml) as rac-bupivacaine (0.5% as salt) or S-bupivacaine (0.5% as base) prior to extraction of impacted third molars on one side and three weeks later on the other side. Anesthesia, blood loss associated with surgery and post-operative pain experience were evaluated. Plasma samples were analysed for bupivacaine enantiomers by chiral HPLC. RESULTS: In 7/12 operations, anesthesia adequate for surgery was delayed (>10 min) or unsatisfactory requiring lidocaine rescue medication. Despite this, there were no significant differences in onset and duration of anesthesia, blood loss or post-operative pain experience between the two arms of the study. Pharmacokinetic parameters were not significantly different and there was no evidence of chiral inversion after dosing with S-bupivacaine. CONCLUSIONS: Both study drugs were inadequate as single anesthetic agent for third molar surgery. Any decision to use S-bupivacaine for oral surgery must rest on evidence that it is less toxic than the racemic drug.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: We examined whether liposome bupivacaine (Exparel) given in the interscalene brachial plexus block lowers pain in the setting of multimodal postoperative pain management for major shoulder surgery. METHODS: Fifty-two adult patients were randomized to receive either 5 mL of 0.25% bupivacaine HCl immediately followed by 10 mL of liposome bupivacaine 133 mg (n = 26) or 15 mL of 0.25% standard bupivacaine alone (n = 26) in interscalene brachial plexus block. The primary outcome (worst pain in the first postoperative week) was assessed by the Modified Brief Pain Inventory short form. Secondary outcomes were overall satisfaction with analgesia (OBAS), functionality of the surgical arm, sleep duration, time to first opioid (tramadol) request and opioid consumption (mEq), sensory-motor block characteristics, and the occurrence of adverse effects. RESULTS: Worst pain was lower in patients given liposome bupivacaine added to standard bupivacaine than in patients given standard bupivacaine alone (generalized estimating equation [GEE] estimated marginal mean values, 3.6 +/- 0.3 vs 5.3 +/- 0.4 points on the Numeric Rating Scale, respectively, although the effect was modest, 1.6 +/- 0.5; 95% confidence interval, 0.8-2.5). Total OBAS scores indicated greater satisfaction (GEE estimated marginal mean values, 1.8 +/- 0.3 vs 3.3 +/- 0.4 on total OBAS, respectively, with modest effect, difference, 1.4 +/- 0.5; 95% confidence interval, 0.5-2.4). There were no differences in any of the other secondary outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Liposome bupivacaine added to standard bupivacaine may lower pain and enhance patient's satisfaction in the first postoperative week even in the setting of multimodal analgesia for major shoulder surgery.This study was registered with clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02554357) on July 11, 2015, by Principal Investigator Catherine Vandepitte, MD.
In a randomized, double-blind study of 39 mothers in labour, we have compared a loading dose of 0.5% bupivacaine 6.0 ml and fentanyl 100 micrograms given extradurally, followed by an infusion of 0.08% bupivacaine 15 ml h-1 plus fentanyl 37.5 micrograms h-1, with a loading dose of 0.5% bupivacaine 6.0 ml and saline 2.0 ml, followed by an extradural infusion of 0.08% bupivacaine alone, per hour. Analgesic levels were more consistent and sustained in mothers who received fentanyl in addition to bupivacaine, and the duration from the time of the loading dose to the first top-up was extended considerably in this group. The only significant side effect was a high incidence of mild pruritus in the fentanyl group. The addition of fentanyl to the extradural loading dose and subsequent infusion of local anaesthetic is a satisfactory alternative to giving higher doses of local anaesthetic alone.
