Arterial hypertension is a highly manageable disorder due to a variety of drugs available for its treatment. Since the late 1990s, angiotensin II receptor blockers have been widely prescribed, achieving appropriate control in patients' blood pressure. Few cases of serious adverse effects have been reported to date. Here, we present a case of acute hepatocellular injury secondary to candesartan administration. Further studies should be performed in patients who present with this adverse effect, in order to prevent more serious outcomes.
There is a wide array of options for migraine prophylaxis; many of the available drugs are clearly proven to be effective and yet are underused in Australia. "New" drugs which are gaining favour for migraine prophylaxis include topiramate, candesartan, gabapentin and botulinum toxin. The evidence for efficacy is excellent for topiramate and reasonably good but limited for candesartan and gabapentin. The use of botulinum toxin is controversial and has gained substantial popularity through anecdotal experience rather than convincing published evidence. Transformed or chronic migraine with medication overuse is a particularly difficult problem. New strategies to aid in medication withdrawal are reviewed. The approach to menstrual migraine and migraine with prominent aura may differ from that for typical migraine. Novel approaches are being explored for these problems.
Candesartan cilexetil is the prodrug of candesartan, an angiotensin II receptor antagonist. Candesartan binds selectively and non-competitively to the angiotensin II receptor type 1, thus preventing the actions of angiotensin II. Clinical trials have demonstrated its efficacy at a dose range of 2 to 32 mg once daily in hypertension of all grades, heart failure, in reducing urinary albumin excretion in diabetes mellitus and in coexisting hypertension and renal failure. Pharmacokinetic properties of candesartan cilexetil in elderly patients are not significantly different from those in younger individuals. Hepatic impairment does not change pharmacokinetics of candesartan cilexetil at doses up to 12 mg/day. No dose adjustment is necessary in patients with mild or moderate renal impairment. Tolerability of candesartan cilexetil is not much different from that of placebo. All adverse events are usually of mild to moderate severity and not dose-related. The most common adverse events were headache, upper respiratory tract infection, back pain, and dizziness. The incidence of these adverse effects, as well as of cough, was similar in patients treated with candesartan cilexetil or placebo. The incidence of adverse events in long-term trials was not different from that in short-term trials. Tolerability of candesartan cilexetil does not differ with either age or gender.
BACKGROUND: Angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors improve outcome of patients with chronic heart failure (CHF). A substantial proportion of patients, however, experience no benefit from ACE inhibitors because of previous intolerance. We aimed to find out whether candesartan, an angiotensin-receptor blocker, could improve outcome in such patients not taking an ACE inhibitor. METHODS: Between March, 1999, and March, 2001, we enrolled 2028 patients with symptomatic heart failure and left-ventricular ejection fraction 40% or less who were not receiving ACE inhibitors because of previous intolerance. Patients were randomly assigned candesartan (target dose 32 mg once daily) or matching placebo. The primary outcome of the study was the composite of cardiovascular death or hospital admission for CHF. Analysis was by intention to treat. FINDINGS: The most common manifestation of ACE-inhibitor intolerance was cough (72%), followed by symptomatic hypotension (13%) and renal dysfunction (12%). During a median follow-up of 33.7 months, 334 (33%) of 1013 patients in the candesartan group and 406 (40%) of 1015 in the placebo group had cardiovascular death or hospital admission for CHF (unadjusted hazard ratio 0.77 [95% CI 0.67-0.89], p=0.0004; covariate adjusted 0.70 [0.60-0.81], p<0.0001). Each component of the primary outcome was reduced, as was the total number of hospital admissions for CHF. Study-drug discontinuation rates were similar in the candesartan (30%) and placebo (29%) groups. INTERPRETATION: Candesartan was generally well tolerated and reduced cardiovascular mortality and morbidity in patients with symptomatic chronic heart failure and intolerance to ACE inhibitors.
Chen et al. show that candesartan (Cand) displays an antioxidant action independent of angiotensin type 1 receptor (AT1R) blockade that translates into a superior renoprotection of chronic renal inflammation. The peculiarity of Cand in combining AT1R-blocking activity and an antioxidant action could have important theoretical implications for therapy.
