PURPOSE: Patients with advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) have few treatment options that yield objective responses. Retrospective and small prospective studies suggest that capecitabine and temozolomide are associated with high response rates (RRs) and long progression-free survival (PFS). PATIENTS AND METHODS: E2211 was a multicenter, randomized, phase II trial comparing temozolomide versus capecitabine/temozolomide in patients with advanced low-grade or intermediate-grade pancreatic NETs. Key eligibility criteria included progression within the preceding 12 months and no prior temozolomide, dimethyl-triazeno-imidazole-carboxamide or dacarbazine, capecitabine or fluorouracil. The primary end point was PFS; secondary endpoints were overall survival, RR, safety, and methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) by immunohistochemistry and promoter methylation. RESULTS: A total of 144 patients were enrolled between April 2013 and March 2016 to temozolomide (n = 72) or capecitabine and temozolomide (n = 72); the primary analysis population included 133 eligible patients. At the scheduled interim analysis in January 2018, the median PFS was 14.4 months for temozolomide versus 22.7 months for capecitabine/temozolomide (hazard ratio = 0.58), which was sufficient to reject the null hypothesis for the primary end point (stratified log-rank P = .022). In the final analysis (May 2021), the median overall survival was 53.8 months for temozolomide and 58.7 months for capecitabine/temozolomide (hazard ratio = 0.82, P = .42). MGMT deficiency was associated with response. CONCLUSION: The combination of capecitabine/temozolomide was associated with a significant improvement in PFS compared with temozolomide alone in patients with advanced pancreatic NETs. The median PFS and RR observed with capecitabine/temozolomide are the highest reported in a randomized study for pancreatic NETs. MGMT deficiency was associated with response, and although routine MGMT testing is not recommended, it can be considered for select patients in need of objective response (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01824875).
BACKGROUND: Patients who have residual invasive carcinoma after the receipt of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast cancer have poor prognoses. The benefit of adjuvant chemotherapy in these patients remains unclear. METHODS: We randomly assigned 910 patients with HER2-negative residual invasive breast cancer after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (containing anthracycline, taxane, or both) to receive standard postsurgical treatment either with capecitabine or without (control). The primary end point was disease-free survival. Secondary end points included overall survival. RESULTS: The result of the prespecified interim analysis met the primary end point, so this trial was terminated early. The final analysis showed that disease-free survival was longer in the capecitabine group than in the control group (74.1% vs. 67.6% of the patients were alive and free from recurrence or second cancer at 5 years; hazard ratio for recurrence, second cancer, or death, 0.70; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.53 to 0.92; P=0.01). Overall survival was longer in the capecitabine group than in the control group (89.2% vs. 83.6% of the patients were alive at 5 years; hazard ratio for death, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.39 to 0.90; P=0.01). Among patients with triple-negative disease, the rate of disease-free survival was 69.8% in the capecitabine group versus 56.1% in the control group (hazard ratio for recurrence, second cancer, or death, 0.58; 95% CI, 0.39 to 0.87), and the overall survival rate was 78.8% versus 70.3% (hazard ratio for death, 0.52; 95% CI, 0.30 to 0.90). The hand-foot syndrome, the most common adverse reaction to capecitabine, occurred in 73.4% of the patients in the capecitabine group. CONCLUSIONS: After standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy containing anthracycline, taxane, or both, the addition of adjuvant capecitabine therapy was safe and effective in prolonging disease-free survival and overall survival among patients with HER2-negative breast cancer who had residual invasive disease on pathological testing. (Funded by the Advanced Clinical Research Organization and the Japan Breast Cancer Research Group; CREATE-X UMIN Clinical Trials Registry number, UMIN000000843 .).
PURPOSE: Hand-foot syndrome (HFS) is a dose-limiting side effect of capecitabine. Celecoxib prevents HFS by inhibiting cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) that is upregulated because of the underlying associated inflammation. However, systemic side effects of celecoxib have limited routine prescription. Topical diclofenac inhibits COX-2 locally with minimal risk of systemic adverse events. Therefore, we conducted this study to assess the efficacy of topical diclofenac in the prevention of capecitabine-induced HFS. METHODS: In this single-site phase III randomized double-blind trial, we enrolled patients with breast or GI cancer who were planned to receive capecitabine-based treatment. Participants were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive topical diclofenac or placebo gel for 12 weeks or until the development of HFS, whichever occurred earlier. The primary end point was the incidence of grade 2 or 3 HFS (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5), which was compared between the two groups using simple logistic regression. RESULTS: In total, 264 patients were randomly assigned to receive topical diclofenac gel (n = 131) or placebo (n = 133). Grade 2 or 3 HFS was observed in 3.8% of participants in the diclofenac group compared with 15.0% in the placebo group (absolute difference, 11.2%; 95% CI, 4.3 to 18.1; P = .003). Grade 1-3 HFS was lower in the diclofenac group than in the placebo group (6.1% v 18.1%; absolute risk difference, 11.9%; 95% CI, 4.1 to 19.6). Capecitabine dose reductions because of HFS were less frequent in the diclofenac group (3.8%) than in the placebo group (13.5%; absolute risk difference, 9.7%; 95% CI, 3.0 to 16.4). CONCLUSION: Topical diclofenac prevented HFS in patients receiving capecitabine. This trial supports the use of topical diclofenac to prevent capecitabine-associated HFS.
BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in multidisciplinary management, patients with biliary tract cancer have a poor outcome. Only 20% of patients are eligible for surgical resection with curative intent, with 5-year overall survival of less than 10% for all patients. To our knowledge, no studies have described a benefit of adjuvant therapy. We aimed to determine whether adjuvant capecitabine improved overall survival compared with observation following surgery for biliary tract cancer. METHODS: This randomised, controlled, multicentre, phase 3 study was done across 44 specialist hepatopancreatobiliary centres in the UK. Eligible patients were aged 18 years or older and had histologically confirmed cholangiocarcinoma or muscle-invasive gallbladder cancer who had undergone a macroscopically complete resection (which includes liver resection, pancreatic resection, or, less commonly, both) with curative intent, and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of less than 2. Patients who had not completely recovered from previous surgery or who had previous chemotherapy or radiotherapy for biliary tract cancer were also excluded. Patients were randomly assigned 1:1 to receive oral capecitabine (1250 mg/m(2) twice daily on days 1-14 of a 21-day cycle, for eight cycles) or observation commencing within 16 weeks of surgery. Treatment was not masked, and allocation concealment was achieved with a computerised minimisation algorithm that stratified patients by surgical centre, site of disease, resection status, and performance status. The primary outcome was overall survival. As prespecified, analyses were done by intention to treat and per protocol. This study is registered with EudraCT, number 2005-003318-13. FINDINGS: Between March 15, 2006, and Dec 4, 2014, 447 patients were enrolled; 223 patients with biliary tract cancer resected with curative intent were randomly assigned to the capecitabine group and 224 to the observation group. The data cutoff for this analysis was March 6, 2017. The median follow-up for all patients was 60 months (IQR 37-60). In the intention-to-treat analysis, median overall survival was 51.1 months (95% CI 34.6-59.1) in the capecitabine group compared with 36.4 months (29.7-44.5) in the observation group (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] 0.81, 95% CI 0.63-1.04; p=0.097). In a protocol-specified sensitivity analysis, adjusting for minimisation factors and nodal status, grade, and gender, the overall survival HR was 0.71 (95% CI 0.55-0.92; p=0.010). In the prespecified per-protocol analysis (210 patients in the capecitabine group and 220 in the observation group), median overall survival was 53 months (95% CI 40 to not reached) in the capecitabine group and 36 months (30-44) in the observation group (adjusted HR 0.75, 95% CI 0.58-0.97; p=0.028). In the intention-to-treat analysis, median recurrence-free survival was 24.4 months (95% CI 18.6-35.9) in the capecitabine group and 17.5 months (12.0-23.8) in the observation group. In the per-protocol analysis, median recurrence-free survival was 25.9 months (95% CI 19.8-46.3) in the capecitabine group and 17.4 months (12.0-23.7) in the observation group. Adverse events were measured in the capecitabine group only, and of the 213 patients who received at least one cycle, 94 (44%) had at least one grade 3 toxicity, the most frequent of which were hand-foot syndrome in 43 (20%) patients, diarrhoea in 16 (8%) patients, and fatigue in 16 (8%) patients. One (<1%) patient had grade 4 cardiac ischaemia or infarction. Serious adverse events were observed in 47 (21%) of 223 patients in the capecitabine group and 22 (10%) of 224 patients in the observation group. No deaths were deemed to be treatment related. INTERPRETATION: Although this study did not meet its primary endpoint of improving overall survival in the intention-to-treat population, the prespecified sensitivity and per-protocol analyses suggest that capecitabine can improve overall survival in patients with resected biliary tract cancer when used as adjuvant chemotherapy following surgery and could be considered as standard of care. Furthermore, the safety profile is manageable, supporting the use of capecitabine in this setting. FUNDING: Cancer Research UK and Roche.
PURPOSE: This phase 3 trial aimed to compare the efficacy and safety of capecitabine or capecitabine plus oxaliplatin (XELOX) with those of fluorouracil plus cisplatin (PF) in definitive concurrent chemoradiotherapy (DCRT) for inoperable locally advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). METHODS: Patients were randomly assigned to receive two cycles of capecitabine, XELOX, or PF along with concurrent intensity-modulated radiation therapy. Patients in each arm were again randomly assigned to receive two cycles of consolidation chemotherapy or not. The primary end points were 2-year overall survival (OS) rate and incidence of grade >/=3 adverse events (AEs). RESULTS: A total of 246 patients were randomly assigned into the capecitabine (n = 80), XELOX (n = 85), and PF (n = 81) arms. In capecitabine, XELOX, and PF arms, the 2-year OS rate was 75%, 66.7%, and 70.9% (capecitabine v PF: hazard ratio [HR], 0.91 [95% CI, 0.61 to 1.35]; nominal P = .637; XELOX v PF: 0.86 [95% CI, 0.58 to 1.27]; P = .444); the median OS was 40.9 (95% CI, 34.4 to 49.9), 41.9 (95% CI, 28.6 to 52.1), and 35.4 (95% CI, 30.4 to 45.4) months. The incidence of grade >/=3 AEs during the entire treatment was 28.8%, 36.5%, and 45.7%, respectively. Comparing the consolidation chemotherapy with the nonconsolidation chemotherapy groups, the median OS was 41.9 (95% CI, 34.6 to 52.8) versus 36.9 (95% CI, 28.5 to 44) months (HR, 0.71 [95% CI, 0.52 to 0.99]; nominal P = .0403). CONCLUSION: Capecitabine or XELOX did not significantly improve the 2-year OS rate over PF in DCRT for inoperable locally advanced ESCC. Capecitabine showed a lower incidence of grade >/=3 AEs than PF did.
This study evaluated the efficacy and tolerability of topical timolol, 0.5%, gel as a treatment of paronychia and pseudopyogenic granuloma induced by antineoplastic agents.
IMPORTANCE: Among all subtypes of breast cancer, triple-negative breast cancer has a relatively high relapse rate and poor outcome after standard treatment. Effective strategies to reduce the risk of relapse and death are needed. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and adverse effects of low-dose capecitabine maintenance after standard adjuvant chemotherapy in early-stage triple-negative breast cancer. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Randomized clinical trial conducted at 13 academic centers and clinical sites in China from April 2010 to December 2016 and final date of follow-up was April 30, 2020. Patients (n = 443) had early-stage triple-negative breast cancer and had completed standard adjuvant chemotherapy. INTERVENTIONS: Eligible patients were randomized 1:1 to receive capecitabine (n = 222) at a dose of 650 mg/m2 twice a day by mouth for 1 year without interruption or to observation (n = 221) after completion of standard adjuvant chemotherapy. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was disease-free survival. Secondary end points included distant disease-free survival, overall survival, locoregional recurrence-free survival, and adverse events. RESULTS: Among 443 women who were randomized, 434 were included in the full analysis set (mean [SD] age, 46 [9.9] years; T1/T2 stage, 93.1%; node-negative, 61.8%) (98.0% completed the trial). After a median follow-up of 61 months (interquartile range, 44-82), 94 events were observed, including 38 events (37 recurrences and 32 deaths) in the capecitabine group and 56 events (56 recurrences and 40 deaths) in the observation group. The estimated 5-year disease-free survival was 82.8% in the capecitabine group and 73.0% in the observation group (hazard ratio [HR] for risk of recurrence or death, 0.64 [95% CI, 0.42-0.95]; P = .03). In the capecitabine group vs the observation group, the estimated 5-year distant disease-free survival was 85.8% vs 75.8% (HR for risk of distant metastasis or death, 0.60 [95% CI, 0.38-0.92]; P = .02), the estimated 5-year overall survival was 85.5% vs 81.3% (HR for risk of death, 0.75 [95% CI, 0.47-1.19]; P = .22), and the estimated 5-year locoregional recurrence-free survival was 85.0% vs 80.8% (HR for risk of locoregional recurrence or death, 0.72 [95% CI, 0.46-1.13]; P = .15). The most common capecitabine-related adverse event was hand-foot syndrome (45.2%), with 7.7% of patients experiencing a grade 3 event. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among women with early-stage triple-negative breast cancer who received standard adjuvant treatment, low-dose capecitabine maintenance therapy for 1 year, compared with observation, resulted in significantly improved 5-year disease-free survival. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01112826.
Although 5‑fluorouracil (5‑FU)‑based chemotherapy is the major treatment for colorectal cancer, it has disadvantages such as systemic toxicity, lack of effectiveness and selectivity, and development of resistance. Capecitabine, a prodrug form of 5‑FU, was designed to overcome these drawbacks, to fulfill the need for more convenient therapy, and to improve safety, tolerability and intratumor drug concentration levels through a tumor‑specific conversion to the active 5‑FU drug. The purpose of the present review is to provide a comprehensive comparison between 5‑FU therapy and capecitabine. In the current review, anticancer drug classification was discussed and the development of capecitabine from the original fluorinated analogue (5‑FU) to overcome its drawbacks was explained. Specifically, 5‑FU is compared with capecitabine therapy regarding various properties, including drug metabolism, cellular mechanism, effect on the apoptosis pathway and cell cycle phases, safety and tolerability. Moreover, three metabolizing enzymes required for the activation of capecitabine to 5‑FU were discussed. Capecitabine, as monotherapy or in combination with other chemotherapies, exhibited improved drug efficacy and survival. However, the changes that mediate the chemoresistance of capecitabine treatment were classified as intracellular, extracellular or cell surface factors, or cell‑phenotype state. Future studies should examine the efficacy of capecitabine combined with novel and safe drugs other than chemotherapeutic agents that play a role in the inhibition of tumor initiation, progression and metastasis.
BACKGROUND: 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) and its oral prodrug capecitabine have been rarely but consistently associated with acute central nervous system toxicity, including transient leukoencephalopathies involving the splenium of the corpus callosum. METHODS: We performed a retrospective search in the French Pharmacovigilance database (FPDB) (January 1985-July 2020) for adult patients affected by solid cancers who developed acute toxic leukoencephalopathies with splenial lesions following treatment with 5-FU or capecitabine. A comprehensive review of the literature helped to circumstantiate our findings. RESULTS: Our research in the FPDB identified six patients who, within 3 days from their first cycle of 5-FU or capecitabine, developed acute neurological symptoms, including gait ataxia (n = 4), dysarthria (n = 3), dysmetria (n = 2), headache (n = 2), and confusion (n = 2). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed T2/FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery) hyperintensities in the corpus callosum, with diffusion restriction and no contrast enhancement, generally accompanied by additional alterations in the bilateral supratentorial white matter (n = 5). All patients discontinued the agent supposedly responsible for the toxicity and experienced full recovery after a median of 8.5 days from symptom onset. Control MRI showed a progressive normalization of acute MRI abnormalities. Literature review identified 26 cases with similar clinical and paraclinical characteristics. A single patient from the literature resumed 5-FU at a lower dose, with no recurrent toxicity. CONCLUSIONS: 5-FU and capecitabine might be responsible for acute leukoencephalopathies with transient splenial lesions that are generally reversible upon drug discontinuation. Resuming the agent responsible for toxicity might be feasible in selected cases, after having excluded dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency, if expected benefits outweigh the risks.
BACKGROUND: Uncommon early-onset severe toxicities from 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and capecitabine can be fatal if early warning signs are not recognized and treated promptly. OBJECTIVES: This article delineates the differences between expected side effects and uncommon early-onset severe toxicities from 5-FU and capecitabine. It also provides background for understanding the reasons patients may develop these toxicities and reviews the efficacy of standard supportive care against a novel therapy (uridine triacetate). METHODS: A panel of nurses convened to review the literature about toxicities associated with 5-FU and capecitabine administration and determined methods to educate nurses about toxicities and treatment. FINDINGS: Standard supportive care for 5-FU and capecitabine toxicities is associated with high fatality rates. Uridine triacetate treatment within 96 hours of administration is associated with survival.
Despite advances in targeted cancer therapy, the fluoropyrimidines 5-fluorouracil (5FU) and capecitabine continue to play an important role in oncology. Historically, dosing of these drugs has been based on body surface area. This approach has been demonstrated to be an imprecise way to determine the optimal dose for a patient. Evidence in the literature has demonstrated that precision dosing approaches, such as DPD enzyme activity testing and, in the case of intravenous 5FU, pharmacokinetic-guided dosing, can reduce toxicity and yield better patient outcomes. However, despite the evidence, there has not been uniform adoption of these approaches in the clinical setting. When a drug such as 5FU has been used clinically for many decades, it may be difficult to change clinical practice. With the aim of facilitating change of practice, issues and barriers to implementing precision dosing approaches for 5FU and capecitabine are identified and discussed with possible solutions proposed.
BACKGROUND: 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is a widely used chemotherapeutic agent that can cause cardiotoxicity manifesting, among others, as chest pain. Capecitabine is an oral prodrug of 5-FU, with reported preferential activation in malignant cells that may also cause cardiotoxic reactions. Standard treatment of 5-FU and capecitabine induced chest pain with vasodilators is mostly effective, but there are several cases of patients unresponsive to these agents. METHODS: We performed a PubMed search on 31st May 2020. We used a three keyword search strategy using Boolean search operators. More specifically, we included fluorouracil or 5-FU or capecitabine and chest pain or angina and mechanism or treatment or management. We included primary reports of clinical and non-clinical data, as well as systematic reviews. Narrative reviews, expert opinions, letters to the editor and other forms of non-primary literature were excluded. RESULTS: Our search yielded a total of 1595 reports. Of these, 1460 were narrative reviews or irrelevant to the topic and were excluded. A total of 135 reports were used for our review. We used 81 reports for data extraction, which included 13 clinical trials, 4 retrospective reports, 61 case reports, and 3 systematic reviews. CONCLUSION: We report the incidence and predisposing factors, the value of available diagnostic procedures, and standard medical and invasive treatments. We also speculate on the potential benefit of arginine as a promising option both in prevention as well as treatment of 5-FU-induced chest pain. Finally, gaps of evidence are identified and proposals are made in terms of future research.
INTRODUCTION: Capecitabine is an oral anticancer drug which can cause some adverse reactions and the great challenge for its use is to ensure the medication adherence. The aim of this study was to analyze adverse reactions and adherence to capecitabine in patients with gastrointestinal cancer. METHODS: A prospective study was performed in a tertiary teaching hospital in Brazil. Outpatients undergoing capecitabine treatment for colorectal or gastric cancer were followed for three cycles of treatment. Patient demographic and clinical characteristics data were collected. Adverse reactions were analyzed using Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v.4. Adherence to capecitabine were evaluated using Morisky-Green and MedTake tests. Statistical analysis was conducted using Chi-square, Fisher's exact and McNemer tests. RESULTS: One hundred and four patients were enrolled in this study, with a mean age was 58.5 +/- 10.9 years; 51.0% were men and 51.0% Caucasian. Nausea and diarrhea were the most frequently reported adverse reactions (82.7% and 62.5%, respectively), followed by vomiting (54.8%), fatigue (54.8%), and hand-foot syndrome (53.9%). Nausea and diarrhea were also the most severe adverse reactions. Most patients were adherent to capecitabine in all cycles of treatment using the Morisky-Green test. Adherence increased significantly between cycle 1 and cycle 2 by MedTake test (p < 0.001). Some demographic and clinical characteristics were associated with adverse reactions (e.g., age and nausea, gender and nausea and vomiting) and capecitabine adherence (e.g., marital status and educational level) as well as some adverse reactions were associated with capecitabine adherence (hand-foot syndrome and nausea). CONCLUSIONS: Clinical oncology pharmacists must provide patient information on the correct use of capecitabine, manage adverse reactions, and monitor adherence to treatment. Strategies to prevent non-adherence to capecitabine must be adopted to ensure the success of pharmacotherapy.
Retrospective studies have suggested that capecitabine combined with temozolomide (CAPTEM) is effective for treating patients with advanced neuroendocrine neoplasms (NENs); however, the efficacy and safety of this regimen needs to be verified by high-quality evidence or results of randomized controlled trials.We carried out a meta-analysis to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of a CAPTEM protocol for patients with advanced NENs. Systematic electronic literature searches were conducted using PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library, and among meeting abstracts of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, European Society for Medical Oncology, European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society, and North American Neuroendocrine Tumor Society, up to June 30, 2017. We selected studies describing CAPTEM regimens for treating advanced NENs and reported on tumor response and/or toxicities according to clear World Health Organization (WHO) grading of patients. Three reviewers independently and repeatedly identified studies, extracted data, and assessed the quality of the literature. A single-proportion meta-analysis was applied to included articles.Fifteen studies with a total of 384 individuals were included. Medium overall survival in most studies was more than 12 months, whereas medium progression-free survival was similar or slightly higher than that in studies using other treatment regimes. Disease control rate of CAPTEM administration for patients with NENs was 72.89% (95% confidence interval, 64.04-81.73%; I = 82.4%; P < .01). WHO grade 3 to 4 toxicities, such as thrombocytopenia (3.36%), neutropenia (0.69%), lymphopenia (0.65%), anemia (0.59%), mucositis (0.57%), fatigue (0.54%), diarrhea (0.49%), nausea (0.39%), and transaminase elevation (0.13%) were reported in the trials included.CAPTEM is effective and relatively safe for treating patients with advanced NENs.
PURPOSE: The present study was performed to examine relationships between systemic exposure of capecitabine metabolites (5-FU, 5'-DFCR and 5'-DFUR) and toxicity or clinical response in patients with metastatic breast cancer. METHODS: A population pharmacokinetic model for capecitabine and its three metabolites was built. Typical parameter values, characteristics of random distributions, associated with parameters, and covariates impact were estimated. Area under the curve (AUC) were computed for 5-FU and compared with grades of toxicity. Pharmacokinetic modeling was based on data collected on the first treatment cycle. Toxicity was assessed on the two first treatment cycles. RESULTS: The study was conducted in 43 patients. The population pharmacokinetic model (a one-compartment model per compound) was able to capture the very complex absorption process of capecitabine. Statistically significant covariates were cytidine deaminase, alkaline phosphatase and dihydrouracilemia (UH(2))/uracilemia (U) ratio. UH(2)/U ratio was the most significant covariate on 5-FU elimination and CDA on the transformation of 5'-DFCR in 5'-DFUR. A trend was observed between 5-FU AUC and thrombopenia toxicity grades, but not with other toxicities. Best clinical response was not linked to systemic exposure of capecitabine metabolites. CONCLUSION: In our study, we propose a model able to describe, meanwhile, and its main metabolites, with a complex absorption process and inclusion of enzyme activity covariates such as CDA and UH(2)/U ratio. Trial registration Eudract 2008-004136-20, 2008/11/26.
BACKGROUND: Gut bacteria-derived short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) and branched-chain fatty acids (BCFA) are considered to have beneficial metabolic, anti-inflammatory as well as anti-carcinogenic effects. Previous preclinical studies indicated bidirectional interactions between gut bacteria and the chemotherapeutic capecitabine or its metabolite 5-FU. This study investigated the effect of three cycles of capecitabine on fecal SCFA and BCFA levels and their associations with tumor response, nutritional status, physical performance, chemotherapy-induced toxicity, systemic inflammation and bacterial abundances in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). METHODS: Forty-four patients with metastatic or unresectable CRC, scheduled for treatment with capecitabine (+/- bevacizumab), were prospectively enrolled. Patients collected a fecal sample and completed a questionnaire before (T1), during (T2) and after (T3) three cycles of capecitabine. Tumor response (CT/MRI scans), nutritional status (MUST score), physical performance (Karnofsky Performance Score) and chemotherapy-induced toxicity (CTCAE) were recorded. Additional data on clinical characteristics, treatment regimen, medical history and blood inflammatory parameters were collected. Fecal SCFA and BCFA concentrations were determined by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). Gut microbiota composition was assessed using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. RESULTS: Fecal levels of the SCFA valerate and caproate decreased significantly during three cycles of capecitabine. Furthermore, baseline levels of the BCFA iso-butyrate were associated with tumor response. Nutritional status, physical performance and chemotherapy-induced toxicity were not significantly associated with SCFA or BCFA. Baseline SCFA correlated positively with blood neutrophil counts. At all time points, we identified associations between SCFA and BCFA and the relative abundance of bacterial taxa on family level. CONCLUSIONS: The present study provided first indications for a potential role of SCFA and BCFA during capecitabine treatment as well as implications for further research. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The current study was registered in the Dutch Trial Register (NTR6957) on 17/01/2018 and can be consulted via the International Clinical Trial Registry Platform (ICTRP).
Introduction: Advanced, persistent or recurrent cervical cancer in patients not amenable to curative surgery or radiotherapy predicts a dismal prognosis. Systemic chemotherapy based on paclitaxel/cisplatin +/- bevacizumab is the current standard of care. However, once progression occurs, the possibility of alternative treatment options is very limited.Areas covered: The usefulness of capecitabine has been well-established against several cancer types, including head and neck, breast, and colorectal cancer. This review covers current literature evidence on the clinical efficacy and safety of capecitabine in cervical cancer treatment, either as monotherapy or combined with other agents or chemo-radiotherapy.Expert opinion: Recent clinical data, albeit scant, suggested a promising role for capecitabine both as monotherapy in patients with platinum-resistant cervical cancer and in combination with cisplatin in chemotherapy-naive patients with metastatic or recurrent cervical cancer. In our opinion, capecitabine, especially in combination regimens, could represent a valid treatment option and further research is warranted to better understand its effectiveness in these challenging patients.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Metronomic capecitabine has been found to be useful in several types of cancers such as pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, gastrointestinal cancers, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, and metastatic colorectal cancer. This unique systematic literature review and meta-analysis was undertaken to assess the effectiveness and safety of metronomic capecitabine as a treatment regimen for hepatocellular carcinoma. METHOD: A systematic search of major databases was performed. Eight studies that dealt with the use of metronomic capecitabine for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) were selected, seven were non-randomized control trials (n-RCTs), and one was a randomized control trial (RCT). Meta-analysis of these studies was performed using Review Manager v5.3 and STATA 15.1 software. The pooled prevalence of overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), overall response rate (ORR), grade 1-2 adverse events (grade 1-2 AEs), grade 3-4 adverse events (grade 3-4 AEs) was determined, including publication bias and sensitivity analysis. RESULT: Eight studies met the inclusion criteria, combining the pooled data of 476 patients from safety and efficacy studies. The pooled prevalence of disease control rate (DCR) and overall response rate (ORR) achieved with metronomic capecitabine was 36% (95% CI 32-41) and 7% (95% CI 5-9) respectively. The median progression-free survival (PFS) and median overall survival (OS) were 3.57 months (95% CI 3.29-3.85) and 11.75 months (95% CI 10.56-12.95) respectively. The incidence of grade 3-4 adverse events (grade 3-4 AEs) and grade 1-2 adverse events (grade 1-2 AEs) was 38% (95% CI 32-44) and 73% (95% CI 67-79) respectively. CONCLUSION: This meta-analysis highlights metronomic capecitabine as a potential treatment for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the advanced stage. However, effective management of capecitabine's side effects is essential.
