The present investigation was undertaken to delineate the in vitro responsiveness of cholelithiatic gallbladders to cholecystokinin (CCK) and compared with those evoked by carbachol, histamine, or electrical stimulation. Gallbladder muscular strips (2-3 mm wide and 15-20 mm long) from patients undergoing cholecystectomy were used for recording the in vitro contractions evoked by electrical and chemical (carbachol, histamine, or cholecystokinin) stimulation. Stimulation of strips with trains of pulses (5-msec duration, 70 V at 100 Hz) of varying train durations (0.01 to 9 sec) elicited duration-dependent increase in the amplitude of contractions and the maximal contractions were seen with 5 sec. Atropine (0.4 microM) significantly attenuated these contractions, leaving about 34% of contractions, which in turn was abolished by xylocaine. Carbachol produced a concentration-dependent (0.004-0.4 microM) increase in force of contraction and the maximal response was seen at 0.4 microM and abolished by atropine (0.4 microM). Histamine also produced contractions and the maximal contractions were about 35% of the maximal carbachol response. Histamine-induced contractions were not abolished by atropine but were abolished by xylocaine. CCK up to 10 microM failed to evoke any contraction, even though the strips were responsive to carbachol. The results indicate that cholelithiatic gallbladders exhibited responses to electrical stimulation through cholinergic and histaminergic plexuses and they were insensitive to CCK.
By constructing cumulative dose-response curves to inhaled carbachol in 12 normal and 17 asthmatic subjects with comparable baseline specific airway conductance, we have shown that there were wide variations among subjects in the dose of carbachol needed to cause a 25 per cent decrease in specific airway conductance (bronchial sensitivity) and in the slopes of the curves (bronchial reactivity). Furthermore, there was no significant correlation between these 2 characteristics of the bronchial response to carbachol. The mean dose-response curves of the asthmatic and the normal subjects were widely divergent, indicating that the asthmatic subjects differed from normal subjects more in terms of bronchial reactivity than in bronchial sensitivity. This suggests that different mechanisms determine the sensitivity and reactivity of the bronchial tree, and that hyper-reactivity is the main feature of the asthmatic response. Both should be assessed when the bronchial response to bronchoconstrictor agents is measured.
Dose-response curves were established in asthmatics by using graded doses of aerosolized carbachol and specific airway conductance (SGaw) measurements. After carbachol inhalation, we evaluated the influence on SGaw of a deep inspiration to total lung capacity followed by a passive expiration to functional residual capacity. When SGaw had returned to its pre-deep-inspiration value, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was obtained. Two groups of patients were selected according to the effect of deep inspiration on SGaw: group A (22 patients) with a less than 25% SGaw increase after deep inspiration, and group B (21 patients) with a more than 75% SGaw increase. Both groups were comparable in age and initial SGaw and FEV1 values. Carbachol inhalation induced a similar SGaw decrease in both groups, whereas FEV1 decreased more (p less than 0.05) in group A than in group B. The two groups did not differ significantly regarding the dose of carbachol causing a 25% SGaw decrease and in the slope of the dose-response curve. We conclude that, in asthmatic patients, airway response to an inhaled broncho-constrictor agent is not related to the airway response to deep inspiration. This suggests that previous studies of airway response to bronchoconstrictor agents which have been performed by using only FEV1 measurements, may need to be reassessed.
