Portal hypertension (PH) is the most common complication ofcirrhosis and represents the main driver of hepatic decompensation. The overarching goal of PH treatments in patients with compensated cirrhosis is to reduce the risk of hepatic decompensation (i.e development of ascites, variceal bleeding and/or hepatic encephalopathy). In decompensated patients, PH-directed therapies aim at avoiding further decompensation (i.e. recurrent/refractory ascites, variceal rebleeding, recurrent encephalopathy, spontaneous bacterial peritonitis or hepatorenal syndrome) and at improving survival. Carvedilol is a non-selective beta-blocker (NSBB) acting on hyperdynamic circulation/splanchnic vasodilation and on intrahepatic resistance. It has shown superior efficacy than traditional NSBBs in lowering PH in patients with cirrhosis and may be, therefore, the NSBB of choice for the treatment of clinically significant portal hypertension. In primary prophylaxis of variceal bleeding, carvedilol has been demonstrated to be more effective than endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL). In patients with compensated cirrhosis carvedilol achieves higher rate of hemodynamic response than propranolol, resulting in a decreased risk of hepatic decompensation. In secondary prophylaxis, the combination of EVL with carvedilol may prevent rebleeding and non-bleeding further decompensation better than that with propranolol. In patients with ascites and gastroesophageal varices, carvedilol is safe and may improve survival, as long as no impairment of the systemic hemodynamic or renal dysfunction occurs, with maintained arterial blood pressure as suitable safety surrogate. The target dose of carvedilol to treat PH should be 12.5 mg/day. This review summarizes the evidence behind Baveno-VII recommendations on the use of carvedilol in patients with cirrhosis.
Carvedilol, a highly protein-bound beta-blocker, is used in therapy as a racemic mixture of its two enantiomers that exhibit different pharmacological activity. The aim of this study was to evaluate the stereoselective nature of its binding to the two major plasma proteins: albumin and alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. The determination of the plasma protein-binding degree for carvedilol and its enantiomers was achieved using ultrafiltration for the separation of the free fraction, followed by LC-MS/MS quantification, using two different developed and validated methods in terms of stationary phase: achiral C18 type and chiral ovomucoid type. Furthermore, molecular docking methods were applied in order to investigate and to better understand the mechanism of protein-binding for S-(-)- and R-(+)-carvedilol. A difference in the binding behavior of the two enantiomers to the plasma proteins was observed when taken individually, with R-(+)-carvedilol having a higher affinity for albumin and S-(-)-carvedilol for alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. However, in the case of the racemic mixture, the binding of the S enantiomer to alpha-1-acid glycoprotein seemed to be influenced by the presence of its antipode, although no such influence was observed in the case of albumin. The results raise the question of a binding competition between the two enantiomers for alpha-1-acid glycoprotein.
Carvedilol is a poorly water-soluble drug employed to treat chronic heart failure. In this study, we synthesize new carvedilol-etched halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) composites to enhance solubility and dissolution rate. The simple and feasible impregnation method is used for carvedilol loading (30-37% weight). Both the etched HNTs (acidic HCl and H(2)SO(4) and alkaline NaOH treatments) and the carvedilol-loaded samples are characterized by various techniques (XRPD, FT-IR, solid-state NMR, SEM, TEM, DSC, and specific surface area). The etching and loading processes do not induce structural changes. The drug and carrier particles are in intimate contact and their morphology is preserved, as demonstrated by TEM images. The (27)Al and (13)C solid-state NMR and FT-IR findings show that carvedilol interactions involve the external siloxane surface, especially the aliphatic carbons, the functional groups, and, by inductive effect, the adjacent aromatic carbons. All the carvedilol-halloysite composites display enhanced dissolution rate, wettability, and solubility, as compared to carvedilol. The best performances are obtained for the carvedilol-halloysite system based on HNTs etched with HCl 8M, which exhibits the highest value of specific surface area (91 m(2) g(-1)). The composites make the drug dissolution independent of the environmental conditions of the gastrointestinal tract and its absorption less variable, more predictable, and independent from the pH of the medium.
Pretreatment with antiarrhythmic agents could improve cardioversion and recurrence rates in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation. In a prospective controlled trial, 145 patients were randomly assigned to treatment with carvedilol, amiodarone, or placebo for 4 weeks before electrical cardioversion. Although the 2 drugs had similar effects on cardioversion rates, amiodarone was superior in terms of sinus rhythm maintenance after conversion.
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is one of the most common surgical treatments for obesity due to the effective long-term weight loss and remission of associated comorbidities. Carvedilol, a third-generation beta-blocker, is prescribed to treat cardiovascular diseases. This drug is a weak base with low and pH-dependent solubility and dissolution and high permeability. As the changes in the gastrointestinal tract anatomy and physiology after roux-en-Y gastric bypass can potentially affect drug pharmacokinetics, this study aimed to assess the effect of roux-en-Y gastric bypass on the pharmacokinetics of carvedilol enantiomers. Nonobese (n = 15, body mass index < 25 kg/m(2) ), obese (n = 19, body mass index >/= 30), and post-roux-en-Y gastric bypass subjects submitted to surgery for at least 6 months (n = 19) were investigated. All subjects were administered a single oral dose of 25-mg racemic carvedilol, and blood was sampled for up to 24 hours. Plasma concentrations of (R)- and (S)-carvedilol were determined by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The maximum plasma concentration (C(max) ) and the area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) of (R)-carvedilol were 2- to 3-fold higher than (S)-carvedilol in all groups. Obese subjects have shown reduced C(max) of (R)- and (S)-carvedilol without changing the AUC. Post-roux-en-Y gastric bypass subjects presented a 3.5-fold reduction in the C(max) of the active (S)-carvedilol and a 1.9 reduction in the AUC from time 0 to infinity compared to nonobese subjects. The time to reach C(max) of (S)-carvedilol increased 2.5-fold in post-roux-en-Y gastric bypass subjects compared to obese or nonobese. Although the beta-blockade response was not assessed, the reduced exposure to carvedilol in subjects post-roux-en-Y gastric bypass may be clinically relevant and require dose adjustment.
In this paper, a chemical coprecipitation method was used for the synthesis of Fe(3)O(4) magnetic nanoparticles. The Fe(3)O(4) magnetic nanoparticles were then modified by carbon via a simple hydrothermal method by using glucose. The synthesized Fe(3)O(4) and carbon-coated Fe(3)O(4) (C/Fe(3)O(4)) magnetic nanoparticles were characterized by diverse techniques such as XRD, FESEM, EDX, FTIR, and BET. The characterization results were confirmed the formation of the uniformly magnetic nanoparticles and a successful modification of them by carbon. The FTIR spectra confirmed the presence of functional groups on the C/Fe(3)O(4) magnetic nanoparticles surface. The magnetic nanoparticles were used for extraction of losartan, carvedilol, and amlodipine besylate from plasma samples based on magnetic solid phase extraction (MSPE) technique. The effective parameters on extraction efficiency were optimized by multivariate optimization. Under the optimized experimental conditions the MSPE method showed wide linear ranges (1-7500 ng mL(-1)), low detection limits (0.09-0.69 ng mL(-1)), good extraction recoveries (56.35-66.43%), and low RSD values (1.6-5.8%). Despite high protein binding of the drugs, the analyses of them were done without protein precipitation. The accuracy was studied by analyses of the spiked plasma samples at different concentrations.
Carvedilol, the third generation of vasodilators; serves as the blocker of non-selective beta-adrenergic receptor and alpha1 adrenergic receptor. It could protect the cardiovascular system of patients receiving dialysis treatment. However, current clinical trials discussing the therapeutic benefit of carvedilol on patients receiving dialysis treatment remain inconsistent. Consequently, we decided to perform a meta-analysis to evaluate the clinical efficacy of carvedilol on patients receiving dialysis treatment. A search was conducted using EMBASE, Pubmed, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Wanfang database, Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and VIP information database up to February 2020. We research publications (include English and Chinese language) that discuss the effects of carvedilol on cardiovascular events, all-cause mortality, hospitalizations or left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) in dialysis population. Our analysis included 4 randomized control trials and 2 observational studies. We discussed the therapeutical effects of carvedilol on all-cause mortality, cardiovascular events, hospitalizations, and LVEF of patients receiving dialysis treatment. Totally, this analysis reported 2998 hemodialysis (HD) patients. We found a significant association between carvedilol and reduced incidence of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular events and hospitalizations in HD patients. In addition, carvedilol significantly improves LVEF (n = 241; WMD = 6.95; 95% CI, 0.54 to 13.36; I2 = 90%) in HD population. Our systematic review and meta-analysis demonstrates that carvedilol is associated with a reduced incidence of cardiovascular events, all-cause mortality and hospitalizations in patients on HD. Besides; carvedilol significantly improves LVEF in HD population. Nevertheless, high-quality and well-powered evidence is still needed, so as to further confirm the impacts of carvedilol on HD patients.
Cardiac K(v)4.3 channels contribute to the transient outward K(+) current, I(to), during early repolarization of the cardiac action potential. Two different isoforms of K(v)4.3 are present in the human ventricle and exhibit differential remodeling in heart failure (HF). Cardioselective betablockers are a cornerstone of HF with reduced ejection fraction therapy as well as ventricular arrhythmia treatment. In this study we examined pharmacological effects of betablockers on both K(v)4.3 isoforms to explore their potential for isoform-specific therapy. K(v)4.3 isoforms were expressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes and incubated with the respective betablockers. Dose-dependency and biophysical characteristics were examined. HEK 293T-cells were transfected with the two K(v)4.3 isoforms and analyzed with Western blots. Carvedilol (100 microM) blocked K(v)4.3 L by 77 +/- 2% and K(v)4.3 S by 67 +/- 6%, respectively. Metoprolol (100 microM) was less effective with inhibition of 37 +/- 3% (K(v)4.3 L) and 35 +/- 4% (K(v)4.3 S). Bisoprolol showed no inhibitory effect. Current reduction was not caused by changes in K(v)4.3 protein expression. Carvedilol inhibited K(v)4.3 channels at physiologically relevant concentrations, affecting both isoforms. Metoprolol showed a weaker blocking effect and bisoprolol did not exert an effect on K(v)4.3. Blockade of repolarizing K(v)4.3 channels by carvedilol and metoprolol extend their pharmacological mechanism of action, potentially contributing beneficial antiarrhythmic effects in normal and failing hearts.
BACKGROUND: In recent years, concerns have been raised on the potential adverse effects of nonselective beta-blockers, and particularly carvedilol, on renal perfusion and survival in decompensated cirrhosis with ascites. We investigated the long-term impact of converting propranolol to carvedilol on systemic hemodynamics and renal function, and on the outcome of patients with stable cirrhosis and grade II/III nonrefractory ascites. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Ninety-six patients treated with propranolol for esophageal varices' bleeding prophylaxis were prospectively evaluated. These patients were randomized in a 2:1 ratio to switch to carvedilol at 12.5 mg/d (CARVE group; n=64) or continue propranolol (PROPRA group; n=32). Systemic vascular resistance, vasoactive factors, glomerular filtration rate, and renal blood flow were evaluated at baseline before switching to carvedilol and after 6 and 12 months. Further decompensation and survival were evaluated at 2 years. RESULTS: During a 12-month follow-up, carvedilol induced an ongoing improvement of systemic vascular resistance (1372+/-34 vs. 1254+/-33 dynes/c/cm5; P=0.02) along with significant decreases in plasma renin activity (4.05+/-0.66 vs. 6.57+/-0.98 ng/mL/h; P=0.01) and serum noradrenaline (76.7+/-8.2 vs. 101.9+/-10.5 pg/mL; P=0.03) and significant improvement of glomerular filtration rate (87.3+/-2.7 vs. 78.7+/-2.3 mL/min; P=0.03) and renal blood flow (703+/-17 vs. 631+/-12 mL/min; P=0.03); no significant effects were noted in the PROPRA group. The 2-year occurrence of further decompensation was significantly lower in the CARVE group than in the PROPRA group (10.5% vs. 35.9%; P=0.003); survival at 2 years was significantly higher in the CARVE group (86% vs. 64.1%; P=0.01, respectively). CONCLUSION: Carvedilol at the dose of 12.5 mg/d should be the nonselective beta-blocker treatment of choice in patients with cirrhosis and nonrefractory ascites, as it improves renal perfusion and outcome.
BACKGROUND & AIMS: Whether non-selective beta-blockers can prevent decompensation of cirrhosis warrants clarification. Carvedilol might be particularly effective since its intrinsic vasodilatory activity may ameliorate hepatic vascular resistance, a major mechanism of portal hypertension in early cirrhosis. We assessed whether carvedilol may prevent decompensation and improve survival in patients with compensated cirrhosis and clinically significant portal hypertension (CSPH). METHODS: By systematic review we identified randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) comparing carvedilol vs. control therapy (no-active treatment or endoscopic variceal ligation [EVL]) in patients with cirrhosis and CSPH without previous bleeding. We performed a competing-risk time-to-event meta-analysis using individual patient data (IPD) obtained from principal investigators of RCTs. Only compensated patients were included. Primary outcomes were prevention of decompensation (liver transplantation and death were competing events) and death (liver transplantation was a competing event). Models were adjusted using propensity scores for baseline covariates with the inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) approach. RESULTS: Among 125 full-text studies evaluated, 4 RCTs were eligible. The 4 provided IPD and were included, comprising 352 patients with compensated cirrhosis, 181 treated with carvedilol and 171 controls (79 received EVL and 92 placebo). Baseline characteristics were similar between groups. Standardized differences were <10% by IPTW. The risk of developing decompensation of cirrhosis was lower with carvedilol than in controls (subdistribution hazard ratio [SHR] 0.506; 95% CI 0.289-0.887; p = 0.017; I(2) = 0.0%, Q-statistic-p = 0.880), mainly due to a reduced risk of ascites (SHR 0.491; 95% CI 0.247-0.974; p = 0.042; I(2) = 0.0%, Q-statistic-p = 0.384). The risk of death was also lower with carvedilol (SHR 0.417; 95% CI 0.194-0.896; p = 0.025; I(2) = 0.0%, Q-statistic-p = 0.989). CONCLUSIONS: Long-term carvedilol therapy reduced decompensation of cirrhosis and significantly improved survival in compensated patients with CSPH. This suggests that screening patients with compensated cirrhosis for CSPH to enable the prompt initiation of carvedilol could improve outcomes. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42019144786. LAY SUMMARY: The transition from compensated cirrhosis to decompensated cirrhosis is associated with markedly reduced life expectancy. Therefore, preventing decompensation in patients with compensated cirrhosis would be associated with greatly improved patient outcomes. There has been controversy regarding the use of non-selective beta-blockers (portal pressure-lowering medications) in patients with cirrhosis and elevated portal blood pressure (portal hypertension). Herein, using a competing-risk meta-analysis to optimize sample size and properly investigate cirrhosis as a multistate disease and outcomes as time-dependent events, we show that carvedilol (a non-selective beta-blocker) is associated with a reduced risk of decompensating events and improved survival in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
BACKGROUND: Postoperative atrial fibrillation (POAF) is the most common arrhythmic complication following cardiac surgery. Current guidelines suggest beta-blockers for the prevention of POAF. In comparing metoprolol succinate with carvedilol, the later has sparked interest in its usage as an important medication for POAF prevention. METHODS: We considered randomized controlled studies (RCTs) and retrospective studies that evaluated the efficacy of carvedilol versus metoprolol for the prevention of POAF. After literature search, data extraction, and quality evaluation, pooled data were analyzed using either the fixed-effect or random-effect model using Review Manager 5.3. The Cochrane risk of bias tool was used to assess the bias of included studies. The incidence of POAF was the primary endpoint, while mortality rate and bradycardia were secondary outcomes. RESULTS: In meta-analysis 5 RCTs and 2 retrospective studies with a total of 1000 patients were included. The overall effect did not favor the carvedilol over metoprolol groups in terms of mortality rate [risk ratio 0.45, 95 % CI (0.1-1.97), P=0.29] or incidence of bradycardia [risk ratio 0.63, 95 % CI (0.32-1.23), P=0.17]. However, the incidence of POAF was lower in patients who received carvedilol compared to metoprolol [risk ratio 0.54, 95 % CI (0.42-0.71), P < 0.00001]. CONCLUSION: In patients undergoing cardiac surgery, carvedilol may minimize the occurrence of POAF more effectively than metoprolol. To definitively establish the efficacy of carvedilol compared to metoprolol and other beta-blockers in the prevention of POAF, a large-scale, well-designed randomized controlled trials are required.
The reactivity of citric acid towards drug substances in the solid state was examined using the beta-blocker carvedilol as a model compound. The reaction mixtures were analysed by LC-MS, the reaction products were isolated by preparative HPLC, and the structures were elucidated by microprobe NMR spectroscopy. Heating a mixture of solid carvedilol and solid citric acid monohydrate for 96 h at 50 degrees C resulted in the formation of about 3% of a symmetrical ester as well as of a number of other reaction products in smaller amounts. Formation of the symmetrical ester was also observed at room temperature. At 70 degrees C, the amounts of three isomeric esters formed reached 6-8%. The minor reaction products were citric acid amides, O-acetylcarvedilol, and esters of itaconic acid.
Two ethanol-solvated adipate and succinate salts of carvedilol (CVD), a Biopharmaceutics Classification System class 2 drug, were synthesized by crystallizing ethanol with adipic acid (ADP) and succinic acid (SUA). Proton transfer from ADP and SUA to CVD and the presence of ethanol in the two novel compounds were confirmed using powder X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry, thermogravimetric analysis, and single-crystal X-ray diffraction measurements. The two novel ethanol-solvated salts exhibited enhanced solubility and dissolution rates compared with pure carvedilol in phosphate buffer (pH 6.8). Additionally, the morphologies and attachment energies of the two novel compounds and pure CVD were calculated based on their single-crystal structures, revealing a correlation between attachment energy and dissolution rate.
A retrospective review of 115 patients who underwent cardiac surgery demonstrated a marked reduction in postoperative atrial fibrillation (8% vs 32%, p <0.05) in patients who received carvedilol versus metoprolol or atenolol immediately after surgery. A prospective study examining the possibility of carvedilol's greater efficacy in preventing postoperative atrial fibrillation appears warranted.
