BACKGROUND: Sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma (SNUC) is an exceedingly rare head and neck malignancy. No consensus exists on treatment for metastatic disease. CASE: A 56-year-old female was diagnosed with SNUC after endorsing sinus congestion, diplopia, and right orbital pain. Initially treated with surgery and radiation, she later developed significant metastatic disease. She demonstrated progression of her hepatic metastases under pembrolizumab therapy. However, the addition of ipilimumab and a COX-2 inhibitor resulted in significant improvement in her lesions as well as an ongoing durable response. Her regimen was complicated by immune-related adverse events successfully treated with steroids. CONCLUSION: Dual checkpoint inhibition deserves consideration when treating metastatic SNUC, especially after single agent therapy has failed. The positive effect of this treatment may be augmented by IDO1 inhibition.
Osteoarthritis constitutes one of the leading causes of pain and disability worldwide with a significant impact on health-care costs. Patients with osteoarthritis are often affected by a number of cardiovascular comorbidities, including hypertension, which is present in about 40% of cases. Just recently, a single tablet combination of amlodipine besylate, a calcium channel blocker, and celecoxib, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, indicated for patients for whom treatment with amlodipine for hypertension and celecoxib for osteoarthritis are appropriate, has been recently approved. Areas covered: We reviewed data from clinical studies that investigated safety and efficacy of the combination of amlodipine and celecoxib in hypertensive patients with osteoarthritis published before 31 August 2018. The literature search was conducted using research Methodology Filters. Expert commentary: The advantages of this single formulation over sequential administration include increased compliance, possibly reduced cost, and less likelihood of dosage-related issues. Moreover, this single tablet formulation combines the anti-inflammatory activity of the celecoxib with the systemic vasodilatation induced by the amlodipine. It is a promising treatment for patients with osteoarthritis and hypertension. Nevertheless, celecoxib may cause a variable degree of blood pressure increase and only a small clinical trial has been conducted before approval to assess interactions related to blood pressure effect between these two molecules.
BACKGROUND: The cardiovascular safety of celecoxib, as compared with nonselective nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), remains uncertain. METHODS: Patients who required NSAIDs for osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis and were at increased cardiovascular risk were randomly assigned to receive celecoxib, ibuprofen, or naproxen. The goal of the trial was to assess the noninferiority of celecoxib with regard to the primary composite outcome of cardiovascular death (including hemorrhagic death), nonfatal myocardial infarction, or nonfatal stroke. Noninferiority required a hazard ratio of 1.12 or lower, as well as an upper 97.5% confidence limit of 1.33 or lower in the intention-to-treat population and of 1.40 or lower in the on-treatment population. Gastrointestinal and renal outcomes were also adjudicated. RESULTS: A total of 24,081 patients were randomly assigned to the celecoxib group (mean [+/-SD] daily dose, 209+/-37 mg), the naproxen group (852+/-103 mg), or the ibuprofen group (2045+/-246 mg) for a mean treatment duration of 20.3+/-16.0 months and a mean follow-up period of 34.1+/-13.4 months. During the trial, 68.8% of the patients stopped taking the study drug, and 27.4% of the patients discontinued follow-up. In the intention-to-treat analyses, a primary outcome event occurred in 188 patients in the celecoxib group (2.3%), 201 patients in the naproxen group (2.5%), and 218 patients in the ibuprofen group (2.7%) (hazard ratio for celecoxib vs. naproxen, 0.93; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.76 to 1.13; hazard ratio for celecoxib vs. ibuprofen, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.70 to 1.04; P<0.001 for noninferiority in both comparisons). In the on-treatment analysis, a primary outcome event occurred in 134 patients in the celecoxib group (1.7%), 144 patients in the naproxen group (1.8%), and 155 patients in the ibuprofen group (1.9%) (hazard ratio for celecoxib vs. naproxen, 0.90; 95% CI, 0.71 to 1.15; hazard ratio for celecoxib vs. ibuprofen, 0.81; 95% CI, 0.65 to 1.02; P<0.001 for noninferiority in both comparisons). The risk of gastrointestinal events was significantly lower with celecoxib than with naproxen (P=0.01) or ibuprofen (P=0.002); the risk of renal events was significantly lower with celecoxib than with ibuprofen (P=0.004) but was not significantly lower with celecoxib than with naproxen (P=0.19). CONCLUSIONS: At moderate doses, celecoxib was found to be noninferior to ibuprofen or naproxen with regard to cardiovascular safety. (Funded by Pfizer; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00346216 .).
We have identified a new reactivity of copper/diamine catalysis for the reductive ring-cleavage of isoxazoles to yield fluoroalkylated enaminones. This protocol has the advantage of using commercially available reagents, ease of setting up, broad tolerance of functionality, and is regiospecific and free of defluorination and reduction of reducible functional groups. The utility was demonstrated by a one-step, regioselective synthesis of fluoroalkylated pyrazole-based drugs such as celecoxib, deracoxib, and mavacoxib.
The objective of the current study was to investigate the effects of resveratrol (RSV), a natural herbal remedy used as an adjacent anti-inflammatory supplement on, the pharmacokinetics of celecoxib in healthy male volunteers. Twelve healthy human participants were involved in two-period open-labeled trial. Celecoxib (200 mg) was given as a single oral dose under fasting conditions as a control phase. Afterward, RSV (500 mg) commenced as a single oral dose for ten days as a treatment phase. Blood samples were collected during the control and treatment phases and analyzed using the validated High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method. RSV pre-exposure significantly increased the area under the curve (AUC(0-24)), peak plasma concentration (C(max)), absorption rate constant (ka), and prolongated half-life (t(1/2)), along with a decrease in elimination rate constant (ke). Meanwhile, the volume of distribution (Vd/F) and apparent total body clearance (CL/F) were significantly decreased for celecoxib. There was no significant change in the time it takes for celecoxib to reach the maximum concentration (t(max)) was observed. The obtained results suggested the presence of a beneficial pharmacokinetic interaction between RSV and celecoxib. Consequently, combining resveratrol as an herbal remedy and celecoxib as an anti-inflammatory drug may synergistically reduce inflammation and osteoarthritis with minimal side effects.
PURPOSE: This study is aimed to assess the anti-cancer effects of Celecoxib and topotecan against Human Gastric cancer cell line (AGS) in comparison to the control in an in-vitro study. METHODS: In this experimental study, Celecoxib and topotecan was prepared at concentrations of 500, 250, 125, 62.5, 31.2, 15.6 and 7.8 mg/ml. The effect of celecoxib and topotecan separately and in mixed form were investigated on AGS and normal HEK cells. To investigate the cell survival, MTT method was used to study the pathway of apoptosis using flowcytometry and Caspase kits based on colorimetric. Finally, one-way ANOVA and t-test were used to analyze the data. RESULTS: The results of this study indicated that Celecoxib was cytotoxic against AGS and HEK cell lines. The topotecan indicated a significant cytotoxicity against AGS cells and was not toxic against HEK cell line. Our results indicated that Celecoxib and topotecan have synergist effects against AGS and HEK cell lines and were more effective than separate celecoxib or topotecan. CONCLUSION: The mixture of clecoxib and topotecan was more effective than celecoxib and topotecan in separate form. Our results indicated that use mixed forms of treatments can cause excellent therapeutic effects and can cause less side effects.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the cardiovascular safety of celecoxib compared to non-selective non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs or placebo. METHODS: We included randomized controlled trials of oral celecoxib compared with a non-selective NSAID or placebo in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis patients. We conducted searches in EMBASE, Cochrane CENTRAL, MEDLINE, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, VIP, Wanfang, and Chinese Biomedical Literature Database. Study selection and data extraction were done by two authors independently. The risk of bias was assessed using Cochrane's risk-of-bias Tool for Randomized Trials. The effect size was presented as a risk ratio with their 95% confidence interval. RESULTS: Until July 22nd, 2021, our search identified 6279 records from which, after exclusions, 21 trials were included in the meta-analysis. The overall pooled risk ratio for Antiplatelet Trialists Collaboration cardiovascular events for celecoxib compared with any non-selective non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs was 0.89 (95% confidence interval: 0.80-1.00). The pooled risk ratio for all-cause mortality for celecoxib compared with non-selective non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs was 0.81 (95% confidence interval: 0.66-0.98). The cardiovascular mortality rate of celecoxib was lower than non-selective non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (risk ratio: 0.75, 95% confidence interval: 0.57-0.99). There was no significant difference between celecoxib and non-selective non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs or placebo in the risk of other cardiovascular events. CONCLUSION: Celecoxib is relatively safe in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis patients, independent of dose or duration. But it remains uncertain whether this would remain the same in patients treated with aspirin and patients with established cardiovascular diseases.
The molecular mechanism underlying denervation-induced muscle atrophy is complex and incompletely understood. Our previous results suggested that inflammation may play an important role in the early stages of muscle atrophy. Celecoxib is reported to exert anti-inflammatory effects. Here, we explored the effect of celecoxib on denervation-induced muscle atrophy and sought to identify the mechanism involved. We found that celecoxib treatment significantly increased the wet weight ratio and CSA of the tibialisanteriormuscle. Additionally, celecoxib downregulated the levels of COX-2, inflammatory factors and reduced inflammatory cell infiltration. GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis indicated that after 3 days of celecoxib treatment in vivo, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly associated with the regulation of immune responses related to complement activation; after 14 days, the DEGs were mainly involved in the regulation of oxidative stress and inflammation-related responses. Celecoxib administration reduced the levels of ROS and oxidative stress-related proteins. Furthermore, we found that celecoxib treatment inhibited the denervation-induced up-regulation of the ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosomal systems related proteins; decreased mitophagy in target muscles; and increased levels of MHC. Finally, celecoxib also attenuated microvascular damage in denervated skeletal muscle. Combined, our findings demonstrated that celecoxib inhibits inflammation and oxidative stress in denervated skeletal muscle, thereby suppressing mitophagy and proteolysis, improving blood flow in target muscles, and, ultimately, alleviating denervation-induced muscle atrophy. Our results confirmed that inflammatory responses play a key role in denervation-induced muscle atrophy and highlight a novel strategy for the prevention and treatment of this condition.
BACKGROUND: The major hurdles for successful cancer treatment are drug resistance and invasiveness developed by breast cancer stem cells (BCSC). OBJECTIVE: As these two processes are highly energy-dependent, the identification of the main ATP supplier required for stem cell viability may result advantageous in the design of new therapeutic strategies to deter malignant carcinomas. METHODS: The energy metabolism (glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, OxPhos) was systematically analyzed by assessing relevant protein contents, enzyme activities, and pathway fluxes in BCSC. Once identified as the main ATP supplier, selective energy inhibitors and canonical breast cancer drugs were used to block stem cell viability and metastatic properties. RESULTS: OxPhos and glycolytic protein contents, as well as HK and LDH activities were several times higher in BCSC than in their parental line, MCF-7 cells. However, CS, GDH, COX activities, and both energy metabolism pathway fluxes were significantly lower (38-86%) in BCSC than in MCF-7 cells. OxPhos was the main ATP provider (>85%) in BCSC. Accordingly, oligomycin (a specific and potent canonical OxPhos inhibitor) and other non-canonical drugs with inhibitory effect on OxPhos (celecoxib, dimethylcelecoxib) significantly decreased BCSC viability, levels of epithelial-mesenchymal transition proteins, invasiveness, and induced ROS over-production, with IC(50) values ranging from 1 to 20 muM in 24 h treatment. In contrast, glycolytic inhibitors (gossypol, iodoacetic acid, 3-bromopyruvate, 2-deoxyglucose) and canonical chemotherapeutic drugs (paclitaxel, doxorubicin, cisplatin) were much less effective against BCSC viability (IC(50)> 100 muM). CONCLUSION: These results indicated that the use of some NSAIDs may be a promising alternative therapeutic strategy to target BCSC.
An isocratic reversed phase HPLC method for the simultaneous determination of doxorubicine (DOX) and celecoxib (CXB) out of a nanoparticulate fixed dose combination (NanoFDC) was developed and validated. Linearity of the results was demonstrated from 1-11 mug/mL for both components. Lower limits of detection were determined as 7 ng/mL for DOX and 13 ng/mL for CXB. Total run time was approximately 15 min.
BACKGROUND: Evidence has shown that ibuprofen and celecoxib are effective in improving depressive symptoms, but their mechanisms of action are unclear. In this study, we aimed to determine the relationship between these two drugs and depressive disorder (DD) and elucidate potential mechanisms of action. METHODS: Relevant targets for ibuprofen, celecoxib, and DD were obtained and screened from multiple online drug and disease public databases. A protein-protein interaction network was obtained. The Centiscape and CytoHubba plug-ins were applied to screen for core targets. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses were performed. Molecular docking was performed to predict the binding of ibuprofen and celecoxib to core targets. Examined the differences in core target protein expression between DD patients (DDs, n = 18) and healthy controls (HCs, n = 16) as a further experimental validation of the network pharmacology results. RESULTS: In total, 220 potential targets for ibuprofen and 316 potential targets for celecoxib were identified and associated with DD. The antidepressant effects of both drugs involve many key targets in pathways such as "pathways in cancer" and "neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction," including ALB, BCL2, MAPK3, SRC, STAT3, EGFR, and PPARG. The binding affinity of ALB with ibuprofen is the strongest, and it is connected only by hydrophobic interactions. Celecoxib exhibits higher affinity at multiple targets such as SRC, EGFR, and PPARG, with stronger and more specific intermolecular interactions, including salt bridges and halogen bonds. Clinical trials have found that serum ALB expression in DDs is significantly lower than that in HCs (t = 6.653, p < 0.001), further confirming the potential role of ibuprofen in DD. CONCLUSIONS: Ibuprofen and celecoxib primarily exert their antidepressant effects through targets and pathways related to inflammation, neural signaling, and cancer, with celecoxib showing a stronger potential antidepressant effect. The expression difference of the core target ALB between depression and healthy individuals further supports the potential effect of the drug on DD. Our findings propose new treatment strategies, support the link between inflammation and depression, and encourage reassessing existing medications for depression.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the changes in the levels of bone metabolism markers related to sacroiliac joint (SIJ) inflammation in patients with axial spondyloarthritis (axSpA) after treatment with imrecoxib and celecoxib and evaluate their relationship with clinical efficacy. METHODS: A total of 120 patients with axSpA with at least 2 magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) SIJ scans during a 12-week follow-up were enrolled. The levels of bone metabolism markers, including dickkopf-1(DKK-1), sclerostin, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), osteoprotegerin (OPG), noggin, beta-catenin, and RUNX2, were measured twice, and their association with disease activity and the Spondyloarthritis Research Consortium of Canada (SPARCC) score for SIJ were analyzed by univariate analysis of covariance. RESULTS: A total of 116 patients completed the follow-up. The levels of sclerostin, OPG, noggin, DKK-1, and RUNX2 were increased, whereas those of VEGF and beta-catenin were decreased. The levels of sclerostin and OPG were negatively correlated with disease duration. The levels of VEGF and beta-catenin were significantly decreased (F = 7.866, P = 0.003; F = 4.106, P = 0.047) in patients with disease remission. A decrease in ESR was significantly correlated with decreased levels of Runx2 and SPARCC scores, with the levels of sclerostin being significantly elevated in the SPARCC-reduced group. There were no statistically significant differences between the imrecoxib and celecoxib groups (P> 0.05). CONCLUSION: Imrecoxib and celecoxib affect SIJ inflammation, disease activity, and the course of disease by regulating bone metabolism and angiogenesis in axSpA. Key Points *After treatment with imrecoxib and celecoxib, the levels of sclerostin, OPG, noggin, DKK-1, and RUNX2 were increased, whereas those of VEGF and beta-catenin were decreased, correlating with the course of disease, disease activity, and SIJ inflammation. * A decrease in ESR was significantly correlated with a decrease in the levels of RUNX2 and SIJ inflammation.. * The levels of sclerostin were more significantly elevated in SIJ inflammation remission group.. *Imrecoxib and celecoxib affect SIJ inflammation by regulating bone metabolism and angiogenesis in axSpA..
The purpose of this meta-analysis was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of celecoxib, a selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor, in addition to standard anticancer therapy. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluated the efficacy and safety of celecoxib-combined cancer therapy were systematically searched in PubMed and Embase databases. The endpoints were overall survival (OS), progression-free survival (PFS), disease-free survival (DFS), objective response rate (ORR), disease control rate (DCR), pathological complete response (pCR), and adverse events (AEs). The results of 30 RCTs containing 9655 patients showed limited benefits in celecoxib-combined cancer therapy. However, celecoxib-combined palliative therapy prolonged PFS in epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) wild-type patients (HR = 0.57, 95%CI = 0.35-0.94). Moreover, despite a slight increase in thrombocytopenia (RR = 1.35, 95%CI = 1.08-1.69), there was no increase in other toxicities. Celecoxib combined with adjuvant therapy indicated a better OS (HR = 0.850, 95%CI = 0.725-0.996). Furthermore, celecoxib plus neoadjuvant therapy improved the ORR in standard cancer therapy, especially neoadjuvant therapy (overall: RR = 1.13, 95%CI = 1.03-1.23; neoadjuvant therapy: RR = 1.25, 95%CI = 1.09-1.44), but not pCR. Our study indicated that adding celecoxib to palliative therapy prolongs the PFS of EGFR wild-type patients, with good safety profiles. Celecoxib combined with adjuvant therapy prolongs OS, and celecoxib plus neoadjuvant therapy improves the ORR. Thus, celecoxib-combined cancer therapy may be a promising therapy strategy.
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a highly prevalent condition with a substantial incidence of relapse or treatment resistance. A subset of patients show evidence of low-grade inflammation, with these patients having a higher likelihood of more severe or difficult to treat courses of illness. Anti-inflammatory treatment of MDD has been investigated with mixed results, and no known studies have included assessments beyond cessation of the anti-inflammatory agent, meaning it remains unknown if any benefit from treatment persists. The objective of the present study was to investigate treatment outcomes up to 29 weeks post-cessation of celecoxib or placebo augmentation of an antidepressant, and how concentrations of selected inflammatory markers change over the same period. METHODS: The PREDDICT parallel-group, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial (University of Adelaide, Australia) ran from December 2017 to April 2020. Participants with MDD were stratified into normal range or elevated inflammation strata according to screening concentrations of high sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP). Participants were randomised to treatment with vortioxetine and celecoxib or vortioxetine and placebo for six weeks, and vortioxetine alone for an additional 29 weeks (35 total weeks). Following a previous publication of results from the six-week RCT phase, exploratory analyses were performed on Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) scores, response and remission outcomes, and selected peripheral inflammatory markers across the entire study duration up to week 35. RESULTS: Participants retained at each observation were baseline N=119, week 2 N=115, week 4 N=103, week 6 N=104, week 8 N=98, week 22 N=81, and week 35 N=60. Those in the elevated hsCRP celecoxib-augmented group had a statistically significantly greater reduction in MADRS score from baseline to week 35 compared to all other groups, demonstrating the greatest clinical improvement long-term, despite no group or strata differences at preceding time points. Response and remission outcomes did not differ by treatment group or hsCRP strata at any time point. Changes in hsCRP between baseline and week 35 and Tumour Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) concentrations between baseline and week 6 and baseline and week 35 were statistically significantly associated with MADRS scores observed at week 6 and week 35 respectively, with reducing TNF-alpha concentrations associated with reducing MADRS scores and vice versa in each case. A post-hoc stratification of the participant cohort by baseline TNF-alpha concentrations led to significant prediction by the derived strata on clinical response at weeks 6, 8 and 35, with participants with elevated baseline TNF-alpha less likely to achieve clinical response. INTERPRETATION: The present analysis suggests for the first time a possible longer-term clinical benefit of celecoxib augmentation of vortioxetine in inflammation-associated MDD treatment. However, further research is needed to confirm the finding and to ascertain the reason for such a delayed effect. Furthermore, the trial suggests that TNF-alpha may have a stronger relationship with anti-inflammatory MDD treatment outcomes than hsCRP, and should be investigated further for potential predictive utility. CLINICAL TRIALS REGISTRATION: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR), ACTRN12617000527369p. Registered on 11 April 2017, http://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?ACTRN=12617000527369p.
