A stability-indicating reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) method has been developed which can separate and accurately quantitate paracetamol, dantrolene, cetirizine and pseudoephedrine. The method was successfully validated for the purpose of conducting stability studies of the four analytes in quality control (QC) laboratories. The stability-indicating capability of the method was demonstrated by adequate separation of these four analytes from all the degradant peaks. A gradient mobile phase system consisting of (A) 50 mmol L(-1) sodium dihydrogen phosphate, 5 mmol L(-1) heptane sulfonic acid sodium salt, pH 4.2 and (B) acetonitrile was used with Discovery reversed-phase HS C(18) analytical column (250 mm x 4.6 mm i.d., 5 microm particle size). Quantitation was achieved with UV detection at 214 nm, based on peak area. The proposed method was validated and successfully applied for the analysis of pharmaceutical formulations and laboratory-prepared mixtures containing the two multicomponent combinations.
The incidence of anticholinergic syndrome due to second generation antihistamines is infrequently reported. Largely due to their decreased affinity for central nervous system (CNS) receptors, second generation antihistamines are rarely associated with anticholinergic symptoms, though toxicity is still possible particularly when taken in excess. We report a case of a six year old boy who presented with agitation, hallucinations, fixed and dilated pupils, tachycardia, and hyperthermia consistent with anticholinergic toxicity several hours after accidental overdose of a second generation antihistamine, cetirizine. Early identification of this rare phenomenon is important not only for appropriate emergency management but also for avoidance of potentially invasive and unnecessary tests which may further increase patient morbidity.
Enantioseparation and determination of chiral drugs are of vital importance in biochemical and pharmaceutical research due to the different biological activity, mechanism, and toxicity of individual enantiomers. As a second-generation H(1)-antagonist, cetirizine's pharmaceutical activity is mainly derived from the levocetirizine while the dextro-enantiomer is ineffective and even associated with side effects. Herein, the enantiomers of cetirizine were separated by capillary electrophoresis and identified by electronic circular dichroism. Satisfactory linear relationship was found between the circular dichroism signal at lambda(max) and the electrophoretic peak area difference in the nonracemic mixture of enantiomers. It made possible identification and quantification of cetirizine enantiomers independent of single enantiomer standards. The method's feasibility was demonstrated on the enantiomeric excess experiments of oral drugs measured in human blank urine. Additionally, the separation and determination of cetirizine in human urine after administration were also realized by capillary electrophoresis, indicating the method was sensitive enough for pharmacokinetic study.
Due to the side effects of cetirizine overdose and the need to monitor its concentration in the human body, in this work, an electrochemical sensor has been prepared by utilizing a carbon paste electrode modified with Li(2)CoMn(3)O(8)/CC(3)N(4) nanocomposite and ethyl-3-methyl-imidazolium chloride ionic liquid ([EMIM][Cl]) to determine cetirizine in the human blood serum sample and urine as well as drug samples. Li(2)CoMn(3)O(8)/CC(3)N(4) nanocomposite was characterized by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The investigation of the influence of each modifier component showed that the existence of all components in modification has a synergistic effect. Li(2)CoMn(3)O(8)/CC(3)N(4)/IL nanocomposite has a larger surface area relative to the components alone, thus providing a more fine-grained media to facilitate electron transfer during the reaction between analyte and electrode. Determination of cetirizine was performed in phosphate buffer solution with pH 7.0 and detection limits obtained in the concentration ranges of 0.03-0.9 and 3-300 muM was 11.8 x 10(-9) M. The diffusion coefficient (D = 9.2 x 10(-6) cm(2)s(-1)) of cetirizine at the surface of the modified electrode was determined by chronoamperometry. Finally, simultaneous detection of cetirizine, phenylephrine and acetaminophen was performed using the suggested sensor without any interference.
The efficiency of wastewater ozonation for the abatement of three nitrogen-containing pharmaceuticals, two antihistamine drugs, cetirizine (CTR) and fexofenadine (FXF), and the diuretic drug, hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), was investigated. Species-specific second-order rate constants for the reactions of the molecular, protonated (CTR, FXF) or deprotonated (HCTZ) forms of these compounds with ozone were determined. All three compounds are very reactive with ozone (apparent second order rate constants at pH 7: kO3,pH7 = 1.7.10(5) M(-1)s(-1), 8.5.10(4) M(-1)s(-1) and 9.0.10(3) M(-1)s(-1) for CTR, HCTZ and FXF, respectively). Transformation product (TP) structures were elucidated using liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry, including isotope-labeled standards. For cetirizine and hydrochlorothiazide 8 TPs each and for fexofenadine 7 TPs were identified. The main TPs of cetirizine and fexofenadine are their respective N-oxides, whereas chlorothiazide forms to almost 100% from hydrochlorothiazide. In the bacteria bioluminescence assay the toxicity was slightly increased only during the ozonation of cetirizine at very high cetirizine concentrations. The main TPs detected in bench-scale experiments were also detected in full-scale ozonation of a municipal wastewater, for >90% elimination of the parent compounds.
A green, simple, quick and economical method is implemented for the first time for the simultaneous estimation of cetirizine (CTZ) and azelastine (AZE) as co-administered eye drops. The method relies on synchronous spectrofluorimetry with ∆lambda = 60 nm. Cetirizine can be estimated at 231 nm and AZE can be measured at 294 nm, each at the other's zero crossing point. All factors affecting the method were studied and properly optimized. Good correlation was obtained in the range of 0.1-2 microg mL(-1) for both drugs. The limits of detection were 0.014 and 0.010 microg mL(-1) and limits of quantitation were 0.043 and 0.029 microg mL(-1) for CTZ and AZE, respectively. Moreover, ICH guidelines were carried out to validate the adopted method. The method was suitable for the analysis of CTZ and AZE in synthetic mixtures, eye drops and aqueous humor. The mean percentage of recoveries of CTZ and AZE in spiked aqueous humor were 99.83 and 99.37, respectively. Furthermore, Green Analytical Procedure Index (GAPI) and analytical Eco-scale approaches were used to evaluate the greenness of the suggested method.
Olopathadine, a newly developed histamine H1-receptor antagonist, was compared with cetirizine in its suppressive effects on histamine-induced wheal and flare reaction using an iontophoresis technique in a double-blind, crossover, placebo-controlled fashion. As a result, olopathadine was found to have effects comparable to cetirizine. This finding may predict the efficacy of this new H1-antagonist in treating pruritic skin diseases.
PURPOSE: The goal of the study was to isolate and analyze a cetirizine degradation product, formed within a PEG-containing formulation and to elucidate the mechanism of oxidation of cetirizine. METHODS: Cetirizine, formulated in PEG-containing matrix, was subjected to forced degradation conditions in the pH range from 3 to 10, and the product was analyzed by HPLC and LC-MS/MS. Additionally, pure cetirizine was subjected to selective oxidization by hydrogen peroxide and sodium percarbonate. The reaction mixture was purified, and the isolated material was analyzed by (1)H NMR. RESULTS: Oxidation process was investigated in order to model the degradation of cetirizine in PEG-containing formulation. Site of oxidation is proposed based on correlation of the results of forced degradation with ionization scheme of cetirizine. The finding was verified by spiking of cetirizine degradation sample with cetirizine N-oxide reference standard. CONCLUSIONS: Degradation of cetirizine in polyethylene glycol arose from the reaction between the drug and the reactive peroxide intermediates such as peroxyl radicals formed through oxidation of PEG. Selective oxidation of cetirizine and isolation/characterization of the oxidation product allowed the identification of the oxidation product as cetirizine N-oxide. The mechanism of oxidation is proposed.
The majority of women have health problems that require medication after giving birth. Complications such as allergies, postpartum depression, and diabetes are often treated with drugs such as cetirizine, venlafaxine, and metformin, respectively. These treatments are considered safe during lactation, but information of the transfer of drugs to breast milk and possible effects on the infant is scarce. Therefore, this needs to be systematically investigated in larger populations. To enable the determination of drug transfer, we here describe the validation of two rapid, sensitive, and high-throughput analysis methods for 1) simultaneous quantification of cetirizine, venlafaxine, and O-desmethylvenlafaxine in human breast milk, and 2) metformin in human breast milk and plasma. In both methods, a simple protein precipitation protocol with acetonitrile and benchtop-centrifugation was used prior to compound analysis with liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. The methods had linear ranges between 0.39 - 194.5 ng/mL for cetirizine, 0.28 - 138.7 ng/mL for venlafaxine, 0.26 - 131.7 ng/mL for O-desmethylvenlafaxine, in milk, and 0.65 - 193.7 ng/mL for metformin in both milk and plasma. Intra-run and inter-run precision and accuracy were </= 9% for cetirizine, venlafaxine, and O-desmethylvenlafaxine in milk, and </= 7% for metformin in milk and plasma. Cetirizine was measured to median milk concentrations of 13 ng/mL (range: 0.65 - 65 ng/mL) in 228 donor samples from breast-feeding women.
Data on drug transfer into human breast milk are sparse. This study aimed to quantify concentrations of cetirizine and levocetirizine in breast milk and to estimate drug exposure to infants. Breastfeeding women at least 8 weeks postpartum and using cetirizine or its pure (R)-enantiomer levocetirizine were eligible to participate. Breast milk samples were collected at six predefined times during a dose interval (0, 2, 4, 8, 12 and 24 h after drug intake) at steady state. Infant drug exposure was estimated by calculating the absolute infant dose (AID) and the weight-adjusted relative infant dose (RID). In total, 32 women were eligible for final inclusion, 31 women using cetirizine and one woman using levocetirizine. Means of the individual maximum and average cetirizine milk concentrations were 41.0 and 16.8 mug/L, respectively. Maximum concentrations occurred on average 2.4 h after intake, and the mean half-life in milk was 7.0 h. Estimated AID and RID for cetirizine in a day were 2.5 mug/kg and 1.9%, respectively. The corresponding values for levocetirizine were 1.1 mug/kg and 1.9%. No severe adverse events were reported. Our findings demonstrate that the transfer of cetirizine and levocetirizine into breast milk is low and compatible with breastfeeding.
Background: Ocrelizumab is an effective medication for multiple sclerosis. However, infusion-related reactions (IRRs) are a concern for patients and may lead to discontinuation of ocrelizumab. To minimize IRRs, pre-medications are administered. However, from our experience, these medications, especially diphenhydramine, can cause marked drowsiness. The primary objective of this study was to evaluate whether cetirizine is non-inferior to diphenhydramine in limiting the proportion and severity of reactions from ocrelizumab infusions. Methods: Twenty participants were serially randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive 10 mg of cetirizine or 25 mg of diphenhydramine orally prior to their first three ocrelizumab infusions. Results: The rate of IRRs in this study was similar across both treatment groups with no increase in the risk of severity, and no grade 3 IRRs. Further, patients receiving cetirizine experienced a reduction in fatigue. While there was not a significant difference in global satisfaction, this score increased over time in the cetirizine arm while it remained unchanged in the diphenhydramine arm. Conclusions: Overall, our results suggest that cetirizine does not increase the risk of infusion-related reactions compared to diphenhydramine.
In this study, two solvents (deep eutectic and water/deep eutectic solvents) were used for N-doped carbon dots (N-CDs) preparation by microwave irradiation. The solvent can influence surface chemical composition, quantum yield, morphology, and fluorescence of CDs. N-CDs synthesized in water/deep eutectic solvent (DES) had better quantum yield (24.5%) with respect to N-CDs synthesized in deep eutectic solvent (17.4%). These carbon dots were used as a rapid and high sensitive "off-on" fluorescent probe for the determination of Fe(3+) ion and cetirizine. Morphology and structure of the N-CDs were characterized by FT-IR, UV-Vis, XRD and TEM. Linear range and detection limit for N-CDs synthesis in deep eutectic solvent for cetirizine were 0.08-48 microM and 15 nM, respectively and for N-CDs synthesis in water/deep eutectic solvent were 0.03-50 microM and 10 nM, respectively. Applicability of this nanoprobe was tested in cetirizine determination in serum sample. Antibacterial activities of the two synthesized N-CDs were also investigated using agar disk diffusion method.
OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Comparison of bilastine and cetirizine in inhibiting skin wheal and flare responses over 24 h. SUBJECTS: Twenty-one healthy male volunteers (aged 19-44 years). TREATMENT AND METHODS: Volunteers were randomised to receive single oral doses of 20 or 50 mg bilastine, 10 mg cetirizine or placebo before provocation of wheal and flare responses to 100 mg/ml histamine by skin prick 1.5, 4, 8, 12 and 24 h later. RESULTS: There were no significant differences between overall inhibitions of wheal or flare by 20 mg bilastine and 10 mg cetirizine. Bilastine was faster in onset than cetirizine, inhibitions of wheal and flare at 1.5 h being 89 +/- 3 versus 44 +/- 14% (P = 0.011) and 85 +/- 4 versus 45 +/- 14% (P = 0.016), respectively (Student's t test). At 1.5 h, both wheals and flares were inhibited by >70% in 11/12 volunteers taking bilastine and 3/11 taking cetirizine (P = 0.003, Fisher's exact test). There were no significant differences between the drugs at later times. Bilastine 50 mg had a longer duration of action than bilastine 20 mg. CONCLUSIONS: Both 20 mg bilastine and 10 mg cetirizine are effective and of long duration in reducing histamine-induced wheal and flare responses, the major difference between the two drugs being the more rapid onset of action of bilastine.
