Purpose There is no consensus on the optimal systemic treatment of patients with extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. The IELSG-19 phase III study, to our knowledge, was the first such study to address the question of first-line treatment in a randomized trial. Patients and Methods Eligible patients were initially randomly assigned (1:1 ratio) to receive either chlorambucil monotherapy (6 mg/m(2)/d orally on weeks 1 to 6, 9 to 10, 13 to 14, 17 to 18, and 21 to 22) or a combination of chlorambucil (same schedule as above) and rituximab (375 mg/m(2) intravenously on day 1 of weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 13, 17, and 21). After the planned enrollment of 252 patients, the protocol was amended to continue with a three-arm design (1:1:6 ratio), with a new arm that included rituximab alone (same schedule as the combination arm) and with a final sample size of 454 patients. The main end point was event-free survival (EFS). Analysis of chlorambucil versus the combination arm was performed and reported separately before any analysis of the third arm. Results At a median follow-up of 7.4 years, addition of rituximab to chlorambucil led to significantly better EFS (hazard ratio, 0.54; 95% CI, 0.38 to 0.77). EFS at 5 years was 51% (95% CI, 42 to 60) with chlorambucil alone, 50% (95% CI, 42 to 59) with rituximab alone, and 68% (95% CI, 60 to 76) with the combination ( P = .0009). Progression-free survival was also significantly better with the combination ( P = .0119). Five-year overall survival was approximately 90% in each arm. All treatments were well tolerated. No unexpected toxicities were recorded. Conclusion Rituximab in combination with chlorambucil demonstrated superior efficacy in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma; however, improvements in EFS and progression-free survival did not translate into longer overall survival.
BACKGROUND: In the GLOW study, fixed-duration ibrutinib-venetoclax showed superior progression-free survival versus chlorambucil-obinutuzumab in patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukaemia who were older or had comorbidities, or both, at a median follow up of 27.7 months. In this Article, we report updated outcomes from GLOW after a 46-month median follow-up. METHODS: GLOW was a randomised, multicentre, phase 3 study done at 67 hospital centres across 14 countries. Patients aged 65 years and older or 18-64 years with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and a cumulative illness rating scale score of more than 6 or creatinine clearance less than 70 mL/min, or both, and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 2 or less were randomly assigned (1:1) via an interactive web system with permuted blocks (block size of four) and stratified by IGHV mutational status and the presence of del11q aberration to the ibrutinib-venetoclax group (three cycles of ibrutinib lead-in [420 mg/day, orally], followed by 12 cycles of ibrutinib plus venetoclax [400 mg/day, orally, including a 5-week dose ramp-up]) or the chlorambucil-obinutuzumab group (six cycles of chlorambucil [0.5 mg/kg, orally, on days 1 and 15 of each cycle], and obinutuzumab [1000 mg, intravenously, on days 1 (or 100 mg on day 1 and 900 mg on day 2), 8, and 15 of cycle 1 and day 1 of cycles 2-6]). The primary endpoint was progression-free survival in the intention-to-treat population, assessed by an independent review committee. The safety population included all randomised patients who received at least one dose of the study treatment. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03462719) and the EU Clinical Trials Register (EudraCT 2017-004699-77). FINDINGS: Between May 4, 2018, and April 5, 2019, 211 patients (122 [58%] were male and 89 [42%] were female) were randomly assigned to receive ibrutinib-venetoclax (n=106) or chlorambucil-obinutuzumab (n=105). At a median of 46 months (IQR 43-47) of follow-up, progression-free survival remained superior for the ibrutinib-venetoclax group (hazard ratio 0.214 [95% CI 0.138-0.334]; p<0.0001); 42-month progression-free survival rates were 74.6% (95% CI 65.0-82.0) for ibrutinib-venetoclax and 24.8% (16.5-34.1) for chlorambucil-obinutuzumab. Following the primary analysis, one patient in the chlorambucil-obinutuzumab group had a serious adverse event of myelodysplastic syndrome. Treatment-related deaths were reported in one patient receiving ibrutinib-venetoclax (cardiac failure, pneumonia, and sinus node dysfunction) and in one patient receiving chlorambucil-obinutuzumab (pneumonia). There were 15 deaths in the ibrutinib-venetoclax group (of which three were due to post-treatment infections) and 30 deaths in the chlorambucil-obinutuzumab group (of which 10 were due to post-treatment infections). INTERPRETATION: After 4 years of follow-up, ibrutinib-venetoclax continues to significantly prolong progression-free survival (vs chemoimmunotherapy) in patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, supporting its use as a first-line option. FUNDING: Janssen Research & Development and Pharmacyclics.
Fifteen adults with refractory or recurrent Hodgkin's disease were treated with a combination of: vincristine, prednisolone, etoposide and chlorambucil (OPEC). All had previously received mustine, vinblastine, procarbazine and prednisolone (MVPP) and seven had subsequently been treated with alternative regimens. Responses were achieved in four, but complete remission in only one. Toxicity was considerable and five died of treatment related complications. Only two are alive (one in complete remission) more than three years after therapy. The toxicity of the OPEC regimen outweighed its benefit in this group of poor prognosis patients.
A series of spin-labeled melphalan and chlorambucil derivatives, coupling the alkylating agents with 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (TEMPO) radicals, were synthesized, characterized, and their biological properties in vitro were evaluated. These compounds showed much higher cytotoxic activity against human leukemia cell line K562 in vitro than their parent compounds.
OBJECTIVE: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) can induce the apoptosis of tumor cells, but leaving its effect on malignant lymphoma largely insignificant, as these tumors may develop drug resistance. Chlorambucil (CLB) had definitive treatment efficacy on low-malignant non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), but with unclear efficacy on highly malignant Burkitt lymphoma. A study has been shown that CLB could enhance the sensitivity of chronic lymphatic leukemia cells against TRAIL. This work aims to investigate the effect of CLB combined with TRAIL on in vitro proliferation and apoptosis of Raji cells. MATERIALS AND METHODS: TRAIL (0, 20, 40 and 80 ng/ml) or CLB (0, 2.5 5 and 10 muM) was used to treat Raji cells. Cell counting kit 8 (CCK-8) was used to test proliferation whilst flow cytometry was employed to examine the apoptosis. The effect of TRAIL or CLB treatment on expression of death receptor 4 (DR4) and DR5 was tested. Combined treatment (80 ng/ml TRAIL and 10 muM CLB) was adopted for observing Raji cell proliferation and apoptosis. RESULTS: Single treatment of TRAIL or CLB has weak effects of inducing apoptosis or inhibiting proliferation. TRAIL concentration has no significant effects on DR4/DR5 expression in Raji cells, whilst CLB treatment elevated those gene expressions. Combined treatment of TRAIL and CLB had more potent effects regarding cell proliferation inhibition or apoptosis induction compared to single treatment. CONCLUSIONS: TRAIL or CLB has weak inhibitor effects on Raji cell proliferation or induction of apoptosis. Via up-regulating DR4 and DR5 expression, CLB has synergistic effects with TRAIL to potentiate the apoptotic induction and proliferation inhibition role.
Sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs), a sensitive measure of chromosome damage, were counted in peripheral-blood lymphocytes from 10 patients with Behcet's syndrome receiving chlorambucil. All patients had abnormal counts. Damage was related to both daily dose and duration of therapy and was occurring at a greater rate than its repair. The patient who had been treated the longest and had received the highest total dose also had the highest SCE count. He died from acute leukaemia. SCE analysis may provide a method for detecting patients at risk from oncogenic effects of cytotoxic drugs.
Thirteen patients with advanced non-Hodgkin's lymphoma who previously failed conventional chemotherapy protocols were treated with a combination of alpha-interferon (IFN) 6,000,000 units i.m. days 1-5 and 8, plus chlorambucil (CLB) 16 mg/m2 days 5-9 repeated every 4 weeks. There were five complete responses (CRs) and one partial response (PR) (46% total responses) with mean duration of remission of 456+ days. Responses were obtained in low and intermediate grade lymphomas. Toxicity was acceptable and easily managed. It is unlikely that IFN alone using this low dose intermittent schedule is responsible for the remissions. The combination of the two agents appears to be an effective treatment modality. IFN may be functioning as a biological response modifier when used in combination with a cytotoxic agent.
The amino analogues of pentamidine with a polymethylene (n = 3 - 6) chain and their chlorambucil derivatives were synthesized. The obtained compounds revealed cytotoxic effect on MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line (IC50 = 22 - 95 +/- 2 pM), mainly by the induction of apoptosis. The topoisomerase I/II inhibition assay and the ethidium displacement assay with the use of pBR322 plasmid DNA were used to the study of mechanism by which the obtained compounds could act. All the compounds are able to bind with DNA and interfere in vitro with the activity of topoisomerase (I and II). The determination of association constants with the use of calf thymus DNA, T4 coliphage DNA, poly(dA-dT)2 and poly(dG-dC)2 showed that the tested compounds bind within minor groove of B-DNA, but not selectively. The alkylating activity of chlorambucil derivatives determined in vitro using a Preussmann test was similar to the activity of chlorambucil. The influence of all the compounds on the amidolytic activity of plasmin and trypsin was also examined. The plasmin activity was inhibited by pentamidine, chlorambucil and aromatic bis-amines (IC50 = 0.1 - 8 mM), whereas the trypsin activity was influenced only by pentamidine.
High performance liquid chromatography with ultra-violet detection (HPLC-UV) and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) methods were developed and validated for the determination of chlorambucil (CLB) and valproic acid (VPA) in plasma, as a part of experiments on their anticancer activity in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). CLB was extracted from 250 microL of plasma with methanol, using simple protein precipitation and filtration. Chromatography was carried out on a LiChrospher 100 RP-18 end-capped column using a mobile phase consisting of acetonitrile, water and formic acid, and detection at 258 nm. The lowest limit of detection LLOQ was found to be 0.075 mug/mL, showing sufficient sensitivity in relation to therapeutic concentrations of CLB in plasma. The accuracy was from 94.13% to 101.12%, while the intra- and inter-batch precision was </=9.46%. For quantitation of VPA, a sensitive GC-MS method was developed involving simple pre-column esterification with methanol and extraction with hexane. Chromatography was achieved on an HP-5MSUI column and monitored by MS with an electron impact ionization and selective ion monitoring mode. Using 250 microL of plasma, the LLOQ was found to be 0.075 mug/mL. The accuracy was from 94.96% to 109.12%, while the intra- and inter-batch precision was </=6.69%. Thus, both methods fulfilled the requirements of FDA guidelines for the determination of drugs in biological materials.
The high level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) at the tumor site has been widely used in the tumor targeted delivery. However, the ROS stimulus-responsive vector itself is also a ROS consumer, and the consumption of endogenous ROS may not be sufficient to maintain sustained drug release. In this study, we designed and synthesized ROS/pH dual-sensitive polymer micelles for the co-delivery of emodin (EMD) and chlorambucil (CLB). The release of quinone methides (QM) can consume glutathione (GSH), on the one hand, it can enhance the chemotoxicity of phenylbutyrate nitrogen mustard, on the other hand, emodin can induce oxidative damage of tumor cells and maintain the sustained targeted release of drugs.
BACKGROUND: The monoclonal anti-CD20 antibody rituximab, combined with chemotherapeutic agents, has been shown to prolong overall survival in physically fit patients with previously untreated chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) but not in those with coexisting conditions. We investigated the benefit of the type 2, glycoengineered antibody obinutuzumab (also known as GA101) as compared with that of rituximab, each combined with chlorambucil, in patients with previously untreated CLL and coexisting conditions. METHODS: We randomly assigned 781 patients with previously untreated CLL and a score higher than 6 on the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale (CIRS) (range, 0 to 56, with higher scores indicating worse health status) or an estimated creatinine clearance of 30 to 69 ml per minute to receive chlorambucil, obinutuzumab plus chlorambucil, or rituximab plus chlorambucil. The primary end point was investigator-assessed progression-free survival. RESULTS: The patients had a median age of 73 years, creatinine clearance of 62 ml per minute, and CIRS score of 8 at baseline. Treatment with obinutuzumab-chlorambucil or rituximab-chlorambucil, as compared with chlorambucil monotherapy, increased response rates and prolonged progression-free survival (median progression-free survival, 26.7 months with obinutuzumab-chlorambucil vs. 11.1 months with chlorambucil alone; hazard ratio for progression or death, 0.18; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.13 to 0.24; P<0.001; and 16.3 months with rituximab-chlorambucil vs. 11.1 months with chlorambucil alone; hazard ratio, 0.44; 95% CI, 0.34 to 0.57; P<0.001). Treatment with obinutuzumab-chlorambucil, as compared with chlorambucil alone, prolonged overall survival (hazard ratio for death, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.23 to 0.74; P=0.002). Treatment with obinutuzumab-chlorambucil, as compared with rituximab-chlorambucil, resulted in prolongation of progression-free survival (hazard ratio, 0.39; 95% CI, 0.31 to 0.49; P<0.001) and higher rates of complete response (20.7% vs. 7.0%) and molecular response. Infusion-related reactions and neutropenia were more common with obinutuzumab-chlorambucil than with rituximab-chlorambucil, but the risk of infection was not increased. CONCLUSIONS: Combining an anti-CD20 antibody with chemotherapy improved outcomes in patients with CLL and coexisting conditions. In this patient population, obinutuzumab was superior to rituximab when each was combined with chlorambucil. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La Roche; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01010061.).
A 2-year-old boy presented with a stage IV neuroblastoma and, despite surgical reduction of the tumor mass followed by chemotherapy and radiotherapy, he developed bilateral chylous pleural effusions. These proved resistant to traditional methods of treatment but were resolved with minimal discomfort to the child by intrapleural injections of chlorambucil chemically bound to antibodies raised by immunizing his father with irradiated tumor cells.
To assess the gonadal effects of chlorambucil given to prepubertal and pubertal boys, testicular function of 21 adolescents or young men, treated with chlorambucil for nephrotic syndrome before or during puberty, have been evaluated. Evaluations have been based on penis and testicular size, serum FSH, LH and testosterone values, and sperm count. Nine patients have testicular hypotrophy, 13 have significantly elevated FSH, 17 have azoospermia, two have severe oligospermia, and repetitive sperm counts show no improvement. A quiescent state of the epithelium of the seminiferous tubules does not protect against chlorambucil toxicity, which seems to be related to the cumulative dose. Chlorambucil should be used with caution, even in children.
