Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are derivatives of the heterocyclic aromatic compound quinoline. These economical compounds have been used as antimalarial agents for many years. Currently, they are used as monotherapy or in conjunction with other therapies for the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Sjogren's syndrome (SS) and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS). Based on its effects on the modulation of the autophagy process, various clinical studies suggest that CQ and HCQ could be used in combination with other chemotherapeutics for the treatment of various types of cancer. Furthermore, the antiviral effects showed against Zika, Chikungunya, and HIV are due to the annulation of endosomal/lysosomal acidification. Recently, CQ and HCQ were approved for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of infected patients with the coronavirus SARSCoV- 2, causing the disease originated in December 2019, namely COVID-2019. Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the pharmacological effects of these drugs: 1) disruption of lysosomal and endosomal pH, 2) inhibition of protein secretion/expression, 3) inhibition of antigen presentation, 4) decrease of proinflammatory cytokines, 5) inhibition of autophagy, 6) induction of apoptosis and 7) inhibition of ion channels activation. Thus, evidence has shown that these structures are leading molecules that can be modified or combined with other therapeutic agents. In this review, we will discuss the most recent findings in the mechanisms of action of CQ and HCQ in the immune system, and the use of these antimalarial drugs on diseases.
As of April 21, 2020, more than 2.5 million cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, have been reported in 210 countries and territories, with the death toll at 171,810. Both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have gained considerable media attention as possible therapies, resulting in a significant surge in demand. In overdose, both medications can cause severe, potentially life-threatening effects. Here, we present a brief overview of the pharmacology of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, manifestations of toxicity, and treatment considerations.
Recent publications have brought attention to the possible benefit of chloroquine, a broadly used antimalarial drug, in the treatment of patients infected by the novel emerged coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2). The scientific community should consider this information in light of previous experiments with chloroquine in the field of antiviral research.
At the end of last century a prominent biochemist once opened the discussion of a controversial issue in the field of Bioenergetics with the following statement: "This is a long story, that shouldn't be long, but it will take a long time to make it short". As it happens, such a statement would apply perfectly well to the story of chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) in the COVID-19 infection: it has become a veritable saga, with conflicting views that have often gone beyond the normal scientific dialectic, and with conclusions that have frequently been polluted by non scientific opinions: thus, for instance, when National Agencies have taken positions against CQ and HCQ, the move has been seen as a pro-vaccine attempt to block low cost therapy means. And it is difficult to avoid the feeling that the opposition to CQ and HCQ has in large measure been shaped not by scientific arguments, but by the fact that their use has been strongly endorsed by National leaders whose popularity among Western intellectuals is extremely low. The role of the two drugs in the COVID-19 infection thus deserves an objective analysis solely based on scientific facts. This contribution will attempt to produce it.
As substrates of CYP2C8, CYP3A4/5 and CYP2D6, chloroquine's (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine's (HCQ) efficacy and safety may be affected by variants in the genes encoding these enzymes. This paper aims to assimilate the current evidence on the pharmacogenomics of CQ/HCQ and to identify risk phenotypes affecting the safety or efficacy of these drugs. It has been found that some CYP3A5, CYP2D6 and CYP2C8 genetic variants may affect the safety or effectiveness of CQ/HCQ. The phenotypes predictively representing ultra-rapid and poor metabolizers have been considered high-risk phenotypes. After considering these high-risk phenotypes in different ethnic groups, it is predicted that a considerable proportion of patients taking CQ/HCQ may be at risk of either therapeutic failure or severe toxicities.
Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are quinoline derivatives used to treat malaria. To date, these medications are not approved for the treatment of viral infections, and there are no well-controlled, prospective, randomized clinical studies or evidence to support their use in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Nevertheless, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are being studied alone or in combination with other agents to assess their effectiveness in the treatment or prophylaxis for COVID-19. The effective use of any medication involves an understanding of its pharmacokinetics, safety, and mechanism of action. This work provides basic clinical pharmacology information relevant for planning and initiating COVID-19 clinical studies with chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, summarizes safety data from healthy volunteer studies, and summarizes safety data from phase II and phase II/III clinical studies in patients with uncomplicated malaria, including a phase II/III study in pediatric patients following administration of azithromycin and chloroquine in combination. In addition, this work presents data describing the proposed mechanisms of action against the severe acute respiratory distress syndrome coronavirus-2 and summarizes clinical efficacy to date.
Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) are the most common drugs used to relieve acute and chronic inflammatory diseases. In this article, we present a review about the use of CQ and HCQ in antitumor therapies based on autophagy mechanisms. These molecules break/discontinue autophagosome-lysosome fusions in initial phases and enhance antiproliferative action of chemotherapeutics. Their sensitizing effects of chemotherapy when used as an adjuvant option in clinical trials against cancer. However, human related-MDR genes are also under risk to develop chemo or radioresistance because cancer cells have ability to throw 4-aminoquinolines out from digestive vacuoles well. Additionally, they also have antitumor mechanism unrelated to autophagy, including cell death from apoptosis and necroptosis and immunomodulatory/anti-inflammatory properties. However, the link between some anticancer mechanisms, clinical efficacy and pharmacological safety has not yet been fully defined.
BACKGROUND: Plasmodium falciparum strains that are resistant to standard-dose chloroquine can be treated by higher chloroquine concentrations maintained for a longer time in vivo. OBJECTIVES: To determine the relative importance of chloroquine concentrations versus exposure time for elimination of chloroquine-susceptible and -resistant P. falciparum in vitro. METHODS: Chloroquine-susceptible (3D7) and -resistant (FCR3) strains were exposed in vitro to 1, 2, 4, 8, 16 or 32 times their respective 90% inhibitory chloroquine concentrations for 3, 5, 7 or 14 days and then followed until recrudescence, or not, by 42 days after the end of exposure. RESULTS: Exposure to chloroquine appeared to eliminate susceptible and resistant parasites, leaving small pyknotic apparently dead parasites. Chloroquine-susceptible and -resistant parasites recrudesced after 3 and 5 days of chloroquine exposure. Recrudescence occurred in one out of four 7 day exposure series but not after 14 days exposure. The median time to recrudescence was 13 to 28 days with a range of 8 to 41 days after the end of exposure. Time to recrudescence after the end of exposure increased with duration of exposure for susceptible and resistant strains (P < 0.001). Time to recrudescence did not correlate with concentrations greater than 1x IC90. CONCLUSIONS: Chloroquine-susceptible and -resistant P. falciparum probably become dormant. Elimination of dormant parasites is primarily dependent upon the duration of chloroquine exposure. Exposure to effective drug concentrations for 7 days eliminates most parasites in vitro. The results support in vivo data indicating that elimination of chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum correlates with Day 7 chloroquine concentrations.
Novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and associated coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) began ravaging most of the globe in November 2019. In the United States more than 25 million people have been infected with SARS-CoV-2. To date, COVID-19 has killed close to 400,000 U.S. citizens. In the face of limited pharmacotherapies, the current burden of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 signals overwhelming sickness and trillions in healthcare costs ahead. The need to expeditiously identify safe and efficacious prophylaxis and treatment options is critical. Drug repositioning may be a promising strategy toward mitigating the impact of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. This rapid review appraises available evidence on the viability of vintage antimalarial drugs chloroquine (CHQ) and its analog hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) repositioned for SARS-CoV-2 prophylaxis and COVID-19 treatment. Findings suggest neither the use of CHQ nor HCQ singularly, or concomitantly, with azithromycin and/or zinc provide definitive benefits for use against SARS-CoV-2 infection or COVID-19 illness. Moreover, administration of these medications was linked to significant and sometimes fatal complications.
OBJECTIVES: To present an index case and review the histologic and electron microscopic findings in chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) myopathy, focusing primarily on cardiomyopathy. CQ and HCQ are antimalarial drugs with disease-modifying activity in rheumatic diseases (DMARD) and now are among the most widely used DMARDs. Although they are rare, severe adverse effects caused mainly by deposition of intracellular metabolites in both cardiac and skeletal muscle have been described. Currently, both CQ and HCQ have been proposed to have efficacy for patients with coronavirus disease 2019, and several large centers in the United States and other countries have started clinical trials. METHODS: A case of HCQ cardiotoxicity diagnosed on an endomyocardial biopsy is presented. A review of the pathology archives was performed to identify additional cases of CQ or HCQ myopathy, and histologic changes were recorded. A brief literature review with an emphasis on pathologic findings in myopathies was performed. RESULTS: Including the index case, 4 cases of CQ or HCQ myopathy were identified. Light microscopic findings included vacuolated myopathy, and electron microscopic findings included myeloid bodies and curvilinear inclusion bodies. CONCLUSION: CQ and HCQ myopathy can present following long-term administration of the drug. The pathologic findings are nonspecific and overlap with other vacuolated myopathies, necessitating careful correlation of the histologic changes with the patient's medical history.
The retinopathy caused by antimalarials is well known. The differences between antimalarials and daily and cumulative doses are important factors in predicting the development of retinopathy. None of the commonly used tests alone are satisfactory for detecting early retinal changes. We recommend baseline color fundus photographs and automated central visual fields to follow these patients every nine to 12 months. Between these examinations, Amsler grid testing is adequate for screening for early defects.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 has resulted in an urgent need for identifying potential therapeutic drugs. In the first half of 2020 tropic antimalarial drugs, such as chloroquine (CQ) or hydroxochloroquine (HCQ) were the focus of tremendous public attention. In the initial periods of the pandemic, many scientific results pointed out that CQ/HCQ could be very effective for patients with severe COVID. While CQ and HCQ have successfully been used against several diseases (such as malaria, autoimmune disease and rheumatic illnesses); long term use of these agents are associated with serious adverse effects (i.e. inducing acute kidney injury, among many others) due to their role in blocking autophagy-dependent self-degradation. Recent experimental and clinical trial data also confirmed that there is no sufficient evidence about the efficient usage of CQ/HCQ against COVID-19. By using systems biology techniques, here we show that the cellular effect of CQ/HCQ on autophagy during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress or following SARS-CoV-2 infection results in upregulation of ER stress. By presenting a simple mathematical model, we claim that although CQ/HCQ might be able to ameliorate virus infection, the permanent inhibition of autophagy by CQ/HCQ has serious negative effects on the cell. Since CQ/HCQ promotes apoptotic cell death, here we confirm that addition of CQ/HCQ cannot be really effective even in severe cases. Only a transient treatment seemed to be able to avoid apoptotic cell death, but this type of therapy could not limit virus replication in the infected host. The presented theoretical analysis clearly points out the utility and applicability of systems biology modelling to test the cellular effect of a drug targeting key major processes, such as autophagy and apoptosis. Applying these approaches could decrease the cost of pre-clinical studies and facilitate the selection of promising clinical trials in a timely fashion.
Chloroquine modulates the activity of cultured human microvascular endothelial (HOME) cells in a complex fashion. At concentrations of 5-25 microM, CQ inhibits basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF-) and human serum-induced mitogenic activity in these cells, in a dose-dependent manner. The kinetics of CQ's inhibitory actions on serum-induced mitogenesis in HOME cells slowly develops with only 30% of maximum inhibition reached after 24 hours. In HOME cells grown in serum-free medium, CQ raised tissue-plasminogen activator antigen levels in cell extracts. There was also a potentiation of bFGF-induced t-PA production. The kinetics of CQ's stimulatory effect on t-PA production by HOME cells, suggest that this effect precedes its inhibitory actions on mitogenesis. This effect of CQ on t-PA generation in endothelial cells was susceptible to cycloheximide inhibition. In wound assays, HOME cell migration, induced with bFGF and HS, was potentiated by CQ.
Chloroquine (CQ) and hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) show good efficacy in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 in the early stage, while they are no longer recommended due to their side effects. As an important drug delivery carrier, serum albumin (SA) is closely related to the efficacy of drugs. Here, the affinity behaviour of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine with two SA were investigated through the multispectral method of biochemistry and computer simulation. The results showed that the intrinsic emission of both SA was quenched by CQ and HCQ in a spontaneous exothermic entropy reduction static process, which relied mainly on hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces. The lower binding constants suggested weak binding between the two drugs and SA, which might lead to differences in efficacy and possibly even to varying side effects. Binding site recognition demonstrated that CQ preferred to bind to the two sites of both SA, while HCQ tended to bind to site I of SA. The results of conformational studies demonstrated that CQ and HCQ could affect the structure of both SA by slightly increasing the alpha-helix content of SA. Finally, we combine the results from experimental start with molecular simulations to suggest drug modifications to guide the design of drugs. This work has important implications for guiding drug design improvements to select CQ derivatives with fewer side effects for the treatment of COVID-19.
