Minoxidil is a potent antihypertensive drug widely used in severe arterial hypertension and in that refractory to treatment. Its effectiveness in less severe forms of hypertension was evaluated in 15 patients who had either a severe to moderate arterial hypertension not previously treated, or who did not tolerate the side effects of other antihypertensive drugs. The usefulness of methyldopa and chlortalidone to prevent a potential minoxidil-induced tachycardia and fluid retention, respectively, was also tested. The patients were initially treated with chlortalidone 100 mg/day, and methyldopa 500 mg/day. Minoxidil was then given in increasing doses until the diastolic blood pressure was equal to or inferior to 90 mmHg. This occurred consistently at doses which ranged from 5 to 50 mg/day (average, 29 mg). Treatment with minoxidil was continued for four months; tolerance to the drugs was not observed. Low doses of methyldopa and chlortalidone were effective in controlling the tachycardia and the retention of sodium and water induced by minoxidil. The three associated drugs were well tolerated and the life quality improved in most patients. Hypertrichosis was the most consistent side effect. Two patients were withdrawn from the study after the blood pressure was controlled by minoxidil, because of the appearance of angor in one, and edema and heart failure in the other.
Chlortalidone (CTD) is a diuretic drug largely used as part of antihypertensive therapies. It is marketed as an equimolar mixture of its enantiomers in the racemic crystal phase named Form I, despite of the higher aqueous solubility of another crystal form. The latter, named Form II, was thought to contain both enantiomers as a racemic conglomerate, i.e., in the form of a mixture of crystals, half of which consists solely of the (R)-enantiomer, the other half the (S)-enantiomer. The occurrence of both enantiomers in individual crystals of CTD Form II was demonstrated in this study. Spontaneous resolution does really occur upon crystallization, as presumed previously even without physical evidence of the (S)-enantiomer. Both (R) and (S)-enantiomers were successfully identified as two domains of a twinned by inversion single crystal of CTD Form II. A reliable Flack parameter of 0.14(4) allowed to determine the proportion of the enantiomers in the crystal, which is formed with 86% of the (R)-enantiomer and 14% of the (S)-enantiomer.
This randomised, double-blind study compared the efficacy and safety of a fixed combination of hydroflumethiazide 50 mg and reserpine 0.125 mg (H-R) and chlortalidone 12.5 mg and atenolol 50 mg (C-A) in adult black patients with mild to moderate hypertension (a resting supine diastolic blood pressure (DBP) between 95 and 115 mmHg after a two week placebo washout period). If the DBP did not reach 90 mmHg after four weeks, the dosage was doubled. There were 27 patients in the H-R group and 22 in the C-A group who completed the study. In the H-R group, supine systolic and diastolic BP were reduced from 156.5 (95% confidence intervals 150.1-162.9) and 102.0 (97.5-106.5) mmHg to 137.0 (130.6-143.4) and 87.4 (83.0-91.9) mmHg, respectively. The corresponding values in the C-A group were 154.1 (147.0-161.2) and 103.4 (98.5-108.4) mmHg to 136.4 (129.3-143.5) and 91.2 (86.2-96.1) mmHg, respectively. Normalisation, response and control of DBP was achieved in 88.9, 92.6 and 100% of patients, respectively, in the H-R group, and in 81.8, 95.5 and 95.5% of patients in the C-A group, respectively. The dose was doubled in 14.8% of patients on H-R and 40.1% on C-A. No clinically significant abnormalities in laboratory variables and no serious adverse effects were encountered. Both drugs have been shown to be efficacious and safe in the treatment of mild to moderate hypertension in black patients.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
A reversed-phased liquid chromatographic method for the control of impurities of nine impurities in Chlortalidone drug substance is presented. The method is sufficiently sensitive to quantify down to the level of 0.0015 per cent equivalent to a concentration of 15 microg/ml.
The photodegradation process of the phototoxic diuretic drug chlorthalidone was studied. The products of its photolysis under UV-B were isolated and identified. Chlorthalidone was found to be active when examined by photohemolysis on human erythrocytes, but not in the presence of the isolated photoproducts. Inhibition of the photohemolysis process induced by chlorthalidone on addition of reduced glutathione (GSH) or ascorbic acid suggests the involvement of radicals species. The inhibition with 1,4-diazabycyclo [2.2.2] octane (DABCO), sodium azide (NaN3) sowie 2,5-dimethylfuran proof the participation of singlet oxygen (1O2) in this process.
Chlortalidone (CLT) is a thiazide-type diuretic with high affinity for the erythrocyte carbonic anhydrase. Therapeutically, it is mostly used to treat edema and hypertension due to liver cirrhosis, heart insufficiency, or renal dysfunction. Although diuretics and masking agents are prohibited by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) at all times in sports, substances belonging to this category are constantly detected in athlete samples, according to WADA's annual testing figures. Within this group of structurally diverse compounds, a threshold of 20 ng/mL has been introduced for six substances solely due to their presence as contaminants in other permitted drugs because of pharmaceutical production processes. In a recent presumptive doping case with a low urinary CLT concentration, the question of unintentional doping, for example, by contaminated non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug intake, arose. To examine this potential scenario, a co-elimination of low-dose CLT and hydrochlorothiazide (HCTA; 20 x 50 mug, 0.2 mg/day each) was conducted on five consecutive days in two volunteers. Urine samples were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Moreover, we examined the incorporation of CLT in scalp hair. HCTA is rapidly excreted renally in comparatively high concentrations. In contrast, the elimination of CLT is considerably slower (terminal elimination half-life extended by a factor of 12) and, consequently, much less concentrated in corresponding urine samples (45 and 53 ng/mL, respectively). Conversely, a higher hair incorporation of chlorthalidone was observed with simultaneous dosing of both. The results suggest that an unintentional intake of sub-therapeutic CLT doses due to contamination might result in an adverse analytical finding.
Some thiazide diuretics seem to exert antioxidant effects, which may be beneficial in the management of hypertension. Although many large-scale clinical trials on hypertension have proved that thiazide diuretics confer significant reductions in stroke and cardiovascular events, most of these trials preferentially used chlortalidone. Therefore, the difference in antioxidant effects between chlortalidone (CAS 77-36-1; 12.5 mg/day) and another thiazide diuretic, trichlormethiazide (CAS 133-67-5; 1 mg/day) was studied. Forty patients with refractory hypertension even after treatment with a combination of a calcium channel blocker and an angiotensin II receptor blocker were randomly assigned to additionally receive either chlortalidone or trichlormethiazide for 6 months. Then, diuretics were switched in each patient and they were treated for another 6 months. Ambulatory blood pressure was monitored for 24 h and markers of inflammation (C-reactive protein) and oxidative stress (8-isoprostane, malondialdehyde-modified low-density lipoproteins) were measured before and after each treatment. Addition of chlortalidone resulted in a greater reduction of blood pressure (mean of 24 h; from 146.8 +/- 18.0/83.8 +/- 12.2 mmHg to 122 +/- 18/72 +/- 11 mmHg) than that of trichlormethiazide (134 +/- 18/ 78 +/- 11 mmHg, p < 0.001). The levels of C-reactive protein, malondialdehyde-modified low-density lipoproteins, and 8-isoprostane were lower after chlortalidone therapy than after trichlormethiazide therapy. These results suggest that chlortalidone is superior to trichlormethiazide in patients with essential hypertension.
Atenolol (CAS 29122-68-7) and chlortalidone (CAS 77-36-1) are marketed associated in a 4:1 strength ratio (100/25 and 50/12.5 mg) for the treatment of hypertension. According to EU guidelines, the bioequivalence of one dosage strength can also cover additional strengths when the pharmacokinetics of a given drug is linearly related with the dose. The kinetics of atenolol is linearly correlated with the dose and chlortalidone has linear kinetics with doses < or = 100 mg. Thus this trial carried out on the 100/25 mg strength also covers the 50/12.5 mg strength. The trial was carried out on 18 healthy volunteers (9 males and 9 females) according to a single dose, two-period, two-treatment, two-sequence study design with washout. Timed atenolol plasma concentrations and chlortalidone blood concentrations were used to assess primary pharmacokinetic parameters Cmax, tmax and AUC extrapolated to infinity by a non-compartmental model. The bioavailability of the two formulations was compared through the 90% confidence intervals (C.I.) of Cmax and AUC in accordance with operating guidelines. C.I. of chlortalidone were fully comprised in the 0.80-1.25 range. In the case of atenolol, which displayed a higher data dispersion, C.I. were comprised in the enlarged 0.70-1.43 range. Time to peak, tmax, did not show any statistically significant difference between the test and reference product with respect to both analytes. Pharmacodynamic measurements of the decrease in systolic blood pressure led to fully overlapping results with test and reference. The authors conclude that the test formulation should be considered bioequivalent with the reference with chlortalidone and in the borderline of bioequivalence with atenolol. As no safety problems were involved and pharmacodynamics led to overlapping results as between test and reference, the bioequivalence conclusion could be extended also to atenolol.
Patients with grade 2-3 essential hypertension and postplacebo mean clinic systolic blood pressure (SBP) 160-190 mm Hg and 24-hour SBP 140-175 mm Hg by ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) received 40 mg azilsartan medoxomil (AZL-M) monotherapy for 4 weeks. "Nonresponders" were then randomized to 8 weeks of double-blind treatment with AZL-M 40 mg, AZL-M/chlortalidone (CLD) 40/25, or AZL-M/CLD 40/12.5 mg. After 8 weeks, mean clinic SBP change was -21.1 (+/-1.04) mm Hg for AZL-M/CLD 40/25 mg, -15.8 (+/-1.08) mm Hg for AZL-M/CLD 40/12.5 mg, and -6.4 (+/-1.05) mm Hg for AZL-M 40 mg (P < 0.001 for both AZL-M/CLD vs AZL-M, ANCOVA). Drug discontinuation rates were 8.9% (AZL-M/CLD 40/25 mg), 7.5% (AZL-M 40 mg), and 3.9% (AZL-M/CLD 40/12.5 mg). Creatinine increased in 8.1% (AZL-M/CLD 40/25), 3.1% (AZL-M/CLD 40/12.5 mg), and 3.0% (AZL-M 40 mg) of patients. AZL-M/CLD was effective and well tolerated in patients not achieving blood pressure targets with AZL-M.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the metabolic, antihypertensive and albuminuria-modifying effects of a heart rate-modulating calcium antagonist-angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor combination compared with those of a beta-blocker-low-dose diuretic combination in non-insulin-dependent diabetic hypertensives. DESIGN: A prospective randomized double-blind study. SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Twenty-four diabetics with diastolic blood pressure 90-115 mmHg without azotemia (plasma creatinine level < 150 mumol/l) were evaluated after 4 weeks receiving placebo and 12 weeks receiving treatment either with combined slow-release verapamil (retard formulation) and trandolapril (mean maintenance doses, 180 and 1.6 mg daily) or with atenolol and chlortalidone (71 and 18 mg daily). Insulin sensitivity (by the minimal model method of Bergman), additional metabolic variables, clinic blood pressure, ambulatory blood pressure profile and renal indices were assessed at the end of the placebo and active treatment phases. RESULTS: Compared with placebo, the two therapies produced similar decreases in mean supine clinic blood pressure [10 +/- 3 versus 11 +/- 3% (means +/- SEM)], upright clinic blood pressure (10 +/- 4 versus 11 +/- 4%) and ambulatory daytime blood pressure (9 +/- 2 versus 12 +/- 3%). However, although the verapamil-trandolapril combination was found to be metabolically neutral, the atenolol-chlortalidone combination aggravated insulin resistance [insulin sensitivity index, from (0.8 +/- 0.2) to (0.3 +/- 0.1) x 10(-4)/min per U per ml], increased the serum triglycerides level and decreased the high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and plasma potassium levels. Although both therapies tended to reduce 24 h albuminuria, this was significant for the verapamil-trandolapril treatment only. CONCLUSIONS: Because the effect of any antihypertensive drug, including diuretics and beta-blockers, on cardiovascular morbidity and on mortality in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients is not known, rational treatment selection can presently be based only on surrogate end-points. Therefore, the triad of metabolic neutrality with antihypertensive and antiproteinuric efficacy supports combined verapamil-trandolapril as a potentially valuable therapy for hypertension accompanying diabetes mellitus.
In case of an adverse analytical finding, a low (estimate) urine concentration can be the consequence of 2 very different situations: it can be the tail end of a drug voluntarily consumed to enhance athletic performance, even by microdosing (which is not effective for all drugs), or it can be the result of a contamination, irrespective of its source. For numerous doping agents, a hair test can allow discriminating doping from contamination based on the measured concentration or even the absence of the target drug. Given hair produces incremental concentrations, its analysis offers the possibility of establishing a pattern of drug use and thus, verifying self-reported histories of exposure. In order to provide a retrospective calendar of drug use, segmental analysis of the hair strand can be performed. In doping, the usual practice is to test the substance in short segments, such as 1 cm to avoid drug dilution when using larger segments. During the last months, seven athletes have returned an adverse analytical finding for the diuretic chlortalidone, with reported urine concentrations in the range 20 to 50 ng/mL. All these athletes submitted, via their legal team, their hair for establishing a pattern of exposure. Results were always consistent with incidental contamination (hair concentration lower than 5 pg/mg), although the source of contamination was never identified. The interpretation of the findings was established in the light of the limited literature, including hair tests after microdosing and therapeutic use.
