Suppositories of chlorphenamine maleate were formulated. The influence of particle size and percentage concentration of chlorphenamine maleate on the physical standards of its suppositories as well as the release of the drug from oily base (cacao butter), water-soluble base (carbowax) and emulsifying base (Witepsol) has been investigated.
The aim of this review was to describe a patient with serotonin toxicity after an overdose of dextromethorphan and chlorphenamine and to perform a systematic literature review exploring whether dextromethorphan and chlorphenamine may be equally contributory in the development of serotonin toxicity in overdose. A Medline literature review was undertaken to identify cases of serotonin toxicity due to dextromethorphan and/or chlorphenamine. Case reports were included if they included information on the ingested dose or plasma concentrations of dextromethorphan and/or chlorphenamine, information about co-ingestions and detailed clinical information to evaluate for serotonin toxicity. Cases were reviewed by two toxicologists and serotonin toxicity, defined by the Hunter criteria, was diagnosed when appropriate. The literature was then reviewed to evaluate whether chlorphenamine may be a serotonergic agent. One hundred and fifty-five articles of dextromethorphan or chlorphenamine poisoning were identified. There were 23 case reports of dextromethorphan, of which 18 were excluded for lack of serotonin toxicity. No cases were identified in which serotonin toxicity could be solely attributed to chlorphenamine. This left six cases of dextrometorphane and/or chlorphenamine overdose, including our own, in which serotonin toxicity could be diagnosed based on the presented clinical information. In three of the six eligible cases dextromethorphan and chlorphenamine were the only overdosed drugs. There is substantial evidence from the literature that chlorphenamine is a similarly potent serotonin re-uptake inhibitor when compared with dextrometorphan. Chlorphenamine is a serotonergic medication and combinations of chlorphenamine and dextromethorphan may be dangerous in overdose due to an increased risk of serotonin toxicity.
Methyl and propyl parahydroxybenzoate (MPHB, PPHB), phenylephrine hydrochloride (PE) and chlorphenamine maleate (CPM) are often combined as ingredients in cough-syrups. Due to distinct chemical structures, pKa values among other chemical properties are different. This may result in a particular chromatographic behaviour on ion-pair reversed-phase liquid chromatographic (LC) systems. A face-centred central composite design was applied to study the impact of four LC mobile phase parameters and parameter interactions on the retention of these four compounds. The mobile phase parameters studied were the concentration of methanol as organic modifier, the concentration of sodium dioctylsulphosuccinate (SDSS) as counter-ion, the concentration of dimethyloctylamine (DMOA) as competitive base and the pH. By means of the proposed design, mathematical regression models and response surface plots were calculated, which could predict the compounds' retention times with good statistical reliability. Adequate combination of the most relevant of these mobile phase parameters enabled complete chromatographic separations within short times of analysis.
The common cold is the most frequent upper respiratory viral infection. Although benign, it represents a high socioeconomic burden. Many over-the-counter drugs are available to manage the symptoms of this condition, with antihistamines and vasoconstrictors being the most widely used. This review aimed to compare the potential mechanisms underlying the efficacy and safety of chlorphenamine and pseudoephedrine, the most commonly used agents in these two classes of drugs, and provide a useful perspective to impact appropriate decisions when considering these options for symptomatic common cold treatment. To conduct a comprehensive analysis, we systematically reviewed the use of pseudoephedrine and chlorphenamine using various databases, including MEDLINE, Google Scholar, Scopus, and Embase. We also perused the bibliographies of relevant articles and the EudraVigilance database. The findings suggest that pseudoephedrine may offer specific benefits in rapidly alleviating nasal congestion in the short term. Chlorphenamine appears to exhibit a higher degree of efficacy in alleviating rhinorrhea and other specific cold symptoms compared to pseudoephedrine. Pharmacovigilance data and case report reviews showed that pseudoephedrine may induce a higher incidence of less common but potentially life-threatening adverse effects compared to chlorphenamine. We concluded that antihistamine drugs exhibit a more favorable benefit/risk profile than vasoconstrictors for treating symptomatic common colds.
Chlorphenamine (CPA) adsorption onto three activated carbons (ACs), namely, Megapol M (MM), Micro 10 (M10), and GAMA B (GB), was studied in this work. The textural properties, concentrations of active sites, surface charge and point of zero charge of the ACs were assessed. The surface areas (S(BET)) of MM, GB and M10 were 1107, 812 and 766 m(2)/g, respectively. The MM surface had an acidic character, while the surfaces of M10 and GB were basic. The adsorption capacity of MM, M10, and GB towards CPA was studied at pH 7 and 11, and the adsorption capacity decreased in the order MM > M10  approximately  GB, which was ascribed to the magnitude of S(BET) and the concentration of acidic sites. The solution pH significantly increased the adsorption capacity of MM towards CPA by raising the solution pH from 5 to 9, and this behavior was attributed to the electrostatic attraction between the negatively charged surface of MM and the cationic species of CPA. The maximum uptake of CPA adsorbed on MM was 574.6 mg/g at pH = 11 and T = 25  degrees C. The adsorption capacity of MM was slightly raised by incrementing the temperature. Lastly, the zeta potential measurements of pristine MM and MM saturated with CPA confirmed that the electrostatic attraction predominated in the pH range of 5-9, and the pi-pi stacking interactions were the principal mechanism of CPA adsorption on MM at pH 11.
A sensitive and accurate HPLC-MS/MS method was developed for the simultaneous determination of dextromethorphan, dextrorphan and chlorphenamine in human plasma. Three analytes were extracted from plasma by liquid-liquid extraction using ethyl acetate and separated on a Kromasil 60-5CN column (3 microm, 2.1 x 150 mm) with mobile phase of acetonitrile-water (containing 0.1% formic acid; 50:50, v/v) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Quantification was performed on a triple quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer in multiple reaction monitoring mode using positive electrospray ionization. The calibration curve was linear over the range of 0.01-5 ng/mL for dextromethorphan, 0.02-5 ng/mL for dextrorphan and 0.025-20 ng/mL for chlorphenamine. The lower limits of quantification for dextromethorphan, dextrorphan and chlorphenamine were 0.01, 0.02 and 0.025 ng/mL, respectively. The intra- and inter-day precisions were within 11% and accuracies were in the range of 92.9-102.5%. All analytes were proved to be stable during sample storage, preparation and analytic procedures. This method was first applied to the pharmacokinetic study in healthy Chinese volunteers after a single oral dose of the formulation containing dextromethorphan hydrobromide (18 mg) and chlorpheniramine malaeate (8 mg).
AIM: This study investigated the bioavailability of single doses of 1.12 and 2.24 mg chlorphenamine maleate applied intranasally (0.4% nasal spray) relative to a single peroral dose of 8 mg chlorphenamine maleate (tablets). METHODS: Twenty-four (24) subjects were treated with single nasal doses of 1.12 mg and 2.24 mg chlorphenamine maleate (0.4% nasal spray) and two 4 mg chlorphenamine maleate tablets (Piriton) on 3 separate study days according to a 3-way cross-over design with a 7-day wash-out between periods. Blood was sampled before and at 0.25, 0.50, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 6.0, 8.0, 12, 16 and 24 hours after drug administration. Additional blood samples were obtained 36, 48 and 72 hours after peroral administration only. All subjects were included in the pharmacokinetic analysis. RESULTS: Nasally applied chlorphenamine maleate was readily absorbed, reaching peak plasma levels after 0.25 to 3.0 hours. The dose-normalized estimated mean Cmax values were 1.24, 1.43 and 1.21 ng/ml for the peroral tablet and the 1.12 mg and 2.24 mg nasal dose, respectively. The dose-normalized estimated mean AUC(0-infinity) values were 25.91, 26.44 and 25.56 ng x h/ml for the tablet and the 1.12 and 2.24 mg nasal dose, respectively. The estimated treatment ratios (nasal dose to tablet) of the dose-normalized values for the 1.12 mg nasal dose were 1.15 (900 CI: 1.0-1.32) and 1.02 (90% CI: 0.88-1.18) for Cmax and AUC(0-infinity), respectively, for the 2.24 mg nasal dose they were 0.98 (90% CI: 0.85-1.13) and 0.99 (90% CI: 0.85-1.13) for Cmax and AUC(0-infinity), respectively. The other pharmacokinetic characteristics (tmax, t(1/2), lambda(z), AUC(0-tf), MRTtot, CL/f and Vz/f) were comparable across all treatments. These data indicate that the disposition of chlorphenamine maleate was independent of the route and dose of administration. CONCLUSIONS: Chlorphenamine maleate is readily absorbed after nasal application using a 0.4% nasal spray. The nasal administration showed that the systemic bioavailability at the two dose levels used was comparable to that for the tablet. Maximum concentrations on the low dose, however, were higher and those on the high dose were comparable to those for the tablet. The nasal application of chlorphenamine maleate does not alter the overall systemic exposure compared to the oral route.
BACKGROUND: The common cold and other viral airway infections are highly prevalent in the population, and their treatment often requires the use of medications for symptomatic relief. Paracetamol is as an analgesic and antipyretic; chlorphenamine is an antihistamine; and phenylephrine, a vasoconstrictor and decongestant. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial sought to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fixed-dose combination of paracetamol, chlorphenamine and phenylephrine in the symptomatic treatment of the common cold and flu-like syndrome in adults. METHODS: This study enrolled 146 individuals aged 18 to 60 years who had moderate to severe flu-like syndrome or common cold. After clinical examination and laboratory tests, individuals were randomly assigned to receive the fixed-dose combination (73) or placebo (73), five capsules per day for 48 to 72 hours. The primary efficacy endpoint was the sum of the scores of 10 symptoms on a four-point Likert-type scale. To evaluate treatment safety, the occurrence of adverse events was also measured. RESULTS: Mean age was 33.5 (+/-9.5) years in the placebo group and 33.8 (+/-11.5) in the treatment group. There were 55 women and 18 men in the placebo group, and 46 women and 27 men in the treatment group. Comparison of overall symptom scores in the two groups revealed a significantly greater reduction in the treatment group than in the placebo group (p = 0.015). Analysis at the first 13 dose intervals (+/- 66 h of treatment) showed a greater reduction of symptom scores in the treatment group than in the placebo group (p < 0.05). The number and distribution of adverse events were similar in both groups. CONCLUSION: A fixed-dose combination of paracetamol, chlorphenamine and phenylephrine was safe and more effective than placebo in the symptomatic treatment of the common cold or flu-like syndrome in adults. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01389518.
A high-performance liquid chromatography procedure for the simultaneous determination of aminophylline, methoxyphenamine hydrochloride, noscapine and chlorphenamine maleate in commercially available compound capsule dosage forms has been developed and validated. The separation and quantification were achieved on an Ultrasphere C18 column using a mobile phase of dichloromethane-methanol-0.25% (v/v) diethylamine aqueous solution (20:60:20, v/v/v) at a flow rate of 1 ml min(-1) with detection of all analytes at 264 nm. The separation was achieved within 6 min for each drug mixture. The method showed good linearity for the aminophylline, noscapine, chlorphenamine maleate and methoxyphenamine hydrochloride mixture in the 125-750, 35-210, 10-60 and 62.5-375 microg ml(-1) ranges, respectively. The intra- and inter-day R.S.D.s ranged from 0.4 to 0.5%, 0.4-0.6%, 0.5-0.7% and 0.4-0.6% for aminophylline, noscapine, chlorphenamine maleate and methoxyphenamine hydrochloride, respectively. The recoveries (mean+/-S.D.) of low, middle and high concentrations were 99.9+/-0.9, 100.4+/-1.3 and 99.7+/-0.7% for aminophylline; 99.9+/-1.1, 100.4+/-0.7 and 100.1+/-0.8% for noscapine; 99.8+/-1.1, 99.7+/-1.0 and 100.7+/-0.8% for chlorphenamine maleate; and 99.8+/-0.9, 100.4+/-1.6 and 99.9+/-0.9% for methoxyphenamine hydrochloride, respectively.
We developed a convenient method by coupling frontal elution paper chromatography with desorption corona beam ionization mass spectrometry (DCBI-MS) for rapid determination of chlorphenamine added in herbal medicines or dietary supplements. In this method, the ethanol extract of the herbal products was spotted directly onto an isosceles triangular filter paper sheet, and then the paper sheet was developed under strong elution condition with the sample zone migrating at the solvent front. The analyte was finally condensed at the V-shaped tip which could then be placed under the visible plasma beam of DCBI for ionization. The overall procedure took less than 5 min. The frontal elution paper chromatography on a triangular plate used in this work improved the signal intensity of chlorphenamine by 30-fold due to the analyte condensing at the tip and the reduction of the background suppression. Furthermore, the paper sheet also functioned as a filter in the analysis of solid or powder samples, which can increase the analytical throughput by omitting the step of centrifugation. The proposed method in current study was successfully applied in the determination of chlorphenamine in herbal medicines. Chlorphenamine was detected in four of the twelve types of herbal medicines examined in this study. The limit of detection was 200 ng/mL (2.0 ng absolute) in full-scan positive-ion mode and the linear range was from 5.0 mug/mL to 50 mug/mL with satisfactory linear coefficient (R(2) (the square of the correlation coefficient)=0.895). Good reproducibility was achieved with relative standard deviations (RSDs) less than 15.0% and the recoveries of chlorphenamine ranged from 84.3 to 90.6%.
