The most common presentation of tinea pedis (athlete's foot) is that involving the interdigital spaces. Tinea pedis interdigitalis may present as asymptomatic dermatophytosis simplex or dermatophytosis complex, which is symptomatic, with secondary bacterial infection. In the dermatophytosis complex presentation there may be inflammation, maceration and odor, with bacterial involvement. Ciclopirox gel offers advantages in the treatment of tinea pedis, especially in the dermatophytosis complex presentation, with antifungal, antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory activity; furthermore, the gel formulation is fast drying, which is an advantage when the toe web area is moist.
One percent Ciclopirox solution, a new topical antimycotic agent, was used in a double-blind controlled trial in 105 dermatomycosis patients. Twelve of the patients were lost to follow-up. Of the remaining ninety-three patients, forty-four were treated with the active drug, forty-nine with a placebo. The cure rate amongst those using ciclopirox was significantly superior to that of the placebo. The drug was effective against Trichophyton rubrum, T. violaceum, T. mentagrophytes and Malassezia furfur.
BACKGROUND: Lung cancer remains a major cause of cancer-related mortality throughout the world at present. Repositioning of existing drugs for other diseases is a promising strategy for cancer therapies, which may rapidly advance potentially promising agents into clinical trials and cut down the cost of drug development. Ciclopirox (CPX), an iron chelator commonly used to treat fungal infections, which has recently been shown to have antitumor activity against a variety of cancers including both solid tumors and hematological malignancies in vitro and in vivo. However, the effect of CPX on non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and the underlying mechanism is still unclear. METHODS: CCK-8, clonal formation test and cell cycle detection were used to observe the effect of inhibitor on the proliferation ability of NSCLC cells. The effects of CPX on the metastasis ability of NSCLC cells were analyzed by Transwell assays. Apoptosis assay was used to observe the level of cells apoptosis. The role of CPX in energy metabolism of NSCLC cells was investigated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) detection, glucose uptake, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) experiments. Western blot was used to examine the protein changes. RESULTS: We report that CPX inhibits NSCLC cell migration and invasion abilities through inhibiting the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, impairing cellular bioenergetics, and promoting reactive oxygen species to activate endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress-induced apoptotic cell death. Moreover, CPX intraperitoneal injection can significantly inhibit NSCLC growth in vivo in a xenograft model. CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed that CPX targets cellular bioenergetics and activates unfolded protein response in ER to drive apoptosis in NSCLC cells, indicating that CPX may be a potential therapeutic drug for the treatment of NSCLC. Video Abstract.
Seborrheic dermatitis is a common inflammatory skin disease, affecting between 1% and 3% of immunocompetent adults. While its cause is unknown, a number of predisposing factors have been reported, including the implications of Malassezia yeasts. Various treatment options are available, such as ciclopirox shampoo, which combines anti-Malassezia activity with an anti-inflammatory action. This agent has been shown to be an effective and safe treatment for seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp.
Drug repurposing is an attractive strategy for developing new antibacterial molecules. Herein, we evaluated the in vitro antibacterial, antibiofilm, and antivirulence activities of eight FDA-approved "non-antibiotic" drugs, comparatively to tobramycin, against selected Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains from cystic fibrosis patients. MIC and MBC values were measured by broth microdilution method. Time-kill kinetics was studied by the macro dilution method, and synergy studies were performed by checkerboard microdilution assay. The activity against preformed biofilms was measured by crystal violet and viable cell count assays. The effects on gene expression were studied by real-time quantitative PCR, while the cytotoxic potential was evaluated against IB3-1 bronchial CF cells. Ciclopirox, 5-fluorouracil, and actinomycin D showed the best activity against P. aeruginosa planktonic cells and therefore underwent further evaluation. Time-kill assays indicated actinomycin D and ciclopirox, contrarily to 5-fluorouracil and tobramycin, have the potential for bacterial eradication, although with strain-dependent efficacy. Ciclopirox was the most effective against the viability of the preformed biofilm. A similar activity was observed for other drugs, although they stimulate extracellular polymeric substance production. Ribavirin showed a specific antibiofilm effect, not dependent on bacterial killing. Exposure to drugs and tobramycin generally caused hyperexpression of the virulence traits tested, except for actinomycin D, which downregulated the expression of alkaline protease and alginate polymerization. Ciclopirox and actinomycin D revealed high cytotoxic potential. Ciclopirox and ribavirin might provide chemical scaffolds for anti-P. aeruginosa drugs. Further studies are warranted to decrease ciclopirox cytotoxicity and evaluate the in vivo protective effects.
BACKGROUND: Seborrheic dermatitis (SD) is a very common inflammatory skin disease. It occurs in 1-3% of the population. The most supported pathogenetic theory links SD to dandruff via a common etiology, yeasts of the genus Malassezia. Ketoconazole and ciclopirox (CPX) shampoo are considered as the first line treatment of SD of the scalp. CPX is a broad-spectrum, hydroxypyridone-derived, synthetic antifungal agent with anti-bacterial, anti-inflammatory, and anti-oxidant properties. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and tolerability of 1% CPX shampoo in SD of the scalp. METHODS: A total of 40 patients, 31 men and 9 women, mean age 33+/-6 years, with scalp SD of moderate-to-severe grade were enrolled, after their informed consent, in this 12-week prospective assessor-blinded trial. One-percent CPX shampoo (5 mL) was applied twice a week for 12 weeks. The primary efficacy parameter was the Total Dandruff Severity Score (TDSS), based on 4-point ordinal scales describing signs and symptoms (scaling, inflammation, and itching) of the disease, evaluated in an assessor-blinded fashion, at baseline and after 6 and 12 weeks. Secondary outcomes were the single items of the TDSS and the evaluation of local tolerability. RESULTS: At baseline the TDSS was 17+/-5. After 1% CPX TDSS was reduced to 10+/-5 at week 6 and to 6.6+/-4 at the end of study period (P=0.0001; ANOVA test). This difference represents a 62% reduction in comparison with baseline. At week 12, the reduction of scaling, inflammation and itching scores were -55%, -65%, and -69%, respectively. The product was very well tolerated. No side effects were reported or observed during the study. CONCLUSIONS: The study supports the use of 1% CPX shampoo in the treatment of SD of the scalp. CPX shampoo was able to reduce desquamation, inflammation and itching associated with scalp SD. Furthermore, 1% CPX shampoo was found to be safe and well tolerated.
BACKGROUND: Treatment of onychomycosis has recently been enhanced by the introduction of combination therapies. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy of a combination therapy of ciclopirox nail lacquer and oral terbinafine compared to oral terbinafine monotherapy for the treatment of onychomycosis caused by dermatophytes. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty patients with onychomycosis were randomly assigned to receive either oral terbinafine 250 mg/day for 16 weeks or a combination of oral terbinafine 250 mg/day for 16 weeks and topical ciclopirox nail lacquer once daily for 9 months. Both groups were followed up for 9 months from start of treatment. RESULTS: After 9 months of treatment, the mycological cure rates were 22/34 (64.7%) for the terbinafine-only group and 30/34 (88.2%) for the combination therapy group (p<0.05). No significant difference was noted in the complete cure rate. CONCLUSION: Combination therapy of oral terbinafine and ciclopirox nail lacquer is a safe and more effective treatment for onychomycosis than terbinafine alone, especially in younger patients and in shorter-duration onychomycosis.
The malignant growth of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive cancer cells is dependent on the continuous expression of the viral E6/E7 oncogenes. Here, we examined the effects of iron deprivation on the phenotype of HPV-positive cervical cancer cells. We found that iron chelators, such as the topical antifungal agent ciclopirox (CPX), strongly repress HPV E6/E7 oncogene expression, both at the transcript and protein level. CPX efficiently blocks the proliferation of HPV-positive cancer cells by inducing cellular senescence. Although active mTOR signaling is considered to be critical for the cellular senescence response towards a variety of prosenescent agents, CPX-induced senescence occurs under conditions of severely impaired mTOR signaling. Prolonged CPX treatment leads to p53-independent Caspase-3/7 activation and induction of apoptosis. CPX also eliminates HPV-positive cancer cells under hypoxic conditions through induction of apoptosis. Taken together, these results show that iron deprivation exerts profound antiviral and antiproliferative effects in HPV-positive cancer cells and suggest that iron chelators, such as CPX, possess therapeutic potential as HPV-inhibitory, prosenescent and proapoptotic agents in both normoxic and hypoxic environments.
Ciclopirox (CPX) is a synthetic antifungal drug that is mainly used to treat dermatomycoses. The aim of the present study was to determine whether CPX could influence Ewing sarcoma progression. The present study suggested that CPX treatment may inhibit Ewing sarcoma (ES) progression through Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1‑Friend leukemia integration 1 (EWS‑FLI1), a common fusion transcript structure in patients with ES. To determine the underlying mechanisms of ES progression, cross analysis was conducted on three high‑throughput genome or transcript me datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus. The results indicated that CPX may inhibit ES growth by affecting vasculature development and DNA replication. A combination of genome‑wide expression and binding profiles revealed several potential targets for CPX in ES, including collagen type I alpha2 chain, N‑myc proto‑oncogene and transforming growth factor beta1, which contained significantly enriched binding peaks of FLI1. In addition, network analysis, including a protein‑protein interaction network and a transcription regulatory network, provided further detailed information about the roles of CPX in ES. This study may provide a novel solution for ES treatment and may also aid in improving its prognosis.
BACKGROUND: Dermatophytoses are the most frequent fungal infections worldwide and there have been described clinical resistance to the commonly used antifungals. Clioquinol is an antimicrobial that had the oral formulations withdrawn from the market in the 70s due to the report of neurotoxicity and recently has been considered as an effective alternative for the treatment of dermatophytosis. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of the double and triple association between clioquinol with terbinafine and ciclopirox on clinical isolates of dermatophytes. The cytotoxicity of these associations on human leukocytes was also verified. METHODS: Checkerboard method was used to evaluate the interaction between antifungal agents. Time-kill assay was used to verify fungicidal action and evaluate the combination with greater effect for TRU47 isolate. Cell viability was assessed by loss of integrity of the leukocyte membrane in order to verify the toxicity. RESULTS: Synergistic interaction was observed in 42% of isolates when terbinafine was associated with clioquinol and in 50% of isolates when ciclopirox was associated with clioquinol. The triple association resulted in synergistic interaction for 75% of the isolates. Clioquinol + terbinafine and triple combination were more effective for TRU47 isolate, and the combinations exhibited a time-dependent fungicidal effect. Furthermore, the results of cell viability demonstrated that clioquinol and terbinafine combination is not cytotoxic to human leukocytes. CONCLUSIONS: Clioquinol in combination with antifungals in the treatment of dermatophytosis can be a therapeutic strategy to overcome problems related to resistance, action spectrum and toxicity of the antifungal drugs used in the clinic.
The Ni and Co doping effect on the ciclopirox (CPX) drug delivery performance of a ZnO ‎nanosheet (ZnO-NS) was investigated theoretically. Doping Ni and Co metals into the ZnO-NS ‎increased the adsorption energy of CPX from -7.9 to -27.4 and -31.7 kcal/mol, respectively. ‎The CPX adsorption reduced the ZnO-NS gap (Eg) from 3.81 to 3.46 eV, while the CPX ‎adsorption reduced the Eg of the Ni- and Co-doped ZnO-NS from 2.74 and 2.68 eV to 1.87 and ‎‎1.71 eV, respectively. The CPX adsorption performance increased after doping process. A drug ‎release mechanism was introduced in cancerous tissues based on the PH.‎.
