We are reporting on the case of a 46XY male patient that presented a bilateral testicular seminoma in the setting of bilateral cryptorchidia and left inguinal hernia. The patient received five courses of cisplatin/ciclophosphamide followed by 3,000 cGy of radiation. The patient then, underwent resection of the residual mass and of an unrecognizable pelvic structure. The histopathological analysis revealed necrosis of the residual seminoma and an atrophic uterus. Currently, the patient is alive and asymptomatic at 88 months of follow-up. This is the third case reported of a patient with persistent mullerian duct syndrome and bilateral seminoma.
The results obtained in 26 patients suffering from metastatic cancer of the breast no longer sensitive to hormone treatment are reported. The patients were treated with ciclophosphamide (CTX) (500 mg i.v.) once a week and triethylenethiophosphamide (20-30 mg i.m.) (TSPA) every 4 weeks associated with cyclophosphamide as follows: CTX--CTX--CTX--CTX+TSPA. 9 objective regressions (34.6%) were observed. Those with objective regression lived 28 months on average (SD 23.45) and those without lived on average 11.41 months (SD 9.89). The difference is statistically significant. Side effects of various types were observed in 7 patients (27%).
AIMS: Technological progress, improvements in the design of clinical trials and in MRI have led to a great variety of therapeutical approaches in dealing with multiple sclerosis (MS), some of which have been successful while others less so, despite promising results from animal models. DEVELOPMENT: In this paper we review the present state of therapy with immunosuppressants in MS and special attention is paid to trials conducted with cladribine, linomide, sulfasalazine, ciclophosphamide, mitoxantrone, cyclosporine A and azatioprine. CONCLUSION: Severe, unspecific immunosuppression lowers the anatomopathological and clinical activity of the disease, with slight improvements in the seizure rates and the MRI. While no effects have been found on the progression, serious short and long term side effects have been observed which, in some cases, prevent it from being administered. However, it is true that proof of the efficiency of these products may not have been possible owing to methodological problems they might be more useful alone or in combination with immunomodulators.
Wegener's granulomatosis, is a rare form of systemic vasculitis characterized by necrotic granulomas around the blood vessels. We report a case of a healthy 43-year-old man presented with multiple ulcerated lesions in head and all over the body, that has appeared spontaneously. It was characterized by a giant deep ulceration covered by thick purulent, in size from 3 to 4 cm, deep; sub febrile temperature, and minimal pain associated. Skin biopsies results pyoderma gangrenosum (PG)-like features: anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (cANCA) positive. Six months later, the patient developed dispea episodes. CT scan (CT) result with multiple focal opacities. He was diagnosed with wegener granulomatosis (WG) and was treated with corticosteroids and ciclophosphamide. Skin involvement in WG is not common and lesions in the skin vary from purpura, paniculitis to ulceration. In our case, skin elements are the first manifestations. Whether these elements are Wegener manifestation or we have coexistence of PG with WG, it remains a still uncertain question to answer. There is no histopathologic pathognomic elements for both. Skin involvement in WG with PG-like lesions have been rarely reported. In front of this type of widespread ulcerations, resistant to treatment we should be aware that one of the reasons may be a disease of autoimmune etiology such as WG.
Although cisplatin and etoposide seem to represent the treatment of choice in Small-Cell Lung Cancer, a lot of data exist in literature supporting both the use of anthracycline-containing regimens and the use of alternating regimens where platinum-containing regimens and anthracycline-containing regimens are alternatively used as first line in the same patient. In our paper we review the outcomes of two different series of patients treated with ciclophosphamide-epidoxorubicin-etoposide (CEVP16) or carboplatin-etoposide (CBE) for extended Small-Cell Lung Cancer. Sixty-three patients (53.4%) were treated with CEVP16 and 55 patients (46.6%) with CBE. Response Rate (complete plus partial responses) was greater in patients treated with CEVP16 (49.2%) when compared with the response rate in patients treated with CBE (30.9%) (p=0.04 using the Chi-Square test); no differences were observed in the median time to progression (235 vs 199 days, using the Log-Rank test). Overall survival was greater in the CEVP16 group when compared with the CBE one (281 vs 208 days and 35.6% vs 16.3% of patients alive after 2 years of follow up for CEVP16 and CBE respectively, p=0.02 using the Log-Rank test). Although our data present all the methodological limits of the "case-series", it is interesting to observe how an anthracycline-containing regimen seems to be more effective than a platinum-containing one and how it could still play a role in the treatment of extended Small-Cell Lung Cancer.
