The conformational characteristics of two H2-receptor antagonists, cimetidine and ranitidine, have been investigated by quantum mechanical PCILO method and the results indicate a folded conformation for cimetidine stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonding and an extended backbone conformation for ranitidine. NMR investigations carried out on these two drugs in solution, however, indicate a predominance of an extended conformation for both the molecules. The significance of this result has been discussed in terms of the activity of these two drugs. Besides these studies, NMR experiments have also been carried out on the drugs incorporated into the lipid bilayers to investigate the drug-lipid interaction. The results from this study suggest that the hydrophobic portion of the drugs is buried in the hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains of the lipid bilayer, while the terminal hydrophilic end of the drug lies at the lipid-water interface.
The new and convenient method for the separation, isolation and characterization of the N-ciano-N'-methyl-N"-(2-/(5-methylimidazol-4-yl)methylthio/ethyl) guanidine and its biotransformation and degradation products was developed. Mass spectra obtained with the FAB (Fast Atom Bombardment) method are described. This method proved to be very successful for the analysis and characterization of studied compounds.
In a prospective randomized study of 39 consecutive cesarean sections, 20 patients received cimetidine 400 mg intramuscularly as a pre-anesthetic, an 19 control patients were given NaCl. No perinatal effects on the infants were observed by cardiotocography before delivery, and K, Na, pH, PCO2, HCO-3 and glucose values in capillary blood were nearly identical in the two groups 2 hours after birth, the difference being non-significant (p greater than 0.05). No respiratory effects or arrhythmias were observed. In another study comprising 8 elective cesarean sections in patients with uncomplicated pregnancies, cimetidine was found to cross the placenta at a maternal/cord blood ratio of 3:1. The drug could not be detected in any of the infants 2 hours after delivery.
Although cimetidine is more effective than a placebo for the prophylaxis of stress-induced ulcers, it has no advantage over titrated antacid dosing. Several comparative studies even suggest that combining cimetidine with antacid is no more effective than use of full-dose antacid. Therefore, we recommend prophylactic use of cimetidine only when very large dosages of antacid are required, in order to minimize acid-base disturbances.
Cimetidine is a rare cause of drug-induced fever. In a patient without evidence of hypersensitivity (the lymphocytes did not react to the drug in vitro) fever was the sole manifestation of an adverse reaction to cimetidine that was confirmed by challenge with the drug.
Cimetidine and antacids are the mainstays of therapy for the prophylaxis of stress-induced ulceration in critically ill children. Previous cimetidine dosing recommendations have been empiric because of a lack of knowledge about cimetidine disposition kinetics in children. Thirty children, mean age 9 +/- 3.2 years, were admitted to the study with the following primary diagnoses: closed head injury (23 patients), sepsis (four), gunshot wound (two), and bleeding gastric ulceration (one). The mean dose of cimetidine was 26 mg/kg/day, administered intravenously over 15 minutes in four divided doses. Cimetidine disposition was best described by a biphasic elimination curve with t1/2 values for cimetidine, cimetidine sulfoxide, and hydroxymethyl cimetidine of 1.39, 2.6, and 4.7 hours, respectively. Cimetidine plasma concentrations were maintained at greater than or equal to 0.5 microgram/ml for a significantly longer time in patients who received greater than or equal to 20 mg/kg/day. Most patients had a plasma cimetidine concentration below 0.5 to 1.0 microgram/ml 4 hours after infusion. The mean apparent volume of distribution and total body clearance for cimetidine were 1.23 L/kg and 10.4 ml/min/kg, respectively. A significant correlation was found between age and either apparent volume of distribution (r = 0.76, P less than 0.001) or total body clearance (r = 0.75, P less than 0.001). No significant correlation between cimetidine concentrations in either plasma or gastric juice and gastric pH could be determined. However, seven of nine patients who received only cimetidine had a gastric pH of greater than or equal to 4 at 2 hours after infusion when the plasma cimetidine concentration was greater than or equal to 1.0 or the gastric juice concentration was greater than or equal to 2.0 microgram/ml. The mean gastric pH was 2.2 at 6 hours, when plasma and gastric juice concentrations of cimetidine were greater than or equal to 1.0 microgram/ml. On the basis of our data, a cimetidine dosage of 20 to 30 mg/kg/day administered in six divided doses should provide for average steady-state plasma cimetidine concentrations of 1.3 to 2.0 micrograms/ml.
The term fasciitis-panniculitis syndrome (FPS) is proposed as a novel compilation encompassing several disorders, common to which is subcutaneous induration caused by cicatrizing fasciitis as well as septal and lobular panniculitis and perimysial fibrosis. Included herein are Shulman's eosinophilic fasciitis, morphea profunda, lupus profundus, venous lipodermatosclerosis, toxic oil syndrome, altered tryptophane-related eosinophilic myositis, graft-versus-host reaction, and fasciitis reactive to subjacent basal cell carcinoma. FPS should be differentiated from scleroderma, which primarily affects the dermal structures and in which arterioles are injured. In contrast, vasculopathy of the subcutaneous medium-sized veins accompanies the hypodermal lesions of FPS. The importance of recognizing and grouping these disorders lies in their different histopathology, characterization as reactive phenomena, enhanced responsiveness to treatment, and better prognosis than scleroderma. In view of the excellent prognosis of FPS, steroid treatment is not warranted. Long-term therapy with cimetidine appears to benefit the majority of patients.
This study was done to determine if the pharmacokinetics and gastric pH response of intravenous cimetidine are superior to oral dosing in seriously ill patients. A paired study of intravenous followed by oral liquid cimetidine was given to eight men and two women who were inpatients in a VA Hospital. Treatment was prescribed for either upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding or prophylaxis against GI bleeding. All patients received cimetidine 300 mg every 6 hours intravenously on day 1 and orally on day 2. After the fourth dose each day, venous blood samples and gastric pH measurements were taken serially for 6 hours. Peak serum cimetidine concentration was 2.0 +/- 0.5 mg/L for the intravenous dose and 1.5 +/- 0.3 mg/L for the oral dose (P = .001). Area under the curve (AUC) of cimetidine concentration was 3.81 +/- 1.1 mg/hr/L for the intravenous dose and 4.19 +/- 1.22 mg/hr/L for the oral dose (P greater than .30). Bioavailability (AUCpo/AUCiv) was 1.13 +/- 0.25, demonstrating complete oral absorption. The time during a 6-hour dosing interval that the gastric pH remained above 3.0 was 3.3 +/- 2.1 hours for the intravenous dose and 2.5 +/- 2.3 hours for the oral dose, P = .171). The time that the serum cimetidine concentration remained above 0.5 mg/L was 2.0 +/- 0.9 hours for the intravenous dose and 2.7 +/- 1.0 hours for the oral dose (P = .055). We concluded that bioavailability, time that gastric pH is maintained greater 3.0, and time that the serum cimetidine concentration is greater than 0.5 mg/L for intravenous cimetidine are not significantly different from oral cimetidine in seriously ill patients.
We report the case of a patient with peptic ulcer disease who developed cimetidine-induced thrombocytopenia. The thrombocytopenia resolved spontaneously following discontinuation of cimetidine, and did not recur with ranitidine. We concluded that cimetidine and ranitidine do not necessarily cross-react to induce thrombocytopenia. Thus the exclusion of both H2-blockers in the event that one has caused thrombocytopenia may not be justified.
The effects of preanesthetic glycopyrrolate and cimetidine on gastric fluid pH and volume were studied in outpatients. One hundred outpatients scheduled for elective surgery were randomly allocated into four groups with 25 patients in each group. Patients in group I were given neither glycopyrrolate nor cimetidine and served as controls. Group II patients received 4-5 micrograms/kg of glycopyrrolate intramuscularly 45-90 min before induction of anesthesia. Patients in group III received 300 mg of cimetidine orally with a sip of water 1-4 hr before induction of anesthesia. Group IV patients received cimetidine, as in group III, and glycopyrrolate as in group II. Twenty-five inpatients undergoing elective surgery also were studied for comparison. Patients in group I (control) served as the basis for comparison with inpatients. Patients with gastric pH less than or equal to 2.5 or volume of gastric contents greater than or equal to 20 ml were defined to be at risk of pulmonary damage in the event of aspiration. Patients in group I had a mean gastric pH of 2.34 +/- 0.30 with a mean gastric volume of 25.6 +/- 4.1 ml. Seventy-six % of the patients in the control group had gastric contents with a pH less than or equal to 2.5 and 52% had volumes greater than or equal to 20 ml. Glycopyrrolate (group II) failed to increase gastric pH or to reduce gastric volume. In contrast, cimetidine in groups III and IV with or without glycopyrrolate significantly reduced the number of patients at risk of aspiration, by increasing the pH and reducing the volume of gastric contents.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
A high performance liquid chromatographic method for the simultaneous determination of cimetidine and its major metabolite, cimetidine sulfoxide, was developed. These compounds and the internal standard, ornidazole, were extracted from 0.5 mL of serum using a solid phase Bond Elut C18 analytical column with detection at 229 nm. Absolute recoveries were 94 to 103%, 93 to 104%, and 95 to 105% for cimetidine, cimetidine sulfoxide, and ornidazole, respectively. The minimum detection limit for cimetidine was 0.1 mg/L and for cimetidine sulfoxide was 0.05 mg/L when the concentrating step was used. Cimetidine and cimetidine sulfoxide demonstrated linearity up to 10 mg/L and 7.5 mg/L respectively, with the between-run precision of less than a 5% coefficient of variation for both compounds. Interferences from other drugs tested or endogenous substances in serum were not detected. The mobile phase was recycled to maintain better long term column stability and to minimize solvent cost. The instability of the drugs in solution was circumvented with a reduced-pressure drying process that produced working standards possessing longterm stability. The problem of drug interconversion observed during sample storage and with concentrating steps was controlled also. In addition, a resolution test mixture was chromatographed daily to control chromatographic quality.
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the extensively metabolized antiarrhythmic agent propafenone were assessed alone and during concomitant administration of cimetidine. Twelve healthy subjects were given successively the following treatments: propafenone 225 mg q8h plus cimetidine placebo; cimetidine 400 mg q8h plus propafenone placebo; and propafenone 225 mg plus cimetidine 400 mg q8h. After a minimum of 5 days on each regimen, plasma drug concentrations and electrocardiogram conduction intervals were measured during a drug washout period. The maximum concentration of propafenone in plasma was 993 +/- 532 ng/mL when propafenone was given alone compared with 1230 +/- 591 ng/mL when propafenone was given with cimetidine (P = .0622). Differences in tmax, t1/2, and Cp ss did not approach statistical significance when propafenone alone was compared with propafenone plus cimetidine. When compared with cimetidine, propafenone significantly increased the PR interval from 161 +/- 5 msec to 192 +/- 6 msec (P less than .01) and the QRS duration from 89 +/- 3 msec to 98 +/- 4 msec (P less than .01). Combination therapy caused a modest additional increase in QRS duration to 103 +/- 3 msec (P less than .01). In conclusion, cimetidine caused small changes in propafenone pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics; but these changes are unlikely to be clinically important.
Cimetidine induces reversible dose-related central nervous system (CNS) toxicity. Trough serum concentrations and the development of CNS toxicity correlate. We compared cimetidine kinetics in 12 healthy subjects and 31 patients. Six of the latter had normal renal and liver function, five had renal disease only, 12 had liver disease only, and eight had both renal and liver disease. Postmortem tissue distribution was assessed in 11 patients, and expressed as tissue:serum ratio. Average cimetidine total clearance (ClB) in milliliters per minute for each group was as follows: patients with renal and liver disease (182 +/- 105), renal disease only (193 +/- 24), liver disease only (463 +/- 145), normal patients (510 +/- 93), and healthy subjects (583 +/- 140). Renal function was the major determinant for ClB, and the relationship was described by ClB = 4.2(CCr) + 140, r = 0.87, where CCr is creatinine clearance. Cimetidine clearance was affected little by age. Tissue:serum ratios from highest to lowest were as follows: kidney greater than stomach greater than liver greater than bone greater than brain greater than fat. Central and steady-state distribution volumes were not influenced by age or disease. There was enchanced CNS penetration in liver disease patients; their cerebrospinal fluid (CSF):serum ratio was twice the normal. Our kinetic studies identify patient characteristics likely to result in elevated blood levels, and suggest that the greatest risk of CNS toxicity is in those with liver disease.
After five years' extensive use of cimetidine, drug interactions have emerged as one of its major adverse effects. Clinically important interactions with warfarin, phenytoin, diazepam, chlormethiazole, propranolol, lidocaine, and a number of other drugs have been reported. An appreciation of the variety of underlying mechanisms, inhibition of drug metabolism, decreased liver blood flow, and altered drug distribution should reduce the risk of further drug interactions with cimetidine.
The object of the present study was to investigate the feasibility of applying ultraviolet-visible and shortwave near-infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-vis-SWNIR DRS) coupled with chemometrics in qualitative and simultaneous quantitative analysis of drug polymorphs, using cimetidine as a model drug. Three polymorphic forms (A, B and D) and a mixed crystal (M1) of cimetidine, obtained by preparation under different crystallization conditions, were characterized by microscopy, X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) and infrared spectroscopy (IR). The discriminant models of four forms (A, B, D and M1) were established by discriminant partial least squares (PLS-DA) using different pretreated spectra. The R and RMSEP of samples in the prediction set by discriminant model with original spectra were 0.9959 and 0.1004. Among the quantitative models of binary mixtures (A and D) established by partial least squares (PLS) and least squares-support vector machine (LS-SVM) with different pretreated spectra, the LS-SVM models based on original and MSC spectra had better prediction effect with a R of 1.0000 and a RMSEP of 0.0134 for form A, and a R of 1.0000 and a RMSEP of 0.0024 for form D. For ternary mixtures, the established PLS quantitative models based on normalized spectra had relatively better prediction effect for forms A, B and D with R of 0.9901, 0.9820 and 0.9794 and RMSEP of 0.0471, 0.0529 and 0.0594, respectively. This research indicated that UV-vis-SWNIR DRS can be used as a simple, rapid, nondestructive qualitative and quantitative method for the analysis of drug polymorphs.
