BACKGROUND: Calcimimetics are widely used in hemodialysis patients and influence serum calcium levels. Although the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes guidelines argued that low calcium levels induced by calcimimetics may be harmless, large observational studies investigating the association between hypocalcemia and mortality are scarce. We investigated the association between serum calcium levels and cardiovascular mortality in calcimimetics users using the nationwide Japanese registry for dialysis patients. METHODS: In this 9-year prospective cohort study, the baseline data were collected at the end of 2009. We enrolled patients on maintenance hemodialysis or hemodiafiltration. We employed three models (baseline, time-dependent and time-averaged) to conduct Cox proportional hazard regression analyses. RESULTS: Cinacalcet was prescribed to 12.7% (N = 22 853) at baseline. The median observation period was 98 (interquartile range 40-108) months and 108 (interquartile range 59-108) months in the whole cohort (N = 180 136) and in cinacalcet users, respectively. Three-quarters of survivors at the end of 2019 had continued calcimimetic therapy for 10 years, corresponding to a mean annual dropout rate of 2.9%. Hypocalcemia was not associated with cardiovascular mortality in the baseline or time-averaged model. In the time-dependent model, however, the lowest calcium decile (corrected calcium <8.4 mg/dL) was significantly associated with higher cardiovascular mortality than the reference (corrected calcium 8.7-8.9 mg/dL) in both cinacalcet users and all patients [hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) 1.32 (1.00, 1.75) and 1.15 (1.05, 1.26), respectively]. Hypocalcemia was especially associated with sudden death and death due to hemorrhagic stroke, heart failure and ischemic heart disease. Higher rate of fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular events was observed in hypocalcemic patients regardless of cinacalcet usage. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that transient hypocalcemia was associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular death independent of cinacalcet usage. We should pay attention to hypocalcemia transiently induced by cinacalcet.
PURPOSES OF REVIEW: With chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression, secondary hyperparathyroidism (sHPT) and mineral and bone metabolism disease (MBD) almost inevitably develop and result in renal osteodystrophy and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Together with active vitamin D, calcimimetics are the main therapy for sHPT in CKD. This review provides an overview of the therapeutic effects of oral cinacalcet and intravenous etelcalcetide on CKD-MBD and vascular disease, with a focus on pediatric dialysis patients. RECENT FINDINGS: Randomized controlled trials in adults and children demonstrate efficient lowering of parathyroid hormone (PTH) by the calcimimetics together with a reduction in serum calcium and phosphate when combined with low-dose active vitamin D, while therapy with active vitamin D analogs alone increases serum calcium and phosphate. Cinacalcet and etelcalcetide both improve bone formation and correct adynamic bone, i.e., have a direct bone anabolic effect. They decrease serum calciprotein particles, which are involved in endothelial dysfunction, atherogenesis, and vascular calcification. Clinical trials in adults suggest a modest slowing of the progression of cardiovascular calcification with cinacalcet. Calcimimetic agents represent a major pharmacological tool for improved control of CKD-MBD, by efficiently counteracting sHPT and allowing for better control of calcium/phosphate and bone homeostasis. Albeit definite evidence is lacking, the beneficial effects of calcimimetics on CVD are promising. Routine use of cinacalcet has been suggested in children.
A facile, simple, green and sensitive spectrofluorometric method was developed for determination of the calcimimetic drug cinacalcet hydrochloride. It is used for the treatment of hyperparathyroidism. The drug showed high native fluorescence intensity at 320 nm after excitation at 280 nm. The method was linear over the range of 5.0-400.0 ng ml(-1)with excellent correlation (R(2)= 0.9999). Limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantitation (LOQ) values were 1.19 and 3.62 ng ml(-1), respectively. The percentage recovery was found to be 100.42% +/- 1.39 (n=8). The proposed method was successfully applied for determination of cinacalcet in spiked human plasma samples with % recoveries of (87.23 to 109.69%). Two recent greenness metrics (GAPI and Analytical Eco-Scale) were chosen to prove the eco-friendly nature of the method. Furthermore, the proposed method was successfully applied to dissolution study of commercial cinacalcet tablets. The interference likely to be introduced by some commonly co-administrated drugs such as metoprolol and itraconazole was studied; the tolerance limits were calculated.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: We tested the hypothesis that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR) alter the response to the calcimimetic cinacalcet. DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: We analyzed DNA samples in the Evaluation of Cinacalcet HCl Therapy to Lower Cardiovascular Events (EVOLVE) trial, a randomized trial comparing cinacalcet to placebo on a background of usual care. Of the 3883 patients randomized, 1919 (49%) consented to DNA collection, and samples from 1852 participants were genotyped for 18 CASR polymorphisms. The European ancestry (EA; n=1067) and African ancestry (AfAn; n=405) groups were assessed separately. SNPs in CASR were tested for their association with biochemical measures of mineral metabolism at baseline, percent change from baseline to 20 weeks, and risk of clinical fracture as dependent variables. RESULTS: There were modest associations of CASR SNPs with increased baseline serum parathyroid hormone and bone alkaline phosphatase primarily with the minor allele in the EA group (all P</=0.03), but not in the AfAn sample. In contrast, there was a modest association of decreased baseline serum calcium and FGF23 with CASR SNPs (P=0.04) primarily with the minor allele in the AfAn but not in the EA sample. The minor allele of two SNPs was associated with decreased percent reduction in parathyroid hormone from baseline to 20 weeks in the EA population (P<0.04) and this was not altered with cinacalcet. In both EA and AfAn, the same SNP (rs9740) was associated with decreased calcium with cinacalcet treatment (EA and AfAn P</=0.03). Three SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium were associated with a higher risk of clinical fracture that was attenuated by cinacalcet treatment in the EA sample (P<0.04). CONCLUSIONS: These modest associations, if validated, may provide explanations for differences in CKD-mineral bone disorder observed in EA and AfAn populations, and for differential biochemical responses to calcimimetics.
Cinacalcet, a positive allosteric modulator of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) reduces parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion by increasing the sensitivity of the CaSR on parathyroid cells. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis on the safety and efficacy of cinacalcet in Primary Hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). MEDLINE, Embase, BIOSIS, and the Cochrane Library were searched for published articles (from database inception to Sept 2020). All double-blind RCTs and cohort studies that reported data on the efficacy and safety of cinacalcet therapy in individuals >/= 18 with PHPT were included. Random effect meta-analysis was performed to estimate the efficacy of cinacalcet in lowering serum calcium and PTH levels compared with placebo. 4 RCTs (177 participants) and 17 cohort studies (763 participants) were eligible for final analysis. Pooled results from the RCTs suggest that, when compared to placebo and administered for up to 28 weeks, cinacalcet normalizes serum calcium (</= 10.3 mg/dl) in patients with PHPT [RR 20 (95% CI 6.04 - 68.52, I(2) = 0%, p(heterogeneity) < 0.00001)]. Serum PTH levels decreased significantly after 2 weeks and up to 28 weeks after treatment with cinacalcet. In the pooled analysis of the 17 cohort studies, serum calcium levels normalized in 76% (95% CI 66% to 86%; I(2) = 92%, p(heterogeneity) < 0.00001) of patients regardless of the duration of treatment. In most studies, PTH levels decreased by 13% to 55%. No RCT reported on BMD as a primary or secondary outcome, and no improvement in BMD was noted in the 2 non-randomized studies that reported densitometric findings. No significant difference in urinary calcium was noted with cinacalcet therapy in either the RCTs or non-randomized studies. There was no significant difference in overall adverse events (AE) (RD 0.01, 95% CI -0.07 to 0.26) compared to placebo noted in the RCTs. In the non-randomized studies, pooled weighted AE rate was 45% (95% CI 32 to 59%). Risk of bias was low in 2/4 RCTs and 6/17cohort studies; risk was intermediate in 2/4 RCTs and 8/17 cohort studies, and risk was high in 3/17 cohort studies. In PHPT, cinacalcet lowers serum calcium and PTH with greater effects on calcium than on PTH in the short term. In the doses reported, the drug is safe with tolerable side effects. These findings can help inform targeted medical therapy of PHPT in those for whom lowering the serum calcium is indicated and for whom parathyroidectomy is not an option.
OBJECTIVE: Few studies have focused on the effects of dialysis on cinacalcet. In addition, there is no data available on hemodiafiltration (HDF) all over the world. Therefore, we studied the pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of cinacalcet in patients undergoing hemodialysis (HD) or HDF to provide more guiding information on its use in these patients, especially in China. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this open-label, single-dose, single-center study of 7 patients with renal failure who underwent dialysis, patients were randomly allocated to two groups consisting of 4 and 3 patients who received low-flux HD and HDF treatments, respectively. All participants underwent dialysis for 4 hours immediately after receiving single oral doses of a 25 mg cinacalcet tablet. High-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) and electrochemical luminescence (EI) were used to determine the cinacalcet plasma concentrations and intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) serum levels, respectively. RESULTS: Peak concentration (C(max)) and area under the curve (AUC) from time 0 to 24 hours (AUC(0-24h)) of the low-flux HD therapy group were 21.8 +/- 18.6 ng/mL and 145.3 +/- 91.8 ngxh/mL, respectively, which were similar to those of the HDF group (30.9 +/- 7.9 ng/mL and 161.6 +/- 26.5 ngxh/mL, respectively). iPTH concentrations of the HD therapy group decreased after cinacalcet administration and increased following its clearance. However, iPTH levels of subjects receiving HDF therapy did not change. CONCLUSION: Compared with healthy Chinese subjects, patients with renal failure had a higher C(max) and AUC(0-24h), slightly prolonged time to C(max) (t(max)) after administration of the same dose of cinacalcet. On HD treatment day, variation trends of iPTH in Chinese patients and healthy subjects were similar and significantly different from that on the HDF treatment day. Considering the high protein binding rate of cinacalcet, this may lead to the great free-drug clearance during HDF treatment.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Index substrates and inhibitors to investigate the role of the polymorphic enzyme, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6, in the metabolism of new compounds have been proposed by regulatory agencies. This work describes the development and verification of physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for the CYP2D6-sensitive substrate, nebivolol and the index CYP2D6 inhibitors, mirabegron and cinacalcet. METHODS: PBPK models for nebivolol, mirabegron and cinacalcet were developed using in vitro and clinical data. The performance of the PBPK models was verified by comparing the simulated results against reported human systemic exposure and clinical drug-drug interactions (DDIs) studies. RESULTS: The exposure of nebivolol, cinacalcet and mirabegron predicted by the PBPK models was verified against pharmacokinetic data from 13, 3 and 9 clinical studies, respectively. For nebivolol, the predicted mean maximum plasma concentration (C(max)) and area under the plasma concentration-time (AUC) values in CYP2D6 extensive metaboliser subjects were within 0.9- to 1.49-fold of the observed values. In poor metaboliser CYP2D6 subjects, the predicted C(max) and AUC values were within 0.41- to 0.81-fold of observed values. For cinacalcet, the predicted C(max) and AUC values were within 0.97- to 1.32-fold of the observed data. For mirabegron, the predicted AUC values across all the studies investigated were within 0.71- to 1.88-fold of observed values. The PBPK model-predicted DDIs were in good agreement (within 2-fold) with observed DDIs in all verification studies (n = 8) assessed. The overall precision was 1.26 and 1.21 for C(max) and the AUC ratio, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The developed PBPK models can be used to assess the DDI potential liability of new chemical entities that are substrates or inhibitors of CYP2D6.
IMPORTANCE: Secondary hyperparathyroidism contributes to extraskeletal calcification and is associated with all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. Control is suboptimal in the majority of patients receiving hemodialysis. An intravenously (IV) administered calcimimetic could improve adherence and reduce adverse gastrointestinal effects. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relative efficacy and safety of the IV calcimimetic etelcalcetide and the oral calcimimetic cinacalcet. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A randomized, double-blind, double-dummy active clinical trial was conducted comparing IV etelcalcetide vs oral placebo and oral cinacalcet vs IV placebo in 683 patients receiving hemodialysis with serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations higher than 500 pg/mL on active therapy at 164 sites in the United States, Canada, Europe, Russia, and New Zealand. Patients were enrolled from August 2013 to May 2014, with end of follow-up in January 2015. INTERVENTIONS: Etelcalcetide intravenously and oral placebo (n = 340) or oral cinacalcet and IV placebo (n = 343) for 26 weeks. The IV study drug was administered 3 times weekly with hemodialysis; the oral study drug was administered daily. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary efficacy end point was noninferiority of etelcalcetide at achieving more than a 30% reduction from baseline in mean predialysis PTH concentrations during weeks 20-27 (noninferiority margin, 12.0%). Secondary end points included superiority in achieving biochemical end points (>50% and >30% reduction in PTH) and self-reported nausea or vomiting. RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the trial participants was 54.7 (14.1) years and 56.2% were men. Etelcalcetide was noninferior to cinacalcet on the primary end point. The estimated difference in proportions of patients achieving reduction in PTH concentrations of more than 30% between the 198 of 343 patients (57.7%) randomized to receive cinacalcet and the 232 of 340 patients (68.2%) randomized to receive etelcalcetide was -10.5% (95% CI, -17.5% to -3.5%, P for noninferiority, <.001; P for superiority, .004). One hundred seventy-eight patients (52.4%) randomized to etelcalcetide achieved more than 50% reduction in PTH concentrations compared with 138 patients (40.2%) randomized to cinacalcet (P = .001; difference in proportions, 12.2%; 95% CI, 4.7% to 19.5%). The most common adverse effect was decreased blood calcium (68.9% vs 59.8%). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients receiving hemodialysis with moderate to severe secondary hyperparathyroidism, the use of etelcalcetide was not inferior to cinacalcet in reducing serum PTH concentrations over 26 weeks; it also met superiority criteria. Further studies are needed to assess clinical outcomes as well as longer-term efficacy and safety. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT1896232.
The present review aims to assess the state-of-the-art regarding cost-effectiveness of therapy for secondary hyperparathyroidism in order to identify the best treatment and review methodological issues. PubMed and the Cochrane Library were searched to identify papers performing comparative analysis of costs and effects of treatment for secondary hyperparathyroidism in adult patients. Among the 66 papers identified, only 10 were included in the analysis. Treatment strategies evaluated in the selected papers were: cinacalcet in addition to vitamin D and phosphate binders versus vitamin D and phosphate binders only (seven papers), paricalcitol versus non-selective vitamin D (two papers), early and late introduction of cinacalcet in addition to vitamin D and phosphate binders (one paper) and paricalcitol versus cinacalcet (one paper). The high degree of heterogeneity among alternative treatments and methodological limits related to cost items considered, resource valuation methods and so on, make it unfeasible to reach a definite conclusion regarding cost-effectiveness but allow for future research opportunities.
OBJECTIVES: Human physiology and epidemiology studies have demonstrated complex interactions between the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, parathyroid hormone and calcium homeostasis. Several of these studies have suggested that aldosterone inhibition may lower parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels. The objective of this study was to assess the effect of 4 weeks of maximally tolerated mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist therapy with eplerenone on PTH levels in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism (P-HPT) when compared to amiloride and placebo. We also investigated the synergistic effect of these interventions when combined with cinacalcet for an additional 2 weeks. DESIGN: Randomized, double-blinded, three parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial. PATIENTS: Patients with P-HPT. RESULTS: Most patients were women (83%) and White (76%). Maximally tolerated doses of eplerenone and amiloride induced significant reductions in blood pressure and increases in renin and aldosterone production; however, despite these physiologic changes, neither intervention induced significant changes in PTH or calcium levels when compared to the placebo. Both eplerenone and amiloride therapy induced significant reductions in procollagen type 1 N-terminal propeptide levels when compared to placebo. When cinacalcet therapy was added, PTH and calcium levels were markedly reduced in all groups; however, there was no significant difference in PTH or serum calcium reductions between groups. CONCLUSIONS: Although maximally tolerated therapy with eplerenone and amiloride induced expected changes in renin, aldosterone and blood pressure, there were no meaningful changes in PTH or serum calcium levels in P-HPT patients. These results suggest that inhibition of aldosterone action does not have a clinically meaningful role in medical therapy for P-HPT.
BACKGROUND: Secondary hyperparathyroidism may lead to increased cardiovascular risk. The use of cinacalcet may improve bone and cardiovascular health with improved parathormone (PTH) and phosphate control. METHODS: This is an open-label prospective randomised controlled trial to compare progression of cardiovascular and chronic kidney disease mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD) parameters. Patients were randomised to receive cinacalcet alongside standard therapy or standard therapy alone. Thirty-six haemodialysis patients who had > 90 days on dialysis, iPTH > 300 pg/mL, calcium > 2.1 mmol/L and age 18-75 years were included. Following randomization, all 36 patients underwent an intensive 12-week period of bone disease management aiming for iPTH 150-300 pg/mL. The primary outcome was change in vascular calcification using CT agatston score. Secondary outcomes included pulse wave velocity (PWV), left ventricular mass index (LVMI), carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT), augmentation index (Aix) and bone measurements. The above measurements were obtained at baseline and 12 months. RESULTS: There was no evidence of a group difference in the progression of calcification (median change (IQR) cinacalcet: 488 (0 to1539); standard therapy: 563 (50 to 1214)). In a post hoc analysis combining groups there was a mean (SD) phosphate reduction of 0.3 mmol/L (0.7) and median (IQR) iPTH reduction of 380 pg/mL (- 754, 120). Regression of LVMI and CIMT was seen (P = 0.03 and P = 0.001) and was significantly associated with change of phosphate on multi-factorial analyses. CONCLUSIONS: With a policy of intense CKD-MBD parameter control, no significant benefit in bone and cardiovascular markers was seen with the addition of cinacalcet to standard therapy over one year. Tight control of hyperphosphataemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism may lead to a reduction in LVMI and CIMT but this needs further investigation. Although the sample size was small, meticulous trial supervision resulted in very few protocol deviations with therapy.
BACKGROUND: Mineral and bone disease in children with chronic kidney disease can cause abnormalities in calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone, and vitamin D and when left untreated can result in impaired growth, bone deformities, fractures, and vascular calcification. Cinacalcet is a calcimimetic widely used as a therapy to reduce parathyroid hormone levels in the adult population, with hypocalcemia among its side effects. The analysis of safety in the pediatric population is questioned due to the scarcity of randomized clinical trials in this group. OBJECTIVE: To assess the onset of symptomatic hypocalcemia or other adverse events (serious or non-serious) with the use of cinacalcet in children and adolescents with mineral and bone disorder in chronic kidney disease. DATA SOURCES AND STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: The bibliographic search identified 2699 references from 1927 to August/2023 (57 LILACS, 44 Web of Science, 686 PubMed, 131 Cochrane, 1246 Scopus, 535 Embase). Four references were added from the bibliography of articles found and 12 references from the gray literature (Clinical Trials). Of the 77 studies analyzed in full, 68 were excluded because they did not meet the following criteria: population, types of studies, medication, publication types and 1 article that did not present results (gray literature). PARTICIPANTS AND INTERVENTIONS: There were 149 patients aged 0-18 years old with Chronic Kidney Disease and mineral bone disorder who received cinacalcet. STUDY APPRAISAL AND SYNTHESIS METHODS: Nine eligible studies were examined for study type, size, intervention, and reported outcomes. RESULTS: There was an incidence of 0.2% of fatal adverse events and 16% of serious adverse events (p < 0.01 and I(2) = 69%), in addition to 10.7% of hypocalcemia, totaling 45.7% of total adverse events. LIMITATIONS: There was a bias in demographic information and clinical characteristics of patients in about 50% of the studies and the majority of the studies were case series. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS OF KEY FINDINGS: If used in the pediatric population, the calcimimetic cinacalcet should be carefully monitored for serum calcium levels and attention to possible adverse events, especially in children under 50 months. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION NUMBER (PROSPERO REGISTER): CRD42019132809.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: Data describing real-world use and effectiveness of cinacalcet are limited. We aimed to characterize predictors of treatment and changes in secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT) biochemistry after cinacalcet initiation. METHODS: We studied 25,250 in-center hemodialysis patients from a large dialysis provider, alive through November 2004, with no prior cinacalcet prescription. Patients were followed until initiation of cinacalcet, censoring, death, or July 31, 2007. Initiators were further followed for dose titration and discontinuation. Predictors of these events were evaluated using Cox proportional hazards modeling. Biochemical parameters and other SHPT medication use were compared between baseline, pre-initiation, and post-initiation time points. RESULTS: Over an average of 1.25 years of follow-up, 30% of patients initiated cinacalcet therapy. Between baseline and initiation (mean of 386 days), parathyroid hormone (PTH) and phosphorus levels increased 78 and 7%, respectively, in these patients. After adjustment, cinacalcet initiation was associated with higher SHPT severity, younger age, African-American race, higher phosphorus levels, and more comorbidity. Within 1 month of initiation, median PTH was reduced by 15-30% and phosphorus by 3-5%. Reductions were sustained or increased over 12 months, depending on initiating PTH level and whether dose up-titration occurred. Discontinuation was common, although many patients reinitiated. CONCLUSIONS: A substantial proportion of patients experienced SHPT progression and initiated cinacalcet treatment. Reductions in biochemistry varied by disease severity and whether doses were titrated.
BACKGROUND: Disorders of mineral metabolism, including secondary hyperparathyroidism, are thought to contribute to extraskeletal (including vascular) calcification among patients with chronic kidney disease. It has been hypothesized that treatment with the calcimimetic agent cinacalcet might reduce the risk of death or nonfatal cardiovascular events in such patients. METHODS: In this clinical trial, we randomly assigned 3883 patients with moderate-to-severe secondary hyperparathyroidism (median level of intact parathyroid hormone, 693 pg per milliliter [10th to 90th percentile, 363 to 1694]) who were undergoing hemodialysis to receive either cinacalcet or placebo. All patients were eligible to receive conventional therapy, including phosphate binders, vitamin D sterols, or both. The patients were followed for up to 64 months. The primary composite end point was the time until death, myocardial infarction, hospitalization for unstable angina, heart failure, or a peripheral vascular event. The primary analysis was performed on the basis of the intention-to-treat principle. RESULTS: The median duration of study-drug exposure was 21.2 months in the cinacalcet group, versus 17.5 months in the placebo group. The primary composite end point was reached in 938 of 1948 patients (48.2%) in the cinacalcet group and 952 of 1935 patients (49.2%) in the placebo group (relative hazard in the cinacalcet group vs. the placebo group, 0.93; 95% confidence interval, 0.85 to 1.02; P=0.11). Hypocalcemia and gastrointestinal adverse events were significantly more frequent in patients receiving cinacalcet. CONCLUSIONS: In an unadjusted intention-to-treat analysis, cinacalcet did not significantly reduce the risk of death or major cardiovascular events in patients with moderate-to-severe secondary hyperparathyroidism who were undergoing dialysis. (Funded by Amgen; EVOLVE ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00345839.).
With the aim to expand the randomized controlled trial evidence of cinacalcet treatment to the unselected, general chronic kidney disease (CKD) population we analysed a large inception cohort of CKD patients in the region of Stockholm, Sweden 2006-2012 (both non-dialysis, dialysis and transplanted) with evidence of secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT). We used marginal structural models to account for both confounding by indication and time-dependent confounding. Over 37 months, 435/3,526 (12%) initiated cinacalcet de novo. Before cinacalcet initiation, parathyroid hormone (PTH) had increased progressively to a median of 636ng/L. After cinacalcet initiation, PTH declined, as did serum calcium and phosphate. In total, 42% of patients experienced a fatal/non-fatal cardiovascular event, 32% died and 9% had a new fracture. The unadjusted cardiovascular odds ratio (OR) associated with cinacalcet treatment was 1.01 (95% confidence interval: 0.83, 1.22). In the fully weighted model, the cardiovascular odds was lower in cinacalcet treated patients (OR 0.67: 0.48, 0.93). The adjusted ORs for all-cause mortality and for fractures were 0.79 (0.56, 1.11) and 1.08 (0.59, 1.98) respectively. Our study suggests cinacalcet treatment improves biochemical abnormalities in the wider CKD population, and adds real-world support that treating SHPT with cinacalcet may have beneficial effects on cardiovascular outcomes.
BACKGROUND: Up to now, there is no unequivocal intervention to mitigate vascular calcification (VC) in patients with hemodialysis. This network meta-analysis aimed to systematically evaluate the clinical efficacy of sodium thiosulfate, bisphosphonates, and cinacalcet in treating vascular calcification. METHODS: A comprehensive study search was performed using PubMed, Web of Science, the Cochrane Library, EMBASE and China National Knowledge Internet (CNKI) to collect randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of sodium thiosulfate, bisphosphonates, and cinacalcet for vascular calcification among hemodialysis patients. Then, network meta-analysis was conducted using Stata 17.0 software. RESULTS: In total, eleven RCTs including 1083 patients were qualified for this meta-analysis. We found that cinacalcet (SMD - 0.59; 95% CI [-0.95, -0.24]) had significant benefit on vascular calcification compared with conventional therapy, while sodium thiosulfate or bisphosphonates did not show such efficiency. Furthermore, as for ranking the efficacy assessment, cinacalcet possessed the highest surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) value (88.5%) of lessening vascular calcification and was superior to sodium thiosulfate (50.4%) and bisphosphonates (55.4%). Thus, above results suggested that cinacalcet might be the most promising drug for vascular calcification treatment in hemodialysis patients. Mechanistically, our findings illustrated that cinacalcet reduced serum calcium (SMD - 1.20; 95% CI [-2.08, - 0.33]) and showed the tendency in maintaining the balance of intact Parathyroid Hormone (iPTH) level. CONCLUSIONS: This network meta-analysis indicated that cinacalcet appear to be more effective than sodium thiosulfate and bisphosphonates in mitigating vascular calcification through decreasing serum calcium and iPTH. And cinacalcet might be a reasonable option for hemodialysis patients with VC in clinical practice. SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: [ http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO ], identifier [CRD42022379965].
Although both cinacalcet and etelcalcetide are calcimimetics that directly inhibit parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion by activating the calcium (Ca)-sensing receptor (CaSR), their binding sites are different. We report a first case of a hemodialysis (HD) patient with secondary hyperparathyroidism (SHPT), in whom cinacalcet, but not etelcalcetide, could reduce serum intact PTH (i-PTH) levels. A HD patient received total parathyroidectomy (PTx) with auto-transplantation 16 years earlier. Due to SHPT relapse, cinacalcet was started at 7 years after PTx. His i-PTH levels had been controlled with both 75-100 mg of cinacalcet and 4.5 mug/week of calcitriol for a year before switching from cinacalcet to etelcalcetide. At 1 month following the switch, his serum i-PTH level increased to 716 pg/mL. The dose of etelcalcetide was gradually increased and finally reached the maximal dose of 45 mg/week. Because even the maximal dose of etelcalcetide for > 4 months did not reduce his serum i-PTH levels to < 700 pg/mL, etelcalcetide was switched to 50 mg/day of cinacalcet, which reduced the levels to 208 pg/mL at 2 months after the switch. Genomic sequencing test using whole blood revealed no mutation in the portion including Cys 482 of CaSR gene. The patient was resistant to etelcalcetide treatment but not to cinacalcet, suggesting the possibility that the enlarged parathyroid gland has some change in the portion including Cys 482 in the CaSR gene. Therefore, considering the possibility of etelcalcetide resistance during SHPT treatment should be kept in mind.
