Although selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are commonly prescribed for prenatal depression, there exists controversy over adverse effects of SSRI use on fetal development. Few studies have adequately isolated outcomes due to SSRI exposure and those due to maternal psychiatric conditions. Here, we directly investigated outcomes of exposure to widely-used SSRIs Fluoxetine and Citalopram on the developing nervous system of Xenopus laevis tadpoles, using an integrative experimental approach. We exposed tadpoles to low doses of Citalopram and Fluoxetine during a critical developmental period and found that different experimental groups displayed opposing behavioral effects. While both groups showed reduced schooling behavior, the Fluoxetine group showed increased seizure susceptibility and reduced startle habituation. In contrast, Citalopram treated tadpoles had decreased seizure susceptibility and increased habituation. Both groups had abnormal dendritic morphology in the optic tectum, a brain area important for behaviors tested. Whole-cell electrophysiological recordings of tectal neurons showed no differences in synaptic function; however, tectal cells from Fluoxetine-treated tadpoles had decreased voltage gated K+ currents while cells in the Citalopram group had increased K+ currents. Both behavioral and electrophysiological findings indicate that cells and circuits in the Fluoxetine treated optic tecta are hyperexcitable, while the Citalopram group exhibits decreased excitability. Taken together, these results show that early developmental exposure to SSRIs is sufficient to induce neurodevelopmental effects, however these effects can be complex and vary depending on the SSRI. This may explain some discrepancies across human studies, and further underscores the importance of serotonergic signaling for the developing nervous system.
Antidepressants are frequently used in the treatment of depressive symptoms associated with schizophrenia. In patients taking clozapine, choice of antidepressant is complicated by additive pharmacodynamic effects and by pharmacokinetic interactions. We predicted that citalopram would not elevate plasma clozapine levels when the two drugs were co-administered because it does not inhibit the relevant enzyme systems. In this preliminary study of five patients given citalopram and clozapine there was no overall change in mean clozapine levels. Based on this limited evidence, citalopram might be the antidepressant of choice in patients taking clozapine.
A pharmaceutical-oriented, transition-metal-free, cyanide-free one-step direct transformation of methylarenes to aryl nitriles is described. For the dimethylarenes, the selectivity can be well-controlled to form mononitriles or dinitriles. Enantioenriched nitriles can also be synthesized by this method. As a pharmaceutically practical method, the antidepressant drug citalopram was synthesized from cheap and commercially abundant m-xylene on a gram scale in high yield, avoiding transition-metal residues and toxic cyanides.
OBJECTIVE: Studies demonstrating that higher doses of citalopram (> 40 mg) and escitalopram (> 20 mg) prolong the corrected QT interval prompted regulatory agency warnings, which are controversial, given the absence of confirmatory clinical outcome studies. We compared the risk of potential arrhythmia-related deaths for high doses of these selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) to that for equivalent doses of fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline. METHODS: The Tennessee Medicaid retrospective cohort study included 54,220 persons 30-74 years of age without cancer or other life-threatening illness who were prescribed high-dose SSRIs from 1998 through 2011. The mean age was 47 years, and 76% were female. Demographic characteristics and comorbidity for individual SSRIs were comparable. Because arrhythmia-related deaths are typically sudden and occur outside the hospital, we analyzed out-of-hospital sudden unexpected death as well as sudden cardiac deaths, a more specific indicator of proarrhythmic effects. RESULTS: The adjusted risk of sudden unexpected death for citalopram did not differ significantly from that for the other SSRIs. The respective hazard ratios (HRs) for citalopram versus escitalopram, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline were 0.84 (95% CI, 0.40-1.75), 1.24 (95% CI, 0.75-2.05), 0.75 (95% CI, 0.45-1.24), and 1.53 (95% CI, 0.91-2.55). There were no significant differences for sudden cardiac death or all study deaths, nor were there significant differences among high-risk patients (>/= 60 years of age, upper quartile baseline cardiovascular risk). Escitalopram users had no significantly increased risk for any study end point. CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence that risk of sudden unexpected death, sudden cardiac death, or total mortality for high-dose citalopram and escitalopram differed significantly from that for comparable doses of fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline.
Agitation is a common neuropsychiatric symptom (NPS) in the early and middle stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia, which is difficult to treat and causes much distress. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA) issued black box warnings against the use of antipsychotics in dementia in 2005 and 2008 due to the increased risk of morbidity and mortality, resulting in the reduction in antipsychotic use for treating dementia-related NPS and spurring the quest for safer and more effective pharmacological options. The data favoring the use of citalopram for treating agitation in AD dementia is particularly compelling, and this may be a class effect for all selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. However, concerns about the cardiac side-effects of citalopram have limited its widespread use for this indication. In this article, available efficacy and safety data for the use of citalopram and escitalopram in treating agitation in AD dementia is reviewed, using a composite case to illustrate key points. Practical recommendations are made to facilitate the use of these medications in routine clinical practice, risk mitigation strategies are discussed and salient issues for future clinical research are emphasized.
Five patients who reacted with the hypersensitive syndrome to zimeldine showed no reaction to one of two other selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitors, citalopram or paroxetine. This further strengthens the impression that the mechanism for the hypersensitivity syndrome induced by zimeldine does not seem to be related primarily to the 5-HT reuptake inhibition as such.
Metabolomics provides valuable tools for the study of drug effects, unraveling the mechanism of action and variation in response due to treatment. In this study we used electrochemistry-based targeted metabolomics to gain insights into the mechanisms of action of escitalopram/citalopram focusing on a set of 31 metabolites from neurotransmitter-related pathways. Overall, 290 unipolar patients with major depressive disorder were profiled at baseline, after 4 and 8 weeks of drug treatment. The 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HRSD(17)) scores gauged depressive symptom severity. More significant metabolic changes were found after 8 weeks than 4 weeks post baseline. Within the tryptophan pathway, we noted significant reductions in serotonin (5HT) and increases in indoles that are known to be influenced by human gut microbial cometabolism. 5HT, 5-hydroxyindoleacetate (5HIAA), and the ratio of 5HIAA/5HT showed significant correlations to temporal changes in HRSD(17) scores. In the tyrosine pathway, changes were observed in the end products of the catecholamines, 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylethyleneglycol and vinylmandelic acid. Furthermore, two phenolic acids, 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid and 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, produced through noncanconical pathways, were increased with drug exposure. In the purine pathway, significant reductions in hypoxanthine and xanthine levels were observed. Examination of metabolite interactions through differential partial correlation networks revealed changes in guanosine-homogentisic acid and methionine-tyrosine interactions associated with HRSD(17). Genetic association studies using the ratios of these interacting pairs of metabolites highlighted two genetic loci harboring genes previously linked to depression, neurotransmission, or neurodegeneration. Overall, exposure to escitalopram/citalopram results in shifts in metabolism through noncanonical pathways, which suggest possible roles for the gut microbiome, oxidative stress, and inflammation-related mechanisms.
The current work describes the efficient creation and employment of a new S-citalopram selective polymeric sorbent, made from poly(divinylbenzene-maleic anhydride-styrene). The process began by using suspension polymerization technique in the synthesis of poly(styrene-maleic anhydride-divinylbenzene) microparticles. These were then modified with ethylenediamine, developing an amido-succinic acid-based polymer derivative. The S-citalopram, a cationic molecule, was loaded onto these developed anionic polymer particles. Subsequently, the particles were post-crosslinked using glyoxal, which reacts with the amino group residues of ethylenediamine. S-citalopram was extracted from this matrix using an acidic solution, which also left behind stereo-selective cavities in the S-citalopram imprinted polymer, allowing for the selective re-adsorption of S-citalopram. The attributes of the polymer were examined through methods such as (13)C NMR, FTIR, thermogravemetric and elemental analyses. SEM was used to observe the shapes and structures of the particles. The imprinted polymers demonstrated a significant ability to adsorb S-citalopram, achieving a capacity of 878 mmol/g at a preferred pH level of 8. It proved efficient in separating enantiomers of (+/-)-citalopram via column methods, achieving an enantiomeric purity of 97 % for R-citalopram upon introduction and 92 % for S-citalopram upon release.
Citalopram, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), has been reported to have adverse effects such as cardiotoxicity, including prolongation of the QTc interval. Although citalopram is well known to be a racemic compound comprised of S-citalopram (escitalopram) and R-citalopram, it is still unclear which enantiomer is responsible for cardiotoxicity induced by citalopram. It is also unclear which biomolecule is the target that produces the adverse effect of citalopram. In this study, we investigated whether citalopram, escitalopram and R-citalopram had an electrophysiological effect on Nav1.5 voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) current and how their electrophysiological properties affected Nav1.5 VGSC. To examine the effects of the electrophysiological properties of them, whole-cell patch clamp recording was performed using HEK293 cells expressing human Nav1.5 VGSCs. Nav1.5 VGSC current decreased by 60.0 +/- 6.3% and 55.1 +/- 12.5% under treatment with 100 muM citalopram and escitalopram, respectively. However, 100 muM R-citalopram decreased Nav1.5 VGSC current by only 36.2 +/- 8.7%. In addition, treatment with 100 muM citalopram and escitalopram changed the voltage-dependence of activation and induced a negative shift of the voltage of half-maximal activation compared to 100 muM R-citalopram. In contrast, treatment with 100 muM citalopram and escitalopram, but not R-citalopram, changed the voltage-dependence of inactivation, and the voltage at half-maximal inactivation slightly shifted toward negative potential. These results suggest that the adverse cardiac effect produced by citalopram might result from modification of the electrophysiological properties of Nav1.5 VGSCs, and escitalopram might contribute more to this adverse effect than R-citalopram.
AIMS: Citalopram (CT) and escitalopram (S-CT) are among the most widely prescribed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors used to treat major depressive disorder (MDD). We applied a genome-wide association study to identify genetic factors that contribute to variation in plasma concentrations of CT or S-CT and their metabolites in MDD patients treated with CT or S-CT. METHODS: Our genome-wide association study was performed using samples from 435 MDD patients. Linear mixed models were used to account for within-subject correlations of longitudinal measures of plasma drug/metabolite concentrations (4 and 8 weeks after the initiation of drug therapy), and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were modelled as additive allelic effects. RESULTS: Genome-wide significant associations were observed for S-CT concentration with SNPs in or near the CYP2C19 gene on chromosome 10 (rs1074145, P = 4.1 x 10(-9) ) and with S-didesmethylcitalopram concentration for SNPs near the CYP2D6 locus on chromosome 22 (rs1065852, P = 2.0 x 10(-16) ), supporting the important role of these cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes in biotransformation of citalopram. After adjustment for the effect of CYP2C19 functional alleles, the analyses also identified novel loci that will require future replication and functional validation. CONCLUSIONS: In vitro and in vivo studies have suggested that the biotransformation of CT to monodesmethylcitalopram and didesmethylcitalopram is mediated by CYP isozymes. The results of our genome-wide association study performed in MDD patients treated with CT or S-CT have confirmed those observations but also identified novel genomic loci that might play a role in variation in plasma levels of CT or its metabolites during the treatment of MDD patients with these selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder is common in people with asthma. Yet, few studies have evaluated depression treatment in those with asthma. OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between antidepressant use, depressive symptoms, and asthma control, pooled data from 3 randomized trials of either citalopram or escitalopram were assessed. METHODS: Linear fixed effects and binary logistic regression analyses were conducted with between-subject covariates including treatment group, (original) study, and demographics. The within-subject effect of visit, and a treatment group-visit (between-within) interaction effect, were also evaluated. Analyses were repeated in a high asthma exacerbation subgroup having at least 3 oral corticosteroid bursts in the previous 12 months. Outcomes included the Hamilton rating scale for depression (HAM-D(17)), the 7-item asthma control questionnaire (ACQ), and oral corticosteroid use (yes or no). RESULTS: In the pooled sample (n = 255), the antidepressant treatment group exhibited lower HAM-D(17) overall (P </= .001) and a lower likelihood for oral corticosteroid use (P </= .001) relative to the placebo group. In the high-exacerbation subgroup (n = 96), treatment group participants had lower overall asthma control questionnaire (P = .004) and HAM-D(17) scores (P </= .001), and a lower likelihood of oral corticosteroid use (P = .003), relative to placebo participants. All treatment group interaction effects were not significant. CONCLUSION: Citalopram or escitalopram exhibited efficacy in reducing depressive symptoms and the need for rescue oral corticosteroids in patients with asthma and major depressive disorder. Future work should determine whether selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are effective at improving asthma outcomes in those with asthma who are not depressed. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00621946 and NCT01324700 (one study was conducted before ClinicalTrials.gov requirements).
Studies assessing associations between prenatal exposure to antidepressants, maternal depression, and offspring DNA methylation (DNAm) have been inconsistent. Here, we investigated whether prenatal exposure to citalopram or escitalopram ((es)citalopram) and maternal depression is associated with differences in DNAm. Then, we examined if there is an interaction effect of (es)citalopram exposure and DNAm on offspring neurodevelopmental outcomes. Finally, we investigated whether DNAm at birth correlates with neurodevelopmental trajectories in childhood. We analyzed DNAm in cord blood from the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study (MoBa) biobank. MoBa contains questionnaire data on maternal (es)citalopram use and depression during pregnancy and information about child neurodevelopmental outcomes assessed by internationally recognized psychometric tests. In addition, we retrieved ADHD diagnoses from the Norwegian Patient Registry and information on pregnancies from the Medical Birth Registry of Norway. In total, 958 newborn cord blood samples were divided into three groups: (1) prenatal (es)citalopram exposed (n = 306), (2) prenatal maternal depression exposed (n = 308), and (3) propensity score-selected controls (n = 344). Among children exposed to (es)citalopram, there were more ADHD diagnoses and symptoms and delayed communication and psychomotor development. We did not identify differential DNAm associated with (es)citalopram or depression, nor any interaction effects on neurodevelopmental outcomes throughout childhood. Trajectory modeling identified subgroups of children following similar developmental patterns. Some of these subgroups were enriched for children exposed to maternal depression, and some subgroups were associated with differences in DNAm at birth. Interestingly, several of the differentially methylated genes are involved in neuronal processes and development. These results suggest DNAm as a potential predictive molecular marker of later abnormal neurodevelopmental outcomes, but we cannot conclude whether DNAm links prenatal (es)citalopram exposure or maternal depression with child neurodevelopmental outcomes.
Cyclodextrin (CD) encapsulation improves physicochemical and pharmacological properties of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are efficacious in treating depression, a global mental health problem. Here, we scrutinize beta-CD inclusion complexes with racemate citalopram (rac-CTP; 1) and escitalopram ((S)-CTP; 2) by combined single-crystal X-ray diffraction and DFT full-geometry optimization. X-ray analysis unveiled that the 2:2 inclusion complexes of 1 and 2 with similar inclusion modes and topologies are stabilized by various intermolecular interactions of host-guest CH...pi, host-host OH...O H-bonds, and guest-guest F...F in the tail-to-tail dimeric asymmetric unit. In the crystals, these dimers are stacked on top of each other, yielding similar channel structures of distinct crystal symmetries, triclinic, P1 (1) and monoclinic, P2(1) (2), which are further maintained by guest-guest pi...pi and CN...pi interactions. The thermodynamic stabilities evaluated by DFT calculation indicate the vital role of weak intermolecular interactions in the formation and stabilization of the beta-CD monomeric and dimeric inclusion complexes. This study provides crystallographic and theoretical evidence for the improved stability and the masked bitterness of CTP through beta-CD encapsulation as patented previously and suggests the pharmaceutical implications in the drug delivery and enantioseparation.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) are common antidepressants which cytotoxicity has been assessed in cancers notably colorectal carcinomas and glioma cell lines. We assessed and compared the cytotoxicity of 2 SSRI, citalopram and escitalopram, on neuroblastoma cell lines. The study was performed on 2 non-MYCN amplified cell lines (rat B104 and human SH-SY5Y) and 2 human MYCN amplified cell lines (IMR32 and Kelly). Citalopram and escitalopram showed concentration-dependent cytotoxicity on all cell lines. Citalopram was more cytotoxic than escitalopram. IMR32 was the most sensitive cell line. The absence of toxicity on human primary Schwann cells demonstrated the safety of both molecules for myelin. The mechanisms of cytotoxicity were explored using gene-expression profiles and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Citalopram modulated 1 502 genes and escitalopram 1 164 genes with a fold change >/= 2. 1 021 genes were modulated by both citalopram and escitalopram; 481 genes were regulated only by citalopram while 143 genes were regulated only by escitalopram. Citalopram modulated 69 pathways (KEGG) and escitalopram 42. Ten pathways were differently modulated by citalopram and escitalopram. Citalopram drastically decreased the expression of MYBL2, BIRC5 and BARD1 poor prognosis factors of neuroblastoma with fold-changes of -107 (p<2.26 10-7), -24.1 (p<5.6 10-9) and -17.7 (p<1.2 10-7). CCNE1, AURKA, IGF2, MYCN and ERBB2 were more moderately down-regulated by both molecules. Glioma markers E2F1, DAPK1 and CCND1 were down-regulated. Citalopram displayed more powerful action with broader and distinct spectrum of action than escitalopram.
A simplified method for the determination of racemic citalopram and its main metabolite desmethylcitalopram in serum using HPLC was developed. The compounds were extracted with heptane-isoamyl alcohol (98:2) and subsequently transferred into phosphate buffer pH 2.5 for direct injection into the HPLC apparatus. The analytes were separated with an acetonitrile-phosphate buffer, pH 2.5-tetraethylamine mobile phase on a C18 column and measured by UV detection at 240 nm. Within the typical range of serum concentrations (30-100 ng/ml) the inter-day variation was < 6% for both compounds. Possible analytical interference from a number of commonly coadministered psychoactive drugs and their metabolites was studied by extracting sera from patients receiving these drugs. Interference was not a problem for the developed method.
Citalopram (CIT) and its S-enantiomer, escitalopram (ESC), are antidepressants belonging to the class called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and have many different pharmacological and biological properties. Understanding the interaction mechanism of small drug molecules with DNA both helps in the development of new DNA-targeted drugs and provides more in-depth knowledge for controlling gene expression. In this study, the interaction of CIT and ESC with double-stranded calf thymus DNA (ct-dsDNA) was investigated for the first time. Spectrofluorometric, liquid chromatographic, and voltammetric response profiles of drugs and ct-dsDNA at different concentrations showed DNA-drug complex formation. Calculated binding constants were greater with all three techniques for ESC compared to CIT and were of the order of 10(3)-10(4), which is in accordance with those of well-known groove binders. The results also showed the significant effect of chirality on complex formation. The thermodynamic parameters, including free energy change (DeltaG < 0) and enthalpy change (DeltaH < 0) obtained at different temperatures, indicated that complex formation was mainly driven by hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces for both drugs. The results of this study may enhance the understanding of the interaction between CIT or ESC and ct-dsDNA and can be considered as the pioneer for future studies to uncover possible hidden phenotypes of these compounds.
