BACKGROUND: First-line medications for acne vulgaris include retinoids and antibiotics. Dapsone is a topical drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of acne. However, due to its side effects, the clinical application of dapsone has not been promoted, and the value of the medication is still unclear. The aim of this study is to determine the efficacy and safety of dapsone gel in patients with acne. METHODS: Systematic searches were performed using the following databases on January 4, 2020: PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), China Biomedical Literature Service System (SinoMed), China Science and Technology Journal Database (CQVIP), and Wanfang Data Knowledge Service Platform. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials was then conducted to analyze the efficacy and adverse events of dapsone gel treatment compared with excipient and other drug therapies. RevMan 5.3 software was used to calculate the odds ratio (OR), and the confidence interval (CI) was 95%. RESULTS: Data of 11,424 participants across 7 trials which met the inclusion criteria were analyzed. Meta-analysis showed that dapsone gel alone or dapsone gel combined with isotretinoin was superior to excipient alone or oral isotretinoin alone in the treatment of acne (OR =1.51, 95% CI: 1.38-1.66, P<0.0001 random effects model, I2=0%). This indicates that dapsone gel is effective for the treatment of acne. We also found that dapsone gel is a more effective treatment for females (OR =1.80, 95% CI: 1.46-2.23). There was no significant difference in the incidence of adverse events between the dapsone group and the control group (OR =0.94, 95% CI: 0.82-1.14, P=0.24 random effects model; I2=29%). The common local adverse reactions in the dapsone group, such as dryness, heat, and eczema, were not statistically significant compared with those in the control group, and the side effects were transient. DISCUSSION: Dapsone gel is effective in treating acne, and there is no significant difference in adverse events compared with other drugs.
An understanding of the clinical significance of dapsone-drug interactions is essential for optimal use of this agent. This review aims to provide clinicians with an overview of this topic.
Lopez-Gomez et al. recently published remarkable but mechanistically unexplained empirical evidence that the old antibiotic dapsone has antiepileptic activity. We addressed the question "Why should a sulfone antibiotic reduce seizures?". We report here our conclusions based on data from past studies that seizures are associated with elevated interleukin-8 (IL-8) and that dapsone inhibits IL-8 release and function in several different clinical and experimental contexts. Diverse CNS insults cause an increase in CNS IL-8. Thus, the pro-inflammatory environment generated by increase IL-8 leads to a lower seizure threshold. Together this evidence indicates dapsone exerts anti-seizure activity by diminishing IL-8 signalling. Since IL-8 is clearly upregulated in glioblastoma and contributes to the florid angiogenesis of that disease, and since interference with IL-8 function has been shown to inhibit glioblastoma invasion and growth in several experimental models, and dapsone has been repeatedly been shown to clinically inhibit IL-8 function when used to treat human neutrophilic dermatoses, we believe that dapsone thereby reduces seizures by countering IL-8 function and may similarly retard glioblastoma growth by such anti-IL-8 function.
A 28-year-old man with a 6-year history of subcorneal pustular dermatosis (SPD) is presented. This case reviews the clinical features, differential diagnosis, etiology, and treatment options of SPD. In particular, this case emphasizes the absence of response to dapsone and colchicine and control with PUVA therapy.
A rapid, specific and a one-stage protein precipitation method for simultaneous estimation of dapsone (DDS) and monoacetyldapsone (MAD) concentration in plasma and urine using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is described. The applicability of the method for monitoring DDS and MAD blood levels in two different acetylator phenotype volunteers following the administration of 100-mg oral dose of DDS was shown. Cumulative urinary excretion of DDS and MAD were studied in the same volunteers.
BACKGROUND: Dapsone (4,4'-diaminodiphenylsulfone) has been widely used for the treatment of infections such as leprosy. Dapsone hypersensitivity syndrome (DHS) is a major side effect, developing in 0.5-3.6% of patients treated with dapsone, and its mortality rate is  approximately 10%. Recently, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B*13:01 was identified as a marker of susceptibility to DHS. OBJECTIVES: To investigate why HLA-B*13:01 is responsible for DHS from a structural point of view. METHODS: First, we used homology modeling to derive the three-dimensional structures of HLA-B*13:01 (associated with DHS) and HLA-B*13:02 (not so associated despite strong sequence identity [99%] with HLA-B*13:01). Next, we used molecular docking, molecular dynamic simulations, and the molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzman surface area method, to investigate the interactions of dapsone with HLA-B*13:01 and 13:02. RESULTS: We found a crucial structural difference between HLA-B*13:01 and 13:02 in the F-pocket of the antigen-binding site. As Trp95 in the alpha-domain of HLA-B*13:02 is replaced with the less bulky Ile95 in HLA-B*13:01, we found an additional well-defined sub-pocket within the antigen-binding site of HLA-B*13:01. All three representative docking poses of dapsone against the antigen-binding site of HLA-B*13:01 used this unique sub-pocket, indicating its suitability for binding dapsone. However, HLA-B*13:02 does not seem to possess a binding pocket suitable for binding dapsone. Finally, a binding free energy calculation combined with a molecular dynamics simulation and the molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzman surface area method indicated that the binding affinity of dapsone for HLA-B*13:01 would be much greater than that for HLA-B*13:02. CONCLUSIONS: Our computational results suggest that dapsone would fit within the structure of the antigen-recognition site of HLA-B*13:01. This may change the self-peptides that bind to HLA-B*13:01, explaining why HLA-B*13:01 is a marker of DHS susceptibility.
In their 60-year history, dapsone and the sulfones have been used as both antibacterial and anti-inflammatory agents. Dapsone has been used successfully to treat a range of dermatologic disorders, most successfully those characterized by abnormal neutrophil and eosinophil accumulation. This article reviews and updates the chemistry, pharmacokinetics, clinical application, mechanism of action, adverse effects, and drug interactions of dapsone and the sulfones in dermatology.
Dapsone toxicity is putatively initiated by formation of a hydroxylamine metabolite by cytochromes P450. In human liver microsomes, the kinetics of P450-catalyzed N-oxidation of dapsone were biphasic, with the Michaelis-Menten constants of 0.14 +/- 0.05 and 0.004 +/- 0.003 mmol/L and the respective maximum velocities of 1.3 +/- 0.1 and 0.13 +/- 0.04 nmol/mg protein/min (mean +/- SEM). Troleandomycin (40 mumol/L) inhibited hydroxylamine formation at 100 mumol/L dapsone by 50%; diethyldithiocarbamate (150 mumol/L) and tolbutamide (400 mumol/L) inhibited at 5 mumol/L dapsone by 50% and 20%, respectively, suggesting that the low-affinity isozyme is CYP3A4 and the high-affinity isozymes are 2E1 and 2C. Disulfiram, 500 mg, 18 hours before a 100 mg oral dose of dapsone in healthy volunteers, diminished area under the hydroxylamine plasma concentration-time curve by 65%, apparent formation clearance of the hydroxylamine by 71%, and clearance of dapsone by 26%. Disulfiram produced a 78% lower concentration of methemoglobin 8 hours after dapsone.
Methaemoglobinaemia is an uncommon but potentially serious condition. It can be caused by congenital or acquired cause. Drug-induced methaemoglobinaemia is the commonest cause of acquired methaemoglobinaemia. The clinical signs and symptoms of methaemoglobinaemia include dyspnoea, desaturation, presence of saturation gap, headache, nausea and seizures depending on level of serum methaemoglobinaemia. We illustrate a case of dapsone-induced methaemoglobinaemia and its successful treatment by intravenous methylene blue.
The quality control of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) is a very important aspect for drug products entering the market. However, also for the well-established drugs, there ought to be a state-of-the-art impurity control. Some of the pharmacopoeial tests for related substances still make use of thin layer chromatography, even though selectivity and sensitivity are suboptimal. Here, we report on the development of a new gradient high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method for dapsone in order to replace the currently described pharmacopoeial TLC method. The separation of all relevant components was achieved on a C18 stationary phase (Waters XTerra(R) RP(18) 5 mum 4.6 x 250 mm) using a water-acetonitrile gradient. A limit of detection (LOD) of 0.02% was registered for all specified impurities. Additionally, within this study an "impurity of an impurity" was identified by means of LC-MS/MS.
Pharmacokinetics of aspirin and chloramphenicol was studied in 16 normal and 16 patients suffering from leprosy. A significant increase (p less than 0.05) in the elimination half-life of chloramphenicol was observed before and after dapsone treatment in leprotic patients as compared with the normal volunteers, while no significant difference was observed in any of the pharmacokinetic parameters with aspirin.
BACKGROUND: Treatment of acne vulgaris (acne) with dapsone gel, 5% requires twice-daily dosing, and some patients may not adhere to this regimen.<br /> OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of a new, once-daily formulation of dapsone gel, 7.5%, with a 50% higher dapsone concentration, versus vehicle over 12 weeks in patients with acne.<br /> METHODS: This 12-week, randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled, multicenter clinical trial enrolled patients with moderate acne aged 12 years and older with 20 to 50 inflammatory lesions and 30 to 100 noninflammatory lesions on the face, and an acne grade of 3 (moderate) on the Global Acne Assessment Score (GAAS). Patients were randomized to receive topical dapsone gel, 7.5% or vehicle once daily for 12 weeks. Investigators assessed GAAS success rate (proportion of patients with GAAS of 0 or 1) and percent change from baseline in inflammatory, noninflammatory, and total lesions.<br /> RESULTS: The intent-to-treat population comprised 2102 patients, 1044 in the dapsone gel, 7.5% group and 1058 in the vehicle group. At week 12, 29.9% of patients in the dapsone gel, 7.5% group and 21.2% in the vehicle group (P<.001) had GAAS success. Mean inflammatory lesions decreased by 55.5% and 49.0%, noninflammatory lesions decreased by 44.4% and 38.4%, and total lesions decreased by 48.7% and 42.4% in the dapsone gel, 7.5% and vehicle groups (all P<.001), respectively, at week 12. The incidence of adverse events was similar in the dapsone gel, 7.5% (19.1%) and vehicle (20.6%) groups. Most events in both groups were mild or moderate in severity. Most patients receiving dapsone gel, 7.5% and vehicle had a severity rating of "none" for stinging/burning, dryness, scaling, and erythema scales at all time points.<br /> CONCLUSIONS: Dapsone gel, 7.5% applied topically once daily is an effective, safe, and well-tolerated treatment for acne.<br /><br /> <em>J Drugs Dermatol</em>. 2016;15(5):553-561.
BACKGROUND: Dapsone is described as being active against Mycobacterium leprae, hence its role in the treatment of leprosy and related pathologies. Despite its therapeutic potential, the low solubility of dapsone in water results in low bioavailability and high microbial resistance. Nanoemulsions are pharmaceutical delivery systems derived from micellar solutions with a good capacity for improving absorption. The aim of this work was to develop and compare the permeability of a series of dapsone nanoemulsions in Caco-2 cell culture against that of effective permeability in the human body simulated using Gastroplus software. METHODS AND RESULTS: The release profiles of the dapsone nanoemulsions using different combinations of surfactants and cosolvent showed a higher dissolution rate in simulated gastric and enteric fluid than did the dispersed dapsone powder. The drug release kinetics were consistent with a Higuchi model. CONCLUSION: This comparison of dapsone permeability in Caco-2 cells with effective permeability in the human body simulated by Gastroplus showed a good correlation and indicates potential improvement in the biodisponibility of dapsone using this new system.
The safety and pharmacokinetics of weekly dapsone and weekly dapsone plus pyrimethamine were examined in adult patients with human immunodeficiency virus infection who were at risk for pneumocystis pneumonia because of a prior episode or a CD4+ T-cell count less than 250 cells per mm3. Groups of patients received 100, 200, and 300 mg of dapsone as a single weekly dose. The maximum tolerated dose of weekly dapsone was established as 200 mg per week in patients receiving at least 500 mg of zidovudine concomitantly. This dose of dapsone was then found to be well tolerated when combined with pyrimethamine at 25 mg. Further patients were randomized to dapsone at 200 mg or dapsone at 200 mg plus pyrimethamine at 25 mg once weekly. Twenty-six patients each were followed for a median of 33 weeks on dapsone alone and 45 weeks on the combination. Seven patients in each group withdrew because of toxicity. Five patients receiving dapsone developed documented pneumocystis pneumonia, while four and two patients receiving dapsone plus pyrimethamine developed documented and presumptive pneumocystis pneumonia, respectively. To evaluate the tolerability of a higher dose of pyrimethamine, 11 patients had their regimen changed to dapsone at 200 mg plus pyrimethamine at 75 mg, which was well tolerated by 10 of the patients for a median period of 11 weeks. The pharmacokinetics of dapsone and pyrimethamine were examined by using a population pharmacokinetic model. Decreases in the apparent volume of the peripheral compartment were observed when multiple-dose regimens of dapsone were compared with single-dose dapsone and when multiple-dose regimens of dapsone with pyrimethamine were compared with multiple-dose dapsone alone. When administered weekly, dapsone at 200 mg and dapsone at 200 mg with pyrimethamine at 25 mg are both well-tolerated regimens. This preliminary study suggests that the efficacy of these regimens in preventing pneumocystis pneumonia, however, may be less than that of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
