Darunavir is a nonpeptidic protease inhibitor recently approved for the treatment of antiretroviral therapy-experienced patients. It has potent in vitro activity against viral isolates that are resistant to currently licensed protease inhibitors. In randomized clinical trials with optimized background regimens, it has shown virologic and immunologic responses superior to comparator-based regimens.
This article reviews antiviral therapies that have been approved for human use during the last decade, with a focus on the process chemistry that enabled access to these important drugs. In particular, process chemistry highlights from the practical syntheses of the HCV drugs sofosbuvir (Gilead), grazoprevir (Merck), and elbasvir (Merck), the HIV therapy darunavir (Tibotec) and the influenza treatment peramivir (BioCryst) are presented.
BACKGROUND: WHO guidelines recommend dolutegravir plus two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) for second-line HIV therapy, with NRTI switching from first-line tenofovir to zidovudine. We aimed to examine whether dolutegravir is non-inferior to darunavir, the best-in-class protease inhibitor drug, and whether maintaining tenofovir in second-line therapy is non-inferior to switching to zidovudine. METHODS: In this prospective, multicentre, open-label, factorial, randomised, non-inferiority trial (NADIA), participants with confirmed HIV first-line treatment failure (HIV-1 RNA >/=1000 copies per mL) were recruited at seven clinical sites in Kenya, Uganda, and Zimbabwe. Following a 2 x 2 factorial design and stratified by site and screening HIV-1 RNA concentration, participants were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1) to receive a 96-week regimen containing either dolutegravir (50 mg once daily) or ritonavir-boosted darunavir (800 mg of darunavir plus 100 mg of ritonavir once daily) in combination with either tenofovir (300 mg once daily) plus lamivudine (300 mg once daily) or zidovudine (300 mg twice daily) plus lamivudine (150 mg twice daily). The NRTI drugs allocated by randomisation were administered orally in fixed-dose combination pills; other drugs were administered orally as separate pills. The previously reported primary outcome was the proportion of participants with a plasma HIV-1 RNA concentration of less than 400 copies per mL at 48 weeks. Here, we report the main secondary outcome: the proportion of participants with a plasma HIV-1 RNA concentration of less than 400 copies per mL at 96 weeks (non-inferiority margin 12%). We analysed this outcome and safety outcomes in the intention-to-treat population, which excluded only those who were randomly assigned in error and withdrawn before receiving trial drugs. This study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03988452, and is complete. FINDINGS: Between July 30 and Dec 18, 2019, we screened 783 patients and enrolled 465. One participant was randomly assigned in error and immediately withdrawn. The remaining 464 participants were randomly assigned to receive either dolutegravir (n=235) or ritonavir-boosted darunavir (n=229) and to receive lamivudine plus either tenofovir (n=233) or zidovudine (n=231). At week 96, 211 (90%) of 235 participants in the dolutegravir group and 199 (87%) of 229 participants in the darunavir group had HIV-1 RNA less than 400 copies per mL (percentage point difference 2.9, 95% CI -3.0 to 8.7), indicating non-inferiority. Nine (4%) participants (all in the dolutegravir group) developed dolutegravir resistance; no participants developed darunavir resistance (p=0.0023). In the other randomised comparison, 214 (92%) of 233 patients in the tenofovir group and 196 (85%) of 231 patients in the zidovudine group had HIV-1 RNA less than 400 copies per mL (percentage point difference 7.0, 95% CI 1.2 to 12.8), showing non-inferiority and indicating the superiority of tenofovir (p=0.019). The proportions of participants with any grade 3-4 adverse event were similar between the dolutegravir (26 [11%]) and darunavir (28 [12%]) groups and between the tenofovir (22 [9%]) and zidovudine (32 [14%]) groups. There were no deaths related to study medication. INTERPRETATION: Dolutegravir-based and darunavir-based regimens maintain good viral suppression during 96 weeks; dolutegravir is non-inferior to darunavir but is at greater risk of resistance in second-line therapy. Tenofovir should be continued in second-line therapy, rather than being switched to zidovudine. FUNDING: Janssen.
OBJECTIVES: Given the high need and the absence of specific antivirals for treatment of COVID-19 (the disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus-2 [SARS-CoV-2]), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) protease inhibitors are being considered as therapeutic alternatives. METHODS: Prezcobix/Rezolsta is a fixed-dose combination of 800 mg of the HIV protease inhibitor darunavir (DRV) and 150 mg cobicistat, a CYP3A4 inhibitor, which is indicated in combination with other antiretroviral agents for the treatment of HIV infection. There are currently no definitive data on the safety and efficacy of DRV/cobicistat for the treatment of COVID-19. The in vitro antiviral activity of darunavir against a clinical isolate from a patient infected with SARS-CoV-2 was assessed. RESULTS: DRV showed no antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 at clinically relevant concentrations (EC(50) > 100 muM). Remdesivir, used as a positive control, demonstrated potent antiviral activity (EC(50) = 0.38 muM). CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the data do not support the use of DRV for the treatment of COVID-19.
Darunavir: (3R,3aS,6aR)-hexahydrofuro[2,3-b]furan-3-yl [(2S,3R)-4-[(4-aminophenyl)sulfonyl] (isobutyl)amino-3-hydroxy-1-phenyl-2-butanyl]carbamate is a synthetic non-peptide protease inhibitor. On June 2006, it was first approved by the Food and Drug administration (FDA) for treatment of resistant type-1 of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In July 2016, the FDA expanded the approval for use of darunavir in pregnant women with HIV infection. Darunavir prevents the replication of HIV virus by inhibiting the catalytic activity of the HIV-1 protease enzyme, and selectively inhibits the cleavage of HIV encoded Gag-Pol polyproteins in virus-infected cells, which prevents the formation of mature infectious virus particles. Darunavir is unique among currently available protease inhibitors because it maintains antiretroviral activity against a variety of multidrug-resistant HIV strains. This article discusses, by a critical extensive review of the literature, the description of darunavir in terms of its names, formulae, elemental composition, appearance, and use in the treatment of HIV-infected patients. The article also discusses the methods for preparation of darunavir, its physical-chemical properties, analytical methods for its determination, pharmacological properties, and dosing information.
