Previous studies report that deferoxamine (DFO) binds metallic ions such as Fe3+, In3+ and Ga3+ with very high affinity. This property of DFO has been utilized to label DFO-coupled compounds with radiometals such as 67Ga and 111In. We have studied the effect of low DFO concentrations and of different incubation conditions on the stability of the 67Ga-DFO complex. In our experience high (> 5 microM) DFO concentration appears to be critical in obtaining high radiochemical purity of such complexes.
BACKGROUND: Arsenic trioxide is an activist agent in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), which acts alone, but has an adverse effect on patients. Moreover, deferoxamine has antiproliferative activity and induces leukopenia. In order to enhance antileukemic effectiveness and to reduce the dosage of arsenic trioxide, the combination effect of it with deferoxamine (DFO) was evaluated on the APL cell line (NB4). METHODS: In this experimental study, to investigate the cytotoxic effects of ATO/DFO in acute promyelocytic leukemia, the NB4 cell line (provided by Pasteur Institute of Iran) was treated with different doses and then at 24, 48, and 72 hrs intervals, the percentage of survival, cell count, metabolic activity and apoptosis induction were investigated respectively. Also, hTERT gene expression was analyzed by the RT-PCR method. RESULTS: We found that DFO alone and in combination with ATO has cytotoxic and antiproliferative effects, and reduces viability and cell metabolic activity in the NB4 cell line in a dose and time-dependent manner. In addition, this combination causes an increase in apoptosis, up-regulation of Caspase-3, and down-regulation of hTERT genes in cells. CONCLUSION: Combined ATO/ DFO treatment cooperatively decreased the mRNA levels of the hTERT and increased the mRNA levels of Caspase-3 in a time-dependent manner compared to DFO alone.
Iron is essential for all living organisms. Under normal conditions there is no regulatory and rapid iron excretion in humans and body iron levels are mainly regulated from the absorption of iron from the gut. Regular blood transfusions in thalassaemia and other chronic refractory anaemias can result in excessive iron deposition in tissues and organs. This excess iron is toxic, resulting in tissue and organ damage and unless it is removed it can be fatal to those chronically transfused. Iron removal in transfusional iron overload is achieved using chelation therapy with the chelating drugs deferoxamine (DF) and deferiprone (L1). Effective chelation therapy in chronically transfused patients can only be achieved if iron chelators can remove sufficient amounts of iron, equivalent to those accumulated in the body from transfusions, maintaining body iron load at a non-toxic level. In order to maintain a negative iron balance, both chelating drugs have to be administered almost daily and at high doses. This form of administration also requires that a chelator has low toxicity, good compliance and low cost. DF has been a life-saving drug for thousands of patients in the last 40 years. It is mostly administered by subcutaneous infusion (40-60 mg/kg, 8-12 h, 5 days per week), is effective in iron removal and has low toxicity. However, less than 10% of the patients requiring iron chelation therapy worldwide are able to receive DF because of its high cost, low compliance and in some cases toxicity. In the last 10 years we have witnessed the emergence of oral chelation therapy, which could potentially change the prognosis of all transfusional iron-loaded patients. The only clinically available oral iron chelator is L1, which has so far been taken by over 6000 patients worldwide, in some cases daily for over 10 years, with very promising results. L1 was able to bring patients to a negative iron balance at doses of 50-120 mg/kg/day. It increases urinary iron excretion, decreases serum ferritin levels and reduces liver iron in the majority of chronically transfused iron-loaded patients. Despite earlier concerns of possible increased risk of toxicity, all the toxic side effects of L1 are currently considered reversible, controllable and manageable. These include agranulocytosis (0.6%), musculoskeletal and joint pains (15%), gastrointestinal complaints (6%) and zinc deficiency (1%). The incidence of these toxic side effects could in general be reduced by using lower doses of L1 or combination therapy with DF. Combination therapy could also benefit patients experiencing toxicity with DF and those not responding to either chelator alone. The overall efficacy and toxicity of L1 is comparable to that of DF in both animals and humans. Despite the steady progress in iron chelation therapy with DF and L1, further investigations are required for optimising their use in patients by selecting improved dose protocols, by minimising their toxicity and by identifying new applications in other diseases of iron imbalance.
Deferoxamine is commonly used for iron-overload related diseases, its drawbacks such as instability and toxicity, however, significantly limited its utility in clinic. To address these issues, oxidation-responsive alginate-deferoxamine (Alg-DFO) conjugates were synthesized and their structure was characterized. The metabolism studies shown the conjugation of alginate significantly increased the stability of the DFO, with half-life more than 10 times longer than that of the free DFO. Moreover, the conjugates could not only quickly respond to oxidative stimuli and degradation, suggesting their potential to be cleared from the body by responding to iron-overload associated oxidative environment to avoid its accumulation and safety concern, but also protect iron binding capacity of the attached DFO from oxidation. The degradation mechanism for oxidative-response was proposed. In addition, the conjugates shown lower cytotoxicity compared to the free DFO. Taken together, the Alg-DFO conjugates synthesized in this work has promise for treating iron-overload related conditions.
Rapidly growing cancer cells exhibit a strong dependence on iron for their survival. Thus, iron-removing drugs, iron chelators, have potential applications in cancer treatment. Deferoxamine (DFO) is an efficient iron chelator, but its short circulation half-life and ability to induce hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha) overexpression restricts its use as an antitumor agent. In the present study, we first found that a pattern of iron-related protein expression favoring higher intracellular iron closely correlates with shorter overall and relapse-free survival in pancreatic cancer patients. We subsequently found that a combination of DFO and the HIF1alpha inhibitor, lificiguat (also named YC1), significantly enhanced the antitumor efficacy of DFO in vitro. We then employed transferrin receptor 1 (TFR1) targeting liposomes to codeliver DFO and YC1 to pancreatic tumors in a mouse model. The encapsulation of DFO prolonged its circulation time, improved its accumulation in tumor tissues via the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect, and facilitated efficient uptake by cancer cells, which express high level of TFR1. After entering the tumor cells, the encapsulated DFO and YC1 were released to elicit a synergistic antitumor effect in subcutaneous and orthotopic pancreatic cancer xenografts. In summary, our work overcame two major obstacles in DFO-based cancer treatment through a simple liposome-based drug delivery system. This nanoencapsulation and targeting paradigm lays the foundation for future application of iron chelation in cancer therapy.
The opportunistic fungal infections are an increasing threat to humans due to the increasing number of patients with immunodeficiency, in which the most popular fungal pathogen is Candida albicans. Fluconazole (FLC) is the common drug for treating C. albicans infections, but increasing drug resistance has limited its clinical use. Currently, combination therapy is being investigated as a treatment to overcome the resistance of C. albicans. This report investigated the synergistic properties of deferoxamine (DFO) and FLC combination therapy in vitro and in vivo against drug-resistant C. albicans. The results showed that the combination of DFO and FLC had a great synergistic antifungal effect against C. albicans, an FLC-resistant strain, with a fractional inhibition concentration index (FICI) of 0.25 by the broth microdilution checkerboard assay. Furthermore, the combination of DFO and FLC significantly inhibited the activity of C. glabrata cells (approximately 30% of C. glabrata cells are azole-resistant). The time-growth curves confirmed that the combination of DFO and FLC have a potent synergistic antifungal effect. Hyphal formation assays confirmed that DFO inhibited the hyphal induction of C. albicans. In addition, the combination of DFO and FLC significantly inhibited the expression of the adhesion gene (ALS1). In vivo experiments showed that the combination of DFO and FLC significantly reduced pustules, CFU counts and inflammatory cell infiltration in skin tissue. These results suggest that the combination of DFO and FLC inhibits yeast-hyphae transformation, reduces C. albicans infectivity and resistance in vitro and in vivo, and affects Cek1 MAPK signaling. This may offer a new option for the treatment of cutaneous candidiasis.
Acute aluminum intoxication is uncommon in clinical practice but can be fatal. This limited experience is reflected in the paucity of data assessing a viable approach to the treatment of these patients. In this report, the authors describe the clinical course and successful, pharmacokinetic-based deferoxamine-hemodialysis treatment regimen of a patient with severe aluminum encephalopathy following alum bladder irrigation. The combined use of deferoxamine and appropriately timed hemodialysis appears to be a very reasonable means of treating patients with severe acute aluminum intoxication.
The Thalassemia Clinical Research Network collected adherence information from 79 patients on deferoxamine and 186 on deferasirox from 2007 to 2009. Chelation adherence was defined as percent of doses administered in the last 4 weeks (patient report) out of those prescribed(chart review). Chelation history since 2002 was available for 97 patients currently on deferoxamine and 217 on deferasirox, with crude estimates of adherence from chart review. Self-reported adherence to both deferoxamine and deferasirox were quite high, with slightly higher adherence to the oral chelator (97 vs. 92%). Ninety percent of patients on deferasirox reported at least 90% adherence, compared with 75% of patients on deferoxamine. Adherence to both chelators was highest in children, followed by adolescents and older adults.Predictors of lower deferoxamine adherence were smoking in the past year, problems sticking themselves (adults only), problems wearing their pump, and fewer transfusions in the past year. Predictors of lower deferasirox adherence were bodily pain and depression. Switching chelators resulted in increased adherence, regardless of the direction of the switch, although switching from deferoxamine to deferasirox was far more common. As adherence to deferoxamine is higher than previously reported, it appears beneficial for patients to have a choice in chelators.
The prevalence rate of thalassemia, which is endemic in Southeast Asia, the Middle East, and the Mediterranean, exceeds 100,000 live births per year. There are many genetic variants in thalassemia with different pathological severity, ranging from a mild and asymptomatic anemia to life-threatening clinical effects, requiring lifelong treatment, such as regular transfusions in thalassemia major (TM). Some of the thalassemias are non-transfusion-dependent, including many thalassemia intermedia (TI) variants, where iron overload is caused by chronic increase in iron absorption due to ineffective erythropoiesis. Many TI patients receive occasional transfusions. The rate of iron overloading in TI is much slower in comparison to TM patients. Iron toxicity in TI is usually manifested by the age of 30-40 years, and in TM by the age of 10 years. Subcutaneous deferoxamine (DFO), oral deferiprone (L1), and DFO-L1 combinations have been effectively used for more than 20 years for the treatment of iron overload in TM and TI patients, causing a significant reduction in morbidity and mortality. Selected protocols using DFO, L1, and their combination can be designed for personalized chelation therapy in TI, which can effectively and safely remove all the excess toxic iron and prevent cardiac, liver, and other organ damage. Both L1 and DF could also prevent iron absorption. The new oral chelator deferasirox (DFX) increases iron excretion and decreases liver iron in TM and TI. There are drawbacks in the use of DFX in TI, such as limitations related to dose, toxicity, and cost, iron load of the patients, and ineffective removal of excess iron from the heart. Furthermore, DFX appears to increase iron and other toxic metal absorption. Future treatments of TI and related iron-loading conditions could involve the use of the iron-chelating drugs and other drug combinations not only for increasing iron excretion but also for preventing iron absorption.
Rhinocerebral mucormycosis can be a rapidly fatal course disease if the institution of treatment is delayed. We describe a case of a long-term dialysis patient in which the role of a siderophore such as Deferoxamine in promoting mucormycosis is discussed. The frequent lack of early diagnosis, itself subsequent to a break away from the standard diagnostic tools (apart from biopsy and culture) makes the survival prognosis particularly critical.
Deferiprone is the only orally active iron-chelating drug to be used therapeutically in conditions of transfusional iron overload. It is an orphan drug designed and developed primarily by academic initiatives for the treatment of iron overload in thalassaemia, which is endemic in the Mediterranean, Middle East and South East Asia and is considered an orphan disease in the European Union and North America. Deferiprone has been used in several other iron or other metal imbalance conditions and has prospects of wider clinical applications. Deferiprone has high affinity for iron and interacts with almost all the iron pools at the molecular, cellular, tissue and organ levels. Doses of 50-120 mg/kg/day appear to be effective in bringing patients to negative iron balance. It increases urinary iron excretion, which mainly depends on the iron load of patients and the dose of the drug. It decreases serum ferritin levels and reduces the liver and heart iron content in the majority of chronically transfused iron loaded patients at doses >80 mg/kg/day. It is metabolised to a glucuronide conjugate and cleared through the urine in the metabolised and a non-metabolised form, usually of a 3 deferiprone: 1 iron complex, which gives the characteristic red colour urine. Peak serum levels of deferiprone are observed within 1 hour of its oral administration and clearance from blood is within 6 hours. There is variation among patients in iron excretion, the metabolism and pharmacokinetics of deferiprone. Deferiprone has been used in more than 7500 patients aged from 2-85 years in >50 countries, in some cases daily for >14 years. All the adverse effects of deferiprone are considered reversible, controllable and manageable. These include agranulocytosis with frequency of about 0.6%, neutropenia 6%, musculoskeletal and joint pains 15%, gastrointestinal complains 6% and zinc deficiency 1%. Discontinuation of the drug is recommended for patients developing agranulocytosis. Deferiprone is of similar therapeutic index to subcutaneous deferoxamine but is more effective in iron removal from the heart, which is the target organ of iron toxicity and mortality in iron-loaded thalassaemia patients. Deferiprone is much less expensive to produce than deferoxamine. Combination therapy of deferoxamine and deferiprone has been used in patients not complying with subcutaneous deferoxamine or experiencing toxicity or not excreting sufficient amounts of iron with use of either drug alone. New oral iron-chelating drugs are being developed, but even if successful these are likely to be more expensive than deferiprone and are not likely to become available in the next 5-8 years. About 25% of treated thalassaemia patients in Europe and more than 50% in India are using deferiprone. For most thalassaemia patients worldwide who are not at present receiving any form of chelation therapy the choice is between deferiprone and fatal iron toxicity.
Deferoxamine (DFO) therapy has been associated with improved survival of thalassemia patients. However, cardiac disease remains the main cause of death in those patients. In 1995, the oral chelator deferiprone became available for clinical use. We compared the occurrence of cardiac disease in patients treated only with DFO and in those whose therapy was switched to deferiprone during the period of observation, from January 31, 1995, to December 31, 2003. All patients with thalassemia major treated in 7 Italian centers who were born between 1970 and 1993 and who had not experienced a cardiac event prior to January 1995 were included. DFO only was given to 359 patients, and 157 patients received deferiprone for part of the time. A total of 3,610 patient-years were observed on DFO and 750 on deferiprone. At baseline, the 2 groups were comparable for age and sex, while ferritin levels were significantly higher in patients switched to deferiprone. Fifty-two cardiac events, including 10 cardiac deaths, occurred during therapy with DFO. No cardiac events occurred during deferiprone therapy or within at least 18 months after the end of it. In the setting of a natural history study, deferiprone therapy was associated with significantly greater cardiac protection than deferoxamine in patients with thalassemia major.
