STUDY OBJECTIVE: The effect of volatile anesthetics on postoperative recovery in older adults is still not entirely clear. Thus, we evaluated the effect of desflurane versus sevoflurane anesthesia on speed of postoperative recovery in older adults eligible for same-day discharge. We further evaluated the incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), bispectral index (BIS) values, and S100B concentrations. DESIGN: Single-center, prospective, observer-blinded, randomized clinical trial. SETTING: Operating room. PATIENTS: 190 patients >/=65 years of age and scheduled for minor- to moderate-risk noncardiac surgeries. INTERVENTIONS: Goal-directed administration of desflurane versus sevoflurane for maintenance of anesthesia with an intraoperative goal of BIS 50 +/- 5. MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was the time to anesthesia recovery, which was defined as the time between arrival at the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) and reaching criteria for discharge from PACU, based on modified Aldrete score >/= 12 points. Modified Aldrete scores were assessed at PACU arrival and thereafter in five-minute intervals. PONV was evaluated during PACU stay and the first three postoperative days, BIS values were recorded during PACU stay, and S100B values were measured before and after surgery, and on the second postoperative day. MAIN RESULTS: 95 patients were randomized to receive desflurane, and 95 patients to receive sevoflurane. We did not observe a significant difference in median duration of postoperative recovery between the groups (desflurane: 0 min [0;0]; sevoflurane: 0 min [0;0]; p = 0.245). 77 patients (81.1%) in the desflurane group and 84 patients (88.4%) in the sevoflurane group already had Aldrete scores >/=12 points upon arrival at PACU (p = 0.277). There was also no significant difference in the incidences of PONV (p = 0.606), postoperative BIS values (p = 0.197), and postoperative maximum S100B concentrations (p = 0.821) between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: Despite previous reports, we did not observe significant faster recovery times after desflurane anesthesia. Both volatile anesthetics may be appropriate for same-day discharge in older adults.
A study relating signal patterns of burst onsets in burst suppression EEG to the anesthetic agent or anesthesia induction protocol is presented. A dataset of 82 recordings of sevoflurane, isoflurane and desflurane anesthesia underlies the study. 3 second segments from the onset of altogether 3214 bursts are described using AR model parameters, spectral entropy and sample entropy as features. The features are clustered using the K-means algorithm. The results indicate that no clear cut distinction can be made between the burst patterns induced by the mentioned anesthetics although bursts of certain properties are more common in certain patient groups. Several directions for further investigations are proposed based on visual inspection of the recordings.
BACKGROUND: The pharmacokinetics for sevoflurane and desflurane makes them suitable for low-flow anesthesia. The aim of the present study was to assess the use of desflurane and sevoflurane at constant vaporizer settings and fixed low fresh gas flows. METHODS: One hundred ASA 1-2 patients undergoing elective laparoscopic surgery were randomized into 4 groups (25 patients each): a fixed fresh gas flow 1.0 or 0.5 L/min with desflurane (D1.0 and D0.5) or sevoflurane (S1.0 and S0.5) throughout anesthesia. A fixed vaporizer setting, sevoflurane 6% and desflurane 18% was used during wash-in. Time to reach 1 and 1.5 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), emergence and gas consumption from start to end of surgery was studied. RESULTS: Time to reach 1 MAC age adjusted desflurane or sevoflurane was D0.5 8.5+/-1.7, D1.0 3.7+/-0.7, S0.5 15.2+/-2.4 and S1.0 6.2+/-1.3 minutes, respectively (P<0.001), and times to increase from 1 to 1.5 MAC differed also significantly. Desflurane anesthesia was associated to significantly shorter time to extubation 6.7+/-2.3 vs. 10+/-2.3 minutes for sevoflurane (P<0.001). The amount of agent consumed g/min. was significantly reduced for both 0.5 L/min groups: 30% less for desflurane and 19% for sevoflurane. CONCLUSIONS: We found an almost twice as rapid wash-in with desflurane and expectedly faster emergence. Gas consumption was lower at 0.5 L/min than it was at 1 L/min for both gases studied however most pronounced for desflurane. Desflurane has clear advantages for minimal fresh gas flow anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Better protection can be provided during neurosurgery due to the establishment of somatosensory-evoked potential (SEP) and motor-evoked potential (MEP) monitoring technologies. However, some studies have showed that inhaled halogenated anesthetics have a significant impact on neurophysiological monitoring. METHODS: A total of 40 consecutive patients undergoing neurosurgery were randomly assigned to two groups receiving inhaled anesthetics, either desflurane or sevoflurane. Multiples levels (concentrations of 0.3, 0.6 and 0.9) of anesthetics were administered at minimum alveolar concentration (MAC), and then the latencies and amplitudes of SEPs and MEPs were recorded. RESULTS: SEP and MEP signals were well preserved in patients who underwent neurosurgery under general anesthesia supplemented with desflurane or sevoflurane at concentrations of 0.3, 0.6 and 0.9 MAC. In each desflurane or sevoflurane group, the amplitudes of SEPs and MEPs decreased and the latencies of SEPs were prolonged significantly as the MAC increased (P < 0.05). The SEP latencies of both the upper and lower limbs in the desflurane group were significantly longer, and the SEP amplitudes were significantly lower than those in the sevoflurane group (P < 0.05). The MEP amplitudes in the desflurane group were significantly lower than those in the sevoflurane group (P < 0.05), only the amplitudes of the upper limbs at 0.3 MAC did not vary significantly. CONCLUSIONS: SEPs and MEPs were inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by both desflurane and sevoflurane. At the same MAC concentration, desflurane appeared to have a stronger inhibitory effect than sevoflurane. All patients studied had normal neurological examination findings, hence, these results may not be applicable to patients with preexisting deficits. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study registered on the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ( www.chictr.org.cn ), Clinical Trials identifier ChiCTR2100045504 (18/04/2021).
The objective of this systematic review was to estimate the relative risk of prolonged times to tracheal extubation with desflurane versus sevoflurane or isoflurane. Prolonged times are defined as >/=15 min from end of surgery (or anesthetic discontinuation) to extubation in the operating room. They are associated with reintubations, naloxone and flumazenil administration, longer times from procedure end to operating room exit, greater differences between actual and scheduled operating room times, longer times from operating room exit to next case start, longer durations of the workday, and more operating room personnel idle while waiting for extubation. Published randomized clinical trials of humans were included. Generalized pivotal methods were used to estimate the relative risk of prolonged extubation for each study from reported means and standard deviations of extubation times. The relative risks were combined using DerSimonian-Laird random effects meta-analysis with Knapp-Hartung adjustment. From 67 papers, there were 78 two-drug comparisons, including 5167 patients. Studies were of high quality (23/78) or moderate quality (55/78), the latter due to lack of blinding of observers to group assignment and/or patient attrition because patients were extubated after operating room exit. Desflurane resulted in a 65% relative reduction in the incidence of prolonged extubation compared with sevoflurane (95% confidence interval 49% to 76%, P < .0001) and in a 78% relative reduction compared with isoflurane (58% to 89%, P = .0001). There were no significant associations between studies' relative risks and quality, industry funding, or year of publication (all six meta-regressions P >/= .35). In conclusion, when emergence from general anesthesia with different drugs are compared with sevoflurane or isoflurane, suitable benchmarks quantifying rapidity of emergence are reductions in the incidence of prolonged extubation achieved by desflurane, approximately 65% and 78%, respectively. These estimates give realistic context for interpretation of results of future studies that compare new anesthetic agents to current anesthetics.
Inhalational anaesthetics were previously reported to promote ovarian cancer malignancy, but underlying mechanisms remain unclear. The present study aims to investigate the role of sevoflurane- or desflurane-induced microRNA (miRNA) changes on ovarian cancer cell behaviour. The cultured SKOV3 cells were exposed to 3.6% sevoflurane or 10.3% desflurane for 2 h. Expression of miR-138, -210 and -335 was determined with qRT-PCR. Cell proliferation and migration were assessed with wound healing assay, Ki67 staining and Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8) assay with or without mimic miR-138/-210 transfections. The miRNA downstream effector, hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), was also analysed with immunofluorescent staining. Sevoflurane or desflurane exposure to cancer cells enhanced their proliferation and migration. miR-138 expression was suppressed by both sevoflurane and desflurane, while miR-210 expression was suppressed only by sevoflurane. miR-335 expression was not changed by either sevoflurane or desflurane exposure. The administration of mimic miR-138 or -210 reduced the promoting effects of sevoflurane and desflurane on cancer cell proliferation and migration, in line with the HIF-1alpha expression changes. These data indicated that inhalational agents sevoflurane and desflurane enhanced ovarian cancer cell malignancy via miRNA deactivation and HIF-1alpha. The translational value of this work needs further study.
While sevoflurane and desflurane have been regarded as inhalation agents providing rapid induction and emergence, previous studies demonstrated the superiority of desflurane-anesthesia compared to sevoflurane-anesthesia in the postoperative recovery in obese and geriatric patients. We investigated whether a short-term switch of sevoflurane to desflurane at the end of sevoflurane-anesthesia enhances patient postoperative recovery profile in non-obese patients. We randomly divide patients undergoing elective surgery (n = 60) into two groups: sevoflurane-anesthesia group (Group-S, n = 30) and sevoflurane-desflurane group (Group-SD, n = 30). In Group-S, patients received only sevoflurane-anesthesia until the end of surgery (for >2 hours). In Group-SD, sevoflurane was stopped and switched to desflurane-anesthesia before the completion of sevoflurane-anesthesia (for approximately 30 minutes). We assessed the intergroup differences in the times to get eye-opening, extubation, and a bispectral index of 80 (BIS-80). Group-SD showed significantly shorter times to get eye-opening (438 +/- 101 vs. 295 +/- 45 s; mean difference, 143 s; 95% confidence interval [CI], 101-183; p < 0.001), extubation (476 +/- 108 vs. 312 +/- 42 s; mean difference, 164 s; 95% CI, 116-220; p < 0.001), and BIS-80 (378 +/- 124 vs. 265 +/- 49 minutes; mean difference, 113 s; 95% CI, 58-168 p < 0.001) compared to Group-S. There was no between-group difference in postoperative nausea, vomiting, and hypoxia incidences. Our results suggested that the short-term (approximately 30 minutes) switch of sevoflurane to desflurane at the end of sevoflurane-anesthesia can facilitate the speed of postoperative patient recovery.
Desflurane is a halogenated ether inhalation general anaesthetic agent with low solubility in blood and body tissues, and approximately one-fifth the potency of isoflurane. The pharmacodynamic properties of desflurane generally resemble those of isoflurane; thus, it produces dose-dependent depression of the central nervous and cardiorespiratory systems, and tetanic fade at the neuromuscular junction. The alveolar equilibration of desflurane is rapid (90% complete at 30 minutes compared with 73% for isoflurane). Both desflurane and isoflurane are distributed to various tissues to a similar extent. Desflurane is resistant to chemical degradation and undergoes negligible metabolism (approximately equal to 10% of that seen with isoflurane). Desflurane 'wash-out' is approximately equal to 2 to 2.5 times faster than that of isoflurane in the first 2 hours after discontinuation of anaesthesia. The low solubility of desflurane facilitates a rapid induction of anaesthesia and precise control of the depth of anaesthesia (during maintenance). Results from a few clinical studies indicate that emergence from desflurane is significantly earlier (by approximately equal to 2 to 6 minutes) than that from propofol anaesthesia, whereas other studies do not concur. In comparison with isoflurane, emergence from desflurane anaesthesia is significantly earlier (by 5 minutes) after ambulatory and approximately equal to 50% earlier (also significant) after nonambulatory surgical procedures. Limited comparative studies with halothane or sevoflurane also suggest an earlier time of emergence from desflurane anaesthesia. Comparative studies of desflurane and propofol, and other inhalation agents, indicate that the times to toleration of oral fluids, sitting and discharge from recovery room are similar, regardless of the general anaesthetic agent administered. However, some limited data in elderly patients (aged > 65 years) suggest that this patient group spends a significantly shorter time in the postanaesthesia care unit after desflurane than after isoflurane anaesthesia. Differences, if any, in the recovery of cognitive and psychomotor functions after desflurane or propofol anaesthesia remain unclear. However, in comparison with isoflurane anaesthesia, recovery of these functions (up to 45 minutes post-operatively) occurs earlier after desflurane. Significantly fewer patients are subjectively impaired (i.e. drowsy, clumsy, fatigued or confused) upon recovery from desflurane than from isoflurane anaesthesia. Likewise, significantly fewer adult patients are delirious when recovering from desflurane than from isoflurane anaesthesia, though in paediatric patients delirium is more likely when recovering from desflurane than from halothane anaesthesia. Haemodynamic stability during coronary artery surgery is as well maintained with desflurane as with isoflurane, and the drug does not worsen the adverse postoperative outcomes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
BACKGROUND: Desflurane is not recommended during anesthesia induction because of its sympathetic stimulation effect, particularly in patients with myocardial ischemic disease. To date, the hemodynamic response to 1 MAC desflurane inhalation in combination with remifentanil infusion during anesthesia induction has rarely been reported. METHODS: This investigation was designed to compare hemodynamic responses to 1 MAC desflurane (group D, n = 200) with sevoflurane (group S, n = 200) during anesthesia induction and endotracheal intubation in adult patients undergoing elective spine surgery. Subgroup analysis of the different age subgroups was also performed. With continuous infusion of remifentanil 0.1 mug/kg/min, anesthesia was induced with propofol bolus, and endotracheal intubation was performed after muscle relaxation. Heart rate (HR) and mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) were measured every minute for 5 min after anesthesia induction (T1-5) and after endotracheal intubation (T6-10). RESULTS: HR was significantly higher in group D (n = 182) than in group S (n = 173) at T3-10 except at T6 (1 min after intubation) (all P < 0.05). In the age-based subgroup analyses, which subdivided the group D and S into four subgroups based on patient's age, the changes in HR from baseline values were significantly different between the coeval subgroups of patients in their 20-29 years and 30-39 years of age (all P < 0.05). MAP was reduced from baseline value, irrespective of group and age. CONCLUSION: Inhalation of 1 MAC desflurane during anesthesia induction with propofol bolus and remifentanil continuous infusion and during endotracheal intubation was more likely to induce elevations in HR more likely than 1 MAC sevoflurane, especially in younger patients. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered in the Clinical Research Information Service (CRIS, http://cris.nih.go.kr ) of the Republic of Korea on Feb 12, 2016 (Registration No. KCT 0,001,813).
STUDY OBJECTIVES: Sleeve gastrectomy has been one of the most commonly performed bariatric surgery methods. The study aimed to compare the effects of 2 most commonly used inhalation anesthetics, sevoflurane and desflurane, on the peroperative hemodynamic alterations and postoperative respiratory functions in morbidly obese patients undergoing sleeve gastrectomy. DESIGN: Nonrandomized cohort. SETTINGS: Operating room, postoperative period. PATIENTS: Eighty-four morbidly obese patients with a body mass index greater than 40 kg/m(2) who had scheduled to undergo sleeve gastrectomy operation were prospectively included in the study. INTERVENTIONS: Patients were divided into 2 groups. The maintenance of inhalation anesthesia was performed by sevoflurane in 1 group (sevoflurane group) and desflurane (desflurane group) in the other group. MEASUREMENTS: Demographic features, peroperative hemodynamic alterations, and the results of preoperative and postoperative 24th hour respiratory function tests were recorded. RESULTS: There was not any statistically significant difference between groups regarding age, sex, body mass index, anesthesia time, peroperative mean arterial pressure, arterial oxygen saturation, end-tidal carbon dioxide, and preoperative or postoperative forced expiratory volume 1/forced vital capacity ratios. CONCLUSION: We determined that both desflurane and sevoflurane provide similar intraoperative hemodynamic and early postoperative respiratory functions in morbidly obese patients in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. Both agents can be regarded as alternatives for inhalation anesthetics in maintenance of anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: By exceeding planetary environmental boundaries, multiple global crises have become imminent in the 21st century. The healthcare system is a contributor to the climate crisis, accounting for approximately 5% of greenhouse gas emissions in Western countries. In anaesthetic clinics, desflurane, a highly potent greenhouse gas and volatile anaesthetic with no compelling indications, accounts for up to two thirds of total emissions. Its use can be drastically reduced using simple measures. In the present study, we investigated whether a relevant and timely reduction in use could be achieved by dismounting desflurane vaporisers and providing information to the team without restricting its use. METHODS: The study was conducted in a German university hospital with approximately 1250 beds, over a 12-month period between 2021 and 2022, with a comparison to the corresponding periods of the previous years up to 2017. The interventions were, first, the removal of desflurane vaporisers, and second, staff education on the climate impact of volatile anaesthetics. The primary outcome variable was the reduction of hypnotic-related emissions in CO(2) equivalents per anaesthetic procedure. RESULTS: Prospective data collection and interventions were conducted from 28 March 2021 to 27 March 2022. The amount of CO(2) equivalent emissions per procedure in the form of volatile anaesthetics was reduced by 86% compared with the year before the interventions (p < 0.001). Interestingly, there was already a 52.1% reduction in the year before the procedure (p < 0.001). There were no significant changes in the use of sevoflurane or propofol. Hypnotic-related costs decreased by euro14,549, whereas extubation time did not change significantly. CONCLUSIONS: Removal of desflurane vaporisers and staff training can quickly and significantly reduce the emissions of an anaesthesia department in a large German teaching hospital. This may also reduce the costs. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was registered with the German Clinical Trials Register, identifier DRKS00024973 on 12/04/2021.
This study was designed to investigate qCON and qNOX variations during outpatient laparoscopic cholecystectomy using remifentanil and desflurane without muscle relaxants and compare these indices with ANI and MAC. Adult patients undergoing outpatient laparoscopic cholecystectomy were included in this prospective observational study. Maintenance of anesthesia was performed using remifentanil targeted to ANI 50-80 and desflurane targeted to MAC 0.8-1.2 without muscle relaxants. The ANI, qCON and qNOX and desflurane MAC values were collected at different time-points and analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA. The relationship between ANI and qNOX and between qCON and MAC were analyzed by linear regression. The ANI was comprised between 50 and 80 during maintenance of anesthesia. Higher values of qNOX and qCON were observed at induction and extubation than during all other time-points where they were comprised between 40 and 60. A poor but significant negative linear relationship (r(2) = 0.07, p < 0.001) was observed between ANI and qNOX. There also was a negative linear relationship between qCON and MAC (r(2) = 0.48, p < 0.001) and between qNOX and remifentanil infusion rate (r(2) = 0.13, p < 0.001). The linear mixed-effect regression correlation (r(2)) was 0.65 for ANI-qNOX and 0.96 for qCON-MAC. The qCON and qNOX monitoring seems informative during general anesthesia using desflurane and remifentanil without muscle relaxants in patients undergoing ambulatory laparoscopic cholecystectomy. While qCON correlated with MAC, the correlation of overall qCON and ANI was poor but significant. Additionally, the qNOX weakly correlated with the remifentanil infusion rate. This observational study suggests that the proposed ranges of 40-60 for both indexes may correspond to adequate levels of hypnosis and analgesia during general anesthesia, although this should be confirmed by further research.
The Gas Man simulation software provides an opportunity to teach, understand and examine the pharmacokinetics of volatile anesthetics. The primary aim of this study was to investigate the accuracy of a cardiac output and alveolar ventilation matched Gas Man model and to compare its predictive performance with the standard pharmacokinetic model using patient data.Therefore, patient data from volatile anesthesia were successively compared to simulated administration of desflurane and sevoflurane for the standard and a parameter-matched simulation model with modified alveolar ventilation and cardiac output. We calculated the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between measured and calculated induction, maintenance and elimination and the expiratory decrement times during emergence and recovery for the standard and the parameter-matched model.During induction, RMSDs for the standard Gas Man simulation model were higher than for the parameter-matched Gas Man simulation model [induction (desflurane), standard: 1.8 (0.4) % Atm, parameter-matched: 0.9 (0.5) % Atm., P = .001; induction (sevoflurane), standard: 1.2 (0.9) % Atm, parameter-matched: 0.4 (0.4) % Atm, P = .029]. During elimination, RMSDs for the standard Gas Man simulation model were higher than for the parameter-matched Gas Man simulation model [elimination (desflurane), standard: 0.7 (0.6) % Atm, parameter-matched: 0.2 (0.2) % Atm, P = .001; elimination (sevoflurane), standard: 0.7 (0.5) % Atm, parameter-matched: 0.2 (0.2) % Atm, P = .008]. The RMSDs during the maintenance of anesthesia and the expiratory decrement times during emergence and recovery showed no significant differences between the patient and simulated data for both simulation models.Gas Man simulation software predicts expiratory concentrations of desflurane and sevoflurane in humans with good accuracy, especially when compared to models for intravenous anesthetics. Enhancing the standard model by ventilation and hemodynamic input variables increases the predictive performance of the simulation model. In most patients and clinical scenarios, the predictive performance of the standard Gas Man simulation model will be high enough to estimate pharmacokinetics of desflurane and sevoflurane with appropriate accuracy.
PURPOSE: Anesthesia has been shown to disrupt the circadian rhythm. Recovery of the circadian rhythm after general anesthesia might help alleviate symptoms of insomnia and postoperative delirium. We hypothesized that recovery of the circadian rhythm is faster after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) with desflurane than with sevoflurane. This study compared the influence of sevoflurane versus desflurane anesthesia on the postoperative circadian rhythm of melatonin in adults undergoing TKA. DESIGN: Single-center, prospective, randomized, controlled, open-label study. METHODS: This study involved adult patients undergoing TKA at a university hospital in Japan from May 1, 2018 to December 31, 2019. The primary outcome of the study was the comparison of the effect of sevoflurane and desflurane on the circadian rhythm of salivary melatonin for 3 days postoperatively. The secondary outcomes were postoperative fatigue and sleep quality for 3 days postoperatively. FINDINGS: Twenty-eight patients (American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status of I or II) were scheduled for TKA and randomized to receive sevoflurane (n = 14) or desflurane (n = 14) anesthesia. There was no significant difference in the melatonin concentration between the sevoflurane and desflurane groups. The salivary melatonin concentration after sevoflurane or desflurane anesthesia was significantly higher at 9:00 p.m. on a postoperative day (POD)0 and POD1 than on POD3 (P < .05). Patients in the desflurane group had significantly greater fatigue than those in the sevoflurane group at 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on POD3 (P < .05). Patients in the sevoflurane group had a deeper sleep than those in the desflurane group on POD0 (P < .05). In the sevoflurane group, the sleep time during the night of POD2 was longer than that on POD0 (6.1 vs 4.2 hours, P < .05). CONCLUSIONS: Under the current study conditions, desflurane was equivalent to sevoflurane in terms of the postoperative salivary melatonin concentration and sleep disturbance after TKA but not in terms of recovering the postoperative circadian rhythm.
