The efficacy of desipramine for mild depression was tested in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study of outpatients with scores below 19 on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D). Of 103 such patients, 23 dropped out and 16 improved during a ten-day placebo period. Among 64 patients completing the randomized portion of the study, significantly more improved with desipramine that with placebo. The Research Diagnostic Criteria (RDC) category of major depressive disorder largely accounted for the drug-placebo response difference found for the entire sample. Patients with intermittent depressive disorder improved significantly less frequently with desipramine than patients with major depressive disorder. Independent of RDC diagnosis, severity of illness correlated with outcome. Thus, patients with pretreatment HAM-D scores at or above the median demonstrated significant drug effect, while patients with lower pretreatment HAM-D scores did not.
This study was performed to determine the difference, if any, between serum and plasma levels of the tricyclic antidepressant drugs imipramine and desipramine. Serum and plasma samples were drawn simultaneously from patients taking either of these drugs. Statistical analysis indicated no difference in the drug levels; that is, serum and plasma levels were identical.
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), along with phenothyazines and some industrial chemicals, are shown to react with enzymes that exhibit peroxidase activity. These reactions result in the formation of reactive intermediates having unpaired electrons. The peroxidase oxidation and reactivity of two TCAs, desipramine and clomipramine, were investigated. As a model of peroxidase, horseradish peroxidase (HRP) was employed. The products of the peroxidase catalyzed oxidation of desipramine and clomipramine were identified as N-dealkylated compounds iminodibenzyl and 3-chloroiminodibenzyl using the GC/MS technique. Both drugs formed broad UV/vis absorption spectra in the presence of HRP and H(2)O(2), indicating the formation of a radical cations-reactive intermediate of the oxidation reaction. The dynamics of the formation of the desipramine intermediate was studied using UV/vis spectroscopy. The extinction coefficient was measured for the reactive intermediate, 7.80x10(3)M(-1)cm(-1), as well as the apparent Michaelis-Menten and catalytic constants, 4.4mM and 2.3s(-1), respectively. Both desipramine and clomipramine degraded DNA in the presence of HRP/H(2)O(2), as was revealed by agarose gel electrophoresis and PCI extraction. Manipulating the kinetic parameters of drug's radical formation and determining the extent of degradation to biomolecules could be potentially used for designing effective agents exhibiting specific reactivity.
A liquid chromatographic procedure has been developed for the assay, content uniformity, and identification of single active ingredient formulations of desipramine, fluphenazine, and promazine. The drugs are extracted from formulations with methanol or dilute hydrochloric acid and quantitated against an internal standard (norephedrine). The drugs are identified by comparison of retention times with those of the reference standards.
Recently detoxified men with alcohol dependence (n = 15) and healthy volunteers (n = 14) were administered oral and intravenous imipramine and desipramine. Alcoholics had significantly greater total body clearance of imipramine (0.93 vs. 0.48 L/hr/kg; P less than 0.05) and desipramine (1.00 vs. 0.62 L/hr/kg; P less than 0.05) than did control subjects. Intrinsic clearance of unbound imipramine was greater in the alcoholic group (19.80 vs. 6.56 L/hr/kg; P less than 0.05), as was the intrinsic clearance of unbound desipramine (14.52 vs. 9.05 L/hr/kg; P less than 0.05). The mean elimination half-life for imipramine was significantly decreased in alcoholics (8.7 vs. 19.9 hours after intravenous infusion and 10.9 vs. 19.6 hours after oral administration; P less than 0.05). The mean elimination half-life for desipramine was decreased in alcoholics after intravenous infusion (16.5 vs. 22.4 hours; P less than 0.05). Unbound fractions of drug in plasma were decreased in the alcoholic group for both imipramine and desipramine after both routes of administration. alpha 1-Acid glycoprotein levels were elevated in the alcoholic group whereas total protein and albumin levels did not differ between groups. These findings suggest that recently detoxified alcoholics may require higher doses of imipramine than do nonalcoholic subjects. Desipramine clearance was affected to a lesser degree than imipramine, suggesting that from a pharmacokinetic standpoint it may be the preferred drug for the treatment of alcoholics with depression. Periodic monitoring of plasma levels may be required for recently abstinent alcoholics treated with antidepressants.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate side effects of methylphenidate and desipramine alone and in combination in hospitalized children with symptoms of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and depression. METHOD: A double-blind placebo controlled crossover design was used to investigate each medication alone and in combination. Side effect ratings and EKGs were done weekly. Pulse and blood pressure were monitored daily. RESULTS: Nausea, dry mouth, and tremor were present in at least twice as many children on combined methylphenidate and desipramine compared with any other condition. Nausea/vomiting, headaches, other aches, refusal of food, and feeling "tired" were significantly more frequent during the combined methylphenidate plus desipramine condition when compared with either methylphenidate alone or with baseline. Significantly higher ventricular heart rate was found on combined methylphenidate plus desipramine compared with desipramine alone, methylphenidate alone, and baseline. Prolonged PR interval and significantly higher heart rate occurred during desipramine alone compared with baseline. CONCLUSIONS: During the several-month duration of the study, there were more frequent side effects during combined methylphenidate plus desipramine treatment than with either medication alone. Clinically, side effects present during combined medication appeared to be similar to and no more serious than those associated with desipramine alone.
OBJECTIVE: As many as 50% of patients with Tourette's syndrome (TS) also meet diagnostic criteria for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Since antipsychotics are of limited value in controlling the symptoms of ADHD and stimulants can exacerbate tics, alternative treatments are directly needed. The purpose of this study was the examination of the efficacy of desipramine (DMI) in the treatment of pediatric patients with chronic tic disorder (CTD; TS or chronic motor tics) + attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). METHOD: All pediatric patients with the diagnosis of CTD that were treated with DMI were ascertained from retrospective systematic chart reviews of a psychopharmacology clinic and a neurology service specialized in movement disorders. RESULTS: Of the 33 identified patients, 30 had comorbid CTD + ADHD and three had CTD alone. In all, 82% had significant improvement in CTD symptomatology and 80% significantly improved ADHD symptoms without major adverse effects over an average follow-up period of 16 months. CONCLUSIONS: Although the conclusions from this retrospective report can be seen as preliminary only until replicated in a controlled investigation, the magnitude and persistence of the response is encouraging and suggest a therapeutic role for DMI in the treatment of CTD + ADHD patients.
Desipramine (DMI) is a widely used tricyclic antidepressant, and it is the major metabolite of imipramine (IMI) and lofepramine (LMI); IMI and LMI are two of the most commonly used tricyclic antidepressants. If DMI enters the aquatic environment, it can be transformed by the environmental bacteria or UV radiation. Therefore, photolysis of DMI in water was performed using a simulated sunlight Xenon-lamp and a UV-lamp. Subsequently, the biodegradability of DMI and its photo-transformation products (PTPs) formed during its UV photolysis was studied. The influence of variable conditions, such as initial DMI concentration, solution pH, and temperature, on DMI UV photolysis behavior was also studied. The degree of mineralization of DMI and its PTPs was monitored. A Shimadzu HPLC-UV apparatus was used to follow the kinetic profile of DMI during UV-irradiation; after that, ion-trap and high-resolution mass spectrometry coupled with chromatography were used to monitor and identify the possible PTPs. The environmentally relevant properties and selected toxicity properties of DMI and the non-biodegradable PTPs were predicted using different QSAR models. DMI underwent UV photolysis with first-order kinetics. Quantum yields were very low. DOC values indicated that DMI formed new PTPs and was not completely mineralized. Analysis by means of high-resolution mass spectrometry revealed that the photolysis of DMI followed three main photolysis pathways: isomerization, hydroxylation, and ring opening. The photolysis rate was inversely proportional to initial DMI concentration. The pH showed a significant impact on the photolysis rate of DMI, and on the PTPs in terms of both formation kinetics and mechanisms. Although temperature was expected to increase the photolysis rate, it showed a non-significant impact in this study. Results from biodegradation tests and QSAR analysis revealed that DMI and its PTPs are not readily biodegradable and that some PTPs may be human and/or eco-toxic, so they may pose a risk to the environment.
The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of methylphenidate (MPH) on attention and inhibition in children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and to establish what the relative contributions of the noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems to this effect were. In addition to MPH, two other drugs were administered in order to affect both transmitter systems more selectively, L-dopa (dopamine (DA) agonist) and desipramine (DMI) (noradrenaline (NA) re-uptake inhibitor). Sixteen children with ADHD performed a stop-task, a laboratory task that measures the ability to inhibit an ongoing action, in a double-blind randomized within-subjects design. Each child received an acute clinical dose of MPH, DMI, L-dopa, and placebo; measures of performance and plasma were determined. The results indicated that inhibition performance was improved under DMI but not under MPH or L-dopa. The response-time to the stop-signal was marginally shortened after intake of DMI. MPH decreased omission and choice-errors and caused faster reaction times to the trials without the stop-tone. No effects of L-dopa whatsoever were noted. Prolactin levels were increased and 5-HIAA levels were lowered under DMI relative to placebo. It is suggested that the effects of MPH on attention are due to a combination of noradrenergic and dopaminergic mechanisms. The improved inhibition under DMI could be serotonergically mediated.
The antidepressant efficacy of alprazolam (ALP) was tested in a double-blind controlled comparison with desipramine (DMI) and an ALP-DMI combination in outpatients diagnosed with major depressive disorder by Research Diagnostic Criteria (90% met criteria for endogenous subtype). Following a placebo period of at least 1 week, subjects who continued to meet severity criteria defined by Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) scores were administered oral doses of the active medication (N = 79), in a dose ratio of 1 mg ALP:50 mg DMI:1 mg ALP + 50 mg DMI. Treatment continued for 6 weeks, and all subjects who completed at least 2 weeks (N = 69) were included in endpoint analyses. Following the placebo baseline, symptoms were rated again at day 5 and at the end of weeks 1, 2, 4, and 6. Final doses averaged 4.6 +/- 1.3 mg for the ALP group, 230 +/- 61 mg for the DMI group, and 4.6 +/- 1.2 mg ALP + 229.5 +/- 1.2 mg DMI for the combination group. The final outcome was a comparable degree of improvement at the endpoint among the three treatment groups on measures of depression (HDRS and Beck Depression Inventory), anxiety (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale), and global improvement (Global Assessment Scale, and Physician and Patient Global Impressions). A similar outcome was found for the subgroup of patients who completed all 6 weeks (N = 56). Endpoint analyses also showed that ALP-treated subjects responded sooner and continued to show improvement throughout the course of the study on measures of depression, anxiety, and global status. These results suggest that ALP alone is as effective as a standard tricyclic for the acute treatment of patients with major depressive disorder and that significant improvement may occur within the first week of medication. Side effect profiles were compared among treatment groups and are discussed, as are other clinical studies that have investigated ALP's potential antidepressant efficacy.
