Second-generation histamine H(1) receptor antagonists were developed to provide efficacious treatment of allergic rhinitis (AR) and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) while decreasing adverse effects associated with first-generation agents. When comparing the efficacy and safety profiles of the newest second-generation antihistamines - desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine - many pharmacological and clinical criteria must be considered. Most importantly, these elements should not be evaluated separately but, rather, as parts of a puzzle that create a whole picture. As a class, second-generation antihistamines are highly selective for the H(1) receptor. Some bind to it with high affinity, although there is marked heterogeneity among the various compounds. They have a limited effect on the CNS, and clinical studies have noted almost no significant drug-drug interactions in the agents studied. No major cytochrome P450 inhibition has been reported with desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine, and the bioavailability of desloratadine is minimally affected by drugs interfering with transporter molecules. Of the second-generation antihistamines, desloratadine has the greatest binding affinity for the H(1) receptor. The use of desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine is not associated with clinically relevant antimuscarinic effects. Desloratadine and fexofenadine do not impair cognitive or psychomotor functioning and are comparable with placebo in terms of somnolence. Based on these pharmacological characteristics, as well as clinical endpoints such as symptom scores, quality-of-life surveys, inflammatory cell counts and investigators' global evaluations, we conclude that desloratadine, fexofenadine and levocetirizine are all efficacious treatments for AR and CIU. However, differences among the antihistamines in relation to a lack of significant interaction with drug transporter molecules and somnolence in excess of placebo may provide some advantages for the overall profile of desloratadine compared with fexofenadine and levocetirizine.
CONTEXT: Desloratadine, an H1 receptor antagonist, is suggested as an effective first-line drug for chronic urticarial (CU). However, the efficacy of desloratadine alone is limited, and the recurrence rate of CU is relatively high. OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate the efficacy and clinical feasibility of desloratadine in combination with compound glycyrrhizin in the treatment of CU. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted in the databases of the China National Knowledge Infrastructure Database, VIP, WanFang, PubMed, and Web of Science using subject terms: "Chronic urticaria", "Loratadine", and "Compound glycyrrhizin". Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared the efficiency and safety of the combination treatment with desloratadine alone starting from January 1, 2014 until February 10, 2021 were selected by two co-first authors independently, and the extracted data were analysed using Rev Man 5.3 software. RESULTS: Fourteen RCTs were included in our meta-analysis with a total of 1501 patients. The results showed that the combination treatment yielded a better treatment effect (total response rate: RR = 1.23, 95% CI: 1.17 to 1.29, p < 0.00001; cure rate: RR = 1.50, 95% CI: 1.30 to 1.73, p < 0.00001), lower recurrence rate as well as superior immune improvement than the treatment with desloratadine alone. In addition, there was no significant difference in the safety of the two treatments. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: The combination of desloratadine and compound glycyrrhizin is a promising treatment for CU and is associated with decreased serum IgE level and improved proportions of CD4+ T and CD8+ T cells.
In this study, we explained the influence of the stepwise protonation of two antihistaminic drugs on their experimental absorption spectra. We demonstrated the capability of the TD-CAM-B3LYP method, combined with a polarizable continuum model, to produce good performance for the calculated spectra. The lowest energy transitions and the molecular orbital plots were analyzed in detail. The calculated UV spectra are proposed as potential alternatives to initialize the well-known MCR-ALS algorithm, especially when the spectra of the pure analytes are not available. Moreover, it can be a useful strategy for planning an experimental methodology oriented to multiway analysis when the drug species exhibit acid-base properties.
Glioblastomas are aggressive and usually incurable high-grade gliomas without adequate treatment. In this study, we aimed to investigate the potential of desloratadine to induce apoptosis/autophagy as genetically regulated processes that can seal cancer cell fates. All experiments were performed on U251 human glioblastoma cell line and primary human glioblastoma cell culture. Cytotoxic effect of desloratadine was investigated using MTT and CV assays, while oxidative stress, apoptosis, and autophagy were detected by flow cytometry and immunoblot. Desloratadine treatment decreased cell viability of U251 human glioblastoma cell line and primary human glioblastoma cell culture (IC50 value 50 microM) by an increase of intracellular reactive oxygen species and caspase activity. Also, desloratadine decreased the expression of main autophagy repressor mTOR and its upstream activator Akt and increased the expression of AMPK. Desloratadine exerted dual cytotoxic effect inducing both apoptosis- and mTOR/AMPK-dependent cytotoxic autophagy in glioblastoma cells and primary glioblastoma cell culture.
BACKGROUND: Pruritus is one of the most common and challenging side effects of epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and has impaired patients' quality of life and treatment compliance. Our study evaluated the efficacy and safety of aprepitant in managing EGFR-TKIs-related pruritus. METHODS: This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted between December 2016 and August 2020 in China. Patients were eligible if they were 18 years or older and had histologically confirmed locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with first onset of moderate to severe pruritus during EGFR-TKI treatment. RESULTS: A total of 130 eligible patients were randomly assigned to aprepitant (n = 65) or desloratadine (n = 65) groups. The median (interquartile range [Q1, Q3]) age was 63 (54, 70) years, and 79 (60.8%) were women. Mean visual analog scale scores at baseline were 6.35 (95% confidence interval [CI], 5.89-6.82) in the aprepitant group and 5.94 (95% CI, 5.56-6.32) in the desloratadine group. After 1 week of treatment, 33 (53.2%) patients responded to aprepitant, which was significantly higher than that of 14 (23.7%) patients responded to desloratadine (p = .001). Moreover, patients in the aprepitant group had a significantly shorter response time than patients in the desloratadine group (mean [days], 13.39 [95% CI, 11.08-15.70] vs. 16.67 [95% CI, 14.19-19.13], p = .04). The most frequent drug-related adverse events in aprepitant group and desloratadine were constipation and dry mouth, and all adverse events were grade 1-2. CONCLUSIONS: To the authors' knowledge, this is the first study to prospectively present that aprepitant elicited a better and faster response and mild toxicity for managing EGFR-TKI induced pruritus than desloratadine. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02646020.
BACKGROUND: An increase in dosages up to fourfold of second generation antihistamines is recommended for recalcitrant chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU). No regimen guidelines about dose de-escalation, however, are mentioned once the disease is controlled. OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate the treatment outcomes and dose reduction in desloratadine assessed using the urticarial activity score over 7 consecutive days. METHODS: Medical records of all patients with CSU treated with desloratadine were collected retrospectively during a period from January 2010 to December 2013. RESULTS: Sixty-seven (94.4%) patients had remission of the disease with variable doses of desloratadine. The patients who had CSU concomitant with antithyroid antibodies or high erythrocyte sedimentation rates had a greater tendency not to respond to the standard dose. Once the disease was completely controlled, 67 patients finished the treatment, but 63 (94%) patients had recurrent symptoms. Sixty-three patients took the same dose that induced the response for a further 4 weeks before stopping or reducing the dose, 41/63 (65.1%), however developed urticaria again. Forty-one patients took the same dose for a further 8 weeks; only 2/41 (4.9%) patients developed the rash again. The mean follow-up period after the disease was controlled was 7.5 months. CONCLUSION: Most patients need higher than the standard doses to obtain remission. Once the disease is completely controlled, however, maintenance of the same dosage for at least 8 weeks before dose reduction is suggested in order to avoid recurrence of the symptoms.
Background Urticaria and allergic dermatoses remains a great challenge to treating dermatologist. Histamine is the major mediator in such disorders. Antihistamines as levocetrizine, fexofenadine and desloratadine are often used to treat such conditions. Ability of antihistamines to suppress the allergic response helps to evaluate the efficacy of the medicine. Objective To compare the efficacy of levocetrizine versus fexofenadine versus desloratadine in suppressing histamine induced wheals in adults. Method One hundred and two healthy adult volunteers completed the study. Subjects were randomized into 3 groups using an envelope method. First group received fexofenadine (N=36), second group received levocetrizine (N =37), and third group received desloratadine (N=29). Pretesting was performed by skin prick test with histamine 1% (positive control) and normal saline (negative control). Wheal size was recorded before and after the treatment (at 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 24 hours). Result At 30 minutes and 1 hour fexofenadine showed statistically significant wheal suppression than levocetrizine and desloratadine (p=0.0016). However by 2 and 4 hours all three antihistamines; fexofenadine, levocetirizine and desloratadine showed significant suppression of wheal. Whereas at 24 hours desloratadine showed greater wheal suppression than levocetrizine and fexofenadine (p= 0.014). Conclusion The results of the present study showed that fexofenadine presented early onset of action but longer suppression of wheal size was seen with desloratadine as compared to other antihistamines. These potentials could be employed in clinical aspects; depending upon the response needed.
Aim: The antimicrobial and antibiofilm activities of the antihistamine desloratadine against multidrug-resistant (MDR) Acinetobacter baumannii were evaluated. Results: Desloratadine inhibited 90% bacterial growth at a concentration of 64 mug/ml. The combination of desloratadine with meropenem reduced the MIC by twofold in the planktonic state and increased the antibiofilm activity by eightfold. Survival curves showed that combinations of these drugs were successful in eradicating all bacterial cells within 16 h. Scanning electron microscopy also confirmed a synergistic effect in imparting a harmful effect on the cellular structure of MDR A. baumannii. An in vivo model showed significant protection of up to 83% of Caenorhabditis elegans infected with MDR A. baumannii. Conclusion: Our results indicate that repositioning of desloratadine may be a safe and low-cost alternative as an antimicrobial and antibiofilm agent for the treatment of MDR A. baumannii infections.
Allergic disease is an increasing problem worldwide. Allergic rhinitis, an inflammatory response to an allergen, affects an estimated 20-40 million people in the US, while chronic idiopathic urticaria is a dermatoallergic condition that affects 0.1-3% of people in the US and Europe. The primary goals of treatment for allergic rhinitis are to reduce symptoms, which include sneezing, rhinorrhoea and nasal congestion, improve quality of life and prevent the sequelae associated with this disease, while the goal for chronic idiopathic urticaria is the rapid and prolonged control of symptoms. Quantitatively, histamine is the most abundant mediator present during an allergic episode - thus, antihistamines (historically called histamine H(1) receptor antagonists, now called H(1) receptor inverse agonists) are a first-line defense against allergic rhinitis and chronic idiopathic urticaria. Although first-generation antihistamines can cause sedation and cognitive impairment, second-generation antihistamines are relatively non-sedating and free of such adverse events owing to their comparative inability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Desloratadine is one such second-generation antihistamine and is indicated for the treatment of allergic diseases, including allergic rhinitis and chronic idiopathic urticaria. It has proven efficacy against the symptoms associated with seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis, including nasal congestion, and chronic idiopathic urticaria. As a result, it has been shown to improve patients' quality of life. The safety and efficacy profiles of desloratadine are well established, and published postmarketing analyses have assessed >54 000 patients. Although earlier second-generation antihistamines have been associated with cardiovascular adverse effects, desloratadine has been shown to be safe and well tolerated at nine times the recommended dose. In addition, it has been shown to not interact with concomitantly administered drugs and food. Overall, current data indicate that desloratadine is a safe and effective treatment for allergic diseases.
BACKGROUND: Our aim was to measure the effectiveness of oral isotretinoin with desloratadine compared with oral isotretinoin alone in treating moderate to severe acne at a tertiary care teaching hospital in North India. In this study, 90 patients with moderate to severe acne were enrolled to participate based on their fulfilling the inclusion criteria. METHODS: A randomized, assessor-blinded, parallel-arm study was conducted. Randomization was done using computer-generated tables to allocate treatments in a 1:1 ratio. A low-dose oral isotretinoin at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg/day with tab desloratadine at 5 mg/day was applied to the study group and compared against the same patients going without the dosage when controls were conducted. Follow-up was at 4, 8, and 12 weeks. RESULTS: The primary outcome was an improved global acne grading system (GAGS) score and decreased acne lesion count. SECONDARY OUTCOME: patient satisfaction with treatment. The 90 participants were randomized and 15 participants dropped out of the study, leaving 75 participants for intention to treat analysis (n = 41, n = 30). At week 12, the GAGS score and acne lesion count between the study and control groups were comparable (P > 0.05). Pruritus reported was 9.76% in the study versus 33.33% in the control group (P = 0.018). Also, 53.66% of participants reported "excellent" treatment satisfaction in the study group versus 36.67% in the control group. CONCLUSIONS: The addition of desloratadine to an isotretinoin regimen has a role in reducing disease and therapy-related pruritus in acne and leads to improved patient satisfaction.
BACKGROUND: Oral strip is very similar to thin strip of postage stamp in shape, size and thickness. The strip is designed to be placed on the tongue or any oral mucosal tissue which immediately gets wet and hydrated after being in contact with the saliva. Desloratadine is one of the better- known second-generation antihistamines that has been studied for being effective in relieving the allergic nasal and skin symptoms. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to develop desloratadine orodispersible film (ODF) with fast disintegration time and suitable mechanical strength to treat allergic symptoms in geriatric patients in order to increase compliance and convenience. METHODS: Solvent casting method using hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) as the film forming polymer was applied. Polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400) and glycerol (Gly) were used as the plasticizers and citric acid (CA) was used as saliva stimulating agent. The resultant films were evaluated for disintegration time, folding endurance, surface pH, weight variation, thickness, surface morphology using scanning electron microscopy, drug content, content uniformity, moisture loss, moisture uptake, and drug-excipient compatibility using DSC and FT-IR. RESULTS: All the selected films started to disintegrate in less than 14 seconds. Selected optimum films exhibited good mechanical properties with a folding endurance value greater than 100. The uniformity in weight, thickness, and drug content in the selected films was obtained. Surface pH was within the normal range (6.4 - 6.8). A smooth surface of the films was obtained and drugexcipient compatibility was proved using DSC and FT-IR. The dissolution test was done for optimum film formulations by simulating the oral cavity physiological conditions using the conventional dissolution test apparatus. More than 87% of the drug was released by the 4th minute. CONCLUSION: Orodispersible film of desloratadine was successfully prepared by solvent casting method in order to improve the disintegration/dissolution of the drug in oral cavity and hence better patient compliance and effective therapy.
Antihistamines are widely used to treat allergic rhinitis (AR) and chronic idiopathic urticaria (CIU) in adults and children. Desloratadine is a once-daily oral antihistamine with a favourable sedation profile that is approved for the treatment of AR and CIU. Phenotypic polymorphism in the metabolism of desloratadine has been observed, such that some individuals have a decreased ability to form 3-hydroxydesloratadine, the major metabolite of desloratadine; such individuals are termed 'poor metabolisers of desloratadine'. This review describes the prevalence of poor metabolisers of desloratadine, quantifies the exposure to desloratadine in poor metabolisers and demonstrates that the increased exposure in poor metabolisers is independent of age when administered at age-appropriate doses. Furthermore, this review demonstrates that the increased exposure to desloratadine in poor metabolisers is not associated with any changes in the safety and tolerability profile of desloratadine, including cardiovascular safety.
