INTRODUCTION: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common severe mental disorder, requiring a tailored and integrated treatment. Several approaches are available including different classes of antidepressants various psychotherapeutic approaches, and psychosocial interventions. The treatment plan for each patient with MDD should be differentiated on the basis of several clinical, personal, and contextual factors. AREAS COVERED: Desvenlafaxine - a serotonine-noradrenergic reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) antidepressant - has been approved in the United States in 2008 for the treatment of MDD in adults, and has been recently rediscovered by clinicians due to its good side-effect profile and its clinical effectiveness. A narrative review on efficacy, tolerability and use of desvenlafaxine in clinical practice was carried out. The keywords: 'major depression', 'depression,' 'desvenlafaxine,' 'efficacy,' 'clinical efficacy,' 'side effects', 'tolerability,' 'elderly patients', 'consultation-liaison', 'menopausal', 'young people', 'adolescent' were entered in PubMed, ISI Web of Knowledge, Scopus and Medline. No time limit was fixed, the search strategy was implemented on May 10, 2023. EXPERT OPINION: Desvenlafaxine should be listed among the optimal treatment strategies for managing people with MDD, whose main strengths are: 1) ease of dosing; 2) favorable safety and tolerability profile, 3) absence of sexual dysfunctions, weight gain and low rate of discontinuation symptoms; 4) low risk of drug-drug interactions.
Objective: To compare the efficacy of vortioxetine and the serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) desvenlafaxine in patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) experiencing partial response to initial treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). Methods: This randomized, double-blind, active-controlled, parallel-group, 8-week study of vortioxetine (10 or 20 mg/d; n = 309) versus desvenlafaxine (50 mg/d: n = 293) was conducted from June 2020 to February 2022 in adults with a DSM-5 diagnosis of MDD who experienced partial response to SSRI monotherapy. The primary endpoint was mean change from baseline to week 8 in Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) total score. Differences between groups were analyzed using mixed models for repeated measures. Results: Non-inferiority of vortioxetine versus desvenlafaxine was established in terms of mean change from baseline to week 8 in MADRS total score; however, a numeric advantage was observed in favor of vortioxetine (difference, -0.47 MADRS points [95% CI, -1.61 to 0.67]; P = .420). At week 8, significantly more vortioxetine-treated than desvenlafaxine-treated patients had achieved symptomatic and functional remission (ie, Clinical Global Impressions-Severity of Illness scale [CGI-S] score </= 2) (32.5% vs 24.8%, respectively; odds ratio = 1.48 [95% CI, 1.03 to 2.15]; P = .034). Vortioxetine-treated patients also experienced significantly greater improvements in daily and social functioning assessed by the Functioning Assessment Short Test (P = .009 and .045 vs desvenlafaxine, respectively) and reported significantly greater satisfaction with their medication assessed by the Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire (P = .044). Treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were reported in 46.1% and 39.6% of patients in the vortioxetine and desvenlafaxine groups, respectively; these were mostly mild or moderate in intensity (> 98% of all TEAEs in each group). Conclusions: Compared with the SNRI desvenlafaxine, vortioxetine was associated with significantly higher rates of CGI-S remission, better daily and social functioning, and greater treatment satisfaction in patients with MDD and partial response to SSRIs. These findings support the use of vortioxetine before SNRIs in the treatment algorithm in patients with MDD. Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04448431.
CONTEXT: Desvenlafaxine is used to treat major depression. Desvenlafaxine is also the active metabolite of venlafaxine. Venlafaxine overdose can cause serotonin toxicity, seizures and cardiovascular effects, but there is limited information on desvenlafaxine overdose. OBJECTIVE: We aimed at investigating the clinical effects and complications from desvenlafaxine overdose. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This was a retrospective observational study of desvenlafaxine overdoses over a six-year period. Demographic details, dose and timing of the overdose, together with clinical effects, treatment and complications were extracted from a local hospital network database or the medical records of patients following hospital admission with a desvenlafaxine overdose. RESULTS: There were 182 cases of desvenlafaxine overdose included in the study. From the 182 cases, 75 were desvenlafaxine (+/- alcohol) only ingestions and 107 included one or more co-ingested drugs. In single-agent desvenlafaxine ingestions, median age was 25 years (range: 13-68 years) with a median ingested dose of 800 mg (range: 250-3500 mg; interquartile range (IQR): 600-1400 mg), and 54/75 (72%) were female. The Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was 15 in 68/74 (92%) patients, 13-14 in 5/74 (7%), and was seven in one patient following aspiration. Mild hypertension (systolic blood pressure [BP] > 140-180 mmHg) occurred in 23/71 patients (32%), and tachycardia occurred in 29/74 (39%) patients. There were no abnormal QT intervals and no QRS >120 m s. Serotonin toxicity was diagnosed by the treating physician in 7/75 (9%) patients, but only one of these met the Hunter Serotonin Toxicity Criteria. None of the 75 patients who took desvenlafaxine only (+/- alcohol) had seizures, were admitted to intensive care or died. In comparison, the 107 patients taking desvenlafaxine in overdose with other medications developed more pronounced toxicity. Generalised seizures occurred in 5/107 (5%), but in three of these cases co-ingestants were possible proconvulsants. Fifteen patients had a GCS </=9 and none had an abnormal QT or QRS. Severe effects appeared to be associated with coingestants. CONCLUSION: Desvenlafaxine overdose causes minor effects with mild hypertension and tachycardia. The risk of seizures or serotonin toxicity is low.
BACKGROUND: During perimenopause, vasomotor symptoms are known to have a detrimental effect on women's functional ability and quality of life. For symptomatic women not eligible for hormonal therapy, desvenlafaxine is an option, but its safety margin and tolerability are not yet determined. METHODS: A computer-based literature search was done in the databases of MEDLINE, Cochrane library, and HINARI (Health InterNetwork Access to Research Initiative). Meta-analysis was conducted by including double-blind randomized controlled studies on the effectiveness and safety of desvenlafaxine in the treatment of hot flashes. The effectiveness, safety and tolerability of desvenlafaxine were determined by standardized mean differences (SMDs) and Mantel-Haenszel odds ratio. Subgroup analysis based on doses of desvenlafaxine and linear meta-regression analyses were performed for several covariates. Heterogeneity testing, the risk of bias assessment and sensitivity analyses were done. RESULTS: Desvenlafaxine was associated with a statistically significant reduction in the number and severity of daily moderate to severe hot flashes. The number of nighttime awakenings because of hot flashes was also significantly decreased. However, the rate of desvenlafaxine treatment discontinuation because of adverse events was a significantly higher than placebo treated women and the risk ratios of adverse events like asthenia, hypertension, anorexia, constipation, diarrhea, dry mouth, nausea, dizziness, insomnia, somnolence and mydriasis were very high. CONCLUSION: Desvenlafaxine is effective in the treatment of hot flashes but it is strongly associated with several adverse events and treatment discontinuation. Further clinical trials focusing only on desvenlafaxine related adverse events are highly warranted before it is approved for public use.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Low adherence to treatment is associated with poorer clinical outcome and greater healthcare resources utilization (HRU). Limited data are available on the extent of adherence to each individual antidepressant. The goal of this study was to compare the adherence rate to desvenlafaxine versus usual care with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) and/or other serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), in subjects with major depressive disorder (MDD). METHODS: Retrospective, multi-centric, observational study including 574 outpatients with MDD. Data were collected from mental and primary care centers. Adherence, persistence, effectiveness, and HRU was evaluated through multivariate regression models. RESULTS: At 12-months, adjusted adherence rate was higher with desvenlafaxine versus SNRI/SSRI, 67.9% versus 59.9% (OR 1.66, 95% CI 1.07-2.59, p = 0.024). Remission rate was numerically higher with desvenlafaxine versus SNRI/SSRI, 55.9% versus 50.1% (OR 1.35, 95% CI 0.93-1.98, p = 0.118), as well as treatment response, 76.5% in desvenlafaxine group versus 70.8% in SNRI/SSRI group (OR 1.25, 95% CI 0.82-1.90, p = 0.300). Medical visits use was higher in SNRI/SSRI than in desvenlafaxine group [9.8 (4.8) versus 9.1 (6.0), p = 0.019]. CONCLUSIONS: Desvenlafaxine is significantly associated with a higher adherence rate at 12 months compared to usual care based on SSRI or other SNRI. This suggests that desvenlafaxine could improve disease management having a positive impact on disease-associated costs.
Desvenlafaxine succinate is a selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor for the treatment of major depressive disorder. The pharmacokinetic profile of desvenlafaxine succinate at the clinically recommended dose of 50 mg in Chinese healthy subjects has been reported rarely. The objective of this study was to evaluate the pharmacokinetics and bioequivalence of desvenlafaxine succinate in Chinese healthy subjects. A single-dose, open-label, randomized, two-way crossover study with a 7-day washout period was conducted. A total of 88 individuals were incorporated to show bioequivalence of a generic and a reference drug, with 48 individuals in the fasting state and 40 receiving a high-fat diet. Finally, 46 and 38 individuals completed the fasting and the fed study, respectively. The 90% confidence intervals of the adjusted geometric mean ratios for maximum plasma concentration, area under the concentration-time curve from time zero to the last measurable concentration, and area under the concentration-time curve from time zero to infinity all fell in the bioequivalent interval of 80%-125% in both the fasting and fed states. A total of 33 adverse events were reported, and all were mild or moderate in severity. In summary, the generic and reference formulations were bioequivalent, with no observable safety differences in the fasting/fed state.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to assess long-term safety and tolerability of desvenlafaxine (administered as desvenlafaxine succinate) in children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD). METHODS: An 8 week, multicenter, open-label, fixed-dose study of children (ages 7-11 years) and adolescents (ages 12-17 years) with MDD was followed by a 6 month, flexible-dose extension study. Patients were administered desvenlafaxine 10-100 mg/day (children) or 25-200 mg/day (adolescents) for a total of 8 months. Treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs), withdrawals because of AEs, laboratory tests, vital signs, and the Columbia Suicide-Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS) were collected. Eight month safety results from the lead-in plus extension studies are reported for extension study participants, using lead-in study day -1 as baseline. RESULTS: Forty patients were enrolled in both studies (20 children; 20 adolescents). Of those, four children and three adolescents withdrew because of AEs. Treatment-emergent AEs reported by three or more patients were upper abdominal pain (15%) and headache (15%) in children, and somnolence (30%), nausea (20%), upper abdominal pain (15%), and headache (15%) in adolescents. Negativism (oppositional behavior) in a child was the single serious AE reported. No deaths occurred during the lead-in or extension studies. Mean pulse rates demonstrated statistically significant increases from lead-in study baseline to final evaluation (children, +5.2 bpm; adolescents, +5.9 bpm; p</=0.05). No statistically significant change in blood pressure was observed at final evaluation. Two adolescents (0 children) reported suicidal ideation on the C-SSRS at screening assessment and during the lead-in and/or extension trials; one adolescent reported suicidal ideation after screening only. CONCLUSIONS: Long-term (8 month) treatment with desvenlafaxine was generally safe and well tolerated in depressed children and adolescents.
OBJECTIVE: Two similarly designed extension studies evaluated the long-term safety and tolerability of desvenlafaxine for the treatment of children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD). Efficacy was evaluated as a secondary objective. METHODS: Both 6-month, open-label, flexible-dose extension studies enrolled children and adolescents who had completed one of two double-blind, placebo-controlled, lead-in studies. One lead-in study included a 1-week transition period prior to the extension study. Patients received 26-week treatment with flexible-dose desvenlafaxine (20-50 mg/d). Safety assessments included comprehensive psychiatric evaluations, vital sign assessments, laboratory evaluations, 12-lead electrocardiogram, physical examination with Tanner assessment, and Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale. Adverse events (AEs) were collected throughout the studies. Efficacy was assessed using the Children's Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R). RESULTS: A total of 552 patients enrolled (completion rates: 66.4 and 69.1%). AEs were reported by 79.4 and 79.1% of patients in the two studies; 8.9 and 5.2% discontinued due to AEs. Treatment-emergent suicidal ideation or behavior was reported for 16.6 and 14.1% of patients in the two studies. Mean (SD) CDRS-R total score decreased from 33.83 (11.93) and 30.92 (10.20) at the extension study baseline to 24.31 (7.48) and 24.92 (8.45), respectively, at week 26. CONCLUSION: Desvenlafaxine 20 to 50 mg/d was generally safe and well tolerated with no new safety signals identified in children and adolescents with MDD who received up to 6 months of treatment in these studies. Patients maintained the reduction in severity of depressive symptoms observed in all treatment groups at the end of the lead-in study.
BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of low-dose desvenlafaxine (administered as desvenlafaxine succinate) in treating major depressive disorder (MDD). METHODS: Adult outpatients (aged 18 years) in the United States and (aged 20 years) in Japan, who met Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition criteria for MDD and had a 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D17) score 20, were ran-domly assigned to placebo, low-dose desvenlafaxine (2550% shaded blockmg/day), or the recommended dose (5050% shaded blockmg/day) after a 6to 14-day placebo lead-in, in an 8-week, fixed-dose trial. The primary efficacy variable was change from baseline in HAMD17 total score at final on-therapy evaluation. Efficacy analyses were based on the intent-totreat (ITT) population, using the last observation carried forward. RESULTS: The ITT population included 699 patients. Reduction in HAM-D17 scores from baseline to final evaluation was not significantly greater for desvenlafaxine 2550% shaded blockmg/day (-8.98) but was significantly greater for desvenlafaxine 5050% shaded blockmg/day (-10.02; P = 0.016) versus placebo (-8.52) after adjusting for multiplicity. P-values were < 0.05 versus placebo for percentage of patients responding to treatment ( 50% decrease in HAM-D17 score) with desven-lafaxine 5050% shaded blockmg/day (46%; P = 0.015), but not with desvenlafaxine 2550% shaded blockmg/day (42% versus 35% with placebo). P-values for remission rates (HAM-D17 score </= 7) were not < 0.05 versus placebo for either desvenlafaxine treatment group. Discontinuations due to adverse events were observed in 2.6%, 3.4%, and 3.4% of patients treated with placebo, desvenlafaxine 2550% shaded blockmg/day, and desvenlafaxine 5050% shaded blockmg/day, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with other clinical studies, desvenlafaxine 5050% shaded blockmg/day demonstrated antidepressant efficacy and appears to be the minimally effective dosage for MDD. ClinicalTrials study identifier NCT00798707.
BACKGROUND: Pharmacogenetic-based dosing support tools have been developed to personalize antidepressant-prescribing practice. However, the clinical validity of these tools has not been adequately tested, particularly for specific antidepressants. OBJECTIVE: To examine the concordance between the actual dose and a polygene pharmacogenetic predicted dose of desvenlafaxine needed to achieve symptom remission. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A 10-week, open-label, prospective trial of desvenlafaxine among Caucasian adults with major depressive disorder (n=119) was conducted. Dose was clinically adjusted and at the completion of the trial, the clinical dose needed to achieve remission was compared with the predicted dose needed to achieve remission. RESULTS: Among remitters (n=95), there was a strong concordance (Kendall's tau-b=0.84, P=0.0001; Cohen's kappa=0.82, P=0.0001) between the actual and the predicted dose need to achieve symptom remission, showing high sensitivity (>/=85%), specificity (>/=86%), and accuracy (>/=89%) of the tool. CONCLUSION: Findings provide initial evidence for the clinical validity of a polygene pharmacogenetic-based tool for desvenlafaxine dosing.
Nine randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies of major depressive disorder were pooled to evaluate the effects of desvenlafaxine 50- and 100-mg/d on energy and lassitude in adults with major depressive disorder ( n=4279). Changes from baseline to endpoint in 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D(17)) Work and Activities, Retardation, and Somatic Symptoms General items, HAM-D(17) psychomotor retardation factor, and Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale Lassitude item were analyzed with a mixed model for repeated measures analysis of variance. Associations between residual energy measures and functional impairment, based on the Sheehan Disability Scale, were modeled using stepwise multiple linear regression. Improvement from baseline was significantly greater for both desvenlafaxine doses versus placebo on all energy symptom outcomes at week 8 (all p⩽0.005). Both early improvement in HAM-D(17) psychomotor retardation at week 2 and residual energy symptoms at week 8 were associated with Sheehan Disability Scale total score at week 8 (all p⩽0.001). Among Sheehan Disability Scale remitters and responders, the HAM-D(17) psychomotor retardation score at week 8 was significantly lower with desvenlafaxine (both doses) than placebo. Desvenlafaxine 50 and 100 mg/d significantly improved energy and lassitude symptoms in patients with major depressive disorder. Both early improvement in energy and fewer residual energy symptoms were associated with functional improvement.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the safety and pharmacokinetic profile of ascending doses of desvenlafaxine in children and adolescents with major depressive disorder. Assessment of the effect of desvenlafaxine on depression symptoms was exploratory. METHODS: The 8-week, open-label study included an initial 3.5-day inpatient period followed by a 7.5-week outpatient period. Children (7-11 years) received a single desvenlafaxine dose of 10, 25, 50, or 100 mg on day 1; adolescents (12-17 years) received desvenlafaxine 25, 50, 100, or 200 mg/day. Plasma and urine samples were collected over the initial 72-hour inpatient period. Evaluations included treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs), physical examinations (including Tanner Staging), vital signs, laboratory assessments, 12-lead electrocardiogram, Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale, and the Children's Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R). RESULTS: In all, 29 children and 30 adolescents took at least one dose of desvenlafaxine and were included in the safety population (children: 10 mg, n = 6; 25 mg, n = 7; 50 mg, n = 9; 100 mg, n = 7; adolescents: 25 mg, n = 7; 50 mg, n = 7; 100 mg, n = 8; 200 mg, n = 8). Total area under the drug concentration-time curve from 0 to infinity (AUC) appeared to increase linearly with increasing dose. Mean (standard deviation [SD]) AUC ranged from 628 (346) ng/mL (desvenlafaxine 10 mg) to 6732 (3031) ng/mL (100 mg) in children and from 1123 (361) ng/mL (25 mg) to 11,730 (3113) ng/mL (200 mg) in adolescents. During the combined inpatient and outpatient period, 16/29 (55%) children and 21/30 (70%) adolescents reported at least one TEAE. One serious adverse event (suicidal behavior) was reported. Mean (SD) change from baseline in CDRS-R total scores at week 8 was -19.00 (9.87) for children and -21.57 (11.50) for adolescents. CONCLUSIONS: Desvenlafaxine AUC values increased linearly with dose; body weight alone provided an adequate prediction for dose-normalized AUC. Desvenlafaxine was generally safe and well tolerated in children and adolescents for treatment up to 8 weeks.
Desvenlafaxine is a biopharmaceutics classification system (BCS) class 1 (high solubility, high permeability) and biopharmaceutical drug disposition classification system (BDDCS) class 3, (high solubility, poor metabolism; implying low permeability) compound. Thus the rate-limiting step for desvenlafaxine absorption (i.e. intestinal dissolution or permeation) is not fully clarified. The aim of this study was to investigate whether dissolution and/or intestinal permeability rate-limit desvenlafaxine absorption from an immediate-release formulation (IRF) and Pristiq((R)), an extended release formulation (ERF). Semi-mechanistic models of desvenlafaxine were built (using SimCyp((R))) by combining in vitro data on dissolution and permeation (mechanistic part of model) with clinical data (obtained from literature) on distribution and clearance (non-mechanistic part of model). The model predictions of desvenlafaxine pharmacokinetics after IRF and ERF administration were compared with published clinical data from 14 trials. Desvenlafaxine in vivo dissolution from the IRF and ERF was predicted from in vitro solubility studies and biorelevant dissolution studies (using the USP3 dissolution apparatus), respectively. Desvenlafaxine apparent permeability (Papp) at varying apical pH was investigated using the Caco-2 cell line and extrapolated to effective intestinal permeability (Peff) in human duodenum, jejunum, ileum and colon. Desvenlafaxine pKa-values and octanol-water partition coefficients (Do:w) were determined experimentally. Due to predicted rapid dissolution after IRF administration, desvenlafaxine was predicted to be available for permeation in the duodenum. Desvenlafaxine Do:w and Papp increased approximately 13-fold when increasing apical pH from 5.5 to 7.4. Desvenlafaxine Peff thus increased with pH down the small intestine. Consequently, desvenlafaxine absorption from an IRF appears rate-limited by low Peff in the upper small intestine, which "delays" the predicted time to the maximal plasma concentration (tmax), consistent with clinical data. Conversely, desvenlafaxine absorption from the ERF appears rate-limited by dissolution due to the formulation, which tends to negate the influence of pH-dependent permeability on absorption. We suggest that desvenlafaxine Peff is mainly driven by transcellular diffusion of the unionized form. In the case of desvenlafaxine, poor metabolism does not imply low intestinal permeability, as indicated by the BDDCS, merely low duodenal/jejunal permeability.
OBJECTIVE: To assess effects of desvenlafaxine (administered as desvenlafaxine succinate) on secondary outcomes of mood, climacteric symptoms, and treatment satisfaction in postmenopausal women with moderate to severe menopausal vasomotor symptoms (VMS). METHODS: A 12-week, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was conducted in postmenopausal women with >/= 50 moderate to severe hot flushes per week. Participants were randomly assigned to desvenlafaxine 100 mg/day, desvenlafaxine 150 mg/day, or placebo. Secondary outcome efficacy variables included Profile of Mood States (POMS), Greene Climacteric Scale (GCS), and Menopausal Symptoms Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire (MS-TSQ) scores. Change from baseline in POMS total mood disturbance (TMD) score and subdomain scores were evaluated using analysis of covariance, adjusting for treatment and study site as factors and baseline score. GCS total and subdomain scores were analyzed similarly. Treatment satisfaction was analyzed using the row mean score test. RESULTS: A total of 458 women were enrolled. At week 12, desvenlafaxine 100 mg/day significantly improved POMS TMD scores (p <0.001) and four of six POMS subdomains compared with placebo (all p </= 0.005). Women taking desvenlafaxine 100 mg/day experienced significantly greater improvement in GCS total scores (p <0.001) and five of six subdomains (all p </= 0.029) compared with placebo. Treatment with desvenlafaxine 100 mg/day resulted in significantly greater treatment satisfaction overall and in six of seven additional MS-TSQ items (all p </=0.042). Desvenlafaxine 150-mg/day results were similar. CONCLUSIONS: Desvenlafaxine treatment improved mood and climacteric symptoms in postmenopausal women with moderate to severe VMS compared with placebo, and more women were satisfied with desvenlafaxine treatment than with placebo.
AIM: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) and serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI) are effective in treating anxiety disorders associated with major depressive disorder (MDD). This randomized, controlled, parallel-group, open-label, phase 4 trial (CTRI/2012/08/002895) was undertaken to compare the effectiveness and safety of desvenlafaxine versus escitalopram, a standard antidepressant. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Effectiveness was assessed using the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D17) and Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A). Response to treatment was assessed by >/=50% decrease of baseline scores (responder rate). Safety and tolerability was evaluated by changes in routine laboratory parameters, vital signs, and adverse events reported by the subject and/or observed by the clinician. RESULTS: Responder rates for both HAM-A and HAM-D scores at 8 weeks were better in the escitalopram group compared to the desvenlafaxine group (HAM-A 76.92% vs. 71.05%; HAM-D 79.48% vs 73.68%) but the differences were not statistically significant (P = 0.59 and P = 0.61). Within group changes of both scores, from baseline to subsequent visits in both treatment arms were statistically significant (P < 0.01). CONCLUSION: The effectiveness of desvenlafaxine was comparable to escitalopram, but escitalopram was better tolerated.
BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the effect of sertraline with desvenlafaxine and sertraline with mirtazapine on HAM-D score and inflammatory markers (IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels) in major depressive disorder. METHODS: Patients (18-60 years) with MDD diagnosed by DSM-V criteria and HAM-D score 18 or more were included (n = 60). Group A patients (n = 30) received sertraline 50 mg/day and desvenlafaxine 50 mg/day. Group B patients (n = 30) received sertraline 50 mg/day and mirtazapine 30 mg/day. All patients were followed up for 8 weeks for the evaluation of clinical efficacy, safety, serum IL-6, and TNF-alpha levels. RESULTS: Our study showed a comparatively similar and statistically significant (p < 0.05) reduction in HAM-D score in both groups in the 4th and 8th week of the treatment. Both drug combinations significantly (p < 0.05) decreased serum IL-6 and TNF-alpha after 8 weeks of treatment. CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that the combination therapy (as treatment initiation) with sertraline and desvenlafaxine, and sertraline with mirtazapine is effective and well tolerated in MDD patients with moderate to severe depression, and their therapeutic efficacy is accompanied by decreased inflammatory markers (serum IL-6 and TNF-alpha).
INTRODUCTION: The response of patients with major depressive disorders (MDD) to antidepressant treatments have been shown to be affected by multiple factors, including disease severity and inflammation. Increasing evidence indicates that the kynurenine metabolic pathway is activated by inflammation in MDD patients and plays a role in the pathophysiology of depression. Antidepressant treatments have been reported to affect kynurenine pathway metabolite levels as well. This study investigates differential associations between the antidepressant treatment outcome to escitalopram versus desvenlafaxine with the pre-treatment and post-treatment-changes in serotonin and kynurenine pathway metabolite levels. METHODS: The levels of serotonin and of kynurenine pathway metabolites were measured in plasma using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in 161 currently depressed patients with MDD at baseline and after 8 weeks of treatment with either escitalopram or desvenlafaxine. Treatment response was defined conventionally by a reduction of at least 50% in the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 21 item (HAMD-21) total score from baseline; remission was defined by reaching a post-treatment HAMD-21 score </=7. RESULTS: Response to escitalopram treatment was associated with higher baseline serotonin levels (p = 0.022), lower baseline kynurenine (Kyn)/tryptophan (Trp) ratio (p = 0.008) and lower baseline quinolinic acid (QuinA)/tryptophan (Trp) ratio (p = 0.047), suggesting a lower inflammation state. Greater improvement in depression symptoms as measured by percent change of HAMD-21 score from baseline was also associated with higher baseline serotonin levels (p = 0.033) in escitalopram treatment arm. Furthermore, remitters to escitalopram treatment showed significant increases in the kynurenic acid (KynA)/3-hydroxykynurenine (3HK) ratio after treatment (p = 0.015). In contrast, response to desvenlafaxine treatment was not associated with any metabolite analyzed. We also confirmed a previous report that plasma serotonin levels are lower in MDD patients compared to healthy controls (p = 0.004) and that the kynurenine plasma level is negatively associated with depression symptom severity (p = 0.047). CONCLUSIONS: In MDD patients the antidepressant response to escitalopram was positively associated with baseline serotonin levels and inversely associated with activation of the kynurenine pathway. These results appear consistent with previous literature showing that biomarker evidence of inflammation is associated with lower response to antidepressants from the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor class. Moreover, increases in the kynurenic acid (KynA)/3-hydroxykynurenine (3HK) ratio, which previously has been characterized as a neuroprotective index, were associated with full remission under escitalopram treatment.
OBJECTIVE: This post hoc analysis examined efficacy and tolerability of open-label desvenlafaxine in patients with major depressive disorder switched from blinded placebo, venlafaxine extended release (ER), or desvenlafaxine. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Patients who completed 8 weeks of double-blind therapy with placebo (n = 176), venlafaxine ER (n = 175), or desvenlafaxine (n = 143) enrolled in a 10-month, open-label extension study and received desvenlafaxine 200 to 400 mg/d. Efficacy (17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale [HDRS(17)]) was assessed separately for nonresponders and responders to double-blind treatment. Tolerability during the first month of open-label desvenlafaxine was assessed. RESULTS: Among nonresponders (n = 134) to double-blind placebo, venlafaxine ER, and desvenlafaxine, mean decreases in HDRS(17) scores were -10.9, -7.3, and -7.7, respectively; HDRS(17) response rates were 67%, 53%, and 48%, respectively. Although responders (n = 360) to double-blind placebo, venlafaxine ER, and desvenlafaxine had more modest decreases on the HDRS(17), response rates were higher (84%, 87%, and 83%, respectively). Rates of adverse events were highest during week 1, and decreased afterward for the remainder of the first month of treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Among nonresponders to 8 weeks of double-blind venlafaxine ER, desvenlafaxine, or placebo, 48% to 67% subsequently responded to open-label desvenlafaxine. Over 80% of responders to double-blind therapy maintained response on open-label desvenlafaxine. The switch from venlafaxine ER to desvenlafaxine was well tolerated.
