Myocardial ischemia causes extensive damage, further exacerbated by reperfusion, a phenomenon called myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury (MIRI). Nowadays, the pathological mechanisms of MIRI have received extensive attention. Oxidative stress, multiple programmed cell deaths, inflammation and others are all essential pathological mechanisms contributing to MIRI. Mitochondria are the energy supply centers of cells. Numerous studies have found that abnormal mitochondrial function is an essential "culprit" of MIRI, and mitophagy mediated by the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced kinase 1 (PINK1)/Parkin signaling pathway is an integral part of maintaining mitochondrial function. Therefore, exploring the association between the PINK1/Parkin signaling pathway-mediated mitophagy and MIRI is crucial. This review will mainly summarize the crucial role of the PINK1/Parkin signaling pathway-mediated mitophagy in MIR-induced several pathological mechanisms and various potential interventions that affect the PINK1/Parkin signaling pathway-mediated mitophagy, thus ameliorating MIRI.
BACKGROUND: There is a need for new and effective oral asthma therapies. Dexpramipexole, an oral eosinophil-lowering drug, has not previously been studied in asthma. OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate the safety and efficacy of dexpramipexole in lowering blood and airway eosinophilia in subjects with eosinophilic asthma. METHODS: We performed a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled proof-of-concept trial in adults with inadequately controlled moderate to severe asthma and blood absolute eosinophil count (AEC) greater than or equal to 300/muL. Subjects were randomly assigned (1:1:1:1) to dexpramipexole 37.5, 75, or 150 mg BID (twice-daily) or placebo. The primary end point was the relative change in AEC from baseline to week 12. Prebronchodilator FEV(1) week-12 change from baseline was a key secondary end point. Nasal eosinophil peroxidase was an exploratory end point. RESULTS: A total of 103 subjects were randomly assigned to dexpramipexole 37.5 mg BID (N = 22), 75 mg BID (N = 26), 150 mg BID (N = 28), or placebo (N = 27). Dexpramipexole significantly reduced placebo-corrected AEC week-12 ratio to baseline, in both the 150-mg BID (ratio, 0.23; 95% CI, 0.12-0.43; P < .0001) and the 75-mg BID (ratio, 0.34; 95% CI, 0.18-0.65; P = .0014) dose groups, corresponding to 77% and 66% reductions, respectively. Dexpramipexole reduced the exploratory end point of nasal eosinophil peroxidase week-12 ratio to baseline in the 150-mg BID (median, 0.11; P = .020) and the 75-mg BID (median, 0.17; P = .021) groups. Placebo-corrected FEV(1) increases were observed starting at week 4 (nonsignificant). Dexpramipexole displayed a favorable safety profile. CONCLUSIONS: Dexpramipexole demonstrated effective eosinophil lowering and was well tolerated. Additional larger clinical trials are needed to understand the clinical efficacy of dexpramipexole in asthma.
The 1,3-benzothiazole (BTZ) ring may offer a valid option for scaffold-hopping from indole derivatives. Several BTZs have clinically relevant roles, mainly as CNS medicines and diagnostic agents, with riluzole being one of the most famous examples. Riluzole is currently the only approved drug to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) but its efficacy is marginal. Several clinical studies have demonstrated only limited improvements in survival, without benefits to motor function in patients with ALS. Despite significant clinical trial efforts to understand the genetic, epigenetic, and molecular pathways linked to ALS pathophysiology, therapeutic translation has remained disappointingly slow, probably due to the complexity and the heterogeneity of this disease. Many other drugs to tackle ALS have been tested for 20 years without any success. Dexpramipexole is a BTZ structural analog of riluzole and was a great hope for the treatment of ALS. In this review, as an interesting case study in the development of a new medicine to treat ALS, we present the strategy of the development of dexpramipexole, which was one of the most promising drugs against ALS.
Eosinophil infiltration is observed in a broad spectrum of skin diseases of various origins. Eosinophils are thought to actively contribute to pathogenesis as they are able to defend against microbes, to regulate inflammation, cause tissue damage, promote remodeling and fibrosis, and initiate pruritus. Therefore, targeting eosinophils would seem a worthwhile therapeutic approach. A promising strategy is to target the production, activation and survival of eosinophils, example with antibodies directed against IL-5 or its receptor, and Siglec-8. Dexpramipexole and tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been shown to reduce eosinophil numbers in patients with hypereosinophilia. Janus kinase inhibitors block signal transduction and thus activation of inflammatory cells including eosinophils. A further approach is to target cells and cytokines acting on or mediators released by eosinophils, for example, CD52, IL-13, IL-31, TSLP, and eotaxins. This review summarizes current therapeutic strategies, including novel agents affecting eosinophils directly that are under clinical investigation.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is characterized by persistent hypereosinophilia associated with end-organ damage. As our understanding of the pathogenesis of various forms of HES broadens, so does our ability to tailor steroid-sparing therapies for each subtype. The purpose of this review is to summarize recent literature related to the etiology, diagnosis, and management of HES. RECENT FINDINGS: Mutations involved in subsets of HES can guide the choice of tyrosine kinase inhibitors beyond just imatinib. Several biologics that target interleukin-5 or its receptor have shown beneficial and selective eosinophil-reducing effects in clinical trials for asthma and other disorders including HES. Early clinical data with emerging therapies such as dexpramipexole and anti-Siglec-8 antibody show promise, but need to be confirmed in randomized trials. Several new biologics and tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been shown to lower eosinophil numbers, but more randomized trials are needed to confirm efficacy in HES.
