Eleven healthy subjects received single oral doses of placebo, 2 mg diazepam, 5 mg diazepam, and 10 mg diazepam in a randomized four-way crossover study. Plasma diazepam levels, the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), and fraction of total electroencephalographic (EEG) amplitude falling in the sigma plus beta (13 to 31 Hz) frequency range were determined during the 12 hours after drug administration. Peak plasma diazepam concentration and area under the 12-hour curve were proportional to dose; time of peak was independent of dose. Baseline percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range averaged 15.7% and did not differ among the four trials. The percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range did not change over baseline with placebo or 2 mg diazepam but was increased 1/4 to 2 1/2 hours after 5 mg diazepam, (maximum, +7.3%) and 3/4 to 12 hours after 10 mg diazepam (maximum, +15.2%). The increase in the percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range was highly correlated with plasma diazepam concentration. DSST scores for placebo and 2 mg diazepam were nearly identical. DSST decrements with 5 and 10 mg diazepam paralleled and were correlated with the changes in the percentage of EEG amplitude falling in the 13 to 31 Hz range and with plasma diazepam levels. Thus the EEG analysis provides objective quantitation of benzodiazepine central nervous system effects, in turn reflecting plasma levels and other clinical measures.
In a cross-over study, intravenous diazepam was compared with rectal diazepam for sedation in outpatient oral surgery. Fifty-four operations were performed on 27 patients. Recovery from sedation, experience during the postoperative course, amnesia, estimation of the sedative effect, and patient preference of method of sedation were studied. The recovery times of the sedation methods did not differ. Sedative effects after the first operation were estimated as good by 87% of patients given intravenous sedation and by 75% of those given rectal sedation. However, there was a significant relationship between the subjective experience of stronger sedative effect and preference of sedation method that favored the intravenous technique. The degree of amnesia was significantly higher during intravenous sedation, but a high degree of amnesia was not related to patients' preference for a sedation method. Neither sedation method produced any local side effects.
The combination of diazepam plus pethidine, reversed with naloxone, was compared in a double-blind randomized study with diazepam alone in 100 patients undergoing endoscopy. Patients accepted both methods of sedation equally well. There was no significant difference in sedation after endoscopy, but the addition of pethidine produced a significant improvement in patient co-operation during the endoscopy (P less than 0.001).
Only sporadic data are available on hair concentrations of diazepam and some of its metabolites (nordazepam, oxazepam, and temazepam) following a single controlled dose. The aim of this study was to investigate the deposition of diazepam and its metabolites in human hair after eight healthy volunteers (four women and four men, ages 24-26, East Asian) consumed 10 mg of diazepam. Hair was collected from all volunteers 1 month after exposure, and also 2 months post-exposure from men and 10 months post-exposure from women. Diazepam and the complete metabolite profile, including oxazepam glucuronide and temazepam glucuronide, were measured by ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) with limits of quantifications (LOQs) of 0.5-2.5 pg/mg for diazepam, nordazepam, oxazepam, and temazepam, and of 10 pg/mg for oxazepam glucuronide and temazepam glucuronide. There were no differences by gender in the amounts of diazepam or metabolites found. The concentration of the main metabolite nordazepam was consistently higher than that of diazepam at both 1 and 2 months after consumption. Oxazepam and temazepam traces were found in some volunteers' hair, but the glucuronides were not detected. Diazepam and nordazepam levels at 10 months post-exposure were extremely low (near the LOQ), indicating drug loss by personal hygiene and physical handling. To our knowledge, this is the first single-dose diazepam study using black hair and the first study to include measurements of oxazepam glucuronide and temazepam glucuronide in human hair.
Occurrence of diazepam and its metabolites, nordiazepam, temazepam, and oxazepam in the water environment in Beijing was investigated. Samples were collected from four rivers flowing through the city and from all the thirteen sewage treatment plants in the urban area. Average influent concentrations of diazepman, temazepam, and oxazepam in 2013 summer ranged from 0.9 to 7.1, 1.5 to 3.4, and 2.9 to 12.4 ng L(-1), respectively, whereas nordiazepam concentrations were below quantification limit on the majority of sampling dates. No significant seasonal variation in influent concentrations was observed. Removal during treatment was low for diazepman (<50%), temazepam (<20%), and oxazepam (<20%), consistent with previous findings reported in the literature. Wastewater-based epidemiology approach was applied to back-calculate population size-normalized diazepam consumption (using temazepam as biomarker) in Beijing, which was found to be at least 3.8 times more of the national average. Diazepam, temazepam, and oxazepam were widely detected in surface waters, with concentrations greater than concentrations in sewage influents at many sampling points, strongly indicating direct discharge of wastewater of high diazepam concentrations into the surface waters in the city.
Polysubstituted pyrazoles (5)(a-l), pyrazolines (7)(a-c), (8)(a-c) and pyrazolotriazine (10) derivatives of diazepam were synthesized. The structures of hitherto unknown compounds were established by analytical and spectral methods. Some of these compounds were screened to test their antibacterial activity against gram-positive (B. subtilis) and gram-negative (P. aeruginosa). All compounds showed potent activity against these bacteria.
Diazepam and lorazepam differ in potency and in the time-course of their action. As a sedative, diazepam 10 mg is equivalent to lorazepam 2-2.5 mg. Diazepam is better absorbed after oral than after i.m. administrations but this does not apply to lorazepam. The clinical effect and amnesia begin more rapidly with diazepam, but last longer following lorazepam. Lorazepam is more effective than diazepam in blocking the emergence sequelae from ketamine. Lorazepam i.v. is followed by a lesser frequency of venous thrombosis.
Benzodiazepines induce a series of clinical effects by modulating subtypes of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors in the central nervous system. The brain concentration-time profiles of diazepam that correspond to these effects are unknown, but can be estimated with physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling. In this study, a PBPK model for the 1,4-benzodiazepines diazepam and nordiazepam was developed from plasma concentration-time courses with PK-Sim software to predict brain concentrations. The PBPK model simulations accurately parallel plasma concentrations from both an internal model training data set and an external data set for both intravenous and peroral diazepam administrations. It was determined that the unbound interstitial brain concentration-time profiles correlated with diazepam pharmacodynamic end points. With a 30-mg intravenous diazepam dose, the peak unbound interstitial brain concentration from this model is 160 nM at 2 minutes and 28.9 nM at 120 minutes. Peak potentiation of recombinant gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors composed of alpha1beta2gamma2s, alpha2beta2gamma2s, and alpha5beta2gamma2s subunit combinations that are involved in diazepam clinical endpoints is 108%, 139%, and 186%, respectively, with this intravenous dose. With 10-mg peroral administrations of diazepam delivered every 24 hours, steady-state peak and trough unbound interstitial brain diazepam concentrations are 22.3 +/- 7.5 and 9.3 +/- 3.5 nM. Nordiazepam unbound interstitial brain concentration is 36.1 nM at equilibrium with this diazepam dosing schedule. Pharmacodynamic models coupled to the diazepam unbound interstitial brain concentrations from the PBPK analysis account for electroencephalographic drug effect, change in 13- to 30-Hz electroencephalographic activity, amnesia incidence, and sedation score time courses from human subjects.
OBJECTIVE: The study assesses the bioavailability of diazepam after intranasal administration (diazepam nasal spray) in healthy volunteers. Comparative agents were diazepam rectal gel, which served as the regulatory reference product; and oral diazepam, a product with decades of clinical use. Tolerability of diazepam nasal spray was also assessed. METHODS: This was a phase 1, open-label, randomized, single-dose, three-treatment, three-period, six-sequence crossover study in 48 healthy adult subjects that consisted of a screening period, a baseline period, and an open-label treatment period. Interperiod intervals were at least 28 days. RESULTS: Forty-eight healthy volunteer subjects were enrolled, two of whom discontinued before receiving study medication. For all routes of administration, the onset of diazepam absorption was rapid, with measurable concentrations of drug present by the first sample time point. The t(max) (time to reach maximum plasma concentration) was similar for diazepam nasal spray and diazepam rectal gel, both of which were slower than oral diazepam in fasted individuals. Variability (as defined by % coefficient of variation of geometric mean) in peak plasma concentration and area under the curve(0-infinity) was lowest with oral diazepam, followed by diazepam nasal spray, with diazepam rectal gel showing the greatest variability. Overall, 131 treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) were considered mild (42 subjects, 91.3%), four TEAEs were considered moderate (four subjects, 8.3%), and no TEAEs were considered severe. The most commonly reported TEAE was somnolence at 56.5% (26/46) during diazepam nasal spray treatment, 89.1% (41/46) with the rectal diazepam gel treatment, and 82.6% (38/46) with oral diazepam treatment. No nasal irritation was observed for the majority of the subjects at any time point after administration, with no score higher than 2 ("minor bleeding that stops within 1 minute"). SIGNIFICANCE: Diazepam nasal spray shows predicable pharmacokinetics and represents a potential novel therapeutic approach to control bouts of increased seizure activity (cluster seizures, acute repetitive seizures).
A method is presented for supplementing local anesthesia with intravenous diazepam and fentanyl. Ease of administration and high patient acceptance in over 1500 cases is discussed.
AIM: The aim of this paper was to determine whether the use of midazolam is a better technique than the use of diazepam, in relation with the definition of conscious sedation in dentistry. METHODS: Eighty-eight patients undergoing oral surgery were divided into 2 groups in which the sedation was randomly achieved with equipotent cumulative doses of diazepam and midazolam, up to a maximum dose of 8 and 4 mg respectively. Patient's tranquillity was assessed after every dose, using a visual analogue score to ten points and the sedation was evaluated as mild, moderate or deep. Blood pressure, heart rate and SpO2 were also recorded. Psychomotor conditions, by Newman test, and the incidence of amnesia and the patient's satisfaction, by telephone interview, were both evaluated. RESULTS: The number of patients who reached maximum subjective tranquillity was greater already after the third dose of diazepam. The average scores of tranquillity were higher after diazepam. Patients treated with diazepam experienced a higher incidence of mild sedation, patients treated with midazolam a higher incidence of moderate and deep sedation. In patients treated with midazolam blood pressure, heart rate and SpO2 were lower. Postoperative recovery was similar in the 2 groups. After midazolam patients experienced greater amnesia for local anesthesia and drowsiness. Satisfaction was high with both treatments. CONCLUSION: The study shows that sedation with diazepam is more in line with the definition of conscious sedation in dentistry. Diazepam guarantees the persistence of consciousness and maximum subjective tranquillity levels. The recovery and satisfaction were comparable in the 2 groups.
It has been previously reported that treatment of urinary oxazepam by commercial beta-glucuronidase enzyme preparations, from Escherichia coli, Helix pomatia and Patella vulgata, results in production of nordiazepam (desmethyldiazepam) artefact. In this study, we report that this unusual reductive transformation also occurs in other benzodiazepines with a hydroxyl group at the C3 position such as temazepam and lorazepam. As determined by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis, all three enzyme preparations were found capable of converting urinary temazepam into diazepam following enzymatic incubation and subsequent liquid-liquid extraction procedures. For example, when H. pomatia enzymes were used with incubation conditions of 18 h and 50  degrees C, the percentage conversion, although small, was significant--approximately 1% (0.59-1.54%) in both patient and spiked blank urines. Similarly, using H. pomatia enzyme under these incubation conditions, a reductive transformation of urinary lorazepam into delorazepam (chlordesmethyldiazepam) occurred. These findings have both clinical and forensic implications. Detection of diazepam or delorazepam in biological samples following enzyme treatment should be interpreted with care.
Objective and subjective effects on performance of single oral doses of indomethacin (IM) 50 mg and 100 mg and diazepam (DZ) 10-15 mg, alone and in combination, were investigated in two double-blind studies conducted with parallel groups of healthy drug-naive student volunteers. Objective and subjective effects were measured at baseline as well as 0.5 and 1.5 hours after treatment. DZ significantly impaired performance in digit symbol substitution, letter cancellation, tracking and flicker fusion tests. It also induced exophoria and caused subjective (visual analogue scales) drowsiness, mental slowness, clumsiness and impaired overall performance. IM proved rather inactive when slightly impairing flicker fusion and digit substitution, and subjectively rendering the subjects clumsier. The combined effects of IM and DZ did not differ from those obtained with DZ alone. Both IM and DZ induced dizziness and their effects in this respect were additive when the drugs were used in combination. It is concluded that single therapeutic doses of indomethacin do not produce major psychomotor effects and do not in this respect increase the effects of diazepam. However, the feeling of dizziness, a side-effect common to both these drugs, may be additive when the drugs are used in combination.
Diazepam (DZ) placental transfer in pregnant women at term, following single or repeated drug administration by various routes, was evaluated. DZ and its metabolite N-demethyldiazepam (NDZ) were constantly present in umbilical cord plasma at concentrations comparable to the mother's shortly after drug administration. N-methyloxazepam (MOX) was detected in cord plasma only in a limited number of cases following chronic DZ treatment. Postmortem analysis of fetal tissue concentrations showed accumulation of NDZ in heart and lungs. Differences in NDZ concentrations between venous cord (VC) and arterial cord (AC) plasms suggest metabolic degradation of DZ in the fetus. The DZ apparent plasma half-life in the newborn was found to be longer (31 plus or minus 2 hr) than previously observed in infants and children. The low drug clearance appears to be linked to reduced urinary excretion of hydroxylated metabolites, suggesting limited capability to dispose of DZ in the newborn.
Results of a previous study indicated that the opioid effects of methadone were enhanced by the concurrent administration of diazepam in methadone-maintained subjects. To determine whether a pharmacokinetic interaction might account for this methadone-diazepam interaction, the plasma levels of methadone, diazepam and diazepam metabolites were determined in blood samples collected during that study. Five adult male patients on methadone maintenance (50-60 mg/day) were administrated single doses of placebo, diazepam (20 and 40 mg), methadone (100%, 150% and 200% of the maintenance dose), and four diazepam-methadone dose combinations (20 and 40 mg diazepam in combination with 100% and 150% of the maintenance dose). The results showed that the concurrent administration of methadone and diazepam did not significantly change the time-course or areas under the plasma concentration-time curve of methadone, diazepam or N-desmethyl-diazepam compared to the levels following the administration of either drug alone. Thus, plasma drug level analysis does not indicate a pharmacokinetic interaction between diazepam and methadone.
Eleven healthy volunteers received a single intravenous dose of diazepam (0.15 mg/kg), midazolam (0.1 mg/kg), and placebo by 1-minute infusion in a double-blind, three-way crossover study. Plasma concentrations were measured during 24 hours after dosage, and the electroencephalographic (EEG) power spectrum was simultaneously computed by fast-Fourier transform to determine the percentage of total EEG amplitude occurring in the 13 to 30 Hz range. Both diazepam and midazolam had large volumes of distribution (1.2 and 2.3 L/kg, respectively), but diazepam's half-life was considerably longer (33 versus 2.8 hours) and its metabolic clearance lower (0.5 versus 11.0 ml/min kg) than those of midazolam. EEG changes were maximal at the end of the diazepam infusion and 5 to 10 minutes after midazolam infusion. Percent 13 to 30 Hz activity remained significantly above baseline until 5 hours for diazepam but only until 2 hours for midazolam. For both drugs, EEG effects were indistinguishable from baseline by 6 to 8 hours, suggesting that distribution contributes importantly to terminating pharmacodynamic action. The relationship of EEG change to plasma drug concentration indicated an apparent EC50 value of 269 ng/ml for diazepam as opposed to 35 ng/ml for midazolam. However, Emax values were similar for both drugs (+19.4% and +21.3%, respectively).
The pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of midazolam and diazepam were compared after intravenous infusions of 0.03 and 0.07 mg/kg midazolam and 0.1 and 0.2 mg/kg diazepam on four separate occasions in 12 healthy male subjects in a randomized four-way crossover design. The Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST) was used as a measure of drug effect. Subjects performed three practice tests before dosing to account for any effects caused by familiarization ("learning curve") with the testing procedure. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data were simultaneously fitted to a semiparametric model. In this model, a pharmacokinetic model related dose to plasma concentrations, a link model related plasma concentrations to the concentration at the effect site, and a pharmacodynamic model related the effect site concentration to the observed effect. The plasma-effect site equilibrium half-life was approximately 2 1/2 times longer for midazolam than for diazepam, which is in good agreement with previously published data. Based on the estimated effect site concentration at which half of the maximal effect was reached, midazolam had approximately a sixfold greater intrinsic potency than diazepam. This difference in potency was also observed in a previous study that used transformed electroencephalographic (EEG) data to assess pharmacodynamic activity. The findings reported here with a clinically relevant pharmacodynamic marker (DSST) confirm the utility of surrogate drug effect measures such as EEG. This work also shows the feasibility of conducting pharmacokinetic pharmacodynamic analysis during the drug development process.
