CONTEXT: Infantile colic is self-limiting condition but it can be a cause of anxiety for parents and challenge for doctors. The challenge for the doctors lies in correct identification of the condition and appropriate management. The objective of this review article is to summarize the pathophysiology, treatment options and outcome in infantile colic so that clinicians can have a fair idea about the condition, recent updates and future prospects. EVIDENCE: A search of the Cochrane Library, PubMed, and Google Scholar was made using the key words "Infant colic", Infantile colic", "excessive crying in infants". All the materials were analyzed and summarized. RESULTS: At present, infantile colic is an area of clinical research both in terms of etiology and treatment. Various etiological theories have been proposed but none of them are strong enough to completely describe the condition. Various treatment agents are being tried for colic like counseling and behavioral modification, dietary modification, lactase and probiotic supplementation, pain relieving agents, and chiropathy. Proper counseling of the parents is the first line of management at present. Simethicone has no role in decreasing the symptoms of colic and Dicyclomine is not recommended in children younger than six months. No specific recommendations have been made on the use of pain relieving agents and manipulative therapies in colic. At present strong evidence is lacking regarding the use of probiotics, lactase supplementation and dietary modification. CONCLUSIONS: Counseling of parents about the benign nature of the condition is considered first line for now until an effective treatment is established. Other treatment options are prescribed on a case-based manner, and based on the parental perception of the condition.
Infantile colic is a benign process in which an infant has paroxysms of inconsolable crying for more than three hours per day, more than three days per week, for longer than three weeks. It affects approximately 10% to 40% of infants worldwide and peaks at around six weeks of age, with symptoms resolving by three to six months of age. The incidence is equal between sexes, and there is no correlation with type of feeding (breast vs. bottle), gestational age, or socioeconomic status. The cause of infantile colic is not known; proposed causes include alterations in fecal microflora, intolerance to cow's milk protein or lactose, gastrointestinal immaturity or inflammation, increased serotonin secretion, poor feeding technique, and maternal smoking or nicotine replacement therapy. Colic is a diagnosis of exclusion after a detailed history and physical examination have ruled out concerning causes. Parental support and reassurance are key components of the management of colic. Simethicone and proton pump inhibitors are ineffective for the treatment of colic, and dicyclomine is contraindicated. Treatment options for breastfed infants include the probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri (strain DSM 17938) and reducing maternal dietary allergen intake. Switching to a hydrolyzed formula is an option for formula-fed infants. Evidence does not support chiropractic or osteopathic manipulation, infant massage, swaddling, acupuncture, or herbal supplements.
BACKGROUND: Infantile colic is typically defined as full-force crying for at least three hours per day, on at least three days per week, for at least three weeks. This condition appears to be more frequent in the first six weeks of life (prevalence range of 17% to 25%), depending on the specific location reported and definitions used, and it usually resolves by three months of age. The aetiopathogenesis of infantile colic is unclear but most likely multifactorial. A number of psychological, behavioural and biological components (food hypersensitivity, allergy or both; gut microflora and dysmotility) are thought to contribute to its manifestation. The role of diet as a component in infantile colic remains controversial. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of dietary modifications for reducing colic in infants less than four months of age. SEARCH METHODS: In July 2018 we searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase , 17 other databases and 2 trials registers. We also searched Google, checked and handsearched references and contacted study authors. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and quasi-RCTs evaluating the effects of dietary modifications, alone or in combination, for colicky infants younger than four months of age versus another intervention or placebo. We used specific definitions for colic, age of onset and the methods for performing the intervention. We defined 'modified diet' as any diet altered to include or exclude certain components. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Our primary outcome was duration of crying, and secondary outcomes were response to intervention, frequency of crying episodes, parental/family quality of life, infant sleep duration, parental satisfaction and adverse effects. MAIN RESULTS: We included 15 RCTs involving 1121 infants (balanced numbers of boys and girls) aged 2 to 16 weeks. All studies were small and at high risk of bias across multiple design factors (e.g. selection, attrition). The studies covered a wide range of dietary interventions, and there was limited scope for meta-analysis. Using the GRADE approach, we assessed the quality of the evidence as very low.Low-allergen maternal diet versus a diet containing known potential allergens: one study (90 infants) found that 35/47 (74%) of infants responded to a low-allergen maternal diet, compared with 16/43 (37%) of infants on a diet containing known potential allergens.Low-allergen diet or soy milk formula versus dicyclomine hydrochloride: one study (120 infants) found that 10/15 (66.6%) breastfed babies responded to dicyclomine hydrochloride, compared with 24/45 (53.3%) formula-fed babies. There was little difference in response between breastfed babies whose mother changed their diet (10/16; 62.5%) and babies who received soy milk formula (29/44; 65.9%).Hydrolysed formula versus standard formula: two studies (64 infants) found no difference in duration of crying, reported as a dichotomous outcome: risk ratio 2.03, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.81 to 5.10; very low-quality evidence. The author of one study confirmed there were no adverse effects. One study (43 infants) reported a greater reduction in crying time postintervention with hydrolysed formula (104 min/d, 95% CI 55 to 155) than with standard formula (3 min/d, 95% CI -63 to 67).Hydrolysed formula versus another hydrolysed formula: one study (22 infants) found that two types of hydrolysed formula were equally effective in resolving symptoms for babies who commenced with standard formula (Alimentum reduced crying to 2.21 h/d (standard deviation (SD) 0.40) and Nutramigen to 2.93 h/d (SD 0.70)).Hydrolysed formula or dairy- and soy-free maternal diet versus addition of parental education or counselling: one study (21 infants) found that crying time decreased to 2.03 h/d (SD 1.03) in the hydrolysed or dairy- and soy-free group compared with 1.08 h/d (SD 0.7) in the parent education or counselling group, nine days into the intervention.Partially hydrolysed, lower lactose, whey-based formulae containing oligosaccharide versus standard formula with simethicone: one study (267 infants) found that both groups experienced a decrease in colic episodes (secondary outcome) after seven days (partially hydrolysed formula: from 5.99 episodes (SD 1.84) to 2.47 episodes (SD 1.94); standard formula: from 5.41 episodes (SD 1.88) to 3.72 episodes (SD 1.98)). After two weeks the difference between the two groups was significant (partially hydrolysed: 1.76 episodes (SD 1.60); standard formula: 3.32 episodes (SD 2.06)). The study author confirmed there were no adverse effects.Lactase enzyme supplementation versus placebo: three studies (138 infants) assessed this comparison, but none reported data amenable to analysis for any outcome. There were no adverse effects in any of the studies.Extract of Foeniculum vulgare, Matricariae recutita, and Melissa officinalis versus placebo: one study (93 infants) found that average daily crying time was lower for infants given the extract (76.9 min/d (SD 23.5), than infants given placebo (169.9 min/d (SD 23.1), at the end of the one-week study. There were no adverse effects.Soy protein-based formula versus standard cows' milk protein-based formula: one study (19 infants) reported a mean crying time of 12.7 h/week (SD 16.4) in the soy formula group versus 17.3 h/week (SD 6.9) in the standard cows' milk group, and that 5/10 (50%) responded in the soy formula group versus 0/9 (0%) in the standard cows' milk group.Soy protein formula with polysaccharide versus standard soy protein formula: one study (27 infants) assessed this comparison but did not provide disaggregated data for the number of responders in each group after treatment.No study reported on our secondary outcomes of parental or family quality of life, infant sleep duration per 24 h, or parental satisfaction. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Currently, evidence of the effectiveness of dietary modifications for the treatment of infantile colic is sparse and at significant risk of bias. The few available studies had small sample sizes, and most had serious limitations. There were insufficient studies, thus limiting the use of meta-analysis. Benefits reported for hydrolysed formulas were inconsistent.Based on available evidence, we are unable to recommend any intervention. Future studies of single interventions, using clinically significant outcome measures, and appropriate design and power are needed.
Chronic abdominal pain is a common gastrointestinal (GI) symptom that characterizes many functional GI disorders/disorders of gut-brain interaction, including irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, and centrally mediated abdominal pain syndrome. The symptoms of abdominal pain in these highly prevalent disorders are often treated with antispasmodic agents. Antispasmodic treatment includes a broad range of therapeutic classes with different mechanisms of action, including anticholinergic/antimuscarinic agents (inhibition of GI smooth muscle contraction), calcium channel inhibitors (inhibition of calcium transport into GI smooth muscle), and direct smooth muscle relaxants (inhibition of sodium and calcium transport). The aim of this review article was to examine the efficacy and safety of antispasmodics available in North America (e.g., alverine, dicyclomine, hyoscine, hyoscyamine, mebeverine, otilonium, pinaverium, and trimebutine) for the treatment of chronic abdominal pain in patients with common disorders of gut-brain interaction. For the agents examined, comparisons of studies are limited by inconsistencies in treatment dosing and duration, patient profiles, and diagnostic criteria employed. Furthermore, variability in study end points limits comparisons. Risk of selection, performance, detection, attrition, and reporting bias also differed among studies, and in many cases, risks were considered "unclear." The antispasmodics evaluated in this review, which differ in geographic availability, were found to vary dramatically in efficacy and safety. Given these caveats, each agent should be considered on an individual basis, rather than prescribed based on information across the broad class of agents.
To better evaluate the non-medical use of anticholinergic substances in Brazil, a review of the local literature was performed. Synthetic compounds such as triexyphenidyl (Artane), benactizine (Asmosterona), dicyclomine (Bentyl) as well as Datura sp. tea were reported as being used by first and second grade students and by street children of several Brazilian cities. In several cases the percentage of youngsters indulging in such use was higher than the percentage found for cocaine, barbiturates, cough syrups and amphetamine-related drugs. Several cases of patients seeking treatment for dependence or for acute psychotic symptoms were also described.
