Herein, we report on nano-sized Mn oxide/carbon nanotubes, graphene and graphene oxide as water-oxidizing compounds in artificial photosynthesis. The composites are synthesized by different and simple procedures and characterized by a number of methods. The water-oxidizing activities of these composites are also considered in the presence of cerium(IV) ammonium nitrate. Some composites are efficient Mn-based catalysts with TOF (mmol O2 per mol Mn per second) ~ 2.6.
A nano-size amorphous calcium-manganese oxide shows efficient water oxidation activity in the presence of cerium(IV) ammonium nitrate.
We have examined the action of nitric oxide (NO) on the ability of Fenton's reagent (ferrous iron and hydrogen peroxide), to oxidize a number of organic optical probes. We found that NO is able to arrest the oxidation of organic compounds at concentrations of NO found in brain, in vivo. We present evidence that Fenton's reagent proceeds via a ferryl intermediate ([Fe[double bond]O]2+), before the generation of hydroxyl radical *OH. NO reacts rapidly with this ferryl, blocking the production of *OH. We propose that NO has an important role in protecting biological tissues, and the brain in particular, from Fenton chemistry.
The aim is to evaluate the prooxidant and antimicrobial effects of Fe(3)O(4) and TiO(2) nanoparticles and thalicarpine by luminescent and standard microbiological assays. Their effect on the kinetics of free-radical oxidation reactions (at pH 7.4 and pH 8.5) is studied in the following model systems, using activated chemiluminescence: chemical, with Fenton's reagent (H(2)O(2)-FeSO(4))-for the generation of hydroxyl radicals ((.)OH); chemical, with oxidant hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)); chemical (NAD.H-PhMS), for the generation of superoxide radicals (O(2)(.-)). Fe(3)O(4) nanoparticles exhibit highly pronounced antioxidant properties; TiO(2) nanoparticles exhibit mild to moderate prooxidant properties at neutral and alkaline conditions. Those properties are tested by the chemiluminescent method for the first time. Thalicarpine and its combination with TiO(2) nanoparticles exhibit pronounced antioxidant activities at pH 8.5 which are lost and transformed into well-presented prooxidant effects at pH 7.4. That is a result-supported proof on the observed typical properties of thalicarpine and TiO(2), namely antibacterial, organic-preserving and anti-pathogenic activities. The antimicrobial effect is tested on Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria: two strains of Escherichia coli, Bacillus cereus 1095 and Staphylococcus aureus. All bacteria are destroyed after the application of TiO(2), but not Fe(3)O(4) nanoparticles, showing their antibacterial effect. Thalicarpine, in combination with TiO(2), showed even synergetic antibacterial effect.
Graphdiyne (GDY) is a novel two-dimensional (2D) carbon allotrope that has attracted much attention in materials, physics, chemistry, and microelectronics for its excellent properties. Much effort has been devoted to exploring the biomedical applications of GDY in 2D carbon nanomaterials, especially for smart drugs and gene delivery. However, few studies have focused on the biocompatibility and potential environmental hazards of GDY and its derivatives. In this study, graphdiyne oxide (GDYO) and graphene oxide (GO) were obtained using different oxidation methods. Their cytotoxicity and hemolysis in vitro and biocompatibility in subcutaneous and peritoneal locations in vivo were compared. GDYO had very low biotoxicity in vitro and was moderately biocompatible in the muscle and abdominal cavity in vivo. Highly oxidized products and graphdiyne quantum dots (GDQDs) were observed in peritoneal cells. GDYO had better biocompatibility and its sheet size was easily diminished through oxidative degradation. Therefore, GDYO is a good candidate for use in 2D carbon nanomaterials in biomedicine.
A novel metal-free composite (GN) composed of two types of carbon-based nanomaterials, graphite oxide (GO) and 2D oxidized carbon nitride (OCN) nanodots was produced. Chemical and morphological characterizations reveal that GN contains a main component of GO with well-dispersed 2D OCN nanodots. GN shows enhanced photocatalytic performance for degrading an organic pollutant, Rhodamine B, under visible light.
Manganese oxide nanoparticles (MnO(x) NPs) have been suggested to possess several enzyme-like activities. However, studies often used either color change or fluorescence to determine the catalytic activity. Despite the simplicity and sensitivity of these probes, these methods may give distracting artifacts or not reflect the catalytic activities in biological systems. To address this issue, herein, we used electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy, a technique proven effective in identifying and quantifying the free radicals produced/scavenged in nanomaterial-catalyzed reactions, to systematically evaluate the catalytic activities of three MnO(x) NPs (MnO(2), Mn(2)O(3), and Mn(3)O(4) NPs) towards biologically relevant antioxidants (ascorbate and glutathione (GSH)) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), superoxide anion, and hydroxyl radical). We found that all three MnO(x) NPs possess both pro- and anti-oxidant activities, including oxidase-, catalase-, and superoxide dismutase (SOD)-like activities but without peroxidase-like or hydroxyl radical scavenging activity. In addition, there are differences among these MnO(x) NPs in their catalytic activities towards different reactions. Mn(2)O(3) shows the strongest ascorbate oxidation activity, followed by MnO(2) and Mn(3)O(4), while Mn(3)O(4) shows the strongest oxidation efficiency towards GSH compared to Mn(2)O(3) and MnO(2). In the catalyzed decomposition of H(2)O(2), MnO(2) NPs show higher efficiency in the generation of molecular oxygen than Mn(2)O(3) or Mn(3)O(4). Cellular studies indicate that all three MnO(x) NPs induced concentration-dependent decreases in the cell viability, with Mn(3)O(4) > Mn(3)O(2) > MnO(2). At lower concentrations (<100 muM), consistent with the enzyme-like activities detected in solution, all three NPs significantly decreased H(2)O(2)-induced cytotoxicity in Caco-2 cells. Our study determined the multi-enzymatic activities of MnO(x) NPs and exhibited differences among MnO(x) NPs of different valences in their enzyme-like activities and their biological implications; these results provide valuable information for safe and efficient applications of MnO(x) NPs as ROS-scavenging biomedical nanomaterials.
A variety of selenium compounds were proven to be useful reagents and catalysts for organic synthesis over the past several decades. The most interesting aspect, which emerged in recent years, concerns application of hydroperoxide/selenium(IV) oxide and hydroperoxide/organoselenium catalyst systems, as "green reagents" for the oxidation of different organic functional groups. The topic of oxidations catalyzed by organoselenium derivatives has rapidly expanded in the last fifteen years This paper is devoted to the synthetic applications of the oxidation reactions mediated by selenium compounds such as selenium(IV) oxide, areneseleninic acids, their anhydrides, selenides, diselenides, benzisoselenazol-3(2H)-ones and other less often used other organoselenium compounds. All these compounds have been successfully applied for various oxidations useful in practical organic syntheses such as epoxidation, 1,2-dihydroxylation, and alpha-oxyfunctionalization of alkenes, as well as for ring contraction of cycloalkanones, conversion of halomethyl, hydroxymethyl or active methylene groups into formyl groups, oxidation of carbonyl compounds into carboxylic acids and/or lactones, sulfides into sulfoxides, and secondary amines into nitrones and regeneration of parent carbonyl compounds from their azomethine derivatives. Other reactions such as dehydrogenation and aromatization, active carbon-carbon bond cleavage, oxidative amidation, bromolactonization and oxidation of bromide for subsequent reactions with alkenes are also successfully mediated by selenium (IV) oxide or organoselenium compounds. The oxidation mechanisms of ionic or free radical character depending on the substrate and oxidant are discussed. Coverage of the literature up to early 2015 is provided. Links have been made to reviews that summarize earlier literature and to the methods of preparation of organoselenium reagents and catalysts.
The speciation and partitioning of arsenic (As) in surface and subsurface environments are controlled, in part, by redox processes. Within soils and sediments, redox gradients resulting from mass transfer limitations lead to competitive reduction-oxidation reactions that drive the fate of As. Accordingly, the objective of this study was to determine the fate and redox cycling of As at the interface of birnessite (a strong oxidant in soil with a nominal formula of MnO(x), where x  approximately  2) and dissimilatory As(V)-reducing bacteria (strong reductant). Here, we investigate As reduction-oxidation dynamics in a diffusively controlled system using a Donnan reactor where birnessite and Shewanella sp. ANA-3 are isolated by a semipermeable membrane through which As migrates. Arsenic(III) injected into the reaction cell containing birnessite is rapidly oxidized to As(V). Arsenic(V) diffusing into the Shewanella chamber is then reduced to As(III), which subsequently diffuses back to the birnessite chamber, undergoing oxidation, and establishing a continuous cycling of As. However, we observe a rapid decline in the rate of As(III) oxidation owing to passivation of the birnessite surface. Modeling and experimental results show that high [Mn(II)] combined with increasing [CO(3)(2-)] from microbial respiration leads to the precipitation of rhodochrosite, which eventually passivates the Mn oxide surface, inhibiting further As(III) oxidation. Our results show that despite the initial capacity of birnessite to rapidly oxidize As(III), the synergistic effect of intense As(V) reduction by microorganisms and the buildup of reactive metabolites capable of passivating reactive mineral surfaces-here, birnessite-will produce (bio)geochemical conditions outside of those based on thermodynamic predictions.
For the first time, two new kinds of inorganic-organic hybrid nanomaterials (Bi(2)WO(6)@rGO and Cu-WO(4)@rGO) were fabricated by simple hydrothermal treatment and employed for green and efficient oxidative desulfurization of real fuel. The characterization of newly synthesized nanocomposites was performed by SEM, EDX, P-XRD, FT-IR and TGA. SEM and XRD analyses revealed well decoration of dopants (Cu-WO(4) and Bi-WO(3)) on the surface of rGO with a crystallite size of <50 nm. The catalytic activity of both nanocatalysts was examined for model (dibenzothiophene) and real fuel (kerosene and diesel) by oxidative desulfurization route. Experimental findings revealed a high efficiency of over 90% under optimal reaction conditions of 0.1 g catalyst, 1 mL of oxidant, and 100 mg/L after 120 min at 30  degrees C. The major factors affecting desulfurization efficiency (time, temperature, catalyst amount, dibenzothiophene (DBT) concentration and amount of oxidant) and kinetic studies were described. The DBT removal via oxidative desulfurization followed pseudo first-order kinetics with an activation energy of 14.57 and 16.91 kJ/mol for Cu-WO(4)@rGO and Bi(2)WO(6)@rGO, respectively. The prepared catalysts showed promising reusability for the ODS process up to 5 times with no significant decrease in efficiency. In conclusion, the findings confirm the robustness of newly prepared nanocomposite for efficient production of sulfur-free oil.
Photoactive materials called photosensitizers can be used for treatment of different types of cancer in combination with light source. In this paper, we have investigated pro-oxidant and antioxidant potentials of four graphene based nanomaterials (graphene oxide-GO, graphene quantum dots-GQDs, carbon quantum dots-CQDs and N-doped carbon quantum dots-N-CQDs) depending on the presence/absence of visible light source. Structural and optical properties of these materials and their potentials for reactive oxygen species generation/quenching are investigated by applying different microscopy and spectroscopy techniques (transmission electron microscopy, FTIR, UV-Vis, photoluminescence, electron paramagnetic resonance). Results show that all types of quantum dots has pro-oxidant and antioxidant potentials whereas GO demonstrated only moderate antioxidant effect. The best free radical scavenger is CQDs sample in the absence of light. CQDs are the best singlet oxygen generator under blue light irradiation as well. To check photo-cytotoxicity of these materials, photo-cytotoxic concentrations of the GO, GQDs, CQDs and N-CQDs were determined for three cellular lines: human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD), cell line derived from human cervix carcinoma Hep2c (HeLa) and fibroblast cell line from murine (L2OB). Cytotoxicity test has indicated that all samples are much less photocytotoxic than cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (cis-DPP). The production method and doping of quantum dots affect the photodynamic activity of tested samples very much.
A new strategy for the fluorescent and colorimetric sensing of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) and glucose based on the metal oxide - carbon-dot hybrid structure was investigated. The sensing system is related to the catalytic oxidation reaction of glucose-by-glucose oxidase (GOx) to H(2)O(2). In this study, a metal oxide hybrid with nitrogen-doped carbon dots (MFNCDs) that showed intrinsic peroxidase-like activity was synthesized and used as a catalyst instead of GOx to oxidize 3,3',5,5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) to blue-emitting oxidized TMB (oxTMB) in the presence of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)). The fluorescence of MFNCDs/TMB at 405 nm was quenched in the presence of H(2)O(2) through the inner filter effect (IFE) and electron transfer within MFNCDs, oxTMB, and glucose system. Therefore, the fluorescence and absorbance intensity can be applied to the quantitative determination of the concentration of H(2)O(2) and glucose with a wide linear range. The detection limit for H(2)O(2) and glucose based on the colorimetric method were as low as 84 nM and 0.41 muM, respectively. In contrast, the detection limit for H(2)O(2) and glucose based on the fluorescent method were as low as 97 nM and 0.85 muM, respectively. Furthermore, the colorimetric readout on the paper device based on the changing color of the solution could also be integrated with a smartphone platform to conduct the on-site analysis of glucose without the use of the spectrometer. In addition, this dual sensor can be applied to detect glucose in real serum with highly accurate results, making it a good candidate for biosensor applications.
