BACKGROUND: Data are limited on the ability of dipyridamole to additionally inhibit platelet function/reactivity in ischaemic cerebrovascular disease (CVD) patients on aspirin. AIMS: To assess inhibition of platelet function/reactivity and platelet activation with dipyridamole in CVD. METHODS: This prospective, observational study assessed TIA/ischaemic stroke patients before (baseline; N = 60), at 14 +/-7 days (14d, N = 39) and >/= 90 days (90d, N = 31) after adding dipyridamole to aspirin. Platelet function/reactivity at high shear stress (PFA-100(R) C-ADP) and low shear stress (VerifyNow(R) P2Y12 and Multiplate(R) ADP assays), and platelet activation status (% expression of CD62P, CD63 and leucocyte-platelet complexes on whole blood flow cytometry) were quantified. 'Dipyridamole-high on-treatment platelet reactivity (HTPR)' was defined as failure to inhibit ADP-induced platelet aggregation +/- adhesion compared with the patient's baseline on aspirin monotherapy by more than twice the coefficient-of-variation of the assay after adding dipyridamole to aspirin. RESULTS: Dipyridamole-HTPR was identified in 71.4-75% of patients on PFA-100 C-ADP, 83.9-86.8% of patients on VerifyNow P2Y12, and 81.5-83.3% of patients on Multiplate ADP assays. There were no changes in CD62P/CD63 expression (P >/= 0.18), or consistent changes in leucocyte-platelet complexes in CVD patients overall at 14d or 90d vs. baseline after commencing dipyridamole. Monocyte-platelet complexes increased in the patient subgroup with dipyridamole-HTPR at 14d and 90d on PFA-100, and at 14d on VerifyNow (P </= 0.04), but not in those without dipyridamole-HTPR. DISCUSSION: Additional antiplatelet effects of dipyridamole are detectable under high and low shear stress conditions with user-friendly platelet function/reactivity tests ex vivo. Increasing circulating monocyte-platelet complexes over time are associated with dipyridamole-HTPR.
A summary is given of the properties of dipyridamole and of the trials at the time this article was written that indicate its potential efficacy in the therapy of glomerulonephritides.
Tumor-associated platelets can bind to tumor cells and protect circulating tumor cells from NK-mediated immune surveillance. Tumor-associated platelets secrete cytokines to induce the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in tumor cells, which promotes tumor metastasis. Combining chemotherapeutic agents with antiplatelet drugs can reduce the occurrence of metastasis, but the systemic application of chemotherapeutic agents and antiplatelet drugs is prone to causing serious side effects. Therefore, delivering drugs to the tumor microthrombus site for long-lasting inhibition is a problem that needs to be addressed. Here, we show that small molecule peptide nanoparticles containing the Cys-Arg-Glu-Lys-Ala (CREKA) peptide can deliver the platelet inhibitor dipyridamole (DIP) and the chemotherapeutic drug paclitaxel (PTX) to tumor tissues, thereby inhibiting tumor-associated platelet function while killing tumor cells. The drug-loaded nanoparticles PD/Pep1 inhibited platelet-tumor cell interactions, were effectively taken up by tumor cells, and underwent morphological transformation induced by alkaline phosphatase (ALP) to prolong the retention time of the drugs. After intravenous injection, PD/Pep1 can target tumors and inhibit tumor metastasis. Thus, this small molecule peptide nanoformulation provides a simple strategy for efficient drug delivery and shows promise as a novel cancer therapy platform.
Hard capsules containing 150 mg dipyridamole and 100 mg aspirin containing pellets were compared in 12 humans against the equivalent dose of conventional products given twice daily. The new product gave extended and more uniform levels of dipyridamole in the steady-state, with a lower incidence of undesirable side-effects, whereas aspirin levels were similar. The new product also had acceptable long-term stability provided it was stored under cool conditions and low humidity.
Co-amorphous systems (CAMs) have shown promise in addressing the challenges associated with poorly water-soluble drugs. However, the limited selection of co-formers and the use of lab-scale techniques for their preparation present challenges in fully utilizing the advantages of CAMs. In this study, we used aspartame (a methyl ester of the aspartic acid/phenylalanine) as a model dipeptide with the BCS class II drug dipyridamole, to prepare co-amorphous systems using spray drying. The feed solutions were prepared by dissolving the drug and co-former into methanol-water mixtures. The spray drying process was evaluated and solid-state properties were compared with those of the individual amino acids, amino acid mixtures and aspartame as co-formers. Co-amorphous systems prepared with aspartame (AspPhe) exhibited better solid-state properties, including a higher glass transition temperature (T(g)), compared to the individual amino acids and the mixture of amino acids. Additionally, this formulation showed improved physical stability when stored at 25  degrees C/60 % RH conditions. Hirshfeld Surface (HS) analysis was employed to visualize and analyse the molecular interaction sites within the crystal structures of dipyridamole and aspartame. The observed interactions were then correlated with the molecular interactions identified through FT-IR spectroscopic analysis within the CAMs. The spectroscopic analysis revealed molecular interactions between the sites found at the shortest distances in the HS analysis. The dominant hydrogen bond interactions identified in the co-amorphous DPM-AspPhe system was found to contribute significantly to its improve stability. X-ray powder diffraction in non-ambient mode reveals that both temperature and humidity play a role in the crystallization of the co-amorphous DPM-AspPhe. Crystallization rates increased notably at high temperature and humidity. To predict stability under accelerated conditions, the crystallization rates from DPM-AspPhe were fitted to a modified Arrhenius equation. However, the predictive accuracy of the resulting model was limited to a specific range of conditions.
AIM: Carbamazepine and dipyridamole are class II compounds (BCS) whose oral bioavailability is limited by poor solubility. The use of glass solutions to improve the bioavailability of this class of compound has been an area of research for a number of years. The influence of polymer parameters (Tg, hydrophilicity, solubility parameter, and ability to hydrogen bond) on glass solution properties is investigated. METHODS: Carbamazepine and dipyridamole glass solutions are prepared with PVP/VA 64 and PVP/VA 37 by spray drying and melt extrusion. The products are then characterized by XRPD, thermal, and spectroscopic methods. Yield, physical stability, and dissolution profiles are also assessed. RESULTS: The properties of the polymer greatly influenced the ability to produce glass solutions. With decreases in Tg and hydrophilicity, melt extrusion became the more viable of the two preparative techniques. Although glass solutions were successfully prepared, the greater the difference in component solubility parameter, the less physically stable the formulation. CONCLUSION: Consideration must be given to the characteristics of the polymer when selecting for glass solution formulation. Although a number of process parameters can be varied for melt extrusion and spray drying, their ability to overcome fundamental differences in the physical parameters discussed is limited.
A plethora of dissolution tests exists for oral dosage forms, with variations in selection of the dissolution medium, the hydrodynamics and the dissolution equipment. This work aimed at determining the influence of media composition, the type of dissolution test and the method for entering the data into a PBPK model on the ability to simulate the in vivo plasma profile of an immediate release formulation. Using two rDCS IIa substances, glibenclamide and dipyridamole, housed in immediate-release formulations as model dosage forms, dissolution tests were performed in USP apparatus II with the biorelevant media FaSSGF, FaSSIF V1, V2 and V3 using both single-stage and two-stage test designs. The results were then integrated into the PBPK software Simcyp(Ⓡ) either as the observed release profile (dissolution rate model, DRM) or using a semi-mechanistic model (diffusion layer model, DLM) and compared with in vivo plasma profiles. The selection of the FaSSIF version did not appear to have any relevant influence on the dissolution of the weakly basic dipyridamole, while the weakly acidic glibenclamide was sensitive to the difference in pH between FaSSIF V1, V2 and FaSSIF V3. Since both compounds have pKa values close to the pH of biorelevant media representing conditions in the small intestine, these results may be specific to compounds with similar ionization behavior. Single-stage and two-stage testing led to equivalent simulations for glibenclamide. Only results from the single-stage test in FaSSGF led to a close simulation of the pharmacokinetic profile of dipyridamole when data were inputted using the DRM, while simulations from two-stage testing were most similar to the observed pharmacokinetic profile when DLM with selection of a dynamic pH profile in the small intestine was selected as the data input method. These results emphasize the importance of data input to the simulation results.
Patients scheduled to receive at least three aortocoronary venous bypass grafts were randomized to active medication or to placebo. The former were given dipyridamole (DP) preoperatively and acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) was added after the operation. For the next 3 months they received DP 75 mg and ASA 325 mg thrice daily. The placebo regimen was identical and the study was conducted with double-blind technique. One patient in each group died. DP-ASA was discontinued in six patients because of gastrointestinal side effects (bleeding peptic ulcer in 2 cases). Angiography after 3 months revealed the patency rate of individual grafts to be 68% in the DP-ASA group and 77% in the placebo group. DP-ASA therefore did not prevent occlusion of aortocoronary venous bypass grafts.
BACKGROUND: Regadenoson is a novel selective A2A adenosine receptor agonist, which is administered as an intravenous bolus at a fixed dose. It is currently not clear if the absolute flow increase in response to this fixed dose is a function of distribution volume in individual patients or if it is generally comparable to the previous standard agents dipyridamole or adenosine, which are dosed based on weight. We used quantitative analysis of clinical 82Rb PET/CT studies to obtain further insights. METHODS: A total of 104 subjects with normal clinical rest/stress 82Rb perfusion PET/CT were included in a retrospective analysis. To rule out confounding factors, none had evidence of prior cardiac disease, ischaemia or infarction, cardiomyopathy, diabetes with insulin use, calcium score>400, renal disease or other significant systemic disease. A group of 52 patients stressed with regadenoson were compared with a group of 52 patients stressed with dipyridamole before regadenoson became available. The groups were matched for clinical characteristics, risk factors and baseline haemodynamics. Myocardial blood flow (MBF) and myocardial flow reserve (MFR) were quantified using a previously validated retention model, after resampling of dynamic studies from list-mode 82Rb datasets. RESULTS: At rest, heart rate, blood pressure and MBF were comparable between the groups. Regadenoson resulted in a significantly higher heart rate (34+/-14 vs. 23+/-10 beats per minute increase from baseline; p<0.01) and rate-pressure product. Patients in the regadenoson group reported less severe symptoms and required less aminophylline. Stress MBF and MFR were not different between the groups (2.2+/-0.6 vs. 2.1+/-0.6 ml/min/g, p=0.39, and 2.9+/-0.8 vs. 2.8+/-0.7, p=0.31, respectively). In the regadenoson group, there was no correlation between stress flow or MFR and body weight or BMI. CONCLUSION: Despite its administration at a fixed dose, regadenoson results in an absolute increase in MBF which is comparable to that following dipyridamole administration and is independent of patient distribution volume. This further supports its usefulness as a clinical stress agent.
The thermodynamics of partitioning (K) of dipyridamole has been determined in n-octanol/buffer and liposome-buffer systems at pH 7.4. Dimyristoylphosphatidylcholine (DMPC) and dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) were used to prepare multilamellar liposomes. Partitioning of dipyridamole did not depend on the amount of n-octanol employed, however, partitioning was dependent upon the quantity of DMPC employed to prepare liposomes. Plots of log K vs 1/T were linear in the n-octanol and liposome systems. Partitioning was generally greater in liposomes than in the n-octanol/buffer system. Among liposomes, the partitioning was greater in DMPC liposomes at all temperatures. The values of enthalpy (delta H) and entropy (delta S) were positive in both the n-octanol and liposome systems. These values were lower in DMPC liposomes and were comparable in the n-octanol and DPPC liposomes. Thus, the interaction of dipyridamole depends on the rigidity of lipid bilayers and liposomes constitute a more selective partitioning system than the n-octanol/buffer system.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the influence of gastric emptying patterns, surfactants, and dosage form on the supersaturation of a poorly soluble weakly basic drug, dipyridamole, using an in vitro model mimicking the dynamic environment of the upper gastrointestinal tract, and, furthermore, to evaluate the usefulness of this model in establishing correlations to in vivo bioavailability for drugs with solubility/dissolution limited absorption. A simulated stomach duodenum model comprising four compartments was used to assess supersaturation and precipitation kinetics as a function of time. It integrates physiologically relevant fluid volumes, fluid transfer rates, and pH changes of the upper GI tract. Monoexponential gastric emptying patterns simulating the fasted state were compared to linear gastric emptying patterns simulating the fed state. The effect of different surfactants commonly used in oral preparations, specifically, sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), poloxamer-188, and polysorbate-80, on dipyridamole supersaturation was investigated while maintaining surface tension of the simulated gastric fluids at physiological levels and without obtaining artificial micellar solubilization of the drug. The supersaturation behavior of different dose strengths of dipyridamole was explored. Significant levels of dipyridamole supersaturation were observed in the duodenal compartment under all the different in vivo relevant conditions explored. Dipyridamole supersaturation ratios of up to 11-fold have been observed, and supersaturation has been maintained for up to 120 min. Lower duodenal concentrations of dipyridamole were observed under linear gastric emptying patterns compared to mononexponential gastric emptying. The mean duodenal area under concentration-time curves (AUC60min) for the dipyridamole concentration profile in the duodenal compartment is significantly different for all the surfactants explored (P < 0.05). Our investigations with the different surfactants and comparison of dosage form (solution versus suspension) on the precipitation of dipyridamole revealed that crystal growth, rather than nucleation, is the rate-limiting step for the precipitation of dipyridamole. A linear dose-response relationship was found for the mean in vitro duodenal area under concentration-time curves (AUCinfinity) in the dose range of 25 mg to 100 mg (R(2) = 0.886). This is in agreement with the pharmacokinetic data of dipyridamole reported in the literature. The simulated stomach duodenum model can provide a reliable and discriminative screening tool for exploring the effect of different physiological variables or formulations on the supersaturation/precipitation kinetics of weakly basic drugs with solubility limited absorption. The amount of drug in solution in the duodenal compartment of the SSD correlates to bioavailability for the weakly basic drug, dipyridamole, which has solubility limited absorption and undergoes supersaturation/precipitation.
Aspirin and dipyridamole in pure admixtures and in dosage forms have been estimated by spectrofluorometry. Aspirin (2-12 mcg ml-1) was estimated in 1% v/v glacial acetic acid in chloroform using 246 and 345 nm for excitation and emission respectively. Dipyridamole (2-12 mcg ml-1) has been estimated in chloroform using 420 nm for excitation and 475 nm for emission. The non-interference of the excipients as well as the drugs in the estimation of each other, as evidenced by the results, indicate that this method may be used for the routine estimation of aspirin and dipyridamole in tablet preparations.
The interactions of dipyridamole with alpha(1) acid glycoprotein of plasma and with human platelets are related to inhibition of adenosine uptake by platelets. Binding studies by equilibrium gel filtration suggested that 1 mol of dipyridamole binds per mol of alpha(1) acid glycoprotein with a dissociation constant of 1.6 muM. Platelets contain two populations of binding sites, one with high and another with lower affinity for the drug. The binding of dipyridamole to the high-affinity sites follows a Michaelis-Menten binding pattern with a dissociation constant of 0.04 muM. Approximately 2 x 10(4) dipyridamole molecules are bound at the high-affinity sites of each platelet. The lower affinity sites bind the drug with a dissociation constant of 4 muM. In the presence of alpha(1) acid glycoprotein of plasma, the binding of dipyridamole to human platelets is inhibited. Correspondingly, the dipyridamole inhibition of adenosine uptake by platelets is reduced 1,000-fold by purified alpha(1) acid glycoprotein. The binding of dipyridamole to human platelets was found to be essential for its inhibition of adenosine uptake by platelets. Dipyridamole decreases the incorporation of [(14)C]adenosine radioactivity in platelet nucleotides and reduces the [(14)C]-ATP to [(14)C]ADP ratio. Purified alpha(1) acid glycoprotein reverses these effects of dipyridamole on adenosine metabolism of platelets in a concentration-dependent manner. An equilibrium of dipyridamole binding to alpha(1) acid glycoprotein and to platelets is proposed.
