Torsades de pointes (TdP) is polymorphic ventricular tachycardia occurring in the setting of a prolonged cardiac repolarization. Drug interactions between macrolide antibiotics such as erythomycin and pharmacologic agents that prolong the QT interval have been known to cause TdP. However, clarithromycin is thought to be less frequently associated with drug induced TdP, because it inactivates hepatic cytochrome P-450 to a lesser extent than erythromycin. We describe a case of TdP caused by a drug interaction in a 76-year-old woman taking long-term disopyramide after she was given clarithromycin concomitantly for chronic bronchitis.
Seventeen patients with recurrent symptomatic arrhythmias were treated with oral disopyramide (DP). Fifteen of the 17 patients had received other currently conventional anti-arrhythmic therapy, to which only 1 patient responded, yet 13 of these 15 patients with resistant arrhythmias responded to DP. Electrophysiological studies were performed on 9 patients. The most impressive electrophysiological findings were the depressant effect of DP on ventricular automaticity and its action in slowing conduction through the His-Purkinje system (including the bundle branches) without depressing sino-atrial rate and atrioventricular (AV) nodal conduction time. Retrograde ventriculo-atrial (VA) conduction was markedly prolonged in 4 patients with reciprocating supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), including 2 patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. All 4 patients with reciprocating SVT appear to be cured of their arrhythmia, probably by this mechanism.
BACKGROUND: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic disorder for which first-line treatments for obstructive HCM (oHCM) include beta-blockers, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, and disopyramide for refractory cases. Mavacamten, a selective cardiac myosin inhibitor, is indicated for symptomatic oHCM to improve functional capacity and symptoms. Use of disopyramide and mavacamten together is not recommended due to concerns of additive negative inotropic effects. Transitioning from disopyramide to mavacamten may be preferred to avoid adverse effects and frequent administration, however, the best approach for making the transition has not been established. CASES: We present a series of seven patients with oHCM who transitioned from disopyramide to mavacamten and underwent echocardiograms mandated by a Risk Evaluation and Mitigations Strategies program. Two methods were employed. The first approach, involving washout of disopyramide before starting mavacamten, resulted in worsening of heart failure symptoms in the first two cases. The second approach, involving tapering disopyramide when starting mavacamten, was successfully implemented in the last five cases, with no adverse effects or worsening of systolic dysfunction. CONCLUSION: Our method of tapering disopyramide when starting mavacamten using a stepwise approach is feasible and safe. Our report fulfills an unmet need by serving as a guide for other clinicians who seek to transition their patients from disopyramide to mavacamten.
Disopyramide has been shown in conditions of cholinergic blockade to have a depressant effect upon sinus node automaticity and the atrial refractoriness. It also prolongs atrioventricular conduction and increases atrioventricular refractoriness. These effects may often be masked in vivo by the anticholinergic effects of the drug.
Disopyramide is a widely used class IA antiarrhythmic drug with a pharmacological profile of action similar to that of quinidine and procainamide. Over the past 10 years disopyramide has demonstrated its efficacy in ventricular and atrial arrhythmias. In therapeutic trials, usually involving small numbers of patients, the efficacy of disopyramide was comparable with that of mexiletine, perhexiline, tocainide, propafenone or prajmalium. Recent comparisons with quinidine have confirmed the similar efficacy and better tolerability of disopyramide. The suggestion from initial studies that disopyramide may be less effective than amiodarone or flecainide requires further investigation. In addition, studies have failed to demonstrate that the early administration of disopyramide after acute myocardial infarction decreases important arrhythmias or early mortality. Thus, disopyramide is now well established as an effective antiarrhythmic drug in ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias although its role in therapy relative to that of recently introduced antiarrhythmic agents is not clear.
We investigated the binding of propranolol (PL), disopyramide (DP), and verapamil (VP) enantiomers by human alpha(1)-acid glycoprotein (AGP; also called orosomucoid) and the relationships between the extent of drug binding and lipophilicity, desialylation, and genetic variants of AGP. Desialylation had little effect on the affinity of AGP for the drugs tested. The percentage binding correlated significantly with the partition coefficients for the drugs tested. Each enantiomer was competitively displaced from AGP by another enantiomer of the same drug, suggesting that they bind to the same site. However, the enantiomers bound to AGP with stereospecific affinities; the (-)-isomers of DP and VP had higher Kd values (4.27 and 4.97 microM, respectively) than the (+)-isomers (1.51 and 2.48 microM, respectively). When enantiomers of the different drugs were used in competitive binding experiments, VP binding was only partially inhibited by DP. This result suggested that drug binding is specific to different variants of AGP (A, F1, S). DP was found to specifically bind to variant A, whereas PL and VP bind to both A and F1/S variants.
Until now, the potential antiarrhythmic benefits of disopyramide have been restricted by anticholinergic side effects. These side effects have included xerostomia (dry mouth, nose or eyes), abdominal discomfort, nausea, constipation and, most importantly, urinary hesitancy and retention. A sustained-release form of pyridostigmine, an acetyl-cholinesterase inhibitor, has been shown to a) prevent the anticholinergic side effects of disopyramide when used prophylactically and b) to eliminate or attenuate these symptoms if they are already present. Pyridostigmine has no measurable effect on disopyramide's antiarrhythmic properties. This represents a beneficial new drug interaction which will improve tolerance of disopyramide and increase patient compliance with disopyramide-containing regimens.
The kinetics and dynamics of total and free (unbound) disopyramide (D) after dosing with D, 1.5 and 2 mg/kg iv, were compared with those of the dealkylated metabolite (MND) after dosing with MND, 0.5 and 1.5 mg/kg iv, in six healthy subjects. Dynamic parameters included ECG with measurement of the QT interval corrected for heart rate (QTc), systolic time intervals, vitamin C-stimulated saliva secretion, pupil size, and maximum accommodation capacity. Mean values of total clearance, apparent volume of distribution, and elimination t1/2 of MND were 5.9, 2.3, and 0.4 times those of total D, respectively. D significantly prolonged the QTc and systolic time intervals and induced transient inhibition of stimulated saliva secretion. In contrast, MND induced no substantial change in either the QTc or systolic time intervals, but did induce more persistent inhibition of salivary secretion. If anticholinergic potency is determined as the degree of inhibition of stimulated saliva flow per plasma concentration unit, MND was three times as potent as its parent when measured at maximum inhibition. There were no consistent drug effects on the ocular parameters. The effect of D on QTc correlated with both total and free plasma concentrations. Furthermore, its transient salivary inhibitory effect paralleled its initial rapid decline in plasma concentration. There was no relationship between the MND plasma concentration and its salivary inhibitory effect. We conclude that disopyramide significantly affected the QTc and systolic time intervals in healthy subjects, while MND in a similar dose had no such effects. MND more strongly inhibited stimulated saliva flow, indicating a more potent anticholinergic effect than D.
Disopyramide binds to two independent sites on protein in human plasma. The first binding site located on alpha-1-acid glycoprotein has an association and a capacity constant of 1.0 x 10(6) M-1 and 3.5 x 10(-6) M, respectively, and accounts for the majority of disopyramide binding. The second site is probably located on albumin and accounts for 5 to 10% of the binding. The bound fraction of disopyramide was concentration-dependent at drug concentrations reported to be therapeutic. After administration of 100, 150, 200 and 300 mg doses of disopyramide (Norpace) to each of four human volunteers, the area under the free (unbound) disopyramide serum-concentration time curve averaged 2.32, 3.33, 5.21 and 8.24 mg/l. hr, respectively, and was directly proportional to dose. The elimination half-lives based on free and total drug concentrations averaged 4.36 and 6.51 hr, respectively (P less than .001), and were dose-independent. The peak response (change in pre-ejection period) and area under the response time curves were better related to free than to total serum concentrations of disopyramide.
The efficacies and side effects of disopyramide and mexiletine used alone and in combination were assessed in 29 patients with chronic ventricular arrhythmias. In combination therapy, one half or two thirds of the conventional doses of each drug were administered. Each patient underwent Holter electrocardiographic monitoring during 4 different periods: baseline, disopyramide alone, mexiletine alone and combination of the two drugs. The mean baseline number of ventricular premature complex per hour was 783 +/- 521 (mean +/- SD), which was significantly reduced with all three therapies. Disopyramide alone significantly reduced the ventricular premature complex frequency in patients with organic heart disease (P less than 0.05), but did not significantly reduce the ventricular premature complex frequency in patients with no apparent heart disease. In contrast, mexiletine alone significantly decreased the ventricular premature complex frequency in no apparent heart disease patients (P less than 0.05), but did not significantly reduce the ventricular premature complex frequency in organic heart disease patients. With disopyramide alone, patients having a significant reduction in ventricular premature complexes (greater than or equal to 83% reduction in ventricular premature complexes) or elimination of ventricular tachycardias tended to be more frequently found in organic heart disease than in no apparent heart disease. The opposite was observed with mexiletine alone. QTc interval with disopyramide alone was significantly prolonged, and the prematurity index of ventricular premature complexes was significantly lowered as compared to mexiletine alone or combination therapy (P less than 0.01 for disopyramide versus mexiletine; P less than 0.05 for disopyramide versus combination therapy). During combination therapy, no patients withdrew from the study due to side effects. However, 3 patients receiving single drug therapy withdrew from the study due to severe side effects. Consequently, disopyramide is suggested to be more effective on ventricular premature complexes in organic heart disease than in no apparent heart disease patients, whereas the opposite was true for mexiletine. A combination of disopyramide and mexiletine in smaller doses may provide almost the same or enhanced antiarrhythmic effects, no aggravation of electrocardiographical parameters and less incidence of side effects when compared to the conventional dose of each drug alone.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) occurs in 1 in 500 individuals. Treatment options for HCM differ from those administered in coronary disease, heart failure, and valvular disease patients that comprise the core of many cardiology practices. In this article, we offer a concise summary of the therapeutic use of disopyramide for reducing gradients and relieving symptoms in obstructive HCM.
A high-pressure liquid chromatographic analysis for disopyramide (I) and its mono-N-dealkylated metabolite (II) in plasma and urine is described. The analysis, in which I and II together with an internal standard are chromatographed as ion pairs with heptanesulphonic acid, employs a simple and rapid method of sample preparation. The method is more sensitive, reproducible, and rapid than previously reported gas chromatographic methods.
OBJECTIVE: alpha1-acid glycoprotein (AAG) has three main genetic variants, F1, S, and A variants. There are few reports on the correlation between AAG variants and binding activity of drug enantiomers. We studied the differences between the binding characteristics of enantiomers of disopyramide (DP), which is a basic drug. The aim of this study was to elucidate the cause of the differences between the binding characteristics of DP enantiomers. METHODS: The variants in human AAG were separated by hydroxyapatite chromatography. Binding of DP enantiomers to AAG variants was studied by the ultrafiltration method. The characteristics of the binding of DP enantiomers to total variants and each variant were examined by Scatchard analysis within a range of concentrations from 0.5 to 50.0 microg/ml. RESULTS: The binding capacity of S-DP was significantly higher than that of R-DP in variant 3, although the binding capacities of DP enantiomers were almost the same in variant 2. On the other hand, the binding capacities for both S-DP and R-DP in variant 3 were significantly higher than those in variant 2. Furthermore, there was an almost 2.4-fold difference in the dissociation constant (Kd) between S-DP and R-DP in variant 3, although no significant difference was observed in the number of binding sites (N). In variant 2 no significant differences between DP enantiomers were observed in either the dissociation constant or number of binding sites per molecule of AAG. On the other hand, significant differences between variants 2 and 3 in the dissociation constant for both S-DP and R-DP were observed. The differences in dissociation constant between variants 2 and 3 were 4.0-fold in S-DP and 1.7-fold in R-DP. CONCLUSION: The difference between the binding capacities of S-DP and R-DP is due to differences in the association of DP to variants 3-6, and the role of the variants 1 and 2 in the binding of drugs to AAG is minor.
