BACKGROUND: Cardiogenic shock is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Although inotropic support is a mainstay of medical therapy for cardiogenic shock, little evidence exists to guide the selection of inotropic agents in clinical practice. METHODS: We randomly assigned patients with cardiogenic shock to receive milrinone or dobutamine in a double-blind fashion. The primary outcome was a composite of in-hospital death from any cause, resuscitated cardiac arrest, receipt of a cardiac transplant or mechanical circulatory support, nonfatal myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attack or stroke diagnosed by a neurologist, or initiation of renal replacement therapy. Secondary outcomes included the individual components of the primary composite outcome. RESULTS: A total of 192 participants (96 in each group) were enrolled. The treatment groups did not differ significantly with respect to the primary outcome; a primary outcome event occurred in 47 participants (49%) in the milrinone group and in 52 participants (54%) in the dobutamine group (relative risk, 0.90; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.69 to 1.19; P = 0.47). There were also no significant differences between the groups with respect to secondary outcomes, including in-hospital death (37% and 43% of the participants, respectively; relative risk, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.60 to 1.21), resuscitated cardiac arrest (7% and 9%; hazard ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.29 to 2.07), receipt of mechanical circulatory support (12% and 15%; hazard ratio, 0.78; 95% CI, 0.36 to 1.71), or initiation of renal replacement therapy (22% and 17%; hazard ratio, 1.39; 95% CI, 0.73 to 2.67). CONCLUSIONS: In patients with cardiogenic shock, no significant difference between milrinone and dobutamine was found with respect to the primary composite outcome or important secondary outcomes. (Funded by the Innovation Fund of the Alternative Funding Plan for the Academic Health Sciences Centres of Ontario; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03207165.).
PURPOSE: Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) effectively supports refractory cardiogenic shock (rCS), and sustains macro- and microcirculations. We investigated the respective impact of increasing VA ECMO flow or dobutamine dose on microcirculation in stabilized VA ECMO-treated patients with rCS. METHODS: In this prospective interventional study, we included consecutive intubated patients, with ECMO-supported rCS and hemodynamic stability, able to tolerate stepwise incremental dobutamine doses (from 5 to 20 gamma/kg/min) or ECMO flows (progressive increase by 25% above baseline ECMO flow. Baseline was defined as the lowest VA ECMO flow and dobutamine 5 mug/kg/min (DOBU(5)) to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) >/= 65 mmHg. Macro- and microcirculations were evaluated after 30 min at each level. RESULTS: Fourteen patients were included. Macro- and microcirculations were assessed 2 [2-5] days post-ECMO onset. Dobutamine-dose increments did not modify any microcirculation parameters. Only the De Backer score tended to be reduced (p = 0.08) by ECMO-flow increments whereas other microcirculation parameters were not affected. These findings did not differ between patients successfully weaned-off ECMO (n = 6) or not. CONCLUSIONS: When macrocirculation has already been restored in patients with ECMO-supported rCS, increasing dobutamine (above 5 mug/kg/min) or ECMO flow did not further improve microcirculation.
PURPOSE: Patients in cardiac intensive care units (ICU) are admitted with increasingly higher disease acuity and a larger burden of non-cardiac critical illness. Accordingly, positive inotropes are being used with increased frequency and little comparative data to support drug selection. We compared the effectiveness and safety of dobutamine and milrinone in low cardiac output states (LCOS) and/or cardiogenic shock (CS). METHODS: We performed a systematic review comparing dobutamine to milrinone on all-cause mortality, length of stay in the ICU (LOS-ICU), length of stay in hospital (LOS-H) and significant arrhythmias in hospitalized patients with LCOS and/or CS. RESULTS: We identified 11 studies that meet eligibility requirements and which were published between 2001 and 2016 and included 23,056 patients. Only one randomized clinical trial was identified, with the remaining studies comprising observational cohort studies. The primary outcome, all-cause mortality, trended towards a benefit with milrinone but did not meet pre-specified significance (OR 1.13, 95% CI 1.00-1.29, p=0.06). While LOS-ICU (mean difference -0.72, 95% CI -1.10- -0.34, p=0.0002) was shorter with dobutamine, there was no difference in LOS-H (mean difference -1.22, 95% CI -4.68 - 2.24, p=0.49). Significant arrhythmias, specifically symptomatic and/or requiring antiarrhythmic therapy, were no different between the groups (OR 1.78, 95% CI 0.85-3.76, p=0.13). CONCLUSIONS: Currently available data comparing milrinone to dobutamine in patients requiring inotropic support is limited. Dobutamine may be associated with a shorter LOS in the ICU, with a worrisome signal of increased risk of allcause mortality. Randomized data are needed to guide inotrope selection in patients with LCOS and/or CS.
Inotropes are an integral component of the early stabilization of the patient presenting with cardiogenic shock. Despite years of clinical experience with the 2 most commonly used inotropes, dobutamine and milrinone, there remains limited data comparing outcomes between the two. We conducted a retrospective review to compare the effectiveness and safety of milrinone or dobutamine for the initial management of cardiogenic shock. Adult patients with cardiogenic shock regardless of etiology who received initial inotrope therapy with either milrinone (n = 50) or dobutamine (n = 50) and did not receive mechanical circulatory support were included. The primary end point was the time to resolution of cardiogenic shock. Changes in hemodynamic parameters from baseline and adverse events were also assessed. Resolution of shock was achieved in similar numbers in both the groups (milrinone 76% vs dobutamine 70%, P = .50). The median time to resolution of shock was 24 hours in both groups (P = .75). There were no differences in hemodynamic changes during inotrope therapy, although dobutamine trended toward a greater increase in cardiac index. Arrhythmias were more common in patients treated with dobutamine than milrinone, respectively (62.9% vs 32.8%, P < .01), whereas hypotension occurred to a similar extent in both groups (milrinone 49.2% vs dobutamine 40.3%, P = .32). The use of concomitant vasoactive medications, dosage required, and duration of therapy did not differ between groups. There was no difference in the overall rate of discontinuation due to adverse event; however, milrinone was more commonly discontinued due to hypotension (13.1% vs 0%, P < .01) and dobutamine was more commonly discontinued due to arrhythmia (0% vs 11.3%, P < .01). Milrinone and dobutamine demonstrated similar effectiveness and safety profiles but with differences in adverse events. The choice of milrinone or dobutamine as initial inotrope therapy for cardiogenic shock may depend more on tolerability of adverse events.
KEY POINTS: Dobutamine stress echocardiography is a validated tool for the non-invasive evaluation of myocardial ischaemia and enables the recording of heart rate variability in non-resting conditions. In this study we determined whether individuals with transient myocardial ischaemia had different autonomic responses to the stress of dobutamine infusion compared to non-ischaemic (normal) responders. Non-ischaemic responders had a residual predominance of parasympathetic over sympathetic activity. However, under conditions of myocardial ischaemia, there was a directionally opposite cardiac autonomic response with a residual increase of sympathetic over parasympathetic modulation. The sympathetic response to dobutamine stress is augmented as the burden of myocardial ischaemia is increased. ABSTRACT: Cardiac autonomic dysfunction has prognostic significance in patients with coronary artery disease. This investigation aimed to assess changes in autonomic modulation induced by dobutamine stress in the presence and absence of myocardial ischaemia. In total, 314 individuals underwent dobutamine stress echocardiography to detect or exclude myocardial ischaemia. Simultaneous autonomic and haemodynamic data were obtained using a plethysmographic device. Total power spectral density and associated low-frequency (LF) and high-frequency (HF) power spectral components in absolute (ms(2) ) and normalised units (nu) were determined. Participants were categorised as non-ischaemic (NI) or ischaemic (IS) responders. There were no significant differences in LFnu or HFnu between groups at baseline. At peak stress, LFnu decreased from baseline in NI (43 +/- 1.8 to 40 +/- 1.8%), but increased from baseline in IS responders (39.5 +/- 2 to 56 +/- 2%, P < 0.05). In contrast, HFnu increased in NI patients (57 +/- 1.8 to 60 +/- 1.8%) but decreased in IS responders (60.5 +/- 2 to 44 +/- 2%, P < 0.05). Those with a high ischaemic burden [more than three ischaemic left ventricular (LV) segments] had a greater increase in LFnu (41 +/- 4.8 to 65 +/- 3.2% vs. 44.8 +/- 3.8 to 57.7 +/- 3.1%, P < 0.05) and greater decrease in HFnu (59 +/- 4.8 to 35 +/- 3.2% vs. 55.2 +/- 3.8 to 42.3 +/- 3.1%, P < 0.05) compared to patients with a low ischaemic burden (1-3 ischaemic LV segments) respectively, at peak stress. In the absence of myocardial ischaemia, dobutamine stress is associated with a residual predominance of parasympathetic over sympathetic activity. Under conditions of ischaemia, there is a directionally opposite autonomic response with a significant residual increase of sympathetic over parasympathetic modulation. This response is augmented as the burden of ischaemia is increased.
BACKGROUND: Dobutamine and dopamine are off-patent drugs prioritized by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and US Food and Drug Administration for further study under the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act. Both agents are used to manage cardiac insufficiency in preterm neonates and are subject to controversy among neonatologists. Among the controversies are outcome measures (blood pressure vs end organ perfusion) and long-term effects. OBJECTIVES: We analyzed retrospective hospitalization data to (1) describe the use of dopamine and dobutamine in low birth weight (LBW) or preterm infants in a large sample and (2) explore the potential of using observational data to describe outcomes in LBW or preterm infants treated with dopamine or dobutamine. METHODS: Inpatient data were extracted from the Premier database to calculate the prevalence of use of dopamine and dobutamine among neonates in 2008. Prevalence of use was calculated by categorizing patients as ever or never having received dopamine or dobutamine. We compared mortality in the neonates by using Cox proportional hazards models to identify variables associated with survival and to control for their effects. RESULTS: Out of 877,201 pediatric hospitalizations in 2008, 65,216 were neonates and had data available about dopamine and dobutamine use. Of these, 7459 were preterm or LBW and included 1143 very LBW (VLBW) neonates. Dopamine alone was given to 194 VLBW neonates, dobutamine alone was given to 14, and both dopamine and dobutamine were given to 79 neonates. For the VLBW neonates, probability of treatment with dopamine or dobutamine varied almost 10-fold from 4.4% to 38.4% at 11 hospitals and did not differ by 3M APR-DRG (all patient refined diagnosis related group) severity of illness or 3M APR-DRG risk of mortality. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest the prevalence of dopamine or dobutamine use was 4.9% in preterm or LBW neonates and 25.1% in VLBW neonates. Treatment with dopamine alone was more common than treatment with dobutamine alone. There was no difference in mortality between neonates treated with dopamine compared with treatment with dobutamine, but access to charts and clinical details are required to conduct a comparative effectiveness study.
The report describes a patient during induction of anaesthesia for coronary artery by-pass grafting, in whom the infusion of dobutamine at a rate of 5 micrograms.kg-1.min-1 resulted in unanticipated severe hypertension. The exaggerated response may be attributed to cimetidine--dobutamine interaction.
Preserving haemodynamics is expected to positively affect tissue oxygen saturation. We hypothesized that maintaining mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) (using phenylephrine (PE) or dobutamine (Dobu)) would equally affect regional cerebral and paravertebral tissue saturation (rS(c)O(2) and rS(pv)O(2), respectively). Thirty-four patients were randomly assigned to receive either PE or Dobu, in order to keep MAP within 20% of the preoperative value. Their effect on haemodynamics, rS(c)O(2) and rS(pv)O(2) at thoracic level T(3)-T(4), T(9)-T(10) and lumbar level L(1)-L(2) was calculated at different doses. Drug-induced haemodynamic effects differed between groups (∆MAP: -2%+/-21 and - 19%+/-17, ∆CI: -14.6%+/-14.6 and 24.1%+/-49.9, ∆HR: -21%+/-21 and 0%+/-16 for PE and Dobu, respectively). Both groups exhibited a significant decrease in rS(c)O(2), with a more pronounced decline in the PE group (-14.1%+/-16.1) compared to the Dobu group (-5.9%+/-10.6). There were no significant changes at the paravertebral level in either group, but a slight but statistically significant difference was detected between the two groups at T(3)-T(4) and L(1)-L(2). Current guidelines advocate maintaining adequate systemic blood pressures to prevent spinal cord ischaemia in specific procedures. However, it is still unknown which circulatory supportive drug is more beneficial for maintaining spinal cord perfusion. Our data indicates that, when used for maintenance of blood pressure within a 20% range of preoperative values, neither phenylephrine nor dobutamine affect paravertebral tissue saturation.
Milrinone and dobutamine were compared in 15 patients with New York Heart Association functional class III and IV congestive heart failure. Dobutamine and milrinone were administered intravenously according a graded titration schedule up to maximum doses (14 micrograms/kg/min and 75 micrograms/kg, respectively) or until increased ventricular ectopy or a reduction in left ventricular end-diastolic pressure to 10 mm Hg or less occurred. Although both agents markedly increased cardiac index, milrinone caused a significantly greater reduction in left and right heart filling pressures and mean arterial pressure than did dobutamine, and for any given increase in dP/dt, milrinone caused a greater reduction in systemic vascular resistance than did dobutamine. Thus, the hemodynamic effects of milrinone are best represented by a combination of the actions of dobutamine, a positive inotropic agent, and a vasodilator such as nitroprusside, which causes both arterial and venous dilation. The positive inotropic responses of individual patients to dobutamine (5 micrograms/kg/min) and milrinone (25 micrograms/kg) were compared. The increases in dP/dt with both agents were variable, and correlated poorly (r = .50; p = .059). Patients were divided into two groups: Group I consisted of eight patients in whom the ratio of the increase in dP/dt with dobutamine vs milrinone was greater than 1.0 (good dobutamine responders); group II consisted of seven patients in whom this ratio was less than 1.0 (poor dobutamine responders).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
Thirteen patients with severe cardiac failure underwent a single crossover study of dopamine and dobutamine in order to compare the systemic and regional hemodynamic effects of the two drugs. The dose-response data demonstrated that dobutamine (2.5--10 microgram/kg/min) progressively and predictably increases cardiac output by increasing stroke volume, while simultaneously decreasing systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. There was no change in heart rate or premature ventricular contractions (PVCs)/min at this dose range. Dopamine (2--8 microgram/kg/min) increased the stroke volume and cardiac output at 4 microgram/kg/min. Dopamine at less than 4 microgram/kg/min provided little additional increase in cardiac output and increased the pulmonary wedge pressure and the number of PVCs/min. At greater than 6 microgram/kg/min, dopamine increased heart rate. During the 24-hour maintenance-dose infusion of each drug (dopamine 3.7--4, dobutamine 7.3--7.7 microgram/kg/min), only dobutamine maintained a significant increase of stroke volume, cardiac output, urine flow, urine sodium concentration, creatinine clearance and peripheral blood flow. Renal and hepatic blood flow were not signfiicantly altered by the maintenance dose of either drug. Systemic and regional hemodynamic data suggest that dobutamine has many advantages over dopamine when infused in patients with cardiac failure.
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Dobutamine causes an increase in cardiac output (CO) by augmenting stroke volume (SV) through enhanced left ventricular contractility and by decreasing systemic vascular resistance. However, in some patients, the dominant mechanism by which dobutamine improves left ventricular performance is an increase in the subject's heart rate (HR). We therefore decided to evaluate the pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationship of dobutamine plasma concentrations and heart rate, SV and CO in healthy volunteers. METHODS: We enrolled 23 subjects who received dobutamine at a dose of 2.5, 5 and 10 microg/kg/min for three consecutive periods of 60 minutes each. Dobutamine plasma concentrations were determined from 22 blood samples drawn during each study session. Echocardiography was used to measure CO before administration of dobutamine and once during each infusion period. RESULTS: There was a clear linear relationship between dobutamine plasma concentrations and CO (r(2) = 0.628; p < 0.001). In most subjects, HR remained stable at dobutamine plasma concentrations produced by the lowest infusion rate but increased markedly thereafter so that overall there was a linear relationship between dobutamine plasma concentrations and HR (r(2) = 0.540; p < 0.001). However, SV increased significantly at the dobutamine plasma concentrations produced by the lowest infusion rate but remained mostly stable or even decreased thereafter. Although clinically slight, the overall increase in SV was statistically significant (r(2) = 0.062; p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Low plasma concentrations of dobutamine resulted in an increase in CO almost solely due to improved left ventricular contractility. However, at higher plasma concentrations of dobutamine, SV remained stable or even decreased, and the linear increase in CO was entirely based on increased HR.
