Dofetilide is an effective antiarrhythmic agent for conversion of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter as well as maintenance of sinus rhythm in appropriately selected patients. However, as with other antiarrhythmic agents, proarrhythmia is a known adverse effect. The risk of dofetilide induced torsade de pointes (Tdp) is low when used with strict dosing criteria guided by renal function, QT interval and concomitant drug therapy. Benefit from dofetilide use must be individualized and weighed against the side effects and the role of other available treatment options. In this review, we discuss the underlying mechanism, risk factors and precautionary measures to avoid dofetilide induced QT prolongation and ventricular tachycardia/Tdp. We suggest a scheme for the management of QT prolongation, ventricular arrhythmia and Tdp as well.
Dofetilide is a class III antiarrhythmic agent with a selective blockade of rapid component of delayed rectifier potassium current (IKr). Dofetilide was found to be safe in patients after myocardial infarction and those with congestive heart failure and left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction of less than 35%). An important adverse effect of dofetilide is its potential proarrhythmic risk of ventricular tachyarrhythmias, mostly torsades de pointes. Because dofetilide has about an 80% renal excretion, dose adjustment is required in patients with impaired renal function. Dofetilide should not be given or discontinued if the QTc is greater than 500 ms.
BACKGROUND: Limited medical options are available for rhythm control in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). There are no published reports of dofetilide use in this population. METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted on 1,404 patients loaded on dofetilide for AF suppression at the Cleveland Clinic from 2008 to 2012, 25 of whom were found to have HCM. RESULTS: The HCM cohort was 32% female, 76% with persistent AF, mean age of 59 +/- 10 years, and mean ejection fraction of 54 +/- 9 %. Of the 25 patients, 21 were discharged on dofetilide, three discontinued during loading due to QTc prolongation, and one due to inefficacy. There were no adverse events during loading. Of those discharged on dofetilide, 11/21 (52%) were still on it at a median follow-up of 396 (198, 699) days at the time of the chart review. For those in whom it was discontinued, the median time on the drug was 301 (111, 738) days. Of the 10 patients who discontinued dofetilide during follow-up, six were due to inefficacy, one postablation, one postheart transplant, one due to death secondary to lung cancer, and one due to worsening edema. CONCLUSIONS: Dofetilide was well tolerated in this group of patients with AF and HCM and it facilitated management of AF in 21/25 (84%) patients. Further research is needed to assess the safety and efficacy of dofetilide in order to develop evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological management of AF in this population.
The pharmacological characteristics of [3H]dofetilide binding were examined in membranes prepared from human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells stably expressing human ether-a-go-go related gene (HERG) K+ channels. The classIII antiarrhythmic compounds dofetilide, clofilium, 4'-[[1-[2-(6-methyl-2-pyridyl)ethyl]-4-piperidyl]carbonyl]methanesulfonanilide (E-4031), N-methyl-N-[2-[methyl-(1-methyl-1H-benzimidazol-2-yl)amino]ethyl]-4-[(methylsulfonyl)amino]benzene-sulfonamide (WAY-123,398) and d-sotalol all inhibited [3H]dofetilide binding. In addition, the structurally unrelated compounds pimozide, terfenadine and haloperidol, all of which prolong the QT interval in man, also inhibited binding. These data indicate that a [3H]dofetilide binding assay using HERG membranes may help identify compounds that prolong the QT interval.
Dofetilide is an antiarrhythmic agent and primarily eliminated renally. Initial dosing is determined by creatinine clearance, calculated by total body weight in the Cockcroft-Gault equation. To date, there is no evidence comparing the dosing of dofetilide in obese versus nonobese patients. We conducted a retrospective review of 217 adults admitted for dofetilide loading to evaluate the tolerability of dofetilide in obese versus nonobese patients. The rate of dose adjustments, including dose reductions and discontinuations, was compared between obese versus nonobese patients in unadjusted and adjusted analyses. Electrocardiograms were collected throughout the loading period, and calculation of QT intervals was performed. Obese patients did not have a significantly higher frequency of dose adjustments compared with nonobese patients (51.5% vs. 44.8%, P = 0.33). Using total body weight to determine starting doses was associated with great odds of dose adjustments compared with ideal body weight (OR 3.69, P = 0.002) and adjusted body weight (OR 4.46, P = 0.02). Men required significantly fewer dose adjustments compared with women on multivariate analysis (OR 0.53, P = 0.03). Obesity is not associated with an increase in the rate of dose adjustments. Total body weight should be used with caution to calculate initial doses of dofetilide in women because it may lead to a higher rate of dose adjustments compared with ideal body weight. Additional studies are needed to confirm the optimal method for selecting starting doses of dofetilide in women, particularly those with a body mass index of >/=30.
INTRODUCTION: Dofetilide is an antiarrhythmic medication that has the potential to cause life threatening arrhythmias, such as Torsade de pointes. The 2014 ACC/AHA/HRS guidelines for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation state that patients need to meet certain criteria to be initiated on dofetilide. Patients who are not initiated on this therapy according to the guideline criteria are likely to be at higher risk of adverse reactions. METHODS: This is a single center, retrospective chart review of patients who were initiated on dofetilide from July 2016-December 2019. Patients included in the study were initiated on dofetilide as a new antiarrhythmic and monitored inpatient for 3 days. The primary outcome was a composite of incidence of cardiac arrhythmias, cardiac arrest, cardiac death, and cardiac related hospital readmission. RESULTS: There were 224 patients included in the analysis: 190 patients who were initiated on dofetilide inappropriately and 34 that were initiated appropriately. The primary outcome (composite of cardiac arrhythmia, cardiac arrest, cardiac death, and hospital readmission) was statistically significant with more patients experiencing an outcome in the group initiated inappropriately. CONCLUSIONS: Patients are placed at a higher risk of adverse reactions when this potentially dangerous antiarrhythmic medication is not used according to the protocol set forth by the guidelines. Practitioners should use caution when prescribing dofetilide. Other antiarrhythmic medications or non-pharmacologic options should be considered due to the incidence of these dangerous adverse reactions.
This report is about a 62-year old male patient with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) for patient activated termination of atrial fibrillation who experienced dofetilide-associated ventricular tachyarrhythmias and ICD-induced ventricular fibrillation six months after the initiation of the antiarrhythmic drug therapy.
Dofetilide is a class III antiarrhythmic agent approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the conversion of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter and maintenance of sinus rhythm in symptomatic patients with persistent arrhythmia. Drug trials showed neutral mortality in post-myocardial infarction patients and those with heart failure. This is a review of postmarket data, including real-world efficacy and safety in a variety of populations. Dofetilide has been used off-label with success in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter, as well as atrial tachycardia and ventricular tachycardia. The real-world acute conversion rate of atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter is higher than that reported in clinical trials. Dofetilide has an acceptable safety profile when initiated (or reloaded) under hospital monitoring and dosed according to creatinine clearance. Dofetilide is well tolerated and a good choice for patients with acceptable renal function and a normal QT interval, especially if atrioventricular nodal blockade needs to be avoided.
We assessed the feasibility of AliveCor tracings for QTC assessment in patients receiving dofetilide. Five patients with persistent AF underwent the two-handed measurement (mimicks Lead I). On the ECG, Lead I or II was used. There was no significant difference between the AliveCor-QTC and ECG-QTC (all +/-20 msec). The AliveCor device can be used to monitor the QTC in these patients.
BACKGROUND: Patients initiated on sotalol and dofetilide require inpatient monitoring and dose adjustments due to risks of corrected QT (QTc) prolongation and Torsades de pointes (TdP). Patients may receive higher initial doses than recommended due to close monitoring by specialized practitioners. The objective of this study was to describe prescribing practices of sotalol and dofetilide and to compare safety outcomes between standard and nonstandard dosing strategies. METHODS: This was a single-center retrospective analysis of adult inpatients who underwent sotalol or dofetilide initiation between June 1, 2015, and August 1, 2018. The end points of this study included the percentage of patients who received standard and nonstandard dosing, incidence of QTc prolongation (>/=500 milliseconds or >/=15% from baseline), incidence of TdP, and dose reduction or medication discontinuation. RESULTS: A total of 379 patients (195 sotalol and 184 dofetilide) were included in this analysis. There were 110 (56.4%) patients in the sotalol group and 111 (58.4%) patients in the dofetilide group that received nonstandard initial dosing. Nonstandard dosing was associated with a greater incidence of QTc prolongation compared to standard dosing (57.5% vs 43.0%, P = .005). Only one patient in the nonstandard dosing group experienced TdP. Patients initiated on nonstandard dosing required dose reduction or therapy discontinuation (37.6% vs 23.4%, P = .003) more frequently. CONCLUSION: Higher than recommended initial doses of sotalol or dofetilide were associated with higher incidence of QTc prolongation and more frequent therapy modification.
OBJECTIVES: The study's goal was to compare the efficacy and safety of dofetilide (DOF) versus amiodarone (AMIO) in patients with atrial fibrillation (AF). BACKGROUND: Comparative efficacy of DOF versus AMIO in patients with AF has not been well established. In addition, proarrhythmia has been a concern with DOF therapy. METHODS: Rhythm control was attempted by using DOF in 657 consecutive patients (mean age 72 +/- 9 years; 35% women) with AF (n = 528) or atrial flutter and AF (n = 129) between January 2014 and December 2018. RESULTS: DOF was successfully initiated in 573 (87%) of 657 patients, including 510 (89%) with persistent AF and 63 (11%) with paroxysmal AF. During a mean follow-up of 19 +/- 7 months, sinus rhythm was maintained in 361 (63%) of the 573 DOF-treated patients. At 12 months, patients on DOF had a similar likelihood of experiencing recurrent atrial arrhythmias compared with the 2,476 consecutive patients treated with AMIO for rhythm control during the study period (37% vs. 39%; p = 0.56). The efficacy of DOF and AMIO was also similar in specific subgroups of patients, including patients >75 years of age, with a low left ventricular ejection fraction, obesity, renal insufficiency, and prior catheter ablation for AF. Among patients with atypical atrial flutter, likelihood of recurrent atrial flutter was similar between the DOF (43 of 108 [40%]) and AMIO (211 of 555 [38%]; p = 0.69) groups. CONCLUSIONS: When properly initiated and monitored, DOF has efficacy comparable to that of amiodarone for rhythm control in patients with AF.
Dofetilide, a class III antiarrhythmic, is widely used in the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias. Antiarrhythmic drugs can have a long duration of action that prolongs the QT interval. This causes bradycardia that predisposes to R-on-T phenomenon subsequently leading to torsades de pointes (TdP). This necessitates constant monitoring to prevent or treat ventricular arrhythmias or bradycardia associated with cardiac medications. Although extremely rare, dofetilide overdose has been described in the literature. However, no evidence found in the current literature required prolonged intervention after the initial acute stabilization, leading to scarcity of data for treatment of ongoing dofetilide overdose. We present the case of an intentional dofetilide overdose in a 61-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, stage IIIb chronic kidney disease, diabetes mellitus type II, hypothyroidism, morbid obesity, and hypertension that required extensive interventions for refractory TdP that lasted 4 days. Therapeutic as well as excess dosage of dofetilide can lead to TdP, which is usually controlled by decreasing the dose or terminating drug administration. If the arrhythmia is not resolved, guidelines recommend management with activated charcoal if ingestion is within 15 minutes, followed by administration of 2 g IV (intravenous) magnesium and addressing the electrolyte imbalance. However, if the arrhythmia is persistent due to ongoing dofetilide toxicity, isoproterenol is given as a bridge to overdrive pacing and dopamine is used as an alternative to isoproterenol.
BACKGROUND: At peak COVID-19 lockdown, patients with symptomatic atrial fibrillation (AF) were faced with an equipoise between a palliative rate-control versus cautious rhythm-control strategy, including hospitalization for initiation of antiarrhythmic drug/s (AADs) and cardiac procedures which was impossible due to hospitalization restrictions. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of outpatient initiation of dofetilide in patients with AF using cardiac implantable electronic devices (CIEDs) for rhythm and QTc interval monitoring. METHODS: Adult patients with symptomatic AF with prior failure or intolerance to other AADs were enrolled if they were willing to in-office insertion of implantable loop recorders or already implanted with pacemakers or defibrillators capable of remote monitoring. Exclusion criteria were known medical contraindications of dofetilide and unable to provide consent. After making a shared management decision, dofetilide was initiated in a physician office, and rhythm and QTc intervals were monitored by ECGs and CIEDs. Patients were followed to assess the efficacy and safety of the treatment. RESULTS: The study cohort comprised of 30 patients, age 76 +/- 7 years (mean +/- standard deviation), 10 female (33%), CHA(2)DS(2)-VASc score 3.25 +/- 1.3, ejection fraction 63.45% +/- 8.52, and QTc interval 431.68 +/- 45.09 ms. From 22 (73%) patients in AF at presentation, SR was restored in 14 (64%) patients after 4 doses of dofetilide. At 46 +/- 59 days of follow-up, maintenance of SR in total 22 (73%) patients without cardiac adverse effects was accomplished. CONCLUSION: Effective and safe outpatient initiation of dofetilide during the extenuating circumstance of COVID-19 lockdown was possible in patients with AF who had CIEDs.
INTRODUCTION: The mechanism of wide QRS complex tachycardias during dofetilide infusion was studied in a patient with atrial fibrillation. METHODS AND RESULTS: Endocardial recordings from the intraventricular conduction system showed that dofetilide caused "classic" aberrant conduction (Ashman phenomenon, typical QRS morphology) at high prematurity ratios (preceding interval = 1.78 x coupling interval--290), thus mimicking ventricular ectopy. In addition, there was frequent sequential bilateral bundle branch block, caused by a significant difference in preceding bundle-to-bundle intervals (mean difference +/- 1 SD: 74 +/- 26 msec). CONCLUSION: The present findings may prove helpful in the clinical assessment of wide QRS complex rhythms after dofetilide and possibly other "pure" Class III antiarrhythmics.
Dofetilide, a new class III antiarrhythmic agent, selectively blocks a specific cardiac potassium channel, IKr, increasing the effective refractory period of the myocyte and thereby terminating reentrant arrhythmias. Given orally, it appears to effectively convert atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter to sinus rhythm and maintain sinus rhythm after conversion in appropriately selected patients. This paper reviews the pharmacology of dofetilide, the evidence of its effectiveness, and the appropriate precautions in using it. KEY POINTS: Dofetilide is generally well tolerated but like other class III drugs can cause torsades de pointes. The risk is dose-dependent and can be minimized by adjusting the dosage according to creatinine clearance and QT interval, by excluding patients with known risk factors for long QT syndrome and torsades de pointes, and by starting treatment in an inpatient monitored setting for the first 3 days. Unlike other antiarrhythmic agents, oral dofetilide did not increase the mortality rate in clinical studies in postmyocardial infarction patients or those with congestive heart failure at high risk for sudden cardiac death. Concomitant use of drugs that increase the plasma level of dofetilide is contraindicated; these include cimetidine, ketoconazole, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and verapamil.
BACKGROUND: Although dofetilide labeling states that the drug must be initiated or reinitiated with continuous electrocardiographic monitoring and in the presence of trained personnel, the risks of dofetilide reloading justifying repeat hospitalization have not been investigated. METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients admitted for dofetilide reloading for atrial arrhythmias were retrospectively reviewed. The need for dose adjustment and the incidence of torsades de pointes (TdP) were identified. The incidence of TdP in dofetilide reloading was compared with patients admitted for dofetilide initial loading. Of 138 patients admitted for dofetilide reloading for atrial arrhythmias, 102 were reloaded at a previously tolerated dose, 30 with a higher dose from a previously tolerated dose and 2 at a lower dose; prior dosage was unknown in 4 patients. Dose adjustment or discontinuation was required in 44 patients (31.9%). No TdP occurred in the same dose reloading group, but TdP occurred in 2 patients admitted to increase dofetilide dosage (0% versus 6.7%; P=0.050). Dofetilide dose adjustment or discontinuation was required in 30 of 102 patients (29.4%) reloaded at a previously tolerated dose and in 11 of 30 patients (36.7%) admitted for an increase in dose. CONCLUSIONS: Although no TdP occurred in patients admitted to reload dofetilide at the same dose as previously tolerated, dosage adjustments or discontinuation was frequent and support the need for hospitalization for dofetilide reloading. Patients admitted for reloading with a higher dose tended to be at higher risk for TdP than patients reloaded at a prior tolerated dose.
Mutations in genes related to long QT syndrome (LQTS) is recognized as an independent risk of drug-induced LQTS. We previously screened a mutation F463L in a Chinese patient with LQT2, syncope, and epilepsy. Here, we planned to illustrate how F463L influences the action of dofetilide on hERG channels. F463L-hERG plasmids were transfected into the stable Human Embryonic Kidney 293 (HEK293) cells expressing WT-hERG to generate heterozygous mutant (WT + F463L-hERG). Whole-cell patch clamp and laser confocal scanning microscopy were used to evaluate electrophysiological consequences and the membrane distribution of hERG protein. In comparison of WT-hERG channels exposed to dofetilide, heterozygous F463L-hERG channels showed a reduction in the density of tail currents when exposed amidarone. F463L-hERG also altered the action of dofetilide on the gating properties of hERG channels. Images of dofetilide-treated cells expressing heterozygous F463L showed a severe retention and reduction of protein expression on the membrane compared to WT. In conclusion, dofetilide displays a powerful inhibitory effect on the currents from cells expressing heterozygous F463L, thus showing an additive suppression of currents by F463L with dofetilide.
BACKGROUND: Dofetilide is a class III antiarrhythmic drug that has been reported to be safe and efficacious in the treatment of atrial dysrhythmias with a known initial risk of QT prolongation and torsades de pointes (TdP). As a result, the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) mandated in-hospital dofetilide initiation and adherence to a common dosing protocol. However, there is a lack of clarity on how to manage dofetilide re-initiation. METHODS: An observational survey was performed including 347 cardiologists in the United States and worldwide to evaluate the deviations from approved manufacturer's protocol during dofetilide initiation and re-initiation among practicing cardiologists. RESULTS: Most practicing cardiologists were cautious about outpatient dofetilide use and adhered to the manufacturer's in-patient dofetilide protocol during de-novo initiation and reported low incidence of TdP in clinical practice. There were substantial differences among practicing cardiologists with deviation from the manufacturer's protocol during re-initiation of dofetilide. About 21% cardiologists always admitted patients to the hospital while 37% admitted patients <10% of the time for dofetilide re-initiation. Only 4% reported major adverse events with outpatient dofetilide re-initiation. There was also wide variation regarding monitoring of electrolytes and QT interval as an outpatient with dofetilide. CONCLUSION: There is significant practice pattern variation in the use of dofetilide for the management of AF. This degree of variation noted is concerning and is a reflection of the current lack of substantial clinical evidence in the re-initiation dofetilide protocol to help direct the provider.
